A -'GEOSSARY 








SRI VEWKATESVARA ORIENTAL SERIES—No. 3 


A GLOSSARY 

OF 

PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 

(SAMSKRT - ENGLISH) 


BY 

C. V. SHANKAR RAU, m.a. 

Honorary Research Scholar 
Sri Venkatesvara Oriental Institute 
Tirupati 


106 


1941 

TIRUMAEAI-TIRUPATI DEVASTHANAMS PRESS. 
MADRAS 


Price Rs. 3 or 4 s. 6d. 





(SAMSKRT - ENGLISH) 




AT THE LOTUS-FEET 
OF 

LORD SRINIVASA 
IS LAID 

THIS GARLAND OF WORDS 
OF 

ETERNAL WISDOM 


q?3 K qTTf li 







PREFACE 


A Glossary op Philosophical Terms, as this small 
book is named, is meant to be a concise lexicon of Sanskrit 
terms with equivalent English expressions. The Glossary 
embraces all systems of Indian Philosophy, Sankhya, Yoga, 
Nyaya, Vaisesika, Mimaiiisa, Vedanta, Bauddha, Jaiua, and 
Pancaratra, with their glossatory ramifications. To suit the 
various senses in which a single Sanskrit term is used in 
different contexts or treatises, varying English words are men¬ 
tioned ; this will enable a choice of words to interpreters at 
their need. When a term is predominant or classical in any 
one system of Philosophy, that is denoted apart by a single 
abbreviating alphabet, such as, (n) for Nyaya, and (y) for Yoga. 
Nine abbreviations are printed at the commencement of the 
Glossary. In many cases where any technical term has been 
considered significant, pervasive or important, definitions 
(Laksauas) have been extracted from treatises in the foot¬ 
notes. I am indebted to the several learned translators, 
Indian and Foreign, for some of these equivalents and they 
have also been used with suitable alterations and adaptations 
whenever necessary. It is hoped that these English eqliiva^ 
lents may, as time passes, become recognised and standardised 
as Anglo-Indian philosophical terms, just as in the field of 
Physical Sciences and Politics words have been coined and 
expressions have been devised to render foreign terms into 
Indian languages. The purpose of these pages is to add a 
facility to the work of the translator—a translator’s task is 
hardly enviable—-and if that purpose is in any manner achiev¬ 
ed, I shall deem it a temporal gratification ; and all apart, this 



vn 


is my humble homage to the great Sages who were the 
original Seers of these philosophical concepts and worshipful 
Idols of Indian spiritual celebrity, and my humble adoration 
to Sri Vehkatesvara, in whose Oriental Institute I have learnt 
the little that gave the incentive to this idea. 

My thanks are due to Sarasvatihrdayalankara, Sarada- 
vilasa, etc., M. Krishnamachariar, m.a., m.h., Ph.D., m.r.a.S., 
the Director of the Institute, for his guidance and to Mr. N. 
Aiyaswami Sastri for helping me in revising the manuscript 
and in passing it through the Press. 

TIRUPATI, 

Avgust 1941 




C. V. Shankar Ratj 



A GLOSSARY OP PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 
Abbreviations 


s 

Sankhya 

m 

Mimaiiisa 

y 

Yoga 

V 

Vedanta 

n 

Nyaya 

b 

Bauddha 

vs 

Vaisesika 

i 

Jaina 


p Pancaratra 



A GLOSSARY 

OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 

3T 

3T a, Visnu, a prefix-particle having negative sense. 

amsa, part, particle, component, — ijjf bhuta forming 
part of. 

^11*51 amsamka , part of a portion (of a deity), secondary incar¬ 
nation. 

amsin, whole, having a share’or parts. 

3T^f^SJ akccnistha, (b) a kind of heaven. 

ahalpana, indeterminate, free from pride. 
akartr, (s) not an agent. 

akrtabhyagama, unwarranted rise of the fruit of 
action which was not performed. 

akevalatva, manifoldness. 
ahramotpatti, simultaneous birth, orderless birth. 

aksapada, name of the sage Gotama, author of the 
Nyayasutras. 

aksayanlvl, a permanent endowment. 
aksara, imperishable, immortal, undecaying. 

akhanda, undivided, whole, not fragmentary. - 'Fir® kola 
time without division, unrelated time. - desa undivi¬ 
ded space. - sftsr bodha undivided knowledge, massive 
understanding. - dkdravrtti, (v) becoming one 

with the nature of [the Supreme Being. - upddhi, 

(n) an indescribable quality. 



2 


A GLOSSARY 


Sfljqrffl dkhyati, non-discrimination between cognition and 
memory. 

agocara, anything that is beyond cognizance of the 
senses; e.g.. Brahman. 

3UT agra, foremost, first, chief. 

aghatitaghatand, accomplishment of the unaccom¬ 
plished. 

STIf ahga, part, component, body, subordinate division of a 
science as six Vedangas; (j) name of the chief sacred texts 
of the Jainas ; (b) name of the each member of the 
12 causal links of Dependent Origination. 

acala, immovable. 

acit, non-spirit, matter, material, devoid of under¬ 
standing. 

acintya, incomprehensible, inconceivable. 

acetana, non-couscious, non-self, inanimate, irrational ( 
insensible. 

acchedya, indivisible. 

ajahallaksand, one of the functions of words indi¬ 
cating the secondary sense without abandoning the pri¬ 
mary one. 

ajhtavada, (b) theory of non-origin of the universe. 
cijiva, lifeless; (j) one of the 9 tattvas. 
ajna, ignorant. - - tva, ignorance. 

ajndna, non-cognizance, ignorance, Maya, illusion, 
Prakrti. 

animan, (•) atomisation, minuteness, fineness. 

SffoTg anistha, most minute. 

anlyas, more minute than usual. 

3{0J anu, minute, what is subtle, atom. - - tva, atomicity, 

°”btlety, minuteness, smallness. — 'TRtTFT — parinidtia, atomic 



OE PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


3 


size. - sfcT - vrata, (j) name of the 12 small duties of the 
lay men adhering to Jaina faith. 

atajjna, not knowing that, (i.e.) Brahman and soul’s 
identity. 
atathya, untrue. 

atafia, (b) a class of deities among Buddhists. 
atideva, surpassing the gods. 

1 atideka , analogy; (m) indirect method of teaching. 
— - vdkya, assimilative proposition. 

atipatti, passing beyond, lapse. 
atiprasahga, unwarranted discussion. 

SlfdPTM atimdtra, much, exceeding the proper measure. 

atiratha, great warrior (fighting from a car). 

^IIcRT<?f atirdtra, one of the seven somayagas. 
atireka, surplus, excess. 

ativarndkramin, a yogin who has risen above all 
asramas and dwell always within himself. 

ativydpti, (n) being too wide, redundance, over¬ 
applicability, unwarranted extension of a definition (a 
fault of a definition). 

atisaya, peculiarity, superiority, some quality produced 
by some performance; (j) one of the superhuman qualities 
attributed to Jain Arhats. 

cdisunya, transcending the void, devoid of attributes, 
defter atita, past existence. 

i. epqEpfei I ^ 5TR^raf»fT*tvr s ^ c r^‘ 

I 

It is well explained in tlie following verse from the standpoint of 
the Mimamsakas : 

SRfsfcrf^lt II 



4 


A GtOS£>ARi? 


atlndriya, beyond sense perception. 

atyagnistoma, second of tte modification of jyotis- 
toma sacrifice. 

atyantdbhdva, absolute (complete) non-existence. 
atyddhdna , act of improving or placing upon. 
atydhita, extreme fear or danger. 

Sjqi atrafia, destitute of shame. 
adambha, free from deceit. 
adr§fa, influence, fate, destiny. 
adyaiana, referring to today, the period of current day. 
3Ts[Sq adravya, non-matter. 

SfgTJf advaya, without a second, unique, non-duality. 
advitlya, without a second. 
advesa, amity, want of aversion. 

advaita, non-dual, monistic, absolute monism. - errs: - vdda, 
monism of Sankara, doctrine of absolute monism of 
Sankara. 

adharma, demerit, wrong or sinful action. - 3T1wq - 
astikaya, (j) category of adharma. 

StqTffl'fi adharmika, unrighteous, unjust. 

3^Ejv(0T 1 adhikarana , set of arguments, container, substratum. 
adhikdra, authority, chapter. 

adhikdrin, one who is qualified for a particular work, 
rightful person. 

3#JpT adhigama, to study or read, to go up to, approach. 
SffSpjef adhideva, presiding deity or god. 



6# PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


5 


adhipati, lord, head or chief. - srarc - pratyaya, (b) 
one of the four causes. 

adhibhuta, objective world, the whole inanimate crea¬ 
tion, supreme spirit. 

adhiloka, on the universe. 
adhivasita , endowed with disposition. 
adhikrayana , act or ceremony of placing over fire. 

adhisavana, hand press used for extracting and strai¬ 
ning the soma juice. 

adhisthana, substratum, basis, seat, abode. 
adhyayana , Vedic study. 

adhyavasdya , mental determination, determinative 
cognition, apprehension. 

adhydtinan , with reference to individual. 
adhydpana , instruction or lecture. 


3MFT adhyaya, chapter. 

adhydropa , wrong imputation, allegation, wrong attri¬ 
bution. 

adhyasa, substratum, superimposition, act of sitting 
over, false ascription. - - pratyaya , repetitional cogni¬ 

tion. 

adhydhdra, supply of the required word. 
adhyesana , asking for instruction. 


adhvan , (b) time, road, way. 
adhvara , sacrifice, not injuring. 
adhvaryu , chief priest in the sacrifice, 

ananta , boundless, infinite. - - jnana, (j) infinite 

knowledge. - apsft - darscma, (j) infinite perception. - 
— vlrya , (j) infinite energy. - — sukha infinite bliss. 



6 


A GtOSSARV 


anantara, immediate. 

ananyavisayatman, having the mind fixed upon 
one object. 

ananyapoha, non-exclusion of others. 

ananyasrayatva, (n) state of being not dependent 
upon anything else. 

£ 

anartha , undesired, unwanted. 

3FRR3JT anavasthd , infinite regress, absence of finality, endless¬ 
ness, unsettledness. 

SRFRf andgata , (b) future, not yet come into existence. 
ana gamin, (b) non-returner. 

SPIPTR ana gar a, houseless, vagrant ascetic. 
anadi , beginningless, immemorial. 
andtmam, non-soul, non-self, nescience, corporeal. 

andrabhyavdda , (m) detached statement about tire 
sacrifice. 

andrabhyddhita , (m) prescribed as detached sub¬ 
ject. 

3RTfd andhata, (y) ten kinds of sounds that emerge from tire 
middle of the twelve-petalled lotus or cah'a of the heart 
in Tantrasastra. 

anitya , impermanent, non-eternal. - - tva, imperma¬ 

nence. 

anirvacaniyakhydti , (b) indefinable appreheir- 
sion, appearance of an indescribable substance. 
an i rV a C ya> indescribable. 
anista , undesirable. 

<5 anukula , favourable. 
anugraha , grace. 
anujfid , consent, permission. 



OP PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


7 


anutpatti, non-generation. 

cmuddtta, low tone, one of the three main accents in 
Vedas. 

anudbhuta, unperceivable, unmanifested. 

anupapatti, inconclusive reasoning, failure of reasoning. 

anupalabdhi, (n) non-cognition, non-perception ; (m) 
one of the instruments of knowledge. 

anupalambha, non-apprehension. 

1 anupasamhdrin , non-conclusive reason, a kind of 
fallacy. 

anupurva, regular, successive order. 

SJgspif anubandha, indispensable preliminary factors to any 
sastra. - 

anubhava , experience. 

anubhdga , (j) one of the four bandhas —rasa. 

anubhava , sign or indication of feeling by look or 
gesture. 

^T 33 p anubhuta , sub-perceptional. 

^ 3 * 3 ^ anubhuti , same as Brahman, eternal consciousness or 
experience. 

anumantrana , consecration by hymns and prayers. 
StgTIT anumd , inference for given premises. 

2 anumdna , inference, instrument of inference. 

$ anumiti, inference. 

3*3^ anumeya , inferable. 

1. dr I gf?r srtlk srdrsrtg: srd'Wff r sf^r 3 *- 

2 . I ?r*r ^ rra I 

3. trcrtreNpi fFrogfaid I 



8 


A GLOSSARY 


anuyogin, correlated substratum. 
anuloman, natural order. 

^3^ anuvada, repetition of what is already prescribed. 

anuvrtti, following, continuity. 

cmusaya, hleha, defilement, repentence. 

anusanga, application of words used in a previous 
sentence, connection of word with word or effect with 
cause. 

®l*pn*T anusthdna, pursuit, observance. 

anusandhdna, (vs) fourth step in syllogism. 
anusamaya, regular connection (as of words). 
anrta, false. 

anekantavada, scepticism. 

®ht c bKl e llf<« > r ^ anekdntavddin, sceptic, a Jaina, Arhat of Jaina. 
anekdsrita, (vs) dwelling in more than one. 
l anaikantika, uncertain, inconclusive, indecisive, un¬ 
steady one of the five divisions of hetvdbhasa (fallacy). 

Spg ant a, (b) extremity. 


antarahga, inward, mind, intimate, interior, proximate. 
antarabhava, (b) existence between death and i-ebirth. 
antarindriya, (v) internal organ. HTvr, §1%, 

stSfK. 

antarihsa, firmament, sky. 


antarjyotis, inner life or spirit of light, enlightened 
inwardly. 

antardhdna, disappearance. 


antardhyana, internally meditation. 


1. It is of three varieties: Sadharana t asadharana and anupcisam harin 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


9 


antaryamin , Inner Being, pervader or ruler. 
antyavisesa, ultimate particularity. 


andhatamasa, blinding darkness, a kind of hell, a kind 
of nescience. 

anna, food. 


anyatama, one of many. 
anyatara, one of the two. 

anyathdkhydti, misapprehension, incorrect cognition, 
erroneous conception of the spirit; («) assertion that some¬ 
thing is not really what it appears to be according to 
sensual perception. 

3pqsj|«jqt(f% anyathdnupapatti, (n) invariable concomitance, in¬ 
ference from circumstances. 

anyathdsiddha, proved wrongly; (n) dispensable 
antecedent, accidental or remote circumstance which is 
not the true cause. 

anyathopapatti, otherwise reasoning. 

HPITTRI anydpoha, exclusion or negation of others. 

l anyonyddhydsa, reciprocal attribution of identity. 
2 anyonydbhdva, mutual non-existence ; (n) reciprocal 
negation of identity. 

3F%3lT2-rc anyonydsmya, (n) mutual dependence or support, 
reciprocal relation of cause and effect. 

anvaya, affirmative premise ; (n) inherence, natural ordei 
of words in a sentence, connection. - STSFcT - drstanta ; (n) 
affirmative example. - — vyativeka, positive and nega¬ 
tive proposition. - - vydpti, (n) positive or affirmative 


1. 5Rss^r«rr nzmw **tt fltfercrrtd: I 

<PTT 3fr% =ET 11 

2. | W TC <TCT * 1 

2 



10 


A GLOSSARY 


concomitance. — WtaMK' sahacara, (n) sequence of positive 
factors. 

anvavasarga , permission to do as one likes, 
anvdgata , connected. 

WPT anvacaya , connecting of a secondary action with main 
action. 

anvddesa , subsequent or repeated mention, referring 
to what has been previously stated. 

3RR**TJfal anvarambhanlya, initiative ceremony. 

0 _ 

anvahdryapacana , southern sacrificial fire. 

apakarsa, subtraction, diminution. - - sama, so¬ 

phism in Nyaya. 

apadesa, second step in a syllogism (statement of the 
reason.) 

<fpora, posterior, lower, next, less comprehensive. — ^ 
— tva, posteriority, proximity. — §55 — saila, a sub-school 
of Buddhism. - STWH' - sdmdnya, inferior generality. 

SWRTif apardnga, posterior constituent. 

aparicchinna, uncircumscribed, undefined. 

smtgr aparoksa, visible. 

apavarga, ultimate goal, final emancipation, liberation. 

1 apavada , exception, rescission. 
apavidyd , evil science. 

apasiddhdnta, false conclusion opposed to orthodox 
teaching or settled dogma. 

3TCR 2 apdna, out-breath, air exhaled. 

apdya, annihilation, losing; (b) place of punishment 

1. *tr rt ^crrftr 1 fPR | 

2. TRFr^^r^r qr^.- | 



OF FHltOSOPHICAI, TERMS 


11 


zpartha, useless. 

vfiuroa, (m) transcendental result, subtle influence, un- 
^en force, unprecedent. - - vidhi, (in) injunction 

F what is entirely unknown. 

a£eksd, dependence. — gfe — buddhi , enumerative cogni- 
on, mental process of arranging and methodising. 

ifioha, negation, exclusion, negation of what is possible, 
ifferentiation. 

T apauru^eya, not man-made, superhuman. 

^ apratipatti , incomprehension. 
cT apratisthita , unstable. 

apratisahkhydnirodha , (b) unplanned destruc- 
on. 

apratyak$a, imperceptible. 

apramdna , untrustworthy, unauthorised, immeasurable. 
' aprccsiddhcc, unknown. 

aprdkrta , non-natural, super-natural, transcendental. 

W apraptakdla , (n) inconsequential, inopportune, ill- 
tned. 

^ aprdmdnya, invalidity, baselessness. 

abrahman , non-self; (v) Maya and its products. 

zbhdva , non-existence, nullity, negation, antithesis. 
ssficRUT - avarana , veil of non-existence. 

d abhigamana, morning observance. 

* abhighdta , (s) inflection of injury, striking, attack. 

‘ abhicdra , magical formula for working a charm, emp* 
ynient of magical spells for malevolent purposes such* as 
lling of enemy, incantation. 

| abhijalpa , address, conversation. 



12 


A GLOSSARY 


abhijna, knowledge, intuition, supernatural faculty of 
the Buddha. 

abhidharma, (b) Buddhist metaphysics. 

1 abhidhd , express or principal meaning of a word. 

abhidheya, nameable or denotable thing. — — tva, 

nameability. 

abhidhyana, meditation, same as cintand, desire. 

2 abhiniveka, attachment, yearning; (y) ignorance cau¬ 
sing fear of death, a kind of klesa. 

abhiprdya, verdict, opinion, purpose, intention. 

abhibhava, suppression, prevailing predominance. 

srfst^lT abhibhd, phenomenon, apparition. 

abhibhdvin, overwhelming, overpowering. 
abhimdna, egotistic feeling, attachment, love. 
abhiyukta, adept, revered personage. 
abhirati, (b) name of a world. 
abhivyakta, manifest. 

sifiRcf abhisava, pressing, drinking soma juice. 
abhisamskara , (b) action. 
abheda, non-difference, identity. 

STWlftf abhydsa, repetition, practice, repeated meditation; <m) 
one of six pramanas for kartnabheda. 

abhyudaya, prosperity. 

abhyupagama, hypothetical assumption or admission, 
supposition. — PrRtFcT— siddhdnta , admitted axiom. 

i* ^ I sr aw I ( m ) 

2. See Y^gasEtra, I, 24.. 



Oi? PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


13 


ctniukta, non-liberation, bondage. 

cc-murta, not-limited-in-existence, incorporeal (substance). 

cctnrta, ambrosia, immortal, residue of sacrifice. - 

— tx>a, final bliss, deathless stage. 

amoha, freedom from delusion, 
o 

SPISfFT ayathdrtha, erroneous. - - anubhava, erroneous 

experience. 

3PR ccyana, way, final absolution, sixth part of the year. 
ayaskanta, magnet. 
ccyukta, unsuitable, nugatory. 
ayutasiddha, inseparable. 

ayogavyavrtti, removing the non-existence of some- 

ttiing. 

cc-rupa, not true, formless, unmanifest. - HR - jnana, 
formless trance. - - loka, immaterial world. - *r*r 

— rdga, (b) desire for relish in the world of non-matter. 

3p| artha, object, purpose, wealth, context, substance. - 

— karman, (m) main act opposed to gundkarman. - 3K 1 - 
vada, explanatory or laudatory passage, exegesis. - 3FJTCT - 
adhydsa, super imposition of objects. - sn’TRT — ajpatti, 
circumstantial inference, implication, postulation, pre¬ 
sumption ; (m) deduction of a matter from that could not 
else “ be.” 

arthdntara, different meaning, irrelevancy. 
aldtacdkra, whirling, fire-brand. 

1. Gautamasntra. 

£rq5^ o iirflq'rw cpt era 5rercR*r*f'iK : I 

■Xliis is of three kinds according to Laugaksi: 3®T3RT ®t3‘ 

2. One of the pramajjas according to Mlm3insakas. 



14 


A GLOSSARY 


alihga , unresoluble primary matter. 
alobha, disinterestedness. 
alaukika, extra-normal. 

^Td^RT avakdsa, free space, place, opportunity. 
avaksefiana, throwing down. 
avacara, (b) region (three), plane of existence. 
avacchinna, delimited. 

avacchedaka , delimiting. - mi$l - tdvdda, delimi¬ 
tation theory. 

*\ > 

avtzcchedya, delimitable. 

avatdra, descent, incarnation, manifestation, introduc¬ 
tion. 

avaddna, (m) setting apart for the purpose of sacrifice ; 
(b) glorious act. 

avadhana, attention, care. 

amROT avadharana , assertion. 

avadhi, limit. 

wt avanl, earth. 

avabhdsa, appearance. 

avayava, limb, member, member of a syllogism, com¬ 
ponent part. 

avayavin, composite structure or product, whole. 

5f=R avara, end, limit, lower. 

SJ'RfR avarodha, (y) suspension of breath. 

avalambcma , basis or hold. 

SfcRTT avasthd, state, condition. 

avdntaraftrakarana—S^miZWW ahgabhdvanapra- 
karatia. .... 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


15 


avdntarapralaya , minor dissolution. 
avikala , uninjured, unmutilated, not separated. 

^fcfcf^q avikalpa, indefinite (first) impression, devoid of cons¬ 
tructive thought 

aviglta , not contradictory to Vedic tradition. 
avighata , non-obstruction. 

1 avidya , wrong knowledge, ignorance, nescience, folly, 
illusion, undifferentiated consciousness; (y) a kind of Mesa, 
avinabhava , invariable relation. 
avindsin , what is undecaying, real existence. 

aviprandsa , a dharma postulated by some school of 
Buddhists as being produced after every action performed. 
3jfcf^prj avibhdga , undivided. 

av i r0( }j ia , non-inconsistent, non-contradiction. 
aviveka, non-discrimination, foolishness. 
avisista , undistinguished, unqualified. 

^cflTd^ avisamvddin , not contradictory. 
avyakta , unmanifested. 

avyaya, eternal, imperishable, grammatical particle, an 
indeclinable. 

2 ccvyapti, (n) partial inapplicability, inadequate perva¬ 
sion of a proposition, 

3 avyapyavrtti , (vs) partial inherence as to the time 
and space. 

avyutpcznna, illiterate, not formed according to the 
prescribed rules. 

1. See YogasHtra, I, 24. This s used in various senses in the several 
systems of philosophy. 

2. I 

3. R^iwr I 



16 


A GLOSSARY 


asaktasucana, (n) not indicating what is possible. 
SRlirf} asakti, inability. 


asandyd, hunger. 

asesabhuvanadhdra, support of the whole world. 

STgl^fr astdksari, the 8 syllabled mantra. See 3^. 

SRRffirf asamskrta, uncompounded (element), uncomposite ele¬ 
ment. 

siMTfcl asamkrdnti, absence of translocation, 
asanklrna, unmixed. 

asankhydti, (b) non-being’s apprehension. 

asahgata, inconsistent. 

ascmjnitd, unconsciousness. 

asanjnisamdpatti, (b) ecstacy with loss of cons¬ 
ciousness. 

dsat , non-being, non-real, non-existence. 


asattdvdda , (v) doctrine of non-existence. 

czsaftaksa, (n) same as vipahsct) not similar to tlie minor 
term. 


1 asamavdyikarana , (n) non-inherent or accidental, 

asatnbhava, impossible to happen. 

asambhdvand, absence of right understanding, doubt. 

m*m asddhdrana, not common, special. - ^ - dharma 
specific feature. 

< n) untrue > unproved, un-established, conclu¬ 
sion or reason unproved. 

astddhi, (n) not achieving what is promised. 

1 . 3^^# I «wr \ 

yatasiddha ” ° f 11166 1 asraySsiddha < svarupasiddha and vysp- 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


17 


astikaya, (j) category. There are five such categories : 
jiva, pudgcda, dharma, adharma, dkasa. 

asteya, not committing theft. 

astra, divine weapon. 

®#TclT l asmita } (y) non-perception of the difference between the 
self and intellect, a kind of Beset. - - matra, (y) a kind 

of samddhi . 

aham, myself, I, ego, I-sense. 

ahahkdra , I-conciousness, egoism, I-principle, persona¬ 
lity substance. 

ahantd , I-ness, one of the 25 elements in Sankhya philoso- 

pky- 

ahamj?ratyaya„ notion of ego. 
ahimsd, non-violence. 
ahlna, sacrifice lasting several days. 

3TT 

dharaja, mine-born. 

3rRjf%T®F5 dhasmika, per chance, providential. 

3 n 5 hT^n' dkdhksd, expectancy, question. 

3TR5R dkdra, form, configuration, character, figure. 
dkdsa , ether, sky, void space. 

akinccmyayatana , (b) plane of nothingness. 

akrti , form, configuration general and distinct form of 
the material object ( avayavasamsthdnavisesa ). 

akuncana , contraction, bending forward. 

Sflfp dhuta, impulsion, idea, intention. 

dhsa, pertaining to the senses, perceptional. 

aksepa, objection. 

1. I Yogasatra, I, 24. 

3 



18 


A GLOSSARY 


dkhyayikd , illustrative tale. 

3fFPT agama , verbal testimony, treatise, science. 
dgamdpdyin , transient. 

r> 

3TWT£[ agnldhra, one of the 16 priests in the soma sacrifice. 

3TH*FT dcamana , sipping the water in a prescribed manner from 
the palm, rinsing the mouth. 

dcdra , rules of conduct, 

®fWN acdrya, teacher, instructor, revered. 

ativahika, (s) transporting body. 

dtman, soul, ego, self. - - khydti, (b) self-appre¬ 

hension. - flvT - tattva, real quality of the soul. (SfRtT) W-} 

- bhava, one’s own body. - - bhdvanirydtand, 

self-surrender. - - vidyd, knowledge of the soul. -Fi^rr- 

^ sdksatkara, self-realisation. - - havis, self offered 

as havis. — 3Tr?Pf — dsraya, self-dependence. 

STMRI'T atmibhdva, becoming one with self. 

SflcilPd'b atyantiha, complete, entire, final, ultimate. 
ddarapratyaya, regardful cognition. 

^ *<J*» origin, beginning. - tffo - karmika, (b) novice. - ^1% 

- sakti, primeval power or energy or force. 

adinava, (b) defect, disadvantage. 

^ ddesa, substitute in grammar, teaching, order, mandate, 
precept. 

ddhdra, substratum, container, receptacle. 

ddhidaivika, pertaining to gods ; (•) caused by divine 
agencies, proceeding from the elements. 

ddhibhautika, elementary; («) caused by animate 
beings. 

ddheya, what is contained, sustained, supported. 

'SfFF? dnanda , bliss, joy, pleasure. 
dnupurvi , order. 



of Philosophical terms 


19 


anumanika, inferential. 

3T13«#li anusravika, (s) known through Veda. 

dnusahgika , following as necessary result* 
dp as, water. 

dpta, reliable person, truth-teller. - - vdeand, the 

word of a reliable person. 

3TPTRT dbhdsa , reflection, semblance, - - vdda , semblance 

theory. 

3TPTR dbhoga , immediate or direct experience. 
dmndya , tradition, scripture. 

3TPT5R dyatana (b) sensory receptacle (12), base of mental 
action, 

vitality, age. 

ayojana , concretive activity* 

3TR am, good, awe. 

3TR*¥T drambha , (m) beginning activity. - - wda, (n) crea- 

tionistic theory of causation. 

drddupakdrin , (m) a kind of auxiliary. 

GJRfa dropa, hypothetical attribution. 
dropita , imposed, assumed. 
arjava, rectitude. 
arhata, Jaiua, follower of Arhat. 

3T|c5*SR alambatia, support (cause). 

alayavijnana, (b) origination or receptacle intellect, 
consciousness, store-house of intellectual impressions. 
alocana, thinking, sense-process, bare awareness. 
alocanajnana, (m) subjective ideation. 

31FRBT avarana, barrier, covering, concealment, enclosure. 



20 


A GLOSSARY 

3 h e M r l avarjana, concentration. 

®fTU?r civrti, false notion. 

*N __ 

f avesa, obsession possession. 

asaya, (y) impression dormant in the mind, latent 
desires. 

3TI3PT asraya, resort, substratum, period of life. - 3T%g- - asiddha, 
(n) unestablished in respect of abode {fiaksa). - arf%T%, (n) 
false substratum, a logical fallacy. 

asatti, juxtaposition. 

dsana, (y) a posture of the body in yoga being one of the 
8 ahgas of yoga. 

asava, intoxicant, infection, defilement of desire. 
astika, orthodox, believer in god, believer in the future. 
aharana, grasping. 

®TffR ahara, species of cause, aliment. 

C _ 

SfJfFf aharya, to be taken or fetched near or supposed. 

r\ __ 

SflsfRi ahuti, pouring a libation into fire. 

I 

% I, Siva. 

icchd, desire, volition, will. — sffrfi — sakti, will power. 

fcR itara, other, different. 

*\ 

itaretarakunyatd, mutual voidness. 

itaretarasrayatva , mutual dependency. 

itikartavyat'a, (m) action subsidiary to the main. 

idaiikarasfiadatva, quality of being the seat of this- 
iiess, objective perception. 

l^rTT idanta, thing-in-itself, this-uess. 


idampratyayatd, dependence. 



oi? PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


21 


indrajala, jugglery, trick, delusion. 

indriya, sense, sense-organ. - ^ — tva, senseness. — 3T*i- 
- arthasannikarsa, relation between sense-organ and 

object. 

iyattd, measure, quantity, extent. 

istavighdtakrt, name of a fallacious reason. 
istdpatti, attainment of the objective. 
istdrtha, anything desired. 

ffs isti, sacrifice of butter etc., opposed to the sacrifice of an 
animal or soma juice. 


^ /, Laksmi. 
fsjRT iksati, seeing. 

iksan, seeing, thinking. 
isvara, lord, god, supreme. 



3 U, Brahman. 


uktha, certain verses forming a sub-division of the sastra, 
name of the Samaveda. 

ukhd, a vessel in which fire is put. 

'SRssRl ucchitti, destruction. 

ucchedavdda, doctrine of destruction. 

3^5^ utkarsa, eminence, superiority, transfer from one place 
to another. - fW - sama, a kind of fallacy. 

utkrstopddhitd, state of having something superior 
as an indispensable condition. 

utksepana, stretching upward, lifting up. 

uttama, superior, high. 



22 


A GLOSSARY 


uiiara , later; (is) reply, post-division, one of the f 
ingredients of an adhtkarana, - - sailer, a sub~sch 

of Buddhism. 

uttdna, lying with face upwards. 

utpatti, evolution, origination, creation, comtnen 
ment, genesis. ~ - vidhi, injunction for any act 

sacrifice anew. 
utpdta , calamity. 

3^11^ uipada , origination. 

utpddaha , producer. 
ntpddya , produced, producible. 
utpreksd , imagination, fancy. 

c 

SyEfff utsarga , general rule. 

l uddna , a kind of vayu (air); (b) kind of verse. 

3^RTH uddslna, indifferent, unaffected, quiet. 

uddharana, corroboration, instance, example, exenij 
fication. . 

3i^F uddesa, enunciation, enumeration, object, end. 
uddesya , subject. 

3§og udbuddha , manifested, awakened. 

vo 

udbodhaka , that which causes something to manife 
stimulating element. 
udbhid , name of a sacrifice. 

udbhijja , plants, born of seed. 

3§^T udvega , (y) dissatisfaction. 
upahdra, benefit. 

34sCT upakrama , beginning, commencement. 

3%T upaMesa, (b) secondary ft/esa. 

1. : i 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


23 


upagraha , influence. 

^qidf upaghdta, demolition, destruction. 

upacaracchala , figurative casuistry, a kind of falla¬ 
cious inference. 

upadesa , (m) teaching, Vedic text expressing a niyoga 
or duty, 

SqqRf upadhdna, imposition. 

^Tqfpt upddhi, peculiarity, attribute, support. 

upanaya , subsumptive correlation ; (n) minor premise, 
reaffirmation, restatement 

upanisad , last portion of Vedas, important. 
upanydsa , statement, discourse. 

1 upapattit explanation, evidence. - OT' - sama , (n) a kind 
of contradiction in which both the contradicting assertions 
are supposed to be demonstrable. 

upapdduka , self-produced. 

2 upamdna , instrument of comparison, simile or parity; 
(n) analogy. 

r\ 

^qpTRT upamiti, assimilative cognition or experience. 
upayoga , utility. 

upalaksana, indication of the self as well as others, a 
mark. 

3 tf 55 foq' upalabdhi , apprehension, pei'ception. 
upalambha , apprehension. 
upastambhaka, support, stimulant. 
upasamhdra, destruction, recapitulation. 
upasarga , preposition. 
upasarjana , unimportant. 

1. dq d^r srwrr sra: l 

2. I d^ I 



24 


A GLOSSARY 


upasthiti, thought, presence. 

Sqpjpf vpdddna, (v) material or substantive cause ; (b) attach¬ 
ment, grasping, clinging, cause; (m) a mode of expression 
like ajahatsvdrtha ; a pramana for Mimamsaka Prabhakara, 
viz. number and gender of an ahga. - - kdrana, 

material cause. 

3qp5?{ upddeya, (m) object of injunction. 

3qyj% 1 upddhi , limitation, disguise, condition, augment, concept, 
special attribute or property, condition ; (n) determination 
(of the absolute), vitiating or adventitious condition, spe¬ 
cial cause for a general effect. 

gqpT updya, means, way, remedy. 

updlambha, censure. 

gqfiH npdsana, adoration, worship, invocation. 

3^1 upeksd, indifference. 

$ 

urnandbha, spider. 

3 ^ uha, modification by conjecture or reasoning, comprehen¬ 
sion of particulars ; (») one of the 8 siddhis, independent 
reasoning. - ~ 1 

3R 

rjunaya, (j) one of the 7 nayas of saptabhahgl in which 
a prediction may be made about a thing. 
rta, truth, cosmic law. 

rtambhard, (y) bearer of truth (i.e.) the self in samadhi. 

rtvij, a priest in a sacrifice such as adhvaryu, hotr , 
brahman, udgdtr, etc., 
rddhi, (b) supernatural power. 

rsi, sage. 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


25 


eka, one. - - jlvavada, one-soul theory. - 

— tvdnyatva, the state of being either the same or the other. 

— - dekin, a sub-class of followers of one philosophi¬ 

cal system, knowing only one part of the true state of 
case. — — rupee, one form. — — vdkya, sentence 

united with some other, a single sentence. - =*I31[Tfl3> 

— vyavahdrika, a sub-school of Buddhism. — — sesa, 

name of a compound denoting that of two or more 
stems alike in form only one remains. — fjfcf — stuti, (j) 
an enunciation in the singular. — — sattdvada, (v) 

doctrine of one existence. 

ekd.gra, close attention, closely attentive. - cfr - td, con¬ 
centration or abstraction. 

^>Ftf ekdnta, exclusive, exclusively. - 5^1 “ dusama,. (j) con¬ 
taining only bad year. - SWr - susamd (j) containing only 
good year. - - raj, name of a Bodhisattva. 

ekdntika, certain, steady, permanent, devoted to one 
aim, person or theory. — HTH — tnarga, monotheism. 

ekdyana, a narrow way or path accessible for only one 
person, centre of union. 


3 

ibfcU.q aikdgrya, concentration on one object. 

aikdntika, permanent, complete, absolute, exclusive. 
_ <«r - tva, certainty, steadiness, permanence. 

aikdtmya, unity of the soul, oneness, identity. 

trgfq aikya, identity, unity, harmony, sameness. 

aitihya, tradition. 

aisvarya, lordship, supremacy, superhuman power. 

♦ 



26 


A GLOSSARY 


otn, pranava. 

oiikara , pranava, combination of 3T, S and *1- 

ota, threaded, intervowen. - 3TTcf - prota, woven length¬ 
wise and crosswise. 


4r 

auttardpathiha, a school of Buddhist philosophy 
that is coming from the northmost part of the country. 

autpaitika, (m) eternal, material. 

autsargika, belonging to a general rule. 

3 iI^ c W autsuhya, eagerness, desire, longing. 
auddrya, magnanimity, generosity. 

auddslnya, indifference, apathy. 

aupacdrika, figurative, metaphoiical. 

aupanisada, follower of Upanisads, contained or tau¬ 
ght in Upanisads. 

aupapatyamkika, (b) consciousness related to rebirth. 

aupapatika, (b) born without apparent cause (i.e.) 
parents. 

aupddhika, dependent on particular conditions, extrin¬ 
sic, limited. 

aurdhvadaihika, relating to a deceased person, per¬ 
formed in honour of the dead. 

avlukya, follower of the Vaisesika doctrine. 


$ 

«fi Ka, Brahman. 

kaksd, disputing side, disputative stand, 
qjg katu, pungent. 

'kathina, hard, stiff, harsh, cruel. 



Ot PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


27 


Kanabuj , another name for Kanada. 

Kanada , atom-eater, a name given to the author of Vaise- 
sika philosophy. 

kantaka, thorn; (n) a term implying the refutation of 
argument, detection of error. 
kanthdbharana, necklace. 

TORIflfl kadhambhdvdkdhksa, (m) expectation of subsidiary 
acts. 

kapila , brown, name of a sage who is the author of 
Sahkhyasastra. 

kapisa , brown, reddish-brown, 

kamandalu, a vessel made of w6od or earth used for 
water by ascetics and religious students. 

£pqr[ kampana , shaking, trembling, unsteady. 

karatala, palm of the hand. 

W karana, medium, means, cause, organ, 

haruna , lamentable, compassion, pity. 
l;artf, doer, author, functionary, agent. 

barman, action, deed, activity, destiny, performance. 

- fpsyi - indriya, (n) organ of action (5). - 'PP T * — hdnda, 

ritual portion of Vedas, name of a Jaina work. - *T?cf 
gati, course of fate. - -^Ici - canddla, a contemptible 
man. - - dhdraya, name of a compound, a subclass of 

tatpurusa compound. - T«T - fiatha, the way or direction 
of an action. - '•‘JW - bhumi, land or region of religious 
actions. - WTM - mimamsd, systematic enquiry on the 
ritual portion of Vedas instituted by Jaimini. - ^PT - yoga, 
yoga of action, practical application, active exertion. 
_ r%tPT - vijndna , (b) activity-intelligence. - rt'TPP - vipa- 
ha, ripening of action. - ^<5 - slla, assiduous in work. 

— ~ sdksin, witness of all acts. 



28 


A GLOSSARY 


^3 halala , embryo. 

kala, part, 16th part, fine art. 

halpa , rule, way, method, a period of time, one of the 
6 Vedangas. 

kalpand , assumption, reflection, creation, imagination, 
conceptual content, presumptive knowledge. 

kalpika, conceptual, (b) fit, proper. 

kalpita , adjusted, imaginary, invented. 

^ fulfil halyanamitra , (b) spiritual teacher. 

hd^dya, astringent, yellowish red. 

kdhatdliya , after the manner of “ the crow and the 
palm-fruit, 1 ” unexpected, accidental. 

kaca, glass. 

Mcakamala , a kind of eye disease, cateract. 
kdncana, gold. - - may a, made of gold. 

kaqda, section, chapter, part, single joint of a stem of a 
plant. - - anusamaya , the performance of all pres¬ 

cribed acts of ritual in orderly succession for a particular 
object before performing the same acts in the same order 
for a second object. 

hdddcitka , occasional. 

^if^T kdnti, brilliance, splendour, beauty. 

kdpdlika , a sect of Saiva ascetics who carries a human 
skull and uses it as a receptacle for his food. (He belongs 
to the left hand sect). 

hdpila , follower of Sankhya system of philosophy foun¬ 
ded by Kapila. 

WT ftdma, erotics, desire, God of Love, one of the four puru- 
sarthas, enjoyment. - Sfa?; - rupin, taking form at will. - 
- loka, world of desire. 

kdmyakarman , action done for a particular object. 



Of PHliOSOPHICAt TERMS 




hdmyavidhi, optional injunction. 

kdya, aggregate, trunk, body. - - danda, control of tbe 

body. ■ 

hdraka, productive, creative, relation between noun and 
verb in grammar. 

qjR°T kdrana, cause, reason, origin. - 5RU - sarlra, (v) causal 
body, the original embryo or source of the body existing 
with the universal impersonal spirit and equivalent to 
Avidya. 

karika, verse. 

karitra , (b) power of action. 

cftRftEj karunya, compassion, pity, 
o _ 

kartsnya, 'entirety. 

kdrmiha , name of a Buddhist philosophical school. 

o _ . . 

karya , product, task, artificial, producible, to be done or 

performed. - qnWM - kdranabhdva, relation of cause and 

effect. - SflT ~ sama, (n) a particular sophistical objection. 

^1^5 kala, time. - sffiTcf - atita, delayed, mis-timed. - 

- atyaydfiadista, invalidated by lapse of time, a term for 
a vain argument. - - mayavapus , time-body, time¬ 

bodied. 

kirti, fame, glory, speech, report. 

kukkulika , a sub-school of Buddhism. 
kudya , wall. 
kutarkin , false arguer. 

humdrila , founder of a new school in mimamsa, other 
wise called Bhattamata. 

humhhaka , (y) suspension of breath, stopping the breath 
by shutting the mouth and closing the nostrils with 
fingers of the right hand, see Prdfjdydma post. .. 

huldla , potter. 

kuvinda , weaver. - ' ’ 



30 


A GLOSSARY 


kusa, sacred grass used for religious ceremonies. 
kusala, good, auspicious. 

granary, room or container in which rice or gr* 
is stored. 

kuhu, new moon (personified as a daughter of Angiras.) 

kutastha, (v) standing at the top, keeping the high' 
position, unchangeable. 

kurca, bundle of grass. 

pfti krtaka, artificial, unreal. 

fcRRT krtawsa, disappearance of fruit of action duly p< 
formed. 

tjfd krti, act, deed. 


krtrima, artificial. 
i?TT krfia, pity. 


^IdK krsnatara, the dark of the eye. 
gsora Urmala, a piece of gold of small weight. 

krsara, a dish consisting of sesamum and grain. 
hevala, attributeless, unqualified, isolated, alone. - c 
- tvam, onliness, loneliness, attributelessness. - frR - jnan 
(j) highest possible knowledge. - - vyatirekin, (: 

a negative, reason showing only the negative concorr 
tance. - — adhikarana, mere container. — SFqfr^ 


- anvgyin, a reason showing the only positive concomitanc 
kevalin, (j) an Arhat possessing the kevalajndna. 

hesonduka, a sling or knot of hair, net-like appai 
tion seen while the eyes are shut. 
iaitikarya, worshipful service. 

'kaimutiha, the rule of ‘ how much more ’ or ‘ ho 
much less,’ arguing a portion and leaving the rest f< 
inference (a fortiori). 

kaivalya, absolute liberation, final absolution; (v) absolu 
unity, perfect isolation. 



OF PHIEOSOPHICAI, TERMS 


31 


kosa, encasement, sheath. 

kramcz, order, sequence, arrangement, arranged position. 
~ 51% - mukti, gradual liberation or absolution. - apfjtr 

- akratna, consecutive and concurrent. 

hramasah, successively. 

fspJT kriyd , action, activity, performance. - srr% - sahti , power 
of action. - - siddhi, fruition of action. 

krodha , anger, ire. 

ksana , moment, sensation, attention, opportunity. - 

- bhahga, continual decay of things. - - bhahgavdda, 

doctrine of continul decay of things. - SRTFf - sdntana, 
series of moments. 

hsanika, momentary, transient. - T31FT - vijndna, (b) 
philosophy of temporary or momentary consciousness of 
Bauddhas. 

h&apanaka, religious mendicant especially Jaina, men¬ 
dicant who wears no garments. 

3WT bsamd, forbearance, patience, faith. 

STTfcr ksanti , forbearance. 

^[R ksdra, alkaline. 

ksetrajna , soul (i.e.) knower of the body. 
ksetna , protection of what is obtained. 

^Tt^FT ksodaksatna, capable of test or investigation. 


khakkhata, hard, solid. 
yc|U^«r[ khandana, refutation. 
khapuspa, sky-flower. 

hhila , additional hymn appended to the regular collection 
of hymns of Vedas. 



32 


A GLOSSARY 


khecari, one of the yogamudra symbols. 

^ifd khyati, (b) discernment, knowledge, publicity, celebrity, 
perception. 


*1 

gaganakusuma, sky-flower. 

gatanugatika , following what precedes, following 
custom or the conduct of another, imitative. 

gatdrtha, object fulfilled. 

gati, motion, result, mode of existence, course, origin. 
gandha , odour, smell. 

gandharvanagara , an imaginary town in the sky, 
Gandharvancity. 

gamaka , indicative, causing to understand. 

WFi gamana , motion, going. 

gamanikd , explanatory paraphrase, method, doctrine. 
garbhita , pregnant, containing inside. 

Tfcjpppi gavdtnayana, name of a sacrifice. 

TfjSfl gdthd , a stanza, verse. 

gambhlrya , magnanimity. 

JpT guna, quality, aspect, characteristic; (m) any material use¬ 
ful for sacrifice, one of the seven categories in Nyaya- 
Vaisesika philosophy. 

guitin, substrate, possessor of quality. 

gP&tii (j) three kinds of guptis, restraint of body,-mind 
and speech. 

guru , another name for Prabhakara. - - tva, solidity, 

weight. - - mata % Prabhakara’s view in Mimamsa. 

grhastha , householder. 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


33 


gokulika, one who gives help to a cow in the mud, 
name of a Buddhist sect. 

^TV'H gocara, object, place. 

^Tt^f gotra, lineage, race, family name. 


gonardiya, belonging to Gonardas ; Patanjali, the foun¬ 
der of Yoga philosophy. 

gomedha, cow-sacrifice. 
gauna, not primary. 

%JTT gaunt, one of the functions of a word to connote a remote 
sense. 

Gautama, the founder of Nyaya philosophy. 

gaurava, a defect in logical discussion consisting of heavi¬ 
ness in argumentation or cumbrousness. 


grantha, work, treatise, book, composition. - - kara, 

author. 


grasta, devoid, eclipsed. 

graha, any ladle or vessel employed for taking up a portion 
of fluid especially of soma out of a larger vessel. 

SffCFf grahana, grasping, seizing, choosing. 

JfpffaT grdmina, villager, peasant. 

grdvastut, one of the 16 priests in soma sacrifice. 

grdhaka, that which grasps the object. 

3THf grdhya, knowable object, that which is to be grasped. 


ghata, jar, pot. - c? - tva, potness, jarness. - sfT'BRT - akdsa, 
space in a. pot. 

’Hd'bvsl ghatakatva, state of being included. 
fc|fdcl ghatita, included, joined. 

ghantdghosa, public declaration, bell-announcement. 

5 



34 


A GLOSSARY 


R’FfRIcT ghanagarjita, the roar of thunder, deep loud roar. 

Id ghrta, ghee. 
ghora, terrific. 

g^osa, hut of herdsmen, a particular form of a temple. 
Sfl^T ghrana, olifactory organ, nose. 

'd'fi cakra, "wheel. — *Tfrr — nemi, wheel-felly. — 'SrtT'T — bhratna 
turning like a wheel. 

caksus, eye, vision, visual sense, sense of sight. - 
- vijfidna, (b) visual cognition. 

catuspat, four-footed, quadripartite. 

candranddi, (y) one of principal nadis or arte: 
passages in the living body. 

camasa, a small vessel used at the vedic sacrifice for talc: 
soma juice. 

■*W'«i cayana, vedic ceremony of piling up bricks. 

caramdvasthd, final state, condition at death. 

Rdd carana, the feet of the venerable, a pada or line oi 
stanza, section, a school or branch of the veda. 

caritdrtha, accomplished object, one who has attaii 
his end. 

RR? carca, consideration, deliberation, discussion. 

R2|f caryd, doing. 

calana, motion, moving. 

R1T55 casdla, a wooden ring on the top of a sacrificial post. 

cdksusa, belonging to the sight or produced from 
sight. 

RljpTR caturmdsya, a sacrifice of 4 months’ duration. . 
cdturya, tactfulness. 



35 


OP PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 

carvaka, materialistic philosopher. - W! - mata, hetero¬ 
dox philosophy, atheism. 

calanl , parasol. 

cid, intelligence, intellect, knowledge, consciousness. - 
- dtmaka, consisting of pure consciousness. - 3fl*TRT - abhasa , 
self semblance. - - maya, consisting of pure thought or 

consciousness. - - mdtra, pure thought. - g^F - mudrd > 

symbol of consciousness, one of the symbols in yogic 
practice. - FT - rupa, consciousness, universal spirit as 
identified with pure thought. 

citi, a layer of wood or bricks. 

citta, mind, thought, conciousness. - - ekatva , mental 

unity or fixity. - - viprayuktadharma, (b) non¬ 

mental compounds. - Ff^rg - vibhrama, confusion of mind, 
mental delusion, mental derangement. - SFcfT% ~ santati, 
continuity of consciousness. 

citra, variegated. 

f%^TT cintd, thought, meditation, speculation, discussion, 
anxiety. 

or clra or civara, (b, j) the dress of a monk. 
curna , powder. 

cetana, | conscious, sentient, intelligent, soul, mind, cons- 
cetana, J ciousness, volition. 

=3^ cetayitr, thinker. 

cetas, mind, thought 

cestasraya, receptacle or vehicle of bodily action or 
motion. 

caitanya, consciousness, intelligence, life, sensation. 
caittika, a sub-school of Buddhism. 
caitya, (b, j) a temple or a place of worship generally con¬ 
taining a monument. 



36 


A GLOSSARY 


codancz, inducement, permission, direction, (m) a vidhiU 
vakya. 

codya , raising a question to be criticised. 

r > 

cyuti, falling down, degeneration, perishing, death. 


3 

chalet, (n) casuistry, quibbling, deceitful disputation, per¬ 
verting the sense of words. - 3T[fd - jdti, futile rejoinder. 
3PT chaga, he-goat. 

3RI chdyd, image, shadow, likeness. 


3T 

jagat, world, earth. 

jathamgni, digestive fire. 

ST? jada, unconscious, stupid, inanimate, insensate, inert, in- 
active. 

janaka , cause, producing. 

SPg jantu, living being, creature. 
jamnan, birth. 

^ janya, producible, produced, born. 

5TT japa, recitation of a mantra, muttering. 
jam, old age, decay, senility. 
jardyuja, bom from womb. 


jala ’ Water ’ - ^ " «***ra, image of moon in water. 
Jaldkasa, sky reflected in water. 

Jal ^ a ’ (n ? dls P uta tion, discourse, one of two kinds of vada 
overbearing reply and disputed rejoinder. 

msm jahallaksand, indicative, indication, secondary sense 
abandoning primary sense. 



OE PHItOSO^HICAt TERMS 


S7 

j a ^dajahallaksana 7 secondary sense partly aban¬ 
doning the primary sense. 

^IPI \jdgrat t waking. - 3TF3Tc[ - jdgrat, perfectly waking state, 
waking state in a waking state. - - susupti, state of 

deep sleep in waking state. - - svapna, dream in the 

waking state. 

STTd jdta, born, brought into existence. 

STTcT^ jdtaka, (b) the story of former birth. 

Sflfd jati, birth, rebirth, caste, general character as opposed to 
individual one, nature, race, family, species; (n) that which 
is asserted, objective. - - uttara , (n) futile rejoinder, 

self-confuting reply. 

^fPTRcft jdydpati , wife and husband. 

jdlandharabandha, a kind of bandha, bodily pose 
in yogic practice. 

jijndsd, desire to know, enquiry. 
jitendriya, one who has subjugated senses. 

fsTd jina, victorious, name of Buddha or Mahavira. 

f%j|I jihvd , gestatory organ, tongue. 

jiva, living world, individual soul, vital spirit. - 
- caitanya, spirit as individual soul. - - nmukta, libe¬ 
rated while living, - - atman, individual soul. 

jaina, relating to Jinas, worshipper of Jina. 

Jaimini, founder of Purvamimamsa. 

n 

^ jna, knower, wise and learned man, knowing. — — sahti, 

intellectual faculty. 
jnapti , knowledge, understanding. 
jndta, known, understood, perceived. 

flddl jndtatd , (m) state of being known or understood. 



38 


A GLOSSARY 


jnana , pure knowledge, thought, consciousness, wisdom, 
idea. - - hdnda , a portion of the veda relating to 

knowledge (i.e.) upanisads etc. - - bhratnsa, loss of 

knowledge. - - laksand , (n) intuitive knowledge of 

anything actually not perceived by senses. - - saw- 

bhdra , accumulation or equipment of knowledge. - 
- adhydsa , super-imposition of knowledge. - 3Fr$TRT - dbhd- 
sa, knowledge-semblance. 

jndpaka , (n) indicative (cause). 
jneya , knowable (thing). 


iJ 

tatastha , neutral. - - Idksana , passive or incidental 

quality. 

tattva , reality, truth, true nature of entity, element, true 
principle. - ^ - jnana , knowledge of truth, insight into 
the true principle. - 5PT - tfwya, name of the triad: Cit, 
Acit and Iswara (universal soul) - £nr - drsti, perceiving 
truth. 

cfx^FTf^r tattvamasi , that thou art. This is called mahavakya. 

<PTkTT tathatd , (b) suchness (doctrine of Uttarapathakas.) 

tathdgata, name of Buddha, one who has arrived at 
perfect state of existence. 

^ tathdca, likewise, accordingly (introducing quotation, 
etc.) 

cRlfi tathdpi , even so, yet, nevertheless (correlative of yadyapi). 
cPTlf! tathdhi , for, so (it has been said), for instance. 
tathya , real. 

tadatmakatva , being of that nature, 
body, thin, slender, small, fine, 
tantu , thread. 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


39 


tantra , system of thought, a class of works teaching 
magical and mystical formulae. - flTC - sara, essence of 
philosophy. 

Hanmdtra, (s) rudimentary substance, subtle element. 
tafias , penance. 

tamas , darkness, ignorance, inertia. 
tamoguna, dullness, inertia. 

cRi tarka, system or doctrine founded on speculation or reaso¬ 
ning. Cogitation, reasoning, enquiry, logic, confutation 
(especially that kind of argument which consists in reduc¬ 
tion to absurdity), reductio ad absurdum, indirect argu¬ 
ment, dialectics, same as Nyaya. 
tarfiana , satiating, refreshing, oblation of water. 
cfWf tdtfiarya , meaning, purport. 

tadavasthya, remaining in the same condition. 
tdddtmya, identity, sameness of character. 

<=fTj*C2I tddrufiya, sameness of form, identity. 

tantrika, taught in a scientific manner, one completely 
versed in any science or system, a follower of tantra 
doctrine. 

rIFl tapa, pain. — SRT — traya, three kinds of passion. 

tapascf, practiser of or relating to religious austerity. 

3FW tamasa, appertaining to or affected by the quality tamas. 
taratamya, gradation, difference. 

tarkika, logician, dialectician, related to or belonging to 
tarka. 

tikta, bitter. 

titiksa, endurance of opposites like heat and cold etc., 
forbearance, patience. 

i. sPTsftfsir l 



40 


A GLOSSARY 


titiksu, patient, forbearing, enduring patiently. 
ffift timira , dark, darkness, eye-disease. 

tirascina , crooked, horizontal, across. 
tirbdhana , obscuration, disappearance. 
cfT^f tbtha , passage, advice, instruction, preceptor. 
tirthanhara, (j) perfect soul among Jainas. 

or tlrthaka or tlrthika, (b) any opponent philoso¬ 

pher. 

tuccha, worthless, vain, empty. 

$ tun, shuttle. 

or jjp turlya or turya, fourth. 
tulya, alike, equal, 
jjfe tusti, satisfaction. 

tusnimbhdva, the state of being silent, silence. 

<j[0T trna, straw, blade of grass. 

<£^11 trsna, desire, craving. 

tejas, light, effulgence, fire. 

*. . 

taijasa, (v) name given to Jiva in the state of dreaming. 

taimirika, one affected by eye disease, cataract. 

<?RT l%*e(f trayi vidyd, three Vedas. 

<=RR5J trasarenu, mote or atom of dust in a sun beam. 

tridandin, ascetic, a school of philosophers. 

tridhdtu, consisting of three parts, especially kama 
dhatu, rupa and ariipa dhatu. 

trimala, three-fold impurity. 

T3RFT triratna, (b) three-fold gem, viz. Buddha, his doctrine and 
order. 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


41 


trirupa, (n) three-featured, (viz) presence of the indicative 
in the subject {pak§adharma ), presence of the indicative 
where the probandum is known to be present ( sapaksa- 
sattva), absence of the indicative where the probandum is 
known to be absent (vipaksavydvrtti). - - lihga, 

three-featured probans. 

trivrtharana, triplicating. 

tretdgni, three kinds of Vedic fire called dhavanlya , 
gdrhapatya and daksindgni. 

traikalika, pertaining to three times (past, present, 
future). 

traikdlya, embracing the three times, a school of Bud¬ 
dhistic philosophy. 

traigunya (s) triple nature of the matter. 
traidhatuha , triple world. 
traividya , well versed in three Vedas. 
tvac, tactile organ, sense of touch, skin. 

k 

cspref dagdha , burnt. 

danda, stick, trunk, stem. - - kamandalu , jar with 

handle, - *TFFcf - nlti, administration of justice. 

damana , taming, subduing, overpowering, control of the 

senses. 

dambha , deceit, hypocrisy. 
dayd, grace, pity, compassion. 
darpa, pride, arrogance. 
darpccna , mirror. 
darsct, new moon. 

darsana, doctrine, knowledge, school of thought or 
philosophy, seeing, sight, perception. 

6 



42 


A GLOSSARY 


darvihoma, oblation made with a wooden ladle or its 
substitute. 

ddna, act of giving, giving up, imparting, teaching, dona¬ 
tion, gift. - qrcrlrtFT - pdramitd , (b) perfection of charity. - 
qr?r - pdtra, object of charity. 

darsanika, acquainted with darsanas, philosopher. 

ddrstanta, explained by an example. 

ddrstdnlika , one who uses an example or simile as a 
proof. 

dis, quarter, direction; (n) one of the nine substances. 
digambara , a sect of Jains. 

divya, divine, superhuman, supernormal. - ST% — drsti, 
supernatural vision, theurgy. - - mdrga, divine path. 

dtksd, initiation, determination, 
cffa dipa, light, lamp. 
dlrgha, long. 

duradhigama, difficult to attain, inscrutable, ununder- 
standable. 

cjE^T durgati, misfortune, (b) bad state of life such as animal, 
etc. 

durjaya, hard to win, a stage of progress in Bodhisattva’s 
career. 

durbala, feeble, of little strength. 

duscarita, misdoing, (b) the 10 chief sins: murder, theft, 
adultery, lying, calumny, lewdness, evil speech, covetous¬ 
ness, envy, heresy. 

dust a, faulty. - f 3 - hetu, defective probans. 
dussddhya, difficult to accomplish. 
duJikha, suffering, pain, sorrow, misery. 

OTJ[ dusana, objection, adverse argument, refutation, finding 
fault, 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


43 


drsya, visible. 

drsta, direct perception, perceived object. 

drstanta, example, illustration. 

drsti, vision, cognition, (b) wrong belief. - - srsti- 

vdda, illusion theory, eye-creation theory. 

deva, God. 

devatd, presiding deity. 

^efFdi devdndmfiriya, (b) beloved of gods, honourable; fool, 
idiot. 

desika, spiritual teacher or guide. 

deliatmavadin, one who holds that there is no soul 
distinct from the body, 
drill'd dainandina, daily, diurnal. 
dainya, (s) lowness, dejection. 

daisiha, relating to space or to any place as opposed to 
kalika. 

dosa, defect, fault. 
doha, hymns in Prakrit. 
s('R=r dravatva, fluidity. 
jj[oZf dravya, substance, matter. 

gq dvaya, the double, being the name given to two mantras 
relating to Ni.ra.yana. 

dvddasdhgl, collection of Jain sacred writings consis¬ 
ting of 12 parts. 

dvddasddhyayl, name of Jaimini’s Mrmamsa consis¬ 
ting of 12 adhyayas. 

m dvdra, entrance, way, means, medium. 
dvesa, dislike, aversion, enmity, hate. 



44 


A GLOSSARY 


dvaita, dual, dualistic doctrine propounded by Ananda- 
tirtha. 

lifd'h dvaitin, dualist. 


dhcmvan, dry soil, desert. 

dharma, characteristic, attribute, quality, duty. - mrq- 
kdya, norm-body, one of the three bodies of Buddha. - 
- cak$us, (b) the eye of the norm. - cfr - td, normalising 
whole nature. — — dhdtu, (b) norm, element of law or 

existence. - m«W - bhdhaka, (b) law-expounder, preacher, 
public reader of Mahabharata and sacred boohs. — jjsf 
megha, (b) a stage of Bodhisattva’s career. - fofPT - vinaya, 
dogma, disciplinary regulation. - 5rr??r - kdstra, law-book' 

code of law. - - dyatana, (b) sphere or objects of 

manas. 

rsr 

dharmin, bearer of the attribute. 

dhdtu,' corporeal element, ingredient, phenomenon, fact of 
consciousness, humour. 

WROT dhdrana, sustaining. 

dhara nd, (v) steadying the mind, fixed meditation, trance. 

Wt dhdrani, magic spell, mystical verse or charm used as a 
kind of prayer to assuage pain. 

dhdrmika, righteous, virtuous, pious. 
dhi, idea, mind. 

^3°! dhutaguna, (b) ascetic practice or precept. 

P dhuma , smoke. 
dhrti, endurance. 

^ c 

SR dhairya , courage. 

^ R tSn? meditati0U ’ (narrower than samadhi i.e. concen- 

^ dhruva, pole star, firm, fixed, immovable, permanent, uu- 
changeable. * 



45 


Otf PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 

dhvamsa , falling down, destruction, annihilative non¬ 
existence, disappearance, perishing, loss. 
dhvcmi, noise, sound. 


nabhas, air. 

nabhascara , one who travels in the air. 
namctna, reverential obeisance, bowing down. 
nara , man, highest soul. 

SR35 naraka , hell. 
navya, modern. 

SpSR nasvara, destructible, perishable. 
nasta, disappeared, perished. 
fiadi, an artery, tube, pipe. 
nada, noise, sound, chime. 

ndntariyaka, unavoidable, intermediate. 

ridtnan , name ; (b) mind. - - rupa, name and form ; 

(b) mind and matter, mentality and corporeality. 

I ridsa, annihilation. 
ndsat , nonentity. 

nastika, heterodox person, unbeliever. 

RspFI nikdya, heap, collection, (b) collection of Buddhistic 
Sutras. 

nigada , reciting, audible recitation, a prayer recited 
aloud. 

FiRffl nigama, a class of Vedic mantras. 

nigamana , (n) final conclusion, restatement of the pro¬ 
position on the basis of the statement of the probans. 



46 


A GLOSSARY 


nigraha, subjugation, suppression. - - sthana, (n) 

clincher, vulnerable. 

FR nitya, constant, eternal. - - batman, daily duty, com¬ 

pulsory rite. - W - tva, eternality. - spg; - baddha, ever 
bound. - r%'4 - vidhi, compulsory injunction. - srftw- 
— anityaviveka, (v) a discerning knowledge of which 
is real or which is unreal, one of the 4 qualifications of 
Brahmavidya. — sfsjf udita, (p) ever manifest. 

rv 

niddna, (b) cause, root cause (twelve root causes). 

nididhydsana, (v) concentrated meditation, profound 
and repeated meditation. 

nidrd, sleep, slumber. 

few nidhana, death, destruction. 

nidhyapti, philosophical meditation, reflection. 
nimittct, (efficient) cause, reason. - - hdrana, (n) 

instrumen tal cause. — «TTfntf4) — naimittika, cause and effect. 
niyata, invariable, constant, suppressed, controlled, check¬ 
ed. - ft - purvavrtti, invariable antecedent. 

%ri?r niyati, restriction, law, regulation, fate, destiny (p) sakti 
consisting of great knowledge. 

few niyama, specification, limitation, rule. 

fefe 1 niyoga , (m) injunction, duty, a force which mediates bet¬ 
ween sacrifice and benefit, apurva. 

fereWf niranvaya, absolute, without residue as in 

nirabhildpyasunyatd, (b) inexpressible voidness. 
nirarthaka , meaningless. 

fesRjRf nimvakdsa, wanting room, having no suitable place 
(to act). 

feqWSf niravayava, inseparable, bodiless, partless. 

W^I4vO J l nriaharana, l'efutation. 

1. ^fcfPFRgft ^S^^\mm^:—Vedantasara 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


47 


f?RRSR3lf^ nirakaravadin, one who holds the theory of image- 
less consciousness, 

PklWdl niratmatd, soullessness. 

f^RRT nirasa , repudiation, rejection, refutation. 
nirukta, defined, one of the Vedangas. 
nirukti, etymological interpretation of a word. 
niruddha , restricted, impeded, stopped, checked. 
nirupakhya , (b) featureless thing. 
nirupaka, correlating, correlated. 
nirupana, exposition. 
nirupya> that which is correlated. 

nirodha, cessation, suppression, (y) retention of breath. 
- H*rrqi% - samapatti , (b) cessation of conciousness. 

nirgrantha, free from all ties, a saint who has with¬ 
drawn from the world and lives either as a hermit or wan¬ 
dering naked. 

f^*|uT nirguna , absolute, quality-less, unqualified. 
nirnaya, decisive knowledge, conclusion. 
nirdesa, definition, particular mention. 

Met nirbhasa, (b) reflection, illustration. 

nirbhdsijndna, (b) cognition by mere reflected image. 

fqTPR nirmanthya, (m) being newly churned by friction (as 
fire.) 

fafap f i Ft nirmdnakdya, (b) body created by some supernatural 
power. 

fqcP'R nirvacana, defiinite predication. 

ficfi lTf nirvana, cessation of finite existence, absolute existence. 

nirvdpa, separating a portion from the heap of grain for 
purpose of sacrifice, 



48 


A GLOSSARY 


ftlW* nirvihalpaka, (n) undifferentiated, indeterminate (b) 
devoid of imagination. — 3 ^FT — jhdna, (n) non-conceptual 
perception, indeterminate perception. 

nirvikalpasamddhi, (y) a kind of yogic concen¬ 
tration. 

f^NiR nirvikdra, unchangeable, immutable. 

nirvisesa, attributeless. - ^ - brahman, attributeless 
brahman. - arfcT - advaita, same as advaita 2 (monism of 
Sankara). 

nivid, particular Vedic mantra containing epithets or 
short invocations of gods. 

Rfl% nivrtti , cessation, emancipation, withdrawing, returning. 
niscaya, definite cognition, resolve. 
niksreyasa, salvation. 

f*$K4M4lc1 nisddasthapati, a carpenter being nisdda by caste. 
nisiddha, prohibited. 
nisedha , prohibition, interdiction. 
niskarsa , definite conclusion, brief statement 
niskala , undivided. 
niskama , desireless. 

%T nistha, climax, highest point. 
nisphala , fruitless. 

nisyandaphala, (b) fruit suited to action. 

RfWFf nissvabhdva, devoid of nature, devoid of existence. 

Wild nlti, politics. 

nlrupa , featureless. 

r\ 

RR5 nlla, blue. 


X. 


2. 


—y edantasara. 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


49 


motive power. 

naikafiratyanikatvam , (n) invariable concomitance. 

P naimittiha, artificial, occasional. — - pralaya, occa- 

ional dissolution. 

nairatmyavada, (b) doctrine which denies the exis- 
snce of the soul as a separate entity. 

■'tad ana, pushing, repelling. 

rydya, accepted generalisation, axiom, popular maxim; (n) 
yllogistic argument. - - sdstra, science of reasoning, 

yaya (tarka) propounded by Gautama. 
y ttna, wanting, incomplete; (n) a nigrahasthdna, 

<1 

ehsa, (n) view, side, position advanced, subject, thesis, 
ninor term. — dr - td 9 subjectness. - W - dharma, (n) pre- 
ence of the indicative in the subject. - - dharmatd , 

ubject-adjnnctness. - TO - pdta, siding with one party. - 
fcT^sr - pratisedha , demolition of argument. - - vaca¬ 

te, assertion of the minor term. 

oft pancakaranl, (b) five-conditions-method to determine 
ausal connection. 

t Pancaksarl, the 5 syllabled mantra of Siva. 

5=T pdncayatana, a five-fold worship of Brahman, Visuu 
iad Mahesvara, etc., a kind of worship in which five 
ymbols are used. 

OT 3 panctkarana , (v) quinquepartite. 
fya, cloth. 

It lias five members, nftifr, fg, 3WT and fJETOE, but 

according to Mimamsakas and VedSntins only three. 

srit i%i% I h 'if 11 

rii^i r%rc im g*: I ^ Hi 

7 



50 


A GLOSSARY 


*3335 patala , chapter. 

qfD^f ftandita, learned. 

qfsRp j pathika, way-farer. 

padartha, thing, substance; (n) category. 

^ para, final, supreme, higher, comprehensive. - STRJT? - at man , 
(s) liberated soul. - of - tva, priority, remoteness, extrinsi- 
cality. - 5TSPT - brahman, Supreme Brahman. - - vdda, 

rival view. - fRTFT - Santana, (b) self of others. - frrfTFH 
- sdmanya, (b) mere existence of categories. 

paratantra, dependent. - - lahsana, (b) relative 

or dependent nature. 

^ parata utpatti, (b) origination by other cause. 

paratahprdmdnya, (m) theory of extrinsic validity. 

L K’H'=^l'Hd x paramavyoman, highest heaven. 

paramahamsa, an ascetic of the highest order. 

parampardsambandlia, indirect relation. 

2 paramanu f atom, minute particle. 

tPF{^ paramatman, supreme soul. 

paramartha, supreme truth. - - sat , absolute reality. 

•FFRT 'pardmarsa, (n) subsumptive reflection, thinking or judg¬ 
ment, understanding minor premise in relation to major. 

tyP-M pardyana, bent on, inclined to. 

1. wi s'W-ti m nrftrty i 

2. FiwsR?n ?rr i«ir | 

3fifra-i4 ^tfrawrrf*pfr II 

i- I 3T3*TPTT{p?mfr 5>rif%i4 ^rto'r to- 

irarf s*nw; I 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


Si 


q^iqT3*fH pararthanumana, (n) inference for the benefit of 
others. 

paravara , one compared with whom the supreme being 
is lower. 

qR^f^FRT parikalpita , imaginary, created. 
parigraha , acceptance, taking. 
parigrahaka , (b) enveloping (cause). 

r\ 

qRtyFI parinama, mutation, modification, evolution. - 
- vada, evolution theory. 

qRM L Hv[$*Tq parini$pannalak$ana, (b) perfect or absolute 
nature. . 

*TR*rRT paribhdsd , technical term, supplementary rules of elu¬ 
cidation or interpretation, as those added to Pauini’s 
grammar. 

MRTfiUI parimaiia , dimension, size, quantity, measure. 

paridevand , lament. 

RKRiS parisista, supplement. 

HR^Tq parisesa , exclusion, remainder, residue. 
parisaha, (j) 32 kinds. 
parllisaka, investigator, examiner. 
partita, investigation. 
paroh^a, out of sight, indirect 

o . . 

q^fccf paryania , limit, uppermost point, 
c _ 

pary ay a, synonym. 

tpg pasu, animal, goat, lower creature. 

qpf> pdka , cooking, ripening, baking. 

qM^f3 pat an j ala, same as Yoga system o^5fS^)L>liv 
by Patanjali. - *%Ea 

qRI^ pdtdla , nether world. 

It vA 





52 


A GLOSSARY 


pdncabhautika, composed of five elements. 

IKRR 1 pancaratra , a school of philosophy. 

IK pada, section, part, quarter. 

RFR pdmara, low, uneducated, ordinary. 

MRd? 52 ! pdratantrya, subordination, dependence. 

IRhlRTfi paramarthika, spiritually absolute, philosophically real. 

C\ 

’-tRWdl paramitd (b) highest, climax. 

parimandalya , the smallest size conceivable, atomic 

size. 

*IKT fiasa, rope, bondage, attachment. 

pdsupata , a sect of Saivas with Pasupati as their deity. 
pdsanda, unbeliever. 
pinda , lump, sum-total, embryo, 
fqqpq'l pipdsd , thirst, 
fqgcf pi sun a, tale-bearer. 
pumstva, virility. 

pmiya , merit. — — parindma , (b) transfer of merit. 

- STOIT - sambhdra , equipment of merit. - * amo - 

dana, (b) delight in merit. 

35(55 pudgala , (b) something like jiva, person, living entity. 

punarukti , redundance, repetition. 

^cJcpspFJ punarvacana , restatement, repetition. 

purascarana , repetition of mantra according to a defi¬ 
nite number. 

1. m ^ fPT | 

The five kinds of jnana are and 

mm % trr} ^ i 

srw t^r ^ 4imi qrffrg i 



OF FHItOSOFHlCAt TERMS 


53 


1 puriyastaka, a subtle body apportioned to each indi¬ 
vidual soul under Saiva Siddhanta. 

purusa , anthropomorphic god, spirit, soul. - - pra~ 

vrtti , personal effort. - an? - artha , object of life, desirable 
object. 

JjfS pusti, prosperity. 

puja, worship. 

2 puraka, (y) inhalation. 

^ purna , full, complete, whole. 

purva, former, prior. - - 'pahsa, opponent’s objection, 

prima facie view, criticism, one of the five ingredients of 

an adhikarana. 
o 

purvahga , prior constituent. 
prthagjana , ordinary. 
prthaktva , separateness. 

pauruseya , emanating from man, coming from the soul 
or spirit. 

prakarana , subject, topic. 
q^<f prakarsa, exceptional quality, superiority. 
qsfiK praltara % mode, adjunct. 

prahasa , luminosity. 
qfig[ prakrta , related to the context. 

qg^T prakrti, nature; (•) primordial matter, evolving matter; 
(j) one of the 4 bandhas. - OT - aniyama , (n) original 
inconsistency. 

1. It continues from creation until the close of the Kalpa ; it is com¬ 
posed of thirty tattvas beginning with the earth and ending with 
Kalpa, 

2. I see hffptto 

3. I 



54 


A GLOSSARY 


prakriya, arrangement, method. 


prakhya, vividness. 

pracchannabauddha , concealed Buddhist, 


jnaptivddin, a sub-school of Buddhism. 


prajnd , wisdom, insight; (v) name given to jiva in the 
state of sleeping. - W$\ - caksus , eye of intuition. - *TRRdT 
- pdramitd , (b) the Buddhist boon of perfection of kuow- 
ledge or intuition. 


pranava , mystic syllable Om. 

pranidhdna , profound meditation. 

rs . 

SflcTfiRT pratikrti, image. 

Sfld^fT pratijna , thesis, proposition, assertion. 

pratitantrasiddhdnta , conclusion peculiar to each 
school of philosophy. 

. r-. 

pratipaksa, (n) counter-conception. 

pratipddyapratipddakabhdva, relation of the 
treated and the treatise. 

l pratiprasava, inverse proposition, exception to excep¬ 
tion, proviso to proviso. 

pratibandhaka, counter-agent, impediment. 

pratihimba , reflection. — - vdda, reflection theory. 

SJRFfT pratibhd , intuition, flash of intelligence. 

T 4mm pratibhdsa illusion. 

pratiyogin , counter correlative ; (a) correlate, positive 
counterpart of negation. ~ flf - ft*, (n) correlativeuess. 

pratiloma, inverse. 

q§[cflf^ prativddin , opponent, disputant. 


1. ftftgCST I 


OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


55 


pratisahkhyanirodha, (b) deliberate destruction. 

rs 

mmil pratisancara , reversal of creation, reabsorption. 

r> _ 

pratisandhana , restoring connection, uniting, recollec¬ 
tion of past experience. 

prat i sandhi, (b) rebirth, new existence. - F%R - vij ft - 
ana , (b) rebirth-consciousness, reconnection*consciousness. 

r-'- C 

pratisarga, secondary creation. 

SfcTTH pratiti, recognition, apprehension. 

pratityasamutpada, (b) dependent origination, chain 
of causation. 

TRTPf pratlpa, opposite. 

pratyal;, subjective. - siriR? - dtman, undivided essence 
(different from individual and supreme soul and worldly 
phenomena). 

pratyahsa, (n) sense-perception. 

JMfTfsfT pratyabh ijnd, recognition, reminiscence. — — dar- 

sana, recognitive system of Indian philosophy. 
pratyaya, contributory cause, co-operative cause, incor- 
porative suffix. - - sarga, (s) creation of the intellect. 

pratyavdya, impediment, obstruction, demerit. 
pratydsatti, proximity, nearness. 
pratyudha, covered over, impeded. 
pratyTiha, impediment, obstruction, opposition. 

pratyeha, each, single. - 55f°T - lahsana, separate charac¬ 
teristic. 

P rthvl, earth. 

qqjff pradhdna, determinative, important ; (s) primary cause, 
main inert substance, primordial matter. 

pradhvamsabhdva, (n) aunihilative non-existence, non¬ 
existence after destruction. 


56 


A GLOSSARY 


*\ 

Ef3j5T pradesa, (j) one of 4 Bandhas explained as 
WPS prapanca, world, amplification. 

prapatti, resignation, God-surrender. 

MRvf prapanna, oiie who has surrendered humbly to God. 

ERR prabadha, discording. 

ERR prabandha, continuity, composition. 

ERT prabhd, effulgence. 

ERl^T prabhakart, (b) illumination, a stage of progress. 

ERR prabhdva, might, power. 

ERf prabhu, lord. 

ERR pramdda, mistake, unattentiveness. 

ER1 pramd, valid idea, correct cognition. 

ER1R pramatva, validity. 

STRUT ' pramdna , proof, evidence, authority, means of cognition, 
(m) evidence of being afiga or auxiliary. - - cakra, 

regulative wheel. 

MW Id pramiti, (n) right cognition. 

ET^T prameya, object of cognition. - ft - tva, cognisability. 

- rfe - viruddha, (n) against the very hypothesis. 

ERR prayatna, effort, volition. 

prayoga, use, formulation of syllogism. 


1. The Carvskas admitted Pratyaksa (direct perception) only as a 
source of knowledge: the Buddhists and Vai^esikas added one more w v 
Anumsna (inference) : the Ssmkhyas a third, viz.. Sabda (revelation)'; the 
NaiySyikas a fourth, w*., Upama (analogy), the Prabhanara Munamsakas 
a fifth, Arthapatti, the Bhat^tas a sixth Anupalabdhi (non-apprehension): ' ' 

irsRflitrrsr ^ ww s? I 
3wqr%fifrR!f frrgRi |i 

RffifRci MSRtlFRIW I 


OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


57 


prayojaka , indirect cause, director. 

prayojana, aim, purpose. 

prayojya, dependent, servant, missile. 

pralaya, dissolution of the world, absorption, deluge, in¬ 
volution. 
c 

£RrR pravartana , incitement. 

r n 

pravrtti , activity, volitional resolution. - f%fTR - vljTiaim , 
(b) intelligence as particular or evolving. 
prasahga , discussion, occurrence. 

■prasajyapratisedha, (m) negation whereto an affir¬ 
mative is expected. 

prasanjana, connecting, occurrence. 

M-HK prasdda, (y) satisfaction. 

R^IRUI prasdrana, stretching forward. 

prasutikosa, sheath of generation. 

prasthd natray a, Upanisads, Brahmasiitras, and Bha- 
gavadgita, three branches or modes of teaching 
prahana , (b) elimination, removing. 

snt>d prakrta, original, popular. - qvgijy - mandala, circle of 
nature. - - pralaya, total dissolution. 

EfFRR prdgabhdva, (n) antecedent non-existence. 

£?[0T prana, air ^inhaled, life, vitality. - jr - may a, astral 
body. - JPJW5T - mayakosa, sheath of energy. - - vdyu, 

vital breath. - - 2 dydma, (y) the act of controlling 

breath, one of 8 angas of the yoga. 

snRT<l% pratipadiha, stem, bare word. 

i- ? ; JTRcr: | srrqr gn%?tr«ffr: i 

grgrar?? || 

8 


58 


A GLOSSARY 


RITWJRRfi pratibhasika , illusory, imaginary, not real. 

STTtf prdpta , obtained, reached. - - bddha , (m) nullification 

of an earlier experience by a later one, impediment to an 
anga (auxiliary). 

STTO^R pfdbhdhara, followers of Prabhakara’s school of Mi- 
mamsa. 

prdmdnya , truth, validity. 

prarabdhaharman , accumulated karma which has 
begun to operate. 

SfTfft priti, (b) zest. 

a 

prehsana, prospective thought. 

Ef^fT prebsd, wisdom, intellect. 

"\ 

q^R pretyabhava, the condition of soul after death. 
q^Rrf preyas, beloved. 

EW presenter, injunction, commission, 
qq prerisa, calling, addressing. 

praudhivdda, pompous or audacious utterance. 


phala, fruit, result, - sqsTTOF upadhayaka, immediate cause 
for any fruit. 

baddha, bound. 

®F=I betndhet, fetter, bondage, as opposed to moksa. 
baler, strength. - ^ - vat, valid, powerful. 
balabala, superior and inferior. 
qflqW bahirahga, outward, external, open. 

bethirandaja, born outside the mundane e°-a\ 



5!^ THlfOSOPHICAT, TERMS 


5§ 


bahirartha , external object. 
sfipW bahutva , multiplicity. 

Sf^55 bahula, many, generally. 
baJiusruta , well-versed. 

■Ovo 

qffTH bahusrutlya , a sub-scbool of Buddliism. 

bddha, contradiction, Impediment, lack of harmony, flaw% 
fallacy, anything that operates adversely. 

bddhakajildna , error-dispelling (right) knowledge. 

SfTI^f bddhita, stultified reason. 

bddhyabddhahau , the annulled and the aiimiller. 

bdhya , outward, external. - - arthasadbhava - 

wrftf, doctrine of the reality of the external world, 
fqisr bimba , image. 

^ buddha, enlightened person, understood, apprehended. 

buddhi , knowledge, cognition, intellect; (a) cosmic Intelli¬ 
gence: (v) the self that decides. - f 1%^ -indriya, (n) organ 
of sensation. 

budhna, bottom. 

sffsj bodha , knowledge, understanding, apprehension. 

ftorf&f, (b) enlightenment - l%xT - citta, (b) thought of 
enlightenment - - paksa, (b) (37) wings of enlighten¬ 

ment. 

sfflg' bauddha, Buddhist 

brahman , one of the trinity, creator. - tR — carya, 
studentship, celibacy. - - car in, religious student, 

celibate. - - l jhdnin , one who knows tlie self. 

- - vddin, theist, philosopher. - - vihdra, (b) 


60 


A GLOSSARY 


(4) Brahman-dwellings. - - anda, cosmic egg. - 

- dnanda, supreme bliss obtainable at the stage of reali¬ 
sation of the Absolute Brahman. 

jflUOI brdhmana, well-versed in Vedas, learned, a portion of 
the Veda. 

* 

bhakti, love, faith, devotion. 

l bhaga, (p) combination of six great qualities. - — vat, 

possessor of bhaga, supreme L,ord. 
bhahga, destruction. 

*flft bhahgl, manner, method. 

■di* bhadra, good luck, auspicious. 

dd bhava, becoming. - 3FJ$ - aiikura, sprout of worldly life. 

- - ahga, (b) process of becoming. - aFfF^ - ahga- 
citta, (b) subconsciousness. 

bhavisyat, (b) a form of cause. 

bhavya, happiness. 

■dlrh bhdhta, figurative, indirect, secondary. 

*flf bhdtta, followers of Bhattamata (Kumarila’s school of 
Mimamsa). 

FtTH bhava, existence, positive entity, idea, character, general 
condition or state. - WW - karya, positive product. - JFR 

- grama, collection of things, all things. - - paddrtha, 

existent entity. - - anyatKavada, (b) theory that 

an entity does not exist at all times. 

*rT5RT bhdvand, mental activity, impression, understanding, 
habit, tendency, reminiscence; (m) injunctive power or 
function. 

i. iFWJW #*!? [ 

q'U’it qq fcfrcqr li 


ot Philosophical terms 


61 


37T C R bhasya, commentary. 
bhasvara , brilliant. 
bhiksu, mendicant. 

rs 

W?f bhinna, different. 

3pP[ bhuvana , cosmic space, world (14 worlds). 

RJf bhiita, elemental being, substance, past. 

bhiitddi, (•) name of ahahhdra, individualism. 
bhuti, becoming. 
bhumi, (b) region, earth, stage. 

bheda, distinction, difference, (b) plurality, several!ty. - 
- abheda, (m) one-many, ideutity-in-difference. 

**v_ 

bhoktr , enjoyer, experiencer. 

*TFT bhoga , experience, enjoyment. 
bhogya, object of enjoyment. 

bhautika, pertaining to material elements. 
bhauma, pertaining to the earth. 

bhrama , illusion. fR jhana, knowledge of an object 

mistaken for some other object. 

bhrdnti, delusion. 

bhrtitiahan , killer of foetus* 

RR mata, system, religion, faith. 

RfR matt, mind, thought. 

madhuvidyd , a mystical doctrine of Upanishads, so 
called; lit . honey science, science of sweetness—knowledge 
relating to the sun. 

madhyama, middle. 


62 


A GtOSSAkV 


madhyastha, unaffected by bias, neutral. 
manana, reflection, l'epeated thinking, consider^ 1 

tnanas, mind, understanding, central organ of se 

- danda, control of thoughts. - TR - maya, co3 
of mind, mind-made. - RffR - vijndna , mental vt 
ing, intellect. 

manusya, man. - R - tv a, humanity. 

*1^ mantra , hymn, incantation, spiritual formrf 

- sdstra , linguistic occultism, science of spiritual 

mamakara , sense of property. 
wm mamata , sense of I-ness. 

mayttrdsana , a posture of the body in the 
yoga, one of the principal asanas. 

^5 mala , taint, sin, impurity 

mahat , (s) cosmic intelligence. - - Imla, e>> 

undivided time 1 , a name for Lord Siva. - RWT — 
great departure, journey to self-destruction. - ** 
gross (great) elements. - - ydna, a school of 

- - vdkya , main or important passage of sn 

- sdddhaha , name of the Buddhist vrjiu mo 
puttakas). - HRRT - samdnya, grand generality 
genus. 

mahiman, magnification, expansiveness. 
madhurya , sweetness. 

*jpsqf%cfj mddhyamika , a school of philosophy liiaiiit, 
doctrine of Shnyata. 
mana , proof, measurement. 

SflSRJ mdnasa , mental. - srer? - pratyahsa , mental pe 

maya, illusion, divine energy, phantom. — ; 
illusionism. 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


63 


maranantika, (j) consciousness at death. 

o __ 

?TFT mcirga , path, process. 

mardava, softness, sinuosity. 

{?Tcf miter, measured, limited. 

inithya unreal. - ffR - jndna, false cognition, misconcep¬ 
tion, illusion. 

fi^epT misrcivarga , mixed group. 

misrasrsti , mixed creation. 

jfFfRTT l mimamsd } investigation, discussion. SfTC - uttara , - 
Vedanta philosophy of Badarayana Vyasa. it - fiurva , - 
the system cf Jaimini’s philosophy. 

■gvfi mukta , freed, liberated (person). 

gfvR mukti, final emancipation, liberation, salvation. 
mukha, face, method, entrance. 
mulzhya , primary, important. 
muditd, (b) joyous stage in rising from mere self. 

3I*T mum, sage. 

ggg mumuksu, one who is in search of moksa. 
murcha, fainting. 

murta, corporeal (moveable) substance. - c=T - tva, bodily 
form. 

W imirti, (p) image (21). - ^ - traya, trinitarian character 
of God. 

JJjS inula, primary, original. - Hf>f% - prakrti, («) primal nature. 
- - bandha, a position of the body in the practice of 

yoga. 

i. tfrumr fesrr i 

fepa? H'# sr§r *rsu*fppfr |l 


.64 


A GLOSSARY 


^ rntidha, delusive. 

mrtyu, death, 
far medha , intelligence. 

meya, measurable. 

Ml maitrt, friendship, love. 

mohsa , emancipation, liberation, salvation. 
moha , confusion, delusion. 
m mauna , silence. 

mleccha , one who does not dwell within. 

Wj^yajus, a class of mantras. 

yajnapahkaja , sacrificial lotus. 

2jR[ ascetic, 
spff yatna , volitional effort, 
qgfpjp* yathdbhuta , real. 
yathdrtha, real. 

yantra , mystic diagram. - STReT - sdstra , theory of magical 
figures, designs which are the seat of invoked deities. 

2PT yatna, penance. 

2TF3T yatrd, religious journey. 

yvtkayogin , one who is always in trance. 

yt/JWi, reason, device, means; (n) affirmative-negative, 
inseparable connection. 

yugapat , simultaneously. 

yunjanayogin , one who is occasionally engaged in 

yoga. 

sp yupa, sacrificial post. 


OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


65 


yoga, union, concentration of mind, trance, to strive to 
obtain what is not previously obtained. - 5rr<5r - sastra, 
yoga philosophy propounded by Patanjali, theistic 
Sankhya. 

yogacara , a school of Buddhism. 

yogyata, pre-established harmony, cougruity, compe¬ 
tence, efficiency. 

yogyanufialabdhi, effected non-cognition, non-cog¬ 
nition of what is necessarily cognisable, while being 
present. 

yauktiha , arrived at by reasoning. 

yaugapadya, simultaneous existence, simultaneity, exis¬ 
tence together. 

yaugika, formed of parts, sense derived from different 
parts of a word. 


* 

rakta, red. 

rajas, passion, energy. 

^ rajju, rope. 

rasa, taste, gestation. 
rasana, sense of taste, gestatory sense. 

rahasyatraya , the three secrets of Vaisnava philosophy, 
Wl raga, desire, attachment to sensual object. 
ratra, (p) knowledge, night. 
rlti, method. 
ruci, liking, taste. 

?*;q rupa, form, body, colour, manifestation, nature. - - raga, 

(b) desire for rebirth in the world of matter. - - loka, 

(b) world of matter. - - s kandha, (b) one of the 

five groups of elements. 

9 


66 


A GLOSSARY 


«S . 

recaha , emission of air, exhalation of breath. 
^ rodha , obstruction. 


55 

lakultsa, a sect of Pasupatas founded by ascetic Lakuli. 
labsana , definition, quality, characteristic aspect. 

3^ftJTT 2 laksand, derivative or indicative power of words, secon¬ 
dary sense. 

3^F33I3li? lahsananyathavada, (b) theory that an entity has 
three times always. 

55^3 lahsya, example. 

35^3$ lalisyartha, secondary sense. 

3>f*33>%T lambikayoga, a way of practising yoga consisting m 
the drawing up of apdna, restraint of prana and fixing 
the tip of the tongue on the uvula. 

353 Haya, dissolution, lapse, absorption, evolution. 

S3 lava, one-sixth of a second. 

35133 Idghava, lightness, insignificance. 

{35^ 'lihga, mark, indication, symbol, (n) inferential, indicative, 
middle term, probans, subtle body, (s) Prakrti. - - deha 


1. 

2. 


3. 

4, 




f: | See W1UFI3P?. 


55sjvn fefeqraife&jfc w^^rr 11 

3pnsi3ts4: 5I#T% I 
ft: ^gpM^htlMdT II 

rv -K r\f 

( a) mm ma* 


U Sankhyakarika. 

(b) 

^q^KI'-l'-TflT *3 cliVi4!'i u 'W II 




OK PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 67 

subtle body. - - pardmarsa (n) subsumptive reflec¬ 

tion of the probans. - srfft - sarira, body which is very 
subtle consisting of 17 tattvas. 

Ungin, subject of the proposition. 

Ilia, sport. 

loka, world, sphere. - JRSq -pratyaksa, ordinary perception. 

- RlS - siddha, w T ell-recognised. 

55tq>pif^j lokayatika, Agnosticism, materialist philosophy 
taught by Carvaka. 

lokottara, supermundane, extraordinary. - - vddin, 

a sub-school of Buddhism. 
lobha, avarice, craving in the largest sense. 

q^qpq vajraydna, (b) adamantine path or vehicle, 
qqft# vajrdi, one of the yoga mudras or symbols. 

^%^vadhu, woman. 

qp^IT vandhyd, barren woman. 

cRtT varana, (y) delusion. 

ejtq varna, colour, alphabet, caste. ■“ - dsrdmadharnut, 

social observances, 
q^ varsa, zone, year, rain. 

vastu, entity, thing, object, 
qff vahni, fire. 

qWf vakya, sentence. - m - sesa, supplementary sentence. 
_ - ekavdkya , formation of a total sentence out of 

smaller sentences. - smk - arthabodha, sententious cog¬ 
nition, verbal judgment. 

qi 4 ^ («F>) vac (vak), speech, expression. - 3TnT=fpJr - cirambhana, 
mere expression and no more. — ~ chala, (n) a quibble. 


68 


A GLOSSARY 


v'dcaka, word expressive of the meaning. 
vacydrtha , primary sense. 

3IcT vdta, wind. 

3ft 1 vdda , debate, argument, theory. 
vddin , disputant. 
vdnaprastha, hermit. 

3ft? varta, science of professions. 

3l{tfe> vdrtika, stipplementary glossary. 

31^ vdyu, air. 

3RRT vdsand , latent force, sub-conscious impression, 
impression, reminiscence, tendency, (b) disposition. 
3lfet vdsita, pervaded, perfumed. 

Vasin , dwelling, dweller. 
vahana , vehicle. 

vihalpa , doubt, imagination, alternative, option, 
tinct impression, fictitious fabrication. 

T33>R vikara, change, transformation, evolved matter, 
- - viraha, changelessness. 

vikasa, expansion. 

flfifd vikrti , change, modification, (m) a kind of sacrific 

viksepa, projection, distraction, reflection in gr 
subtle bodies. — — sakti, power of giving ris 

variety of objects. 

feff vigraha, dispute, analysis of compound words. 
fsRFR vicaya , inquiry, analysis. 

f^NR vicara , inquiry, applied thought, discussion, tho 
consideration. 

1. HiI 

\ Gautamasutra . 


OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


69 

vijaya, (b) a stage of progress in Buddhist philosophy. 

vijnana, knowledge, thought, consciousness, mental act 
or process, individualistic cognition, inherent comprehen¬ 
sion of mental phenomena, mind in special connection 
with sense-cognition. - spT - gliana, all-conscious. - JPT'Prsr 
- mayakosa, sheath made of intelligence. - 313: - 'vada, a 
system of Buddhist philosophy, thought-system. - - 

skandha, (b) consciousness-group. - ferfcf - sthiti, (b) resting 
place for consciousness. 

2 vitanda, (n) wrangling, fallacious controversy, a kind 
of vada. 

vitatha , false, unreal. 

videhamukti , (v) salvation attained at the time of 
bodily death as opposed to jivamnukti. 

vitarka , deliberation, perverse argument or consideration. 

vitana , magical awning. 

f%^rr vldya , higher knowledge, science. 

vidyut , lightning. 

vidvadanubhava, mystic intuition, experience of the 
learned. 

vidhdna , prescription. 

m vidhi, (m) mandate, injunction, mandatory text ; (m) vedic 
injunction, niyoga. 

Tcfitef vidheya, predicate. 
fiR2T vinaya, disciplinary regulation. 
vinasa , destruction. 
vindsin, destructible. 

1. See SffST^isrfR^. It teaches that nothing exists except thought. 

2 . * 


A GLOSSARY 

f^[^f l vipah$a, (n) not having the same characteristic j 
minor term (subject), heteralogue, counter-example. ~ 
— vyavrtta , (n) absence of the indicative where tli 
bandum is known to be absent. 
vifiaba, fruition, effect. 

vipantakhyati , contrary experience. 
viparyaya , opposite, perverse, converse. 

frpifer viparyasa, misconception, error. 

vipratipatti , doubts diversity of opinion, miss 
hension. 

vibhava, (p) manifestation, evolution. •- fprr - 
desire for well-being. 

f^WFl vibhaga , division, disjunction. 

vibhu, all-pervasive, omnipresent. - m - tva, om 
sence. 

vibhuti, (p) manifestation. 

vimatyadhikarana, a theme under dispute. 
vimarda, suppression. - 

{%R35T vimald, pure, a stage in Buddhist philosophy, 
fijgfe vimukti, release. - - siikha, (b) bliss of release. 

viyoga, disjunction, discorrelation, separation. 

Mf virati, cessation, abstinence. 
virala, broken by intervals. 
virdga, non-attachment. 
virat , cosmos. 

viruddha, opposite, reverse, contradictory, (n) adveir 
bans or reason. 


1. ?T?8jr: m&f: | 



OP PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


71 


virTtpa, dissimilar. 
virodha , contradiction. 
vivarana, explanation. 

vivaria, dispute. - "K - pada , matter under dispute. 
vividisd, desire to know. 

vivaria, modification, conversion. - - vdria, illusory- 

ppearance theory. 

vivelta, discrimination. - ^1% - khyati, (b) discriminate 
discernment. 

visaya , doubt, one of the five components of adhikarana. 

isva, universe, (v) name given to jiva in the state of 
making. 

visista , distinct, qualified. - SRftfcf - pratiti , determinate 
ognition. - - advaita , qualified monism of Ramanuja, 

Ldvaita but with a distinction. 

visesa, (n) particularity, ultimate individuality, one of the 
ategories in nyaya, difference. - 3°T — guna, specific qua- 
ity. 

T visesana , attribute, adjective, qualifying adjunct. 

ter visesadvaita, Advaita of a special kind or variety 
visesa), Snpati’s theory of Vedanta. 1 

visesya, substantive. 
visama, dissimilar, opposite. 
visaya , subject or topic, proper recipient, object. 

[J visayitd, subjectness. 

^ visayin , that to which the object refers, subject. 
vistara, seat. 

visvac , all-pervading, going or being everywhere. 



72 


A GLOSSARY 


r\ C , _ 

vihangamarga, (v) one of the two ways of attaining 
mukti. 

'TRRH virasana, one of the principal postures in the practice 
of yoga. 

m vlrya , prowess, might. 
vrksa , tree. 

rs 

fTrT vrtti, operation, condition, sense, quality, sustenance, ex¬ 
pressive force, glossary. - - jnana , knowledge arising 

from an operation of inner organ. 

vrddhi , growth. 

*\ 

SR velocity, speed. 

veda, self-authoritative and most sacred texts of the 
.Hindus. 

vedana, feeling, suffering, act of knowing, torment. 

veddnta, the system of philosophy propounded by Bada- 
rayana Vyasa, end of the Vedas. 

vedi , sacred altar. 

vaikuntha, (p) highest heaven. 

vaihrta, secondary, transformed. 

vaitandika, wrangler. 

t*Ri vaidharmya , dissimilarity, heterogeneity. 
vainakika , destructionist. 

vaiyadhikaranya, being in different case-relations. 

vaiyarthya , uselessness. 

vaiyakarana , grammarian. 

3RRT twmgya, indifference towards sense objects. 

vaisesika, the system of philosophy propounded by 
Kanada. 

vaisnava, pertaining to Visnu, same as Pancaratra. 



OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


73 


FR 

™ ydkia , manifested world. 

~N 

^ vyakti , manifestation, individual. 

^^5 vyanjaka , manifesting, phenomenalising. 

l vyanjana, phenomenal form, suggestive power of words, 
(b) form of cause. 

vyatireka , (n) negative premise. - - drstanta , (n) 

negative example. - - vyapiu (n) negative concomi- 

tance, negative generalization. - - sahacdra, con¬ 

comitance of negation. 

vyadhiharana, relating to a different subject. 

frsfR vyabhicara , want of correspondence, wrong deviation, 
deviation, (n) too wide, pervasive, tautology. 

vyabhicaritva, variability, changeabilit}’. 
vyartha , useless. 

_ ’’S 

vyavaccheda, (n) differentiation. 


^ITrf vyavadhana , intervention, separation. 
vyavadhi, intervening space. 
vyavasdya, determination. 
vyavasthdpana, determinant, deciding. 

[el^T vyavasthdpya, determinable. 

['TfH vyavahdra, designation, investigation, transaction, con 
vention, parlance. 

[fg vyasti, microcosm. - ijflr - srsti. individual creation. 


RR vyascma, longing. 

vyakarana, (b) formal prophecy, grammar. 
vydkrta, manifest, explained. 
rpcZfR vydkhydna, comment, interpretation. 


1. 2f2]TS^f I 

10 


74 


A GLOSSARY 


vyaghata, (n) contradiction, destruction. 

vyana, one of the five vital vayus (air). 

vyapdka, all-pervading, pervading. — R - tva, being all- 
pervading. 

5 dTd vyapta, pervaded, comprehended. 

'vyapti, (n) invariable concomitance, pervasion. - ITR - 
jnana, (n) knowledge of relation. 

^Fd^lTdl* vyapyatvasiddha, unestablished in respect of its 
concomitance. 

vydpyavrtti, pervasive. 

vydpdra, functional activity, operation, activity, func¬ 
tioning, intermediate cause. 

(■V 

vyavartaka , differentiating feature. 

vyavaharika , relative, colloquial, conventional, real 
for the purpose of human parlance. 

vyavrtti, absolute exclusion, non-existence of the sigii, 
exclusion. 

vyasajyavrtti , partially contained. 
vyasanjna, partially out of relation. 
vyutpatti , learning. 

o2p[ vyuha , (p) group, arrays of two (three) in incarnation. 
vyuhantcrra, (p) sub-vyuhas. 


1 . | 
2. I 

if^r 5 n 


t>E PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 75 

m vrata , religious act of devotion, vow. 

vrlhi, grain. 


sakta, having significatory power, capable. 

sakya, sense derived from the primary function of a word, 
possible. 

sakti, significatory power, faculty, power, potency, female 
energy. - sif - graha, learning of the .significatory power. 

- firmer _ niyama, (s) restriction of potencies (causes). 

- errs: — vada, the Naiyayika theory of power of expression 
of words. 

sahkd, doubt. 

sabala, variegated, coloured. 

$[3^ kabdet, word, sound, revelation, verbal proof. - m - 
artha, the word and its object. - - tanmatra , subtle 

sound. - W - pramdna, verbal source of knowledge. - 
sffT^ — brahman, word, sound, Brahman. - r ira - vrtti, 
significative power. 

5K>J|Flfd saranagati, self-surrender, seeking succour. 

sarira, body. - 3PT - traya, three-fold physical body. 
sahifiy moon. 

^FT sakya, people of Saka clan, Buddhist. 

5J|^c(T sakha, branch, school. 

5112 sata, (j) complete removing of action. 

gpa Santa, quiescent, tranquil. - - udita, (p) occasionally 

manifest. 

1 sariraltamhnamsa , enquiry on tlie spiritual sub¬ 
ject : soul, etc. 

1. So named after sarira, 


which, is the human individual soul. 


76 


A GLOSSARY 


sabda, verbal. - fTR — jTiana, verbal cognition. — «rf£T 
- bodha, verbal cognition. 

sdbdibhdvand, (m) verbal injunction. 

?fl?f sdstra, science, scripture. - 3fWW - dbhdsa, fallacious 
system. 

sdstr, ruler, spiritual teacher. 

Rl^fl siksa, teaching, one of the six ahgas of the veda. 
silpa, art. 

sista, true observer of the vedic rituals. - STHTR - dear a, 
doings of the above. 

I^f CJ l sisya, pupil. 
sita, cold. 

3% suhti, nacre, pearl-shell, conch-shell. 
sukla, white. 
suci, clean, pure. 

suddha, pure. - - tattva, (p) pure matter. - SRT - varga, 

pure group. - cflScf - advaita, pure monism. 
subha, auspicious. 

^ sunya, void. - - vdda, the theory of relativity of Bud¬ 

dhists. 

sesa, remainder, (m) ahga. 

sesin , whole ; (m) angiu. 

, , 

saiva, worshipper of God Siva. 

soka, sorrow. 

syama, black. 

3RU sraddhd . interest, faith. - 5fl¥ - sdstra, religion of faith. 
3FPI sramana, Buddhist monk. 

sramabhmii, (b) stage of effort. 




of FhiLosoFhicaI terms 


77 


s mvana, auditory organ, ear, hearing, learning by hearing. 
raddha, annual obsequy. 
i, fortune, wealth, beauty. 

■ida, learning, heard. - - arthdpatti, implication 

lerived from what is heard. 

ruti, revealed texts, veda. 

sreyas, welfare. 

irotra, organ of hearing. 

sloka, verse. 

R[ svetdmbara, a sect of Jainas. 


5 1 satsthala , six kinds of upasana of lihga according to 
Snpati. 

=R saddyatana, (b) six organs of sensation. 




saihjnd, name, ideation, perception. 
samyama, constraint. 

; samyukta, joined together, related (elements). - 3f£cT - 
advaita, same as Visistadvaita. 

I samyoga, union, contact, (n) conjunction. 

; samvdda, union, agreement, resemblance. 

% samvitti, cognition, knowledge, feeling. 



5R?I I 

According to Snpati, Satsthala is the connecting link between the 
rn and Brahman. The Atman attains Brahmatva by jnana and jnana is 
ined by drastavya (closely examining the truth), srotavya (by hearing the 
.is by upadela), mantavya (by meditation), and nididliySsitavya (by firm 
entration). If jnana is obtained in this manner, the result is that Jiva 
mes Sambliu. 


^8 


A GLOSSARY 


flfd samvrta, subjective. - AST - satya, empirical reality, (b^ 
conventional truth. 
samvrti , (b) empirical truth. 
samsaya , doubt. 

samsarga , contact, coherance. - - adhyasa , (v) 

identification of self with the inner organ by juxta- 
positic n. 

samsdra, material or temporal life, cycle of birth and 
rebirth, transmigration, bondage of self, phenomenal 
world. 

WRK samskdra , (n) embellishment, perfection, momentum, 
reminiscent impression or subliminal impression ; (b) la¬ 
tent disposition, action. 

samskrta , refined, combined. 

samsthdna , configuration. 

samhata , combined. 

'tffR samhdra , destruction, withdrawal. 

tiRtil samhita, cardinal teaching, collective, narrative. 

sakampapravrtti, tremulous or halting or hesitating 

effect. 
sakala, all. 
s akama, desirous. 

saguna, determinate, qualified, dualistic. 

* ^ 

sahksepa , summary. 
j sankara , mixing. 

sahkalpa, purposing, determination, resolve, will to be, 
imagination. 

tij'Hd sahhucita, shortened. 

*\ 

sank eta, indication, convention. - - manaskara 

conventional conception. ’ 


OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


79 


saiikoca , contraction, .restriction, limitation. 

sahkranti , union, passing over. - - vadin , a school 

of Buddhists. 

flfpJT sahkhya, number, knowledge. 

r\ 

<EIfFRT sahgati , relevancy, unison. 

$3Tf sahgralia> compilation, compendium. 
sahgha , group, society. 
sail ghat a, combination, whole, aggregate. 

1 sacciddnanda , existence-knowledge-bliss. 

?F5ffdPl sajdtiya, of the same quality. 
sancita , accumulated (karma). 

saf, being, existence, real, existent. - - kdrya , effect 

pre-existent in cause. - - twfo (e) theory of effect exis¬ 

ting in the cause. - WTcT - khydti , an illusory perception 
of a thing at a time and place where it really is not, such as 
the perception of a snake in rope where it is not. - Jr ref. 
- pratipaksa, (n) opposable reason. 

sattd, existence, being. - WRPT - samavdya, inherent 
existence. 

sattva , goodness, harmony ; (*) one of the three gunas, a 
living being. - 3TRT - tydga , (•) abandonment of existence. 

satya , reality. - - kama , lover of truth. - - loka , 

heaven of truth, abode of Brahma. - - vada, truism. 

- - sankalpa , unfailing mental resolve. 

sadasadatmaka, both is and is-not; it is as it 
self; it is not as itself. 

?Jo[HR saddedra , see rWFW. 

sadyomukti , immediate absolution. 




80 


A GLOSSARY 


sadvdrikd, mediate. - - srsti , mediate creation¬ 

al^ saddhetu , (n) valid probans. 
santati , continuity, progeny. 
santdna , serial order, continuity, progeny, series. 

santanint unit in the serial number. 
saniosa , pleasure. 

sandigdha , (v) uncertain, doubtful, doubtful probans. 

sandhyopdsana , prayers morning and evening. 
sannikarsa , relation, contact. 
sannidhi , proximity. 

^rf^qifdd^ sannipdtin , (m) a kind of auxiliary. 

^F^IH sannydsa , renunciation, asceticism. 
sannydsin , mendicant. 

sapaksa, similar instance, homologue. - - sattva , ( 

presence of the indicative where the probandum is knov 
to be present. 

lEFTR samatva , equality, resemblance, (n) parity. 

samcmantara , immediately contiguous. - JT3R - praty 
ya, (b) a type of causal relation. 

sanianiyata , invariable concomitant. 
satnanvaya , mutual connection, sequence. 
samabhivydhdra , verbal context. 

FFR samaya , time, moment, opportunity. 

^FRfFl Wwawy#, (n) inherence. 

1. Sf^FfHT | 

#h: ^TORT; 5f#RTcT: l| 



OP PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


81 


samavayin, 'constitutive. - ’EIT'T - kdrana, (n) consti¬ 
tutive or inherent or intimate cause. 

^czmaveta, intimately united. 

®<ZTi'iasbi, totality, ^icro cosni> generality. 

s&madhana, reply. 

sct-madhi, trance, (y) last stage of Raja yoga (embracing 
dixy ana), concentration. 


x scttriana, a kind of vayu (air). — 3ffa${ u ! — adhikarana, 
coexistent. - arfiriTC - abhihdra, blending of similar things. 

sczmapatti, state of balance. 
sczmasa, brief, compound of words. 

sczmdropa, imposition, doubt, misconception. 

^FWTtO'C sccmohdra, collocation. 


scrmuccaya, aggregations ; (v) the doctrine of combina¬ 
tion of ‘ work and knowledge ’ accepted by Ramanuja etc. 

scrmutpdda, origination, causation. 

'ST3^T 3 T Sfzmuddya, group, collection. 

sctmuha, multitude, mass, collection. - 3TR5^T - dlatnbana, 
gromp-cognition. 

sccmpatti, successful realisation, attainment. 

^p£JJrfT scctnprajnd, self-possession. 

samprajndta, (y) a kind of samadhi. 

sampratipatti, comprehension, consensus. 
samprayukta, (b) united (cause). 
sctmbandha, relation, connection, a form of cause. 
sambodhana , addressing. 


II 


1 . 


11 


82 


A GLOSSARY 


sambhava, (n) happening, probability, deduction. 
sambheda, connection. 

sambhogakdya, body of bliss. 
samyagjndna, true knowledge. 
sarpavidyd, snake-lore. 
sarupa, similar. 

0 

?PT sarga, generation, creation, beginning. 

sarva, all, everything. — — dttnan, omnipresent. ~ ^ — 

bhuta, all-supporting, -«nTO - vydpaka, all-pervading. 
- - vyapin, all-pervading. 

sarvajna, omniscient. - vT - tva, omniscience. 
sarvatraga , omnipresent. 

sarvdstivddin, a school of Buddhist philosophers 
also called Vaibbasikas, 

savikalpaka , differentiated, conceptual, determinate 
mediate. - ~ jnana, (m) conceptional perception , 

determinate perception. 

savyabhicara , (n) inconclusive or straying (reason), 

sahakara , acting jointly. 

sahabhuhetu, (b) co-operative cause, 

sahetukaviriasa , caused destruction. 

sahokti, (b) togetherness, associated reference, ioint 
mention. J 

^tkl Sah °P alambha> (b) invariabl e association, joint percep- 

sdmsiddhika, natural. 

sakaravadin, system of thought which holds that 
^consciousness assumes a form in the process of cognition. 
flUft sdhkarya, mixture, promiscuity. 



OE PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


83 


saksathara, direct perception, sight of God. 
sdhkhya, one of the six systems of Indian philosophy. 
flrfrSR; sattvika, a thing characterised by sattva (goodness). 
sadrsya, similarity, likeness. 

sddhana, instrument, means, equipment, inferrant, ac¬ 
complishment. - — catustaya, four qualifications for 

Brahmavidya. 

sadharmya , similarity. 

sddhdranya , equipoise, common, general. 

sadhumati, (b) good thought, a stage in Buddhist phi¬ 
losophy. 

sddhya , (n) probandum, major term. - - vikala, (n) 

devoid of the probandum. - - sddhanadharma , ob¬ 

jective of the probans and the probandum. 

flPF? sananda , (y) a kind of samadhi. 
sdnta , having an end. 

safiek^atva, state of dependence, 
srosft samagrl, apparatus, whole causal apparatus. 

samayikabhava , temporary non-existence. 

o 

samarthya, vitality, capability. 

sanianadhikaranya , being in apposition, co-exis¬ 
tence. 

sdmdnya, (n) universal, generality, genus. - 3$ - chala , 
(n) general causistry. - - visesa , generic differen¬ 
tia. - ~ visesasamuddya, aggregate of generic and 

particular qualities. 

sdmdnyatodrsta, (m) one of the two kinds of ami- 

mana. 

sdmya , equipoise, likeness. 



86 


A GLOSSARY 

syddvdda , (j) assertion of possibility and non-possibility 
of things; agnostic doctrine of the Jainas. 

sva, property, own. 

svatantra , uncontrolled, free, self-sufficient, independent, 
free to act 

svatograhya, intrinsically compreliensible. 
svatojanya, intrinsically producible. 

svatovyavartaka, self-discriminating. 
svatovyavrtta, self-differentiated. 
svatafprdmanya, (m) theory of self-evidence. 

13 JT svapna, dream. - arrr^ - ja-grat, waking state within the 
dreaming state. - qjih - susupti, state of deep sleep with¬ 
in a state of dream. - $TT - svapna, perfectly dreaming 
state. 

svaprakasa, self radiant, self-luminous. 

W svabhava, character. - W?T - bhinna, naturally divided. 
svara, Vedic accent, voice. 

svarupa, own form, essential attribute. - - samban- 

dha, self-relation, self-linking. - - asiddha, (n) un¬ 

established in respect of itself. 

_SL 

Wi svarga, region of heaven. 

V 

W'I'h svarloka, heaven. 

svalaksana, distinct character. - aniUr - alma, (v) specific 
individuality, 

svavacanavirodha, self-contradiction. 
f'RFdR svasantdna, (b) one’s self. 

svasamvitti, self-cognition. 


88 


A GLOSSARY 


heti, weapon. 
heya, rejectable. 

hotr, sacrificer, one of the performers of the sacrifice, 
tfcf homa, sacrifice, 

^ hrasva, short. 
fRT hrdsa, shortening. 

lildda, bliss, pleasure. X. 

'— H U \ 






%fRTf5[5woir sfeicrr 



wtt5h 



l. 


2 . 


3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 


7. 


8 . 


9. 


10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13 . 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 


FOR SALE 


Rs. A. P. 

1. Sri Venkatachala Mahatmyam (Hindi) Vols. 

1 and II ... ... ... 4 0 0 

2. „ „ (Devanagari) 10 0 

3. „ „ (Telugu Script) 18 0 

4. Maricisamhita or Vimanarcanakalpa (Sanskrit) 1 8 0 

5. Sri Venkatesvara Stuti (Sanskrit) ... 0 8 0 

6. Sri Venkatesvara Itihasamala (Devanagari) 

Ed. by Dewan Bahadur Dr. S. Krishnasvami 
Aiyangar ... ... ...10 0 

7. A History of Tirupati (English) by Dewan 

Bahadur Dr. S. Krishnasvami Aiyangar 

2 Vols. ... ... . 

8. T. T. Devasthanams Epigraphical Report 

(English) ... ... ... 4 0 0 

9. T. T. Devasthanams Inscriptions (English) 

5 Vols. ... ... ... 15 0 0 

10. Tallapakkam Poetical Works (Telugu) 3 Vols. 4 4 0 

11. Ashtamahishi Kalyanam (Telugu) ...18 0 

12. Photographic Album of 25 pictures about 

Sri Venkatesvara’s festival ... ... 1 4 0 

13. A Glossary of Philosophical Terms (Samskrt- 

English) ... ... ... 3 0 0 

SRI VENKATESVARA ORIENTAL SERIES 

(in the press) 

1. Sri Venkatesvara-Kavya-Kalapah (Sanskrit)... 

2. History of Tirupatf (English) Vol. II. . 

3. Atrisaip^fta ' 

4. Psychology in Telugu language * 

5. Suvarnasaptati, a Chinese commentary on 

Sankhyakarika. ... 

6. Journal of Sri Venkatesvara Oriental Insti¬ 

tute—Vol. 1. (4 parts) ... ... 6 0 0 

Apply to :— 

DIRECTOR, 

S. V. O. INSTITUTE, TIRUPATI, 

(S. INDIA) 


OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS 


87 


svasamvedana, self-cognition. 
svatantrya, liberty of action. 
^JT^TRT svddhydya, study of the Vedas. 

svabhavika, natural, essential. 

<TN 

svamin , lord, master. 


^TT«T svdrtha, one’s own benefit. - 3RITR - anumana, (n) infer ‘ 
ertce for one's own benefit. 

svalaksanya, definite character of a thing, 
svetarabheda, difference from the rest. 
sveda, heat, sweat. 
svedaja, produced from sweat. 


hamsa, swan, Brahman, prana, a kind of sannyasiu. 

rs, 

hanta, green. 
hdna, rejection, escape. 
ft^T himsa , violence. 

ClFt hlna, bereft. - *TR - ydna, a school of Buddhism. 

hetu, (v) cause, probans, reason, valid reason, middle term. 
- HqRepsr - upanibandha, causal series. - 3TORT - x abhasa, 
(n) fallacious reason, semblance of reason, defective 
probans. 

hrdaya, heart. - jirt - granthi, knot of the heart, igno¬ 
rance rooted like a knot. 


1. HWiqeT: — 

tcfflRT^ qsw || 


i snwr m. ^ *rr tcfw^q; i 



