A 


NEW TRANSLATION 


NICHOMACHEAJV ETHICS 


OF 


ARISTOTLE. 


OXFORD, 

PRINTED KOH R, RKARMON j 

AU ° " Y M,iH8BR ' BOWMAN, HtIRST, KKKIt, OHM* 
liltOWH, I.OI1 lUtNT. 

1819. 





ADVERTISEMENT. 


THE following Translation profosses no rivalry with 
former versions of thp same trealise. Its utmost aim is 
to be n faithful interpreter of its original, which it has 
constantly followed as closely as the different idioms of 
the two languages will allow. Eel it be recollected) 
that instances have been where a translator has dis¬ 
guised, or endeavoured to disguise, in pretty no-meaning 
sentences, his ignorance of bis author. In the present 
attempt no artifice of that kind is employed. Diffi¬ 
culties are fairly met, ami in most instances, it is Imped, 
satisfactorily cleared; and if any ambiguity appenrs in 
the English, the name uncertainty will be found in the 
same passage in the Orcrk * for it is to be remarked, 
that the worth) and phrases of doubtful import in the 
two languages remarkably correspond. 

The Notes are chiefly illustrative; discussion has 
been generally avoided, ns of little nsc to those for whom 
this work is principally intended. They are added hy 
the translator of the four last books. The former six 
arc hy a different hand. Both are Gentlemen, the 
sufficiency of whose knowledge has been approved from 
high authority, and whose mint01 would In* no dis¬ 
advantage to the work were they to be made public. 


ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK I. 


CHAP. 1. 

That evety action has an end. Ends divided into chief 
and subordinate. 

h EVERY art and every institution, and in like manner 
every action, as well as predilection 4 , seems to aim ut some 
good : wherefore men have well defined the good [or summitm 
bmuwtj to be M that which all things desire." 

But there appears to be a kind of difference in ends ; for 
some are operations ; other* ugain beyond these, certain pro¬ 
ductions: but in things which have certain ends besides the 
actions, in these the productions are naturally better than the 
energies K 

& Now there being many actions, mid many nm mul 
sciences, there arise also many ends ; for of medicine tin* end 
is health; a ship, of shipbuilding ; victory, of generalship ; 
wealth, of economy. But m many of such art* m are con¬ 
tained under any one superior, (m for instancy under the 
equestrian art is contained the making of bridles, and ;*> 
many other arts as belong to the equipment of horses ; tlm 

a Ttgmtytmi that which in riwmm, after mtinmf Mlintmlm* in pnfVt 
race to imy thing eLc: didre, pmttlhicllmi, or priwlpltr nf tairnu 
h Thun tin* net of riding i« tm ojrnttlmi, ur energy* fltHiith, 

which follows wa prmJuetitm, %y#», It k *n ideal Unit lumtrli k hnu i 
thaw riding. 


it 




o 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK U 


art and every warlike action under the art of generalship; 
and in like manner others under their respective arts ;) in all 
these [series of arts] the ends of all the master arts are more 
eligible than the ends of those contained under them; be¬ 
cause for the sake of the former, the latter also are pursued. 
It makes., however, no difference whether the operations 
themselves are the ends of actions, or something else beyond 
these, as we have seem in the forementioned sciences 0 . 


CHAP. II. 

That there is a chief end—that it belongs to the science of 
politics , 

1. If, therefore, there is any end of the subjects of actions, 
which we wish on its own account, and other things on ac¬ 
count of this; and if we do not choose every thing for the 
sake of something else, (for thus the question woukl proceed 
to infinity, so that desire would be empty and vain,) it is 
evident that this must be the good, and the best good. Has 
not then the knowledge of this end a great weight with re¬ 
spect to life ? and, like archers, should we not be more likely 
to obtain that object which is right, if we have a mark ? If 
so, we must attempt to sketch it, at least coarsely; shewing 
what it is, and to which of the sciences or faculties it belongs; 
but it would appear to belong to the most important, and 
most superior. 

2. Now of this kind the political science appears to be: for 
this ordains which of the sciences arc necessary in states, and 
what sort each class of men should learn, and to what extent. 
Moreover, we see that even the most honourable of the facul- 


c Although it has been said above, that when the same art admits both 
an operation and a production, the production is better than the. operation; 
yet if the end of the master art be an operation, and the end of one of the 
subordinate arts be a production, the former is still superior; l e* the 
operation is an higher end than the production. 



CHAP. HI. 


ETHICS. 


3 


ties are subordinate to this, as that of generalship, of economy, 
of rhetoric. Since then this science employs the other prac* 
tical sciences, and moreover lays clown laws for what we 
ought to do, and from what to abstain, the end of this must 
include those of the others; so that this end must be the good 
of man. For though the good of an individual and a state be 
the same, yet to obtain and preserve that of a state appears to 
be greater and more perfect ; for it is a thing to be contented 
with, to find the good of even a single individual; but to find 
what is the good of nations and cities, is more noble and 
divine. The plan [of our treatise] therefore pursues these 
objects, being a kind of political treatise. 


CHAR 111. 

Thai the accuracy with which any treatise is written, depends 
oh the nature of the subject. What awe the qualijlcations if 
a disciple in the school (f morality. 

1. Our argument would be sufficiently discussed, if it were 
explained according to the subject matter. For accuracy is 
not to be required equally in all disquisitions, as neither in 
all productions of mechanic art But things noble and just, 
which the science of politics has to consider, admit so great a 
difference, and so much uncertainty, as to seem to exist only 
by compact, but not by nature. So likewise, tilings good 
possess a similar want of certainty, because calamities have 
befallen many out of them. For some, we know, have pe¬ 
rished through wealth, and others through fortitude, ft is 
then sufficient that, as we are treating of such subjects and 
drawing our arguments from them, we should point out the 
truth rudely, and merely in a sketch ; and that m treating of 
and from things contingent, we should also draw similar con¬ 
clusions. 

5k By the same rule also ought we to admit each of the 
propositions laid down ; for it is the sign of an educated man 
to require accuracy in each class of subjects, just so far as the 

i)2 



4 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK t. 


nature of the subject admits; for it appears nearly the same 
to allow a mathematician to reason on probabilities, as to de¬ 
mand demonstrations from an orator. 

$* Now every one judges well of those things which he 
knows; and of these he is a good judge. In particular sciences 
therefore, he is a good judge who has been instituted in these; 
but universally, he who has been instructed in every thing. 
Wherefore the young man is not a proper hearer of politics, 
for he is inexperienced in the actions of life; but these dis¬ 
cussions are from such, and concerning such actions. More¬ 
over, being apt to follow his passions, he will be a disciple in 
vain and to no purpose, since the end is not knowledge, but 
practice. But it differs nothing, whether he be a youth in age, 
or youthful in manners; for the defect arises not from the 
time, but from his living according to passion, and running 
after every thing; for to such knowledge becomes useless, as 
it does to the incontinent; but to those who conform their ap¬ 
petites and actions to reason, the knowledge of these things 
must produce vast utility. Concerning the hearer, and in 
what manner he is to admit [the discussion,] and what we 
propose to treat of, let thus much be prefaced. 


CHAP. IV; 

The name of the chief end. False opinions of men concerning 
it Whether we should argue from effects [particulars ] to 
causes [universals'J or contrariwise. 

m ** to return ; s * nce every knowledge and predilection 
aims at some good, let us shew what it is, which we say that 
the political science aims at, and what is tile highest good of 
all subjects of action. As to name indeed, it is almost agreed 
upon by most men; for both the vulgar and learned call it 
happiness: but they conceive that to live well and to act well* 

d eS ******* generally signifies to be fortunate, bene rent germ: but 
Aristotle seems to use the phrase in its literal sense, and for m obvious 
reason; as he makes happiness depend upon action, iff w at owe 

the cause and effect. 



chap* iv. ETHICS. 5 

are the same as to be happy. But concerning happiness, 
■what it is, they disagree, and the many do not give the same 
definition of it as the wise ; for some fancy it to be an obvious 
and well known object, such as pleasure, or wealth, or ho¬ 
nour ; but different men think differently: and frequently 
the same person thinks it a different thing; for, when dis¬ 
eased, he believes it to be health; when poor; riches; hut, 
feeling their own ignorance, they admire those who call it 
something great and above their comprehension. Some again 
have supposed that, besides these c many goods, there is an¬ 
other self-subsisting good, which to all these is the cause of 
their being goods* Now to examine all the opinions would 
perhaps be rather unprofitable; but it will suffice us to exa¬ 
mine those which are most prominent, or seem to carry some 
reason with them. 

2. Let it not, however, escape our notice, that arguments 
from* principles differ from arguments to 8 principles; for 
well did Plato also start this question, and enquire whether 
the way is from principles or to principles; as in the course 
[whether a race is] from the presidents to the goal, or the 
contrary. For we must begin from those things that are 
known, and things are known in two ways; for some are 
known to us h , but others simply in themselves 1 ; perhaps 
therefore we should begin from things known to us. 

S* Wherefore it is necessary that he should have been well 
brought tip in his moral conduct, who is to listen with ad¬ 
vantage to a discussion of things noble and just, and political 
things in general For the existence ^L^jMng J^. the prm - 
t iple; and if that were proved to satisfaction, there wotda be 
no necessity for the reason why it is so. Such an one either 
possesses, or would easily acquire, the principles* But let 


* Plato v. c. 0. 

f The synthetical method. 

% The analytical method* 

h The knowledge of them is acquired by each individual from his own 
personal experience, as the principles of moral action. 

* Abstractedly, without any reference to action, as the principles of 
pure mathematics. 

B $ 



6 , ARISTOTLE'S book i. 

him, who has neither of these advantages, hear the sentiments 
of Hesiod " - 5 


Far best is* he, whose own instinctive powY 
With cautious wisdom weighs each coming hour: 
He too is good, whom borrow’d counsels guide : 
But he who, slave to ignorance and pride, 

Scorns or forgets what wiser tongues have said. 
Alive is useless, and despised when dead L 


CHAR V. 

The opinions of most men concerning the nature of happiness 
are considered, and proved erroneous . 

1* But let ns proceed, whence we have digressed; for men 
seem not unreasonably to form their notion of the good , and 
of happiness, from different lives. The many and most worth¬ 
less class [suppose] pleasure [to be the good,] wherefore 
they are satisfied even with a life of enjoyment. 

2. For there are three kinds of lives which are most pro¬ 
minent; that just mentioned, and the political, and a third, 
the contemplative, 

S. Now the many appear entirely slavish, deliberately 
choosing the life of brutes; but they find a plea for it, be¬ 
cause- many persons, filling places of power, arc led by the 
same passions, as Sardanapalus. 

■4. But the well-educated and active, [consider] honour 
[as the great good;] for this is nearly the end of political lift; 
but it appears to be too superficial for the object of our en¬ 
quiry ; for it seems to have its being more in those who ho¬ 
nour, than in him who is honoured k; but we have a natural 
conception, that the good is something peculiarly one's own, 
and difficult to be taken away. Moreover, men seem to pur¬ 
sue honour, that they may believe themselves to be good ■ at 

1 Sec 11ie same sentiment in Livy, Jib. xxii. c, £9. ami SYphodes, Anti¬ 
gone, v. 720 . Cicero pro Cluentio. Herodotus, Polymn. 10, 
k Vide book vim chap. 8. at the beginning. 



CHAP- V. 


ETHICS. 


< 


least they seek to be honoured by prudent men, and by their 
acquaintances, and on the score of their virtue: it is plain, 
therefore, that at least in their opinion virtue is superior. 
But perhaps one would rather suppose ihh [virtue] to be the 
end of the political life; but tins also appears too imperfect ; 
for it seems possible for a man, while in possession of virtue, 
either to sleep, or be inactive; through life; and besides this, 
to undergo calamities, and he in tin; highest degree unfor¬ 
tunate : but a man living thus, no one would pronounce 
happy, unless in defence of a favourite opinion. Enough, 
therefore, of those things; for we have treated of them at 
considerable length in our miscellaneous writings. 

5. The third life is the contemplative; concerning which 
we shall institute an enquiry hereafter, 

6, But the money-getting life is under a kind of restraint; 
and it is obvious that riches arc not the good which we an* trac¬ 
ing; for they are merely useful h and for the sake of some¬ 
thing else. Wherefore one would rather suppose, that the 
ends before mentioned [were the goods ;‘J for they are loved 
on their own account; hut not even those appear to be so, 
although many arguments have been built upon them. Let 
these things then be dismissed* 

1 Thu term *«*;/«/» to hem used to denote something, whowt 

end w nut in itself, hut it in merely useful towards tin* obtaining wane 
higher end; m used in the same aensu in e. vi. ?, 



s 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK X. 


CHAP. VI.' ‘ 

Plato*s doctrine of happiness considered. 

INTRODUCTION* 

UPON PLATO’S DOCTRINE OF IDEAS* 

An abstract idea is the notion of some property common to many ob-* 
jects, wholly abstracted from its existence in those objects, and gene¬ 
ralized in the mind: so that the mind conceives an idea of this property 
unconnected with any thing material, and without requiring any operation 
of sensation to form the idea. Thus my eye tells me that a house is white, 
snow is white, and paper is white, and by the operation of sense, I have 
a distinct notion of a white horse, white snow, and white paper: but 
when I abstract this common notion from the objects themselves, and 
contemplate whiteness without reference to any object, in which it is in¬ 
herent, I have a general or abstract idea of whiteness; and this is an 
operation of pure intellect, without any intervention of sensation. 

The same general or abstract idea is acquired of properties, which are 
not, like whiteness, perceived by the senses. Thus I see different men 
performing different virtuous actions, and I obtain an abstract idea of 
virtue: 1 see different men obtaining happiness by different pursuits, and 
I obtain an abstract idea of happiness. 

But as these abstract ideas could not exist in matter, and every thing 
must exist somewhere, the ancient Philosophers, and Aristotle amongst 
them, assigned them a place in the mind of the Deity: tiny considered 
these as the archetypes or patterns of every thing in the material world, 
as truly eternal, and unchangeable, in contradistinction to corporeal forms, 
which are in a constant vicissitude of generation and corruption. 

Thus far Plato and Aristotle agreed. Aristotle however and his School, 
although they acknowledged these self-existing, eternal, and archetypal 
forms, yet did not suppose that they had no real existence in those bodies 
also, which convey the notion of them to the senses, and thence to the 
mind. Thus they held snow to be really white, although there was only 
one self-existent whiteness; and though there was only one real form of 
happiness, (that in the mind of the Deity,) yet they did not deny that those 
several circumstances, which are commonly said to produce happiness, did 
really produce what was really and truly happiness. 

But Plato went farther, and maintained that those idea** or species of 
things had a real existence by themselves, not only out of tiny eorf»renl 
form, but out of any mind or intelligence; that they were tacorjtfraU 
substances, not accidents or qualities of other substances* He considered 
that these were the only forms, which had any real existence; that ffbadowt 
or copies might seem to emanate from them, and give names to objects 
here below; but these objects were nothing more than names. Thus 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


9 


several beings are called by the common name of man, but they 

are only called so, because they partake of that one general form, which 
is the the very man. So also many things here are called 

3-as, goods: but he maintained that none of them were really and in¬ 
trinsically goods, but only that one ecv*?aot>yocS- 0 v, which was the form and, 
archetype of them all. Consequently the *T2af) abstract idea or 

form of happiness, was the only happiness which had any real existence. 

It is this doctrine of Plato, which Aristotle combats in the following 
chapter. 


1. Perhaps it is better to investigate the question of uni¬ 
versal [good,] and to enquire what is meant by it, although 
such an enquiry involves difficulties, because men who are our 
friends introduce the doctrine of ideas [or universal goodk] 
But perhaps it may seem to be better, and even necessary, at 
least for the preservation of truth, that we should overthrow 
even our own systems, especially as wc arc philosophers; for 
both »» being our friends, it is our sacred duty to prefer the 
truth. 

% But those who introduced this opinion, did not suppose 
ideas of those things in which they predicated a prior and a 
posterior; wherefore they did not establish an idea of num¬ 
bers. But the good is predicated in substance, in quality, and 
in relation. But the self-subsistent and the essence are na¬ 
turally prior to the relative; for this is like a branch, and an 
accident of being; so that there cannot be any common idea 
in these. 

S. Again, since the good is predicated in as many ways as 
being, (for it is predicated in essence, as God and intellect; 
and in quality, as the virtues; and in quantity, as the mean; 
and in relation, as utility ; and in time, as opportunity $ and 
in place, as a habitation, and so on [in the other predict 
bles n ;]) it is evident, that it cannot be any tiling common, 


m Truth, and (Plato) the supporter of this doctrine. 

* The prcdieublca, or categories, are the various relations in which any 
being, can stand to another. Aristotle made ton categories, viz- «rJ> 
stance, quantity, quality, relation, action, passion, time, place, situation, 
and habit. 



10 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK I. 


universal, and one i for then it would not have been predi¬ 
cated in all the categories, but in one only. 

4. Farther still, since of things under one idea there is also 
one science, there would then be some one science of all 
goods; but now there are many sciences even of goods under 
the same category; as for instance of opportunity, in war the 
military art is the science, but in disease, the medical art ; 
and again of the mean, in food the science is the medical, 
but in labours the gymnastic. 

5. But one might doubt what they mean to say by the self 
of any thing, since in manVself and man there is one and 
the same definition of man; for as far as he is man, they will 
not differ. If so then, neither will there bo difference as far 
as good is concerned, between good and the self of good; 
nor yet will it be more a good from being eternal; since nei¬ 
ther, is the white which is of long duration, whiter than that 
which is for a day. 

6. But the Pythagoreans seem to speak more probably 
concerning it, placing unity in the catalogue 0 of goods; whom 
Speusippus also seems to have followed. 

7. However concerning these subjects there must be an¬ 
other disquisition. But in what we have just asserted a doubt 
suggests itself, because our arguments have not been spoken 
concerning every good; but those things, which are pursued 
and cherished on their own account, are predicated under one 
species of good; and things productive of these, or in any 
way preservative of them, or preventive of the contrary, are 
said to be goods on account of these, and in another manner. 
It is evident then, that goods may be predicated in two ways; 
and some on their own account, the others on account of the 
former* Separating therefore goods per sc from useful [or 
preparatory] goods, let us consider whether they are predi¬ 
cated under one idea . But -what kind of goods would one 
determine to be goods on their own account? Whether such 
as are pursued even when insulated, such as wisdom, sight, 

0 This catalogue may be seen in a note to the Greek text in VVilUmmA 
coition. 



chap. vi. 


ETHICS. 


n 


sonic pleasures, and honours ? for these, though we pursue 
them on account of something else, yet one would class among 
things good on their own account: or is there nothing good 
per se besides the idea ? if there is, then the idea is of no use 
whatever. But if these also are goods on their own account, 
the definition of good must necessarily shew itself the same 
in all these ; just as the definition of whiteness in snow, and 
white lead: hut of honour, and prudence, and pleasure, there 
are other and different definitions, in the very particular of their 
being goods. The good therefore is not any thing common 
under one idea. 

8. But how comes it then [it will he asked] that the same 
term goad is predicated [of different things?] for it does not 
appear to be applied to things accidentally equivocal; is it 
because all things proceed from one, or tend towards one 
good ? or is it not rather by proportion ? For it is as sight in 
the body, intellect in the soul, and other goods in other sub¬ 
stances. 

f). But perhaps these things must be dismissed for the pre¬ 
sent; for it would better become another branch of Philo¬ 
sophy to descant closely upon these subjects, as it would also 
concerning the idea ; for even if there were some one good 
predicated in common, or something separate, independent 
by itself, it is obvious it would not be practical or to be pos¬ 
sessed by man; but for the present this very kind of good is 
the object of our enquiry. Perhaps, however, it would seem 
to some one that it were well to know it, as being conducive 
to those goods, which an 1 to be possessed and acted upon; 
for having this as a pattern, we shall be more likely to know 
the goods that are in our reach: and if we know them, we 
shall obtain them. Certain!}* this position has some plausi¬ 
bility, but it appears to be at variance with the sciences ; for 
all of them, although aspiring after some good, and seeking 
that which is deficient, omit the knowledge of this; though, 
that all artists should be ignorant of an aid of such conse- 

p This is said ironically; for he mean# to say that there in something 
good per ay," besides the idea. 



12 


ARISTOTLE’S 


book: u 


quence, and never enquire for it, is not at all reasonable. It is 
a question likewise bow a weaver or carpenter would be be¬ 
nefited towards bis own trade by knowing this very good ; 
or how will he who has bad an insight into this idea be better 
suited for a physician, or a general; for neither does the 
physician appear to regard health in this manner, but the 
health of a man, and perhaps rather that of a particular indi¬ 
vidual ; for he cures individually. Concerning these things 
then let so much be said. 


CHAP. VIL 

The requisites for a summum bonum are explained , and 
then Aristotle's own definition of if. 

1. Now let us again proceed to the good we are in search of, 
what it is . For it seems to be different, in different actions and 
arts; for it is different in the medical art, in generalship, and 
so also in the rest. What then is the good m each ? h it not 
that, for the sake of which the other things arc done ? Now that 
in the medical art is health; in the art of commanding an 
army, victory; in architecture, a house ; in other arts, other 
ends. But in every action and predilection it is the end; 
since for the sake of this all men perform the other things* 
So that, if there is any end of all the subjects of action, this 
must be the practical good; but if more ends, these must 
be it. 

s ; 0ur argument at length, often shifting the view, hm 
arrived at this same points But we must attempt to explain 
this still farther. Since ends appear many, and of these we 
choose some for the sake of others, an, for instance, riches* 
musical instruments, and in fine all things instrumental, if in 


^ There are two extinct ways by winch happiness i« proved to be the 

ZT'T rmU fr ° m ilS bdng th& crjd f>f Wffhew ,vkw«** 

condly, from its being the ultimate end of all human action#. 



CHAP. VII. 


ETHICS. 


1 o 

W 


obvious, that they are not all perfect. But the chief good 
appears to be something perfect; so that if there is one only 
perfect end, that must be the very thing, which we are in 
search of; but if there are many, the most perfect of them. 
Now we say, that the object pursued for its own sake is more 
perfect than that pursued for the sake of another; and that 
which is never chosen on account of another thing, more so 
than those which are eligible both in themselves, and for sake 
of that other: in line, we call that completely perfect, which 
is always eligible for its own sake, and never on account of 
any thing else. 

3* Of this kind does happiness seem in a peculiar manner 
to be; for this we always choose on its own account, and 
never on account of something else. But honour, and plea¬ 
sure, and intellect, and every virtue we choose in part cer¬ 
tainly on their own account, (for were no further advantage 
to accrue, we should choose each of them,) but we choose 
them also for the sake of happiness, supposing that we shall 
attain happiness by their means; but no one chooses happi¬ 
ness tor the sake of these, nor in short for the sake of any 
thing else. a 

4. But the same result seems also to arise from self-suffi¬ 
ciency f~or independence Q for the perfect good appears to 
be self-sufficient; but we call that self-sufficient, not what is 
so to a single being leading a solitary life, but also to parents 
and children, and wives, and, in short, to friends and fellow 
eitissens; since man is naturally a political animal. Some 
limit, however, must be assigned these ; for, if a person ex¬ 
tends them to parents and descendants, and to the friends of 
friends, it will proceed to infinity. But this must be investi¬ 
gated hereafter r ; and we lay down the self-sufficient to be 
that, which, separated from every thing else, makes life eligi- 

r The stoics defined the aummnm lomm to be gwt. Ari-* 

stotle was afraid that his own description of the mmmnm kmum might 
seem to lead to the same conclusion: he therefore mentions it here, though 
he shews the difference more fully hereafter; viz. that his definition of 
happiness implies avrx^xaa, but that does not imply perfect 

happiness, it being only a part of it. 



u 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK I. 


ble, and in Want of nothing. But such a thing as this we 
suppose happiness to be; and moreover, we* suppose it the 
most .eligible of all, even when not added [to any. other 
good;] but when added, more eligible doubtless, in conjunc¬ 
tion with the smallest good ; for the part added becomes an 
excess of good; but of goods the greater is always more eli¬ 
gible. Happiness then appears something perfect and self- 
sufficient, being the end of all things to be done. 

5. But perhaps to say that happiness is the best ot goods, 
appears something already allowed; and it is desirable that 
we should state still more clearly what it is. Perhaps then 
this may be clone, if the peculiar work of man be assumed; 
for as to the musician, and statuary, and to every artist, and 
in short to all who have any work or action, the good and 
excellence of each appears to be in the work * so would it 
appear to he with man, if there is any peculiar work belong* 
big to him 3 . Are there then certain peculiar works and 
actions of the carpenter and shoemaker; and is there no pe¬ 
culiar work of man, but is he bom to be idle 1 ? or as there 
appears a certain work of the eye, the hand, and the foot, 
and, in fine, of each of the members, so likewise, would not 
one assume a certain work of man besides all these ? 

0. What then can this work be u ? For to five appears to 
be common to him, even with vegetables; but his peculiar 
work is the question with us ; we must therefore abstract the 
life of nutrition and'growth. Then a kind of sensitive life 
would next follow; but this also appears to be common both 
to the horse, and the ox, and to every animal. There remains 
therefore a certain practical life of that, which is in possession 
of reason ; and of this, part is so as being obedient to reason, 

3 The excellence of every artist, considered as an artist, will lu* Known 
by observing his peculiar work: and as happiness is the excellence of 
man, considered as man, we shall know what happiness is, hy observing 
■ what is the peculiar work of man. 

* *Agy3?» i* e. without an fyyuv. 

11 It must be something peculiar to man, and yet common to (or in the 
reach of) all mankind: the things common to all mankind arc 
snmw, £wjj akStririXTh and But its it must also be peculiar to 

man, the two former are excluded. 



CHAP. VII. 


ETHICS. 


15 


the other as possessing it* and exercising’ intellect. But this 
life also being spoken of In two ways x * [[according to energy 
and according to habitJ we must take that according to 
energy; for that appears more properly to be called so. Nov/ if 
the work of man is an energy of the soul according to reason* 
or not without reason; and if we say that the work of any 
man* and of any good man* is the same in genus* as of a 
harper* and a good harper *- (and so* in short* in all cases* su¬ 
periority in each particular excellence being added to each 
particular work ;) for it is the work of a harper to play* of a 
good harper to play well: If so* and if we assume the work 
of man to be a kind of life* and that life an energy of the 
soul* and actions performed with reason ; and the work of a 
good man to be the same things done well* and excellently ; 
and'every thing to be complete according to its proper ex¬ 
cellence: if these things are true* man’s eh ter good proves to 
be an energy of Ihe mid according (o virtue ; but if the virtues 
are plural, according to the best and most perfect: and be¬ 
sides this* throughout the greater part of life for as nei¬ 
ther one swallow, nor one day* makes a spring ; so neither 
does one day* nor a short time* make a man blessed and 

ha ppy- 

7. Thus then let the good be delineated * for it is neces¬ 
sary* perhaps* first to sketch, then afterwards to complete the 
figure. But it would seem to be incumbent upon every one to 
improve and render distinct things* that arc correctly sketched, 
and time would seem to he the discoverer of such things 
as these* or at least a good assistant ; whence also proceed the 
improvements of arts *• for it is the duty of every one to add 
that which is deficient. But it is necessary to bear in mind 
what has been mentioned already* and not to demand accu¬ 
racy equally in all cases* but in each according to its subject 
matter* and just so far as is appropriate to the plan ; for the 
carpenter and geometrician examine a right angle with dif¬ 
ferent views; the one* as far a& it is necessary for his work* 

x Vide book x. chap. 0. at the beginning. 

y Bm vtXtias certainly docs wot mean a perfect or whole life* ai$ may 
he seen in c. 10. 



16 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK I. 


the other, what it is, or what qualities it has; for he is a con- 
templator of the truth. In the same manner then must we 
act in all other instances, that the ornaments may not become 
greater than the works themselves. Neither indeed is the 
cause to be equally required in all things, but it suffices in 
some cases, as for instance in first principles, that their exist¬ 
ence be clearly shewn: but,the existence is the first and the 
principle. 

8. Now of principles some are perceived by induction, 
others by sense, others by a certain habit, and different prin¬ 
ciples by different modes; but we must endeavour to trace 
each of them in the manner they are formed by nature ; and 
we must use our utmost skill, that they be well defined, for 
that has great weight in the discussions which follow. The 
principle, then, seems to be more than the half of the whole, 
and many of the subjects of enquiry to become clear by means 
of this. 


CHAP. VIII. ’' ■ 

Every thing that is supposed by other writers to be requisite for 
happiness, is found in Aristotle’s definition . 

1. But we must consider happiness not only from the con¬ 
clusion, and the particulars, from which our arguments are 
drawn, but also from the assertions of others concerning it: 
for all the real parts of a thing accord with the truth: but 
the truth is immediately discordant with falsehood z . 

% Now goods being distributed into three parts, and some 
called exterior, others said to belong to the soul, and others 
to the body, we call those belonging to the soul, the superior, 
and most perfectly good: but we assume, that actions and 
energies of the soul belong to the soul. So that our definition 
would be right, according to this opinion at least, which i« 

* If Aristotle’s definition is true, and the assertions of other philoso¬ 
phers arc true, they must necessarily agree. 



CftAP* VIII. 


ETHICS. 


i *■ 


ancient, and allowed by philosophers: it would also be rights 
because it has been said, that certain actions and energies 
are the end; for thus it becomes one of the mental goods, 
and not one of the exterior \ 

3. Also, that the happy man lives well and acts well is 
consonant with our definition; for it is there almost called a 
certain well-living, and well-acting b . 

4. Again, all the qualities required in happiness ate shewn 
to exist in what we have defined; for to some it seems to he 
virtue, to others prudence, and to others a kind of wisdom: 
to some again, these, or any of them joined with pleasure, or 
at least not without pleasure; others again include external 
prosperity: but of these opinions, many and ancient writers 
support some; a few, and those men of celebrity, the others ; 
nor is it reasonable to suppose that any of these have totally 
erred, but that they are right in one particular' at least, or in 
most. 

5. With those then, who say it is every virtue, or some 
virtue, the definition accords; for to this [virtue] belongs the 
energy according to it But c perhaps it makes no small dif¬ 
ference, whether we suppose the chief good to consist in pos¬ 
session, or use; and whether in habit or energy; for it is 
possible that a habit, when existing, may effect no good; for 
instance, in one, who is asleep, or in any other way inactive; 
but for energy to effect no good, is impossible; for it will act 
from necessity, and it will act well But as in the Olympic 
games, not the most beautiful and strongest are crowned, but 
those who contend, (for some of these are victorious;) thus 


a His argument is this: philosophers have divided grids into three 
kinds, exterior, mental, bodily: of these the mental are most important t 
I may therefore neglect the rest, and need only pro?© that my definition 
contains mental goods: hut, as I have made the end to consist in action* 
external goods cannot be implied: but I have gone farther; I have ex¬ 
pressly mentioned actions or energies of the soul 
b The terms agtrh, and vixuo^ in the definition imply &and 

* c He does not only prove his definition to agree with former opinions-* 

but to go beyond them, as it contains more. 


c 



18 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK 1, 


also those, who act rightly, become successful candidates for 
the noble and good things in life. 

6 . Moreover, their life is in itself delightful $ for to be de¬ 
lighted, is a good of the soul; but that is delightful to every 
man, of which he is said to be a lover $ as a horse to a lover 
of horses, a spectacle to a lover of spectacles ; so also just 
things to a lover of justice 5 and, in short, virtuous actions to 
a lover of virtue. However, those things which are delightful 
to the multitude, are inconsistent, because they are not such 
by nature * but to the lover of what is noble, those things 
are delightful, which are by nature delightful * and such are 
actions according to virtue 5 so that they are delightful both 
to these characters, and in themselves. Their life therefore 
does not call for pleasure, as a kind of appendage, but has 
the pleasure in itself 5 for besides what has been said, he is 
by no means a good man, who does not rejoice in noble ac¬ 
tions j nor would any man call him just, who does not de¬ 
light in acting justly; nor liberal, who does not exult in li¬ 
beral acts; and in like manner in the other virtues. If so, 
actions according to virtue will be delightful in themselves; 
they will also be good and noble, and each of these in the 
greatest degree* if the good man judges rightly concerning 
them ; and he does judge so as we have said already. Hap¬ 
piness therefore is the best and most noble, and most de¬ 
lightful j and these qualities are not separated according to 
the Delian inscription; for all these qualities are attached to 
the best energies $ but we have said that happiness is all 
these, or that one of them which is the best. 

7* At the same time however it seems, as we have said, to 
stand in need of exterior goods * for it is impossible, or at 
least not easy to perform praiseworthy actions without ex¬ 
terior means 5 for many things are performed as it were by 
instruments, by friends, and wealth, and political power. 
But men deprived of some things, as of noble birth, fine pro¬ 
geny, or fine form, sully their happiness $ for lie is not alto¬ 
gether capable of happiness, who is deformed in his body, or 
of mean birth, or is deserted and childless t and still less so, 
perhaps, if he have vicious children, or if they were dear and 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


19 


dutiful, and have died. As we have said, therefore, it seems 
to demand such prosperity as this; whence some arrange 
good fortune in the same class with happiness: but others 
virtue. 


CHAP. IX. 7' 

That happiness is acquired by action. 

1. Hence d it is also doubted, whether it is acquired by dis* 
cipline, or habit, or in some other manner by exercise ; or 
whether it comes to us from some divine allotment, or even 
from chance. 

2 . If then any other good is the gift of gods to men, it is 
reasonable to suppose that happiness also is a divine gift, and 
more so than any thing else, inasmuch as it is the best of 
human goods. But this would perhaps be better adapted to 
another discussion 5 but, even if it be not a divine gift, but 
results from virtue, and a kind of discipline or exercise, it 
appears to be one of the most divine things, for the prize and 
end of virtue appears to be the best, and something divine, 
and blessed. 

3. But it must also be common to many 5 for it may be 
possessed through some discipline and study by all who are 
not disabled for the reception of virtue. But if it is better 
that happiness should be derived in this way, than by for¬ 
tune, it is reasonable to suppose it is so $ since natural pro¬ 
ductions by nature exist in the best way in which it is pos¬ 
sible for them to exist 5 so also is it with things produced by 
art, and every other cause, and especially by the best cause. 
But to commit the greatest and most excellent of things to 
chance would be very discordant e . This question is also 
cleared up from the definition for it has been said to be an 
energy of a certain quality according to virtue 5 but of other 

d *• c. from the Want of some external goods to make happiness com¬ 
plete. 

* Lucian. Hermotimus, vol. i. p. 768. ed. Hemst* 



ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK t. 


fiO 


goods some necessarily exist with it, others are by nature co¬ 
operative and usefuLin the manner of instruments. But this 
would accord with what we have said in the beginning $ for 
we have laid down the end of the political science to be the 
best; but this uses the greatest diligence to render the ci¬ 
tizens of a certain character, and good and apt to perform 
noble actions j therefore that we do not call either an ox, or 
a horse, or any other brute happy 3 for it is impossible for 
any of them to partake of such an energy. And for this 
reason neither is a child happy 3 for on account of his age he 
is not yet capable of acting in this manner 3 but such as are 
called so, are pronounced happy through hope; for, as we 
have said, it requires both perfect virtue, and a perfect life. 
For there are in life many changes and vicissitudes of all 
kinds j and it is possible that he, who has the greatest 
abundance, should in old age fall into the greatest calamities, 
as is fabled in heroic poems concerning Priam 3 but him, 
who meets with such misfortunes and dies miserably, no man 
will pronounce happy. 


CHAP. xrf’ r ' w 

What effect the vicissitudes of fortune have upon the happy man. 

1. Is no man f then to be pronounced happy while lie 
lives, but must we according to Solon look to the end ? And 
if this must be admitted, is he then happy when he has died ? 
Or is not this altogether absurd, especially to us who assert 
that happiness is a kind of energy ? 

Q. But if we do not say that the dead man is happy, and 
supposing this not to be Solon’s meaning, but that one may 
safely pronounce a man happy at that period, as being beyottd 
the reach of evils and calamities, this also involves a certain 
question. For there appears to be something both good and 

f Ou3’ uXXov dbVtm uvSt^irm, no man at all, not only children, but m 
man at any age. 



CHAP. X. 


ETHICS, 


£1 


evil to a dead man, as there may be to one alive, but not 
conscious * of it: as honours and disgraces, and the pros¬ 
perity and adversity of children and descendants in general. 
But these things also produce a doubt $ for to one who has 
lived happily till old age, and died accordingly, if it is pos¬ 
sible that many changes may happen in his offspring, and 
that some of them may be good, and obtain a life according 
to desert, and others the contrary; and it is evident, that 
even after great intervals of time it is possible for them to 
affect their parents in various ways. It would then be ab¬ 
surd, if the dead too changed with them, and became one 
while happy, at another time miserable 5 it would be also 
absurd that the affairs of descendants should not be interest¬ 
ing to parents for some time at least. 

3 . But we must return to the former subject of dispute; 
for the present question may perhaps be also solved from 
that 1 *. If therefore it is necessary to look to the end, and 
then to pronounce a man happy, not as being happy, but be¬ 
cause he was so before ; how is it not absurd, that, when he 
is happy, his present possession may not be truly predicated 
concerning him, merely because we are unwilling to pro¬ 
nounce men happy when alive on account of the changes of 
fortune, and because we have supposed happiness to be 
something stable, and by no means easily changed $ whereas 
fortune makes many revolutions about the same persons } 
for it is manifest, that if we follow each change of fortune, 
we must frequently call the same man happy, and again mi¬ 
serable, exhibiting the happy man as a kind of cameleon, 


E The way in which a dead man may be said to be unhappy by the vi¬ 
cissitudes of his descendants, is illustrated by the case of a living person, 
who has some calamity befal him, e. g. losing a ship at sea, or a son in 
a distant country; where he does not know of the misfortune at the time 
when it happens; but still as it has happened, he must he considered un r 
happy in consequence. 

h The questions arc, first, May we not call a man happy whilst he 
is alive ? which leads to the second ; Are the dead aflbeted by the vicis¬ 
situdes of the living ? He first answers the former, and by it the latter 
also. 



22 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK I 


and seated on an unstable foundation. Or rather is it 
by no means right to follow the changes of fortune } for the 
distinction of good or bad does not depend on these, but 
the life of man, as we have said, requires their presence: but 
the energies according to virtue are the regulators of happi¬ 
ness, and the contrary energies of the contrary. Moreover, 
the present subject of dispute bears testimony to the defi¬ 
nition. For in no human affairs does stability so exist as in 
the energies according to virtue; for they seem to be more 
stable than even the sciences 5 but of these the most honour¬ 
able are also the most stable, because happy men chiefly and 
most stedfastly live in them ; which seems like a reason why 
there is no oblivion concerning them. Consequently that 
which is enquired after, will be possessed by the happy man, 
and such will he be through life, for he will be in the practice 
and theory of the actions of virtue always, or more than any 
thing else : and will bear his fortune most nobly, and in 
every way and at all times consistently, as a truly good man, 
and a square' without defect. 

4 . But the circumstances of fortune being many, and 
differing in greatness and smallness, it is obvious, that pros¬ 
perous events, and so also the contrary, when small are of 
no consequence in life 5 but many and great events hap¬ 
pening prosperously, will render life more happy; for they 
are naturally adapted to be an ornament, and the use of 
them is beautiful and good ; but happening in the contrary 
manner, they contract and sully the happiness ,* for they bring 
on sorrows, and impede many energies. Nevertheless,* even 
in these circumstances the noble gleams forth when a man 
hears many and great misfortunes easily, not through insen¬ 
sibility, but being generous and magnanimous. But if 
energies are the mainsprings of life, as we have said, no 
happy man can become miserable, for he will never do de¬ 
testable and vile actions; for we suppose that he, as being 

* A perfect cube, which, having each of its sides a square, however it 
be thrown, will rest upon either of its sides perpendicularly. A Greek 
proverb, v. Hhet. 1. iii. c* XI. Plato, Protag. vol, iii. p, 145. ed. Bip. 



CHAP. XI. 


ETHICS. 


23 

truly good and wise, bears his fortunes as becomes him, and 
from existing circumstances always performs the most noble 
deeds; as we suppose that a good general uses the army he 
has with him in the most warlike manner; and that the 
shoemaker from the skins given him makes the most 
beautiful shoe, and in the same manner all other artists. 
But if so, the happy man can never become miserable ; nor 
yet will he be prosperous if he should fall into the calami¬ 
ties of Priam 3 but he will not therefore be variable and 
easily changed, for he will not be removed from happiness 
either easily or by common misfortunes, but by great and 
many; and out of these he cannot become again happy in a 
short time; but if at all, in some long and perfect time, 
having in the interval k become possessed of great and noble 
goods. 

5. What then prevents our calling him happy, who ener¬ 
gizes according to perfect virtue, and is sufficiently furnished 
with external goods, not for a casual time, but through the 
greater part of his life? or must we add, who will thus con¬ 
tinue to live, and will die accordingly } since the future is 
invisible to us, and we have laid down happiness to be an 
end, and wholly perfect. But if this be .the case, we will 
pronounce those among the living blessed, who have and will 
have the qualities we have mentioned, but still we must call 
them blessed as men. And let so much be explained concern* 
ing these things. 


CHAP. XI. 

How far the dead are concerned in the fortunes of their 
descendants . 

1. That the fortunes of descendants and of all friends should 
not in any degree affect us, appears a very unfriendly doctrine, 
and contrary to the opinions of all men* Now the events 
of life being many, and having various distinctions, and 
some affecting us more, some less, it appears a long and 


fc Or tv mvM may mean within himself. 



m 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK. X« 


endless task to discuss them particularly, and perhaps if the 
subject were treated generally and in the outline, it would 
be sufficient. 

%. If then of the calamities which befal the man himself, 
some have a certain weight and consequence in life, while 
others seem to be lighter $ so is it likewise with calamities 
which befal all his friends : (but it makes a much greater 
difference whether each of the calamities [of friends] hap¬ 
pens to the living or the dead, than whether atrocious and 
dreadful deeds exist for the first time in tragedies, or were 
actually perpetrated.) [If this be true,] we must conclude 
the difference to be as stated j or rather perhaps we may 
conclude the doubt concerning the dead, whether they par¬ 
take of any good, or of the contrary; for it appears from the 
above, that if any thing, either good or its contrary, extends 
to them, it is something weak and small* either in itself or 
to them ; but if not [small,] of such a magnitude and qua¬ 
lity as neither to make those happy who are not so, nor to 
deprive the happy of their haapiness \ The prosperity there¬ 
fore as well as adversity of friends seems partly to affect 
the dead; but in such a manner and so far, as neither to 
render those happy who are not happy, nor any thing else 
of such kind. 


CHAP. XII 

That happiness is of the class of things honourable and divine. 

1. These points then being determined, let us consider hap¬ 
piness, whether it belongs to things praiseworthy, or rather 

1 I consider the whole passage from pi S»j to aitpwgttff&w r« 

/xazastav as one argument: the reasoning of which is this: a man is only 
affected hy great misfortunes; in the same manner the misfortunes of his 
friends only affect him when they are great; but whether these mis¬ 
fortunes of his friends happen to him when he is alive or dead, makes a 
great difference: consequently the original question, whether the dead are 
affected by the misfortunes of the living, may thus be answered : for the 
case is the same as a man being affected by the misfortunes of his friends 
while alive, viz. only great misfortunes affect him at all: and when he 
is dead, those only affect him in a small degree. 



CHAP. XII. 


ETHICS. 


25 

to things honourable; for it is evident that at least it is not 
merely one of the faculties m , [or powers of action.] Now 
every thing laudable appears to be praised, in being of a 
certain quality, and havinga certain reference to something* 1 ; 
for we praise the just man, the brave, and, in short, the good 
man, and virtue, on account of works and actions ; and the 
strong, the swift, and every one else, because they are by 
nature of a certain quality, and have a certain reference to 
something good and excellent. But this is plain also from 
the praises given to the gods 5 for they appear ridiculous 
when referred to us; but this happens because praises are 
given by reference °, as we have said.' But if praise belongs 
to such things as these, it is obvious that praise is not given 
to the best things, but something greater, and more ex¬ 
cellent, as also appears to be the case; for we proclaim the 
gods blessed and happy, and proclaim blessed the most 
godlike among men; so is it also with goods; for no man 
praises happiness as he would justice, but pronounces it 
blessed as being somethingmore divine and excellent. Eudoxus 
also seems to have well contended for giving the chief rank 
to pleasure; for its not being praised although it is one of the 
goods, he thought signified that it was superior to things 
laudable; but that God and the good were of this class, for 
other things had a reference to these; for praise belongs to 

m Those things which are really and intrinsically goods, and which 
cannot by any error or persuasion become evils, but must either be goods, 
or cease to have any existence at all, these the ancient philosophers 
divided into honourable and praiseworthy. But any thing which de¬ 
pended upon the different characters of men, whether it were a good or 
an evil, such as money, strength, &c. these they called powers or 

faculties, because though they have the power of being good, they are not 
necessarily so. 

“he. something Mgfier than itself. 

0 ^ something higher . This is not expressed by Aristotle, but is 
evidently intended: consequently if we praise the gods according to human 
ideas of merit, we refer them to a standard lower than themselves, which 
is ridiculous. Nevertheless we certainly do praise men, not only for hav¬ 
ing made advances towards a higher standard, but for having surpassed 
those below them. This latter kind of praise is not noticed by Aristotto. 



%6 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK I. 


virtue, because men are adapted by it to noble actions; but 
encomiums belong to particular actions, both bodily and 
mental. But perhaps it would better become those who 
labour at panegyrics, to discuss these matters closely$ but 
to us it is plain, from what has been said, that happiness be¬ 
longs to things honourable and perfect. It seems also to be 
so, because it is a principle; for we all perform all other 
actions for the sake of this $ but we admit the principle and 
cause of good to be something honourable and divine. 


CHAP. XIII. 

Of virtue, &nd the soul, so far as it is connected with virtue. 

1* Since then happiness is a certain energy of the soul 
according to perfect virtue, we must consider virtue 5 for 
perhaps we should thus be better able to consider happiness 
also. Now the real politician p seems to be particularly en¬ 
gaged with this 5 for he wishes to render the citizens good 
and obedient to the laws 5 and of this we have an example in 
the legislators of the Cretans and Lacedaemonians, [Minos 
and Lycurgus,] and if there ever have been any other such. 
But if this enquiry belongs to the political science, it is evident 
that the investigation of it would be consistent with our ori¬ 
ginal purpose. We must therefore 9 consider virtue, and 
evidently human virtue; for we have been tracing human 
good and human happiness 5 but we mean by virtue not that 
of the body, but that of the soul 5 and happiness also we call 
an energy of the soul. 

2. But if these things are so, it is obvious, that the poli¬ 
tician ought in a manner to know every thing that relates to 

p The man whose professed end and business is woXivmh : whereas Aris* 
totle only considers xoktnxh, because he cannot separate ti&xtt from it. 

% Read <bj. 



CHAP. XIII, 


ETHICS. 


27 


the soul 5 as he., who would cure the eyes, should know the 
whole body $ and more so, as the political science is more 
honourable and excellent than the medical. And of medical 
men, those who are well educated, spend much labour on the 
knowledge of the body. So likewise the politician must con¬ 
sider the nature of the soul; but he must consider it for the 
sake of these things, and as far as is necessary to the objects 
of enquiry. For to investigate this matter with more accu¬ 
racy, is perhaps more laborious than is. required by the sub¬ 
ject proposed. 

3. But some things are spoken well enough concerning it 
even in our popular writings, and we must use them j such 
as that one part of it is irrational, the other rational. But 
whether these are divided in the same manner as the parts of 
the body and every thing divisible, or whether they are two 
only in definition, being by nature indivisible, as in the cir¬ 
cumference of a circle, the convex and concave side, makes no 
difference for the present. 

4. Of the irrational, one part resembles the common and 
vegetative power 5 I mean the cause of its being nourished 
and increased : for such a power of the soul r one would ad¬ 
mit in all things that are nourished, even in embryos, and 
the same also in perfect animals; for it is more reasonable 
that this should exist in them than any other. Now the vir¬ 
tue of this appears to be common, and not human $ for this 
part and this power seem to operate most in sleep; but the 
good and bad man are least distinguishable in sleep $ whence 
they say that the happy for half their life differ in nothing 
from the miserable: and this happens reasonably j for sleep 
is the inaction of the soul, as to that from which it is termed 
good and bad, unless some emotions partially reach it [even 

r It is evident from this that the Greek term and the English term 
md have not exactly the same signification attached to them: ipux* seems 
to imply every thing distinct from the more mass of matter of which man 
is composed: not only that spiritual and immortal part which is to sur¬ 
vive the material, hut all the properties active and passive possessed by the 
material. Thus x is opposed to 1 tmjmrmh in 1 Cor. xv. 44, 
4fi: see also 1 Cor, ii. 14. 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK I. 


38 

then], and for this reason the visions of the good become 
better than those of ordinary men. But of these things 
enough 5 and therefore the nutritive part must be rejected, 
since it is naturally destitute of human virtue. 

5. There appears, however, to be another nature of the 
soul, which is irrational but nevertheless partakes in a man¬ 
ner of reason ; for we praise the reason of the continent and 
incontinent man, as well as that part of the soul which pos¬ 
sesses reason 5 for it excites men rightly and to the most ex¬ 
cellent deeds. 

6. But there appears in them another part also naturally 
contrary to reason, which contends with and resists reason - 9 
for in fact, as the paralyzed members of the body, if we in¬ 
tend moving them to the right, on the contrary are torn 
away to the left, just so is it in the soul $ for the impulses 
of the incontinent are towards the contrary. But in bodies 
we see that which bears itself contrary, but in the soul we do 
not see it; but perhaps we must nevertheless suppose that 
there is also in the soul something contrary to reason, oppos¬ 
ing and bearing against it 5 but in what manner it is different 
does not matter. 

7. But even this appears, as we have said, to partake of 
reason ; this part, therefore, in the continent man is obedient 
to reason; and still more submissive perhaps is it in the tem¬ 
perate and brave ; for in these every thing is concordant with 
reason. The irrational part then appears to be two-fold j for 
the vegetative by no means partakes of reason ; but the part 
which desires and in short that which moves the appetite par¬ 
takes of it in a manner, inasmuch as it is obedient to it. Thus 
too we say that a man pays regard to his father and friends, 
and not as he’ pays regard to the mathematical sciences *. 
But that the irrational part is somehow directed by reason, 
both admonition and every reproof and exhortation indicate. 

* This sentence can scarcely he translated into English: %x m 

generally means, as it is here rendered, to pay regard io 9 in which sense it 
may he applied to the advice of friends, or mathematical pursuits : but in 
the former case it may be taken literally, and a man may be said Xtyw 
%X ilv to employ the reason of his father. 



CHAP. XIII. 


ETHICS- 


29 


8 . But if we must say that this also possesses reason, that 
division of the soul which is rational will be also two-fold*; 
the one properly and in itself, the other as a something obe¬ 
dient to a parent. 

9 . But virtue also is divided according to this difference ; 
for we call some of the virtues intellectual, others ethical ; 
wisdom, and intelligence, and prudence, we call intellectual; 
but liberality and temperance, moral; for when speaking o£ 
the moral character of a man, we do not say that he is wise 
or intelligent, but that he is meek or temperate; but we 
praise the wise man also according to habit; but praise¬ 
worthy habits we call virtues. 

t It ipight be concluded that there are three parts of the soul, the ra¬ 
tional, and the two parts of the irrational. But as that part which disobeys 
reason sometimes also obeys it, and therefore some people have chosen to 
ball it rational; Aristolc allows them to subdivide both parts of the soul 
into two: first, the rational part, into that which is purely intellectual, and 
that which obeys reason: second, the irrational part, into that which op¬ 
poses reason, and into the vegetative part. He acknowledges this four¬ 
fold division in the 6th book, c. 12, where he speaks reit rm 




ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK II. 


CHAP. I. 

That virtue is not innate, but acquired by custom. 

I. Virtue being two-fold, the one part intellectual, the 
other moral * the intellectual for the most part derives both 
Its origin and increase from discipline ; hence it needs expe¬ 
rience and time ; but the moral comes to us from custom, 
whence also it has received the name [«&*«], but little re¬ 
moved from the word custom 

% From which likewise it is clear, that not one of the 
moral virtues is born in us by nature $ for none of those 
things which exist by nature can be changed by custom ; for 
instance, a stone naturally borne downward could not be 
caused by custom to tend upwards, not if a person accustomed 
it ten thousand times by throwing it upward, nor could the 
fire be made to tend downwards 5 nor can any of the things 
naturally produced one way be turned by custom to the con¬ 
trary. The virtues then are produced in us neither from na¬ 
ture, nor contrary to nature, but after we have been naturally 
adapted to receive them, and perfected by custom. 

3. Again 51 , as many things as accrue to us from nature, we 

a This is a good opportunity for mentioning the two senses in which 
the word is used: it signifies, first, the mere capacity of acquiring 

a habit, which is implanted in us by nature : secondly, the faculty of per¬ 
forming an action, which is the natural consequence of the habit, and 
which is acquired by our own exertions. In those things, which are given 
by nature, as the senses, nature supplies at once both- the capacity and the 



32 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK II# 


first receive the powers of them, but afterwards produce the 
energies 5 which is evident in the case of the senses 5 for we 
have not from frequently seeing or frequently hearing re¬ 
ceived those senses, but, on the contrary, having the senses 
f we use them, but have not received them by using. But the 
virtues we receive by first operating, as in the case of other 
, arts; for whatever we are to do when we have learnt, these 
we learn by doing 5 as by building, men become builders, 
and harpers by playing on the harp; so also by performing 
just acts we become just, by doing temperate acts temperate, 
by performing brave acts we become brave. 

4 . Moreover what is done in states adds its testimony to 
this j for legislators render the citizens good, by accustoming 
them; and indeed this is the wish of every lawgiver; but as 
many as do not do this well, err; and in this respect polity 
differs from polity, the good from the bad. 

5 . Again, every virtue is both generated and corrupted from 
the same things, and through the same b ; so also is it with 
every art 5 for from harping both good and bad harpers are 
produced, and analogously architects and all other artists; 
for from building well, men will be good builders, but bad 
from building ill; for if it were not so, there would be no 
occasion for a master, but all would be born either good or 
bad. Just so then is the case with the virtues ; for by per¬ 
forming the acts of intercourse between man and man, we be¬ 
come some just, others unjust; by acting in dangers and 
accustoming ourselves to be terrified or confident, some be¬ 
come brave, others cowards. So also is it with acts of desire 

faculty, md the act may immediately take place. In those things which 
are acquired, as moral virtues and arts, nature gives the capacity, but w*e 
acquire the faculty by practice. Thus a man is born with the capacity of 
being a statuary; but he must have practised a long time and even made 
many entire statues in a rude and imperfect manner, before he can be pro¬ 
perly said to have the faculty of making a statue. This capacity and this 
faculty are both expressed by the same word and perplexities often 

arise from not observing the distinction. 

b Or, in other words, virtue and vice are both produced by a succession 
of similar actions: for the expression, that vjrtue is corrupted, is emiiv*. 
lent to saying that vie* is. produced. 



CHAP. ir. 


ETHICS. 


33 


and angel*; for some become temperate and meek, others in¬ 
temperate and irascible • the one by being engaged with them 
in one way, the others by engaging in them another way. 

6. And in one word therefore, from similar energies arise 
similar habits ; wherefore it is necessary to produce energies 
of a certain quality ; for the habits follow according to the 
different species of these. It makes then no small difference 
whether we accustom ourselves one way or the other imme¬ 
diately from our youth, but a very great or rather the whole 
difference. 


CHAP. n. 

As moral virtue depends upon actions, it is considered how each 
particular action should be performed. 

1. Since then the present undertaking is not for the pur¬ 
pose of theory, as other discussions are; (for we do not 
speculate that we may know what virtue is, but that we may 
become good, since otherwise there would no advantage 
accrue from it;) it is necessary to consider the circumstances 
of actions, in what manner we are to perform them ; for 
these are the causes of the habits also being of a certain qua¬ 
lity, as we have before said. 

2 . Now to act according to right reason is too general a 
precept, and let it lie over for the present 5 but we will dis¬ 
cuss that subject hereafter, both what right reason is, and 
what reference it bears to the other virtues. 

3. But let this be previously agreed upon, that every 
treatise concerning practical things ought to be composed in 
outline, and not with accuracy, as we have also said in the 
outset; because reasonings are to be required according to 
the subject matter; but things belonging and conducive to 
actions have no stability, as neither have things conducive to 
health. But the general argument being of this nature, 
much more will the discussion of particulars be deficient in 

D 



84 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK. It, 


accuracy $ for it does not come under any art or under any 
precept: but it becomes the individuals themselves, when in 
action, to observe what is suitable to the occasion, as is the rule 
in the medical and the pilots art. But although the present 
discussion is of such a nature, (i. e. incapable of accuracy,) 
we must endeavour to make up for it. 

4. In the first place then it must be noticed, that things 
of this kind are by nature apt to be corrupted by defect and 
excess, as we see in strength and health, (for it is necessary 
to use things obvious, as examples in things less known ;) 
for exercises, which are excessive as well as those which arc 
defective, destroy the strength. In like manner also liquids 
and eatables taken in too great or too small a quantity de¬ 
stroy the health $ but when taken in moderation, both pro¬ 
duce and improve and preserve it. This then is the case 
with temperance and fortitude and the other virtues $ for he 
who flies from and is terrified at every thing, and sustains 
nothing, becomes timid; and he that fears nothing alto¬ 
gether, but marches up to every thing, is rash. In the same 
manner he who takes his fill of every pleasure, and abstains 
from none, is intemperate; but he who dies from all plea¬ 
sures, as rustics do, is a kind of insensible character. For 
temperance and fortitude are destroyed by the excess and de¬ 
fect, but preserved by mediocrity. 

5. But not only the origin, and increase, and corruption 
[of the virtues] proceed from and by the same things, but 
also their operations will be in the same things c • for thus 
it is in other more obvious cases 5 for instance, in strength $ 
for that is produced by taking much food, and submitting to 
many labours j and the strong man is best able to do these 
things. So it is also with the virtues; for by abstaining 

c Or, in other words, the act which precedes and leads to the habit, and 
that which follows aud flows from it, will be the same in kind. But, as is 
shewn in the following chapter, there will be this difference between them: 
the latter is accompanied with pleasure, the former is not s at least al¬ 
though the man may feel pleased that he has been obliged to do a virtuous 
act, yet if the habit is not formed, he will feel a certain degree of pain in 
resisting the suggestions of his passions. 



CHAP. HI. 


ETHICS. 


35 


from pleasures we become temperate, and having become 
temperate we are most able to abstain from them. In like 
manner also in fortitude ; for accustoming ourselves to con¬ 
temn terrific objects, and to bear them, we become brave, 
and having become so, we shall be best able to endure ter¬ 
rific things. 


CHAP. III. 

That the pleasure or pain attendant on our actions is to be the 
test of our habits, whether they are formed to virtue or vice; 
and therefore that virtue and vice are conversant in pleasure 
and pain . 

1. But we ought to make the pleasure or pain which at¬ 
tends actions, the indication of habits. For he who abstains 
from bodily pleasures, and exults in this very thing, is tem¬ 
perate; but he who is grieved in doing so, is the intempe¬ 
rate d .* and he who endures dangers, and exults in doing so, 
or at least feels no pain, is brave; but he who feels pain is a 
coward ; for moral virtue is conversant with pleasures and 
pains; for we act viciously by reason of the pleasure, and ab¬ 
stain from noble deeds by reason of the pain. Wherefore it 
is requisite, as Plato says, to be trained up in a particular 
manner immediately from our childhood, so that we may be 
pleased and pained by the things we ought; for this is right 
education. 

2. Moreover, if the virtues are conversant with actions and 
passions, but pleasure and pain are consequent upon every 
passion and action, for this reason also virtue must be con¬ 
versant with pleasures and pains. 

4 He who at »stains from bodily pleasures without any struggle at all, 
merely from the force of habit, is temperate* He who abstains after some 
struggle, because his principle overpowers his passions, is continent* But 
he who abstains and is very sorry at being obliged to abstain, k intern* 



36 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK H, 


3, The punishments also inflicted by means of these [pains] 
point out this $ for they are a kind of remedies ; but reme¬ 
dies are naturally applied by contraries e . 

4. Again, as we have also said before* every habit of the 
soul* by whatever it is naturally apt to become worse and 
better, bears its nature toward those things and about them ; 
but they [the habits of the soul] become vitiated by means of 
pleasures and pains, by our pursuing and avoiding either 
those things which we ought not, or when we ought not, 
or in a manner we ought not, or in as many other ways as 
these things are divided by reasonWherefore some define 
the Virtues to be certain apathies and tranquillities; yet not 
properly, because they assert it simply, not saying as is pro¬ 
per, and as is not proper, and when it is proper, and other pro¬ 
visos which are added *. Virtue therefore is admitted to be of 
this kind, conversant with pleasures and pains, apt to per¬ 
form the best actions 5 but vice is the contrary. 

4. These very things may be made yet clearer from those 
[arguments which follow]. For the objects of desire being 
three, and the objects of aversion being also three, the ho¬ 
nourable, the advantageous, and the delightful; and the 
three contraries, the base, the disadvantageous, and the pain¬ 
ful 5 in all these the good man succeeds, but the bad man errs, 
and particularly in the instance of pleasure 5 for this is com* 
mon to all animals, and attends upon all the objects of 
choice; for both the honourable and the advantageous ap¬ 
pear to be delightful. Further, pleasure is connected with 


e Punishment is evidently a pain : therefore if punishments (like fae- 
dimes) act by contraries, the vicious act, which required pain as a pu¬ 
nishment, must have been caused by pleasure. 

. f ** e * m ar) y of the seven other categories, which are in all ten s vide 1 
1 . c. 6. note n. 

t Some people, observing the influence which pleasure and pain had 
upon virtue and vice, conceived virtue and vice to be wholly inactive, and 
that pleasure and pain alone influenced the virtuous and vicious man- 
thus virtue and vice would each be an ***&/» or 4^*. But, says Aris¬ 
totle, they ought to have added, that virtue, (even supposing it to be in 
active) is influenced by pleasure rightly, vice wrongly. 



CJIAP. IV. 


ETHICS. 


37 


the growth of each of us from our infancy; hence it is a dif¬ 
ficult task to expunge that passion which has given a colour 
to life. Moreover, we measure our actions by the rule of 
pleasure and pain, some of us more, some less. On this ac<- 
count then it is necessary that the whole discussion should 
have a reference to these things ; for it is of no mean conse¬ 
quence towards actions, whether we rejoice or feel pain pro¬ 
perly or improperly. 

5. Again, it is more arduous to contend against pleasure, 

than anger, which last Heraclitus speaks of as an arduous 
task ; but both art and virtue are always engaged with the 
more difficult thing.; for the good is more excellent in this 
[difficulty]. So that on this account also the whole business 
both of virtue and the political science is with pleasure and 
pain ; for he who employs these well, will be a good man, 
but he who employs them badly, will be bad. , 

6. That virtue then is conversant with pleasures and pains, 
and that by whatever it is produced, it is both improved and 
vitiated by those same things when not performed in a si¬ 
milar manner 5 and that, from whatever it is produced, it 
also energizes about the same., let so much be said. 


CHAP. IV. 

An objection is started to the clause , that men become virtuous by 
performing virtuous actions , and that they are not necessarily 
virtuous in the performance of them ; and an answer is given, 
by shewing the many requisites towards an action being good 
besides the mere act or performance f 

1. But a person might doubt, hqw we say that men must 
become just by doing just actions, and temperate by acting 
temperately; for if they perform just and temperate acts, 
they are already just and temperate; as, if a person perform 

r> 3 



38 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK II* 


grammatical or musical actions, they are grammarians and 
musicians h . 

2. Or is this not true even in the arts ? For it is possible 
to do a thing grammatically, either from chance or at an¬ 
other’s suggestion. He will therefore be a grammarian then 
only when he does a thing both grammatical and grammati¬ 
cally, that is, according to the art of grammar inherent in 
himself. 

S. Moreover the case is not similar with the arts* as with 
the virtues ; for the things produced by the arts contain the 
excellence in themselves. It suffices, therefore, that these 
should be done in a certain manner; but the things per¬ 
formed according to the virtues, are performed [for instance] 
justly or temperately, not if the actions themselves are of a 
certain cast, but if the doer performs them with certain dis¬ 
positions ; in the first place, if he performs them knowingly; 
next, if deliberately choosing them, and deliberately choosing 
them on their own account; and thirdly, if with a firm and 
immutable habit. Now these things are not reckoned among 
the requisites for the possession of the other arts, except the 
mere knowing. But to the acquisition of the virtues, the 
mere knowledge avails little or nothing, whereas the other 
requisites have not a little but the whole forcej which 
[requisites] also accrue from frequently performing virtuous 
actions j for instance, just and temperate actions. 

4 Actions therefore are called just and temperate, when 
they are such as a just or temperate man would do; but he 
is the just and temperate, not who merely does these things, 

h The refutation of this objection is most complete: the objection ap¬ 
peals to the arts of grammar and music. Aristotle proves, first, that in 
those arts the case is not as the objector states: secondly, supposing it 
were so, he denies the analogy between the arts and virtue. 

1 And yet in the first and second chapters he argued analogically from 
the arts to the virtues. The case is this. There is an analogy in the pro¬ 
duction of arts and moral habits; for they arc both produced by a succes¬ 
sion of similar actions. But here the analogy ceases; and the difference 
between performing a moral act and a work of art is what is stated in the, 
text 



CHAP. V. 


ETHICS. 


39 

but who also does them* as just and temperate men per¬ 
form them. It is therefore rightly said, that the just cha¬ 
racter results from performing just actions* and the tem¬ 
perate from performing temperate actions* but from not 
doing these things no one would ever be likely to become 
good. But the multitude do not act thus* but flying to 
mere words* they fancy they are philosophers* and that thus 
they shall be worthy characters; acting something like the 
sick* who indeed attentively hear the physicians* but use 
none of their prescriptions. As therefore these will never 
have a good habit of body by thus taking care of it* so 
neither will those have a good habit of mind who thus 
philosophise. 


CHAP. V. 

That virtue is a habit. 

1 . In the next place we must consider what virtue is. 
Since then the things produced in the soul are three k , pas¬ 
sions* powers, and habits, virtue must be one of these. By 
passions I mean, desire, anger* fear* audacity* envy, joy* love, 
hatred, anxiety* emulation, pity* in short, those things which 
pleasure or pain follow 5 and by powers* those things by 
which we are said to be capable of these passions 5 for in¬ 
stance, by which we are capable of being angry, or pained, 
or feeling pity 5 but habits* by which we are well or ill 
disposed with respect to the passions; for instance* with 

k Since moral virtue in the subject of discussion at present, he of course 
speaks of that part of the soul only, which sometimes obeys and sometimes 
disobeys reason; (vide 1. i. c. ult.) the purely intellectual part is necessarily 
excluded. Now nothing is given by nature to the moral part, (if it may 
be so called,) except animal passions, and the power of acting in. conse¬ 
quence of them : nor can any other effect be produced from following or 
subduing them, than a good or bad habit; i. e- there can be nothing in the 
moral part of the soul, except passions, capacities, (v. note a, to c. 1. of this 
book,) and habits, 

» 



40 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK II. 


respect to being angry, if we are vehemently or remissly so, 
we are badly affected3 but if moderately, well $ and so on 
with the rest. 

2. Neither the virtues therefore nor the vices are pas¬ 
sions 3 for we are not called worthy or vicious on the score 
of our passions, but we are said to be so on the score of our 
virtues or vices, and because we are neither praised nor 
blamed on the score of our passions 3 for neither he who is 
angry, nor he who is afraid, is praised 3 nor is he blamed who 
is simply angry, but he who is so after a certain manner; 
but we are praised or blamed on the score of our virtues and 
vices. 

3 . Again, we are enraged or terrified without deliberate 
choice 3 but the virtues are a kind of deliberate choice, or 
not without deliberate choice. 

4 . And in addition to these reasons, we are said to be 
moved according to our passions, but are not said to be moved 
according to the virtues or vices, but to be disposed in a cer¬ 
tain manner 1 . 

5 . For these reasons neither are they powers 3 for we are 
called neither good nor bad from being able simply to feel 
passion, nor are we praised or blamed. And farther still, we 
possess powers from nature, but we do not from nature be¬ 
come good or bad; but concerning this we have spoken 
before. 

6 . If then the virtues are neither passions nor powers, it 
remains that they are habits. What therefore virtue is in 
genus has been explained. 


1 An argument drawn from mere words may at first appear weak : it 
must be remembered however that words are only the signs of things, but 
they are signs universally agreed upon: consequently if men had con- 
ceived virtues and passions to be the same, they would not by universal 
consent have used different signs to express their effects. 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


41 


CHAR VI. 

Virtue is a habit consisting in a mean. 

1. It is proper, however, not only to say thus, that it is a 
habit, but also what kind of a habit it is. We must say then, 
that every virtue causes the thing itself, of which it is the 
virtue, to be rightly formed, and brings to perfection the 
work of it; for instance, the virtue of the eye renders the 
eye and its work excellent ; for by the virtue of the eye we see 
well. In a similar manner the virtue of a horse renders the 
horse excellent and proper for running, and bearing its rider, 
and standing the charge of an enemy. But if this be the 
case in all instances, then the virtue of man must be the 
habit, by means of which man becomes good, and by which 
he will produce his peculiar work perfectly. 

2. How this will be effected we have shewn already 
And it may also be proved in this way, if we trace out what is 
its nature. Now in every thing continuous and divisible we 
may take a greater, a less, and an equal part ; and that 
either in the thing itself, or with reference to Ourselves ; but 
the equal is a kind of mean between excess and defect. 
Now I call that the mean of the thing itself, which is equally 
distant from each of the extremes, which is one and the 
same in all things, but the middle with reference to us, that 
which neither exceeds, nor falls short of what is proper. 
But this is not one nor the same to all $ for instance, if ten 
are too many, but two too few, they take six for a mean ac¬ 
cording to the thing; for [six] equally exceeds [two], and is 
exceeded [by ten]. But this is a mean according to arithme¬ 
tical proportion; the mean, however, with reference to us is 
not to be thus assumed. For supposing the eating ten 
pounds is too much, but eating two pounds is too little, the 
master of the exercises will not prescribe six pounds; for 
perhaps this also may be too much or too little for Mm who 


m Vide c. ii. of this book. 



4& 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK II. 


is to take the food; for to Milo it would be little, but to 
one who is a beginner in the exercises, much; so is it in the 
race and wrestling. Thus then every, scientific man avoids 
excess and defect, but searches out for the mean, and makes 
this the object of his choice ; the mean, not of the thing, 
bnt that which is referred to ourselves. 

3 . Now if every science brings its work to perfection in 
this way, by looking to the mean, and making the produc¬ 
tions tend towards that; (whence men are accustomed to 
say of well-executed works, that it is impossible to take 
away from, or add any thing to them, inasmuch as the ex¬ 
cess and defect destroy the excellency, but the mean pre¬ 
serves it;) and if good artists work, as we say, looking to 
this, but virtue as well as nature is more accurate and better 
than every art, virtue must certainly be a something tending 
to the mean. But I am speaking of moral virtue; for this 
is conversant with passions and actions ; but in these there 
is excess and defect, and the mean; for instance, it is pos¬ 
sible to be afraid, and be confident; and to desire, and abhor; 
to be enraged, and to pity; and, in short, to be pleased, and 
be grieved, both in excess and defect, and each manner not 
right. But the being moved by our passions at the proper 
time, and for proper reasons, and towards proper per¬ 
sons, and for a propet end, and in a proper manner, is the 
mean and the best, which is a quality of virtue, in like 
manner also in actions there is excess and defect, and a 
mean 5 but virtue is conversant in passions and actions, in 
which the excess is an error, and the defect is blamed, but 
the middle is praised and succeeds; and both these belong 
to virtue. Hence virtue is a certain mean, inasmuch us it 
tends to the middle. . Again, it is possible to err in many 
ways 5 (for evil belongs to the infinite, as the Pythagoreans 
conjectured, but good to the finite 5 ) but we can act rightly 
only in one way; wherefore also the one is easy, the other 
difficult; for it is easy to miss the mark, but difficult to bit 
it; and on this account excess and defect belong to vice, but 
the mean only to virtue; “ For men are only in one way 
good, but bad in various Ways.” 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


43 


4 . Moral virtue then is a habit deliberately choosing, existing 
in a medium, which refers to ns, and is defined by reason, and as 
a prudent man would define it; but a mean between two 
evils, the one consisting in excess, the other in defect; and 
farther, it is a mean, in that one of these falls short of and 
the other exceeds what is right, both in passions and actions, 
and that virtue both finds and chooses th^fciean. Where¬ 
fore, according to essence, and the delimtionv which explains 
the genus, virtue is a mean j but according to preeminence 
and excellence it is a summit. 

5 . But neither every action nor every passion admits a 
mean$ for some as soon as named imply depravity, such as, 
malevolence, impudence, envy; and of actions, adultery, 
theft, murder. For all these and such like are named from 
their being themselves bad, but not the excess nor defects 
of them. It is impossible therefore at any time to be right 
in these, but we always must err. Nor does the good or the 
bad consist in things of this kind, in committing adultery 
with whom, or when, or how we ought, but the mere doing 
of any of these actions is to err. Similar to this would be 
the requiring a mean, and excess, and defect in doing an 
injury, and in acting the coward, and in being intemperate j, 
for there would be in such a case indeed a mean of excess 
and defect, an excess of excess, and a defect of defect. But 
there is no. excess and defect of temperance and fortitude, 
because the mean is in one point of view a summit, so nei¬ 
ther is there a mean, nor excess, and defect of these, but in 
whatever manner they are performed there is an error ; for, 
in short, there is neither a mean of excess and defect, nor 
excess and defect of the mean ®. 


n I have translated furirw and pttrov by the same word mean, m 1 know 
of no separate terms which will express the difference. The difference 
however is plain: ptirav is the mean itself, or centre of any thing, 
the 'act of being in the ptrav. 

0 This fifth section may be summed up by saying, there is a mean, ex¬ 
cess, and defect in every thing, except in that which is itself a mean, an 
excess, or a defect. 



44 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK II. ■ 


CHAP. VII. 

By an induction of the particular virtues the truth of the general 

proposition is demonstrated , namely , that virtue is a mean. 

1. It is necegfcy however that this should not only be 
asserted universally, but it should also be applicable to par¬ 
ticulars 5 for in discussions on actions, universal reasonings 
are more unsubstantial, and particular ones more true j for 
actions are engaged in particulars $ and with these our po¬ 
sitions ought to accord. We must therefore assume these 
things from a sketch. 

2 . Now in fear and confidence, fortitude is the mean. Of 
those who exceed, he who exceeds in absence of fear has nq 
particular name 5 (there are indeed many characters name¬ 
less $) but he who exceeds in confidence, is audacious $ he 
again who exceeds in being afraid, but is deficient in being 
confident, is timid. 

3 . Again, in pains and pleasures, not in all, however, and 
indeed less in pains, the mean is temperance, the excess 
intemperance. But those who are deficient in pleasures do 
not often exist, wherefore neither have these obtained an 
appellation ; but let them be called the insensate. 

4 . In the giving and receiving of money, the mean is 
liberality, but the excess and defect are prodigality, and illi- 
berality. But men exceed and are deficient in these con¬ 
trariwise ; for the prodigal exceeds in expending, but is de¬ 
ficient in receiving money; on the other hand, the illiberal 
exceeds in receiving, but is deficient in expending, For the 
present, we speak in outline and summarily, being con¬ 
tented with going thus far ; but we shall discuss them more 
accurately at a future time. 

5 . In the case of riches, there are also other dispositions 3 
the mean is magnificence; for the magnificent man differs 
from the liberal5 for the former is conversant with great 
expences, but the latter with small 3 but the excess is a 
want of taste, and a vulgarity in profusion, and the defect 



CHAP, Vll. 


ETHICS. 


45 


parsimony; but these [dispositions] differ from those which 
relate to liberality; in what however they differ will be here¬ 
after explained. 

6. In honour and dishonour, the mean is magnanimity, 
the excess is what is called haughtiness $ the defect, pusilla¬ 
nimity. 

7 . But in the same manner as we have said that liberality 
is related to magnificence, differing only in that it is con¬ 
versant with small things, thus also a certain disposition has 
a relation to magnanimity, which is engaged in great ho¬ 
nour, itself being conversant with small 5 for it is possible to 
aspire after honour as w6 ought, and more and less than we 
ought. Now he who exceeds in his desires is said to be 
ambitious, but he who is deficient) unambitious, but the 
middle has no peculiar name. The dispositions also have no 
name, except that of the ambitious man, ambition 5 whence 
the extremes claim as their right the middle place. And we 
indeed sometimes call the middle ambitious, sometimes un¬ 
ambitious $ and sometimes we praise the ambitious, some¬ 
times the unambitious. But from what cause we do this 
will be explained in the course of the following treatise 5 
but now let us speak concerning the rest, according to the 
manner we have set out with. 

8. In anger there is also excess and defect, and a mean$ 
but these being nearly anonymous, as we call the middle 
character mild) we will call the mean mildness 5 and of thd 
extremes, let him who exceeds be the wrathful, and the 
vice wrathfulncsss and let him who is deficient be a certain 
dispassionate character, but the defect dispassion. 

9. There are also three other means, having indeed some 
similarity to each other, but different from each other ; for 
all of them are conversant with an interchange of words and 
actions, but they differ because the one is engaged in the truth 
which is in those actions, the others in what is pleasant; 
and this latter, part consists in amusement, part in all the 
affairs of life. We must therefore speak concerning these, 
that we may the more clearly see, that in all cases the mean 
is laudable, but that the extremes are neither right nor laud- 



46 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK. II. 


abk, but reprehensible. Of these also the greater part are 
anonymous ; but we must attempt, as in the other cases, to 
give them appellations, for the sake of perspicuity, and that 
we may be easily followed. 

10. As to truth then, the middle character is a kind of 
truth-telling person, and the mean may be called truth ; but 
pretence, when carried to excess, may be termed arrogance, 
and he who possesses it, arrogant; but that which leans to 
defect, may be called dissimulation, and the person a dis¬ 
simulator. 

11. With respect however to pleasure in amusement, the 
middle character is the facetious, and the disposition faceti¬ 
ousness; but the excess is scurrility, and he who possesses 
it, a scurrilous man ; but he who is deficient, a kind of rustic 
character, and the habit may be called rusticity. 

12. Now concerning the other pleasure, that in the affairs 
of life, he, who pleases in such a way as is proper is friendly, 
and the medium is friendliness ,* he who exceeds, if for no 
advantage to himself, is a fawner, but if for his own ad¬ 
vantage, he is a flatterer; and he who is deficient, and in all 
things unpleasant, is contentious and morose. 

13. There are likewise means in the passions, and in things 
attendant on the passions; for modesty is not a virtue, but 
still the modest man is praised; for in these, the one cha¬ 
racter is called middle, but he who exceeds, being, as it were, 
confounded, is the man who is abashed at every thing; and 
he who is deficient [in modesty], lor who has it not at all, is 
the impudent, but the middle character is the modest* 

14. Again, indignation is the mean between envy and ma¬ 
levolence, and these are conversant with the pain and plea¬ 
sure, which arise from what happens to our neighbours; for 
the indignant man is pained at those, who are undeservedly 
prosperous; but the envious man exceeding the former, is 
pained at all who do well; but the malevolent man is so far 
short of feeling pain at the misfortunes of other men, that 
he even feels pleasure at them. But there will be an op¬ 
portunity for these things elsewhere : with respect to justice 
however, since the term is not used in one way only, at a 



CHAP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


47 


future opportunity, we will divide it, and speak concerning 
each of its parts, how they are means; in like manner also 
we shall treat concerning the rational virtues. 


CHAP. VIII. 

How the extremes are opposed to the mean and to each other* 

1. Now there being three dispositions, two of which are 
vices, one in excess, the other in defect, and there being one 
virtue, the mean, each in some manner are opposed to each $ 
for the extremes are contrary both to the mean and to each 
other, and the mean is contrary to the extremes. For as the 
equal with reference to the less is greater, but with reference 
to the greater, less$ so the middle habits compared with the 
defects are excessive, but compared with the excesses are 
deficient, as well in passions as in actions; for the brave 
compared with the timid appears rash, but compared with 
the rash he appears timid. In like manner also the temper 
rate compared with the insensate is intemperate, but com¬ 
pared with the intemperate is insensate ; the liberal man 
compared with the illiberal is prodigal, but with the prodi¬ 
gal, he is illiberal; wherefore also the extremes drive the 
mean each to the other, and the timid calls the brave auda¬ 
cious, but the audacious man calls him timid, and analo¬ 
gously in the other cases. 

2. Now these being thus opposed to each other, the ex¬ 
tremes have a greater cifttrariety to each other than to the 
mean ; for they are more widely separated from each other 
than from the mean ; as the great is more remote l from the 
small, and the small from the great, than both from the 
equal. Again, there appears a certain similarity in some 
extremes to the mean, as in rashness to fortitude, and in 
prodigality to liberality; but between the extremes and each 
other there is the greatest dissimilarity $ but things very 



48 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK II, 


distant from each other are defined to be contraries 3 so that 
things the more distant are also the more contrary. 

3. But in some things the defect, in other the excess is 
more opposed to the mean 5 for instance, to fortitude is op¬ 
posed not rashness, which is the excess, but timidity, which 
is the defect 3 to temperance, not insensibility, which is the 
defect, but intemperance, which is the excess. 

4. And this happens for two reasons 3 one indeed from 
the thing itself; for from that one extreme being nearer and 
more similar to the mean, we oppose to it not that extreme, 
but rather the contrary 3 for instance, since rashness seems 
to be more similar and nearer to fortitude, but timidity more 
dissimilar, we rather oppose this latter 3 for things the more 
distant from the mean seem to be the more contrary to it. 

5. This then is one cause for the thing itself: but another 
cause is from ourselves 3 for to whichever extreme we are 
somehow naturally more inclined, this appears more con¬ 
trary to the mean; for instance, we are ourselves naturally 
more inclined to pleasures, wherefore we are more easily 
borne to intemperance, than to orderly conduct. We call 
those then more contrary, to which the propensity is greater 3 
and on that account intemperance being an excess is more 
contrary to temperance. 


CHAP. IX, 

How we are to arrive at the mean in action. 

1. That ethical virtue therefore is a mean, and how it is 
s o, and that it is the mean between two vices, the one con¬ 
sisting in excess, the other in defect, and that it is of such a 
nature, because it is a thing tending to the mean, which is 
in passions and actions, has been sufficiently discussed. 
Whence also it is a difficult task to be virtuous ; for in every 
thing, to find the middle is a task 5 for instance, to find th<p 
centre of a circle is not in the power of every one, but of the 
scientific man. Thus also to be angry is in every one’s 



CHAP. YXXI. 


ETHICS. 


49 


power, and easy; so also is the giving and spending money ; 
but to do it with propriety as to the person, the quantity, the 
time, the motive, and the manner, is not in the power of 
every one, nor is it easy ; for in these particulars is situated 
the good, the rare, the laudable, and the noble. 

%. Hence it is necessary, that he who would attain the 
mean, should first recede from that which is more contrary; 
as Calypso also advises. 

Far from the smoke and waves steer off the ship P. 

For of the extremes the one is more erroneous, the other less. 
Since then it is excessively difficult to attain the mean, as 
the next best thing % according to the proverb, we must 
take the least of two evils ; but this will be best done in the 
way we have mentioned. 

3 . It is likewise necessary to mark the extremes to which 
we ourselves are more easily inclined; for different men are 
naturally inclined to different vices: this will be known 
from the pleasure and pain which attends us. But we ought 
to draw ourselves away to the contrary; for by removing 
ourselves far from error, we shall arrive at the mean ; which 
those do, who straighten crooked pieces of wood. 

4 . In every case, however, we must particularly guard 
against the delectable and pleasure ; for we are not unbiassed 
judges of it. In the same manner, therefore, as the Trojan 
chiefs were affected towards Helen, we also ought to be af¬ 
fected towards pleasure, and in all cases to speak their sen¬ 
timent; for by dismissing it as they did Helen, we shall err 
the less. By doing these things then, (to sum up all,) we 
shall he most able to obtain the mean. 

5 . This is perhaps difficult, and especially in particulars ; 
for it is not easy to define how, and with whom, and on what 
account, and how long a time it is right to be angry : for we 

P The smoke and waves represent Charybdis, which Ulysses was told 
to shun as the greater of two evils. 

1 That this is the meaning of the proverb x&va rav Ssungoy may 
he seen from Polybius, L viix. c. 2 . v. 6. ed. Schweigh. where it occurs, 

E 



50 


ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS. 


BOOK XI. 


sometimes praise the defective in anger, and call them meek ; 
sometimes again we praise those who are exasperated, and 
we entitle them the manly 5 hut he who deviates a little 
from rectitude is not blamed, whether it be to the more or 
the less, but he who proceeds far 5 for such a character cannot 
escape notice. But for what degree and what quantity of 
anger any one is reprehensible, is not easy to determine by 
precept, neither is it easy in any object of sense j but things of 
this nature depend upon particulars, and the judgment of 
them rests with sense. 

6. Thus much, therefore, is manifest, that the middle ha¬ 
bit is in all things laudable 3 but it is necessary to incline 
sometimes to excess, at other times to defect 3 for thus we shall 
most easily attain the mean and the right. 



ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK III. 

CHAP. I. 

Concerning the circumstances which determine the quality of ac¬ 
tions r . And first , of the voluntary and involuntary. 

i. Now virtue being conversant with passions and actions,* 
and praises and censures taking place in voluntary things* 
but in involuntary pardon, and sometimes even pity [being 
granted], it is perhaps necessary for those who contemplate 
virtue to define the voluntary and involuntary. It will be 
useful to legislators also, in the distribution of rewards and 
punishments. 

2. But those actions appear to be involuntary which are 
done by compulsion or through ignorance 3 and the com- 
pulsatory is that, the principle of which is external, being of 
such a nature, as that the agent or the patient contributes 
nothing 5 as if, for instance, the wind, or men, who are 
masters of any one, should carry him to any place. 

$. But as to those things which are clone through fear of 
greater evils, or for the sake of something noble ; for in- 

x It was asserted in book Ik chap. 4. that the mere act or doing of a 
thing does not determine the character of the action, hut that the agent 
must be actuated by certain dispositions; we see also in chap. 6. that 
forms part of the definition of virtue; hence, these things being 
of such material consequence, it was necessary that they should be more 
fully discussed, which is done in the first five chapters of this hook. 

E 3 



52 


ARISTOTLE’S 


book nr. 


stance, supposing a tyrant should command a person to do 
any base action, having the parents and children of that man 
under his power, and that, if he did it, they should be spared, 
but if he did it not, they were to die ; such cases as these 
carry with them a doubt, whether they are voluntary or in¬ 
voluntary. Some such question as,this arises in the case of 
throwing things overboard in storms ; for, simply speaking, 
no one voluntarily throws his own goods overboard; but all 
endued with common sense do it for the safety of themselves 
and the rest of the crew. Such actions therefore are of a 
mixed character; but they are more similar to voluntary ac¬ 
tions, for they are objects of choice at that particular time 
when they are performed; but the end of an action is ac¬ 
cording to the particular time; and therefore we must speak 
of the voluntary and the involuntary at the time when a man 
performs the action. But he performs it voluntarily ; for the 
principle of moving the instrumental parts in such actions is 
in himself; but the doing or not doing of those things is in 
his own power, the principles of which is in himself. Such 
things therefore are voluntary ; but, simply considered, they 
are perhaps involuntary; for no one would choose any of 
such things on its own account. 

4. But in such actions as these, men sometimes are even 
praised, when for the sake of great and noble rewards, they 
endure any thing disgraceful or painful; but when they do 
the contrary, they are censured; for to endure the most dis-, 
graceful things with a view to no noble or moderate good is 
the part of a base man. To some actions praise indeed is 
not granted, but pardon, when a man may have done what 
he ought not to do, on account of such things as surpass 
human nature, and which no one could bear. Some things 
perhaps we should not allow ourselves to be compelled to do, 
but we should rather die, having suffered the most dreadful 
evils ; for the causes which compelled the Alcmaeon of Eu¬ 
ripides to kill his mother appear ridiculous. But it is some¬ 
times difficult to determine, what is to be chosen in pre¬ 
ference to what, and which of two evils Is to be endured; 
and it is still more difficult to stand firm by our decisions ; 



CHAP. I. 


ETHICS. 


53 


since for the most part the evils which are expected are dis¬ 
agreeable, and the things we are compelled to do are dis¬ 
graceful. Hence, both praises and censures are given to 
those who act, or act not from compulsion. 

5. What actions then are to be called compulsatory ? Are 
they those simply when the cause is in externals, and the 
agent contributes nothing } But things, which are of them¬ 
selves involuntary, and yet are eligible at the .present time 
and in preference to something else, and the principle of 
which is in the agent, in themselves indeed are involuntary- 
but at the present time and in preference to those other things 
they are voluntary ; but they are more similar to voluntary 
actions; for actions depend upon particulars ; and these are 
voluntary. But it is not easy to make out what things are 
to be chosen in preference to others, for there are many va¬ 
rieties in particulars. 

6. But if any one should say, that things pleasant and 
noble are compulsatory, (because, as they are external, they 
do compel,) all actions would thus be compulsatory; for all 
men do all things for the sake of these ; and those, who do 
things by compulsion, and unwillingly, act with pain; but 
those who act under the influence of the pleasant, act with 
pleasure. It is therefore ridiculous for a man to accuse things 
external, and not himself, who easily falls a prey to things 
of this kind; and to consider himself as the cause of his 
noble actions, but delectable things [or pleasure] as the cause 
of his base actions. It appears therefore that the compul¬ 
satory is that, the principle of which is external, the person 
compelled contributing nothing. 

7. But every thing which is clone from ignorance, is not 
therefore voluntary; but that is involuntary, which is at¬ 
tended with pain and repentance; for he who does any thing 
from ignorance, but is not at all grieved at the action, has 
certainly not done it willingly, inasmuch as he knew it not; 
nor yet ,on the other hand unwillingly, as he is not pained by 
H. Of those therefore who act from ignorance, be who 
repents of it seems to be unwilling; but be who repents not, 
since he is another character, may be denominated not \yilh 

b if 



54 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III. 


ing ; for since be is different from the other, it is better 
that he should have a name of his own. 

8. And also to act from ignorance appears to be a different 
thing from acting ignorantly 13 ; for he, who is drunken or en¬ 
raged does not’appear to act from ignorance, but from some 
other of the above-mentioned causes, and yet not knowingly., 
but ignorantly. Every vicious person therefore is ignorant 
what things he ought to do, and consequently what he ought 
to abstain from j and from a defect of this kind men be¬ 
come unjust and altogether wicked. But an action ought to 
be called involuntary, not if a person is ignorant of what is 
advantageous; for ignorance in the deliberative choice 0 of 
a thing is not the cause of the action being involuntary, but 
is the cause of depravity j nor is the ignorance of univcrsals 
[to be called involuntary], for men are censured for this 5 
but the ignorance of particulars, in which and about which 
action is engaged; for towards these there is pity and par¬ 
don ; for he, who is ignorant of any of these [particulars], 
acts involuntarily. 

9. Perhaps then it would not be amiss to define these, what 
and how many they are $ they are these then, namely, the 
person who acts, and the thing done, and the circumstances 
of the action ; sometimes also there is the thing with which, 
for instance, the instrument - 3 and the thing on account of 
which, for instance, of safety 5 and the manner in which a 
thing is done, for instance, gently or vehemently. All these 
things therefore no man can be ignorant of, unless he is In- 

b One maybe called ignorance of the principle ; the other, ignorance of 
the fact: thus if a man has killed another, and pleads ignorance of the 
crime of murder, he is not excused; but if he was ignorant of any par¬ 
ticular circumstance which caused the act, he 13 considered to have acted 
involuntarily, and is excused. But this particular ignorance is sometimes 
inexcusable, as is explained at the end of chap. 8. book v. 

c For every person is supposed to he by nature capable of deliberating 
upon the best means for obtaining any end, i. e. of forming a : 

consequently if a man pleads ignorance in this choice of means, his own 
neglect or vicious course of life must have caused that ignorance; and the 
action which follows must be considered entirely voluntary. 



CHAP. I. 


ETHICS. 


55 


sane ; but it is plain that he cannot be ignorant of the agent 3 
for how can he be ignorant of himself? A man however 
may be ignorant of what he does 5 for instance, men, who 
have said what they ought not, allege that the words 
escaped them, or that they were ignorant of their being 
secrets, as Eschylus did of the mysteries ; or wishing to shew 
an instrument, a man may let it fly, as the man did the cata- 
pulta. A person also may fancy, like Merope, that a son is 
an enemy; and that a sharp-pointed spear is blunted, or 
that a stone is a pumice 5 and one striking a person with a 
view to his safety, may kill him 5 and wishing to shew a 
person how to box, as they do who spar, may strike him. 
Now ignorance being in all these particulars in which ac¬ 
tion is concerned, he who is ignorant of any one of these 
seems to act unwillingly, and especially in the particulars of 
greatest consequence; but those seem of greatest conse¬ 
quence, in which the action consists, and the cause of the ac¬ 
tion. Consequently a deed according to such ignorance 
being called involuntary, it is still farther necessary, that it 
should be painful and repented of. 

10. But the involuntary being that which is com pulsatory, 
and that which is done-from ignorance, the voluntary would 
seem to be that, the principle of which is in the person himself, 
knowing the particulars in which the action takes place. 

11. For perhaps it is not well said, that things done by 
anger or desire are involuntary. For, in the first place, [if 
it were so,] no other animal would act voluntarily, nor 
would children. In the next place, of those things which 
we do from desire or anger, do not we do any voluntarily ? 
Or do we the noble actions voluntarily, but the base actions 
involuntarily 1 Or is not that ridiculous, since the cause of 
both is the same ) And perhaps it is absurd to call those 
things involuntary which we ought to desire ; but it is our 
duty to be angry at some things, and to desire some things; 
as, for instance, health and learning $ and, indeed, involuntary 
things seem to be painful, but the objects of desire arc pleasant* 
And again, in what do the errors committed by reason or 

e 4 



56 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK HI. 


passion differ with respect to their being involuntary? for 
both are to be avoided d ; and the irrational passions do not 
seem to be less human; but some actions of man proceed 
from anger and desire. It would be absurd then to consider 
these as involuntary. 


* CHAP. II. 

By negative argument we trace the definition of deliberate choice; 

OTj in other words, the genus of Trgoeugtrti being given, viz* ro 
. huvrin, those species of it are enumerated , which are not 
TrgWgscri?. Then the difference between and each of 

these being added to the genus, we are able to define the species 

1. The voluntary and involuntary being defined, it follows 
that we should pursue the subject of deliberate choice j for 
it seems to be very closely attached to virtue, and to be a 
better test of moral character than actions c are. Deliberate 
choice certainly seems to be a voluntary thing, yet not the 
self-same, but the voluntary is more extensive: for both 
children and other animals partake of the voluntary, but not 
of deliberate choice 5 and things suddenly done we denomi¬ 
nate voluntary, but we do not say they are according to de¬ 
liberate choice. 

9 ,* But those who call it desire, or anger, or will, or a 
certain opinion, do not appear to speak rightly. 

3. For deliberate choice is not common to irrational 
beings, but desire and anger are; and the incontinent man 
acts from desire, but not with deliberate choice ,* on the con- 

d If it were true that whatever is done through anger or desire, is invo¬ 
luntary, then an error committed through anger would he involuntary, 
and consequently would differ from an error in deliberation; for in the 
latter case the action cannot be called involuntary: but there is really no 
difference, since they are both equally to be avoided: consequently the 
error committed through anger is not involuntary. 
e Vide book x. c. 8. sect, % 



CHAP. XI. 


ETHICS, 


57 


trary, the continent acts with deliberate choice, but not from 
desire. And desire is opposed to deliberate choice, but desire 
is not opposed to desire. And desire is formed upon the 
pleasant and the painful, but deliberate choice is neither 
formed upon the painful nor the pleasant. Still less then 
is it anger ; for things done from anger seem least of all [to 
be done] according to deliberate choice. 

4 . Nor yet indeed is it will, though it nearly resembles 
this; for there is no deliberate choice of impossibilities; and 
if any one should say that he deliberately chooses such 
things, he would appear to be an idiot $ but will applies to 
impossibilities ; as, for instance, to immortality. And the 
will is engaged in those things which are by no means to be 
performed by the person himself, who wills : for instance, 
that a certain actor, or prizefighter, may be victorious; but no 
one deliberately chooses things of this kind, but as many 
only as he supposes may be effected by himself. And again, 
the will rather belongs to the end, but deliberate choice to 
those tilings which conduce to the end ; for instance, we 
wish to be in health, but we deliberately choose the means 
by which we may obtain it: and we wish indeed to be 
happy, and express our wish ; but to say, we deliberately 
choose happiness, has no propriety; for deliberate choice 
seems to be entirely conversant with the things that are in our 
power. 

5 . Neither therefore can it be opinion $ for opinion seems 
to be conversant with all things; and no less with tilings 
eternal and impossible, than with the things in our own 
power; and it is divided into the false and true, not into the 
good and evil; but deliberate choice rather into the latter. 

6 . Perhaps then no one ever asserts it to be the same with 
opinion in general f ; but neither is it the same with a par¬ 
ticular opinion; for by deliberately choosing good or evil, 

f i. e. Deliberate choice, considered generally and abstractedly, might 
perhaps not be the same as opinion taken abstractedly; hut still it might 
foe argued, that each particular act of deliberation was only the forming 
an opinion. 



58 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III, 


we become of a certain character 3 but not by forming an 
opinion. And we deliberately choose to obtain, or avoid, or 
something of that kind 3 but we form an opinion of what it 
is, or to what it is advantageous, or in what manner 3 but 
we do not at all form an opinion of taking or rejecting a 
thing. And deliberate choice is praised for its being as it 
ought, than for being successful s ; but opinion, for its being 
true. And we deliberately choose those things which we 
best know to be good 5 but we have our opinion of those 
things which we do not at all know. And the same persons 
do not appear deliberately to choose the best things, and have 
their opinion of them 3 but some appear to have a just opi¬ 
nion of what is better, but through depravity to choose the 
things which they ought not. But whether opinion pre¬ 
cedes or follows deliberate choice does not matter, for we 
do not investigate that point; but whether it is the same with 
a particular opinion. 

7. What then or what species of thing is it, since it is 
neither of the things mentioned > It certainly appears to be 
something voluntary; but every species of the voluntary is 
not the object of deliberate choice, but that only which has 
been first deliberated upon ; for deliberate choice is attended 
with reason and discursive judgment. Its name 
seems to suggest that, as being jVg* irbgw cagewv] eligible in 
preference to other things. 

S A person is praised, if he chooses those means which he is convinced 
are morally good, without it being considered, whether they are most 
likely to ensure his success. in this place has no relation to moral 

rectitude, but to eventual success; in which sense it is properly applied 
to opinion, but not to 5See book vi. c. 9 . Vol&s Ififont % 



CHAP. in. 


ETHICS. 


59 


CHAP. III. 

The genus of (or rather of the ^osu^irov) being given, 

viz. to htwcnw, it remains to give the difference, viz. fiovXtvtns, 
deliberation. This chapter therefore explains the subject-mat¬ 
ter and the process of deliberation. 

1. But do men deliberate upon all things, and is every 
thing the subject of deliberation, or are there some things 
upon which there is no deliberation ? But perhaps that is to 
be considered as a subject of deliberation, not upon which 
any idiot or madman would deliberate, but upon which a 
person of sound intellect would. But concerning things 
eternal no man deliberates, as concerning the world, or con¬ 
cerning the diagonal and side of a square, because they are 
incommensurate; nor indeed concerning things which are 
in motion, but always existing after the same manner, whether 
it is by necessity, or nature, or from any other cause, as, for in¬ 
stance, the seasons h , and risings of the sun ; nor concerning 
things which are different at different times, such as drought 
and rain; nor about things depending upon chance, such as 
the finding of a treasure ; nor yet upon all human affairs; for 
instance, no Lacedaemonian deliberates how the Scythians 
may best regulate their state5 for none of these things could 
be effected by us. 

% But we deliberate upon things, which can be effected 
by ourselves; and these indeed are all that remain [after 
what we have already excluded]: for the causes of all actions 
seem to be nature, necessity, and fortune j and besides these 
intellect and everything which operates by man himself 1 . 
But each particular man deliberates upon those things, which 
may be effected by himself. And concerning the perfect and 
self-sufficient sciences there is no deliberation; for instance, 


More properly perhaps the solstices or equinoxes. 

1 And as the three first have been excluded as causes o£ subjects for 
deliberation, the last, viz. intellect, is the only one which remains. 



60 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III. 


concerning letters, for we do not doubt how we are to form 
the letters. But whatever things are done by us, but not al¬ 
ways in the same manner, concerning such we deliberate ; 
for instance, concerning things belonging to the medical art, 
and the art of gaining money, and concerning the pilot’s art 
more than the gymnastic art, inasmuch as it has beep less 
determined by laws : so also concerning the rest; and we 
deliberate more in the arts than the sciences; for we are 
more divided in opinion concerning them. But deliberation 
exists upon things which happen generally, but are obscure 
as to the event, and in which there is something indefinite, 
And in matters of importance we employ counsellors, dis¬ 
trusting ourselves as insufficient to determine them. 

3. But we deliberate not concerning ends, but upon the 
things contributing to the end ; for neither does a physician 
deliberate whether he still cure, nor a rhetorician whether 
he shall persuade, nor a politician whether he shall establish 
good laws, nor does any other character deliberate upon the 
end ; but having proposed some end, they examine in what 
manner and by what means it may be obtained. And if it 
appears, that it is to be obtained by means of many things, 
they examine by which of those it may be obtained in the 
easiest and noblest manner; but if it is to be effected by one 
medium, they deliberate in what manner it will be by that, 
and by what [medium], that [medium] itself [may be effected], 
until they arrive at the first cause k , which is the last in the 
investigation; for he, who deliberates seems to investigate 
and analyze in the manner described, as he would analyze a 
diagram. Every species of enquiry however does not appear 

k We wish to attain the grand end happiness, and we thus deliberate; 
How are we to attain happiness ? By energizing according to a habit of 
perfect virtue. How may we be possessed of a habit of virtue ? By virtu¬ 
ously performing virtuous actions. In what manner are virtuous actions 
thus performed ? By preserving the mean and avoiding the extremes in all 
the concerns of life. How are we to observe the mean ? By avoiding that 
to which our nature is prone: which, though we arrived last at it in the 
enquiry, is the first thing to be accomplished by us in our search after 
happiness. ‘ 



CHAP. III. 


ETHICS. 


61 


to be a deliberation ; for instance, mathematical enquiries are 
not; but every species of deliberation is an enquiry, and the last 
clause in the analysis is first in production. But should they 
meet with an impossibility, they desist 5 for instance, if there 
is occasion for money, and it is impossible to procure it; but 
if it appear possible, they attempt to obtain it. But those 
things are possible, which can be effected by ourselves ; for 
things effected by means of friends are in a certain respect 
by means of ourselves; for the principle is in ourselves l . 
Sometimes instruments are sought for, sometimes the use of 
them, so also in other things ; sometimes the cause through 
which, at other times how, or in what way. Man then, as 
has been said, seems to be the principle of actions; and de¬ 
liberation takes place upon things to be performed by him ; 
but actions are for the sake of other things m . Hence the 
end can not be the subject of deliberation, but things which 
conduce to the end j neither surely can particulars 5 as, whe¬ 
ther this thing is bread, or whether it is baked or made as it 
ought; for these things are the province of sense, but if a 
man shall always be deliberating, he will go on to infinity. 

4. But the subject of deliberation and that of deliberate 
choice arc the same, except that the subject of deliberate 
choice has been already determined ; for that which is pre¬ 
ferred after deliberation is the subject of deliberate choice ; 
for every one ceases enquiring how he may do a thing, when 
he has reduced the principle to himself, and to that part of 
himself which presides; for that is the part which deli¬ 
berately chooses. This is moreover clear from the ancient 
polities, which Homer has introduced into his poems 5 for 
the chiefs announced to the people what they had themselves 
deliberately chosen n . 

1 For we gained the friend by some action of our own, and he loves us 
for our own sakes. 

m Deliberation is upon action ; actions have always some ulterior end 
in view : consequently the end itself, which has nothing ulterior, cannot 
be the subject of deliberation. 

n The kings in the ancient governments formed a deliberate choice: so 
does the governing principle in man: hence every action originated with 



62 


ARISTOTLE’S 


book in. 


5 . Now since the subject of deliberate choice is a thing 
deliberated upon, and something desired, which is in our own 
power, deliberative choice must be a desire of the things in 
our own power attended with deliberation 5 for having de¬ 
termined upon a thing after deliberation, we form our desire 
according to the deliberation. Let so much be said in out¬ 
line concerning deliberative choice, both concerning what it 
is engaged in, and that it belongs to things which conduce 
to ends. 


CHAP. IV. 

Whether the object of will be a real or apparent good. 

1. That will belongs to the end has been proved 5 but to 
some it appears to belong to [the end which is] real good, to 
others, apparent good. But to those, who assert that the 
object of the will is the summum bonum } it happens that 
that thing is not an object of the will, which he wills, who 
does not choose rightly 5 for if it were an object of the will, 
it would be also good 3 but it may be if chance would so 
have it bad. But to those, on the other hand, who say that 
the object of the will is apparent good, [this error is inciden¬ 
tal,] that there is not in nature an object of will, but to every 
man what appears to be such : and a different thing presents 
itself to different persons, and, if chance would have it so, 
contraries. 

2. But if these systems do not please, we must therefore 
say, that simply and in reality the good is the object of will 5 
but to individuals, apparent good. Consequently to the 
good man, that which is really good is the object, but to the 
depraved, according as it may happen 3 as is the case with 

the kings; so does it with the governing principle in man i having been 
decided by the kings, it was executed by inferior agents 5 so is it in man : 
the intellect decides; the senses and members execute. 



CHAP* V, 


ETHICS. 


68 


bodies, to such as are established in health, things are salu¬ 
brious, which arc in reality such ; but to such as are diseased, 
something different. So is it also with things bitter, and 
sweet, and hot, and heavy, and each of the rest ; for the 
worthy man judges of every thing rightly, and in each case 
the truth presents itself to him ; for in every habit there are 
some things peculiarly honourable and pleasant. And perhaps 
the worthy man is most different from other characters in 
this, that he sees the truth in all things, being as it were the 
rule and measure of them 3 but with the multitude the de¬ 
ception appears to exist through pleasure, for, though not a 
good, it appears to be so. They therefore choose what is 
pleasant, as a good, but fly from pain, as an evil. 


CHAP. V. 

That virtue and vice are voluntary ; and particularly vice, 

1. Since therefore the end is an object of will, but things 
conducing to the end are objects of deliberation, and deliberate 
choice, the actions conversant with these must be according 
to deliberate choice, and voluntary 3 but the energies of the 
virtues are conversant with these. Virtue therefore is also 
in our power, and in like manner vice also; for in whatever 
to act is in our power ; not to act is also in our power 5 and 
in whatever case we can desist, we can also act. Wherefore, 
if the doing of a thing, when honourable, is in our power, 
the not doing it, when base, will be in our power 5 and if 
the not doing an action, when honourable, is in our power, 
the doing of it, when base, is also in our power. But if the 
doing things excellent and things base is in our power, as 
well as the not doing them 5 (but this is tantamount to being 
good and bad;) to be worthy and depraved will be in our 
power. 

2. But such a sentiment, as that f<r No man is willingly 



64 


ARISTOTLE’S 


book nr. 


depraved, or unwillingly happy,” is partly false and partly true ; 
for no man is unwillingly happy 5 but depravity is voluntary 5 
or we must question what has been already laid down, and 
we must assert, that man is not the principle or creating 
cause of actions, in the same manner as he is of children. 
But if these things are evident, and we cannot reduce them to 
any other principles than those in our power, those things, 
the principles of which are in our power, are themselves also 
in our power, and are voluntary °. 

3. But to these things testimony seems to be added, b®th 
privately by individuals, and by legislators themselves; for 
they chastise and punish those who perpetrate villainous ac¬ 
tions, as many as do them not by compulsion, or from igno¬ 
rance, of which they are not the cause ; but they honour 
those who act well; as if they would animate the latter, but 
repress the former. But surely, in such things as are neither 
in our power nor voluntary, no man animates another to ac¬ 
tion, as it would be nothing to the purpose to be persuaded 
'not to be hot or cold, or hungry, or any such thing; for we 
shall not the less suffer these things. For indeed they 
punish a man for the ignorance itself, if he appears to be 
the cause of the ignorance ; thus the penalties are doubled 
for the intoxicated ; for the principle js in the man himself; 
for he has the power of not becoming intoxicated ; but this 
is the cause of his ignorance. And they punish such as are 
ignorant of any particulars in the laws, which they ought to 
know, and which are not abstruse; so also in other things, 
which men seem to be ignorant of through negligence, 
since the being not ignorant of them was in their power; 
for they have the power of paying attention. 

4 But perilaps a person is of such a constitution as not to 


0 This argument is taken from the process of deliberation mentioned 
in the last chapter; where it was stated, that we do not cease to delibe¬ 
rate and begin to act, till we K have found some means, which is imme¬ 
diately in our own power; i. c. till we have brought the principle or be¬ 
ginning of the action to ourselves: consequently the action, which follow®, 
must proceed from ourselves, and be voluntary. 



chap, v. ETHICS. 6 $ 

have been in the habit of paying attention 3 but men them¬ 
selves are the causes of their being such, by living disso¬ 
lutely; and men are themselves the causes of their being 
unjust, or intemperate, the former by acting dishonestly, 
the latter by spending their lives in drinking, .and other 
vices of that description 3 for energizing in any mode ren¬ 
ders men of such and such habits. This is obvious from 
those who are trained for any contest, or action 3 for they 
persevere in energizing. Now to be ignorant that by ener¬ 
gizing in any thing [similar] habits are produced, is the 
character of one thoroughly insensate. Again, it is absurd, 
that he who cJbes unjust actipps does not wish to be unjust, 
or that he who acts intemperately is unwilling to be intem¬ 
perate : but if any one does those actions, from which he 
will be unjust, not ignorantly, he will be unjust unwillingly. 

5. Not that he will cease being unjust, if he should wish, 
and become just 3 for neither can the sick become healthy, 
though, most probably, he voluntarily became diseased by 
living intemperately, and disregarding his physicians. Then 
indeed it was in his power not to be diseased, but no longer, 
after having abandoned himself; as it is impracticable for 
a person who has flung a stone to recall it; but at the same 
time to throw and pelt it was in his power; for the prin¬ 
ciple was in his power 3 thus also the unjust and intem¬ 
perate were at liberty in the outset not to become such ; 
hence they are voluntary; but having become so, it is no 
longer in their power not to be so. 

6. But not only the vices of the soul are voluntary, but in 
some persons the vices of the body also, which are those 
that we censure; for no one censures those who are na¬ 
turally deformed; but those who are so through want of 
exercise^ and inattention to themselves. The case is the 
same with debility, and deformity, and mutilation; for no 
one would reproach a man blind by nature, or from disease, 
or a blow, but would rather pity him 5 but every one would 
censure a person blind from sottishness, or any other intem¬ 
perance. Of the vices then attached to the body, those in 
our own power are censured, but not those which are not in 

v 



66 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III, 


our power. Rut if this is right., in other cases p also those 
vices which are censured must be in our power. 

7. But if any one should say, that all aspire after what 
appears good to them, but are not directors of the faculty, by 
which they see good; but that of whatever character each 
is, such also the end appears to him; if in a certain respect 
every one is to himself the cause of his habit, he will also be 
in a certain respect the cause of this faculty. 

8. But supposing that no man is the cause of his com¬ 
mitting vice, but that he does those things from ignorance of 
the end, fancying that through such means the best good 
will be his ; and if the pursuit of the end is not spontaneous, 
but he must be born with it as with sight, by which he will 
judge rightly, and choose the real good; and if that man is 
of a good natural disposition, in whom this is innate in a 
perfect manner j (for he will have that which is the greatest 
and most noble, and which it is impossible to receive or learn 
from another, otherwise than it comes by nature, and that 
this should be excellently and finely implanted in us by na¬ 
ture, must be perfect and real goodness of disposition ;) if, I 
say, these things are true, why will virtue be more voluntary 
than vice ? for the end, whether by nature or by whatever 
means, equally is placed in view to each, both to the good and 
the bad in the same way; and referring other things to this, 
they act according to their different habits; 

9. Whether then ^ the end, whatever it is, does not present 
itself to each by nature, but there is something in his own 
power j or whether the end be natural, but because the 
worthy man performs the rest, i. e. the means, voluntarily, 

P The argument is this : it is true that only those bodily failings are 
censured, which are voluntary: therefore the converse is true, that when 
bodily failings are censured, they are voluntary: applying this analogy to 
moral conduct, when moral failings are censured, they are voluntary. 

4 This is a continuation of the last argument: he had there shewn, 
that if nature gives the ends, then virtue would be as involuntary as vice: 
(which is not what the objectors wish to prove.) He now argues, that 
granting their assertion to be true, that nature gives the ends, still as the 
means are in our power, vice must be voluntary. 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


67 


therefore virtue is voluntary, vice also must be no less volun¬ 
tary 5 for free-will is possessed in an equal manner by the bad 
man, in the actions, whatever it be in the end. If then, as 
has been said, the virtues are voluntary, (for we are in a 
certain respect the cooperative causes of habits, and because 
we are of certain qualities, we propose an end of the same 
character*) the vices also must be voluntary; for they are 
under similar circumstances. 

10. We have now spoken generally concerning the vir¬ 
tues, stating* the genus in outline, that they are means, and 
that they are habits, and by what they are produced, and 
that they are apt to perform the same things, and that of 
themselves, and that they are in our power, and voluntary, 
and in such a manner as right reason shall prescribe. But ac¬ 
tions and habits are not voluntary in one and the same man¬ 
ner ; for we have power over our actions from beginning 
to end, being conscious of particulars, but of habits we are 
masters of the beginning only 5 but the accession of par¬ 
ticulars is not known to us, as it is not in diseases; but be¬ 
cause it was in our power to use the particulars in this or 
that manner, at first, on this account the habits are volun¬ 
tary. TEesuming therefore our discussion, let us speak con¬ 
cerning each of the virtues, what they are, and on what 
things they are engaged, and in what manner; at the same 
time it will become evident, how many in ntimber they arc. 
And first concerning fortitude. 


CHAP. VI. 

What those cases are in which fortitude is most shewn. 

1. That fortitude is a mean conversant with fear and 
confidence, has been already observed. But we evidently 
fear those things which are objects of fear ; and these are, 
in one word, evils; hence they also define fear to he the 

p 2 



68 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK 1X1. 


expectation of evil. We fear then all evils, as disgrace, 
poverty, disease, a friendless state, and death r . 

$ u t the brave man does not appear to be conversant 
with all evils ; for it is a duty to fear some things, and it is 
noble 5 and not to dread them is base, as, for instance, in¬ 
famy 5 for he who fears that, is a worthy and modest man ; 
but he who fears not disgrace, is impudent. But this cha¬ 
racter by some is called brave, by metaphor; as he possesses 
something similar to the brave man ; for the brave man is 
also a certain fearless person. But perhaps it is no duty to 
fear poverty, or disease, or, in fine, all such things as are not 
generated from vice nor from ourselves ; but still, he who is 
fearless in these circumstances, is not brave. But we apply 
the term to this character also from its similitude; for some, 
who are timid in the dangers of war, are liberal, and behave 
With firmness undet the loss of money. Nor if a man fears 
insult upon his children and Wife, or envy, or any shch evil, 
is he therefore a coward 5 nor, if lie feels confidence when 
about to be flogged, is he brave. 

3 . With what species then of fearful things is the brave 
mail conversant ? Is it not with the most fearful ? for no 
man is more patient of dreadful evils. But death is the 
most fearful of all things; for it is the boundary of life; 
and nothing further appears for the dead, either good or 
evil But it would seem, that the brave man does not shew 
himself in death under all circumstances; for instance, not 
if it were in the sea, or in diseases. In what kinds then ? 
Is it not in the noblest deaths } But such are deaths in war ; 
for they happen in the greatest and noblest danger. The 
honours conferred by states and monarchs are also conso¬ 
nant with these sentiments. He then would be called pro¬ 
perly brave, who is fearless in a noble death, and in such 
things as when they bring* death are sudden. And of this 
kind particularly are the clangers of war. 

r it is said in the Rhetoric, (book 2. concerning fear,) that men do not 
fear death: but the author is there speaking of death as a distant evil, in 
meditating upon which the passion of terror is not raised; he is here con¬ 
sidering it as present, in which the habit of fortitude is displayed. 



chap. VII. 


ETHICS. 


69 


4 . Not but that the brave is fearless also by sea, and in dis¬ 
eases but not in the same manner as seamen ; for the 
former despair of -their fafety, and indignantly bear a death 
of this kind $ but the latter are well supported with hope 
from their experience. Besides, brave men act with forti¬ 
tude where there is strength necessary, or where to die is 
noble ; but in deaths of this kind there is neither. 


CHAR VIL 

The characters of the brave , the audacious, and the timid, 
described. 

I. But the terrible is not the same to all ; but we say, 
that there is something [terrible] even beyond [the forti¬ 
tude of] man; this therefore is terrible to every one endued 
with intellect. But things tolerable for man differ in 
magnitude, and in being more or less terrible $ so also.is it 
with things which inspire confidence. Now the brave .man 
is undaunted, as a man $ he will therefore fear ^uch things 
as the above 5 but he will endure them as is right, and as 
reason dictates, for the sake of what is noble $ for that is the 
end of virtue. But it is possible to fear these-things pa a 
greater and less degree, and even to fear things which are 
not terrible, as if they were so. But one error arises from not 
bearing what we ought *j another from not bearing it in ,a 
proper manner 5 another, not at a proper time, or some¬ 
thing of this kind; the same is also the case with the things 
which inspire confidence. 

% He, therefore, who endures and is terrified at those 
things which he ought, and for a proper reason, and in the 
manner, and at the time that is proper, and he who feels 
confidence in the same way, is a brave man $ for the brave 

* The text is probably corrupt here: but this seems to be the meaning 
of the passage: pr perhaps we should read *1 fjt.lv, <!rt av% m fot 

F 3 



70 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III. 


man suffers and acts according to the importance of the 
thing, and as reason prescribes. But the end of every 
energy is that which is agreeable to the habit3 and to the 
brave man the habit of fortitude is a noble thing; such also 
is the end 3 for every thing is defined by the end. Conse¬ 
quently, the brave man, for the sake of what is noble, en¬ 
dures and performs things incident to fortitude. 

3. But of those who exceed, he who exceeds in fearless¬ 
ness has no particular name : and it has been said by us al¬ 
ready., that many characters have no particular name : but a 
person, if he feared nothing, neither an earthquake, nor in¬ 
undations, as they say of the Gauls, must be in a manner mad 
or insensible of pain. 

4. He, on the other hand, who exceeds in being confident 
in things terrible, is audacious 5 moreover the audacious ap¬ 
pears to be arrogant, and a pretender to fortitude. As there¬ 
fore the former really is with respect to things terrible, such 
does this character wish to appear; consequently in whatever 
he is able, he imitates him. Hence also many of them, are 
audacious cowards; for being audacious in these things, they 
do not endure things terrible. 

5. He again, who exceeds in being terrified, is timid 3 for 
the [circumstances of fearing] the things, which are not pro¬ 
per, and in the manner that is not right, and all such 
[failings], are attendant on him 3 he is also deficient in con¬ 
fidence 3 but he is more conspicuous, when he shews his ex¬ 
cess in [not bearing] pain. The timid therefore is a kind of 
despairing character; for he fears all things: but the brave 
is the contrary : for to be confident is the province of one 
full of hope, 

6 . It appears then that both the timid, and audacious, and 
the brave man, are conversant with the same things 3 but 
they are differently affected towards them 3 for the two former 
exceed and are deficient 5 the latter is situated in the me¬ 
dium, and acts as he ought 3 arid the audacious, though pre¬ 
cipitate and eager before dangers, in the dangers themselves 
shrink away 5 but the brave are ardent in actions, but before 
are placid. As fcas been said therefore, fortitude is a medium 



CHAP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


71 


conversant with things inspiring confidence, and fear, in such 
cases, as we have mentioned: and it chooses and endures 
them because it is honourable or because it is base hot to do 
so. But to die, in order to fly poverty, or love, or any thing 
painful, is not the part of a brave, but rather of a timid man; 
for to fly things toilsome is effeminacy ; and this character 
does not endure it because it is honourable, but to escape tbe 
evil. Fortitude, therefore, is something of this nature. 


CHAP. VIII. 

We proceed to mention other kinds of courage which are similar 
to fortitude, but are inferior either as to the principle or the 
manner . 

1. There are, moreover, other kinds of fortitude spoken 
of under five divisions t: and first, political fortitude u ; for 
it is most similar to the former ; for citizens appear to en¬ 
dure dangers on account of the punishments and disgraces 
inflicted by the laws, and on account of honours. And for 
that reason, those [nations] appear to be most brave, among 
whom the timid are in disgrace, and the brave honoured. 
Such heroes Homer introduces; as for instance, Diomed and 
Hector, who says, ff Polydamas will first cast reproaches 
“ upon meand Diomed ,• For Hector shall sometime 
" say haranguing the Trojans, The son of Tydeus fled from 
me.” This kind of courage is most similar to that before 
mentioned, because it owes its origin to virtue ; for it owes 
it to a sense of shame, and a desire of what is noble; namely, 

* The tests for trying these five kinds of fortitude are, whether the mo¬ 
tive is the xnkov ; whether the several acts are performed i foams, tfgou/$cv- 
fttvMt, and (ZiGectas* Vide book ii. c. 4*. 

u By political fortitude is meant that of native troops, as opposed to that 
of mercenaries. 

F 4 



n 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III i 


[a desire] of honour x , and the avoiding of disgrace* which is 
shameful. Under the same head one would arrange those 
also, who are impelled to dangers by their leaders; but they 
are inferior, inasmuch as they do not thus act from the in¬ 
fluence of shame, but of fear; and to escape not what is dis¬ 
graceful, but, what is painful 3 for their superiors compel 
them, as Hector does ; 

Whom I find crouching, slinking from the fight. 

That covert shall not save him from the dogs. 

And their marshals do the same, even flogging them, if they 
retreat. Those also who draw up troops before trenches and 
the like, effect the same 5 for all use compulsion ; but a man 
should be brave not from compulsion, but because it is ho¬ 
nourable. 

2. Experience in particulars seems also to be a kind of 
fortitude; whence Socrates was even of opinion that fortitude 
was a science. Different men have this in different matters 3 
but in warlike affairs, mercenary soldiers have it 3 for there 
seem to be many empty terrors in war, which these most see 
at one view. On that account they appear brave, because 
other men know not of what kind these terrors are : again 
from their experience they are most able to assail and not 
suffer, and to guard themselves, and to strike, being able to 
use their arms, and bearing such arms as would be most 
powerful both to attack and to defend. They fight therefore 
as it were armed with unarmed men, and as well trained 
wrestlers with common persons; for indeed in such contests, 
not the most brave are most fit for the struggle, but those who 
are most powerful, and have their bodies in best order. But 
mercenary soldiers become timid, when the danger overwhelms 
them, and when they fail in numbers, and ammunition 5 for 
these fly first: but troops actuated by political courage die 
maintaining their post, which was the case also at the Her- 
maeus ; for to such flight is disgraceful, and death is more 
eligible than such security; the others also in the onset en¬ 
countered the danger, as being superior 3 but having known 

x We are accustomed to translate uaXov and fifth by the same word, 
honour: we here see the difference between them. 



CHAP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


73 


their danger, they fly, dreading death more than disgrace. 
But the bravey man is not such. 

3 . And some refer anger to fortitude ; for those also seem 
to be brave, who are borne on by anger, just like wild beasts, 
on their assailants 3 and because the brave are irascible3 
since anger is a great incentive to dangershence Homer 
says, <f He added strength to his anger and, “ He roused 
“ his courage and anger ■” and, <f Pungent fury flowed 
“ through his nostrils ” and, ff His blood boiled f for all 
these expressions seem to point out the excitation and impulse 
of the mind. The brave therefore act for sake of what is 
noble 3 and anger 'cooperates with them 5 but beasts act 
from pain 3 for. it is from their being wounded or terrified 3 
since if they are in a wood or in a marsh, they do not come 
on. It is not therefore fortitude, that things incited by pain 
and anger rush upon danger, foreseeing none of the formidable 
circumstances ; since thus even asses would be brave, when 
they are starving3 for, though beaten, they .do not desist 
from grazing 3 and adulterers also perform many daring 
acts through their lust. Those consequently are not brave, 
which are impelled to danger by pain or anger. But the 
fortitude, which proceeds from anger, seems to be most na¬ 
tural, and by adding deliberate choice, and a proper motive, 
to be real fortitude. Men also when enraged feel pain, but 
having avenged themselves they are delighted; but those 
who are spirited on these accounts are contentious, but not 
brave; for they do not act with a view to what is noble, nor 
as reason dictates, but by the force of passion3 however 
they have some similarity. 

4, Neither in fine are the sanguine brave 3 for “they are 
confident in dangers, because they have conquered many 
people at many times 3 but they are similar, because both are 
confident: now brave men are confident for the above 
mentioned reasons; but these, because they fancy that they 
are superior, and shall Safer nothing in return. Those also 
are intoxicated do the same things since they become 


y Vide Thucydides, 1 . v. c. 72 . 



74 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III. 


elated with hope ; but when things similar [to their hopes] 
do not happen to them, they fly 5 but it was said to be the 
character of the brave man to endure things which are and 
appear formidable to man, because it is noble to endure, 
and base not to endure. Hence it appears the part of the 
braver man to be fearless and undisturbed in sudden terrors, 
rather than in such as were foreseen; for it is more from 
habit, or even because it is less from preparation: for things 
which are foreseen, a person might even choose deliberately 
from reasoning and reason 5 but things which are sudden, 
[must be chosen] from habit. 

5 . Thpse also who act from ignorance, appear brave, and 
are not fair removed from those elated by hope 5 but they are 
inferior, inasmuch as they have formed no conception [of the 
evil]; but the others have: hence also the latter stand firm 
for a certain time ; but the former having been deceived, if 
they know that the fact is different from what they sus¬ 
pected, fly; which the Argives experienced when they fell 
in with the Lacedaemonians, taking them for Sicyonians. 
We have stated therefore what kind of character the brave 
|iave, and those who appear to be brave. 


CHAP. IX. 

That fortitude is rather an endurance of pain than abstinence 
from pleasure ; consequently that the brave man feels pain 
from the means , though from the glory of the end proposed he 
cheerfully endures it. 

1 . Now fortitude being engaged with confidence and fear, 
is not equally engaged with both, but rather with things 
terrific s for he who is unruffled in these, and when engaged 
in them conducts himself as he ought,,is the brave man, 
rather than he, who thus conducts himself in things which 
inspire confidence. Men therefore, as has been said, are 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


75 


called brave from their enduring painful things ; hence for¬ 
titude is also very painful, and is justly praised; for it is 
more difficult to endure things painful, than to abstain from 
pleasures. Not but that the end which belongs to fortitude 
may appear to be pleasant, but to be obscured by surround¬ 
ing objects: as is the case likewise in gymnastic contests; 
for to boxers, the end for which they contend is pleasant, 
viz. the crown and honours; but to be beaten, (at least if 
they are made of flesh,) is bitter and painful, and so is every 
labour; but because these are many, the end, for the sake 
of which they contend, being small, appears to possess no¬ 
thing pleasant. Consequently, if the case is the same with 
fortitude, death and wounds will be painful to the brave 
man, and against his will; but he will endure them because 
it is noble, or because not to endure them is base. And by 
how much the more he possesses every virtue, and the more 
happy he is, by so much the more will he be pained at death : 
for life is most valuable to such a man, and he is knowingly 
deprived of the greatest goods : now this is painful; yet the 
person is no less brave : and perhaps even more so, because 
he chooses that which is honourable in war, in preference to 
the other goods. In fine, to energize with pleasure is not 
possible in all the virtues, except as far as it is connected with 
the end. Butnothingperhaps hinders mercenary soldiers,who 
are not thus formed, from being best, but those maybe so, 
who are less brave, and have no other good in possession : 
for these, are prepared for dangers, and exchange their lives 
■for inconsiderable gain. Concerning fortitude therefore let 
so much be said; but to conclude at least in outline what it 
js, is not difficult from what has been said. 



76 


ARISTOTLE'S 


30OK HI, 


CHAR X. 

Of temperance .* that it is a mean conversant with pleasures ; not 
all , however, but the pleasures of taste and touch only. 

1. Next to this virtue., let us speak concerning temper¬ 
ance j for these seem to be the virtues of the irrational 
parts 2 . That temperance therefore is a mean conversant 
about pleasures, has been mentioned by us ; for it is enr 
gaged with pains in an inferior and dissimilar manners in 
■these intemperance also shews itself. Let us now therefore 
determine, with what kind of pleasures it is conversant. 

% Let the pleasures then of the soul be divided from 
these of the body; such as ambition, love of learning 5 for 
out of these, every man is delighted with that of which he 
is fond, the body being not at all affected, but rather the 
mind; but those -engaged in such pleasures are not called, 
either temperate o.r intemperate. In like manner, neither 
are those called so, who are engaged in as many other plea¬ 
sures as are not bodily ; for we.call the lovers of fables, and 
newsmongers, and those who spend their days in pursuit of 
trifles, talkative, but not intemperate; nor those who are 
pained at the loss of money or friends. t 

, ,S. Temperance then must be conversant with the plea¬ 
sures of the bo fly; nor yet with all these,; for those who are 
delighted with the pleasures of sight, such as colours, and fi¬ 
gures, and drawings, are neither called temperate nor intem¬ 
perate ; although.it should seem to be possible to be delighted 
'with these also, both in the degree that is right, and in ex¬ 
cess and defect. So is it also in the pleasures of bearing $ 
for no man calls those intemperate, who are excessively de- 


* Of those virtues which axe formed by bringing the irrational parts, 
i. e. the passions, under the obedience of reason, fortitude, and temper 
*ance are the best 



CHAP. X. 


ETHICS, 


77 


lighted with music, or acting ; nor those who are delighted 
within bounds, temperate ; nor those delighted with scents, 
except by accident; for those who are delighted with the 
scents of apples, or roses, or perfumes, we do not denomi¬ 
nate intemperate; but rather those [who are delighted with 
the scents] of balsams and meats 5 for the intemperate are 
delighted with these, because by means of them a recollection, 
of the objects of their desire is formed in them. Now one 
may see other men also, when they are hungry, delighted 
with the scents of meats$ but to be delighted with such 
things is characteristic of the intemperate man 5 for these 
to him are the objects of desire. Nor indeed is there plea¬ 
sure to any other animals by means of these senses, except 
by accident; for dogs are not delighted with the scent of 
hares, but the eating of them ; but the scent causes the sense 
[of taste]. Neither is the lion delighted with the voice of the 
ox, but the eating of it; but he perceives by the voice that 
he is near, and hence he appears to be delighted with the 
voice : in like manner he is not delighted from seeing or 
finding a stag or a wild goat, but because he shall have food. 
In fine, temperance and intemperance are engaged with 
such pleasures as other animals also participate in ; hence 
they appear slavish and brutal; and these are the' touch and 
taste. 

4. Indeed, they appear to use even the taste but in a 
•small degree, or not at all $ for the province of the taste is 
the judgment of savours,* which those do who try wines, 
and season food: now the intemperate arc delighted very 
little, if at all, with these savours, but with the enjoyment 
which is produced entirely by the touch, both in meats and 
drinks, and in those pleasures which arise from love. Hence, 
one Plailoxenus, the son of Eryxis, who was an epicure, 
wished he had a neck longer than that of a crane, as being 
delighted with touch, (which by the bye is the most com¬ 
mon of the senses,) in which intemperance is situated; and 
it would seem to be justly ignominious, since it exists in us 
not as we are men, but as we are animals. 

5. In short, to be delighted with, and very fond of, such 



78 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III. 


things is brutal 3 for the most liberal of the pleasures of the 
touch are excepted a , such as the pleasures produced in gym¬ 
nastic exercises by friction and heat 5 for the touch of the 
intemperate man is not extended to all the body, but to 
certain parts of it. 


CHAP. XL 

Desires divided into common and peculiar. It is shewn how 
temperance is a mean, and intemperance an excess,, in each of 
those classes. 

1. Of desires, however, some appear to be common, others 
peculiar and adventitious 5 for instance, the desire of food 
is natural; since every one, when in want of it, desires dry 
or moist food, and sometimes both : the young and vigorous 
man desires the joys of love, as Homer says 3 but every one 
does not desire this or that food, nor the same food. Hence 
it appears to depend upon ourselves 3 not but that it has 
something natural also j for different things are pleasing to 
different persons, and some things are more pleasing than 
others to some persons. 

% In natural desires then few err 3 and that to one side, 
namely, to excess; for to eat or drink common food, till 
there is excessive fulness, is to exceed in quantity the measure 
of nature 3 for natural desire is the supplying of a deficiency. 
Hence such persons are called gluttons, as supplying that 
beyond what is becoming : those, who are perfect slaves to 
appetite, become such. 

3 . But in peculiar pleasures many err, and that in many 
ways : for men being called lovers of such and such things, 
either from their being delighted with what they ought not, 
or in being excessively pleased, or as the multitude is dc~ 

* It certainly puts intemperance in a worse point of view to shew that 
it docs not enjoy the most liberal pleasures even of touch. 



CHA.P. XI. 


ETHICS. 


79 


lighted, or in the manner that is not proper, or with a view 
to what is not proper 5 in all these the intemperate exceed 5 
for they are both delighted with some things which they 
ought not, because they are detestable 5 and if it is proper 
to be delighted with any pleasures of that kind, they are de¬ 
lighted more than is proper, and as the multitude is de¬ 
lighted. That excess then in pleasures is intemperance, and 
that it is reprehensible, is evident. 

4 . But as to pains, a man is not called temperate by en¬ 
during them, as in fortitude 3 nor intemperate by not en¬ 
during them ; but he is intemperate, in being pained more 
than he ought at not meeting with pleasures; and indeed 
pleasure to him causes pain; he on the other hand is tempe¬ 
rate, in not being pained at the absence of pleasure, nor in 
being restrained from it. The intemperate man therefore 
desires all pleasures, or the chief of them 3 and is so led by 
desire, as to choose these in preference to all other things 5 
hence also he is pained, both when missing his object and 
when desiring it: for desire is accompanied by pain ; but it 
seems absurd that a man should be pained for sake of plea¬ 
sure. 

5, Blit those who fall short with regard to pleasures, and 
are delighted with them less than is right, are not frequently in 
being : for such an insensibility is not human 3 for even other 
animals discriminate food, and are delighted with some kinds 
and not with others. But if to any body nothing is pleasing, 
and no one thing differs from another, he must be very far 
from being human j but this character has no name al¬ 
lotted him, because it does not frequently occur. 

6, But the temperate man is moderate towards these 
things; for he is not pleased with the things which the 
intemperate man is especially delighted with, but rather is 
disgusted with them; neither at all with things which he 
ought not, nor excessively with any such pleasure; nor is he 
pained by their absence j neither does he feel desire, or at 
least only moderately, nor more than he ought, nor when he 
ought not, nor, in short, any thing of this kind* But what-* 
ever things tend to health, or a good habit of body, being 



30 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK III. 


pleasant, these he desires moderately and as he ought $ and 
other pleasant things he desires, as long as they are no im¬ 
pediment to these, nor are contrary to what is noble, nor 
beyond his means 5 for he who is thus affected, loves such 
pleasures more than they deserve 5 now the temperate man 
is not such, but is such as right reason warrants. 


CHAP. XII. 

That intemperance is more voluntary than cowardice , consequently 
more reprehensible. That our desires ought to be obedient to 
reason , as a child ought to his governors . 

1. Rut intemperance seems more voluntary than coward¬ 
ice 5 for the former arises from pleasure, but the latter from 
pain, of which the one is eligible, the other an object of 
aversion. And indeed pain confounds and destroys the na¬ 
ture of him who feels it, but pleasure does no such thing. 
Consequently it is more voluntary $ hence it is also more 
disgraceful $ for it is more easy to be accustomed to these 
things; since th^re are many such in life $ and customs are 
formed without danger; but in things that cause terror it is 
otherwise. 

2. Timidity likewise would appear to be voluntary not in 
the same manner with particular acts [of timidity] ; for the 
habit itself is free from pain ,* but particular acts confound a 
mm through pain, so that he even throws away his arms, 
and behaves indecently in other respects: whence also they 
seem compulsory. But with the intemperate it is the con¬ 
trary ; for particular acts are voluntary; since he desires 
and longs after them; but [the habit], as a whole, is less 
voluntary; for no man desires to be intemperate. 

S. But we apply also the name of intemperance to child¬ 
ish errors; for they have a certain similarity; but which is 



CHAP. XII. 


ETHICS. 


81 


named from the other, matters not for the present subject. 
It is clear however that the latter [derived its name] from 
the former b ; nor does it appear to be badly transferred; for 
it is expedient, that the thing, which desires what is base, 
and has luxuriant growth, be corrected: but of this nature 
particularly are desire, and a child ; for children live under 
the influence of desire, and the desire of what is pleasant is 
predominant in them. If therefore it be not docile, and 
under the management of its superior, it will spread to a 
great extent; for the desire of that which is pleasant is 
insatiable, and comes from all quarters to the foolish man; 
and the energy of desire increases every thing allied to it; 
and should those desires be great and strong, they even drive 
out reason. Hence it is necessary, that they should be mo¬ 
derate and few, and in nothing be opposite to reason ; but 
we call such a thing docile and corrected: for as it is right 
that a child should live according to the mandate of his pre¬ 
ceptor, so likewise should the part of the soul, which de¬ 
sires, live according to reason. Hence it is necessary that 
the part of the temperate man, which desires, should accord 
with reason ; for the honestum is the aim of both ,* and in¬ 
deed the temperate man desires the things which he ought, 
and as he ought, and when he ought $ just so does reason 
also ordain. Let these things then be explained by us con¬ 
cerning temperance. 

b It is clear that the name of intemperance is properly and primarily 
applied fo bodily desires, and from thence in a borrowed sense to childish 
errors. 


G 




ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK IV. 


CHAP. I. 

Concerning liberality, and its extremes, illiberality and 
prodigality. 

1. In the next place let us speak concerning liberality. It 
seems to be a mean about wealth; for the liberal man is 
praised not in warlike concerns, nor in those cases in which 
the temperate [is concerned], nor yet in judicature, but for 
the giving and receiving of property; and rather in the 
giving. But we call all those things property, the value of 
which is measured by money. 

2. Moreover, prodigality and illiberality are excesses and 
defects about property. And we charge illiberality always 
upon those who are more solicitous than is right concerning 
their property, and sometimes by combination we apply [the 
term] prodigality to the intemperate; for we denominate 
the incontinent and those expensive upon intemperance, 
prodigals; hence these seem to be the most depraved; for 
they have at the same time many vices. They are not how¬ 
ever appositely designated ; for a prodigal will be one who 
has one certain vice, the wasting of his property; for the 
prodigal is he who is ruined by himself; butjte reduction 
of one’s property seems to be a certain desHfction of the 
person, as life is preserved by means of that. In this sense 
then we take prodigality. 

3. Now whatever there is any use for, it is possible to 
use both well and ill; but riches are of the number of 

G $ 



84 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK IV. 


useful things ; now that man best uses any thing, who 
has the virtue attendant on it ; and consequently he will 
use riches in the best manner who has the virtue conversant 
in wealth 3 and this is the liberal man. But the use of 
wealth seems to be the expenditure and giving of it; but the 
accepting and preserving it seems rather a possession : hence 
it appears more the province of the liberal to give to those 
whom he ought, than to receive whence he ought, and not 
to receive whence he ought not; for it is more the part 
of virtue to benefit than be benefited, and mofe to perform 
noble actions than not to perform mean actions. It re¬ 
quires indeed no proof, that to benefit and to perform noble 
actions attend upon giving; but that to be benefited or not to 
do a base action attend upon receiving. And thanks [are 
due] to the giver, not to him who does not receive ; to him 
praise also is rather due. And again, the not receiving is 
easier than giving; for men less willingly dispose of their 
own than they abstain from receiving what is another’s. 
And again, those who give are called liberal; but those 
who do not receive, are praised, not for liberality, but just as 
much for justice; but those who receive are not praised at 
.. all. But of those who are loved for their virtue, the liberal 
are beloved nearly in the highest degree ; for they are useful; 
and this [use consists] in the giving. But actions according to 
virtue are noble, and for the sake of the noble; and therefore 
the liberal man will give for the sake of the noble, and give 
rightly; for he will give to whom he ought, and how much, 
and when, and all other [provisos] attendant on right giving : 
and that with pleasu^, or without pain; for that which re¬ 
lates to virtue is pleasant, or void of pain, but least of all 
painful. But he who gives to those to whom it is not right, 
or not for the sake of the noble, but for some other rea*- 
son, shall not he denominate liberal, but some other cha¬ 
racter. Noi^j|jjhc liberal who gives with pain; for he would 
choose riches “in preference to a noble action; but this is not 
the character of the liberal. Nor will he again receive whence 
he ought not 3 for such a receiving is not the mark of one who 
does not value riches. Neither is he at all apt to ask favours ; 

G- $ 



CHAP. I. 


ETHICS. 


85 

for it is not the part of o-ne who confers favours, to receive fa¬ 
vours easily; but he will receive whence lie ought ; for in¬ 
stance, from his own possessions, not as being noble, but as 
necessary, that he may have means of expending. Nor will 
he neglect his own affairs, wishing indeed by means of these 
to support others. Nor will he give to persons indifferently, 
that he may have to bestow on whom he ought, and when, 
and where it is noble. Moreover, it is also [the peculiarity] 
of the liberal man to be extremely excessive in the giving, 
so as to leave the lesser part for himself; for the not having 
regard to himself is the character of the liberal man. Now 
the term liberality is applied with reference to the property 
[of the giver]: for the liberal does not consist in the number 
of the things given, but in the habit of the donor ; and this 
gives according to the property. And nothing binders, but 
that he who gives the smaller quantity may be more liberal, 
if he gives not of smaller means. But those men seem to 
be more liberal who have not gained their property, hut 
have received it from others ; for they are inexperienced in 
want; and all men are more fond of their own productions, 
as are, for instance, parents and poets. It is not easy then 
for the liberal man to be rich, being neither disposed to 
receive, nor to preserve wealth, but to dispense it, and not 
valuing it on its own account, but for the sake of giving. 
Hence also an accusation is laid against fortune, because 
those who are most worthy of riches, are least rich. But 
this happens not unreasonably; for it is impossible that he 
should possess wealth who does not study how he may ob¬ 
tain it; as neither can it be in other things. Nevertheless 
he will not give to those to whom he ought not, nor when he 
ought not, in any such ways as are improper; for he would 
• then no longer be acting according to liberality; and having 
expended upon these objects, he would not have wherewithal 
to expend upon objects which are proper; f*8h as has been 
said, he is liberal who spends according to lls property, 
and upon objects which are proper; but he who exceeds is 
prodigal. Hence wo do not term kings prodigals; for it 
does not seem an easy task for them in gifts and expences tp. 

g 3 



86 


ARISTOTLE* S 


BOOK IV. 


exceed the quantity of their property. Liberality then being 
a mean engaged in the giving and receiving of wealth, the 
liberal man will both give to and expend upon proper ob¬ 
jects, and in proper quantities, equally in small and great 
things; and that with pleasure. He will also receive whence 
he ought, and as much as he ought; for the virtue being 
a medium engaged in both. [i. e. giving and receiving,] he 
will perform both as is right; for a corresponding receiving 
attends a just giving; but that which does not correspond 
is contrary. Those things therefore which are consequent, 
subsist together in the same subject; but contraries plainly 
cannot. But if it should happen to him to expend beyond 
what is proper and honourable, he will be pained, yet mode¬ 
rately, and as he ought; for it is a characteristic of virtue both 
to be pleased and pained with the things we ought, and in the 
. manner we ought. Moreover, the liberal man is communi¬ 
cative in pecuniary affairs; for as he does not regard wealth, 
he may even be injured: and he is more hurt if he has not spent 
something which it was his duty to spend, than vexed if he has 
spent something which it was not his duty to expend : and he 
is no admirer of [penurious persons, such as] Simonides. 

4. But the prodigal errs in these things ; for he is neither 
pleased nor pained at proper objects, nor In the manner that 
is proper. But this will be more clear to us as we proceed. 
Now we have said, that prodigality and illiberality are ex¬ 
cesses and defects; and that in two things, in giving and re¬ 
ceiving ; for we place expending also under the head of 
giving. Prodigality therefore exceeds in giving, and in not 
receiving, but is deficient in receiving; illiberality is de¬ 
ficient in giving, and excessive in receiving, yet in small 
Pthings only. The components therefore of prodigality are 
not altogether compatible; for it is not easy for him, who 
receives from no source, to give to all; since property ra¬ 
pidly fails tljgse private individuals who give [largely] $ who 
also appear % be prodigals. Again, such a character as 
this would seem to be in no small degree better than the 
illiberal; for he is easily reformed both by age and distress, 
and may arrive at the medium; for he possesses the pro-* 



CHAP. I. 


ETHICS. 


87 


perties of the liberal 3 since he both gives and does not re¬ 
ceive, yet neither as he ought, or well. If then he were to 
become accustomed to this, or should in any other way be 
changed, he would be a liberal man 5 for he would give 
to those to whom he ought, and would not receive whence 
he ought not. Hence he also appears not to be depraved 
in his moral character ; for it is not the mark of a villainous 
or ignoble person to be excessive in giving and not re¬ 
ceiving, but of a silly man. Now he who is in this man¬ 
ner prodigal, appears to be much better than the illiberal, 
both for the above-mentioned reasons, and because the one 
benefits many, the other no one, not even himself. But 
most prodigals, as has been mentioned, also take whence 
they ought not, and are in that view illiberal. But they be¬ 
come greedy to receive, because they wish to spend, but are 
not able to do that easily 5 for their means shortly fail them. 
They are therefore compelled to procure them elsewhere; 
at the same time, since they have no regard whatever for 
what is noble, they receive thoughtlessly, and from every 
source 5 for they have a violent desire of giving; but how 
or whence makes no difference to them, Wherefore neither 
are their gifts liberal j for they are not noble, nor for the 
sake of that same noble, nor as is proper; but sometimes 
those who deserve to be in poverty, they make rich, and will 
give nothing to the virtuous in morals, and yet much to 
flatterers, or those who procure them any other pleasure. 
Hence also the most of them are intemperate3 for spending 
their property freely, they are also expensive on intemperate 
pleasures ; and because they do not live by the canon of 
what is noble, they incline to pleasures. The prodigal then 
being left without a guide, transgresses in these things 3 but 
were he to meet with attention, he may arrive at the me¬ 
dium and the becoming. 

5 . But illiberality is incurable3 for old age and every in¬ 
firmity seem to render men illiberal 3 and it is more conge¬ 
nial to men, than prodigality 3 for the great mass of mankind 
is more fond of money, than apt to give, Moreover it is 

g 4 



88 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOqK IT. 


very widely extended, and is multiform 3 for there appear 
many species of illiberality5 since, consisting of two things, 
the deficiency in giving, and excess in receiving, it does not 
come to all in its entire state, but sometimes is separated ; 
and some [illiberal] men exceed in receiving, others are de¬ 
ficient in giving. For those who come under such appella¬ 
tions as these, as stingy, closefisted churls, all are deficient in 
giving; yet they do not desire the property of others, nor 
wish to receive it, some indeed through a certain sense of 
justice and awe of disgrace ; for some of them seem to be, 
or at least say they are, careful of their means, that they may 
never be compelled to do a shameful action. Of these also 
the split-straw, and all that class, has been denominated from 
the quality of not giving to any one being excessive in them. 

' Others again refrain from property not their own through 
fear, considering it not easy for a man to take the property of 
other men, and that others should not take his. They are 
content therefore neither to receive nor give. Others again 
exceed in receiving, by taking from every quarter and every 
thing: such as those who work at illiberal trades, and pan¬ 
ders, and all that class, and usurers, and those who purchase 
small gains at a dear rate ; for all these receive whence they 
ought not, and a quantity which they ought not. But the 
baseness of gain appears to be common to these; for all of 
them endure disgrace for the sake of gain, and that a paltry 
gain. For those who take great things whence they ought 
not, and such as they ought not, we never call illiberal, as 
tyrants, who sack cities and sacrilegiously rifle temples, but 
rather we call them villains, and impious, and unjust. Ne¬ 
vertheless the gamester, and the highwayman, and the robber, 
are among the illiberal 5 for they are addicted to base gain ; 
since for the sake of gain both the last toil, and undergo in¬ 
sults : and the one class endures the greatest dangers, for the 
sake of what they may get3 the others gain from their friends, 
to whom it is their duty to give. Both these therefore wish¬ 
ing to gain whence they ought not, are addicted to base gain : 
and consequently all such receivings are illiberal. Justly 
then is illiberality said to be contrary to liberality 3 for it is 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


89 


both a greater evil than prodigality, and men are more apt 
to err in this than in the prodigality, which we before de¬ 
scribed. Concerning liberality therefore and its opposite vices 
let so much be said. 


CHAP, II. 

Concerning magnificence, which is a virtue in shewy expences, as 
liberality is in common ones, and its extremes, parsimony and 
illiberal profusion. 

1. It would seem to follow next that we should discuss 
magnificence : for this also seems itself to be a certain vir¬ 
tue engaged in wealth; it does not indeed, as liberality, ex¬ 
tend to all actions attendant on wealth, but to those only, 
which are sumptuous. But in these it exceeds liberality in 
magnitude; for, as the name itself suggests, it is a becom¬ 
ing sumptuousness in greatness. Magnitude however is a 
relative term: for the same expenditure does not become a 
trierarch * and a president of games. The becoming there¬ 
fore is referred to the person who gives; the object, on 
which he spends ; and the sum, which is spent. Still he, 
who expends with propriety in small or in moderate things, 
is not called magnificent; such as , ee Often have I bestowed 
{e on the wandering beggarbut he [who spends with pro¬ 
priety] in great things is the character: for the magnificent 
is certainly liberal 5 but the liberal is not consequently mag¬ 
nificent. And of such a habit the defect is called parsimony 5 
but the excess, a vulgar and inelegant profusion 5 and all 
such vices, as do not exceed in magnitude in cases where 
greatness is proper, but which are gaudy in things not be¬ 
coming. But we shall speak concerning these at a future 
period. 

» Those citizens, who, from their wealth, had the expensive offices of 
the state laid upon them in Athens, were called \urw%yoi : the principal 
offices were 'rpngagx'®* 



90 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV. 


2. Now the magnificent is similar to the scientific man 3 
for he is capable of tracing out the becoming, and of expend¬ 
ing vast sums with elegance: for, as we have said in the be¬ 
ginning, a habit is defined by the operations, and by those 
things, of which it is the habit. Consequently the expences 
of the magnificent are vast and becoming : consequently his 
works are also such 3 for thus the expenditure will be great, 
and suitable to the work. Wherefore it is right that the 
work should be worthy the expence; and the expence equal 
to the work, or even surpassing it. The magnificent man 
then will thus expend for the sake of what is noble; for 
this motive is common to all the virtues ; and moreover [he 
will spend] with pleasure and amply, for a strict account of 
expences is parsimonious. And he will rather consider, how 
a deed may be performed most nobly and becomingly, than 
at what expence, and how at the least expence. It is neces¬ 
sary then that the magnificent man should be liberal; for 
the liberal man also will expend what is right, and that in 
the manner that is right 3 but in these things whatever is 
great refers to the magnificent, for instance, the greatness 
of the expence b . Though liberality is conversant with the 
same things as magnificence, magnificence even with equal 
expence will produce a more magnificent work 5 for the 
virtue of possession and production is not the same 3 for a 
possession should be most valuable and precious, as gold 5 
but a work should be vast and noble ; for the display of such 
a thing is admirable ; but the magnificent is admirable. And 
the virtue of a work is magnificence in magnitude. But there 
are some expences which we call honourable, such as those 
which belong to the gods, offerings, and building of temples 
and sacrifices : in like manner also expences relating to every 
thing divine, and whatever is done from an ambition of pa¬ 
triotism 3 for instance, if in any state they should think it 
their duty to furnish splendid spectacles, or triremes, or even 
to entertain a whole city at a feast. In all cases however, 
as we have said, respect is had to the agent, as to who he is, 


b The passage is corrupt. 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


91 


and what his means are; for the expence ought to be worthy 
of the means, and to become not only the work, but also 
the performer. Hence a poor man cannot be magnificent j , 
for he has not the means of spending much in a becoming 
manner; but he who attempts it is silly 5 for he attempts 
it inconsistently with his rank and with propriety : but 
whatever is right, is according to virtue. Such expence is 
becoming to those, who have had such means in possession 
through themselves, or from their ancestors, or those with 
whom they are connected; also to the nobly born and re¬ 
nowned, and such characters; for all these have magnitude 
and dignity. In the most perfect sense therefore such is the 
magnificent man, and in such expences consists magnificence, 
as we have said; for these are the greatest and most ho¬ 
nourable. But of private expences, those are magnificent, 
which are incurred once; such as a marriage-feast, and 
whatever is of that class, and whatever the whole city is 
earnestly occupied about, or those who are in dignified si- 
illations*, also expences incurred in the receiving and dis¬ 
missing of noble strangers, in gifts and remunerations 5 for 
the magnificent is not lavish on himself, but on the public. 
But gifts have some similarity to offerings. Moreover it is 
the province of the magnificent man to furnish his house in 
a manner suitable to his wealth ; for this also is a kind of or¬ 
nament 5 and rather to be expensive on those works, which 
are lasting; for these are the most honourable; and in all 
cases to preserve fitness 5 for the same things are not suitable 
to gods and men, nor in temples and sepulchres. And of 
expences, each is great in its own class : and that is most 
magnificent, which is great in a great work : but in any par¬ 
ticular instance, what is great in that And,' greatness in 
the work is distinct from greatness in the expence; for a 
ball or very beautiful jug has the magnificence of a child’s 
gift 5 yet the price of it is small ahd illiberal. On this ac¬ 
count it is the duty of a magnificent man, to act magnifi¬ 
cently in whatever genus of things he may be acting j for 
such magnificence is not easily surpassed, and is done with 



93 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV. 


a due reference to the expence. Such therefore is the cha- 
racter of the magnificent. 

3. But he, who exceeds and is vulgarly profuse, exceeds, 
as has been explained, in spending inconsistently with what 
is right; for in things requiring small expence he expends 
much, and is unbecomingly splendid ; for instance, feasting 
his club companions with the pomp of a marriage-feast; and 
being manager of the chorus at a comedy, he introduces 
them in purple on their entrance, as the Megarensians do. 
And all these things he will do, not for the sake of what is 
noble, but to display his wealth, and fancying that by such 
means he shall be admired ; and where it is his duty to expend 
much, he expends little; but where he ought to spend little, 
he is profuse. 

4. But the parsimonious man will be deficient in every 
thing, and having expended the largest sums, he will ruin 
the honour of the deed in a trifle; putting off whatever he is 
to do, and reckoning how he may spend least; and this, 
bewailing and suspecting that he is doing every thing more 
sumptuous than he ought. These habits, then, are vices - 
nevertheless they do not bring reproach on men, because 
they are neither injurious to one’s neighbours, nor very un¬ 
seemly. 


CHAR 1IL 

Concerning magnanimity, and its extremes, pusillanimity in 
defect, vanity in excess. 

1. But magnanimity seems from the very name to be 
conversant with great things. But with what kind of things 
it is conversant, let us first ascertain. It makes no difference, 
whether we consider the habit, or the man who acts accord¬ 
ing to the habit, Now he appears to be the magnanimous 



CHAP. in. 


ETHICS. 


9S 


man, who, being worthy, thinks himself worthy of great 
things 5 for he, who does this without desert, is a fool : but 
of those who act according to virtue, no one is a fool or an 
idiot. He therefore, who has been just described, is magna¬ 
nimous ; for he, who is worthy of small [honours], and thinks 
himself worthy of the same, is modest, but not magnani¬ 
mous 5 for magnanimity consists in magnitude, as likewise 
beauty does in a large body : for small men are elegant anti 
well-formed, but not handsome. He again, who thinks 
himself worthy of great things, being unworthy, is vain ; 
but every one is not arrogant, who thinks himself worthy of 
more than he is : but lie, who thinks himself worthy of less 
than he deserves, is pusillanimous, whether he is worthy of 
great things, or of moderate things, or even of little things, 
if he thinks himself worthy of still less; and he, who is really 
worthy,, of great things, would seem to be most [pusillani¬ 
mous] ; for what would be have done, if he had not been 
worthy of such things ? 

<2. The magnanimous therefore is as to magnitude at the 
summit; but in observing propriety he is in the mean; for 
he thinks himself worthy of that, which is according to his 
desert; but the others exceed and are deficient. Conse¬ 
quently, if being worthy, he thinks himself worthy of great 
things, and especially if of the greatest, he must be especially 
conversant with one thing. What that is must be collected 
from its value; now value is spoken of with reference to 
exterior goods. But we roust lay that down as greatest, 
which we attribute to the gods, and which men of conse¬ 
quence most aspire after, and which is the prize in the most 
noble contests; of this kind is honour; for this is the great¬ 
est of external goods. Therefore the magnanimous man is 
conversant with honours anti dishonours, just as he ought. 
And indeed without argument the magnanimous are evidently 
engaged with honour; for great men especially think them¬ 
selves worthy of honour ; but it is according to their desert. 
But the pusillanimous man is deficie^* both with respect to 
himself, and in reference to the claim of desert in the mag¬ 
nanimous man; but the arrogant exceeds with respect to him- 



94 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK. IV, 


sdfj not so however with reference to the magnanimous 
man. 

$. But the magnanimous man, if he is really worthy of the 
greatest things, must be a most excellent character 5 for the 
better man is always worthy of the greater honour, anti the 
best man of the greatest. It necessary follows then, that a 
man truly magnanimous must be good $ and what is great 
in each virtue would seem to be the duty of the magnani¬ 
mous: and it would by no means fit a magnanimous man to 
fly wringing his hands, or to commit an injury; because, 
what inducement can he have to commit base actions, to 
whom nothing seems great ? Indeed, if we consider particu¬ 
lars, a man magnanimous without being good would appear 
perfectly ridiculous. Nor can he by any means be worthy of 
honour, if he is vicious; for honour is the reward of virtue, 
and is allotted to the good. Magnanimity therefore appears 
to be as it were a kind of ornament of the virtues: for it 
renders them greater, and does not exist without them. For 
this reason it is arduous to be in reality a magnanimous 
man : for it is impossible to be so without perfect virtue. 

4. The magnanimous man therefore is especially con¬ 
versant with honours and dishonour. And with great ho¬ 
nours, and when conferred by worthy men, he will be mo¬ 
derately pleased, as if he only obtained what was his own, 
or even less 3 for there cannot be an honour adequate to 
perfect virtue. Not but that he will receive them, in that 
they have no greater to confer on him 3 but the honours 
presented by indifferent persons, and for trifles, he will alto¬ 
gether contemn 3 for he is not deserving of these : so like¬ 
wise he will despise dishonour 3 for it cannot be justly ap- 
e plied to him. The magnanimous man therefore is for the 
most part, as we have said, engaged with honours. Never¬ 
theless he will conduct himself moderately with respect to 
wealth also, and power, and every prosperous and adverse 
fortune, in whatever manner they may happen. And nei¬ 
ther in prosperity will he be too elated, nor in adversity too 
dejected 3 for he does not even so behave with respect to ho¬ 
nour, which is a thing of the greatest value 5 for dominion and 



CHAP, III. 


ETHICS. 


95 


riches are eligible on account of honour; since those who 
possess them wish to be honoured on their account. Con¬ 
sequently to whomsoever even honour itself appears trifling* 
to him all other things surely are so 5 hence they also ap¬ 
pear to be supercilious. 

5. However successes seem to contribute to magnanimity ; 
for the nobly born are thought worthy of honour; as also 
they who are in power* or are rich* for they are in a superior 
state ; but every thing that has a superiority in any good is 
more honourable. Hence such things as these render men 
more magnanimous; for they are honoured by some. But 
in reality the good man alone is to be honoured; yet he who 
possesses both these is thought more worthy of honour; but 
those who possess such goods without virtue* neither justly 
think themselves worthy of great things, nor are properly 
called magnanimous; for this cannot properly be without 
perfect virtue. But men who are supercilious and insolent* 
and possess these external goods* become depraved; for 
without virtue it is not easy to bear successes with a good 
grace; now being not able to bear them* and fancying that 
they are superior to other men, they despise them; yet act 
themselves as chance directs; for they imitate the magna¬ 
nimous* though they are unlike him * and this they do in 
whatever they are able. They do not therefore perform ac¬ 
tions suitable to virtue* but they despise others. 

6 . The magnanimous man justly despises others ; for he 
has a correct opinion of things; but the multitude is right 
or wrong by accident. Moreover he is not apt to expose 
himself to small dangers* nor is he a lover of danger* since 
he thinks but few things to be of consequence; but he cqurts 
great dangers; and when in the clanger* he is prodigal of 
life* as if life were altogether of no value. And be is always 
inclined to do a kindness* but when he receives one* he is 
ashamed; for the former is the part of a superior* the latter 
of one who is surpassed. And he is apt to return more than 
he received; for thus he* who began* will be Ms debtor* and 
will be the person benefited. They seem moreover to re- 



96 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV. 


member those, whom they may have benefited, but not so 
those, by whom they have been benefited ; for he who is bene¬ 
fited is the inferior of him who confers; but he wishes to be 
the superior: and the one circumstance they hear with plea¬ 
sure, but the other with pain. Hence also it is that Thetis does 
not recount her good services to Jupiter, nor the Lacedaemo¬ 
nians to the Athenians, but those cases, in which they had 
been benefited. It is moreover the character of the mag¬ 
nanimous to beg nothing or barely any thing of any one, but 
readily to supply the wants of others. And in his behaviour 
to men of consequence and affluence, to be great ; but to the 
middle class, moderate 5 for to surpass the former is diffi¬ 
cult and dignified, but to surpass the latter is easy 5 and to 
be august among those is not ungcntlemanly, but to be so 
among the lower class, is vulgar, just as displaying strength 
upon the weak. And not to eager for what is held ho¬ 
nourable, or for those things in which others are chief. 
And to be inactive and slow, except where the honour or en- 
terprize is great ; and to be active in few things, but these 
1 great and renowned. It is moreover requisite, that he should 
be an open enemy and an open friend ; for to be concealed 
is the part of one who is afraid. And to attend more to 
truth than to opinion. Also to speak and act openly ; for 
that is the part of one, who contemns others; hence he uses 
freedom of speech c 5 [for this is the part of one who asserts 
his liberty of speaking; hence he is a contemner of others,] 
and a lover of truth, except what he speaks in irony: but' he 
is ironical to the vulgar. And it is his character also not to 
be dependent upon any one, except upon a friend; for that 
would be servile : hence all flatterers are mercenary 5 and 
abject persons are flatterers. Nor is he given to admiration; 
for nothing is great to him. Nor is he mindful of injuries j 
for it is not the province of the magnanimous to recollect 
any thing, especially injuries, but rather to overlook them. 

c Thepe is evidently some corruption here: I should wish to leave out 
what is between the brackets, and to read the Greek, 
ho w&pjiiuriaftKof xoti ctXfiSwriXof* 



CHAP. III. 


ETHICS. 


97 


Nor does he speak of men,- for he will speak neither of 
himself, nor of another; since he studies neither to be 
praised himself, nor how others may be blamed. Neither 
again is he apt to praise 5 on which account he is no ‘slan¬ 
derer, not even of his enemies, unless it be because of an in¬ 
sult. And in necessary or trifling concerns, he is least of all 
apt to whine and beg; for to behave so in these matters is 
the character of him who takes great pains about them. And 
he is apt to possess things noble and unproductive, rather 
than such as are lucrative and advantageous ; for that is 
more the part of an independent person. Morepver, the mo¬ 
tion of the magnanimous man appears to be slow, his voice 
deep, and his expression stately : for he is not apt to hurry, 
who studies but few things ; nor impetuous, who thinks no¬ 
thing great; but shrillness of voice and hurried step arise 
from these causes. Such then is the magnanimous. 

7. But he who is deficient is pusillanimous ; and he who 
exceeds is vain. Neither indeed do these appear to be wicked ; 
for they are not injurious to others, but they are under an error; 
for the pusillanimous, being worthy of good things, deprives 
himself of what he is worthy; and he appears to have a kind 
of depravity from his not thinking himself worthy of good 
things ; and he appears also to be ignorant of himself; for 
otherwise he would aspire after those things of which he is 
worthy, especially if they are goods. Not that such men 
appear to be fools, but rather sluggish. Moreover such an 
opinion seems to render them still worse; for every man 
desires thoSe things, which are according to his desert ; and 
they also withdraw themselves from noble actions and pro¬ 
fessions, as if they were unworthy of them ; and in like 
manner, from external goods. But the vain are foolish and 
ignorant of themselves, and that openly ; for they make an 
attempt at things honourable, as if they were deserving, then 
they are exploded; they also adorn themselves with fine 
clothes, and by a dignified appearance, and such things ; and 
wish that their successes should be public, and speak of them¬ 
selves as if they were to be honoured on this account. But 
pusillanimity rather than vanity is opposed to magnanimity ; 

n 



9 ® 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV. 


because it more frequently exists, and is worse. Magnani¬ 
mity therefore, as we have said, is engaged in those honours 
which are great. 


CHAP. IV. 

Concerning an anonymous virtue conversant with small honours, 
which is called ambition, or want of ambition , according to 
the nature of its object* 

1. But there seems to be another virtue engaged with 
this subject, as was stated in our first [sketch], which would 
seem to be related to magnanimity in the same way that 
liberality also is to magnificence ; for both these retire indeed 
from what is great, but in moderate and small things they 
dispose us as is proper. Now as in the receiving and giving 
of money there is a mean, and excess, and defect; so also in 
the desire of honour there is the desiring it more than is 
proper, and less, and whence it is proper, and in the manner 
that is right 3 for we blame the ambitious man, as one aiming 
after honour both more than he ought, and whence he ought 
not; and the unambitious, as one determined not to be ho¬ 
noured even for noble actions. Sometimes indeed we praise 
the ambitious as heroic, and a lover of what is noble 5 but 
the unambitious, as moderate and temperate, as we have also 
said at the first. It is however evident, that since a man is 
styled a lover of any thing in more ways than one, we do 
not always apply the term ambitious to the same thing,- but 
in praising him, we refer to his being more ambitious than 
the vulgar; but in blaming him, to his being more so than 
he ought. Now the mean having no particular name, the 
extremes appear to contend for it, as a vacant place $ but 
in whatever there is excess and defect, there is also a mean. 
But men desire honour both more than they ought, and less 5 
consequently there is also the desiring it, as is proper. In 



CHAP* V* 


ETHICS. 


.99 


short, this habit is praised, being an anonymous mean en¬ 
gaged with honour. It appears when compared with am¬ 
bition, to be want of ambition ; when compared with want 
of ambition, ambition; when compared with both, it ap¬ 
pears to be in a manner both: but this seems to be the case 
in the other virtues also. Here however the extremes are 
apparently opposed, because the mean is not named. 


CHAP. V. 

Of meekness, which is a mean between hastiness of temper , and 
an anonymous defect. This virtue regulates the passion of 
anger. 

1. Meekness is a mean in anger. Now the mean and 
perhaps the extremes also having no peculiar names, we 
place in the mean meekness, which inclines to the deficiency, 
which also has no peculiar name. But the excess may be 
'called a certain hastiness ; for the passion is anger; but the 
things which produce it are many and various. 

<2, He therefore who is roused to anger by just causes, 4 
and at proper objects, and moreover in the manner that, and 
when, and as long as is proper, is praised. Such a man 
would be the meek, if indeed meekness is praised ; for the 
meek man is generally undisturbed, and not led by his pas¬ 
sion ; but feels indignation, as reason would dictate, and for 
such motives, and for such a time. But he appears to err 
rather towards the defect; for the meek is not apt to re¬ 
venge, but rather to forgive. But the defect, whether it is 
a certain want of proper spirit, or whatever it may be, is ’ 
blamed; for those who are not moved to anger by causes 
which they ought, seem to be foolish, as are they who are 
not moved as they ought, nor when, nor by proper objects; 
for they appear not to feel, nor be pained ; and, not being 
moved to anger, they appear to be incapable of defending 

h 2 



100 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV. 


themselves j but that a man when personally insulted should 
bear it, and overlook his friend’s being so, is slavish. 

3 * Now the excess exists in all possible ways j for there 
is the being angry with those with whom it is not proper, 
and from causes that are not proper, and in a greater de» 
gree, and quicker, and for a longer time than is proper. 
Not indeed that all these faults exist in the same person 5 
for that could not be ; since the evil both destroys itself, and 
if it comes all at once, it becomes intolerable. The irascible 
then are roused to anger quickly, and with things which are 
not proper, and from causes that are not proper, and more 
than is proper; but they are soon assuaged, which is indeed 
the best quality they possess. But this happens to them, be¬ 
cause they do not confine their anger, but return it on their 
enemy ; by which means they are easily seen, because of their 
impetuosity, after that they are calm. But the furious are im¬ 
petuous in excess, and irascible towards every thing, and on 
every occasion ; whence also the name was derived. But the 
* bitterly angry are difficult to appease, and are angry for a long 
time ; for they confine their anger : but there comes a cessa¬ 
tion, when they have revenged themselves5 for revenge allays 
the anger, producing pleasure instead of pain. But as long 
as this does not take place, they carry a weight [on their 
minds] $ for since it is not open, no one expostulates with 
them } but for the anger to subside of itself needs time. 
But such characters are most annoying to themselves and 
their best friends. But we *Call those severely angry, who 
fret at those things at which they ought not, and more, and 
for a longer time, than they ought, and will not be recon¬ 
ciled without revenge or punishment. 

4 . But we oppose the excess more particularly to mild- 
nesss, ince it is more frequent; for to revenge an injury is 
more human. And for society the severe in anger are the 
worse kind. Moreover what was before asserted, is obvious 
also from what has just been said; for it is not easy to de¬ 
fine the points how, and with whom, and for what reasons, 
and how long a time, a man should be angry, and up to 
what point a man does right, or errs. For he who errs a 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


101 


little is not blamed either for his excess, or his deficiency; 
for sometimes we praise those who are deficient, and call 
them meek ; and we call those who are angry manly, as 
being capable of governing. But how far, and how a man 
errs, so as to be blameable, is not easy to define in precept,- 
for the deciding of this depends upon particulars, and upon 
sense. But so much at least is clear ; that the middle habit 
is praiseworthy, by means of which we are angry with 
proper objects, and from proper causes, and in a proper 
manner, and all that ; but the excesses and defects are re¬ 
prehensible 5 and when erring only a little, slightly repre* 
hensible ; proceeding to a greater degree, more blameable ; 
% but if to a very great degree, they are strongly reprehensible. 
It is evident therefore, that we must adhere to the middle 
habit. Let the habits therefore which are engaged with 
anger be so far discussed. 


CHAP. VI. 

In the pleasures of society, there is an extreme which may he 
called litigiousness , which is the deficiency ; another, the excess, 
is flattery ; and an anonymous mean , which is something similar 
to friendship, 

1 . But in intercourse and society and a communication 
of words and actions, some men appear to be fawners ; who 
praise every thing with the view of pleasing, and qct ad¬ 
versely in nothing, but in short who think that it is their 
duty to be inoffensive to those whom they meet; those again, 
who are the opposite to these, opposing every thing, and 
having not the least caution of offending, are called morose 
and contentious. 

■2. That therefore the above-mentioned habits are 
blameable, requires no proof: and that the mean of these is 
praiseworthy, according to which a man will assent to what 

H 3 



I0 c l 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV. 


he ought, and as he ought, and in a similar manner will be 
dissatisfied. Now no name has been assigned it; but it is 
most like friendship 3 for he, who is according to this middle 
habit, is just such a character as we generally call a worthy 
friend, after he has added affection for us, But it differs 
from friendship, because it is without strong feeling and af¬ 
fection towards those, whom he has intercourse with 3 for 
he does not assent to each circumstance as he ought, from 
loving or hating the person ; but because he is of this kind 
of disposition 3 for he will do this equally by those whom he 
does not, and those whom he does know 3 and by his asso¬ 
ciates and those he does not associate with, except in each 
case as far as is suitable to himself 3 for it is not fit to re¬ 
spect, or on the other hand to give pain to, familiars and 
strangers in the same manner. It has been therefore asserted 
universally, that he will have intercourse with men in such 
a manner as is proper ; but referring to the noble and ad¬ 
vantageous, he will aim at not giving pain, or at pleasing. 
For indeed he seems to be engaged with the pleasures and 
pains, which occur in our intercourses with men ; but as 
many of these pleasures as it is either not honourable or 
injurious that he should contribute to, lie will feel indignant 
at, and will choose rather to give pain. And should the 
pleasure bring disgrace, and that not small, or injury upon 
the person, who thus pleases, but the contrary brings but 
little pain, he will not receive it, hut will be indignant. But 
lie will associate differently with men of consequence, and 
common persons, and with those who are more or less 
known to him ; in like manner also with respect to the other 
distinctions, allotting to each what is suitable. And ge¬ 
nerally choosing to give pleasure, and dreading to give pain3 
but following the circumstances, which happen, if they are 
greater 5 I mean, what is honourable ami advantageous 3 
and for the sake of great pleasure- to ensue, he will give a 
little pain. 

3. The middle character then is such 3 but it has no pecu¬ 
liar name. But of that character which contributes pleasure, 
he, who aims at being pleasant for no other end, is fawning ; 



CHAP* VII. 


ETHICS* 


103 


but he, who does so that some advantage may accrue to him, 
in money, or those things which are obtained by money, is 
a flatterer. He again, who is dissatisfied with every thing, 
we have said is morose and contentious. But the extremes 
appear to oppose each other, because the medium is anony¬ 
mous. 


CHAP. VII, 

Concerning the observer of truth, or veracious, who is the middle 
character, and the extremes, arrogant and dissemblers, which 
are conversant with nearly the same subjects as the characters 
last treated of. 

1. Almost with the same subjects is the medium of ar¬ 
rogance engaged ; this also is anonymous. However it is 
not wrong to discuss such like habits; for we may be more 
acquainted with what belongs to manners, by treating the 
virtues individually $ and we should believe that the virtues 
are means, if we were conscious that it is so in all of them. 
Now in society, those who have intercourse with men with 
a view to pleasure or pain, have been mentioned. But let 
us speak concerning those who are observant of truth, and 
those who are false, both in words and actions, and preten¬ 
sion to character. ' 

2 . The arrogant therefore seems to pretend to things il¬ 
lustrious, and which he does not possess, and greater than 
he does possess. The dissembler, on the other hand, [seems] 
to deny what he possessevs, or render them less $ but the 
middle character, being a certain self-eame in every thing, 
is a man of veracity both in his life and his words, allowing 
those things to belong to him which he does possess, and 
neither greater or less. Both of these things however may be 
done for the sake of something, or for nothing. But such as 
a man is, such things does he speak and do, and so does he 

h 4 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV, 


104 

live, unless he acts for the sake of something. Of itself 
however falsehood is base and reprehensible; and truth, 
noble and laudable. Hence also he, who is observant of 
truth, being a middle character, is laudable 5 but those who 
are false, are both indeed reprehensible ; though the arrogant 
is the more blameable. 

3. Let us then speak concerning each; and first, of the 
character observant of truth 5 for we are not talking of him, 
who observes truth in compacts, or in things which relate to 
justice or injustice : for these things would belong to an¬ 
other virtue; but of him, who, when nothing of this kind 
is concerned, is observant of truth both in words and in his 
life, because he is such in habit. But such a man must ap¬ 
pear to be a worthy man 5 for the lover of truth, and he who 
speaks the truth in matters in which it makes no difference, 
will still more be observant of truth in cases where it makes 
a difference 5 for he will dread a falsehood, as base, which 
he had already dreaded in itself5 but such a character is 
praiseworthy. But he will rather lean to what is less than 
the truth 3 for this appears more fitting, because excesses 
are intolerable. 

4. He, again, who pretends to greater things than he pos¬ 
sesses for the sake of nothing, is similar to a depraved man : 
for, [otherwise,] he would not have been delighted with a 
falsehood 3 but he appears more a vain than a bad man. If 
however it is for the sake of something, he who is so for the 
sake of glory or honour, is not very reprehensible, such as 
is the arrogant 5 but he, who is so for the sake of money, or 
those things which produce money, is more mean. But the 
arrogant man does not derive his character from his capa¬ 
bility of being so, but from his deliberate choice; for he is 
arrogant by habit, and because he is of that character, as 
is the liar also ; the one delighting in the falsehood itself, 
the other desiring glory or gain. Those therefore who ^re 
arrogant for the sake of glory, pretend to those things, 
which praise or congratulation attends 3 but those who are 
arrogant for the sake of gain, pretend to those things, the 
enjoyment of which goes also to their neighbour, and which 



.CHAP. VIII. 


ethics; 


105 


may be kept a secret when they do not exist, as the being a 
physician, or prophet, or philosopher. Hence most men 
pretend to such things, and are arrogant in such; for the 
qualities we have been describing are in them. 

5 . But the dissemblers speaking less than the truth ap¬ 
pear more amiable in manners, for they do not seem to 
speak for the sake of gain, but to avoid fastidiousness. 
These men especially deny [the possession of] illustrious 
things; as Socrates did. But those, who pretend they do 
not possess things small and obvious, are called meanly cun¬ 
ning, and are truly despicable. And sometimes this appears 
to be arrogance; for instance, the dress of the Lacedaemo¬ 
nians ; for both excess and a great deficiency is arrogant. 
But those, who moderately use dissimulation, and who use 
it in things which are not too common and obvious, appear 
to be well-bred men. But the arrogant appears to be op¬ 
posed to the observer of truth; for he is the worse cha¬ 
racter. 


CHAP. VIII. 

Of the medium in relaxation and social conversation > which u 
called facetiousness ; the extremes of which are scurrility and 
rusticity. 

1. There being also relaxation in life, and in that a 
spending of time in jesting, there seems to be here also a 
certain just intercourse, and a speaking the things which are 
proper, and in a proper manner; in the same manner also 
we may hear them. There is a distinction also between the 
speaking among such and such persons, and listening to 
such persons. But it is evident, that there is in these things 
also an excess as well as defect of the mean. Those then 
who exceed in the ludicrous, seem to be buffoons and vulgar, 
always itching after the ludicrous, and rather aiming at 



106 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IV. 


raising a laugh, than speaking decent language, and not 
paining the person jested upon. But those, who can neither 
themselves speak any thing ludicrous, and are dissatisfied 
with those who thus speak, appear to be rustic and morose. 
But those, who jest elegantly, are termed facetious, as it 
were, well-turned 3 for there appear to be in the moral cha¬ 
racter such motions as these: for as bodies are judged of 
from their motions, so also are manners. Now the ludicrous 
being redundant, and most men being delighted with jest, 
and satirizing more than is proper, buffoons are also called 
facetious, as being genteel men; but that they differ, ahd 
not a little, is clear from what has been said. 

2 . But good taste also is a proprium of this middle habit. 
But it is the character of the man of good taste to speak and 
hear such things, as are adapted to a good and liberal man 3 
for there are some things proper for such a man to speak 
and hear by way of jest. And the jesting of the liberal man 
differs from that of the slavish, and again that of the edu¬ 
cated from that of the uneducated. This a person may also 
see from the old and new comedies 3 for in the one obsce¬ 
nity was the ludicrous; in the other the delicate hint: and 
these things make no little difference as to decency. Is then 
the man who jokes properly, to be defined by his speaking 
the things which become a liberal man } or by bis not 
giving pain to the hearer, or by his giving him pleasure’ 
or is not a thing like this indefinite ’ for different things are 
disgusting as well as delightful to different persons. More¬ 
over he will hear the same kind of things 3 for whatever 
things a man endures to hear, these he also appears to do. 
Consequently he [the middle character] will not do every 
thing; for a joke is a kind of invective ; but legislators for¬ 
bid some kinds of invective ; .they ought perhaps to forbid 
lampooning also. Consequently the gentlemanly and li¬ 
beral man will thus behave, being, as it were, a law to him¬ 
self. Such an one therefore is the middle character, whether 
he is called the man of taste, or facetious. 

S. But the buffoon is overpowerd by the ludicrous, sparing 
neither himself nor others, if he can raise a laugh; and 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS, 


107 


speaking such things as a gentleman would not speak at 
all, and some things which he would not hear. 

4. On the other hand, the rustic is useless in such meet¬ 
ings : for contributing nothing himself, he is dissatisfied with 
all. But, relaxation and jesting appear to be necessary in 
life. The three last mentioned means therefore are media in ■ 
common life 3 and they are all engaged with a communica¬ 
tion of certain words and actions, but they differ, because 
one is conversant with truth, the others with what is plea¬ 
sant. And of those conversant with pleasure, the one is en¬ 
gaged with jests, the other in the intercourses of the rest of 
life. 


CHAP. IX. 

That shame is no virtue* as was generally maintained , nor 
a mean. 

1. We ought not to treat of shame, as of a virtue, for it is 

snore similar to a passion than a habit. It is defined how¬ 
ever to be a certain dread of disgrace ; and its effect is nearly 
the same as the fear, which is engaged with dangers: for 
those who are ashamed blush 5 but those who dread death 
are pale. Both consequently appear to be in a manner 
bodily ; which appears to be rather characteristic of a passion 
than a habit. ^ 

2. But this passion Is not adapted to every age, but to 
youth 5 for we consider it just, that persons of that age 
should be bashful, because living under the influence of 
passion they err in many things, but are checked by shanqe. 
And we praise the bashful among young men ; but no man 
would praise an old man, because he is bashful; for we sup¬ 
pose that it is not right he should do any thing upon which 
shame would be consequent 5 for neither is shame the cha¬ 
racteristic of a good man, if indeed it arises from the com- 



108 


ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS, 


BOOK IV, 


mission of base actions : for he ought not to perform such. 
But whether some things are in reality shameful, others in 
idea, differs not; for neither are to be committed; so that 
they ought not to feel shame. Moreover it is the character 
of a depraved man to be such, as to commit any base action ; 
but that a person should be so affected, as to feel shame if he 
commit any such, and on that account fancy himself to be 
worthy, is absurd • for shame is attendant on voluntary 
actions 5 but a worthy man will never voluntarily commit 
base actions. But shame may upon certain suppositions be a 
worthy feeling5 for if the good man did such things, he 
would be ashamed ; but this is not in the virtues ; but if 
impudence is vile, and not to be ashamed at committing 
shameful deeds, the being ashamed, when doing such things, 
is not the more worthy. 

3. Neither is continence a virtue, but something mixed ; 
but we will treat of this at a future place. But now let us 
speak concerning justice. 



ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK V. 


CHAP. I. 

Of justice, and its contrary, injustice. Justice and injustice are 
' divided into universal aud particular. Universal justice ex¬ 
plained. 

1. BUT let us investigate justice and injustice, with what 
actions they happen to be conversant, and what kind of 
mean the habit of justice is, and between what things the 
principle of justice d is a medium. And let our investigation 
be according to the same method with that of the subjects 
before treated of. We see then all men willing to call 
justice a habit of that kind, by which men are wont to 
practise just things, and by means of which they do perform 
justice, and wish what is just; in the same manner also of 
injustice, [that it is the habit], by means of which men do in¬ 
juries, and wish what is unjust. Wherefore let thus much 
be laid down by us first in outline: for the case is not the 
same with the sciences and faculties as with habits c . For a 


4 A distinction should carefully be observed throughout this book be 
tween the habit of justice, Wffri. and the principle of justice, rtlowr 


the former is a (tttro<nw> the latter a ftterov. ^ 

t The above definition is not sufficient, because one term of it, «. !<*««. 
requires.explanation as much as Swwwew, the term defined: also xn 
describing moral habits, wc must give a different definition for two con- 



110 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK ¥, 


faculty and science seems to be the same in contraries 5 but 
the same habit does not belong to contraries j for example, 
from health the contrary actions are not performed, but 
those alone which indicate health 3 for we say that a man 
walks healthfully, when he walks as a healthy man would. 

2. Frequently, therefore, a contrary habit is found out from 
its contrary, and frequently habits [are known] from their 
subjects 1, 5 for supposing a good habit of body is well known, 
a bad habit also becomes well known ; and from things which 
create a good habit the good habit [is known], and from this, 
those things which create a good habit; for if a good habit 
of body be firmness of flesh, it is necessary that a bad habit 
of body be softness of flesh 3 and that which produces a good 
habit is that which is creative of firmness in the flesh. It 
follows, also for the most part, that if one of the two [con¬ 
traries] have more significations than one, the other likewise 
has more than one signification : for instance, if the just has 
more, so also has the unjust s. Now the term justice, as well 
as injustice, appears to have more than one signification ; 
but, because their homonymy is near 11 , it is not observed, 
and not clear, as it is in things widely separated; for the 
difference in that case is great, namely, a difference of spe¬ 
cies : for instance, the Greek term xXsk is predicated lio- 


trary habits, such as justice and injustice; which is not required in de¬ 
scribing a science: for instance, whatever is the definition of the science 
of medicine, a good or bad physician lays claims to it: so also the defi¬ 
nition of rhetoric comprehends the orator and the sophist This makes it 
more difficult to define a moral habit; though there is one advantage, that 
by taking the direct opposite of any definition, we know the contrary habit. 

f Tk vx-axtfatw means every thing connected with the habit.: thus if 
we understand what <ra Timm is, we shall know what the habit is, W 
trvvki which is conversant with it. 

% If the term just is applied to different characters, so probably is the 
term unjust* 

h h e. because the different significations closely resemble each other. 
An homonymous term is what we otherwise call an equivocal term, i. e. 
one which is applied to many things in different significations. Thus (a* 
will he-shewn in section 3.) Timm is an equivocal or homonymous lean, 
applied in significations somewhat different to the tlpi/ws and- the 



CHAP. I. 


ETHICS. 


in 


raonymously, both of that bone which is under the neck of 
animals, and of a key by which they lock doors. 

3. Let us then discover how many significations the unjust 
man admits of'. Now the illegal, and the avaritious, and 
the unequal man, appear to be unjust; hence it is obvious, 
that the just man will be the observer of the law, and the 
equal man. Justice then is what is lawful and equal 5 in¬ 
justice is the unlawful and the unequal., 

4 *. But since the unjust man is also avaritious, he will be 
so with respect to goods $ yet not all goods, but such as 
prosperity and adversity is concerned with; which are in 
themselves always goods, but to individuals not always so* 
Now men wish for and pursue these things; yet they ought 
not $ but rather to pray, that those things which are in them¬ 
selves goods may be good to them also, but to choose the 
things which are good to them. But the unjust man does 
not always choose the greater part, but even the smaller in 
things absolutely bad. But because he thinks that the lesser 
evil is in one view a good, and avarice is a desire of more 
good, on that account he appears to be avaricious. The 
unjust man is also unequal: for this comprehends the other, 
[viz. avarice,] and is common to both. He is also illegal $ 
for this, that is illegality, or in other words inequality, com¬ 
prehends every injustice, and is common to all injustice. 

5 . Now since the illegal man was said to be unjust, and 
the legal just, it is obvious, that all things legal are in one 
view just j for the things defined by the legislative power 
are legal 5 and we say that each of' these is just. But the 
laws treat of all things, aiming either at what is advantageous 
to all men in common, or to the best, or to those in power, 
or according to virtue, or some other such rule. Hence in 
one view we call those things just which are productive and 
preservative of happiness and its parts to the political society. 

i The second section contained rules for discovering moral habits, which 
rules are applied in this and the following sections to the habit of justice: 
for Afoxiot is known from its subject matter ro dhxov, and from is 
known its contrary tix<xto<ruvti. 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V. 


112 

But the law enjoins the doing the works of the brave man, 
such as, not to desert one’s post, nor to fly, nor throw away 
one’s arms 5 and the works of the temperate man, such as, 
not to commit adultery, nor offer violence to any one 5 and 
the actions of the meek, as not to strike, nor revile 5 so also 
throughout the other virtues and vices, encouraging the one, 
and forbidding the other 3 in a proper manner, the law 
which is properly enacted 3 but that which is hastily drawn 
up, badly. 

6. This justice therefore is perfect virtue: not simply so 
however, hut relatively k . And on this account justice ap¬ 
pears frequently to be the most exalted of the virtues, and 
neither morning dawn nor the evening star are so wonderful. 
And we say in a proverb, te Every virtue is collected in jus¬ 
tice/’ And it is especially perfect virtue, because it is the 
use of perfect virtue 5 and it is perfect, because he who pos¬ 
sesses this is able to use virtue not only in himself, but to¬ 
ward another also 3 for many are able to use virtue in their 
private concerns, but in their dealings with others they can¬ 
not And for that reason the saying of Bias seems to be 
good, that a public office will prove a man 3 for he who 
bears a public office is necessarily engaged with other men, 
and is in society. For this very same reason also justice 
alone, of the virtues, appears to be another man’s good, 
because it is applied to another 3 for it performs the things 
advantageous to another, either his superior or the public. 
He therefore is most depraved who applies his villany to- 
himself and his friends 3 but he is best, not who applies his 
virtue to himself, but he who does it to another; for this is 
a difficult task. This justice therefore is not a part of vir¬ 
tue, but the whole of virtue ; nor is its opposite, injustice, a 
part of vice, but all vice. In what however virtue and this 
justice differs, is evident from what has been said : for it Is 
the same in substance, but its essence is not the same; since, 

k Not that justice is the only virtue, which is relative; for liberality* 
magnificence, and several others arc so also s but if on account of the* 
excellent nature of justice, we choose to call it perfect virtue, we must 
add that it is relative. 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


113 


inasmuch as it refers to another, it is justice; but in that it 
is a habit of a certain kind, it is simply virtue 1 . 


CHAP. II. 

That there is a particular justice and injustice. Particular 
justice divided into distributive and corrective. 

1 But we are in search of the justice which is a part of 
virtue; for there is due of that kind, as we have said; so 
also of the injustice which is a part of vice. A proof that 
such exists is this; he who performs any other act of depra¬ 
vity, acts unjustly, but is not at all avaritious ; for instance, 
he who threw away his shield through eowardme, or who 
has spoken ill of another through asperity, or has not assisted 
another with his wealth through illiberality; but when he 
covets more than his share, it is frequently in pursuance of 
none of these vices; nor surely is it in pursuance of all, 
but of some one particular vice ; for we blame him also on 
the score of injustice 1 ". There is certainly then another 
kind of injustice, as it were a part of universal injustice, and 


1 The substance of this chapter is briefly tins. Justice (&*«»«»>i) is 
that habit by which men wish and do what is just («' Wv.) Thai if 
we substitute and7«» for justice will be that habrt. by which 

men Wish and do what is legal and equal. Then if we adopt the e*pla- 
nation of the term as given in section 5, justice wiB be that habit, 

by which men consult the happiness of the community, and practise every 
virtue. This definition results from a consideration of only one of the 
former terms, viz. the other, T«», is discussed in the next chapter, 

and furnishes another definition of justice. , 

m According to the description of justice and injustice contained in the 
last chapter, if a man performed any act of vice, he would be unjust^ be- 
causehe violates the law. Butif welook to fcicts, we see a man perform 
an act of vice, and he is not necessarily called unjust: t ere * us 
fore be a kind of injustice distinct from the former, which attends upon 
every particular vice: and the truth is, that when a man performs an act 
Of vice for the sake of gain, he is then, and then only, called unjust. 

I 



114 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK V, 


something unjust as a part of what is universally unjust and 
contrary to the law. Again, if one man should commit 
adultery for the sake of gaining, and should receive .something 
in addition, and another through his desire should do the 
same, having given of his own, and being a loser by it; the 
latter would seem to be intemperate rather than avaricious, 
but the former unjust, and not intemperate; it is then ob¬ 
vious that it is so because he did it for the sake of gain. 
Again, in all other unjust deeds there is a reference made 
still to some particular vice; for instance, if a man has com¬ 
mitted adultery, [it is referred] to intemperance; if he has 
deserted his comrade, to cowardice; if he has struck any 
body, to anger; but if he has gained by it, it is referred to 
no other vice than to injustice. So that it is clear that there 
is a certain other particular injustice besides the universal, 
synonymous with it, because the definition is in the same 
genus ; for both virtually exist in being relative n ; but the 
one is conversant with honour, or wealth, or safety, or, if 
we could include all these things under someone term, with 
that; and under the influence of the pleasure which arises 
from gain ; but the other is conversant with all the things 
with which the upright man is conversant. That therefore 
there are more justices than one, and also that there is a cer* 
tain other justice besides the whole of virtue, is evident; but 
we must understand what it is, and of what nature. 

2. The unjust therefore has been divided into the illegal, 
and the unequal; and the just into legal and equal. In the 
illegal then the first mentioned injustice is situated. But 0 
since the unequal and the illegal are not the same, but dif¬ 
ferent, as a part to the whole; for every thing unequal is 
illegal, but every thing illegal is not unequal; the unjust 
also and injustice in the one are not the same with those in 


» The same definition of wishing and doing to another what is legal 
-and equal applies to both; but universal justice is more concerned with 
obeying the law, particular justice with observing equality. 

0 I cannot make any sense of the received text, and have therefore 
adopted the reading of Muretus. 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


115 


the other, but different; these indeed are as parts, those as 
wholes; for this injustice is a part of universal injustice ; 
so also is this justice a part of that justice. Wherefore we 
must also treat of justice and injustice, which are particular, 
and of the just and unjust in like manner. The justice there¬ 
fore and injustice, which are arranged under entire virtue, 
the one being the application of the whole of virtue to other 
men, the other of [universal] vice, may be dismissed. And 
it is evident in what manner the just and unjust which at¬ 
tends on these are to be distinguished ; for almost the whole 
of things legal are the same things as are enjoined by uni¬ 
versal virtue ; for the law .enjoins us to live according to 
each virtue, and forbids diir living according to each vice. 
But the things productive of universal virtue are those legal 
things, which have been enacted for the discipline of the 
community. But concerning discipline in particulars, by 
means of which a man is properly good, whether it belongs 
to the political science, or some other, must be determined 
at a future time?. For perhaps it is not the same thing to 
be a good man and a good citizen in every sense. 

3. Of particular justice and the just which is attached to 
it, that is one ( i species, which is engaged with the distribu¬ 
tions either of honour, or wealth, or of those other things 
which are divisible among such as partake of the benefits of 
the state : for in these things it is possible to have an un¬ 
equal and an equal share compared with one another; an¬ 
other species is that which is corrective in the dealings be¬ 
tween man and man. Of this there are two parts ; for of 
those dealings some are voluntary, some involuntary. The 

P Tide book x. c. ult. 

<1 In c. 1. sect. 3. justice was defined to be a habit, by which men wish 
and do what is legal and equal; and by explaining the term legal, 0 i/upo*,) 
we obtained a description of universal justice. The other term* s (7m) 
enables us to describe particular justice: so that universal justice is that 
habit, by which men wish and do what is vopiftov : particular justice, that 
habit, by which they wish and do what is 7m. But as the term equality 
admits of two senses, viz. an equality between two things, and an equality 
of ratios, particular justice will also be divided into two kinds. 

i <2 



116 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V. 


voluntary are such as these, for Instance, selling, buying, 
lending, bail, borrowing, pledging, hiring; but they are 
called voluntary, because the principle of these dealings is 
voluntary. Of the involuntary, some are clandestine, such 
as theft, adultery, poisoning, prostitution, kidnapping, 
assassination, false witness ; others compulsatory, as blows, 
bonds, death, plundering, maiming, libelling, aspersion. 


CHAR III. 

That all justice is in proportion: and distributive justice in 
geometrical proportion. 

1, But since the unjust man is unequal, and injustice is 
unequal, it is evident that there is also a certain mean of the 
unequal, and that is the equal; for in whatever action there 
is the greater and the less, there is also the equal. If then 
injustice is unequal, justice is equal ; which is clear to all 
men, even without demonstration. But since that which is 
equal is a mean, justice also must be a kind of mean. But 
the equal is in two things at least; it is therefore necessary, 
that j ustice, being a mean as well as equal, should be both in 
reference to something and he between some persons ; and 
inasmuch as it is a mean, [it is a mean] between certain 
things; and these things are the more and less ; but in that 
it is equal, it is an equality of two things; but in that it is 
just, [it is just] to certain persons. It is necessary then, that 
justice should consist of four things at least; for the ob¬ 
jects, to whom it happens to be just, are two; and the sub¬ 
jects, in which the affairs take place, are two. 

£. Also the equality will be the same, of the persons and 
of the things in which the just consist r ; for as the things in 

r There will be an equality of ratio between one person and one thing, 
and the other person and the other thing : or the ratio of Ajax to his re¬ 
ward will be the same as that of Achilles to his reward. 



CHAP. III. 


ETHICS. 


117 


which the j ust consists are to each other, so are those per¬ 
sons also to whom it is just; for if the persons are not 
equal, they will not have equal things. But hence arise 
quarrels and accusations, when either equal persons have 
and are allotted unequal things, or unequal persons have 
equal things. This is further evident from the consideration 
of merit; for all allow that in distributions justice ought to 
be according to a kind of merit. All however do not as¬ 
sert that merit is the same thing; but the members of a 
democracy think it is liberty 8 : those of an oligarchy, either 
riches, or birth; but of an aristocracy, virtue. Justice there¬ 
fore is a kind of proportion ; for proportion is the property 
not only of arithmetic, but of number universally; for pro¬ 
portion is the equality of ratio, and is in four terms at least. 

3 , That disjunctive 1 proportion therefore is in four terms, 
is obvious; so also is continuous; for it uses one term as 
two, and mentions it twice ; for instance, as the line A is to 
the line B, so is the line B to the line C ; the line B, there¬ 
fore, is repeated twice; so that if the line B is laid down 
twice, the proportionate terms will be four. But justice is 
also in four things at least, and the ratio is the same; for 
the persons, and the things in which the justice is, are 
correspondently divided. Consequently, as the term A is to 

B, so will C be to D; and therefore alternately, as A is to 

C, so is B to D, So that the whole also bears a ratio tp the 
whole u , which indeed the distribution conjoins; and if they 

$ That is, in a democracy he is considered to have most merit, and to 
desire the honours of the state, who has contributed most to liberty : in 
an oligarchy, the rich or the well-born obtain the honours of the state: in 
an aristocracy, the virtuous. 

1 Disjunctive proportion is this, A is to B, as C to D ; continuous pro¬ 
portion is this, A is to B, as B to C. 

u By the whole is meant the person and his reward united* In num¬ 
bers or letters the proportion is evident s nor will it be less so if we take 
the real terms in question: first, Ajax is to Achilles, as Ajax’s reward is to 
Achilles* reward i secondly, alternately, Ajax is to his reward, as Achilles 
is to his reward: thirdly, Ajax when rewarded is equal to Achilles when 
rewarded; which last is called the composition of ratios; and if this com-, 
position is not equal, the distribution is not just. 

i 3 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V* 


118 

are put together in this manner, it conjoins them justly. 
Consequently the connection of the term A with C, and of 
B with D x , is the justice which takes place in distribution 5 
and justice is a mean, that is, of that which is contrary to 
proportion 5 for proportion is a mean j and justice is propor¬ 
tion. But mathematicians call such a proportion as this 
geometrical; for in geometrical proportion the whole proves 
also to be to the whole, as each part is to each y. But this 
proportion is not continuous 5 for the person and the thing 
cannot become one term in number. 

4 . This justice therefore is in proportion : but the unjust 
is that which is contrary to proportion ; it becomes then 
partly more, partly less. Which is indeed the case with ac¬ 
tions; for he who injures has more, but he who is injured 
less of the good. But in evil, the contrary happens; for the 
lesser evil comes into the account of good, compared with 
the greater evil 5 for the lesser evil is more eligible than the 
greater; but the eligible is good, and the more eligible is the 
greater good. This then is one species of what is just. 


CHAP. JV. 

Of corrective justice, which is similar to arithmetical proportion, 
and is used in reducing the loss and gain to an equality in vo¬ 
luntary and involuntary dealings. 

1. But the remaining species is the corrective, which exists 
in the voluntary and involuntary dealings between man and 
man. Now this justice has a different form from the former; 
for the justice which is distributive of common property is 
always according to the proportion just described5 for if 
there is made a distribution out of public money, it will be 
nciade according to the same ratio, which the services con¬ 
tributed have to each other, and the unjust the opposite to 
this just, is contrary to that proportion. 

x Here A ^x\d B arc taken for the two persons, 0 and D for the two 
things. 

y The reason therefore why distributive justice is in geometrical pro* 
portion, is because in distributing we may compound the ratios. 



CHAP. IV. 


ETHICS. 


119 


2. But justice in contracts is a kind of equality, and the 
unjust is unequal 5 yet not according to the above propor¬ 
tion; but to arithmetical proportion 2 ; for it matters not, 
whether a worthy man has cheated a bad man, or a bad man a 
worthy one ; nor whether a good or bad man has committed 
adultery 3 but the law looks only to the difference of injury, 
and treats them as equal, whether the one injures and the 
other is injured, or whether the latter should do, and the 
former suffer harm. Whence the judge endeavours to reduce 
to equality this injustice, as being unequal; for indeed when 
one is struck, but the other strikes, or when one kills, but 
the other dies, the suffering and action are divided into un¬ 
equal parts; but he endeavours by a penalty to equalize 
them, by subtracting from the gain. For to speak generally, 
we use the term gain in such cases as these, although it is 
not exactly appropriate to some, as for instance when it is 
applied to the person who struck, and loss to him who suf¬ 
fered ; but when the suffering has been calculated, the one 
is called loss, the other gain. So that the equal is a meap 
between the greater and less. But the gain and the loss are, 
one greater, the other less in a contrary manner; the greater 
share of good, and the less of evil is gain, the contrary is 
loss: between which, equality was said to be a mean, which 
we call justice. So that corrective justice must be the mean 
between loss and gain. 

3. Hence also when men disagree, they fly to the judge • 

and to go to the judge is tp go to justice: for the judge will 
be as it were justice embodied j and they search after a 
judge as a mean j and some call them mediators, 

z The reason therefore why corrective justice is in arithmetical, and 
not geometrical proportion, is because the persons are here not taken into 
consideration, as they are in distributive justices but the only object of 
the judge is to make the two things themselves, and not their ratios, equal. 
For instance, the buyer is to his money, as the seller is to his commodity * 
ora person robbed is to his loss, as the robber is to the penalty: here the 
money and the commodity, the loss and the penalty, arc made respectively 
equal; but as ,no notice is taken of the relative state of the parties, the 
ratios cannot be compounded, and consequently it cannot be geometrical 
proportion, 

J4s ’ 



120 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V. 


supposing that, if they find the medium, they will find what 
is just. Justice then is a certain mean, if the judge is so. 
But the judge equalizes, and, as if a line were divided into 
unequal parts, he takes off that quantity, by which the greater 
division exceeds the half, and adds it to the lesser division 3 
but when the whole is divided into two equal parts, they 
then say that each has his own, when they receive what is 
equal. But the equal is the mean of the greater and less, 
according to arithmetical proportion a . On this account also 
it is named lixmw, because it is equally divided; as if one 
were to say and the judge were called 

for two things being equal, if a part were taken from the 
one, and added to the other, the latter exceeds by these two 
parts ; for if it had been subtracted, and not added to the 
other, the latter Would have exceeded by one part only 3 con¬ 
sequently it exceeds the mean by one part, and the mean 
exceeds that from which the part was taken, by one part. 
By this then we shall know what we ought to take away 
from him who has more, and what to add to him that has 
less 3 for by how much the mean exceeds the lesser part, so 
much we are to add to him who has less 3 and the part by 
which it is exceeded we must take away from the greatest. 
Let the lines AA, BB, CC, be equal to each other 3 from 
AA, let AE be subtracted, and added to CC, namely* the 
part CD ; thus the whole line DCC exceeds the line AE by 
CD and CF 3 consequently it exceeds BB by CD*. 



\ 


* That is, if twenty pounds are divided between two persons, one of 
whom has taken twelve, the other eight pounds ; they go to the judce 
who draws an arithmetical mean between the two quantities, and oives 
each of them ten pounds. 

b Let AA and CC represent two persons, each of whom possess ten 
pounds, and let BB represent the ten pounds .• now let A A of four 

pounds and take it to himself: then CC exceeds AA by eight pounds and 

BB by four pounds, 0 1 



CHAP. Y. 


ETHICS. 


121 


This moreover is the case with other arts * for they would be 
subverted, unless the thing acted upon received the same in 
substance, quantity, and quality, as the thing acting produced. 
But these terms, loss and gain, came from voluntary exchange 3 
for the having more than his own property is called gaining, 
but the having less than at the onset c is called losing; as in 
buying and selling, and such other contracts as the law has 
granted liberty in. But when neither more nor less but the 
very same things are produced, they say that they have their 
own, and neither lose nor gain by them. So that justice is 
a mean between a certain gain and loss in involuntary deal¬ 
ings, namely, the having an equal part both before and af¬ 
terwards. 


CHAP. V. 

Whether the giving like for like is justice: that simple reta¬ 
liation is not consonant with distributive or corrective justice s 
but a proportionate return after the goods have been first made 
equal ; that money is this common standard of measure, 

1. But retaliation seems to some to be simply justice,' as 
the Pythagoreans maintained3 for they defined justice sim¬ 
ply to be that which was retaliajed upon another. But re¬ 
taliation does not coincide with either distributive d or cor¬ 
rective justice 3 though they even wish to assert that this 
was the justice of Rhadamanthus, If a person should suffer 
ce the things he has committed, upright justice would fol- 
" low for in many parts it disagrees j for instance, if a 
magistrate has struck any one, ft is not right he should be 
struck in return ; and if a person has struck a magistrate, he 

c The state which the parties were in before any intercourse took place 
answers to the mean in numbers or lines. 

d He does not explain why an exact retaliation cannot take place in 
distributive justice: in fact, the thing is evident: for if a general wins a 
victory, the state cannot go out and reward him by winning one for him 
in return. 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V. 


m 

deserves not only to be struck, but even to be severely pu¬ 
nished e . Again, there is a great difference, whether an 
action is voluntary or involuntary ^ 

2. Rut in commercial intercourse that kind of justice 
which makes a return by proportion and not by equality, 
keeps the parties together. For by proportionate returns 
being made, a state stands united ; for either men seek to 
return an injury, otherwise there appears to be slavery if 
they do not retaliate; or they desire to return a benefit, 
otherwise there is no remuneration : but by remuneration 
they stand united. Hence they also place the temple of the 
Graces in a conspicuous situation, that there may be retri¬ 
bution,* for this is the property of gratitude & : for a person 
ought to serve in return him who conferred the kindness, 
and to shew the first kindness again himself. But diagonal 
conjunction produces the retribution which is according to 
proportion: for instance, let the builder of a house he A, a 
shoemaker B, the house C> the shoe D, 

A B 

The builder of a house. A shoemaker. 



e And yet it was said in section 2. of the last chapter, that the persons 
are never taken into consideration: but there is no contradiction between 
t he two passages; for they are not considered, when they are before the 
judge, but only so far as to hinder a person from taking the law into his 
own hands. 

f Which difference was destroyed if retaliation were allowed in every 
case. 

g This sentence is unintelligible in English, from the circumstance of 
the Greek word signifying grace and gratitude. 



CHAP. V. 


ETHICS. 


ns 

It is necessary then that the builder receive from the shoe¬ 
maker his work, and himself return his own work to the 
other. If therefore there be at first that equality which is 
according to proportion, and then a mutual return is made, 
and what was said above will exist 5 but, if not, there is no 
equality, nor will the state remain united ; for nothing pre¬ 
vents the work of the one from being better than that of the 
other. In short, it is therefore necessary that these should 
be equalized 5 this, moreover, is the case with other . arts; 
for they would be subverted, unless, how far soever, and 
howsoever the agent acted, the thing acted upon received the 
same, and just so far, and just in the same manner. For so¬ 
ciety is not made up of two physicians, but of a physician 
and husbandman, and, in short, of different persons, and 
those not equal; but it is necessary that these be equalized. 
Hence it is necessary, that the things, of which there is ex¬ 
change, should in some manner admit of comparison. 

3. For which purpose money has been introduced, and is 
become in a manner a measure 3 for it measures all things ; 
consequently it measures both excess and defect; and there¬ 
fore, how many shoes are equal to a house, or to food. It is 
necessary therefore that whatever proportion the builder of 
a house bears to a shoemaker h , so many shoes should answer 
to a house, or food ; for, if this is not done, there will be 
neither exchange nor intercourse. But this will not be, un¬ 
less they are in some manner equal. It is necessary, then, 
that all things should be measured by some one measure, as 
has been before said 3 and this is in reality the demand, 
which connects all things; for if men were in want of no¬ 
thing, or not equally so, either there would be no exchange, 
or at least not the same. But coin has been made by com¬ 
pact a kind of substitute for demand; and on that account 
it has this name because it exists not by nature, but 

by law (vo^,) and it is in our power to alter, or render it 

useless. 

h i. e. the proportion of the labour, expence, &c. should regulate the 
exchange: the persons themselves are of course not considered, as was 
stated above. 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V. 


124 


4. So that there will be retaliation, when the things 
have been equalized. So that, as the husbandman is to the 
shoemaker, so is the work of the shoemaker to that of the 
husbandman. But it is necessary to apply them to the scale 
of proportion, when they are to be exchanged ; for, if pot, 
the one extreme will have both excessesBut, when they 
have their own, they are in this manner equal and capable of 
commerce, because this equality can take place between 
them. Let A be the husbandman, the food C, the shoe¬ 
maker B, his work when made equal D. 


A 

The husbandman. 

c 

The food. 


B 

The shoemaker. 

J) 

The work of the shoemaker 
equalled to the food. 


But, if it were not possible to have such mutual retribution, 
there would have been, no society. But that the demand, - 
being as it were some particular thing, is the tie [of society,] 
is evident from this, that men, when they do not stand in 
need of each other, either both or one of the two, do not 
exchange 5 as when one man wants what the other has, 
for instance, wine, they grant an exportation of corn. It is 
necessary then that this should be equalized. But /or the 
use of a future exchange, if nothing is wanted at this time, 
the coin is as it were a pledge to us, that, when it is wanted, 
the thing will be to be had; for it is necessary that the 
thing be ready for him to receive who brings this. This 
moreover is liable to the same objection ; for it is not always 
of the same value 3 at the same time it is more likely to be 
stable. Hence it is necessary that all things should be va¬ 
lued ; for thus there will always be exchange: and if that, 
then commerce. Consequently money, as a measure ren¬ 
dering things commensurate, equalizes them; for, if there 
had been no exchange, there would have been no com- 


i 1 c . the.work which he gives will be too little; that which he receives 
will be too great. 



CHAP. V. 


ETHICS. 


125 


merce ; nor exchange, if there had not been equality; nor 
equality, if there bad not been a common measure. In 
reality, it is impossible for things differing so much to become 
commensurate $ but with regard to the demand, it is suffi¬ 
ciently possible. Consequently there must be one certain 
[standard] j and this from universal compact. Hence it is 
called yopirp *; for this renders all things commensurate; 
for all things are measured by money. Let a house be A, 
ten pounds B, a bed C 5 A then is the half of B, if a house 
is worth or equal to five pounds ; but let the bed C be the 
tenth part of B ; it is clear then hbw many beds are equal to 
a house, namely, five. But that exchange was thus, before 
coin was used, is evident; for it makes no difference whe¬ 
ther five beds, or the value of five beds, are given for a 
house. 

5. What therefore injustice is, and what justice, has been 
discussed. But these things being determined; it is evident, 
that acting justly is the mean between injuring and being 
injured $ for the one is the possessing more than is just, the 
other less. Now the habit of justice is a mediocrity, not in 
the same manner with the former virtues k , but because it is 
so in a mean 1 ; and injustice belongs to the extremes. And 
justice is the habit in which a just man is said to be apt to 
practise that which is just from deliberate choice, and fit to 
distribute justly both between himself and another man, and 
between two other persons; not in such a manner, as [to 
allot] the greater share of the eligible to himself, and the 
less to his neighbour, and the contrary of what is hurtful 5 
hut allotting that equality which is according to proportion ; 
in like manner also between two different persons. The 
habit of injustice, on the other hand, is practical of what is 
unjust; and this is the excess and defect of what is profitable 
or injurious contrary to proportion. Wherefore injustice is 
excess and defect, because it belongs to excess and-deficiency$ 

k The difference between the habit of justice d&weaoo’uvvi) and all the 
other virtues is, that Vmaiovt ffie subject matter of htcostoerwh, is itself a 
mean. 

l Which mean is the Mjcmov. 



126 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK. V, 


as to the person himself, the excess of what is in itself pro- 
Stable, and the defect of what is injurious : and between 
other men, the whole act is similarly unjust; but the viola- 
tmn of proportion leans to whatever side chance directs. 
And of unjust action, the less is to be injured; the greater, 
to injure. Concerning justice and injustice, what is the na¬ 
ture of each, let it be discussed in this manner: in like 
manner also of the just and unjust universally. 


CHAP. VI. 

The ^ uestion “ Proposed, in what way a man must commit an 
act, of injustice, in order to be called unjust.- which leads to a 
distinction between abstract and political justice. 

I. But since it may happen, that he who does an unjust 
action is yet not unjust, by perpetrating what kind of unjust 
deeds is he consequently unjust in each species of injustice > 
is it, for instance, by doing it as a thief, or adulterer,' or as a 
robber would do it ? Or will there be no difference in that 
respect ? for a person may have connection with a woman 
knowing who she is, yet not originally from deliberate choice* 
but through passion. He therefore acts unjustly, but is not 
an unjust man; for instance, he is not a thief, yet he has 
stolen ; nor an adulterer, yet he has committed adultery 
and in like manner in the other crimes. r 

2. But it must not escape us, that the object of our en¬ 
quiry is both abstract justice, and political justice» . hut 


“ This distinction of attract and political justice is necessarv in nrd., 

hewV! 16 abOVeqUeSti0n ‘ Forif We ^ « man by abstract justice 
he must be pronounced unjust, when he barely performs an J* „ P l ?’ 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


127 


this last takes place amongst those, who have society to¬ 
gether to the end that they may have a sufficiency they 
being free and equal, either by proportion, or according to 
number". So that as many as have not this, have not po¬ 
litical justice towards each other, but a species only of justice 
and that by similarity. For justice exists amongst those’ 
with whom there exists law also towards each other; but law 
exists where injustice is; (for judgment is the determi¬ 
nation of what is just and unjust,) and among whomsoever 
there is injustice, there is also among these the doing unjust 
actions ; but where the acting unjustly is, there is not always 
injustice. But this [the acting unjustly] consists in the dis¬ 
tributing to one’s self the greater share of things simply 
good, and the less of things simply bad. Hence we do not 
suffer man to rule, but reason ,• because he does this for him¬ 
self, and becomes a tyrant. But he who rules is the guardian 
of justice; and if of justice, of equality also. But, since 
there appears to be no greater good accruing to him, at least 
if he is a just man ; (for he does not allot to himself the 
greater share of what is simply good, unless the proportion 
comes to him;, on which decount he acts for another, and 
consequently they say that justice is another man’s good, as 
has been mentioned also before.) Some reward then must 
be presented ; and this is honour and distinction; but all 
those to whom these things are not sufficient become ty- 
rants. 7 

But the justice between master and servant, and be¬ 
tween father and child, is not the same with these, but similar 5 
for there is not injustice simply towards a man’s own pro- 
petty; but the slave, and the child, as long as he is of a cer¬ 
tain age, and is not separated, is as a part of himself; but 
no man deliberately chooses to hurt himself. Hence there 
is no habit of injustice towards a man’s self. Consequently 
there is no political injustice, nor justice : for it was stated 
to be according to law, and among persons with whom law 

“ That is * eitIlcr actually equal, as in a pure democracy; or having an 
equality of rights, but a distinction of ranks. 



128 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK. V. 


naturally existed j but these were they, who had in possession 
an equality of ruling and being ruled. Hence there exists 
justice rather towards a wife than towards children and slaves; 
for this is economical justice 5 but this also is different from 
political justice. 


CHAP. VII. 

Political justice divided into natural , and legal. A definition of 
the terms used in speaking of justice and injustice, 

1, But of political justice, one kind is natural, the other le¬ 
gal. The natural, which has the same power every where, and is 
not just from its being or not being decreed. The legal, 
which at first, whether it was enacted in this or the other 
way, made no difference, but after they have constituted it, it 
does differ; as the ransoming of prisoners for a mina, or the 
sacrificing a goat and not two sheep: again, as many laws 
as men enact on particular occasions, such as sacrificing to 
Brasidas and things agreed upon by public edicts. 

3. But all [just] things appear to come to be such, [i. e. 
legal,] because that which subsists by nature is immoveable, 
and has the same power every where 3 as, the fire burns both 
here and with the Persians 5 but they see that just things 
are moved. Now this is not so, yet it is in a certain degree $ 
nevertheless with the gods perhaps it never is so 3 but with 
us there is something moveable even by nature, but not 
every thing. But at the same time there is a certain justice 
by nature, and a certain other not by nature. Now which of 
the things capable of change is just by nature, and which is 
not so, but legal and enacted by compact, if both are equally 
moveable, is plain; and the same distinction will apply in 
other things °. For by nature the right hand is the better 3 

* The point most insisted on in this chapter is, that there is a natural 
justice, although even that is in some cases liable to change : and the 
chief argument is, that an exception does not overturn a general rule. 



CHAP. vnr. 


ETHICS. 


129 


nevertheless it is possible thst some should hove the use of 
both hands equally. But things which are just from com¬ 
pact and utility are similar to measures; for the measures of 
■wine and corn are not in all places equal; but where men 
buy, they are larger; where they sell, smaller P. In like 
manner also just things which are not natural, but human, are 
not the same in every place; since neither is the form of 
government the same; but one only is every where accord¬ 
ing to nature, namely the best. 

8. But of things just and legal, each bears the same re¬ 
ference to actions, as universnls to particulars; for the things 
done are many; but each of the former, viz. justice and in¬ 
justice, is- one: for they are universal. But an injury and 
injustice differ; so do a just action and justice; for injustice 
exists by nature, or compact. But this, when put in prac¬ 
tice, is an unjust action ; but before it was committed, it 
was not so yet, but unjust; and in a similar manner also is 
a deed of justice. Moreover the common act is called rather 
lucuMxpiwjtei ; but iuue/mfut is the correction of an unjust 
action. But how many and what are the species of each 
of these individually, and what things they are conversant 
with, must bn investigated at » future time. 


CHAP. VIII. 

We return to the question proposed in chap. 6. and frm a con¬ 
sideration of the voluntary and involuntary, we conclude that, 
to constitute a man just or unjust, it is necessary that the deeds 
be accompanied with deliberate choice, 

1. Now just and unjust things being what were mentioned 
above, a man does unjustly and acts justly, when he does 

P It is difficult to understand this remark: perhaps the moaning in, 
that in importing countries the measures are larger, in exporting coun¬ 
tries’they are smaller. 


K 



130 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V 


them voluntarily ; but when he acts involuntarily, he neither 
acts unjustly, nor acts justly, except by accident; for they 
do such things, as happened to be just or unjust. But an un¬ 
just and just deed are determined by the voluntary and in¬ 
voluntary ; for, when the thing is voluntary, it is blamed at 
the same time also, it is then an unjust action. So that it 
will be something unjust, but not yet an unjust action, unless 
the voluntary is added to it. 

2 . But I call that voluntary, as was stated before, which 
being amongst the things in his own power, a man does know¬ 
ingly, and not ignorant of the person whom he acts upon, or 
the thing with which, or the thing for the sake of which; 
for instance, whom he strikes, and with what, and for the 
sake of what, and all those things, not from accident, nor by 
compulsion $ as if a person seizing a man’s hand should 
strike another with it; but the blow was not voluntary, for 
it was not in his power. But it may be that the man struck 
was his father, and that he knew that he was a man or one 
of those present, but was ignorant that he was his father* 
In like manner let the same distinction be made with regard 
to motive, and the whole action. But that which is unknown, 
or which, though not unknown, yet is not in the power of 
him who acts, or is done by compulsion, is involuntary; for 
we both perform and endure many of the things which come 
to us by nature knowingly, none of which are either volun¬ 
tary or involuntary, as, to grow old, or to die. But accident 
takes place both in unjust things and just: for should a 
person restore a deposit unwillingly and through fear, he 
cannot be said either to do just things, or practise justice, 
except by accident. So also we should say, that he who by 
compulsion and unwillingly does not restore a deposit, in¬ 
jures and performs unjust things by accident. But of things 
voluntary, we do some with deliberate choice, others without 
deliberate choice ; with deliberate choice, as many as we do 
having first deliberated ; but without deliberate choice, as 
many as we do not having first deliberated. 

3 . Now there being three kinds of harm in the intercourse 
of men, those accompanied with ignorance are errors, when 



C&AP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


131 


a man does these things neither to the person, nor in the 
manner, nor with the instrument, nor from the cause that he 
conceived, for he thought either that he should not strike, or 
not with this instrument, or not this person, or not for this 
end, but an event followed, not with the motive he thought ; 
for instance, he did it, not that he might wound, bat that he 
might prick him; or not this person, or not in this manner. 
When therefore the harm follows unintentionally, it is a 
misfortune; but when it happens not unintentionally, yet 
without maliciousness, it is an error 1 *; for a man errs, when 
the principle of the cause is in himself; but is unfortunate, 
when the principle is exterior. When however he does it 
knowingly, yet not having previously deliberated, it is an 
unjust deed; for instance,such things as befal men through 
anger and other passions, which are necessary or natural • 
for hurting and erring in these, they injure indeed, and the 
deeds are unjust; nevertheless they are not for those reasons 
unjust men, nor wicked ; for the harm was not done through 
villany. But when it is done from deliberate choice, he is 
unjust and vicious. Hence things proceeding from anger 
are rightly judged not to proceed from forethought; for it is 
not he who acts from anger that is the principle, but he who 
irritated him. Moreover the question is not concerning the 
thing being done or not, but concerning the justice of it ■ 
for anger is roused at the appearance of injustice. For it 
is not as in dealings of commerce that they dispute con¬ 
cerning the fact, when one of the parties must be vicious r 
unless they do so from forgetfulness ; but being agreed as 
to the fact, they dispute whether it is just. But he, who 
plots the harm, is not ignorant. So that the one person 


kill hfm u ! a l ®’ meamng onIy t0 hit hiro > but happens to 
afe™’- r T r ' But lf h ° throWS the stone int0 the air, to make 

Arr* r any ° ther cause ’ and ** ha pp ens * m b an d 

tciu him, it is a misfortune. 

JJ[ A mys that lent B a sum of and B denies it, one of them 

" e e “ ess th 7 f J ct = “‘her A must have said what was 

not true, or B must have denied what was true. 

x 21 



132 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOO£ V. 


thinks he is injured, the other things he i§ npt. But if he 
hurts frqn^ deliberate chpice, he injures ; and in sqch qnjust 
actiqqs s$ these a man injuring is consequently unjust, when 
it is contrary to proportipn* or equality. In like manner ip 
a tpap just also, \yhen he practises justice with deliberate 
qho|ce $ but he practises justice, if he only does it willingly. 
But of involuntary actions some are pardonable, others un¬ 
pardonable ; for as many things as men do amiss not pufy 
ignorantly, but alsp through ignorance ®, are pardonable 5 
hvft as nqany things as are done, not through ignorance, but 
ignqrqntly, yet through a passion neither natural nor hu-i 
ma'n, are unpardonable. 


CHAP. IX. 

To constitute art, injury it must he a ham inflicted against a 
man's with That he who distribute^ the greater share to an¬ 
other is, the person whp does the injury. That it is no easy task 
to be just, though to apt urym$$y ys in our power* 

L But, one might doubt, whether theques$qp cqnqerni$$ 
being injured, qn| injuring, has been satisfactorily disputed 
First, whether ttye case is, as Euripides has said absurdly 
enough, f<r I have killed my mother; the story is short, I 
“ willing killed her willing; or I was not willing and she was 
<< willing.” For the question is, whether it is thus true, that 
a person is injured voluntarily or not } or rather is it not al¬ 
together involuntary, just as injuring is altogether voluntary, 
and consequently that it is altogether in the one way or the 
q^her, as, injuring is also altogether voluntary; or is it partly 
voluntary, partly involuntary ? In a similar manner may we 
enquire concerning receiving one’s due; for to practise jus- 

8 ?or th^ dfetiqction bstwspn doing a thiq^ %<pgh ignqrancc ig¬ 
norantly, see book iii, c. 1. SfCt Si. 



chAp. ix. 


fiTHWS. 


1S3 


tide is afHogfether vbluhtdr}'. $6 that it is reasonable, that 
as to being voluntary or involuntary, the receiving an injury 
sind receiving one’s due are similarly opposed in each. It 
would indeed appear absurd as to receiving one’s due, if it 
were all voluntary ; for some receive their due not Willingly. 
Since one might tpieStiori this also, whether every one who 
has suffered an unjust deed, is injured; is it not the’ subtle 
with receiving as with doing ? for it is possible in both to 
obtain what is just by Occident. But it is equally plain, that 
it is the same also in unjiist thing! : fpr to perforih unjust 
things is not the Same With doing ah 1 injury,- hor the suffer¬ 
ing What is thijust tfib samfe With being injured. So is" ft 
alSo in practising jdsticd abd receiving oft^s due 3 For it is 
impossible to receive' an injury, When there is nb one whO 
injures j or to receive one’s due, when there is no one Wht) 
doe! justice. 

2. But if injuring is simply to hurt any one willingly, and 
willingly meads knowing both the person, and 1 the instru¬ 
ment, drid the foannej 1 , but the inddritihent man willingly 
KUrt! hiidself j then lid ihight Willingly be injured, ahd it 
be possible for U mail to afhjiire hixtfsfelf. Bill 1 this is 
one Of the matters of dispute, Whether it is possible for a 
man to injure himself. Again, a man willingly may through 
his incontinence be hurt by another willing; so that it 
WoUld Be possible for a man to be injured willingly. Or is 
the afhdVe definition hot true, but ifiust We add to f hurting a 
niany knoWing both the person, and the instrument, and the 
mk'hher, its 1 Iteihg also 1 contrary to thd' other persons' will ? 
A person, therefore, is hurt 1 willingly, sind suffers uinjust 
things*; btit bo one is Willingly injured ;* for no one Wishes 
it, nbt <Weh the' incontinent; but he adts contrary to his will; 
for no man wills 1 wtottf he does not think to be good; btit 
the incontinent doetf whbi f he doeS not think thhb he ought 
to do. But he. Who gives aWa^his 6Wn, aS' Homer relates 
that Glaucus did to Diomed, ** Golden for brazen armour, 
ic the value of a hundred beeves for the value of nine,” is 
not injured; for the presenting them is in his own power; 
but to be injured is not in his power, but there must be a 

3 K 3 




* 134 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK. Y* 


person who injures. Concerning the being injured, there¬ 
fore, that it is not voluntary, is evident. 

3 . But of the questions we proposed, there are yet two to 
be discussed : whether he who has distributed the greater 
share beyond a man’s worth, or he who receives it, injures ; 
and whether it is possible for a man to injure himself. For 
if what was said first is possible, and he who distributes is 
the injurer and not he who possesses the greater part, if any 
one allots more to another than himself knowingly and vo¬ 
luntarily, this man injures himself 3 which moderate persons 
seem to do; for the equitable man rather takes the less part. 
Or is the matter not simply thus ? for, it may happen, that 
he covets the greater share of some other good 3 for instance, 
of glory, or of what is in itself honourable. Again, this 
question is also solved from the definition of injuring; for he 
suffers nothing against his own will. So that he is not in¬ 
jured, at least not through this ; but, if any thing, he is hurt 
only. Moreover, it is evident, that he who distributes in¬ 
jures, but not he who receives the greater part; for it is not 
the man to whom the injustice happens to come that in¬ 
jures, but he in whom is the doing this voluntarily 3 but this 
is in the person whence the principle of the action originates, 
which is in the distributer, not in the receiver. Again, since 
to act admits of several meanings, and it is possible that in¬ 
animate things kill, as the hand, and a slave at the command 
of his master; these tilings do not injure, but perform un¬ 
just things. Again, if a man has decided ignorantly, he 
does not injure according to legal justice, nor is his judg¬ 
ment unjust 3 yet he is in a certain manner unjust; for le¬ 
gal justice and the first sort 1 are different. But if he has 
knowingly decided unjustly, he is also himself desirous either 
of favour, or vengeance. Just therefore as when a person is 
party in an unjust action, so he who on these accounts judged 
unjustly, receives a greater share; for^ in the latter case 

t In c. 6. sect % justice was divided into abstract and political: by the 
first sort is meant the abstract, according to which a man Would be un¬ 
just merely from doing an act which was in itself unjust without any 
intent. ■ ■ 



chap. IK. ETHICS. 1S5 

he who adjudges the field, does not receive the field, but 
money. 

4 . But men are of opinion that to injure is in their 
power, and therefore that to be just is easy. But it is not 
so ; for to have connection with the wife of a neighbour, 
and to strike a neighbour, or give money with one’s hand, 
is easy and in their power; but to do these things thus 
and thus disposed is neither easy nor in their power. 
And in like manner to know just things and unjust they 
.think is nothing clever, because it is not difficult to under¬ 
stand the things concerning which the laws treat ; but these 
filings are not just except by accident ; but acted and dis¬ 
tributed in a certain manner fhey are just things. But this is 
,a greater task than to know what things are wholesome ■ 
since there also it is easy to know honey, and wine, and 
hellebore, and burning, and cutting; but how it is necessary 
to apply these to healing, and to whom, and when, is as 
much a task, as being a physician. And for this same reason 
paen suppose that to injure is no less the action of the just 
man : because the just man is no less but even more able to 
do each of these things : for he is able to have connection 
with a wo,rpan, and to give blows, and a brave man may 
throw away his shield, and turning away run to any side. 
But to be timid and unjust is not merely the doing these 
things, (except from accident,) but it is to perform these 
things disposed in a particular manner 5 as also to physic 
and to heal is not merely the cutting or not cutting, or the 
administering or not administering medicines, but the doing 
this in a certain manner. But just things exist among those, 
with whom there is a participation of things in themselves 
good; they have also excess and defect in them. For to 
some beings there is no excess of goods, as perhaps to the 
gods; to others no particle is beneficial, as to the incurable 
and wicked, but are noxious j but to others they are goods 
po a certain extent: on this account the good is human, 



136 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK V. 


CHAP, X. 

Concerning equity , which is a superior kind of justice situated in 
the breast of the good man, whereby he rectifies the general 
terms of the law, and applies them in a softer sense to par¬ 
ticular cases, 

1. It now follows that we speak concerning equity and 
the equitable, how equity has a reference to justice, and the 
equitable to the just thing 5 for to those who examine this 
subject, it neither appears as simply the same, nor as dif¬ 
ferent in genus. And sometimes we praise the thing which 
is equitable, and the man of that character j so that in prais¬ 
ing we even transfer to other things instead of the term 
good the term equitable, thereby shewing that it is better. 
Sometimes again it appears absurd to us when we follow 
the reasoning, that the equitable being something beyond the 
juU is praiseworthy 5 for either the just is not equitable, or 
the equitable is not just, if it is a different thing 5 or if both 
are good, they are the same. 

2. The doubt therefore concerning the equitable arises 
almost entirely from these, things. Now all these are in a 
certain view right, and in no respect contradictory to one 
another; for the equitable, inasmuch as it; belongs to one 
sort of justice, is a better species pf justice, and not as being 
any other genus, is it better than justice. The just and the 
equitable, therefore, are the same $ and both being excellent, 
the equitable is better u . But this creates the difficulty, that 
the equitable indeed is just, yet not the just according to the 
law, but the rectification of the legal justice. And the rea¬ 
son is this, that every law speaks universally $ but concern¬ 
ing some things it is impossible to speak correctly and uni¬ 
versally. In whatever things then it is necessary to speak 
universally, and it is impossible it should be correctly, the 

u The comparison can in fact never be made whether justice or equity 
would decide the same cause best ? for equity is only called in where jus* 
tice cannot be applied. 



CHAJP. X, 


ETHICS, 


l$7 


law assumes the general case, though it is not ignorant of 
the defect. Nor is it therefore less right 3 for the fault is 
not in the law, nor in the legislator, but in the nature of the 
thing; for, from the first the matter of the subjects of ac¬ 
tion is of this kind. When, therefore, the law expresses 
itself universally, and something turns out in these matters 
besides the universal, then it is right, where the legislator is 
deficient, and erred by speaking universally, to rectify that 
which was omitted, which indeed the legislator, if he were 
present, would thus have said 3 and if he had known it, he 
would have enacted accordingly. 

$. Hence it is justice, and better than a certain kind of 
justice ; not better than that which is abstractedly just, but 
than the defect which arises from its being abstract. And this 
is the nature of the equitable, the rectification of the law where 
it is deficient from being universal; for this is the reason that 
all things are not according to law, because it is impossible 
that a law should be enacted concerning some things. So that 
there is need of a decreej for of the indefinite, the rule also 
is indefinite, as of a Lesbian building * the rule is leader; 
for the rule is altered to suit the figure of the stone, andis 
not fixed; and so is a decree, to suit the cireumstaneeg. 
What, therefore, the equitable is, and what sort of justice it 
is, and better than what kind of justice, is clear. It in 
moreover evident from this, who the equitable man is: for 
he who is apt deliberately to choose these things, and ready 
to perform them, and who is not strictly just on the worse 
side, but ready to make allowances, though he has the law 
to support him, is equitable 3 and this habit is equity, Mag 
a species of justice and not a different kind of habit 

* That style of building is her© alluded' to, in' -width the Stones tfewo 
not put together, so as to form me eve®; surface, hut each Stone idfewnatety 
projected and retired# 



138 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK V, 


CHAP. XL 

The question of a man being able to injure himself is considered 
both in universal and particular justice. 

1. Whether it is possible for a man to injure himself or 
not, is evident from what has been said; for one part of 
justice is that which is ordained by the law in reference to 
the whole of virtue ; for instance, the law does not com¬ 
mand a man to kill himself; but, what it does not com¬ 
mand, it forbids. Again, when a person hurts another con¬ 
trary to the law, not hurting in revenge, he injures willingly j 
and he acts willingly, who knows both the person, and~the 
instrument, and the manner. But he who cuts his own 
throat through rage, perpetrates that willingly contrary to 
right law, which the law permits not. Consequently he in¬ 
jures; but whom? is it not the state, and not himself? for 
he suffers voluntarily; but no man is injured voluntarily. 
Hence also the state punishes him, and a certain disgrace is 
attached to him who has destroyed himself, as to one who 
injures the state. Again, with respect to a man being un¬ 
just, who only commits an act of injustice, without being 
entirely depraved, [i. e. in particular injustice,] it is not pos¬ 
sible for a man to injure himself; for this head of injustice 
is different from the other; for the unjust man is in a man¬ 
ner depraved, in the same manner that the timid man is; 
not as having the whole of depravity. So that neither in 
this injustice does he injure himself; for the same thing 
might at the same time be subtracted from and added to 
the same person; but this is impossible; but it is necessary 
that the unjust and just should always exist between 
more persons than one. Again, injuring is voluntary, 
and from deliberate choice, and an act of aggression J s for 
he who, because he has suffered, repays the same, appears 

y If A injures B, the act of A must precede any act of B; but if A in¬ 
jures himself, it cannot be said that the act of A precedes the act of A. 
for there is only one act, T 



CHAP. XI. 


ETHICS. 


m 


not to injure; but he who hurts himself both suffers and 
performs the same things at the same time. Besides, it 
would then be possible for a man to be injured willingly. 
And besides these things, no man commits an injury without 
its being one of the particular acts of injustice; but no man 
commits adultery with his own wife, nor breaks through his 
own wall, nor steals his own property. But on the whole 
that a man should injure himself is refuted, according to 
the definition concerning being voluntarily injured. 

3 . It is moreover obvious, that both are bad things, the 
being injured and injuring; for the one is to have less, the 
other to have more than the mean ; which is like what is 
salutary in the medical art, and what in the gymnastic art is 
productive of a good habit of body. But at the same time 
to injure is the worst of the two; for to injure was stated 
to be joined with viciousness, and to be blameable; and 
that viciousness either perfect and simply so, or that which is 
nearly so ; for every thing voluntary is not attended by in¬ 
justice; but the being injured is without viciousness and in¬ 
justice. In itself therefore to be injured is a less evil 5 but 
by accident nothing prevents its being the greater evil. But 
that has nothing to do with art; but art calls a pleurisy a 
severer disease than a stumble; and yet the other by ac¬ 
cident may become the greater, if it should happen to a per¬ 
son stumbling to be taken by the enemy, in consequence of 
his fall, and to be slain. 

4 . But by metaphor and similitude, there is indeed no 
justice between a man and himself, but between certain parts 
of himself. Not, however, every kind of justice, but that 
between master and slave, or the economic; for in this 
manner the part of the soul possessing reason is distinct 
from the irrational*. To which men consequently refer, and 
think that there is injustice from a man towards himself, be- 


* See book i. c. 13. sect. 7. where it was said that the irrational part of 
jthe soul obeys the rational, like a child obeys its father s so that when a 
child commits an act of injustice against its father, it is considered to be 
like the irrational part opposing the rational* 



146 


ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK V. 


cause it is “possible in this sense to suffer something contr&r^ 
to their desires. As therefore the governor and governed 
have a certain justice between themselves, sO also have these 
parts. Concerning justice, therefore, and the other moral 
virtues, let a discussion be made in this manner. 



ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS, 


BOOK VI. 


CHAP. I. 

He proves the necessity of explaining the nature of right reason; 
and, for this purpose, divides the rational part of the soul into 
the scientific, (fer and the reasoning or ratiocina- 
five part 

I, BUT since we have before observed that it is necessary 
tp chpose the mean, not the excess* npr the defect $ and 
siippe the ip.eao ie as right reason directs*, let us discuss this 
subject more fully. For in all the habits already described* 
as well as in other things, there is a certain mark, to which 
he, whp possesses reason, looks, and is thereby more intent 
or remiss [in exertion] ; and there is a certain boundary of 
the rnea^s* which we say are between excess and defect* 
bpieg according to right reason 41 . Now [simply] to say so is 
true indeed, but not at all perspicuous ; for in other pur¬ 
suits in which science is employed, it is a truth to say, that 
it is not ht to labour or relax, too much or too little, but 
ijnodprately, and a 9 right reason [directs]. But a man having 
received this alone, wwld not know my thing the more: 
for instance, [he would not know] what things ought to be 
applied to the body, if any one was to say, that they are 

4 It is reason, only which can settle the boundaries of the mean; l c. 
declare how far it can go without running either into excess or deficiency. 



142 


ARISTOTLE’S 


book vr. 


those which the medical art prescribes, and as one who 
possesses this [art] would. Hence it is necessary in treating 
of the habits of the soul also, that not only this be spoken 
with truth, hut that it he also explained what right reason 
is, and what are the bounds ' 5 by which it acts. 

2 . The virtues of the soul then we have already divided, 
and some we have said belong to morals, others to intellect*. 
Those then which belong to morals we have thoroughly ex¬ 
amined ; and as to the others, having first spoken of the 
soul, let us proceed to treat of them. It has indeed been 
before observed, that there are two parts of the soul, one 
possessing reason, the other void of reason. And now a 
similar division of the part possessing reason must be made ; 
and let it be laid down, that those parts which possess reason 
are two, the one being that by means of which we contem¬ 
plate those things whose principles cannot be otherwise than 
they are j the other that whereby we contemplate those things 
which are contingent: for in [contemplating] things dif¬ 
ferent in kind, it is necessary that the part of the soul also 
which is naturally formed for each be*different in kind : if 
at least it is by similitude, and connection c [with objects] 
that they possess the knowledge of them. Let one of these 
parts then be termed the scientific, the other the reasoning 
part, ior to deliberate and to reason are the same thing. But 
no one deliberates about those things which cannot exist 
otherwise. Wherefore of that part of the soul which pos¬ 
sesses reason, the reasoning [or ratiocinative] part is one. 
We must see therefore what is the best habit of each of 


it n, rrf mean ‘ nS ° f the word beTeis somewhat doubtful I consider 
wrSZ^ 6 d T 5 r ° f m ° raI VirtUe “ b00k - - * where'it 

for , h ! C^ra,) is fyrpi,, xiy V , «) 4, a, i tot, } ! 

St I t" e t ; T SS WhiCh M9Uire definition: 

fim, what is to decide the limits of the mean ? which we are told isTal 

we ~ What ** ~ - 

the thing rf imStti WhiCh C °“‘ en,plat “ “ in connected with 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


143 


these. For this is the virtue of each; but [every] virtue [is 
best known] by reference to its peculiar work d . 


CHAP. II. 

The best work or t\ym of each part is found to be truth; for it 
is truth which makes the ordinary work of each perfett 

1 . Now there are three things in the soul, which influence 
action and truth c , [viz.] sense, intellect, desire } but of these, 
sense is the principle of no moral action : and this is evident 
from brutes having sense, but yet partaking of no moral 
action. What, however, affirmation and negation are in the 
discursive power [of the soul], that pursuit and aversion are 
in desire. So that since moral virtue is a habit joined with 
deliberate choice, and deliberate choice is desire attended by 
deliberation, it follows that reason must be true, and desire 

d As the reasoning part of the soul has been divided into two parts, 
right reason must reside in one of them: and it must necessarily be the 
virtue or excellence of that part: we must therefore find the virtue, or 
(which is the same thing) the best habit of each part: but every habit is 
formed, and may therefore be known, by some particular work ; and the 
best habit Will be known by discovering what is the best work, or i^yop 
of that in which the habit resides: we must therefore find the best work, 
or ttyov, of each part of the soul t for the best work will give us the best 
habit of each; the best habit will give us the virtue of each $ and one of 
these virtues must he right reason. 

c The investigation is begun by mentioning action and truth, because 
these are the ordinary employments or objects of the reasoning and scien* 
tific parts; and to find how they are performed in the most perfect man¬ 
ner, is the same as to find the tgyev s for the fgyav is only the common 
employment performed well. Therefore if intellect and desire (nv s ml 
h&t) influence every action, if we can discover what makes intellect and 
desire perfect, we shall have the action perfect; and consequently we 
shall know the t^yov of the reasoning part of the soul. 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI, 


IU 

right, if the deliberate choice is good** and the one [rea¬ 
son] must assent to, and the other [desire] pursue, the same 
things. This discursive power of the soul then, as well as 
this truth, are adapted for action. 

2 . But of that discursive power of the soul which is con¬ 
templative, and not practical, nor effective, the excellence 
and the fault are, truths and falsehood, for this is the work 
of the whole discursive power. But of that power which is 
practical as well as discursive, truth, existing agreeably to 
right desire, 

3 . The principle therefore of action, whence motion pro¬ 
ceeds, is deliberate choice, but not the causal principle h . 
But the principles of deliberate choice are desire, and that 
reason * which has some end in view: wherefore deliberate 
choice is* not without intellect and the discursive power, nor 
is it without moral habit. For good conduct and the con¬ 
trary of this in action, is not without the discursive power of 
the soul, and moral character. But it is not this discursive 
power that causes any motion, unless it is that which has 
some end in view and is practical. For this directs the pro¬ 
ducing part also. For every one that produces any thing 
does so on account of some particular thing: and that which 
is effected is not in itself the end, but has a reference to 
something, and belongs to something j but not so that, 
which, is, tho subject of action. For good conduct is the end 

f L e. before tte deliberate, choice,ip»be good, the desire must be mo. 
raUy good, and reason., must assent on true principles, which last is the 

most important* 

& Truth therefore is at aucef the ordinary employment and the Sf^yoy of 
the scientific part: far in necessary truths there are no degrees of eon* 
tainty, and nothing can make one truth more perfect than, another. 

b Two things may be called the'principles of action: either the ulterior 
object, for sake of which we first think of the action: or that result of 
ou» ddiberarionsy which tcUa us how we 'are to begin, the action s the !**■¥* 

* By desire and reason are here meant the same 1 things which were 
called intellect and desire at the beginning of the chapter s and when they 
were, said' to influence action* it was, beoauwr they, influence deliberate 
choice, which is the principle of action* 



CHAP, III. 


ETHICS. 


145 


[of action], and desire aims at this. Hence deliberate choice 
Is intellect operating upon desire, or desire guided by intel¬ 
lect : and such a principle is man. 

5. Nothing however already effected is an object of deli¬ 
berate choice. For instance, no one deliberately chooses to 
raze Troy. For a person does not consult about the past, 
but about the future, and contingent. For a thing that is 
done cannot be undone. Wherefore Agatho has rightly 
said. 

Of one thing only God is not possess’d, 

That to undo, whatever has been done. 

The work then of both the intellectual parts of the soul is 
truth. The habits, therefore, according to which each of 
these parts declares the truth most correctly, are the virtues 
of both k . 


CHAP. III. 

The intellectual virtues are divided into five, viz, intellect , science, 
wisdom , art, and prudence: science is shewn to be a demon¬ 
strative habit , anjl conversant with things necessarily and eter¬ 
nally subsisting. 

1. Commencing therefore a deeper investigation of the 
subject, let us again speak concerning these [virtues]. Let 
those things then, by which the soul arrives at truth, in af- 

k The substance of this intricate chapter seems to be this: the reason¬ 
ing and scientific parts of the soul arc always directed to action and truth 
respectively. The motive principle of action is deliberate choice: and 
deliberate choice may be resolved into desire, (which chooses the end,) and 
reason, (which assents to the choice of means :) so that in order for the 
deliberate choice and the action to be good, reason must assent on true 
principles: therefore truth is the employment or fyyov of the reasoning 
part; but it is truth harmonizing with good desires. It requires no de¬ 
monstration to shew that truth is the fyyw of the scientific part. 

L 



146 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK VI. 


firming or denying, be five 1 in number ; and these are, art, 
science, prudence, wisdom, intellect. For it is incidental to 
conception and opinion to be wrong. 

2. What science is then, is manifest from this [which fol¬ 
lows], if we must examine [the matter] accurately, and not 
follow similitudes. For we all have a conception of that 
which cannot subsist otherwise than it docs ; but as to those 
things which may subsist otherwise, when they are out of 
our contemplation, it is hid from us whether they exist, or 
not m . The object therefore of science has a necessary ex¬ 
istence j therefore it is eternal. For those things which 
exist in themselves by necessity, are all eternal. But things 
eternal are increate, and incorruptible. 

3. Moreover all science appears to be capable of being 
taught, and the object of science of being understood, by 
learning. Now all doctrine is derived from things previously 
known, as we have said in our analytics. For one part of it 
is obtained by induction, the other by syllogism. Induction 
is a principle, and belongs to universals ; but syllogism is 
composed of universals. Therefore there are certain prin¬ 
ciples of which syllogism is made up, and of which there is 
no syllogism, [i. e. which cannot be proved by syllogism.] 
Therefore there is an induction of them. 

4. Science therefore is a demonstrative habit, and what¬ 
ever else we have added to the definition of it in the analy¬ 
tics. For when a person believes in a manner that a thing 
is so, and when the principles are known to him, he has a 

1 f° r the soul seeks for truth in contingent matter for only two reasons; 
either to perform some action, or to produce some work ; and the habit, 
which arrives at truth in the former is prudence, in the latter, art. In 
necessary matter the soul either contemplates principles, in which case 
the habit, which arrives at truth is intellect (vou$) ; or it contemplates the 
conclusion drawn from principles, where the habit is science. But this 
science can only be perfect, when the same habit has discovered the truth 
both of the principles and conclusions; and the habit which does this is 
wisdom. 

ra This is a good distinction between necessary and contingent matter: 
a contingency only exists while it is being contemplated; the subjects of 
necessary matter are eternal. 



CHAP* IV. 


ETHICS. 


147 


scientific knowledge of it. For if the principles are not bet¬ 
ter known to him than the conclusion, he will have science 
accidentally only. Concerning the distinctions of science 
therefore let it suffice to have spoken in the above manner. 


CHAP. IV. 

Concerning art; that it is a habit of the mind joined with true 
reason, productive, and conversant with things contingent 

1. Op that,, however, which may subsist otherwise than 
it does, there is part which is the subject of production, and 
part which is the subject of action. But production and 
action are different: (and concerning these we trust to the 
exoteric discussions :) so that the practical habit which is 
joined with reason is different from the productive habit 
which is joined with reason. Neither are they contained, 
one by the other. For action is not production, nor pro¬ 
duction action. 

% But since building is a certain art, and the same as a 
productive habit in conjunction with reason; and since there 
is neither any art, which is not a productive habit in con¬ 
junction with reason, nor any such habit, which is not an 
art 5 art and productive habit in conjunction with true reason 
must be the same. 

3. Every art, however, is conversant with generation, and 
producing the work of the art, and contemplating how some 
one of those things, which may exist, or not exist, and whose 
principle is in the producer, not in the thing produced, 
may be generated. For art belongs neither to those things 
which exist or are generated from necessity, nor yet to those 
which exist according to nature; for these contain the prin¬ 
ciple in themselves. Since, however, production and action 
are different, art must belong to production, and not to 
action. 

l 3 



148 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI 


4. Also chance and art are in a certain manner conversant 
with the same things, as Agatho also says. 

Art loves fortune, as does fortune art. 

Art therefore, as has been said, is a certain productive habit 
in conjunction with true reason* The absence of art, on the 
contrary, is a productive habit in conjunction with false rea¬ 
son, conversant with that which may subsist otherwise than 
it does. 


CHAP. V. 

Concerning prudence; that it is a habit of the mind in con - 
junction with true reason, practical of human good and evil* 
and conversant with things contingent. 

1. We shall gain a knowledge of prudence by considering 
whom we call prudent. Now it appears to be the part of a 
prudent man to be able to deliberate well upon those things 
which are good and expedient for him, not in part, as what, 
things are conducive to health and strength $ but what things 
are conducive to a good life Universally, And a proof of this 
is, that we call men prudent in some particular thing, when, 
with a view to arrive at some particular end, they reason 
well in things of which there is no art. Wherefore he who 
is able to deliberate, is wholly prudent. 

2. No one, however, deliberates upon those things which 
cannot be otherwise than they are, or which are impossible 
to him to perform. So that if science be attended with 
demonstration, and if there he no demonstration of those 
things whose principles may be otherwise than they are, 
(for all these [things] may subsist otherwise than they 
do,) and if there is no deliberation upon those things 
which exist from necessity, prudence can not be a sci¬ 
ence, nor an art: not a science, because the subject of 



CHAP, V. 


ETHICS. 


149 


action may subsist otherwise than it does : and not an art, 
because the genus of action, and production, is different. 

3. It remains therefore, that it be a true habit in con¬ 
junction with reason, practical about those things that are 
good and bad for man. For the end of production is some-* 
thing else [than production itself] j but the end of action 
is not always something else [than the action itself]. For 
acting well is itself an end of action. Hence we deem Pe¬ 
ricles and others of the same class prudent men, because 
they can contemplate the things that are good for themselves, 
and for men in general; but such we deem the economical 
and political men to be. 

4* Whence we give temperance its name <ra(p^m ? as 
preserving prudence. But it preserves such a conception of 
the mind as we have described \ for the pleasant and the 
painful do not corrupt or pervert every conception of the 
mind n ; for instance, [they do not corrupt or pervert the 
conception] that a triangle has or has not its angles equal 
to two right angles: but those only which are conversant 
with that which is the subject of action. For the principles 
of the subjects of action are that on account of which things 
that are the subjects of action are performed. But to him 
that has been corrupted by pleasure, or pain, the principle 
will not appear at all, nor will it appear to him that for the 
sake, and because of this, he ought to choose and perform 
every thing. For vice is destructive of the principle. Where¬ 
fore prudence must be a true habit joined with reason, prac¬ 
tical about human goods. 

5. Moreover, of art there is a virtue, but of prudence there 
is not 0 , 4nd in art indeed, he that errs voluntarily is pre- 

n The etymology of is <ra%uv Qgevwfty. The property of tem¬ 

perance is to preserve the habit of deliberating well upon human good, 
and acting accordingly. The inference from these two statements is, that 
<P$mws must he that habit, 

0 Having examined the two habits in contingent matter separately, we 
proceed to compare them, that we may discover which is dumbest ; drat, 
there are degrees of excellence in art, so that one art excels an** 

other, and some art must therefore be imperfect: but there are no de« 

l 3 



150 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI* 


ferable to the contrary character: but in prudence, the 
former is inferior to the latter, as well as in the virtues. It 
is evident, therefore, that prudence is a certain virtue, and 
not an art., But as the rational parts of the soul are two, it 
must be the virtue of one, viz. the part conceptive of opinion. 
Bor opinion and prudence are conversant with that which 
may subsist otherwise than they do. Nor yet is it only a 
habit joined with reason: and a proof of this is, that there 
may be oblivion of such a habit, but of prudence there can 
not. 


CHAP. VI. 

Concerning intellect; that it is employed in the knowledge of 
principles . 

1. Since, however, science is a conception of the mind, 
engaged in uni vers als, and in those things that exist from 
necessity, and since there are principles of things demon¬ 
strable, and of every science; (for science is joined with 
reason;) it will be neither science, nor art, nor prudence, 
which discovers the principle of the subject of science. For 
the subject of science is demonstrable; and the two others 
(viz. art and prudence) are conversant with things that may 
subsist otherwise than they do; neither therefore is it 
wisdom; for the wise man must have demonstration in 
certain things. If therefore those parts of the son], by 
which we declare the truth, and arc never mistaken, in 
things that may, or may not, subsist differently, are science, 

grees in prnclencc; for a man is not called prudent, until he in able to 
deliberate and act rightly; and if he could have deliberated or acted bet¬ 
ter, he was not a prudent man; secondly, when an artist errs voluntarily, 
he is considered better as an atlhi than one who errs from ignorance; 
though he may be considered worse as a mm ; but in prudence there mix 
be no such thing as voluntary error. 



CHAP, VII. 


ETHICS. 


151 


and prudence, and wisdom, and intellects, and if neither of 
the three first has to do with the knowledge of principles 3 
I mean the three* prudence* wisdom, science 3 it remains that 
intellect is that which discovers principles. 


CHAP. VII. 

Concerning wisdom ; that it is composed of science and intellect ; 
it is different from, and superior to, prudence , because its ob¬ 
jects are divine and eternal , but those of prudence contingent. 

1. Wisdom in the arts, wc attribute to those who are 
most accurately skilled in the arts : for instance, we call 
Phidias a wise sculptor, and Polyclitus a wise statuary : here, 
therefore, signifying nothing else by wisdom than that it 
is the excellence of art. But some men we deem wise uni¬ 
versally, not partially * nor do we deem them any thing else 
than wise, as Homer says in his Margitcs, 

The goth, nor miner him, nor yet a ploughman made, 

Nor wise in any other thing. 

Wherefore it is manifest that wisdom be the most accurate 
of the sciences. It is necessary then that the wise man 
not only know those things which follow from the princi¬ 
ples, but also arrive at truth about the principles < 1 ' 

Consequently wisdom will be composed of intellect and 
science 3 and being, as it were, the head, It will be a science 
of the most honourable things. For it would be absurd if 

P Art is omitted, because the same reasons exclude it, which exclude 
prudence; and it has already been shewn to be inferior to prudence. 

*1 It is allowed that in art, the term wisdom and skill is applied to those, 
who arc most accurate in the art; therefore when wc arc talking of intel¬ 
lectual skill, or wisdom, wc must make it the most accurate of the sci¬ 
ence®; but knowledge or science cannot be entirely accurate or perfect, 
unless the principles are known as certainly as the conclusions. 

L 4 



1 52 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI. 


any one should think that the political science., or prudence, 
is the best [science], unless man be the best of all things in 
the world. If then one thing is salubrious and good to 
man, and another to fishes, but what is white and straight is 
always the same ; all men will also say, that wisdom is al¬ 
ways the same, but prudence is different at different times. 
For they would say, that the being, who has a perfect view 
of particulars pertaining to himself, is prudent, and to him 
they would commit these particulars. Hence we say that 
some brutes are prudent, viz. as many as seem to have a 
power of forethought as far as regards their own life. 

3. It is evident, however, that the political science and 
wisdom cannot be the same. For if they denominate that 
science, which is employed about things profitable to indi¬ 
viduals, wisdom, there will be many kinds of wisdom. For 
it is not one science that is employed about the good of all 
animals, but a different one about that of each. Unless 
there is also but one medical science that is employed about 
all beings. 

4. But whether men say that man is the 'best of all other 
animals, matters not r ; since there are other things much 
more divine than man in their nature; for instance, those 
visible objects of which the universe is composed. From 
what has been said, therefore, it is clear that wisdom is 
both a science and an intelligence of things most honourable 
by nature. Hence men say, that Anaxagoras, and Thales, 
and others of the same class, are wise, but not prudent 
when they see that they are ignorant of what is advantage¬ 
ous to themselves. And they allow that they understand 
things that are extraordinary, and wonderful, and difficult, 
and divine, but useless, because they seek not human goods • 
but prudence is conversant with human goods, and such as 
it is possible to deliberate about. For this, viz. to deliberate 

T It was observed before, that prudence could not be bettor than wisdom 
because man is not the best of all things in the world : nor if it he in¬ 
sisted that man is better than all other animals could the superiority of 
prudence be proved. 



CHAP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


153 


well, we say is especially the work of the prudent man. But 
no one deliberates about those things which cannot subsist 
otherwise than they do, nor about those things of which 
there is not some end, and this too, a practical good. He, 
however, deliberates well universally, who by reasoning aims 
at that practical thing which is best for man. 

5 . Neither indeed is prudence of universal alone, but it 
ought to be acquainted with particulars also j for it is of a 
practical nature: and action is conversant with particulars. 
Hence, some who have not scientific knowledge are more 
capable of action than some who have, and in other things 
the experienced [are more capable of action than mere theo¬ 
rists]. For although a person know that light flesh is easily 
digested, and productive of health, but is ignorant what meat 
is light, he will not produce health ; but he will rather pro¬ 
duce it, who knows that the flesh of birds is light, and pro¬ 
ductive of health. Prudence, however, is of a practical 
nature. Wherefore it is necessary that we should have the 
knowledge of both, [i. e. universals and particular,] or rather 
the latter: but here also there must be a kind of super- 
excellent prudence. 


CHAP. VIII. 

Another distinction is shewn in prudence, viz. that whi$h con- 
suits the good of the individual , and that which consults the 
good of all the members of the state. The latter has already 
been mentioned as political science. The connection between 
these two is shewn. 

1 . Now the political science, and prudence, are the same 
habit, but their essence is not the same 8 5 and of the science 
that is engaged about a state, the one part being as it were 

8 The same definition will apply to both, viz. a habit of deliberating 
well upon human good, and acting accordingly. 



154 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI. 


a master prudence* is called legislative ; the other* being like 
something particular* has the common name of political 
science 1 : and this is practical* and deliberative. For a 
decree is practicable* as being the last thing. Hence men 
say that this class of prudent men alone manage the affairs 
of a state. For these alone act* as artificers do u . 

2 . Rut that appears to be especially prudence* which is 
employed about one’s self* and an individual $ and therefore 
it has the common name* prudence. But of the former 
[species of prudence x ], one is economy* another legislation, 
another the political science: and of this last* one part is 
deliberative* and another judicial. Therefore to be ac¬ 
quainted with one’s own affairs will be a certain species of 
knowledge: but it admits of great difference. And he who 
knows his own affairs* and engages himself in them* ap¬ 
pears to be a prudent man: but those who are engaged in 
political affairs* are men of much business. , Wherefore Eu« 
ripides alfio says* 

Where was my prudence, who from trouble free. 

And number’d with the martiall’d multitude, 

Might fortune with the wisest heads have shar’d ? 

For Jupiter officious persons hates, 

And those who will be busy to excess. 

For the former seek their own good* and think it necessary 
to do this 3 from this persuasion of theirs* therefore* it arises 
that they are prudent men. Though perhaps it is not possi¬ 
ble for one to be acquainted with his own affairs* without 
economy and policy. And again, how a man ought to admi¬ 
nister his own affairs* is a thing unknown* and requiring con¬ 
sideration. 

1 It was stated at the end of the last chapter that the prudence of the 
individual was divided into general and particular : so also political pru¬ 
dence is divided into two, legislative, and that which is peculiarly called 
political. And these two divisions correspond to the two former ones. 

u Both those who legislate, and those who pass decrees, are said 
rtoXirwffStu, but the latter more especially: like a stone mason (who is a 
xup<r't%m) may more properly be said to build a house than an architect. 
x h c. the political prudence. 



CHAP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


155 


3, A proof of what we have said is, that young men may 
become geometricians and mathematicians, and wise in 
things of this sort: but [no young man] appears to become 
prudent. And the reason is, because prudence is concerned 
with particulars, which become known by experience. But 
a young man is not experienced : for it is length of time 
that produces experience 3 since a man should consider this 
also, viz. why a boy may become a mathematician, but not 
[become] wise, or skilled in physiology } Is it because those 
[i. e. the objects or principles of mathematics] are abstracted 
from particulars 3 but the principles of these [i. e. of physics] 
are known by experience? And youths do not believe the 
latter, but repeat them only. But with respect to those, [i. e. 
principles of mathematics,] it is evident what they are - v . 
Moreover, error in deliberating, is either with respect to the 
universal or the particular. For [it is an error in the uni¬ 
versal, for instance,] not to know that all heavy waters are 
bad; and [in the particular], that a certain water is heavy, 

4. That prudence, however, is not a science, is evident 3 
because it relates to the last thing, as has been said: for 
whatever is practicable is such 5 it is therefore opposed to in¬ 
tellect. For intellect has to do with terms, upon which there 
is no reasoning, [or which cannot be obtained by syllogism.] 
But prudence belongs to the extreme, of which there is no 
science, but sense 3 not the sense by which we know the pro¬ 
perties of bodies, but such as that by which we perceive in 
mathematics, for instance, that the last thing is a triangle z ; 

T For they are axioms or self-evident propositions. 

* In every demonstration there are two things, which are known not 
by deductions of reason, but by a kind of intuitive faculty: first, the first 
principles or axioms, which arc proved by induction r secondly, some 
figure, e. g. a triangle, must be given: and the perception of the triangle, 
which is an object of sense, is the last thing before the demonstration 
begins: the last thing therefore, <ro Het^ecrrov, is discovered by sense ; but 
the faculty which discovers the properties of the triangle is different from 
this. So in contingent matter also there arc two extremes, which arc 
not discovered by reasoning, but by induction and sense, nvg and a/er&ntrif ; 
and Aristotle chooses afterwards to call both these by the name of vaug, 
because their office is the same. 



156 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI. 


for it will stop there. But this prudence is rather sense ; but 
.of the other there is a different species. 


CHAP. IX. 

Good deliberation is considered. 

1. To investigate, and to deliberate, are different. For to 
deliberate is to investigate something. But we must 
thoroughly comprehend good deliberation, what it is, 
whether it be a science, or opinion, or right conjecture, or 
some other genus. Now it is not a science, for men do not 
investigate what they know. But good consultation is a 
kind of deliberation; and he who deliberates, investigates 
and reasons. Nor yet is it right conjecture; for right con¬ 
jecture is not joined with reason, and is something hasty. 
But men deliberate for a long time, and they say,,that it is 
necessary, indeed, speedily to put into execution what has 
been deliberated upon, but to deliberate slowly. Moreover 
sagacity and good deliberation are different. But sagacity 
as a kind of right conjecture. Neither indeed is any good 
deliberation, opinion. But since he who deliberates badly 
errs, and he who deliberates well, deliberates rightly; it is 
evident that good deliberation is a kind of rectitude: but 
not of science, nor of opinion. (For of science indeed there 
is no rectitude, because there is no error. But truth is the 
rectitude of opinion. Besides, every thing of which there is 
an opinion, has been already determined, [but not so the 
object of good deliberation.] Moreover, good deliberation 
is not without reasoning; and therefore is inferior to the 
discursive power, for it is not yet a declaration; whereas opi¬ 
nion is not an investigation, but an actual declaration • but 
he that deliberates, whether ho deliberates well or ill inves¬ 
tigates something, and reasons.) But good deliberation is a 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


157 


rectitude of deliberation. Wherefore deliberation must first 
be investigated* both as to what it is* and what it is conver¬ 
sant with. But since rectitude is predicated in various ways* 
it is evident that not every rectitude is good deliberation. 
For the incontinent and depraved will obtain from reasoning 
what they have proposed to see. So that they will have de¬ 
liberated rightly* but will have received a great evil. But to 
deliberate well seems to be something good $ for such a rec¬ 
titude of deliberation as is calculated to obtain good, is good 
deliberation. But it is possible to obtain even this by false 
reasoning 5 and to obtain that which it is proper to effect* 
and yet not by proper means* but the middle term may be 
false. Wherefore that is not yet good deliberation* accord¬ 
ing to which a person obtains indeed what he ought* but not 
by the means he ought. Again* it is possible for one person 
to obtain after deliberating for a long time ; and for another 
to obtain it by a hasty deliberation. Wherefore neither is 
this yet good deliberation. But that is rectitude of delibe¬ 
ration which is according to utility* and calculated to obtain 
what is proper* and in the manner* and time, which is 
proper. Moreover it is possible to deliberate well generally* 
and with a view to a certain end. That which is generally 
so is that which succeeds in obtaining an end generally; 
but the particular rectitude is that which succeeds in obtain¬ 
ing some particular end. If therefore* to deliberate well be¬ 
long to the prudent* good deliberation will be that rectitude 
which is according to utility* directed to a certain end, of 
which prudence has the true conception. 



158 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI. 


CHAP. X. 

Of intelligence: that it is not any science, or opinion, wholly or 
partially; and that it is not the same with prudence, though 
conversant with the same things : the origin of its name. 

1. Intelligence, however, and the want of intelligence, 
according to which we call men intelligent or unintelligent, 
are not wholly the same with science, or opinion ; otherwise 
all men would be intelligent. Nor is it any one of the par¬ 
ticular sciences, as medicine, for then it would be conversant 
with things productive of health 5 or geometry, for itrwould 
be conversant with magnitudes. For intelligence is neither 
conversant with those things which always exist and are im¬ 
moveable, nor with those things which are generated in any 
way : but it is conversant with those things about which 
any one would doubt, and deliberate. Wherefore it is con¬ 
versant with the same things as prudence; and yet intelli¬ 
gence and prudence are not the same thing. For prudence 
is imperative; for the end of it is, what it is necessary to 
do, or not to do. But intelligence is only judicial. For in¬ 
telligence and right intelligence are the same thing 5 since 
intelligent men are also rightly intelligent. Intelligence 
however is neither the possessing nor the receiving of pru¬ 
dence ; but like as learning is said to be, understanding, 
when it employs science, the same is the case in using opi¬ 
nion to judge of those things, about which prudence is con¬ 
versant, when another person speaks, and to judge well. 
For the doing of a thing rightly, is the same with doing it 
well. And hence the name intelligence 31 is derived, according 
to which men are denominated rightly intelligent, viz. from 
understanding in learning, for we frequently say, to learn, 
instead of, to understand. 

a The avnros and tu%vnro$ seem to be men of quick understandings: 
who though not possessing prudence themselves, are yet able to under¬ 
stand the motives and reasons of the prudent man, and to decide rightly 
at his suggestion. ’Sfoms might perhaps be translated apprehension, and 
iy^vsm right apprehension. 



CHAP. XI. 


ETHICS. 


159 


CHAP. XL 

Of judgment, intelligence or apprehension, prudence, and 
intellect. 

1. Bat that which is called judgment, according’ to which 
we say that men are judicious, and possess judgment, is the 
right decision of the equitable man. A proof of which is, 
that we say that the equitable man is especially apt to par¬ 
don, and that it is equitable to pardon in some cases. But 
pardon is the right judgment of the equitable man ; and the 
right judgment is that of the man who follows truth. 

2. All these habits however naturally tend to the same 
thing ; for referring judgment, intelligence, prudence, and 
intellect to the same persons, we say that they possess judg¬ 
ment, and with it intellect, and that they arc prudent, and 
intelligent. For all these faculties belong to extremes b and 
particulars. And the intelligent man, and he who has good 
judgment, or is apt to pardon, is engaged in judging of those 
things with which the prudent man is conversant. For 
equitable things are common to all good men in their deal¬ 
ings with others. But all practicable things belong to parti¬ 
culars and extremes. For the prudent man ought to know 
these. And intelligence and judgment are conversant with 
things practicable and these are extremes. 

3 . Intellect is conversant with the extremes on both sides. 
For it is intellect, and not reason, which perceives both the 
first and the last terms $ that part of it which is engaged in 
demonstrations is conversant with immutable and first prin¬ 
ciples ; but that which is engaged in practical things, is of 
the extreme, and of the contingent, and of the particular 
proposition ; for these are the principles of that on account of 

b By rk iffx&rtx, is meant the last step, which immediately precedes the 
action. The first principles, which are discovered by induction, are also 
called t<r%ccr*, but generally when the word is used without any addi¬ 
tion, it signifies that last extreme which immediately precedes the action. 
They are both extremes, inasmuch as one is the beginning or foundation* 
the other the end of the deliberation. 



i6o 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VI. 


which any thing is done. For the universe is derived from 
particulars ; therefore we ought to have a sensible percep¬ 
tion of these ; and this is intellect. 

4 . Wherefore, these appear to be natural. Whereas no 
one is wise by nature, but he has judgment, and intelligence, 
and intellect, [by nature.] A proof of which is, that we sup¬ 
pose these to accompany the progress of age ; and that this 
or that particular age has intellect and judgment, considering 
nature as the cause of them. For which reason intellect is 
the principle and the end $ for from these demonstrations 
are derived, and with these they are conversant. So that we 
ought to attend to the undemonstrated enunciations and 
opinions of the experienced and aged, or prudent, no less 
than to their demonstrations. For, because they have an 
eye from experience, they perceive the principles. What, 
therefore, wisdom and prudence are, and with what things 
each is conversant, and that each of them is a virtue of a 
different part of the soul, has been [sufficiently] shewn. 


CHAP. XIL 

The utility of wisdom and prudence is shewn . 

1. Rut some one may start ,a question respecting these, in 
what they are useful. For wisdom contemplates nothing 
whereby man may be happy 5 for it does not belong to any 
thing which produces. But prudence possesses this quality ; 
and yet to what end is there need of it, if prudence is that 
which is conversant with what things are just, and honourable, 
and good to man $ and these are those things which it is the 
part of the good man to practise? Neither are we by the 
knowledge of these the more capable of practice, if the 
virtues are habits ; as, neither [are we more capable of 
practice by the knowledge of] the things that are productive 
of health, and a good habit of body, as many as are spoken 



CHAP. XII, 


ETHICS* 


161 


of not as consisting in the power of action, but from habit ; 
for we are not the more capable of practice from possessing 
the medical or gymnastic art. But if we must grant that 
a man is prudent not on account of his possessing these, 
but for the sake of becoming good, prudence will not be at 
all useful to those who are already virtuous. Neither, again, 
will it be useful to those who do not possess any [virtuous 
habit,] for it will make no difference whether they possess 
prudence themselves, or obey others who possess it. And 
this would be sufficient for us in this case, as it is also in the 
case of health. For although we wish to be in good health, 
still we do not learn the medical art. 

% In addition to this, it would seem absurd if, being infe¬ 
rior to wisdom, it should have greater authority than it. For 
that which produces, rules and commands in everything. 
Of these therefore we must treat. For as yet, we have only 
advanced questions about them. 

3 . First, then, we say that inasmuch as they are virtues, 
of each part of the soul, they must be eligible in themselves ; 
even if neither of them produce any thing. Again, they 
do indeed produce something; not, however, as the medical 
art produces health; but as health produces, happiness, so 
does wisdom c . For, being a part of universal virtue, it 
renders a man happy by the possession of it, and by ener¬ 
gizing. Besides, the work is completed according to pru¬ 
dence and moral virtue. For this virtue makes the mark 
right, but prudence those things that lead to it Such a 
virtue, however, does not belong to the fourth part of the 
soul, which is nutritive; for this has not the power of acting 
or not acting any thing. 

4 f. But with regard to [the objection], that we are not by 
means of prudence more capable of practising things noble 
and just, we must begin a little further back, taking this for 
a principle. For as we say that some persons who perform 


c Wisdom docs not produce happiness like cause and effect; but in the 
same manner as a person cannot be happy without health, although health 
does not produce happiness, so he cannot be happy without wisdom, 

M 



162 


ARISTOTLE’S 


book: vti. 


ju5t things, are not yet just, such as those who do the things 
enjoined by the laws, either against their will, or through 
ignorance, or on account of any other thing, and not for the 
sake of the things themselves, although they do what things 
it is fit they should, and as many as a good man ought; so, 
as it seems, it is necessary to perform every thing with a 
certain disposition, in order to be a good man. But I 
mean, through deliberate choice, for instance, and for the 
sake of the things done : now virtue causes the deliberate 
choice to be right, but [to discern] what things are naturally 
necessary to be performed for the sake of it, is not the part 
of virtue, but of another faculty. 

5 . Of these things, however, we must speak with atten¬ 
tion, and greater perspicuity. There is, therefore, a certain 
faculty which men call cleverness. And this is such, that 
whatever things tend to [the attaining of] the end proposed, 
it is able to perform the same, and to obtain them. If, 
therefore, the end proposed be good, this [faculty] will be 
laudable; but if bad, it will be craftiness. Hence we say 
that prudent men are clever, and not crafty. Prudence, 
however, is not this faculty, nor yet is it without this faculty. 
But in this eye, as it were, of the mind, the habit is produced 
not without virtue, as has been said before, and is evident 
For the syllogisms d of practical things contain the principle; 
since the end is of this kind, and the best thing, whatever it 
may be. For let the end, for instance, be any thing. But 
this does not appear, but to the good man. For vice per¬ 
verts, and causes us to form a false judgment with respect 
to practical principles. Wherefore it is evident that a man 
cannot be prudent, who is not good. 


d Reasonings in practical affairs are always with a view to some end, 
which end is the principle of action; but if by the good man only a good 
end is proposed, and if this cannot be attained without prudence being 
employed in reasoning, the habit, prudence, is not acquired Without virtue . 



CHAP, XIII. 


ETHICS. 


163 


CHAP. XIII. 

Virtue is divided into natural and perfect; by which the app$~ 
rent contradiction is explained, that virtue cannot be obtained 
without prudence, nor prudence without virtue. 

1. Agaikt, therefore, we must consider virtue. Eor virtue 
bears a relation, like prudence does to cleverness, being not 
the same thing, but similar: for in the same manner is na* 
tural virtue with respect to virtue properly so called. For 
every moral character appears to subsist in a certain manner 
in all by nature ; for we are disposed to be just, and tem¬ 
perate, and brave, and possess other good qualities, imme¬ 
diately from our birth. Still, however, we seek something 
else, in speaking of that which is properly good, and think 
that things of this kind subsist after another manner. For 
the natural habits subsist in children and brutes ; but with¬ 
out intellect they appear to be noxious. Nay, so much as 
this maybe evidently seen, viz. that, as it happens to a strong 
body that is moved without sight to stumble grievously, be¬ 
cause it does not possess sight, so it is in the case of natural 
virtue: but if it receive intellect, it excels in action ; and 
the habit being uniform, will then be properly virtue. So 
that, as in that part of the soul which is conceptive of opi¬ 
nion there are two forms, viz. cleverness and prudence; so 
in the moral part also there are two, the one natural virtue, 
and the other virtue properly so called. And of these, virtue 
properly so called is not produced without prudence*. Where¬ 
fore men say that the virtues are prudences. And Socrates 
considered the question partly with correctness, and partly 
be erred. For inasmuch as he thought that all the virtues 

d So also prudence is not formed without natural virtue: for unless 
natural virtue makes a man frequently choose a good end at first, clever¬ 
ness (that natural faculty, which makes choice of the moans) will never 
ripen into prudence: so that we may truly say without arguing in a circle 
that prudence is not formed without [natural] virtue : and [perfect] virtu© 
is not formed without prudence. 



164 


ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK VI, 


were prudences, he erred ; but [in saying] that they are not 
without prudence, he said well, and this is a proof of it: 
for all now, when they define virtue, having said what it 
has a reference to, add that it is a habit according to right 
reason. And that is right [reason] which is according to 
prudence. All therefore seem to have a kind of natural no¬ 
tion that a habit of this* kind which is according to prudence, 
is virtue. We must, however, make a little digression. For 
it is not that habit only which is according to right reason, 
but also that which is in conjunction with right reason, that 
is virtue. And prudence is right reason in these things. So¬ 
crates, therefore, thought that the virtues were reasons 5 for 
[he said] they were all sciences: but we [say they are] in 
conjunction with reason. Therefore it is evident from what 
has been said, that it is impossible to become perfectly good 
without prudence j nor for a man to be prudent without 
moral virtue. But in this manner also, that reasoning may 
be refuted, by which any one might argue that the virtues 
are separated from one another, because the same person is 
not naturally fitted for all [of them ]: so that he will have 
obtained one already, but not another. For this may be the 
case in the natural virtues; but it is not the case in those 
according to which a man is said to be simply good. For 
they will at once all subsist together with prudence, which 
is but one. It is evident, however, that although it were 
not practical, still there would be need of it, because it is a 
virtue of a part [of the soul], and because deliberate choice 
will not be right without prudence, nor without virtue. For 
the one is the end ; and the other causes us to perform those 
things which tend to the end. Nevertheless it has no rule 
over wisdom, nor over the better part of the soul. As 
neither has the medical art over health. For it does not 
employ it, [health,] but sees how it may be affected. It 
prescribes, therefore, for its sake, but not to it. Besides, it 
would be just as if one were to say that the political science 
rules the gods, because it gives injunctions concerning all 
the affairs of a state. 



ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK VII. 


CHAP. I. 

The subject of this seventh book stated: and some popular opinions 
with respect to continence and incontinence. 

1* AFTER what has been already said; we must make a 
another beginning, and state, that there are three species of 
things to be avoided in morals, vice, incontinence, brutality. 
The contraries of two of these are evident: for we call one 
virtue, and the other continence : but as an opposite to bru¬ 
tality, it would be most suitable to name a virtue above hu¬ 
man nature, a species of heroical and divine virtue, as Ho¬ 
mer has made Priam say concerning Hector, to express his 
excessive goodness. 


. .- nor does he seem 

The son of mortal man, but of a god. 

So that if, as people say, gods are formed from men on ac¬ 
count of excess of virtue, the habit, which is opposed to bru¬ 
tality, would evidently be something of that kind : for in the 
same manner as there is no vice or virtue in a beast, so also 
there is not in a god : but the one is something more dig- 

a Thc construction in the Greek is somewhat singular, Xtw'w . , * 
wmebpinn. There is a similar construction in hook viii. c. 13. sect* 4 
and in Polybius, L xii. c. 9* 

M 3 



166 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VII. 


nified than virtue; and the other, a different genus of vice. 
But since the existence of a divine man is a rare thing, (as 
the Lacedemonians, when they admire any one exceedingly, 
are accustomed to say, He is a divine man:) so also the 
brutal character is rare amongst men, and is mostly found 
amongst savages. But some instances arise from diseases 
and bodily imperfections: and those, who exceed human 
nature in consequence of vice, we call by this odious name. 
But concerning such a disposition as this we must make some 
mention hereafter: and we have spoken concerning vice 
before. 

2. But we must treat of incontinence and effeminacy, and 
of continence and patience: fur we must neither form our 
idea of each of them as of the same habits with virtue and 
vice, nor as being a different genus. But, as in other cases, 
we must state popular opinions ; and after first mentioning 
the difficulties, then prove if we can all the opinions that 
have been entertained on the subject of these passions \ but 
if not that, the greatest number and the most important: 
for if the difficulties are solved, and the opinions are left un¬ 
contradicted, the subject would be explained sufficiently. 

3 . It is a common opinion then, first, that continence and 
patience are amongst the number of things good and praise¬ 
worthy j but incontinence and effeminacy, amongst things 
bad and reprehensible.' Secondly, That the continent man is 
the same with the man, who abides by his determination $ 
and the incontinent, with the man, who departs from his de¬ 
termination. Thirdly, And the incontinent man, knowing 
that the things are bad, does them through passion ; but the 
continent man, knowing that the desires are bad, does not 
follow them in obedience to reason. Fourthly, And they 
think that the temperate man is continent and patient: but 
as to the latter, some think that every one of them is tem¬ 
perate 3 others think not: and they call the intemperate 
man incontinent, and the incontinent intemperate, indis¬ 
criminately ; but others say that they are different. Fifthly,’ 
And as to the prudent man, sometimes they say it is impos¬ 
sible for him to be incontinent; at other times, that some 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


167 


men both prudent and clever are incontinent. Sixthly, 
Again, they are said to be incontinent of anger and honour 
and gain. These are the opinions, that have been given. 


CHAP. IL 

The different opinions stated in the last chapter are briefly con¬ 
sidered here. 

1. A person might doubt, how any one forming a right 
conception is incontinent. Some say, that if he has certain 
knowledge, it is impossible: for it is strange, as Socrates 
thought, if knowledge exists in the man* that,any thing else 
should prevail, and draw him about like a slave. Socrates 
indeed opposed the argument altogether, as if there was no 
such thing as incontinence : for that no one forming a right 
conception a,cted contrary to what is best, but only through 
ignorance. Now this system is sat variance with what we see 
evidently *, and we must enquire concerning this passion, if 
it proceeds from ignorance, what kind of ignorance it is ; for 
that the incontinent man, before he is actually in the pas¬ 
sion, does not think that it is right, is evident. 

% There are some who grant part of this, but not the 
rest: for that nothing is superior to knowledge, they allow ; 
but that no one acts contrary to what appears best, they do 
not allow : and for this reason they say, that the incontinent 
man is overcome by pleasures, not having knowledge, but 
opinion. But still if it is opinion, and not knowledge, nor a 
strong conception, which opposes, but a weak one, as in 
persons who are doubting, the not remaining firm to these 
against strong desires is pardonable : but vice is not pardon- 
able ; nor any thing else which is reprehensible b . [If then 

And the first of those six opinions in the last chapter was that iueo% 
tinence is reprehensible. 

M 4 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VII. 


X6S 

it is not a weak opinion], it must be prudence which opposes; 
for this is the strongest. But that is absurd ; for then the 
same man will at once be prudent and incontinent: but no 
one would say that it is the character of the prudent man 
willingly to do the most vicious things. Besides this, it has 
been shewn before, that the prudent man in particular is 
distinguished in action : for he has to do with the last ex¬ 
tremes, and possesses the other virtues. 

3 . Again, if the continent man consists in having strong 
and bad desires ; the temperate man will not be continent, 
nor the continent temperate : for excess does not belong to 
the temperate man, nor the possession of bad desires. But 
nevertheless the continent man must have them ; for if the 
desires were good, the habit, which forbids him to follow 
them, is bad : so that every species of continence would not 
be good j and if they are weak and not bad, there is nothing 
noble [in conquering them] : nor if they are bad and weak, 
is there any thing great. 

4. Again, if continence makes a man adhere to every opi¬ 
nion, it is bad ; as, for instance, if it makes him adhere to 
a false one: and if incontinence makes him depart from 
every opinion, some species of incontinence will be good ; as 
the Neoptolemus of Sophocles in the Philoctetes ; for he is 
praiseworthy for not adhering to the persuasions of Ulysses, 
because he felt pain in telling a lie. Secondly ; Again, the 
sophistical reasoning, called Men{iens, causes a difficulty 0 : 
for because they wish to make the other party allow some¬ 
thing contrary to his opinion, in order that they may appear 
clever when they succeed, the syllogism, which is formed, 
becomes a difficulty : for the intellect is at a stand, when it 

c The whole of this section relates to the second of the six opinions in 
the last chapter ,* and different absurdities are shewn to result from t}ie 
hypothesis, that the incontinent man is the same with him who departs 
from his opinion. The second absurdity is this: a sophist, by getting me 
to allow his premises, makes me allow his conclusion, which common 
sense tells me is false, but which I cannot refute : by allowing it there¬ 
fore I have departed from my opinion, and consequently according to the 
above hypothesis, I am incontinent: which is absurd. 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


1 69 


does not wish to stop there, because the conclusion does not 
please $ but it cannot advance, because it cannot solve the 
argument. Thirdly5 And by one mode of reasoning it hap¬ 
pens that folly in conjunction with incontinence becomes 
virtue; for it acts contrary to its conceptions on account of 
incontinence j but its conception was, that good was evil, 
and that he ought not to practise it: so that he will practise 
what is good and not what is evil d . Fourthly; Again, he who 
practises and pursues what is pleasant from being persuaded 
that it is right, and after deliberate choice, would appear to be 
better than the man e who does so not from deliberation, but 
from incontinence j for he is more easily cured, because he 
may be persuaded back again $ whereas the incontinent man 
comes under the proverbial expression. 

When water chokes, why need we drink it more f ? 

For if he had s been persuaded, that what he does is right, he 
might have been persuaded back again, and have desisted : 
but now although he is persuaded that it is not right, never¬ 
theless he acts contrary to that conviction. 

5 . ? Again, if incontinence and continence are exhibited in 
every thing, who is the man who is simply called inconti¬ 
nent } for no man possesses every species of incontinence * 
but we say, that there are some simply so. 

6 . The difficulties are some such as these : and of these 

d This is still upon the same hypothesis. Being foolish, ft e. not hav¬ 
ing he will mistake good for evil: being incontinent, he will (ac¬ 

cording to that hypothesis) depart from his opinion, and act contrary to it: 
consequently he will unintentionally act virtuously. 

• i. e. the intemperate man. 

f When reason leads a mail astray, or at least does not prevent him, 
what use is there in reasoning with him ? 

I 1 follow Lambinus in leaving out the negative s the argument la, 
that as the incontinent man reasons rightly up to the very commencement 
of the action, but then departs from his opinion and from reason, it m 
hopeless to reason with him; whereas the intemperate man, as he is only 
mistaken in his reasoning, might, if the thing was set properly before him, 
be brought to act well. The fallacy is solved in c. 8. 



170 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK Vll, 


we must remove some, and leave others; for the solving of 
a difficulty is a discovery. 


CHAP. HI. 

The third question is considered , whether the incontinent act 
contrary to the knowledge of their duty . 

1. First then we must consider, whether men are incon¬ 
tinent, knowing what is right, or no; and in what manner 
knowing. Secondly; Next, what we must call the subject mat¬ 
ter of the continent and incontinent; I mean, whether it is 
every pleasure and pain, or some definite ones. Thirdly, and 
whether the continent and patient man are the same, or 
different. So also as many other subjects as are connected 
with this speculation. The beginning of the consideration 
is, whether the continent and incontinent differ in the sub¬ 
ject, or in the manner: I mean, whether the incontinent 
man is incontinent merely from being employed in this par¬ 
ticular thing; or whether it is not that, but it is in the man¬ 
ner; or whether it is not that, but it results from both. 
Next, whether incontinence and continence are displayed in 
every thing, or no : for he that is simply called incontinent, 
is not so in every thing, but in the same things with which the 
intemperate is concerned: nor is he so from merely having 
to do with these things, (for then it would be the same as 
intemperance,) but from having to do with them in a par¬ 
ticular manner: for the one [the intemperate] is led on by 
deliberate choice, thinking that he should always pursue 
what is pleasant at the moment: the other does not thinlf 
sd, but still pursues it. 

% Now whether it be a true opinion, but not knowledge, 
in opposition tb which men are incontinent, makes no dif¬ 
ference as to the argument: for some of those who are in 
doubt, do not feel any doubt, but think that they know fof 



CHAP, III. 


ETHICS. 


171 


certain. If then those, who form opinions, in consequence 
of a weak assent to them act contrary to their conception 
more than those who have knowledge, knowledge will in no 
respect differ from opinion : for some trust to what they 
think, no less than others do to what they know : Heraclitus 
is an instance of this. 

3 . But since we speak of a man having knowledge in two 
ways; (for he that possesses, but does not use his know¬ 
ledge, as well as he that uses it, is said to have knowledge j) 
there will be a difference between his doing what he ought 
not to do, when he possesses but does not use it, and when he 
possesses and uses it. 

4 . Again, since there are two kinds of propositions, [uni¬ 
versal and particular,] nothing hinders a man from acting 
contrary to knowledge, when he possesses both ; that is, 
when he uses the universal but not the particular h : for 
particulars regulate action. There is a difference also in the 
universal $ for it partly relates to the person, and partly to the 
thing. As, for instance, a person knows that dry meats are 
good for every man 5 and that this is a man, or that such and 
such a thing is dry; but whether this is such and such a 
thing, either he does not possess the knowledge, or does not 
use it. In this manner there will be a vast difference : so 
that in one way there seems to be no absurdity, but in the 
other way it would be wonderful. 

5 . Again, it is possible for men to possess knowledge in 
a different manner from those that have been mentioned : 
for we see the habit differing, in consequence of a man pos¬ 
sessing, but not using knowledge j so that in a manner he 
has it and has it not; such as the person who is asleep, or 
mad, or drunk. Now those who are under the influence of 
passions are affected in the same way: for anger, and sensual 
desires, and some such things as those, evidently even alter 
the body; and in some they even create madness. It is 

h Thus a man may possess the knowledge, that all intemperance is bad: 
and that drinking a particular quantity of wine is intemperance s but when 
he come® to act, he forgets, and docs not use the latter. 



172 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VII. 


evident therefore that we must say that the incontinent are 
in a similar situation to these. Rut the fact of their using 
expressions which must have proceeded from knowledge, is 
no proof to the contrary $ for those who are under these 
passions, recite demonstrations and verses of Empedocles 5 
and those who are learning for the first time, connect sen¬ 
tences together, but do not yet understand them 5 for they 
must grow up with them 5 and this requires time. So that 
we must suppose the incontinent use these expressions in 
the same manner as actors. 

6. Again, one might take a view of the cause physically 
in this manner. There is one opinion upon universals, and 
another upon those particulars, which sense has the direction 
of: and when one is formed from the two united, the soul 
must necessarily assent to the conclusion, and if it is a prac¬ 
tical matter must immediately act upon it; for instance, if 
it is right to taste every thing sweet, and this, as being some 
particular thing, is sweet, then the person, who has the 
power and is not prevented, when he puts these two to¬ 
gether, must necessarily act. When therefore one universal 
opinion exists in the man, which forbids him to taste j and 
another [universal one], that every thing sweet is pleasant, 
and this particular thing is sweet; and the last universal 
acts, and desire happens to be present; the first universal 
tells him to avoid this particular thing, but desire leads him 
on; for it is able to move each of the parts. So that he 
happens in a manner to act incontinently from reason* and 
from opinion: not that these two are opposed to each other 
naturally, but accidentally: for it is the desire and not the 

* l*" 01, h* an act °f reason to put the last universal and the particular 
opinion together, and to draw ,an inference from them. The argument 
is this; the man possesses two universal opinions; one, that it is wrong 
to indulge in sweet things: the other, that all sweet things are pleasant; 
hie has also a particular opinion, viz. that this (whatever it may he) is 
pleasant: now if this particular opinion was united to the first universal, 
he would not taste it: if to the second, he would: and when desire exists 
|n hiip # 0 , that together with the second universal overpowers the first, 
and he tastes it; so that desire is really the cause* 



CHAP. IV* 


ETHICS. 


173 


opinion, which is opposed to right reason. So that for this 
reason brutes are not incontinent, because they have no uni¬ 
versal conceptions, but only an instinct of particulars and 
memory. But how the [temporary] ignorance ceases, and 
the incontinent man again becomes possessed of knowledge, 
the case is the same with a man drunk or asleep, and is not 
peculiar to this passion ; which case we must hear explained 
by physiologists. But since the last [i. e. the particular] pro¬ 
position is an opinion formed by the sensitive part, and 
decides the actions, the man, who is under the passion, either 
doe3 not possess this, or possesses it in such a way, that the 
possessing k it not to have knowledge, but merely to re¬ 
peat [what proceeds from knowledge], like the drunken man 
repeats the verses of Empedocles. And because the last ex¬ 
treme [i. e. the particular opinion] is not universal, and does 
not appear to convey knowledge so much as the universal, 
that which Socrates enquired into seems to be the fact: for 
the passion does not take place when that, which appears pro¬ 
perly to be knowledge, is present ; nor is this dragged about 
by the passion $ but it is, when that opinion which is formed 
by sense is present. Concerning the question therefore of 
acting incontinently with knowledge, or without, and how it 
is possible to do so with knowledge, let this suffice. 


CHAP. IV. 

The sixth question is considered, viz. what is the subject 
matter of incontinence. 

X. We must next consider, whether any one is absolutely 
incontinent, or all are so in particular things j and if the 
former, what is the subject matter. Now that the continent 
and patient, the incontinent and effeminate appear so in 


k I follow Lambinus in reading to 



174. 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VII, 


pleasures and pains, is evident. But since some of those 
things which create pleasure are necessary, and others, 
though chosen for their own sakes, yet admit of excess, bodily 
pleasures are necessary: I mean by such, the pleasures of 
food, and sensual pleasures, and such bodily pleasures, as we 
have stated to be the subject of intemperance and tem¬ 
perance : others are not necessary, but chosen for their own 
sakes; I mean, for instance, victory, honour, wealth, and 
such like good and pleasant things. Now those, who ex¬ 
ceed in these contrary to the right reason, which is in thenv 
we do not simply call incontinent, but we add, incontinent 
in money, in gain, in honour, or anger: but not simply in¬ 
continent, as if they were different, and called so only from 
resemblance; as the victor at the Olympic games was called 
man ; for to him the common appellation differred a little 
from his own, but yet it was different 1 . A proof of what I 
have Said is this t incontinence is censured, not only as an 
error, but also as a species of vice, either simply so, or par¬ 
tially : but nobody, who runs into the other failings, is so 
censured. But of those who indulge in bodily enjoyments, 
in which we have said that the temperate and intemperate 
are distinguished, he, that pursues the excesses of pleasures, 
and avoids excesses of pain, as hunger and thirst, heat and 
cold, and every thing connected with touch and taste, not 
from deliberately choosing, but contrary to bis deliberate 
choice and his judgment, is called incontinent, not with the 
addition, that it is in this particular thing, such as anger, but 
simply so. A proof of it is this : people are called effemi¬ 
nate in these matters, but in none of those others: and for 
this reason we rank the incontinent and intemperate, the 
continent and temperate, under the same head, but not any 
of the others, because the former are in a manner concerned 
with the same pleasures and pains. They are indeed con¬ 
cerned with the same things, but not in the same manner; 
but the one deliberately choose them, the others do not. 

1 This passage is translated. literally, without professing to understand 
the meaning of it. 



CHAP, IV. 


ETHICS. 


175 


herefore we should call the man, who pursues excesses and 
avoids moderate pains, not from desire, or, if at all, a faint 
desire, more intemperate than him, who does the same from 
vehement desire; for what would the former have done, if 
e had felt also youthful desire, and excessive pain in the 
Want of necessary things ? 

2. But since some desires and pleasures come under the 
genus of things honourable and good; for of things, which 
are pleasant, some are eligible by nature, some are the con- 

thZ ° f thos ^ andothers between both, (as we distinguished 
them before,) for instance money, and gain, and victory, and 

nnt'hl" 7 " !. UCh tlun & s and those between both, men are 
not blamed for feeling, or desiring, or loving them, but for 

Wheref )' S manner ’ and carr y iD £ them to excess, 

bv naf T 5 are OVerCorae b y> or pursue, what is 

; y ":: e h0n0UrabIe and S ood «»tmy to reason, such as 
those who are very anxious and more so than they ought 

IZedTT’ it f ° r thCir Chik,ren ° r 1>arents ’ t thesc « in¬ 
sured :] for these come under the head of goods, and those 

who are anxious about them, are praised; but still there is a' 

kind of excess even in them, if any one, like Niobe, strove 

n against the gods, or, like Satyrus surnamed Philopater 

foohsh T?c h ' Sf t e % f0r he WaSth0U S ht t0 be excessively 

foS ■" \ n ° dCpraVity in those 

for the reason given, that each of them comes under those 
things, which are by nature chosen for their own sakes • but 
. ‘ elr ° Wn e3ccesses are bad and to be avoided. So also there 
”” >»“■»*'«»“ >” •!.=»; for incontinence is not only ^ 

» u ‘ 11 '"‘"“=<1 amongst U.iL, 
censurabk But from the similarity of the affection, they 
add the particular incontinence, and use the term to each 
in the same manner as they call a man a bad physician and 
a bad actor whom they would not simply caU bad. As 
therefore m these instances they would not simply call them 
so, because each of them is not really a vice, but from its 
proportionate resemblance; so also in the other case we must 
evidently suppose that only to be incontinence and conti¬ 
nence, which has the same subject matter with temperance 



17 6 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VII. 


and intemperance. Bat in the case of anger, we use the 
term from resemblance s wherefore we call the man incon¬ 
tinent, adding, in anger, as in honour and gain. 


CHAP. V. 

Upon brutality, 

1. But since some things are pleasant by nature, (and of 
these, some are so universally, others to different kinds of 
animals and men :) others are pleasant not from nature, but 
some from bodily imperfections, some from custom, and 
others from depravity of disposition, in each of these we may 
see corresponding habits. I mean brutal habits : for in¬ 
stance, that woman, who, they say, ripped up women with 
child ., and devoured the children; or such things, as they say 
some savages about Pontus delight in, some with raw meat, 
some with human flesh, and others to lend their children to 
each other for a feast: or what is said of Phalaris. These 
are brutal habits. Others are produced in some people from 
disease and madness; like the man, who slaughtered and ate 
his mother, and another ale his fellow-servant's liver. Others 
come from disease ox from custom, as the pulling of hair qnd 
biting of nails, and farther the eating coals and earth : to 
which may be added the love of males : for these things 
happen to some by nature and to others from custom ; for 
instance, to those who have been accustomed to them from 
childhood. With whomsoever nature is the cause, no one 
would call them incontinent; as they would not call women 
so, from the natural distinction of sex; the case is the same 
with those, who are habitually diseased. Now to be subject 
to any of these is out of the limits of vice, as also is brutality. 
But when subject to them, to conquer them or to be con¬ 
quered by them is not absolutely [continence or] incontinence, 
but*in resemblance only; in the same manner as we must 



CHAP. V. 


ETHICS. 


177 


say of the passionate man, that he has this part of the affec¬ 
tion m , but not that he is entirely incontinent: for with 
respect to every excessive vice, and folly, and cowardice, and 
intemperance, and rage ; some of them are brutal, and some 
from disease 5 for the man, who is by nature such, as that he 
fears every thing, even if a mouse makes a noise, is subject 
to a brutish cowardice ; and another man was afraid of a cat 
from disease. And of fools, those who are irrational by na¬ 
ture, and live only by sense, are brutish, as some tribes of 
distant barbarians ; but those, who are so from disease, for 
instance, epilepsy or madness, are constitutionally diseased. 
But it is possible only to be subject to some of these occasion¬ 
ally, and not to he conquered by them : I mean, for instance, 
if Phalaris had restrained himself, when he felt a desire to 
eat his child, or for unnatural pleasures. It is possible also 
not only to be subject to, but to be conquered by, them. As 
therefore in the case of depravity, that which is natural to 
man, is simply called depravity: and another kind, with the 
addition, that it is brutish or constitutional, but not simply 
so : in the sarnie manner evidently incontinence is partly 
brutish, and partly constitutional 5 but simply, only that, 
which is akin to human intemperance. Therefore that in¬ 
continence and continence only exist in the same things witli 
intemperance and temperance, and that in other things there 
is another species of incontinence, called so metaphorically 
and not absolutely, is evident. 

m I have erideaVOured to translate this passage without altering the 
text: but perhalps ftambinus’s emendation, is requisite: with the' 

article c* prefixed is Used all throughout this book for* the particular way 
in which the incontinent man is affected s h e. it is used to signify incon¬ 
tinence* 



178 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VU, 


CHAP. VI. 

A comparison between incontinence in anger, and incontinence in 
desire . 

1 Let ns now consider the circumstance, that inconti¬ 
nence in anger is less disgraceful than incontinence in desires. 
For anger seems to listen in a manner to reason, but to listen 
imperfectly ; as hasty servants, who, before they have heard 
the whole message, run away, and then make a mistake in 
executing it: and dogs, before they have considered whether 
it is a friend, if he only makes a noise, bark : thus anger, 
from a natural warmth and quickness, having listened, but 
not heard the order, rushes to vengeance. For reason or 
imagination has signified, that the slight is an insult; but 
anger, as if it had drawn the inference that it ought to 
quarrel with such a person, is immediately exasperated. 
But desire, if reason or sense only say that the thing is 
pleasant, rushes to the enjoyment of it. So that anger fol¬ 
lows reason in a manner, but desire does not 11 : it is there¬ 
fore more disgraceful 5 for he that is incontinent in anger, 
is in a manner overcome by reason; but the other by desire, 
and not by reason. 

2. Again, it is more pardonable to follow natural appetites, 
since it is also more pardonable to follow such desires as are 
common to all, and as far as they are common. But anger 
is more natural, and excessive anger is more natural than 
desires carried to excess and unnecessary ones; like the man 
who defended himself for beating his father, because, said 
he, my father beat his father, and he again beat his 5 and 
this also (pointing to his child) will beat me, when he be- 

n This may seem to contradict the last sentence; for there is a kind of 
inference drawn in the case of desire, as well as anger. But mere instinct 
is sufficient in the former case; whereas in anger, reason does not only 
point out that the slight is an insult, but that the insult must be revenged; 
which are not the operations of instinct. 



CHAP. Vi. 


ETHICS. 


m 


comes a maa j for it is natural to our family 0 . And he that 
was dragged by his son, bid him stop at the door, for that 
he himself had dragged his father so far. 

3. Again, those who are more insidious, are more unjust. 
Now the passionate man is not insidious, nor is anger, but 
open j whereas desire is so, as they say of Venus, 

~Deceit-contriving Venus. 

And Homer says, 

——-the Cestus, [wherein dwelt] 

Deceit, which tricks the senses of the wise. 

So that if this incontinence is more unjust, it is also more 
disgraceful than incontinence in anger, and is absolute incon* 
tinence, and in a manner vice. 

4. Again, no one insults feeling pain; but every one, who 
acts from anger, acts feeling pain ; whereas he that insults, 
does it with pleasure. If then those things are more unjust 
with which it is most just to be angry, then incontinence in 
desire is more unjust; for there is no insolence in anger p. 
Consequently that incontinence in desires is more disgraceful 
than that in anger, and that continence and incontinence are 
concerned with bodily desires and pleasures, is evident. 

5. But we must understand their different forms : for, as 
has been said at first, some are human and natural, both in 
kind and in degree; some are brutal $ and others come from 
bodily defects and diseases : but temperance and intem¬ 
perance are only concerned with the first of those. Where¬ 
fore we never call beasts temperate or intemperate, except 
metaphorically, or if any kind of animals differ in some re¬ 
spect entirely from another kind in wantonness and mis¬ 
chievousness, and in being voracious : for they have no de¬ 
liberate choice, nor reason, but depart from nature, like 
human beings that are mad. 

6. But brutishness is a less evil than vice, though more 

0 stor y seems to be brought as an instance of unnecessary and ex¬ 
cessive desires. 

P Because, as we learn from Rhet. b. ii. c, 2. anger is felt in consequence 
of insult 

N 2 



180 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VlX. 


formidable: for the best principle has not been destroyed, 
as in the human being, but they never possess it. It is the 
same therefore as to compare an inanimate with an animate 
substance, to see which is worse; for viciousness is always 
more harmless in that which is without principle ; but in¬ 
tellect is the principle. It is therefore almost the same to 
compare injustice [the abstract] with an unjust man [the 
concrete]: for it is possible that either may be the worse : 
for a vicious man can do infinitely more evils than a beasts 


CHAP. VII. 

A common between incontinence and intemperance, and con¬ 
tinence and patience . Two different/orms of continence are 
described. 

1. But with respect to the pleasures and pains connected 
with touch and taste, and desires, and aversions, (to which 
intemperance and temperance have already been defined to 
belong,) it is possible to have them in such a manner, as to 
be overcome even by those which the generality overcome; 
and it is possible to conquer even those to which the gene¬ 
rality give way. Of these, he that is concerned with plea¬ 
sure, is either incontinent or continent he that is concerned 
with pain is either effeminate, or patient. But the habits 
of the generality are in a medium, although they incline 
most to the bad. 

2 . But since some pleasures are necessary, while others 
are not so, and necessary up to a certain point, but their ex¬ 
cesses and deficiencies are not necessary; so is it also with 

q And yet, as was said above, the beast is more formidable, as it has 
no intellect. The case seems to be this: were we to see a lion and a 
vicious man together, we should fear the lion more than the man; and 
yet were they both absent, we should fear the man most, because he is 
able to plot against us. Or to take another case, if we see an assassin 
with a dagger, it is really the dagger that we fear, but it is the assassin 
who is able to do so much harm. 



CHAP. fir. 


ETHICS. 


181 


desires and pains: he that pursues those pleasures which are 
in excess, or pursues them to excess, or with deliberate choice, 
and for their own sakes, and not for any ulterior result, is 
intemperate: for such a man must necessarily be out of 
the way of repentance; so that he is incurable. He that is 
deficient, is the opposite of the above; he that is in the mean, 
is temperate. It is the same with the man who dies from 
bodily pains, not from being overpowered, but from delibe¬ 
rate choice. But of those who do the same without delibe¬ 
rate choice, one is led on by pleasure ; another from avoid¬ 
ing the pain which comes from desire : so that they differ 
from each other. But every one would think a man was 
worse, if he did any thing disgraceful, having no desires, or 
at least a slight one, than if he had very strong desires ; and 
if he struck another without being angry, than if he had 
been angry: for what would he have done, had he been 
under the influence of passion? wherefore the intemperate 
is worse than the incontinent. 

3 . Of those then that have been mentioned, one is‘ ra¬ 
ther a species of effeminacy, the other is incontinent. The 
continent is opposed to the incontinent, and the patient to 
the effeminate; for patience consists in resistingi continence 
in conquering: but to resist and to conquer are different, in 
the same manner as not being defeated differs from gaining 
a victory. Wherefore also continence is preferable to pa¬ 
tience. But the man that fails in resisting those things 
which the generality strive against and prevail, he is effemi¬ 
nate and delicate ; (for delicacy is a species of effeminacy 3) 
who drags r his cloak after him, that he may not be annoyed 
with the pain of carrying it: and imitating the invalid, he 
does not think himself unhappy, when he is very like an un¬ 
happy man. 

4 . The case is the same with continence and incontinence; 

T I follow Lambinus and several manuscripts in omitting I con¬ 
ceive the meaning to be the same in Juvenal, Sat. i. v. 27. Tyrias humero 
revocante laccrnas. Where Schrevelius has this note: Adeo cnim fraetus 
erat mollitie, ut penulam in humero propter pondus non rctinuerit, scd de~ 
orsim vergerc pasms sit, ita ut humerus ipsum crebro revocaret. 

ST 3 



182 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK VII. 


for it is not strange, if a person is overcome by violent and 
excessive pleasures or pains $ but it is even pardonable, if 
he struggled against them, (as the Philoctetes of Theodectes, 
when he had been bitten by the viper, or the Cercyon of 
Carcinus * in the Alope i and like those who endeavour to 
stifle their laughter, burst out, as happened to Xenopbantus:) 
but it is strange, if any one is conquered by and cannot re¬ 
sist those which the generality are able to resist, not from 
their generic nature, or from disease, as effeminacy is in the 
kings of Persia generically; and as the female differs from 
the male. Pie that is greatly given to mirth, is thought to 
be intemperate : but he is effeminate ; for mirth is a relaxa¬ 
tion, if it is a cessation : and amongst those who carry re¬ 
laxation to excess, conies the man who is given to mirth. 

5. One species of incontinence is precipitancy, another is 
weakness : for the latter having deliberated, do not abide by 
their determinations, owing to their passions: but the 
former, from not having deliberated at all, are led on by 
passion. For some, (like those, who when they have tickled 
themselves * beforehand, do not feel the tickling of others,) 
having notice of it previously, and foreseeing it, and rousing 
themselves and their reason beforehand, are not overpowered 
by the passion, whether it be pleasant or painful. Those 
who are quick, and those who are melancholy, are generally 
subject td the precipitate incontinence i for the former from 
haste, and the latter from excess of feeling, do not wait for 
reason, because they are in the habit of following their 
fancy. 

5 In the note to Wilkinson’s edition it is written whereas it 

should be K fyxmu for the penultima is short. Aristoph. Nub. 1261. 
Vesp. 1501, 1505. Pax. 782, 864 

t One manuscript reads wgoyKgyaXipS-ivms, which would be better: but 
I should prefer ^^oyec^yct^.ura,fx.mt. 



€HAP, VIII. 


ETHICS. 


1*83 


CHAP. ‘VIH. 

In what the vicious or intemperate and th? incontinent differ 
from, and in what they resemble, each other. 

1. The intemperate man, as has been said, is not in the 
habit of repenting ; for he adheres to his deliberate choice j 
but the incontinent man, under every form of incontinence, 
is in the habit of repenting. Wherefore the fact is not ac¬ 
cording to the difficulty stated above 41 : but the former is 
incurable, and the latter curable: for depravity resembles 
dropsy and consumption in diseases, and incontinence re¬ 
sembles epilepsy ; for the former is a constant, the latter not 
a constant failing. And on the whole the genus of incon¬ 
tinence and vice is different ; for vice acts imperceptibly,; 
but incontinence does not act imperceptibly. 

2 . But of these themselves, those that are forsed from 
their opinion, are better than those who have feason, but 
do not adhere to it; for these last are overpowered by a 
weaker passion, and are not without permeditation, as the 
others are: for the incontinent resembles those who are in¬ 
toxicated quickly, and with a little wine, and less than the 
generality, 

3 . Consequently that incontinence is not vice, is evident: 
but perhaps it is to a certain degree : for the one is contrary, 
the other according to deliberate choice. Not but that they 
are similar in their effects: like the saying of Demodocus 
about the Milesians ; for the Milesians are not fools, but 
they do such things as fools would : and the incontinent are 
not unjust, but they act unjustly. But since the character 
of the one is such, that he follows those bodily pleasures, 
which are in excess and contrary to right reason, not from 
being persuaded that he should do so; but the other is per¬ 
suaded to it, because his character is such, as inclines him to 
pursue them ; for this reason the former is easily persuaded 
right, but the latter is not. For as to virtue and depravity, 

* u At the end of the fourth section of the second chapter* 

N 4 



184 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIE. 


one destroys and the other preserves the principle: but in 
practical questions, the object, is. tile principle*, as the hypo¬ 
theses are in mathematical questions. In the latter case rea¬ 
son does not teach the principles, nor in practical questions, 
but virtue either natural or nioral teaches the habit of think¬ 
ing rightly upon the principle. Such a character therefore 
is temperate, and the contrary is intemperate. But there is 
a.character, which from passion is forced out of right reason, 
whom passion so far conquers, as that he does not act ac¬ 
cording to right reason ; but it does not conquer him so far, 
as that he is of such a character as to be persuaded that he 
ought to follow such pleasures without any restraint. This 
is the incontinent man ; better than the intemperate, and not 
wholly vicious j for the best, i. e. the principle, is preserved. 
But another character is opposite to.this, he that adheres to 
reason, and is not. forced outjof; it, at least not from passion. 
It is evident then from all this, that one habit i* good, the 
other bad. 


CHAP. IX. 

The second question is discussed: and the difference shewn, be¬ 
tween continence and,obstinacy,. 

1. Is he then continent, who adheres to any reason and 
to any deliberate choice whatever, or he, who adheres to the 
right? and is he incontinent, who does not adhere to any de¬ 
liberate choice and to any reason whatever, or he who does 
not adhere to true reason and right deliberate choice, in the 
manner that we doubted before ? or is it accidentally he, 
that adheres to any whatever, but in real fact the one ad- 

* I<: has already been seen, particularly in the 6th book, c. & that there 
ara two principles of action, the causal and .the motive principle, the latter 
of which is the : but it is the former which is destroyed by in¬ 

temperance and-.preserved by .temperance. 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


1S5 


heres and the other does not adhere to true reason and right 
deliberate choice y? For if anyone chooses or pursues this 
particular thing for the sake of that, he really pursues and 
chooses that; but accidentally the former; and speaking 
generally we mean that which he really pursues. So that 
it. is possible that the one adheres to, and the other departs 
from, any opinion whatever ; but absolutely, the true one. 

2. But there are some, who adhere to their opinion ; and 
there are some, whom they call obstinate, such as those who 
are difficult to be persuaded, and not easy to be turned from 
their persuasions, who have some resemblance to the conti¬ 
nent, like the prodigal has to the liberal, and the rash to the 
courageous ; but they are different in. many respects. For 
the one is not led by passion and desire to change, and that 
is the continent; for the continent man will be easily per¬ 
suaded under certain circumstances ; but the other, not even 
by reason ; since many of them take up desires, and are led 
by pleasures. The self-willed, and the uneducated, and 
clowns, are obstinate; the self-willed, from pleasure and 
pain: for they take delight in getting the better, if they are 
not forced to give up their opinion ; and they feel pain, if 
their decisions, like public decrees, are not ratified. So that 
they resemble the incontinent more than the continent. 

3. But there are some, who do not adhere to their opi¬ 
nions, not from incontinence, like Neoplolemus in the Phi- 
loctetes of Sophocles ; and yet it was on account of pleasure 
that he did not adhere, but it was a noble pleasure ; for to 
speak truth was to him noble, and he had been persuaded 
by Ulysses to speak falsely: for not every one that does 
any thing from pleasure is intemperate, or vicious, or incon¬ 
tinent, but he who does it for a vicious pleasure. 

4. But since there is.such a character, as takes less delight" 
than he ought in bodily, pleasures, and does not adhere to 
reason, the character between that and the incontinent is the 

r Ho that adheres to any opinion, adheres to it because he thinks it is 
founded upon right reason ; therefore he really, *«&• adheres to right 

reason; and his adherence to the other is only accidental. 



186 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK VII®- 


continent: for the incontinent, in consequence of some ex* 
cess, does not adhere to reason ; and the other, in conse¬ 
quence of some deficiency; but the continent adheres to it, 
and does not change from either cause. Rut if continence is 
good, both the opposite habits must be bad, as they appear 
to be: but because the one appears in few persons and 
seldom, in the same manner as temperance seems to be only 
opposed to intemperance, so does continence to inconti¬ 
nence. 

5. But since many expressions are used from resemblances, 
the continence of the temperate man has followed from their 
resemblance: for the continent man is inclined to do no¬ 
thing contrary to reason for the sake of bodily pleasures, 
and so is the temperate j but the former possesses, the latter 
does not possess bad desires : and the character of the latter 
is not to be pleased contrary to reason, but of the former, to 
feel pleasure, though not to be led by it® The case is the 
same with the incontinent and intemperate; they are dif¬ 
ferent, but both follow bodily pleasures: the one thinking 
that it is right, the other not thinking so. 


CHAP. X. 

The fifth question, whether the prudent man can he incontinent* 
A comparison between incontinence and vice . 

1. It is impossible for the same man to be at once prudent 
and incontinent: for when a man is prudent, he has been 
shewn to be at the same time morally good. Again, a man 
is not prudent from merely knowing, but from being also 
able to act,* but the incontinent is not able to act. But 
nothing hinders the clever man from being incontinent; 
whence some men now and then seem to be prudeqt, and 
yet incontinent, because cleverness differs from prudence iq 



CHAP. X. 


ETHICS. 


18? 


the manner that has been mentioned above 2 , and resembles 
it with respect to reason, but differs with respect to delibe¬ 
rate choice. 

2 . Nor yet is the incontinent like one, who has knowledge 
and uses it, but like one asleep or drunk: and he acts will¬ 
ingly; for he in a manner knows both what he does and 
why; but he is not wicked 5 for his deliberate choice is 
good; so that he is half-wicked, and not unjust, for he is 
not designing. For one of them is not apt to adhere to his 
deliberations ; and the melancholy does not deliberate at all. 
Hence the incontinent man resembles a city, which passes all 
suitable decrees, and has good laws, but uses none of them, 
like the jest of Anaxandrides, 

The state decrees, which careth nought for laws: 

but the wicked man resembles a city, which uses laws, but 
uses bad ones* 

S. Incontinence and continence are displayed in that which 
surpasses the habit of the generality; for the one adheres 
more, and the other less, than the ability of the generality. 
But the incontinence of the melancholy is more curable than 
that of those, who do deliberate, but do not adhere to their 
deliberations; and those who are incontinent from custom* 
than those who are so by nature; for it is easier to change 
custom than nature. For the same reason also it is difficult 
to change custom, because it resembles nature, as Euemis 
says. 

Practice, my friend, is lasting: which becomes 

A second nature in the end to man. 

What then continence is, and what incontinence, and pa¬ 
tience, and effeminacy, and what relation these habits bear 
to one another, has been explained. 

* Book vL c. 12. sect & 


The four chapters which follow, being generally considered 
m spurious, and as the same subject is treated of at the beginning 
of the 10 th book, I have not translated them . 



ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS, 


BOOK VIII. 


CHAP. I. 

Friendship is necessary to all conditions and ages: it is natural, 
the bond of society, and noble. Different opinions as to the 
formation of it 

1. It wpuld follow next after this to treat of friendship* 
for it is a species of virtue, or united to virtue. Secondly * 
It is also most necessary for life* for without friends no one 
would choose to live, even if he had all other goods. Por 
to the rich, and to those in office and authority, there seems 
particularly to be a need of friends: for what profit is there 
in such good fortune, if the power of conferring benefits is 
taken away, which is shewn in the greatest degree and in 
the most praiseworthy manner towards friends ? or how 
could it b# kept up and preserved without friends ? for by 
how mucli the greater it is, so much the more likely is it to 
fall. And in poverty and other misfortunes they think that 
friends are the only refuge. Thirdly ; It is also necessary to 
the young to preserve them from error, and to the old to at¬ 
tend upon them, and supply that which is deficient in their 



190 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VUi. 


actions from weakness a : and to those in the vigour of life to 
further their noble deeds. 

Two going together, &c» &c. &c. 

For they are more able to conceive and to execute. 

%. It seems also naturally to be felt by the thing producing 
towards the thing produced; and not only amongst men, 
but also in birds, and in most animals, and in those of the 
same tribe towards one another, and most of all amongst 
men: where we praise the friendly. One may see also 
in travelling, how intimate and friendly every man is to 
another. 

3. Friendship also seems to keep states together, and legis¬ 
lators to pay more attention to it than to justice; for unani¬ 
mity seems to be something resembling friendship $ and they 
are most desirous of this, and banish sedition as being the 
greatest enemy. And when men are friends, there is no 
need of justice ; but although they are just, they still want 
friendship. And of all the feelings of justice, the principal 
seems to be the feeling of friendship. 

4. It is not only necessary, but also honourable $ for we 
praise those, who love their friends ; and the having many 
friends seems to be one species of things honourable. 

5. But there are not a few disputes concerning it j for 
some consider it a kind of similarity, and that those, who 
are similar, are friends : whence they say, fe Like to like,” 

Jackdaw to jackdaw,” and such like proverbs : others on 
the contrary say that all such are like potters to one another. 
And concerning these matters they carry their enquiries 
higher and more physically : Euripides says. 

The earth parch’d up with dryness loves the rain; 

The clouds, when charg’d with rain, from their high seats 

Love to descend to earth. 

Heraclitus also thought that contrariety is advantageous, 

a I have omitted fion&tSecs, for which there seems no necessity, and 
which hardly admits of any construction, as it stands now. 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


191 


and that there is the most beautiful harmony from things 
different, and that every thing is generated in strife. Em¬ 
pedocles and others thought contrary to this ; that like is 
fond of like. 

6. Now the physical questions must be passed over • for 
they do not belong to our present consideration. But as 
many as belong to man, and refer to his morals and his pas¬ 
sions, these let us consider : such as, first, whether friend¬ 
ship exists in all, or whether it is impossible for the depraved 
to be friends: secondly, whether there is only one species 
of friendship, or more; for those, who think there is only 
one, because it admits of being greater or less, do not trust 
to a sufficient proof $ for things differing in species also ad¬ 
mit of being greater or less; and we have spoken about this 
before. 


CHAP. IL 

The three objects of friendship, and the perfect definition of it 

1. Perhaps some certainty would appear about these mat¬ 
ters, if the object of friendship were known j for it seems 
that it is not every thing that is loved, but only that, which 
is an object of friendship} and this is, what is good, plea¬ 
sant, or useful. But that might be reckoned useful, by 
means of which there is produced some good or pleasure*: so 
that the good and the pleasant would alone be objects of 
friendship, considered as ends. 

% Whether then do men love the good, or what is good 
to them ? for these sometimes are different. The case is the 
same with the pleasant. But each seems to love that, which 
is good to himself; and really and truly the good is an ob¬ 
ject of friendship, but to each individual, that which is so to 
each. But each loves not what is good to himself, but what 
appears so: and this will make no difference: for the object 
of friendship must be that, which appears to be one. 



m 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK VIIX. 


$. But since there are three things., for which men love, in 
a fondness for inanimate things the term friendship cannot 
be used : for there is no return of fondness, nor any wishing 
of good to the other. For it is perhaps ridiculous to wish 
good to wine ; but if a man should do so, he wishes it to be 
preserved, that he himself may have it. But we say that 
.men should wish good to a friend for the sake of that friend 5 
and those, who wish it in the above manner, we call well- 
disposed, unless there is also the same feeling from the other 
party: for good-will where both parties feel it is friendship ; 
or must we add that this mutual good-will must not be un¬ 
known to both parties ? for many feel good-will towards 
those, who they have never seen, but who they suppose are 
good or useful to them. But if any one of the others feels 
this towards him, these certainly appear well disposed to one 
another; but how can one call them friends, when they do 
not know how they are disposed to them } They ought 
therefore to have good-will towards each other, and wish 
them what isgood, not unknown to each other, and for one 
of the motives mentioned above. 


GHAF. Ill; 

The three species of friendship are explained, and the persons 
who feel each. Why friendship for the good is best. 

1. But these motives differ in species from one another 5 
therefore the affections do so likewise, and the friendships. 
For there are three species of friendship, equal in number to 
the motives of friendship j since in eaeh there is a mutual 
fondness, and that not unknown to both parties. But those 
who love one another, wish goods to one another according 
to that motive for which they love. Now those Who • love 
one another for the useful, do not love them for their own 
sakes, but inasmuch as there results some gmi to themselves 



CHAP. Ill* 


ETHICS. 


193 


from one another. So also with those who love for plea¬ 
sure : for they do not love the facetious from their being of 
a certain character, but because they are pleasant to them : 
and therefore those who love for the useful, love for the 
sake of what is good to themselves : and those who love for 
pleasure, love for the sake of what is pleasant to themselves; 
and not for the consideration that the person loved is in 
existence, but that he is useful or pleasant. These friend¬ 
ships therefore depend upon accident; for the person loved, 
whoever he may be, is not loved in respect to his existence, 
but inasmuch as they furnish something either good or 
pleasant. Consequently such friendships are easily dissolved, 
if the parties do not continue in similar circumstances 3 for 
if they are no longer pleasant, or useful, they cease to love: 
but the useful does not continue, but becomes different at 
different times. Therefore when that is done away, for 
sake of which they became friends, the friendship also is 
dissolved, which clearly shews that the friendship was for 
those motives. 

2. Such friendship seems mostly to exist amongst old 
men $ (for men at such an age do not pursue the pleasant, 
but the useful 5 ) and as many of those in the vigour of life 
and in youth, as pursue the useful. But such people do not 
altogether associate with one another, for sometimes they are 
not pleasant. Nor indeed do they want the addition of such 
society, unless they are useful to each other $ for they are 
pleasant so far as they entertain hopes of good. Amongst 
those also they rank the friendship of hospitality. But the 
friendship of young men seems to be for the sake of plea¬ 
sure ; for they live according to passion, and mostly pursue 
what is pleasant to themselves and immediate. But as their 
age changes, what is pleasant also becomes different $ where¬ 
fore they quickly become-friends and quickly cease; for 
their friendship changes together with what is pleasant: and 
of such pleasure as this the change is quick. Young men 
also are given to love •, for the principal part of love is from 
passion and for pleasure. Wherefore they feel a friend¬ 
ship, and quickly cease to feel it, changing many times in 

o 



194 


ARISTOTLE’S 


book vnr. 


the same day. But these wish to pass their time together, 
and to associate; for their feelings of friendship are thus 
formed. 

S. Bat the friendship of the good, and of those who re¬ 
semble each other in virtue, is perfect: for these equally 
wish good to one another, inasmuch as they are good ; but 
their goodness is inherent in themselves $ and those, who 
wish good to their friends for the friends’ sake, are friends 
in the greatest degree; for they have this feeling for sake 
of the friends themselves, and not from accident. Their 
friendship therefore continues, as long as they are good ; and 
virtue is lasting. And each is good abstractedly, and to his 
friend; for the good are both abstractedly good and useful 
to one another. In the same manner also they are pleasant: 
for the good are pleasant both abstractedly and to one an¬ 
other: for to each their own peculiar actions, and those 
which agree with their character, are pleasant: but the 
actions of the good do agree with their character, or re¬ 
semble it. Such friendship as this is naturally lasting: for 
it contains in it every thing, which friends ought to have. 
For every friendship is for the sake of good or pleasure, 
either abstractedly or to the person loving, and from a cer¬ 
tain resemblance. But in this friendship, all that has been 
mentioned exists in the parties themselves; for in this there 
is a similarity, and all the other requisites, and that which 
is abstractedly good, is also abstractedly pleasant: but these 
are principally the motives of friendship 5 and therefore the 
feeling friendship, and friendship itself, exists principally in 
these, and is the best. But it is natural for such to be rare ; 
for there are few such characters as these. Moreover it re- * 
quires time and long acquaintance : for, according to the 
proverb, it is impossible for men to know one another^ before 
they have eaten salt together: nor can they admit each 
other, nor become friends, before each appears to each 
worthy of friendship,, and obtains his confidence. But those, 
who hastily perform offices of friendship to one- another, are 
willing to be friends, but are not really so, unless they are 
also worthy of friendship, and know this to be the case.! 



CHAP. IV. 


ETHICS. 


195 


Therefore a wish, for friendship is formed quickly, but not 
friendship. This species of friendship therefore both with 
respect to time and every thing else is perfect, and is formed 
upon the basis of all these requisites, and is the same from 
each to each ; which ought to be the case between friends. 


CHAP. IV. 

Equality is the bond of friendship. What kind of men each 
friendship suits. 

1. But friendship for the agreeable has a resemblance to 
that ; for the good are agreeable to one another. So also 
that for the useful: for the good are useful to one another. 
But in these also the friendships continue most, when there 
is an equal return from each other, for instance, of pleasure. 
And not only thus, but an equal return from the same thing, 
for instance, from the facetious to the facetious, and not as 
from the lover to the person loved : for these do not feel 
pleasure in the same things, but the one in loving the other, 
and the other in receiving attention from the lover. But 
when the personal beauty ceases, sometimes the friendship 
ceases also : for the face is no longer agreeable'to the one, 
and the other does not receive attention. Many how¬ 
ever continue friends, if from long acquaintance they love 
the character, being of the same character. But those, who 
in love affairs do not return the agreeable but the useful, are 
friends in a less degree, and continue less. But those, who 
are friends for the useful, separate together with the useful; 
for they were not friends to one another, but to that which 
was profitable. Consequently for the sake of pleasure and 
the useful it is possible for the bad to be friends with one 
another, and the good with the bad, and a man that is nei¬ 
ther good nor bad with either 3 but for the sake of the parties 
themselves, evidently only the good can be friends; for the 

0 2 



196 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIII, 


bad feel no pleasure in the persons themselves,, unless there 
is some advantage. And the friendship of the good is alone 
free from complaints ; for it is not easy to trust any one 
concerning that, which has been proved by ourselves from a 
long space of time : and between such persons there is con¬ 
fidence, and an anxiety never to offend, and every thing else, 
which is expected in real friendship. But in the other 
friendships nothing hinders such things from occurring. 
Consequently since men call those friends who are so for the 
useful, as cities are 5 (for alliances seem to be formed be¬ 
tween cities for the sake of advantage :) and those who love 
one another for pleasure, as children do$ perhaps we also 
must say that such men are friends, but that there are many 
species of friendship 5 and first and principally that of the 
good, inasmuch as they are good 5 and the others from their 
resemblance ; for inasmuch as there is something good or 
like it, so far they are friends - 3 for the agreeable is a kind 
of good to those who love the agreeable. But these two do 
not generally unite, nor do the same people become friends 
for the useful and the agreeable; for two things which de¬ 
pend upon chance are not often united. Friendship there¬ 
fore being divided into these species, the bad will be friends 
for pleasure or utility, being similar in that respect; but the 
good will be friends for the friends’ sake 5 for they will be 
so inasmuch as they are good. These therefore are really and 
truly friends j the others accidentally, and from their re,- 
semblance to the former. 


CHAP. V. 

The difference between the habit and exercise of friendship* Of 
the friendship of the aged, and the good . 

1. But as in the case of virtue, some men are called goo4 
from the habit, others from the exercise of it, so is it also in 



CHAP. V. 


ETHICS. 


197 


friendship : for some take pleasure in each other, and mu- 
tually confer benefits, by living together ; but those who are 
indolent, or locally separated, do not act, but are so circum¬ 
stanced/that they could act in a friendly manner: for dif¬ 
ference of place does not absolutely destroy friendship, but 
the exercise of it. But if the absence is long, it seems also 
to produce a cessation of friendship : whence it has been said, 

Privation of conversation has dissolved many friendships. 

2. But the aged and the morose do not appear to be fit 
for friendship 5 for the feeling of pleasure is weak in them ; 
and no one can pass his time with a person that is disagree¬ 
able, or not pleasant: for nature is particularly shewn in 
avoiding what is disagreeable, and desiring what is pleasant. 
But those who merely approve of one another without living 
together, seem rather well-inclined, than friends; for no¬ 
thing is so strong a mark of friendship, as to live together : 
for the needy long for assistance; and the happy wish to 
pass their time together $ since it least of all becomes them 
to be solitary. But it is impossible for men to associate, if 
they are not agreeable, and do not take pleasure in the same 
things ; which seems to be the case with the friendship 
merely between companions. 

3. That between the good therefore is friendship in the 
greatest degree, as has been said frequently: for that which 
is in itself good or pleasant, seems to be an object of friend¬ 
ship and of choice, and to each individual, that which is so 
to him; but the good man is an object of friendship and 
choice to the good for both these reasons, Fondness is like 
a passion, and friendship like a habit; for fondness is felt 
no less towards inanimate things: but men return friendship 
with deliberate choice, and deliberate choice proceeds from 
habit. They also wish goods for those they love, for their 
sakes, not from passion, but from habit: and when they 
love a friend, they love that which is good to themselves 5 
for the good man, when he becomes a friend, becomes a 
good to him whose friend he is. Each therefore loves that 



198 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIII. 


which is a good to himself, and makes a return that is equal 
both in wish and in form 3 for equality is said to be friend¬ 
ship. These requisites therefore exist mostly in the friend¬ 
ship of the good. 


CHAP. VI. 

The old are rather well-inclined than friends. In perfect friend¬ 
ship we can only be friends with a few. Comparison between 
the agreeable and the useful. Of the friendship of the great . 

1. But in the morose and the aged there is less friendship, 
in proportion to their being more difficult to be pleased, and 
their taking less pleasure in society ; for those seem to be¬ 
long to friendship, and to produce it in the greatest degree. 
Wherefore young men soon become friends, but old ones do 
not ; for they never become friends of those in whom they 
do not take pleasure; nor the morose in the same manner. 
But such men as these are well-inclined to one another - for 
they wish what is good, and meet each other's wants; but 
they are not generally friends, because they do not pass their 
time together, nor take pleasure in each other 5 which things 
seem particularly to belong to friendship. 

2. To he friends with many, is a thing impossible in the 
perfect friendship ; the same as it is to be in love with many 
at once ; for love is something exceeding ; and that which 
exceeds is naturally felt towards one object. And for the 
same man greatly to.please many at once is not easy b , and 
perhaps it is good that it should not be so. They must also 
become acquainted with one another, and be similar in cha¬ 
racter, which is very difficult. But for the useful and for 
the agreeable it is possible to please many ; for many are of 

b Lambinus translates this passage differently. My only doubt is as 
to the latter clause, av$ uyuB-ov tTm, There is no doubt hut that hfaxm 
may govern an accusative. 



CHAP* VI. 


ETHICS. 


199 


that character, and the services required are performed in a 
short time. 

3. But of these, that which is for sake of the agreeable is 
most like friendship, when the same things are produced by 
both, and they take pleasure in one another, or in the same 
things; of which description are the friendships of the 
young; for there is more liberality in them. But that 
which is for the useful, suits mercenary characters. 

4. The happy do not want useful but agreeable friends, for 
they wish to have some persons to live with ; and they bear 
any thing painful for a short time only 3 nor could any one 
bear it constantly, not even good itself, if it were painful to 
him; hence they seek for agreeable friends. Perhaps also 
they must seek for good friends, who are so by character, 
and also to them; for thus they will have whatever friends 
ought to have. Those who are in authority seem to use 
different kinds of friends; for some arc useful to them, and 
others agreeable. But the same men are not generally both : 
for they do not seek for friends who are agreeable from their 
virtue, nor useful for honourable exploits; but they wish 
the former to be facetious, when they desire the agreeable, 
and the latter to be clever in executing commands : and 
these qualities do not generally meet in the same person. 
And yet we have said that the good man is at once agreeable 
and useful $ but such a character does not become the friend 
of a man high in power, unless the latter is exceeded by the 
other in virtue; otherwise the person who is inferior in 
power, does not make a proportionate return : but such men 
are not frequently found c . 

5. All the friendships therefore which have been men¬ 
tioned, consist in equality; for the same things proceed from 
both parties, and they wish the same to each other; or else 
they exchange one thing for another, such as pleasure for 
profit. But that these are friendships in a less degree and 

c There is some obscurity here. The sense seems to be, that men, 
who* hove very much power, generally speaking have not very much vky 
pie also. 

o 4 



^00 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VUI. 


continue less, has been mentioned 3 they seem also from 
their being like and yet unlike the same thing, to be and 
yet not to be friendships. For from their resemblance to 
that which is formed for virtue’s sake, they appear friendships; 
since one contains the agreeable and the other the useful, 
and both of these exist in the former also. But from that 
being free from complaints and lasting, whereas these 
quickly fall off, and differ in many other respects, they ap¬ 
pear not to be friendships from their dissimilitude to the 
other. 


CHAP. VII. 

Of friendship between parties , which are unequal. 

1, There is another species of friendship, where one of 
the parties is superior 3 as that of a father for his son, and 
generally an older for a younger person, and a husband for 
his wife, and every one in power for the person under him. 
But these differ from one another: for it is not the same 
from parents to children, as from governors to the go¬ 
verned ; nor even from a father to his son, as from a son to 
his father, nor from a husband to his wife, as from a wife to 
her husband: for the perfection and the office of each of 
these is different 3 therefore the motives of their friendship 
are different. Consequently their affections and their friend¬ 
ships themselves are different: hence the same offices are not 
paid from each to the other, nor ought they to require them. 
But when children pay to their parents what is due to those 
who begat them, and parents to their sons what is due to 
children, the friendship of such as these is lasting and sincere. 
But in all those friendships, where one party is superior, the 
fondness also ought to be proportionate 3 as that the better 
person should be loved in a greater degree than he loves, so 
also the more useful person, and every other in the same 



CHAP. VII. 


ETHICS. 


mi 

way. For when the fondness is proportional, then there is 
in a manner an equality which seems to be a property of 
friendship. 

2. But equality does not seem to be the same in justice as 
in friendship ; for equality in proportion to merit holds the 
first place in justice, and equality as to quantity is the second ; 
but in friendship, that which relates to quantity is first, and 
that which relates to merit is secondary. This is evident, if 
there is a great distance between the parties in virtue, or 
vice, or prosperity, or any thing else : for they are then no 
longer friends, and they even do not expect it. It is mo&t 
evident in the case of the gods $ for they possess all goods to 
the greatest excess : it is also evident in the case of kings 5 
for they who are very inferior do not presume to be friends 
with them 5 nor do the worthless presume to be so with the 
best or wisest men. 

3. Between such parties as these there is no strict limita¬ 
tion, how far they may be friends ; for although we take 
away much from one party, still the friendship continues $ 
but when one is very far removed from the other, as from a 
god, it continues no longer. Whence also there is! a doubt 
whether friends wish their friends the greatest goods, for in¬ 
stance, that they should become gods; for then they would 
no longer be their friends ; and therefore they would not be 
goods to them 5 for friends are goods. But A if it has been 
rightly said, that a friend wishes his friend good for his 
sake, the friendship ought to continue, whatever the other 
party may become. He will therefore e wish him to have the 
greatest goods, as a man ; though perhaps not every good ; 
for each wishes goods for himself most of all. 


Read Si. 


* Read W. 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIII, 


20% 


CHAP. YIIL 

Friendship consists more in loving than being loved. Concerning 
the duration of friendship. 

1. Most men from desire of honour seem to like to be 
loved rather than to love : wherefore the generality are fond 
of flattery; for the flatterer is a friend who is inferior to the 
other, or pretends to be so, and to love rather than to be 
loved : and to beloved seems to resemble the being honoured, 
whieh most men are desirous of. They do not however seem 
to choose honour for its own sake, but contingently • for the 
generality delight in being honoured by those in power on 
account of hope; for they think that they shall obtain from 
them whatever they want. Thus they delight in honour, 
as an earnest of receiving favours. But those who are de¬ 
sirous of honour from men of equity and judgment, are 
anxious to confirm their own opinion of themselves: thus 
they take delight in the idea that they are good, trusting to 
the judgment of those who say so. But they feel delight in 
being loved merely for the sake of being loved ; wherefore 
to be loved might seem to be better than to be honoured, and 
that friendship chosen for its own sake consisted in this; but 
it really seems to consist in loving rather than being loved. 
A proof of this is, that mothers take delight in loving * for 
some give their children to be nursed, and knowing that thev 
are their children love them, though they do not seek to be 
loved in return, if the feeling cannot be mutual - f but it seems 
sufficient to them if they see them doing well: and they love 
their children, although the latter from ignorance cannot 
repay to their mother what is due. But since friendship 
consists more in loving, and those who love their friends 
are praised, to love seems to be the perfection of friends. 

So that the parties between whom this takes place pro,, 
portionately are lasting friends, and the friendship of such is 
asting. But in this manner those who are unequal, may 
also be the greatest friends ; for they may be brought to an 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


203 


equality. But equality and similarity is friendship, and par¬ 
ticularly the similarity of the virtuous : for as they continue 
the same to themselves, they also continue the same to each 
other, and neither want any thing bad, nor contribute to the 
procuring it, but if we may so, they even prevent it: for it is 
characteristic of the good, neither to commit faxilts themselves, 
nor to suffer their friends to contribute to it. But the wicked 
have no stability; for they do not remain consistent even with 
themselves $ but they become friends for a short time, taking 
delight in each other’s wickedness. The useful and the 
agreeable continue friends longer than these; for they con¬ 
tinue as long as they furnish pleasure and profit to one 
another. 

3 . But of those who are in opposite situations, there seems 
to be most friendship for the useful; for instance, a poor 
man with a rich one, an uneducated with a learned man j 
for whatever a needy person wants, being desirous of that, 
he makes other presents in return. Under this head one 
might bring in the lover and the person loved 5 the handsome 
and the ugly. Whence also lovers sometimes appear ridicu¬ 
lous, when they expect to be loved as much as they love : 
when they are equally objects of love, they may perhaps ex¬ 
pect it • but when they possess nothing of the kind, it is ri¬ 
diculous. But perhaps opposite never desires opposite for 
itself, but contingently ; and the aim is directed to the mean j 
for that is a good : for instance, what is dry desires not to 
become moist, but to arrive at the mean; so also what is 
warm, and every thing else in the same way. Let us have 
done with this, however, for it is foreign to ofir purpose. 


CHAP. IX. 

All friendship , as well as justice , is in community : and cmry 
community is subordinate to the general community . 

1. Friendship and justice appear, as was said at first, to 
be about the same things, and between the same persons^ for in 



204 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIII. 


every community there seems to be some justice and some 
friendship. Thus they call fellow-sailors and fellow-sol¬ 
diers friends, and so likewise those in any other community. 
But as far as they have any thing in common, so far is 
friendship; for justice is also thus far. And the proverb, 
that the property of friends is common, is right; for friend¬ 
ship consists in community: and to brothers and compa¬ 
nions all things are common 3 but to others, certain definite 
things, to some more, to other less, for some friendships are 
stronger and some weaker. There is also a difference in 
justice; for it is not the same between parents and children, 
as between brothers and one another; nor between compa¬ 
nions as between citizens, and so on in every other friend¬ 
ship. Injustice is therefore different between each of these, 
and is aggravated by bfing done to greater friends ; for in¬ 
stance, it is more shameful to rob a companion of money 
than a fellow-citizen, and not to assist a brother than a 
stranger, and to strike one’s father than any one else. But 
justice naturally increases together with friendship, as they 
are between the same parties, and of equal extent. 

2. But all f communities seem like parts of the political 
community3 for men travel together for some advantage, 
and furnishing some of the necessaries of life. Political 
community seems also originally to have been formed and 
still to continue for sake of advantage, for legislators aim 
at this, and say that what is expedient to the community is 
just. Now the other communities desire advantage in some 
particular thing 5 as sailors that which is peculiar to sailing, 
either for the gaining of money, or something of that kind 3 
soldiers that which belongs to war, desirous* either of 
money, or victory, or the taking of a city 3 so also people of 
the same tribe and borough seek each their own advantage. 
Some communities seem to have been formed for the sake 
of pleasures, such as merry-makings and clubs 5 for these 
were formed for the sake of sacrifice and sociability: for* the 

f Bead 

% There is evidently some corruption here, and some transposition seems 
necessary: I have followed one much less violent than that of Muretus. 



CHAP. X. 


ETHICS. 


205 


ancient sacrifices and general meetings seem to have' been 
held after the gathering of harvest; the first-fruits, for in¬ 
stance; for the people had most leisure at that time, when 
they were offering sacrifices and paying honours to the gods 
in those meetings, and providing themselves an agreeable 
relaxation. But all these seem to be subordinate to political 
community; for this desires not present advantage, but 
what is so for the whole of life. All communities therefore 
seem to be parts of the political community; and similar 
friendships will follow similar communities. 


CHAP. X. 

Of different forms of government, monarchy, aristocracy, timo¬ 
cracy; and the corruptions of them, tyranny, oligarchy, and 
democracy. A counterpart of each of these is found in private 
families. 

X. There are three forms of civil government, and as 
many deflections, which are as it were corruptions of them. 
The governments are, a kingdom, an aristocracy, and a 
third from the influence of property, which it seems proper 
to call a timocracy: but the generality are accustomed to 
apply the term government or commonwealth exclusively to 
this last. 

2. The deflection from kingly power is tyranny; for both 
are monarchies: but there is the greatest difference between 
them; for the tyrant looks to his own benefit, the king to 
that of his subjects ; for he is not a king who is not inde¬ 
pendent, and who does not abound in all goods; but such 
a person as this wants nothing else; and consequently he 
would not be considering what is beneficial to himself, but 
to his subjects , for he that does not act so, must be a kind 
of king chosen by lot. But tyranny is opposite to this; for 
a tyrant pursues his own peculiar good. And it appears more 



205 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIII. 


evidently in this respect, that it is the worst form of all; for 
that is worst, which is opposite to the best. But the de¬ 
flection from kingly power is to tyranny; for tyranny is a 
vieiousness of monarchy, and a vicious king becomes a 
tyrant. 

S. The deflection from aristocracy is to oligarchy, through 
the ill conduct of those in power, who distribute the offices 
of the state without a consideration of merit, give all or 
most goods to themselves, and the offices of state constantly 
to the same people, paying most consideration to wealth*: 
consequently a few and vicious people are in power instead 
of the best. 

4 . The deflection from timocracy is to democracy; for 
they border upon one another, since a timocracy is also ge¬ 
nerally in the hands of the multitude, and all who are raised 
by their estates are equal But democracy is the least de¬ 
praved; for this form of government is only a small de¬ 
flection. Such then are the most freqpent changes of go¬ 
vernments; for thus they depart the least and in the most 
natural manner from their proper form. 

5 . One may find resemblances, and as it were examples of 
these even in private families : for the community of a father 
and his sons wears the form of kingly power: for the father 
takes care of the children. Hence also Homer calls Jupiter 
Father ; for the kingly power Is generally a paternal au¬ 
thority. But in Persia the authority of a father is tyrannical; 
for they use their sons like slaves. The authority of a master 
over his slaves is also tyrannical: for in that the benefit of 
the master is consulted. This therefore appears right, but 
that of the Persians is wrong; for the power of those who 
are in different circumstances ought to be different. Se¬ 
condly, The community of a man and his wife seems to be 
aristocratical: for the husband governs because it is his due, 
and in those things which a husband ought; and whatever 
is suitable for the wife, he gives up to her. When the 
husband lords it over every thing, it departs into an oli¬ 
garchy; for he does this beyond what is his due, and not in 
consideration of his superiority. But sometimes women. 



Chap. xi. 


ETHICS. 


207 


when they are heiresses, have the authority. Thus the power 
is not according to merit, but according to wealth and in¬ 
fluence, as in oligarchies. Thirdly, The community of brothers 
is like a timocracy 5 for they are equal, except as far as they 
differ in age. Wherefore if there is a great disparity in their 
ages, the friendship is no longer that of brothers. A demo¬ 
cracy takes place mostly in families, where there is no 
master, for then all are equal j and wherever the ruler is 
weak, and each has his own power. 


CHAP. XL 

In each form of government there is a peculiar friendship t 

1. In each of these forms of government there seems to 
be a friendship, to the same extent that there is justice. That 
between a king and his subjects consists in conferring supe¬ 
rior benefits 5 for he does good to his subjects, if he is good 
and takes care of them, that they may be happy, like a shep¬ 
herd takes care of his sheep; whence also Homer calls Aga¬ 
memnon “ the shepherd of his people. 1 ’ Such also is paternal 
friendship : but it exceeds the former in the magnitude of 
its benefits; for the father is the cause of the son’s existence, 
which is thought to be the greatest thing, and of food and 
of education. The same also may be said of ancestors; for 
a father is by nature the ruler of his sons, and ancestors of 
their descendants, and a king of his subjects. But these 
friendships consist in one party being^ superior 3 whence also 
parents receive honour: therefore also justice is not the 
same between the two parties, but according to proportion 3 
for thus also must the friendship be. 

2. Between man and wife there is the same friendship as 
in an aristocracy : for the greater good is given according to 
merit and to the better person, and to each that which is 
suitable. Justice between them is also in the same way. 

3 . The friendship of brothers is like the friendship of com-* 



ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK VIII. 


208 

panions ; for they are equal and of the same age; and such 
persons generally learn the same things, and have the same 
moral character. The friendship of a timocracy is therefore 
like this} for citizens think themselves equal and good : 
consequently the government is held by turns, and equally. 
Such also is the friendship. 

4 . But in the deflections, as justice has little influence, so 
also has friendship, and least of all in the worst. For in a 
tyranny there is no friendship, or very little; for between 
those parties, where the ruler and the ruled have nothing in 
common, there is no friendship : for there is no justice : hut 
the same as between a workman and his instrument, the 
soul and the body, a master and his slave; for all these are 
benefited by the employers. But there is no friendship nor 
justice felt towards inanimate things, neither is there to¬ 
wards an horse or an ox, nor towards a slave, considered as 
a slave j for there is nothing in common; since a slave is 
an animated instrument, and an instrument is an inanimate 
slave. Considered as a slave therefore, there is no friend¬ 
ship towards him, but only as he is a man : for there seems 
to be some sort of justice between every person and every 
one, who is able to participate in a law and a contract; 
some sort of friendship therefore accompanies every state of 
man. Hence friendship and justice extend but a little way 
in tyranny; those in democracies extend farthest; for there 
are many things in common to those, who are equal. 


CHA)P. XII. 

Horn and why different relations love one another . 

Every friendship therefore is in community, as has been 
said already ; but one might separate that of relations and 
companions: those between citizens, and tribesmen, and 
fellow-sailors, and such like, more resemble those in commu- 



CHAP. *11. 


ETHICS. 


M§ 


nity i for they seem as it were to follow a kind of agreement. 
Amongst these also one might rank the 'friendship of hospi¬ 
tality. That also between relations seems tji have many 
forms, and all to depend upon the paternal friendship. 

2. Parents love their children, as being something of 
their own : children love their parents, as being themselves 
something from them. But parents know what comes from 
themselves, better than the offspring knows that it does 
come from them : and the original cause is more intimately 
connected with the thing produced, than the thing produced 
is with that which produced it: for that which proceeds 
from a thing, belongs to the thing from which it proceeded, 
as a tooth, or hair, or any thing whatsoever, belongs to the 
possessor of it: but the original cause does not belong to 
any of those, or in a less degree. In length of time also [the 
love of parents exceeds that of children] : for the former 
love them as soon as ever they are born ; but the latter love 
their parents in process of time, when they have acquired 
intellect or sense: from this also it is evident why mothers 
feel the greater love. Parents then love their children as them¬ 
selves ; for that which proceeds from them, becomes by the 
separation like another self j but children love their parents* 
as being sprung from them. 

3 . Brothers love one another from being sprung from the 
same parents $ for the identity with the latter produces an 
identity between each other. Whence the expressions of 
the same blood, the same root, and such like. They are there¬ 
fore in a manner the same even in things distinct. Being 
educated together, and being of the same age, greatly con¬ 
tributes to friendship; for £t coeval pleases coeval ai>d 
those of the same character are companions. Whence also 
the friendship of brothers is like that of companions. 
Cousins and other relations owe their connection to these; 
for it is from their being sprung from the same stock : some 
are more near, others more distant, from the parent stock 
being nearer or farther off. 

4 . The friendship, which children feel towards parents, 
and men towards gods, is as it were towards something good 

r 



210 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIII, 


and superior ; for they have conferred the greatest benefits; 
since they are the cause of existence, of food, and education 
to their offspring* Such a friendship as this contains the 
agreeable aJPthe useful, more than that between strangers, 
inasmuch as their mode of living is more in common. They 
are contained also in the friendship between brothers, as 
they are in that between companions : and more so between 
the good, and in general between similar people, inasmuch 
as they are more connected, and love one another immedi¬ 
ately from their birth $ and inasmuch as they are more si¬ 
milar in character, who come from the same stock, and who 
are fed together, and educated similarly \ and the trial, which 
is made by time, is here the longest and most certain. The 
duties of friendship are proportional in all other relation¬ 
ships. 

5 . Between man and wife friendship seems to exist by 
nature 5 for man is by nature a coupling rather than a po¬ 
litical animal, inasmuch as a family is earlier and more ne¬ 
cessary than a state, and procreation is more common to 
animals. To other animals therefore community proceeds 
thus far only; but men associate not only for the sake of 
procreation, but for the necessaries of life; for the offices of 
man and wife are distinct from the very first, and different. 
They therefore assist one another, making a common stock 
of their private property. For this reason also the useful 
and the agreeable seems to exist in this friendship: it may 
also be formed for virtue’s sake, if they are good ; for there 
is a virtue of each, and they may take delight in this. But 
children seem to be the bond ; wherefore those who have 
no children, sooner separate 5 for children are a common 
good to both, and that which is common, binds together. 
But the enquiry how a man is to live with his wife, and, in 
short, a friend with his friend, seems in no respect different 
from the enquiry, how justice exists between them: for it 
does not seem the same between a friend and a friend, a 
stranger, a Companion, and a fellow-traveller. 



CHAP. XIII. 


ETHICS. 


211 


CHAP. XIII. 

In what kind of friendship complaints arise. Two kinds of 
friendship for the useful, moral, and conventual. The receiver 
is to decide the value of the return. 

1. There being then three kinds of friendship, as was 
said at first, and in each of them some being friends on an 
equality* and others with a superiority on one side $ (for those 
who are equally good become friends, and the better with 
the worse j so also do the agreeable, and so also for the 
useful forming an equality by mutual benefits, although they 
differ:) those who are equal ought [to be friends] on an 
equality, by making their love and every thing else equal 5 
and the unequal should be friends, by making a proportion¬ 
ate return to the superiority of the other party. 

% Accusations and complaints arise in the friendship for 
the useful, and in that only, or mostly so, which might be 
expected $ for those who are friends for virtue's sake, are 
anxious to benefit each other 5 for such is the property of vir¬ 
tue and friendship : and when they are contending for this, 
there are no complaints or quarrels j for no one dislikes one 
who loves and benefits him ; but if he is polite, he returns 
the kindness. And he who surpasses the other, since he ob¬ 
tains what he wanted, cannot complain of his friend $ for 
each was aiming at something good. Nor do they often 
arise in friendships formed for pleasure ; for both parties ob¬ 
tain at once what they want, if they take pleasure in living 
together: and he would appear ridiculous, who complained 
of another not giving him pleasure, when it is in his power 
not to live with him. But the friendship for the useful is 
liable to complaints j for since they make use of one another 
for their own benefit, they, are constantly requiring some¬ 
thing more, and think that they have less than their due, 
and complain that they do not receive as much as they 
ought, although they deserve it: and those who confer be¬ 
nefits cannot assist them as much as the receivers require. 

r % 





ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK VIII. 


3 . But it seems that like as justice is twofold j (for part 
is unwritten, and part enacted by law 3) so also of the friend¬ 
ship for the useful, part is moral, and part conventual. Now 
complaints arise chiefly when they, do not make a return in 
the same kind of friendship which they formed at first: but 
conventual friendship is formed upon settled terms, one kind 
of it altogether mercenary, from hand to hand ; another kind 
more liberal, as it allows time, but it is still settled by agree¬ 
ment, what is to be returned for what: in this the debt is 
evident, and does not admit of dispute, but it allows a 
friendly delay in the payment; whence among some people, 
there are no trials for these kind of agreements, but they 
think that those who made any contract upon the faith of 
the other party, should be satisfied with that. Moral friend - 
ship is not upon settled terms, but each party makes a pre¬ 
sent, or does any thing else to the other, as to a friend. But 
he expects to receive what is equal, or more, as if he had 
not given, but lent ; and if he is not repaid in the manner in 
which he contracted the friendship, he will complain. This 
happens, because all or the greatest number wish what is 
honourable 3 but upon deliberation they choose what is pro¬ 
fitable : now it is honourable to confer benefits, not with the 
intention of receiving again : but it is profitable to receive 
benefits. 

4. He therefore that has the means,must return the value of 
what he has received, and that voluntarily: for we must not 
make a man our friend against his will, as in that case he 
would have erred at the beginning, and received a kindness 
from one, from whom he ought not; for he would not have 
received it from a friend, nor from one who conferred it for 
the sake of friendship: he must therefore repay it, as much 
as if he had received the benefit upon settled terms 3 and he 
would allow, that if he had the means he would repay it; 
and if he can not, the giver would not even expect it So 
that if he is able, he must repay it: but he should consider 
at first by whom lie is benefited, and upon what grounds, 
that he may keep to these, or not. 

5 * But it admits of dispute, whether we ought to measure 



CHAP. XIV. 


ETHICS. 


913 


the return by the benefit done to the receiver, and make it 
according to that, or by the kindness of the conferrer. For 
the receivers say that they have received such things from 
their benefactors, as were trifling to them, and which they 
might have received from others, diminishing the favour; 
the others on the contrary say, that they were the greatest 
favours they had, and which they could not have received 
from any others, and that they were conferred in time of 
danger, or such like exigencies. Is not therefore the benefit 
of the receiver the measure in friendship for the useful ? for 
he is the person in want, and the other assists him, as if he 
was to receive an equivalent: the assistance therefore is as 
great as the benefit which the other receives : and conse¬ 
quently he must repay as much as he has found it to be 
worth, or more 5 for that is more honourable. But in 
friendship for virtue's sake there are no complaints ; and the 
deliberate choice of the conferrer seems to be the measure ; 
for the distinguishing part of virtue and moral conduct lies 
in deliberate choice. 


CHAP. XIV. 

Of friendship between unequal and dissimilar parties, 

I. Differences also arise in friendships, where one party 
is superior; for each expects to receive more: and when 
this takes place, the friendship is dissolved : for the better 
character thinks that it is his due to have more, because more 
is given to the good man 5 so also does he, who renders the 
greater assistance5 for they say, that an useless person should 
not have equal, since it will be a burthensome service, and 
not friendship, if the profits of the friendship shall not be in 
proportion to the offices done. Fbr they think, that as in 

p 8 



214 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK VIII. 


pecuniary partnerships those who contribute more, receive 
more, so also it ought to be in friendship. But the needy 
and the worse character argue differently 3 for they say, that 
it is the duty of a good friend to assist the needy 3 for what 
advantage is there, they say, in being the friend of a good 
or powerful man, if they are to receive nothing from it ? 

2: Each party seems to claim what is right, and it seems 
that each ought to give to each a greater share out of the 
friendship, but not of the same thing : but to the wealthy, a 
greater share of honour, to the needy, a greater share of 
gain 3 for honour is the reward of virtue and kindness, and 
gain is an assistance to indigence. This seems to be the 
same also in- states 3 for he, who furnishes no good to the 
community, is not honoured 5 for public property is given to 
the public benefactor, and honour is public property. For 
we cannot receive money and honour at once from the public 
stock 3 for no one puts up with a less share of every thing. 
Consequently to him who puts up with less money, they 
give honour3 and to him who likes presents, money; for 
proportion equallizes and preserves friendship, as has been 
said. 

3 . On this footing then the unequal must associate; and 
he, who has received benefit from the money or virtue of the 
other, must make a return of honour, repaying whatever 
he is able; for friendship requires what is possible, not what 
is proportionate : for this is not possible in every thing, for 
instance, in honour paid to the gods and to parents: for no 
one can ever make a proportionate return ; but he, who at¬ 
tends upon them to the extent of his ability, is considered 
good. Whence also it would appear unlawful for a son to 
abandon his father, but lawful for a father to abandon his 
son : for he that is in debt, ought to pay 3 but there is nor¬ 
thing which the son can do equivalent to the benefits re¬ 
ceived ; so that he is always in debt; and those who have 
debts owing them, have power to release'the debtor; con¬ 
sequently the father has. At the same time perhaps it would 
seem that no one Would separate himself, unless the other 



CHAP* XIV. 


ETHICS. 


215 


party was excessively depraved; for besides natural friend¬ 
ship, it is not likely that man would reject assistance 5 but 
to assist him, when he is depraved, is to be avoided, or not 
eagerly sought after. For most men wish to receive bene* 
fits, and avoid conferring them, as unprofitable. Enough 
then has been said upon these matters. 



ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOR IX. 


CHAP. I. 

How friendships between unequal parlies are preserved, and when 
broken. Who is to fix the return. 

i. In all the dissimilar friendships, proportion equalizes 
and preserves the friendship* as has been stated 3 like as in 
political community* the shoemaker receives a proportionate 
return for bis shoes, and the weaver* and every one else. In 
these instances a common, measure is provided^ money : 
every thing therefore is referred to this, and is measured by 
it. But in amatory friendship, the lover sometimes com¬ 
plains* that although he loves exceedingly, he is not, loved in 
turn* when perhaps he possesses nothing to excite love : and 
frequently the* person loved complains, that the other having 
promised every thing at first, now performs nothing. Such 
cases as this occur, when the one loves the other for plea¬ 
sure’s sake, and he loves the lover for the xiseful* and, these 
things, are found not to exist in both. For as the friendship 
was formed on these motives, n separation takes place, when 
thfey do not obtain th#,, for which they loved; for it was 
not the persons that they loved, hut something belonging to 
them* which happens not to be lasting $ wherefore the friend¬ 
ships aj$ the same alstK But a friendship fowicM upon 



218 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IX. 


character, as it is felt for its own sake, continues, as has been 
stated. 

% Differences also arise, when they receive something 
else, and not what they were desirous of ; for it is the same 
as having nothing, when they do not have what they de¬ 
sired. Like the man, who made promises to the harper, and 
by how much the' better he performed, so much the more 
he promised; and when in the morning he claimed these 
promises, he said that he had repaid him pleasure for plea¬ 
sure. Now if each party had wished this, it would have 
been sufficient; but if the one wishes entertainment, the 
other gain, and the one receives his wish, the other not, the 
exchange cannot be fair. For each attends to that which 
he happens to want, and for sake of that gives what he does 
give. 

3 . But whose office is it to fix the value ? the person's 
who first gives } or is it not rather his who first receives } 
for the person who gives, seems to allow the other to de¬ 
cide : which they say is what Protagoras did ; for when he 
gave any lessons, he ordered the learner to fix how much he 
thought the knowledge was worth, and so much he received. 
In some such transactions, “ The promised reward, &c.” is 
sufficient. 

4. But those who receive the money beforehand, and then 
perform none of their promises, because they were so exces¬ 
sively great, are with justice complained of j for they do not 
execute their agreements. The Sophists perhaps are forced 
to do this, because no one can give money in return for 
knowledge. These therefore, when they do not perform 
that for which they received pay, are justly complained of. 
But when there is no agreement made about the service per¬ 
formed, it has been stated that those, who give for sake of 
the persons themselves cannot complain: for friendship for 
sake of virtue is of this kind. 

5. The return must be made according to the intention; 
for it is this which characterizes friendship and virtue. It 
seems also that those who have philosophy communicated 
tQ them, must act thus $ for the value of it is not measured. 



CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


219 


by money, and no equivalent price can be paid. But per¬ 
haps, as towards the gods and parents, that which is in 
our power is sufficient. But when the present is not made 
in that manner, but in hopes of something, perhaps it is best 
that a return should be made, which seems to both parties 
to be proportionate. But if this cannot be, it would seem 
not only necessary that he who first receives should settle it, 
but also just : for as great as was the benefit which he re¬ 
ceived, or at what cost he would have purchased the plea¬ 
sure, so much will the other receive in return, and have an 
equivalent. Eor in sales this seems to be done ; and in 
some places there are laws forbidding trials to be held upon 
voluntary contracts : as if it was right, when we have trusted 
any one, to settle with him, according to the intimacy: for 
they think that it is more just for him to decide to whom 
the matter was entrusted, than him who entrusted it to him; 
for people do not in general put the same value upon things 
which they have received, as they did when they were wish¬ 
ing to receive them; for what belongs to us, and what we 
give away, seems to each of us to be very valuable. But 
nevertheless the return is made at such a rate as the re¬ 
ceivers would fix; though perhaps he ought not to value 
it at so much as it seems worth, when he has received it, but 
according to what he valued it at before he received it. 


CHAP. II. 

Of the relative duties of friends and relations. 

1 . Such questions as these cause a difficulty; for instance, 
whether we ought to give everything to our father, and obey 
him in every thing? or whether when sick we should obey 
a physician, and choose a military man to be a general } In 
the same manner must we serve a friend rather than a good 
man r And must we rather return a favour to a benefactor, 



££0 


ARISTOTLE'S 


book ix* 


than give to a companion, supposing that we cannot do 
both } To define all these things accurately i3 not easy $ for 
they contain many and various differences in being great or 
small, honourable or necessary. 

£. Rut that we must not bestow every thing upon the 
same person, needs no proof: and generally we must rather 
return kindnesses, than give them to companions, in the same 
manner as we must rather return a debt to a creditor, than 
give to a companion. Rut perhaps this is not always so : 
for instance, must a person who has been ransomed from 
robbers, do the same in return to him who ransomed him, 
whoever he may be, or should he repay a man who has not 
been taken prisoner, but who demands a debt from him? 
or should he ransom his father rather than the other? for it 
would seem that he ought to ransom his father even before 
himself. As we stated therefore, in general the debt should 
be repaid s but if the present [which he wishes to make] ex¬ 
ceeds [the payment of the debt] in being honourable, or ne¬ 
cessary, he should incline to the latter. For sometimes there 
is no equality in returning the prior favour of another, when 
the other conferred it, knowing that the person was good ; 
but the latter has to return it to one whom he thinks is 
wicked. For sometimes a man must not lend in return to him 
Who lent to him $ for the other, thinking that he should receive 
back, lent to one who was good ; but the latter does not hope 
to receive back from a wicked man. If then the circumstances 
are really such, the claim is not equal $ or if they are not so 
really, but they think that they are, it would not be thought 
that they act strangely. 

3 . Therefore as we have frequently slated, treatises upon 
passions and actions admit of strict definition correspond- 
ently to the subject matter. Now that we must not give 
the same to every body, nor every thing to our father, in the 
same manner that we do not sacrifice every thing to Jupiter, 
needs no proof. Rut since different things are due to parents, 
and brothers, and companions, and benefactors, we must 
give to each their own, and what suits them. In fact, men 
seem to act thus* for they invite relations to marriages; 



CHAP. III. 


ETHICS. 


m 

since the family is common to them, and consequently family 
affairs. And for the same reason they think that it is most 
suitable for relations to meet at funerals. But it would seem 
that they ought to assist their parents most of all in nourish¬ 
ing them, being as it were in debt; and that it is more ho¬ 
nourable to assist the authors of their existence in that re¬ 
spect than themselves. They should also give honour to 
their parents, as to the gods; but not every honour : for they 
do not give the same to father and mother: nor again the 
honour of the wise man, or the general, but the honour of 
a father, and so also of a mother. They should also give to 
every old man the honour becoming his age, by rising up, 
and making him sit down, and such-like offices. To com¬ 
panions and brothers they should give full liberty of speech, 
and a partnership in every thing. To their relations and 
tribesmen, and fellow-citizens, and every one else, they 
should always endeavour to give what belongs to them, and 
to compare the claims of each with respect to relationship, 
or virtue, or acquaintance. Now between relations the de¬ 
cision is easy > but between different people it is more dif¬ 
ficult j we should not however for that reason desist, but m 
far as it is possible, so should we distinguish between them. 


CHAP. HI. 

When it is lawful to dissolve friendship, 

1. There is a difficulty in the question, whether we should 
dissolve friendship or no with those who do not continue the 
same > or is it, that with those who became friends for the 
useful or the agreeable, when they no longer possess those, 
there is nothing strange in breaking with them? for they 
were friends only for those qualities, upon the failure of 
which it is natural to feel friendship no more. 

■£» But a person might complain, if another loving him 
really for the useful or the agreeable, pretended, that it wa« 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK tX. 


$22 

on account of his character: for, as we stated at first, most 
differences in friendships arise, when the parties are not friends 
according to their real sentiments. When therefore a person 
is deceived, and fancied that he was loved for his character, 
when the other did not at all act, as if it was so, he should 
blame himself. But when he is deceived by the profession 
of the other, he is justified in complaining of the deceiver, 
and even more so than with those who counterfeit money, 
inasmuch as the crime is committed upon a more valuable 
subject. 

3 . But if he admits him to his friendship, as being a good 
man, and then he becomes wicked, or if he even seems to be 
so, must he still love him ? or is this impossible, since not 
every thing is an object of love, but only the good 1 We are 
not then to love a wicked man, nor is it right: for we should 
not be lovers of wickedness, nor assimilate ourselves to the 
bad : and it has been stated, that like is friendly to like. 

4 . Must we then immediately separate? or not with all, 
but only those who are incurable from their wickedness ? 
and should we not rather assist those who admit of improve¬ 
ment in their character than in their property, inasmuch as 
it is better, and belongs more peculiarly to friendship ? But 
still the person who separates, would not be thought to do 
any thing extraordinary $ for it was not that man, or such 
an one as he, that he was in friendship with: when therefore 
he is unable to recover the person so alienated from him, he 
withdraws. But if the one continues the same, while the 
other becomes better, and greatly improves in virtue, must 
he still consider the other as his friend > or is that not pos¬ 
sible } This is most evident when the difference becomes 
great, as in friendships contracted from childhood: for if one 
continues a child in intellect, and the other becomes one of 
the most perfect men, how can they be friends, when they* 
no longer' take pleasure in the same things, nor feel joy and 
pain together? for these feelings will not exist in them to¬ 
wards each other. But without these it has been stated that 
they are’no friends j for it is impossible that they can live to¬ 
gether ; and we have treated of all this already* 



CHAF. IV. 


ETHICS, 


223 


5 , Must he then feel no otherwise towards him, than if he 
had never been his friend } or ought he to remember the 
past intimacy, and like as we think that a man should do 
favours to friends rather than to strangers, so ought he to 
bestow something upon those who were his friends, for sake 
of the past friendship, when the separation does not take 
place from excessive wickedness ? 


CHAP. IV. 

All the feelings of friendship are the same as those of the good 
man towards himself. 

1. The feelings of friendship towards friends, and all the 
definitions of friendship, seem to flow from the feelings of a 
man towards himself$ for they define a friend to be, first, he 
Who wishes and does what is good, or seems to be so, for 
the other's sake: or, secondly, he who wishes his friend to 
exist and to live for his own sake, which is the feeling of 
mothers towards their children, and of those friends who 
have had a slight quarrel h . Thirdly, Others define him to 
be, he who passes his time with, or chooses the same things 
as, or, fourthly, who has the same pleasures and pains with, 
his friend : this latter also is found mostly in mothers. By 
some one of these all men define friendship. 

Or, But each of these feelings exist in the good man to¬ 
wards himself; and in others, in proportion as they fancy 
themselves to be good $ for virtue and the virtuous man 
seem, as has been stated, to be a standard to each j since he 
agrees with himself, and desires ihe same things with all his 
soul. Hence he wishes for himself what is good, or what 

h For as they cannot expect any favours for themselves, on account of 
the quarrel, all good wishes must be disinterested. 



£24 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK, IX. 


appears so, and practises it j for it is characteristic of the 
good man to labour .for what is good, and for his own sake $ 
for it is for sake of his intellectual part, which is thought to 
constitute the existence of every one. Secondly, He also 
wishes himself to live and be preserved, and particularly that 
part by which he thinks: for existence is a good to the vir¬ 
tuous man *. and each one wishes good to himself; and no 
one, were he to become another person, would wish that 
which he was before \ to possess every thing : for the Deity 
now possesses the summum bonam but whatever he is, he 
is always k . The intellect also must be thought to be the 
essence of every one, or for the most part. Thirdly, Such a 
man also wishes to live with himself for he does this 
agreeably to himself; since the recollection of the past is 
pleasant, and the hopes of the future are promising 5 but 
such recollections and hopes are agreeable. Moreover he has 
abundant subjects for contemplation in his mind. Fourthly, 
He also participates in his own pleasures and pains to the 
greatest degree; for the same thing is constantly painful or 
pleasant, and not now one thing and now another $ for he 
is neyer subject to repentance, if we may say so. 

$. Consequently from the good man having all these feel¬ 
ings towards himself, and feeling towards his friend as he 
does towards himself; (for his friend is another self 5) friend¬ 
ship also seems to consist in some one of these feelings, and 
tfrey to be friends in whom they reside. But whether there 
is or is not friendship towards one’s self, let that question be 
dismissed for the present. But friendship must be thought 

1 Lambinus translates Ixim to id, in quod commutatus sit, 

which I cannot reconcile with the Greek, or the context. The argument 
appears to 'me to he this; every man wishes the greatest good for himself; 
and were he to change his identity, he would still wish for himself in his 
aeW character the .greatest good 5 and consequently he would no longer 
wish the greatest good for that which he once wished might possess 
it. 

* I suspect the text to be corrupt here: as it stands at present, it is- 
perhaps meant tb be an argument for the immutability of &od, from the 
possession of the summtim bontiM being always one of his attributes. 



CHAP. IV. 


ETHICS. , 


225 


to exist there., where there are two or more of the above-men¬ 
tioned definitions; and excessive friendship to be like that 
of a man towards himself. These feelings however seem to 
exist in many, although they are bad men. I3o they then 
partake of them so far as they are agreeable to themselves, 
and fancy themselves to be good ? since they do not exist, 
nor even appear to exist, in any who are excessively bad and 
atrocious : indeed they scarcely exist in the bad. 

4. For the bad are at variance with themselves; and they 
desire one thing, but wish another, like the incontinent; for 
instead of what seems to them to be good, they choose the 
agreeable, which is detrimental. Others again from cow¬ 
ardice and idleness abstain from doing what they think best 
for themselves. Secondly, Some indeed, who have done many 
atrocious things and are detested for their wickedness, fly 
from life and destroy themselves. Thirdly, The wicked also 
seek for persons, with whom they may pass their time, and 
fly from themselves ; for they call to mind many unpleasant 
acts, and expect others of the same kind, when they are by 
themselves; but when they are with others, they forget them. 
And since they possess nothing amiable, they have no 
friendly feeling towards themselves. Fourthly, Consequently 
such men do not partake of their own pleasures and pains $ 
for their soul is divided, and one part from depravity feels 
pain, because it is restrained from something, while the 
other part feels pleasure ; and one draws him this way, an¬ 
other that, as if they were pulling him asunder. But if it Is 
impossible to feel pain and pleasure at the same time, yet 
after a little while he feels pain at having been pleased, and 
wishes that these things had not been agreeable to him : for 
bad men are full of repentance. The bad man therefore 
seems not to have a friendly disposition, even to himself, 
because he possesses nothing amiable. If then such a con¬ 
dition as this is excessively miserable, he should anxiously 
fly from wickedness and strive to be good ; for by this a 
man may have friendly feelings towards himself, and be¬ 
come the friend of others. 



22o 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IX. 


CHAP. V. 

Of the difference between good-will and friendship. 

1. Good-will resembles friendship, and yet it is not 
friendship; for good-will is felt towards people we do not 
know, and without being expressed • but friendship is not: 
all which has been said before. Nor yet is it fondness ; for 
good-will has no earnestness, nor desire : but both of these 
attend upon fondness. And fondness is formed after ac¬ 
quaintance ; but good-will may be sudden; as it is when 
felt for wrestlers; for they wish them well, and partake in 
their wishes, but they would not assist them at all; for, as 
we have stated, they feel good-will suddenly, and- their love 
is superficial. 

2. It seems then to be the beginning of friendship: in the 
same manner as the pleasure, which comes from sight, is 
the beginning of love : for no one feels love, unless he has 
first found pleasure in the form : but he that takes pleasure 
in the form is not necessarily in love, except he longs for the 
person when absent, and desires his presence. In the same 
manner then it is impossible to be friends without having 
felt good-will. But well-wishers are not necessarily friends ; 
for they only wish good to those, for whom they have good¬ 
will ; but they would not assist them at all, nor take any 
trouble about them. Wherefore one might call it metapho¬ 
rically inactive friendship; and say, that when it has con¬ 
tinued some time, -and arrived at familiarity, it becomes 
friendship, but not that for the useful or the agreeable: for 
good-will does not arise from those motives. Tor he that 
has received a benefit, returns good-will for what he has re¬ 
ceived, therein acting justly: but he that wishes any one to 
be prosperous, having some hope of plenty through his 
means, appears to be well disposed not to the other person, 
but rather to himself: in the same manner as he is not a 
friend, if he pays attention to him for sake of some profit. 
On the whole, good-will is formed on account of virtue, or 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


227 


some goodness, when anyone appears honourable, or manly, 
or something of that kind to any one: as we have stated it 
to be in the case of wrestlers. 


CHAP. VI. 

Of the difference between unanimity and friendship. 

1 1. Unanimity also seems to belong to friendship 3 where¬ 
fore it is not the same as agreement in opinion; for that 
may exist between people who are strangers to each other. 
Neither do we say, that they who think the same upon any 
subject whatever, have unanimity5 for instance, those who 
think the same about the heavenly bodies3 for unanimity 
upon these matters does not belong to friendship. But we 
say, that states have unanimity, when they think the same 
upon questions of expediency, and deliberately make the 
same choice, and execute public decrees. It seems then that 
men have unanimity upon practical matters, and out of 
them, upon those which are important, and which may 
exist in both parties, or in all ; for instance, states are 
unanimous, when all agree that the magistrates should be 
elected, or that an.alliance should be made with Sparta, or 
that Pittacus should be in administration, when he wished it 
also himself. But when each party wishes for himself, as 
the two brothers in the Phoenissae, they quarrel; for this is 
not unanimity, that each party should conceive the same 
thing, whatever it may be, but that their conceptions should 
meet in the same person : for instance, when both the peo¬ 
ple and the better part agree for an aristocracy 3 for thus all 
obtain what they desire. Unanimity then seems to be po¬ 
litical friendship, as indeed it is said to be 3 for it is upon 
matters of expediency, and those which have a reference to 
life. 

* 2. But such unanimity exists between the good 3 for these 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IX. 


228 

have unanimity both with themselves and each other* being 
engaged* as we may say* upon the same subjects: for the 
counsels of such men as these continue firm* and have no 
flux and reflux* like the Euripus : and they wish what is just 
and expedient; which also they desire in common. But it 
is impossible for bad men to have unanimity* except in a 
small degree ; as it is impossible for them to be friends* 
since they are desirous of more than their share in what is 
profitable* but in labours and public services they take less. 
But when each party wishes the same things for himself* he 
examines into and prevents his neighbour; for if they are 
not on the watch* the state is destroyed. It happens there¬ 
fore that they split into factions* as they use force to one 
another* and are not willing themselves to do what is just. 


CHAP. VII. 

Those, who confer kindnesses feel more love than those who re¬ 
ceive them: the commpn an,d the true explanation of this. 

1 . Benefactors seem to love those whom they have be¬ 
nefited, more than those who have received favours love 
the conferrers * and as if this were contrary to reason* an 
enquiry is made into it. Now the opinion of the generality 
is* that the one party are debtors* and the other creditors: 
consequently in the same manner as in the case of debts* the 
debtors wish their creditors not to live* but those who have 
lent take care actually of the health of their debtors; so also 
they think that those who have conferred favours* wish the 
receivers of them to live* as being about to receive them 
back again* while the other party has no anxiety to repay 
them. Now Bpieharmus perhaps would say that they hold 
this language* because they take their views from the bad 
part of mankind: but it seems like a true picture of man *■ 



CHAP. VII. 


ETHICS. 


229 


for the generality are forgetful, and are more desirous of 
receiving than conferring benefits. 

<2. But the reason should appear to be more natural, and 
not like this, which is taken from lenders 5 for there is no 
fondness towards the other party in them, but a wish for 
their preservation, for the sake of receiving a return. But 
those who have conferred favours, are fond of and love the 
receivers of them, even if they neither are, nor ever will be, 
useful to them : which also is the case with workmen 5 for 
every one loves his own work, more than he could be loved 
by the work, were it to become animate. This perhaps hap¬ 
pens most to poets 5 for they love their own poems exceed¬ 
ingly, doating upon them like children. Such then seems to 
be the case of benefactors $ for that, which has received a 
kindness, is a work of theirs : consequently they love this 
more than the work loves the producer of it. The reason of 
this is, that existence is an object of choice and love to all; 
but we have our existence in action 3 for we have it in the 
act of living and doing. The work then may in a manner 
be considered the producer of it in actions : hence he loves 
the work, because he loves his existence. But this is taken 
from nature 5 for the work shews in action that which ex¬ 
ists in power. 

3 . At the same time also the result of the action is ho¬ 
nourable to the benefactor, so that he takes pleasure in the 
pefson in whom that appears : but to the receiver there is 
frothing honourable in the conferrer 5 but if any thing, ad¬ 
vantage : and this is less agreeable or less an object of love. 
The actual performance of a thing when present is agreeable, 
and so is the hope of it when future, and the recollection of it 
whefr past: but the actual performance of it is most agreeable, 
and most an object of love. To the conferrer therefore the 
work Continues $ for that which is honourable, is lasting : but 
to the receiver, the useful soon passes away. The recollection 
also of honourable things is pleasant; but of useful things, 
ribt generally so, or in a less degree. The expectation seems 
to be the contrary of this. Fondness also is like something 
active \ but the being loved is like Something passive: Upon 

a $ 



230 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IX. 


those therefore who are conspicuous in the active part, love 
and all the feelings of friendship attend. Again, all feel 
greater love for what they have acquired with labour; as 
those, who have acquired their money, love it more than 
those who have inherited it. Now to receive favours seems 
to be without labour; but to confer them is laborious. Tor 
this reason also mothers are more fond of their children $ for 
the bringing them forth is more painful, and they feel more 
convinced that they are their own. The same also would seem 
peculiarly to belong to those, who have conferred favours. 


CHAP. VIII. 

Whether a man should love himself most: mistakes have arisen 

from not distinguishing between proper arid improper self love. 

Why a good man must love himself most. 

1. But there is a difficulty, whether a man should love 
himself most, or another: for we are apt to censure those, 
who like themselves best; - and as if it were disgraceful, we call 
them selfish. The bad man also seems to do every thing for 
his own sake; and the more so, in proportion to his wicked¬ 
ness. They therefore complain of him, as if he did nothing 
foreign from his own interest: but the good man acts from 
honourable motives, and by how much the better he is, so 
much the more does he act from honourable motives, and 
for his friend’s sake; but he passes over his own interest. 

2 . But facts are at variance with these remarks, and that 
not unreasonably: for it is a common saying, that a man 
should love his greatest friend best; but he is the greatest 
friend, who wishes the other person good for that person's 
sake, and even if nobody knows it: but this and every other 
feeling, by which a friend is defined, exists in a man most 
of all towards himself; for we have stated, that from himself 



CHAP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


231 


proceed all the feelings of friendship, which he has for others. 
All proverbs agree in this : such as, c<r one soul:” and “ the 

property of friends is common and friendship is 
“ equalityand ff the knee is nearer than the calf:’* for 
all these feelings exist mostly towards himself; for he is 
the greatest friend to himself 5 and therefore he must love 
himself most. 

3, But the question is reasonably asked, which of these; 
two must we follow, since both seem worthy of credit } Per¬ 
haps then we should divide and distinguish such conclusions 
as these, and shew how far and in what respect each are 
true. If then we can understand in what sense each use 
the word self-love, perhaps the thing would be plain. Those 
therefore who bring it into disrepute, call them selfish, who 
give to themselves a greater share of money, or honour, or 
bodily pleasures; for the generality are desirous of these, 
and extremely anxious about them, as if they were the best 
things ; whence also they are subjects of contention. Those 
therefore who are covetous of these things, gratify their de¬ 
sires, and in short their passions, and the irrational part of 
the soul. But the generality are of this kind : whence also 
the appellation has arisen from the generality, which are 
bad. Consequently reproach is justly cast upon those who 
-are selfish in this sense. But that the generality are ac¬ 
customed to call those selfish, who give such things as these 
to themselves, requires no proof. For if any one is con¬ 
stantly anxious that he himself more than any other person 
should do what is just, or temperate, or any thing else eonr 
nected with virtue, and in short is always for gaining some¬ 
thing honourable for himself, no one would call such a man 
selfish, nor blame him. And yet such a character as this 
would seem to be particularly selfish 5 for he gives to him¬ 
self what is most honourable and the greatest goods, and 
gratifies the governing part of himself, and obeys that in 
every thing. And like as that part, which has most autho¬ 
rity, seems particularly to constitute the state, and in every 
other body the same, so is it also in man : and therefore he, 
who loves this part and gratifies it, is particularly selfish, 

ft 4 



232 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK IX. 


So also a man is called continent or incontinent,, according 
as the intellect has authority or not* as if this constituted 
each individual. And men think that what they do most in 
obedience to reason, they do themselves and voluntarily. 
That this therefore mostly constitutes each individual, re¬ 
quires no proof, and that the good man particularly loves 
this. Wherefore he must be particularly selfish, in a dif¬ 
ferent manner from the person who is reproached for it, and 
differing in as great a degree, as living in obedience to rea¬ 
son differs from living in obedience to passion, and desiring 
the honourable differs from desiring what seems to be ad¬ 
vantageous. 

4. Now all approve of and praise those who are particu¬ 
larly anxious about performing honourable actions : and if 
all contended for what is honourable, and strove to perform 
the most honourable acts, there would be to every one gene¬ 
rally what is right and proper, and to each individually the 
greatest goods; at least if virtue is such as we have described 
it. So that the good man must necessarily be selfish ; for he 
will be delighted in performing honourable acts himself, and 
will give what is profitable to others. But there is no neces¬ 
sity for the wicked man to be so j for he injures both him¬ 
self and his neighbours, by following evil passions. To the 
wicked man therefore, what he ought to do, and what he 
does, are at variance; but what the good man ought to do, 
that he does ; for every intellect chooses what is best for 
itself 5 and the good man obeys his intellect. It is true also 
of the good man, that he performs many acts for his friends 
and his country, even if he is required to die for them : for 
he will give up money and honours, and in short all goods, 
which others contend for, securing to himself that which is 
honourable. For he would prefer being pleased for a short 
time excessively, than for a long time slightly j and to live 
one year honourably, than many years in the ordinary man¬ 
ner ; and to perform one honourable and great act, ra¬ 
ther than many small ones. To those who die for their 
country, this perhaps actually happens. Thus they choose 
something greatly honourable for themselves, and they would 



CHAP. XX. 


ETHICS. 


o 0 <? 

give up money on conditions that their friends should receive 
more of it: for the friend receives money, and he himself 
what is honourable 3 but he gives the greater good to him¬ 
self. The same rule holds with respect to honours and 
offices ; for he gives up all these to his friend 3 since this is 
honourable to himself and praiseworthy. With reason then 
he has the reputation of being a good man, choosing what is 
honourable in preference to every thing else. It is possible 
also that he may give up the performance of these actions to 
his friend, and that it may be more honourable for him to be 
the cause of action to his friend, than to act himself. In all 
praiseworthy things therefore, the good man seems to give 
to himself the greater share of what is honourable. In this 
sense therefore it is right to love one’s self, as has been stated ; 
but in the manner that the generality do, it is not right. 


CHAP. IX. 

In what manner and for what reason the happy mm wants 
friends. 

1. But there is also a question about the happy man, whe¬ 
ther he wants friends or no j for it is commonly said that 
those* who are prosperous and independent,, do not require 
friends 5 since they have all goods already, and therefore that 
being independent, they require nothing additional; but 
that a friend, being another person, provides what the man 
is unable to provide of himself. Whence comes the saying, 

When fortune favours us, why need we friends ? 

And yet it seems an absurdity to attribute all goods to the 
happy man, but not to give him friends, which seem to be 
the greatest of all external goods. And if it is more the 
part of a friend to confer than to receive favours, and tot do 
good is characteristic of a good man and of virtue, and It is 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IX. 


284 


more honourable to benefit friends than strangers, the good 
man must require some persons to receive his favours. 
Whence it has even been asked, whether there is greater 
need of friends in adversity or prosperity : as the man in ad¬ 
versity wants some persons to benefit him, and those in pros¬ 
perity want some persons whom they may benefit. And it is 
perhaps absurd to make the happy man a solitary being j for 
no one would choose to possess all goods by himself since 
man is a political animal, and formed by nature to associate : 
this therefore is the case with the happy man 5 for he pos T 
sesses whatever is by nature a good. But it is evident that 
it is better to pass our time with friends and good men, than 
with strangers and ordinary persons. The happy man there T 
fore wants friends. 

2. What then is the argument of the first-mentioned peo 7 
pie, and how far do they speak truth } is it not that the ge¬ 
nerality consider those only to be friends, who are useful l 
The happy man will have no need of such friends as these, 
since he is in possession of all goods; nor consequently those 
who are friends for sake of the agreeable, or only in a small 
degree ; for his life being agreeable, does not require any 
adventitious pleasure. But since he does not require such 
friends as these, he has been thought not to require friends 
at all. But this perhaps is not true; for it was stated at the 
beginning that happiness is a kind of energy : and an energy 
is evidently produced, not merely possessed, like any pro¬ 
perty. And if happiness consists in living and energizing, 
and the energy of the good man is good and pleasant in itself, 
as was stated at the beginning; and if that which peculiarly 
belongs to us is amongst the number of pleasant things, and 
we can observe others better than ourselves, and their actions 
better than our own, then the actions of good men, when 
they are their friends, are pleasant to the good; for both 
possess what is naturally pleasant: and consequently the 
happy man will want such friends as these, if his principle is 
to observe actions which are good, and peculiarly his own. 
But such are the actions of the good man, when he is his 
friend. 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


235 


3 . But it is thought that the happy man ought to live 
pleasantly. Now to a solitary person life i9 irksome : for it 
is not easy to energize constantly by one's self, but with and 
towards others it is easy. The energizing therefore will be 
more constant, when it is pleasant in itself 5 which ought to 
be the case with the happy man 5 for the good man, inas¬ 
much as he is good, takes delight in actions proceeding from 
virtue, and feels pain at those which proceed from vice : just 
as the musician is delighted with beautiful songs, but feels 
pain at bad ones. And there may be a kind of practice for 
virtue from living with good men, as Theognis has re¬ 
marked. 

4. But if we examine the question more on natural princi¬ 
ples, it appears that the good friend is by nature an object of 
choice to the good man ; for it has been stated, that what is 
good by nature, is in itself good and pleasant to the good 
man. But life is defined to consist, in animals, in the fa¬ 
culty of sensation, and in men, of sensation or intelligence $ 
and the faculty is referred to the energy 5 and the principal 
part consists in the energy. Life then seems peculiarly the 
exercise of sensation or intellect 5 and life seems to be one 
of those things which are good and pleasant of themselves ; 
for it is something definite 5 and that which is definite par¬ 
takes of the nature of the summum bon uni; and that which is 
a good by nature, is a good also to the good man : whence 
it seems to be pleasant to all. But we must not take a de¬ 
praved and corrupt life, nor one involved in sorrows $ for 
such a life as this is undefined, as are the circumstances of 
it j which will be more evident in what is to follow upon the 
subject of pain. But if life is a good, it is also pleasant; 
which seems to be the case from all desiring it, and par¬ 
ticularly the good and happy : for to them life is most eli¬ 
gible, and their mode of life is most happy. But he that 
sees, feels that he sees, and he that hears, feels that he hears, 
and he that walks, that he walks ; and in every thing else in 
the same manner there is something which feels that we arc 
acting *. we must also feel that we are feeling, and understand 
that we are understanding. But this very fact of our feeling 



236 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK lx. 


or understanding, is to say, that we are existing; for exist¬ 
ence was defined to be the act of feeling, or understanding. 
Rut to feel that one is alive, is amongst those things which 
are pleasant in themselves ; for life is a good by nature : and 
0 perceive that there is a good inherent in one’s self is plea¬ 
sant. But life is eligible, and particularly to the good, be- 
cause existence is to them good and pleasant; for when 
they feel sensible of that which is in itself a good, they are 
pleased. But the good man feels towards his friend, as he 
does towards himself; for the friend is another self; in the 
same manner therefore as to exist one’s self is eligible to every 
one, so also is it for one’s friend to exist, or nearly so. But 
existence was said to be eligible, on account of the perception 
of that which is a good; and such a perception is pleasant 
in itselt. We ought therefore at the same time to be sensible 
Of the existence of our friend; and this must take place in 
assoc.at.ng with him, and sharing his words and thoughts : 
or this Would seem to be the meaning of the word society, 
when applied to men, and not as in the case of cattle, the 
merdy feed.ng in the same place. If then existence is in 
itself eligible to the happy man, being by nature something 
good and pleasant, and if the existence of a friend is nearly 
the same, then a friend must also be amongst objects which 
are eligible. But that which is eligible to a man, he ought 
topiMsessj or else he is deficient in that respect; he there¬ 
fore that is to be happy will want good friends*. 

' T 1 ? r 5 " 0f thiS fourth section ma y be briefly stated thus: that 
winch is by nature good and peasant in itself, is so to the good man hfe 

is by „ atoe good and p leasantin soto f h ™ m f e 

ol!,? f r nthe “ e ° f or intellect: and „ 

good Jan -TuT feelsT " a T“ ^ g °° d and pIeasant to the 

; Ut be feeIs towards his friend, as he does towards himself- 



CHAP. X. 


ETHICS. 


rsi 


CHAP. X. 

Upon the number of friends which it is possible or desirable to have . 

1. Must he then make as many persons his friends as 
possible } or as it seems to have been appositely said in 
allusion to hospitality, 

May I neither have many nor few to entertain, 

so also will it apply in the case of friendship, that he should 
neither be without friends, nor yet carry the number of his 
friends to excess. The saying would seem to apply alto¬ 
gether to those who are friends for the useful: for it is la¬ 
borious to return favours to a great many, and life is not 
sufficient for them to do it. Consequently more than what 
are sufficient for each particular kind of life, are superfluous, 
and an impediment to living honourably ; and therefore 
there is no need of them. And a few friends are sufficient 
out of those who are friends for pleasure’s sake 3 like sauce 
in meats. But with respect to the good, should we have as 
great a number as possible r or is there some limit to num¬ 
ber in friendship, as there is in a city ? for neither can there 
be a city composed of ten people, nor is it any longer a city 
when composed of an hundred thousand: but the quantity 
is not perhaps some particular number, but all between cer¬ 
tain fixed limits. 

2. With friends therefore there is also some definite num¬ 
ber; and perhaps the greatest number with whom one can 
associate 5 for this appeared to be the greatest sign of friend¬ 
ship. * But that it is not possible for the same person to asso¬ 
ciate and continue in friendship with many, requires no 
proof. Besides these, other persons must also be friends to 
each other, if all intend to pass their time with each other 5 
and this is difficult in a great number. It is also dif¬ 
ficult to share exactly the same pleasures and pains 
with many people 3 for it is likely to happen at the same 
time, that a man may be rejoicing with one friend and 
grieving with another. Perhaps then it is well not to seek 



% 3 $ 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK IX, 


to have as many friends as possible, but so many as are suf¬ 
ficient for society; for it would seem impossible to be a 
friend to many in a great degree. Whence it is impossible 
to be in love with many; for this is generally a kind of ex¬ 
cess of friendship: and this is directed to one object; and 
therefore excess in it can only be felt towards a few. So it 
seems to be in real fact: for in friendship between compa- 
nions, many do not become friends; but those which are 
most celebrated, are between two only. Those who have 
many friends, and are familiar with every body, are by no 
one thought to be friends, except in a political sense; and 
they call them obsequious. In a political sense then a man 
may be a friend to many even without being obsequious, 
but really as a good man : but for sake of virtue and the 
persons themselves, it is impossible to be a friend to many;, 
it is a great thing indeed to find a few such. 


CHAP. XL 

Upon the duties and advantages of friends in prosperity and 
adversity, 

1 . Is there greater need of friends in prosperity or in ad¬ 
versity ? for they are sought for in both ; since the unfortu¬ 
nate want assistance, and the fortunate want companions 
and persons whom they may benefit; for they wish to do 
good. 

2 . It is more necessary to have them in adversity; whence 
in this case there is need of useful friends: but it is more 
noble in prosperity ; whence also they seek for good friends j 
since it is more desirable to benefit them, and to live with 
them. 

3 . Besides this presence of friends is agreeable both in 
prosperity and adversity ; for those who are in pain feel 
lightened, when their friends grieve with them. Whence 



CHAP. XI. 


ETHICS, 


239 


bne might ask the question, whether they as it were share 
the bui'then 5 or perhaps it is not that, but their presence 
being agreeable, and the idea of condolence, make the pain 
less. Whether then they feel lightened from this or any 
.other cause, we may omit to consider; but what we stated 
seems to be the fact. 

4 . But the presence of them seems in a manner to cause 
a mixed feeling ; for the fact of seeing friends is pleasant, 
and particularly to one in misfortune, and it becomes a kind 
of assistance to hinder pain : since a friend is consolatory 
both in look and in words, if he manages well; for he knows 
the character of the other, and what things give him plea¬ 
sure and pain. But to perceive his friend feeling pain at 
his own misfortunes is painful $ for every one avoids being 
the cause of pain to his friends. Wherefore those who are 
of a manly disposition, guard against letting their friends 
share their pain ; and unless a, person is himself excessively 
devoid of pain, he cannot endure that his friends should feel 
pain [on his account]: nor does he at all call in fellow- 
mourners, because he is not given to mourning himself. But 
women and womanish men delight in having people to 
mourn with them, and love them as friends and partners in 
affliction. But in every case we ought of course to imitate 
the best. 

5. The presence of friends in prosperity produces an 
agreeable mode of passing the time, and the consciousness 
that the friends are feeling pleasure at our good. Wherefore 
it would seem that we ought to invite friends to our pros¬ 
perity eagerly ; for it Is an honourable thing to be benevolent: 
but to adversity, with reluctance $ for we ought to impart 
our misfortunes as little as possible; whence is the saying, 

I am enough to mourn- 

A person should call them in mostly, when they may render 
him great assistance, with a little trouble* 

6. He should go perhaps on the contrary to those who are 
in misfortune, without being called iu and eagerly. Bor it 
becomes a friend to confer benefits, and particularly upon 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK. IK. 


MO 

those who are in need and did not ask it; for in both cases it is 
more honourable and pleasant: but to those who are in pros¬ 
perity, if it is to cooperate with them, he should go will¬ 
ingly 7 for this is the use of a friend : but if it is to enjoy 
their abundance, he should go reluctantly ; for it is not 
honourable to be anxious to receive assistance. But perhaps 
he must guard against appearing ungracious in his refusal: 
for this is sometimes the case. The presence of friends then 
is necessary in all circumstances, 


CHAP. XII. 

Society is the great bond of friendship. 

1. Is it not then, that like as sight is most desirable to 
lovers, and they choose that sense more than the others, as 
if love existed and arose mostly in that, so also society is 
most desirable to friends ? for friendship is community. 
And like as he feels towards himself, so does he towards his 
friend; and with respect to himself, the perception of his ex¬ 
istence is desirable 5 it is the same therefore with respect to 
his friend. But the exercise of their friendship consists in 
society $ so that it is with reason that they are desirous of 
it. 

2. And whatsoever existence is to either party, or on 
whatever account they choose life, in that they wish to pass 
their time with their friends. Wherefore some drink to¬ 
gether, some play together, others exercise and hunt to¬ 
gether, or learn philosophy together j each passing their 
time in that occupation, which they love most of all things 
in life $ for when they wish to associate with their friends, 
they perform and share with them those things, by which 
they think that their society is kept together. 

3. Therefore the friendship of bad men is depraved : for 
they participate in what is bad, being unsettled j and they 



CHAP. XII. 


ETHICS. 


241 


become depraved, from assimilating themselves to each 
other; but that of good men is good, being mutually in¬ 
creased by acquaintance. Besides, men appear to become 
better by exercising friendship, and correcting one another : 
for they copy from each other whatever they are pleased 
with : whence is said, 

Learn what is good from the good. 

Concerning friendship therefore let thus much be said. It 
would now follow that we treat of pleasure. 



ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK X. 


CHAP. I. 

The reasons why it is necessary to treat of pleasure. 

i. It follows next perhaps to discuss the subject of plea¬ 
sure 5 for it seems above every thing else to be intimately 
connected with our formation. Hence they educate young 
men, steering them by pleasure and pain. It seems also to 
be of the greatest consequence towards the attainment of 
moral virtue, that they should take delight in what they 
ought, and hate what they ought; for these feelings continue 
through the whole of life, carrying with them great weight 
and influence towards virtue and a happy life - } for men de¬ 
liberately choose what is pleasant, and fly from what is 
painful. 

2 . But it would seem that we ought by no means to pass 
over such feelings as these; especially as they give rise to 
much difference of opinion. For some say that pleasure is 
the summum bonum; others, on the contrary, that it is utterly 
bad $ some of these last perhaps persuaded that it really is 
so s but others thinking that it is better for human life to 
declare pleasure to be among bad things, even if it is not so, 
because the majority of mankind incline towards it, and are 
slaves to their pleasures 5 and therefore that it is right to lead 

n 2 



244 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK X. 


them to the contrary, by which means they would arrive at 
the middle course. 

8 . But perhaps this is not good language to hold 5 for 
arguments about matters of suffering and acting are less 
persuasive than facts. When therefore arguments are at 
variance with what is evident to the senses, they are de¬ 
spised, and destroy the truth also , for if he who censures 
pleasure, is ever seen to be desiring it, he appears to have a 
leaning towards it, as if all pleasure were of the same na¬ 
ture ; for to draw nice distinctions is not the character of 
the multitude. 

4. True arguments therefore seem not only to be very 
useful for obtaining knowledge, but also with a view to 
life 5 for when they agree with facts, they are believed. 
Hence men exhort those who understand them, to live ac¬ 
cording to them. Enough then of such matters 5 and let 
us go 'over what has been said upon the subject of pleasure. 


CHAP. II. 

The arguments by which Eudoxus maintained pleasure to be the 
summum bonum. 

1. Eudoxus thought that pleasure was the summum bonum, 
because he saw all things, both rational and irrational seek¬ 
ing it ; and in every thing that which is an object of choice 
is good, and that which is most so is the greatest good : but 
he considered that for every thing to have an inclination to¬ 
wards the same object proved that object to be the best for 
all; because each finds that which is good for himself as he 
does food ; consequently that which is good to all, and 
which all aim at, he thought was the summum bonum. And 
his words were believed, more from the excellence of his 
character, than from themselves; for he had the reputation 



•CHAP. II. 


ETHICS. 


245 


of being singularly temperate: it therefore seemed that he 
did not hold this language as being a friend to pleasure., but 
that the case really was so. 

2. But he considered it to be not less evident from the 
contrary of pleasure; for pain is in itself an object of aver¬ 
sion to all, and its contrary is in the same manner an object 
of choice : and that is in the highest degree an object of 
choice, which we choose not on account of any thing else : 
but pleasure is confessedly of this nature; for no one asks 
why he is pleased, as if pleasure was eligible on its own ac¬ 
count, and if added to any good whatsoever, makes it more 
eligible 5 for instance, if added to the act of justice or temper¬ 
ance : and therefore good is increased by this [pleasure]. This 
argument certainly seems to prove it to be amongst goods, 
but m not more so than anything else 5 for every thing is 
more eligible when in conjunction with another good, than 
when left alone. By a similar argument indeed Plato de¬ 
stroys the idea of pleasure being the summum bonum be¬ 
cause a pleasant life is more eligible jvhen joined with pru¬ 
dence than without; but if the union of the two is better, 
pleasure simply is not the summum bonum ,* for the summum 
bonum must be eligible, though nothing be added to it: and 
it is evident that nothing else can be the summum bonum n , 
which becomes more eligible when joined to any of those 
things which are eligible on their own account. 

3. What idea then of the summum bonum is of such a na¬ 
ture that we also entertain it ? for such is the object of our 
enquiry. Those who insist that that is not a good which all 
aim at, perhaps talk nonsense; for we affirm, that what ap¬ 
pears tp all, must really exist. And he who tries to over¬ 
throw this proof is not at all more worthy of being followed; 
for if it had been said that unintelligent beings only sought 

I would read &xx $ for xa.U 

n This does not contradict what he said in book i. c. 7. that happiness 
became greater, if added to even the smallest good: for although it may 
thus be increased in quantity, it cannot (as is the expression here) become 
more eligible from being joined to any good which is chosen for its own &ah'C$ 
because happiness implies the possession of all such goods. 

E 3 



246 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK. X. 


pleasure, there might be something in the objection ; but if 
beings possessing prudence also seek it, how can they be 
said to argue sensibly ? and perhaps even in the inferior 
beings there is some natural good principle, superior to their 
general character, which aims at that good which is pecu¬ 
liarly adapted to them. 

4. Neither does what they say about the contrary appear 
to be said well: for they say that although pain be an evil, 
it does not follow that pleasure is a good ; for evil is opposed 
to evil °, and both are opposed to that which is neither good 
nor evil ; in which they do not speak amiss, but it does not 
happen to be true in the case before us : for if both were 
evils, both must be objects of aversion, or if neither of them 
were, then neither would be, or they would he so correspond- 
cntly : but men are seen to avoid the one as an evil and 
to choose the other as a gooo : they are therefore opposed in 
the manner which was stated. 


CHAP. HI. 

Other objections against pleasure being a good are obviated; and 
■it is proved that there must be different species of pleasure. 

1. Noe yet if pleasure is not amongst qualities, is it there¬ 
fore not amongst goods ; for the energies of virtue are not 
qualities,-nor is happiness. But it is said that good may be 
defined, but pleasure is undefinable p, because it admits of ' 
bezng more or less. Now if they form this opinion from the 


° wo hav0 soen in thu two extremes of excess ami deficiency. 

P To say that a thing is undefinable or is not a quality is the same - a 
quality being only a logical term to express any tiling which admits’ of 
definition: lor every definition consists of a genus and difference; and as 
the genus is said to be predicated in quid, and the difference in quale, any 
thing which admits of definition may be said to be predicated in quail 

quality a " d therC&re the 0l “S itsclf * <*** -V, r> a 



13HAP, III. 


ETHICS. 


247 


exercise of pleasure, the same thing will .apply to justice and 
the other moral virtues, (from following which it is allowed 
that men evidently become of a certain quality in a greater 
or less degree,) and to virtue generally 5 for some men are 
just and courageous in a greater degree : it is possible also 
to perform the acts of justice and temperance in a greater or 
less degree. But if they apply their assertion to pleasure 
abstractedly, I imagine they do not mention the cause, if 
some pleasures are unmixed and some mixed But what 
objection is there, that like as health, which is defined, ad¬ 
mits of being greater or less, pleasure should be in the same 
state } for there is not the same formation in all men, nor in 
the same person is it always one, but although relaxed, yet 
it continues up to a certain point r , and differs in being greater 
or less. It is possible then that the case of pleasure may be 
the same. 

52 . Laying down the summum bonum to be perfect, and mo¬ 
tions and creations to be imperfect, they attempt to prove 
pleasure to be a motion and a creation s . But it seems that 
their argument is not correct, and that it is not a motion; 
for quickness and slowness appears to belong to every mo¬ 
tion ; and if not absolutely, as in the motion of the yvorld, 
yet relatively. But neither of these exist in pleasure 5 for 
it is possible to become pleased quickly, as it is to become 
angry 5 but not to feel pleasure quickly, not even relatively.; 
but only to walk, or to grow, and all such things. It is 
possible therefore to change 1 into a state of pleasure quickly 

<1 For although the mixed pleasures may be undcfinable, the pure and 
nnmixed will admit of definition, which distinction the opponents of 
pleasure ought to have stated, when they argued against its being a good 
on the ground of its not being definable. 

r Two people will be said to be in health, although one is certainly 
more perfectly so than the other ; and it is impossible to fix the limits 
where a good state of health ends and a bad state begins; and yet health 
itself is definable. 

* i. e. that pleasure itself is not the feeling produced in the mind, but 
that which generates and produces that feeling; or that it is the moving 
from a state of pain, or absence of pleasure, into pleasure. 

* And this is what the objectors conceived pleasure to consist in. 

R 4 



248 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK X. 


or slowly; but to exercise the feeling of pleasure quickly is 
not possible : (which is expressed by the Greek term 
qdzr&a f.) 

3 . How also can it be a creation [or something creative] ? 
for it appears that any thing is not generated from any 
thing; but from whatever it is generated, into that it is 
dissolved ; and that which pleasure generated, pain u de¬ 
stroys. But they say that pain is a want of something 
which nature requires, and that pleasure is the supplying of 
that want. But these are bodily feelings : consequently if 
pleasure is the supplying of that which nature requires, that 
thing must feel the pleasure, in which the supplement takes 
place; that is, the body must feel it. But this does not 
seem to be the case ; therefore pleasure is not the supplying 
of a want 5 but when the supplement has taken place, then 
a man may feel pleasure; in the same manner that when he 
has been cut, he feels pain x . But this opinion seems to 
have had its origin from the pains and pleasures connected 
with food : for when men are in want and have previously 
felt pain, they feel pleasure at having the want supplied. 
But this does not happen in all pleasures : for the pleasures 
of mathematics are without pain; and of the pleasures of the 
senses, those which come by smelling and hearing and see¬ 
ing; many recollections also and hopes. To what then will 
these give birth > for there are no wants of any thing, which 
may be supplied. 

4. In answer to those who bring forward reprehensible 
pleasures, one might say, that these are not pleasant $ for 
we are not to think that because they are pleasant to evil- 
disposed persons, they are also pleasant in themselves, ex¬ 
cept to these particular persons ; in the same manner as we 
are not to think those things wholesome, or sweet, or bitter, 

u If pleasure merely consisted in generating a certain feeling in the 
mind, that feeling would be resolved again into pleasure; but it continues 
there till it is expelled by pain. 

x It is not pain which cuts a man, but after he has been cut, he feels 
pain: so it is not pleasure which supplies the want, but when it is sup¬ 
plied pleasure is felt. 



CKAP. Ill, 


ETHICS. 


249 

which are so to the sick : nor again those to be white, 
which appear so to persons with diseased eyes. Or should 
one answer thus, that pleasures are eligible, but not from 
these sources; as wealth is eligible, but not to one who gets 
it by treachery 5 so is health, but not to one who gets it by 
eating all kinds of things. Or is it not rather that pleasures 
differ in species ? for those which proceed from honourable 
sources are different from those which come from disgrace¬ 
ful ones j and it is impossible to have the pleasure of the 
just man without being just, or that of the musician, with¬ 
out being musical; and so in other cases. 

5 . But the circumstance of the friend being different from 
the flatterer seems to prove either that pleasure is not a good, 
or that pleasures are different in species; for the former 
seems to associate for good, the latter for pleasure 5 and the 
one is reproached, but men praise the other ; as if they asso¬ 
ciated for different motives. Secondly, And no one would 
choose to live, having the intellect of a child throughout his 
life, taking pleasure in those things which please children, 
even to the greatest degree 5 nor to take delight in doing 
any disgraceful thing, not even if he was never to feel pain for 
it. Besides, we should take pains about many tilings, even if 
they brought no pleasure, as seeing, remembering, knowing, 
possessing virtue. But whether pleasures follow these things 
of necessity or no, makes no difference j for we should 
choose them, even if pleasure did not arise from them. 

6. Consequently that pleasure is not the summum Lonum, 
nor every pleasure eligible, seems to be evident: and that 
some are eligible for their own sakes, differing either in 
species, or the source from whence they come. Let this then 
be sufficient as to the opinions which have been entertained 
upon the subject of pleasure and pain. 



£50 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X. 


CHAP. IV. 

It is proved more at large that pleasure is not a motion, but 
that it makes the energy complete. 

1. But what is the genus or species of pleasure would 
become more evident if we resume the subject from the be¬ 
ginning. For vision seems to be perfect at any period of 
time ; for it is not in want of any thing, which by coming 
afterwards will make its species perfect. But pleasure re¬ 
sembles this; for it is something entire: and there is no 
particular time at which one might feel pleasure, the species 
of which would be perfected if it lasted a longer time. 
Wherefore it is not a motion; for every motion consists in 
time, and is directed to some end ; for instance, the motion 
of building is perfect, when it produces what it is aiming 
at; it is therefore perfect either when the whole time is out, 
or at this or that particular time. But in the separate parts 
of time all the motions are imperfect, and different in species 
from the whole motion, and from one another: for the 
putting together of the stones is different from measuring the 
perpendicularity of the column, and these are different from 
the completion of the temple. And the motion of the tem¬ 
ple is perfect: because it wants nothing towards the end 
proposed ; but the motion of the foundation and the triglyph 
is imperfect: for each belongs only to a part. Consequently 
they differ in species; and it is not possible at any particular 
time to take a motion which is perfect in its speciesbut if 
it is ever perfect, it must be in the whole time. It is the 
same in walking, and every other motion. For if loco-mo¬ 
tion is the moving from one part of space to another, the 
specific differences of loco-motion must also be so also, as 
flying, walking, leaping, and such like. But not only thus, 
but even in walking itself; for the whence and the whither 
are not the same in the stadium, and in part of the stadium, 
or in one part of it and the other. Nor is it the same thing 
to pass this line or that; for a person does not only pass a 
line, but a line in one particular part of spacej and this is 



CHAP. IV. 


ETHICS. 


251 


in a different part of space from that. We have treated 
minutely of motion in another place. It seems however 
not to be perfect in every part of time, but that the greater 
number are imperfect and different in species, if the whence 
and the whither form the species. But the species of plea* 
sure is perfect at any time whatsoever. It is evident there¬ 
fore that pleasure and motion must be different from each 
other, and that pleasure belongs to things entire and perfect. 
This also would appear from the fact of its being impossible 
to move except in time, but we may feel pleasure without 
reference to time 3 for that which is felt at this particular 
moment is something entire. But from all this it is evident, 
that men do not correctly say that pleasure is a motion or 
creation ; for these terms are not applied to every thing, but 
to those which are devisable and not entire: for there is no 
generation of vision, nor of a point, nor of a unit: nor is 
any thing the motion or generation of these things, nor 
consequently of pleasure 3 for it is something entire. 

2. But since every sense acts upon the object of sense, and 
that acts perfectly which is well-disposed towards the best of 
all the objects which fall under it: (for a perfect act seems 
particularly to be of this nature 3 and whether we say that 
the sense acts, or that in which the sense is, makes no dif¬ 
ference 5 but in every thing the act is best of that which is 
well-disposed towards the best of all the objects which fall 
under it:) this must be the most perfect and the most plea¬ 
sant : for pleasure attends upon every sense, as it does also 
upon every act of intellect and contemplation ; but the most 
perfect is the most pleasant, and the most perfect is that of 
the thing which is well-disposed towards the best of all the 
objects which fall under it. Pleasure therefore makes the act 
perfecty : but pleasure docs not make it perfect in the same 

y The argument seems to be this; every act is attended by an operation 
either of Intellect or sensation: but every such operation is attended with 
pleasure, and the most perfect operation of sensation and intellect must 
be attended with the most perfect pleasure; consequently no act what¬ 
soever can be perfect and complete, unless there is a perfect and com¬ 
plete pleasure attending it; i. e. pleasure makes the act perfect. 



ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK X. 


252 

manner that the object and the sense do if they are good; as 
health and the physician are not in the same manner causes 
of a person being healthy. 

3. But that there is a pleasure in every act of sense is evi¬ 
dent : for we say that acts of vision and hearing are pleasant t 
and it is also evident that this is most so, when the sense is 
the best, and acts upon the best object. But if the object of 
sense and the thing which feels the sense are of this nature, 
there will always be pleasure as long as there is an active and 
a passive. But pleasure makes the energy complete, not as 
the inherent habit, but as some end added to it, as personal 
grace to those in the prime of life. As long therefore as the 
object of sensation or intellect be such as it ought, as also 
the faculty which judges or contemplates, there will be plea¬ 
sure in the energy : for when the patient and the agent are 
similar and correspond to one another, the same effect is na? 
turally produced. 

4 . Why then is no one continually pleased ? is it that he 
becomes fatigued ? for no human things have the power of 
energizing continually. Pleasure therefore cannot 1 , for it 
follows the energy. But some things cause delight when 
they are new, and for the same reason they do not cause it in 
the same degree afterwards : for at first the mind is inclined 
towards them, and energizes earnestly in them, like as in the 
case of sight those who fix their eyes; but afterwards the 
energy is not of the same kind, but relaxed. Wherefore also 
the pleasure becomes obscured. 

5. But one might imagine that all men seek pleasure, be¬ 
cause all are desirous of life; and life is a species of energy ; 
and every one energizes upon and in those things which he 
loves most; as the musician, in hearing, upon music 5 the 
studious man, in his intellect, upon theorems; and so with 
the rest. But pleasure makes the energy perfect, and there¬ 
fore it makes life perfect, which men desire. It is with rea¬ 
son therefore that they are also desirous of pleasure; fot 
it makes life, which is an object of choice, perfect to every 


* I have ventured to read 'huwrm for ylnvm* 



CHA.P. V. 


ETHICS. 


25$ 


one. But let the question whether we choose life for the 
sake of pleasure, or pleasure for the sake of life, he omitted 
for the present, for these seem to be intimately connected, 
and not to admit of separation 5 for without an energy plea¬ 
sure is not produced, and pleasure makes every energy per¬ 
fect. 


CHAP. V. 

Different energies require different energies to make them 'perfect: 
and to know what pleasure is the best, we must look to the best 
man . 

1. Whence also they seem to differ in species j for we 
think that things which are different in species are made 
perfect by different things 5 for such seems to be the case 
with natural things and works of art, as animals and trees, 
and painting and statues, and a house and furniture. So also 
we think that energies which differ in species are made per¬ 
fect by things which differ in species. 

%, But the energies of the intellect differ from the energies 
of sensation, and each of these differ from one another in 
species; consequently the pleasures which perfect them 
differ. This would also appear from each pleasure being 
intimately connected with the energy which it perfects 5 for 
the appropriate pleasure contributes to increase the energy $ 
for persons who act with pleasure judge of every thing and 
perform it accurately in a greater degree; as those become 
geometricians who take pleasure in geometry, and they per¬ 
ceive every thing more distinctly. So also those who are 
fond of music, or fond of building, and every one else make 
a progress in their peculiar employment, taking pleasure in 
it. Pleasures therefore contribute to increase the energy; 
but what contributes to increase must be closely connected ; 
and things which are closely connected with objects differing 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X, 


254 

in species, must themselves be different in species. Again, 
this would appear still more from the fact that pleasures 
arising from other things are impediments to energies 3 for 
those who love music cannot attend to conversation if they 
hear any one playing, because they take more pleasure in 
music than in their present energy. The pleasure therefore 
which attends music destroys the energy that was employed 
in conversation. This is the same in every other case, when 
a man is employed upon two things at once: for the plea¬ 
santer energy drives out the other ; and if there is a great 
difference as to the pleasure, so much the more, so that he 
cannot energize at all upon the other. Wherefore when we 
take excessive delight in any thing, we generally do not do 
any thing else; and we do something else, when we are but 
moderately pleased with the other thing, as persons who eat 
sweetmeats in the theatre, do it most when the actors are 
bad. But since the appropriate pleasure makes the energies 
accurate, and more lasting, and better, but the pleasures 
arising from any thing else spoil them, it is evident that 
they are very distinct. For pleasures arising from something 
else have nearly the same effect with pains from the thing 
itself 3 for pains in the thing itself destroy the energies; 
for instance, painting or reasoning is unpleasant and painful 
to any one, the one does not paint, and the other does not 
reason, the energy being painful. The contrary effect there¬ 
fore is produced in energies from pleasures and pains which 
peculiarly belong to them : but those peculiarly belong to 
the energy which follow it of itself. It has been mentioned 
also that pleasures from other objects produce nearly the 
same effect with pain ; for they destroy the energy, but not 
in the same u ay. 

3 . But since energies differ in being good or bad, and 
some are to be chosen, some to be avoided and others nei¬ 
ther, the pleasures also are in the same way 3 for there is a 
pleasure peculiarly belonging to every energy. That there¬ 
fore which belongs to the good energy is just, and that 
which belongs to the bad energy is vicious 3 for the desires 
of honourable things are praiseworthy, of disgraceful ones. 



ci-iapt v. 


ETHICS. 


255 


reprehensible. But the pleasures, which are in energies, 
more peculiarly belong to them than the desires j for the 
latter are different according to time and disposition; hut 
the former follow close upon the energies, and are so inse¬ 
parable from them, that it admits of dispute, whether the 
energy is the same with the pleasure. It appears however 
that pleasure is not an operation of intellect or sensation; 
for it is absurd 5 but because they are not separated, they 
appear the same to some people. As therefore the energies 
are different, so are the pleasures. But sight differs from 
touch in purity, and hearing and smelling from taste: the 
pleasures therefore differ in the same way j and the plea¬ 
sures of intellect differ from these, and each from one an¬ 
other. But there seems to be a pleasure peculiarly belong¬ 
ing to every animal, as there is a peculiar work; for it is 
that which belongs to the energy. And if we examine each 
particularly, this would appear to be the case ; for the plea¬ 
sure of a horse, of a dog, and of a man is different • as He¬ 
raclitus says, that an ass would prefer rubbish to gold ; 
for food is pleasanter than gold to asses. The pleasures 
therefore of things differing in species arc different 5 but it 
is reasonable that the pleasures of tiie same things should 
have no difference. 

4. But they have no small difference with respect to men ; 
for the same things give pain to some and pleasure to 
others j and to some they arc painful and hateful, to others 
pleasant and delightful. The same is also the case in sweet 
things; for the same things do not seem sweet to a man in 
a fever and a man in health ; nor does the same thing seem 
warm to an invalid and a man in a good state of body; the 
same is also the case with every thing else. But in all these 
cases that which appears to the most excellent a of the kind 

a Lambinus translates <r$ artfovli&ty, viro bono, virtuicqite pradito* In 
which I conceive that he is wrong, or at least that he only gives one part 
of the meaning of the term* In the examples quoted in the preceding sen¬ 
tence, the uyiaUw is &^oul»7os compared with the tfufarM, and the iu- 
txrmit compared with the oc&ms* 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X, 


So 6 

seems to be the true appearance. If this remark is true,, (as 
it appears to be,) and excellence, and the good man, so far 
as he is good, are the standard of every thing; these must 
be pleasures which appear so to him, and those things plea¬ 
sant in which he delights. Rut if the things which are dis¬ 
agreeable to him seem pleasant to any one, it is no wonder; 
for there are many things which corrupt and injure men; 
but such things are not pleasant, except to those men and 
others who are so disposed. With respect to those which 
are acknowledged to be disgraceful, it is evident that we 
must not call them pleasures except to the corrupted. Rut 
of those pleasures which seem to be good, what particular 
one or what kind must we say is the pleasure of man ? or is 
this discoverable from the energies ? for pleasures follow 
them. Whether then there be one or more energies of the 
perfect and happy man, the pleasures which perfect them 
must properly be called the pleasures of man; and the rest 
must be so in a secondary and promiscuous manner, like the 
energies. 


CHAP. VI. 

Happiness is an energy according to virtue. 

1 . As we have treated of the virtues, of friendships, and of 
pleasures, it remains that we should discuss the subject of 
happiness in the outline, since we have laid this down to be 
the end of human actions. Wherefore if we recapitulate 
what has been said before, the argument would be more 
concise. 

2 . Rut we have said b that it is not a habit; for if it were, 
it might exist in a man who slept throughout his life, leading 
the life of a vegetable, and unfortunate in the greatest dc- 


b Vide b. i. c. 7. 



CHAP. VI. 


ETHICS. 


257 


gree. If then this does not please us, but we must rather 
bring it under a kind of energy, as was said before 5 and of 
energies, some are necessary and chosen for the sake of 
something else, others are chosen for their own sokes 5 it is 
evident that we must consider happiness to be one of those 
which are chosen for their own sakes, and not onq of those 
which are chosen for sake of something else : for happiness 
is in want of nothing, but is self-sufficient. 

3 . Now those energies are chosen for their own sakes, 
from which nothing additional is sought for beyond the 
energy. But actions done according to virtue seem to be 
such ; (for the performance of noble and excellent acts is 
amongst things chosen for their own sakes :) and of amuse¬ 
ments, those which are pleasant : for men do not choose these 
for sake of any thing else; for they are rather injured by 
them than benefited, since they neglect their persons and pro¬ 
perty. But many of those who are called happy fly to such 
pastimes as these : wherefore those who have a good turn 
for such pastimes as these are in favour with kings ; for they 
make themselves agreeable in those things which the others 
desire 5 and such are the men that they require. These 
things therefore seem to belong to happiness, because those 
who are in power pass their leisure in them. But such men 
are perhaps no proof; for virtue does not consist in having 
power, nor does intellect, from which two things good ener¬ 
gies proceed 5 nor if these men, who have never tasted real 
and liberal pleasure, fly to bodily pleasures, must we there¬ 
fore think that these pleasures are more eligible; for chil¬ 
dren think that those things which are esteemed by them 
are the best. It is reasonable therefore to suppose, that as 
different things appear honourable to children and to men, 
so also they do to the bad and the good. Wherefore, as we 
have said very often, those things are honourable and plea¬ 
sant which are so to the good man. But to every man that 
energy is most eligible which accords with his peculiar habit; 
and therefore to the good man, that which accords with vir¬ 
tue. Consequently happiness does not consist in amusement $ 
for it is absurd that the end should be amusement, and that 

s 





ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X. 


men should toil and suffer inconvenience all their life for the 
sake of amusement: for we choose every thing, as we might 
say, for the sake of something else, except happiness; for 
that is the end. Rut n to be serious, and to labour for the sake 
of amusement, appears foolish and very childish. But to 
play that we may be serious, as Anacharsis said, seems to be 
Tight • for amusement resembles recreation. Recreation 
therefore is not the end, for it is had recourse to for sake of 
the energy. 

4 . But the happy life seems to be according to virtue ; and 
this is serious, not in amusement. We say also that serious 
things are better than those which are ridiculous and full of 
amusement ; and that the energy of the better part and of 
the better man is more serious ; and the energy of the better 
man is superior, and therefore more connected with happi¬ 
ness. Besides any person whatsoever and a slave may enjoy 
bodily pleasures no less than the best man; but no one 
allows a sl&ve to partake of happiness unless he does also of 
[a virtuous] life : for happiness does not consist in such modes 
of passing life, but in energies directed by virtue, as has been 
stated already. 


CHAP. VII. 

Happiness consists in the energies of the intellectual virtues ,* 
which energies are shewn by induction to contain all the re¬ 
quisites for happiness more than the moral energies. 

1 . Buft if happiness is an energy according to virtue, it is 
reasonable to suppose that it is according to the best virtue ; 
and this must be that of the best part. Whether then this 
best part be intellect, or any thing else, which seems natu¬ 
rally to have the rule and government, and to possess ideas 
upon noble and divine subjects; or whether it is itself divine, 
or the most divine of any thing within us; the energy of 



CHAP. VII. 


ETHICS. 


this part according to its peculiar virtue must be perfect 
happiness : and that this energy is contemplative has been 
stated c . 

2. This also would seem to agree with what was said 
before, and with the truth : for this is the best energy3 since 
the intellect is the best thing, within us, and of subjects of 
knowledge, those are best with which the intellect is con¬ 
cerned. 

3. It is also most constant • for we are able to energize 
more constantly than to do any thing else. 

4 . We think also that pleasure ought to be united to hap¬ 
piness : but of all the energies according to virtue, that ac¬ 
cording to wisdom d is confessedly the most pleasant: at 
least wisdom seems to contain wonderful pleasures both in 
point of purity and continuance and it is reasonable that 
life should be pleasanter to those who have knowledge, than 
to those who only seek it. 

5. Also that which is called independence must exist 
most in contemplative happiness; for both the wise man, 
and the just, and all other men require the necessaries of 
life j but supposing them to be sufficiently supplied with 
such goods, the just man requires persons towards whom and 
between whom he shall act justly ; so also the temperate 
man, and the courageous, and every other morally virtuous 
man. But the wise man, even if by himself, is able to con¬ 
template 5 and the more so, in proportion as he is wise 3 
perhaps he will energize better, if he has coadjutors 3 but 
still he is most independent. 

6. This would seem also to be the only energy which is 


c We have now* arrived by a different process at the same definition of 
happiness which was given in the first book, c. 7. viz. An energy of the 
soul, according to the best virtue ; hut as we arc now able to explain what 
is the best virtue, we may substitute tjie one word B-wfa, contemplation, 
for the whole of the definition. 

d Wisdom was shewn in the 6th book to be the best of the intellectual 
virtues: contemplation therefore (which is an energy) is the exercise of 
wisdom, (which is an habit:) and wisdom was shewn (in the 6th book, c. 
7.) to contain knowledge. 

s 2 



260 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X. 


loved for its own sake ; for nothing is produced from it be¬ 
sides contemplation; but from the active energies, we gain 
more or less besides the performance of the action. 

7- Happiness seems also to consist in leisure e ; for we are 
actively engaged, that we may have leisure ; and we go to 
war that we may be at peace. Now the energies of the 
active virtues seem to consist in political or military affairs ; 
but actions in these appear to have no leisure. Certainly 
military actions are altogether without it : for no one chooses 
war for the sake of war, nor even to make preparations for 
war 3 for a man would seem to be altogether sanguinary, if 
he made his friends enemies in order that there might be 
battles and murders. The energy of the political character 
is also without leisure 3 besides the actual administration of 
the state, being engaged in gaining power and honour, or 
happiness for himself and his citizens, which is evidently dif¬ 
ferent from the political science that we are in search of f - 

8. If then of all actions according to the virtues, the civil 
and the military excel in beauty and greatness 3 and these 
are not in leisure and aim at some end, and are not chosen 
for their own sakes 3 but the energy of the intellect seems to 
excel in intensity, as it is contemplative, and to aim at no 
end beyond itself, and to have a pleasure peculiarly belong- 

e i. e. in being disengaged from active energies, that we may have 
time for contemplation. 

f There appears to be some corruption of the text in this place. I have 
ventured to read eJSjXov Ivsgav ovetotv <rw wv xoc) t £n f fovfi sv, so as not 

to repeat the words Iwgav ovtccv twice. But still there is some confusion ; 
for although there are certainly two kinds of croA./'mij, one which is engaged 
in the administratibn of the state, and another in providing for the hap¬ 
piness of the people; yet this last cannot be said to be different from the 
“ which we arc in search of” because it is that and not the execu¬ 
tive #o\irtxh, which we have been considering all throughout the book- 
Besides the construction seems to require cumv to agree with tvStu- 
pbmm rather than with I would therefore either substitute 

s vSeufitivUt for m or follow Eustratius in reading The 

sense will then be' evident: for undoubtedly the happiness which the 
neoXmxli seeks for his citizens is not contemplative happiness, but happi¬ 
ness in the popular sense of the word. 



CHAP, VII. 


■ETHICS. 


261 


ing to it 3 and if this increases the energy; and if self-suffi¬ 
ciency, and leisure, and freedom from decay, (as far as any 
thing human can be free,) and every thing which is attri¬ 
buted to the happy man, seem to exist in this energy ; then 
this must be perfect happiness of man, when it receives the 
end of life complete ; for nothing is incomplete of those 
things which are classed under happiness. 

9 - But such a life [it will be objected] would be too good 
for man ; for he will lead such a life as this, not inasmuch 
as he is man, but inasmuch as there is something divine in 
him. But so far as this divine part excels the whole com¬ 
pound, so much does its energy excel the energy of the rest 
of virtue. If then the intellect be divine when compared 
with man, also the life which is in obedience to that will be 
divine when compared with human life. Put a man ought 
not to entertain human thoughts, as some would advise, 
because he is human, nor mortal thoughts because he is 
mortal ; but as far as it is possible he should .abstract himself 
from mortality, and do every thing with a view to living in 
obedience to the best of all things within fdfti ; for if this is 
small in size, yet in power and value it very far exceeds all. 
Besides each of us would seem to exist in this part, if it is 
the ruling and the better part. It would be absurd there¬ 
fore, if a man were to choose not his own life, hut the life 
of something else g . And what was said before will apply 
now 5 for that which is peculiarly suited to each by nature, 
is best and most pleasant to every ope; and therefore to man 
the life according to intellect js most pleasant, if this is par¬ 
ticularly man. That life therefore is the most happy. 

8 As intellect is the proprium of man, intellect may be said to be man; 
and therefore a life according to intellect is the proper life for men ; and 
a life according to any of the other parts which make up the compound, 
man, would be the life of that compound, and not of man. 



262 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X. 


CHAR VIII. 

Intellectual happiness is shewn by several arguments to be supe¬ 
rior to moral happiness: and this notion is confirmed by the 

opinions of other philosophers. 

1 , But that life which is according to the rest of virtue is 
happy in a secondary manner ; for the energies according to 
that virtue are human 5 for we perform what is just, and 
courageous, and every thing else belonging to the moral 'vir¬ 
tues, in our intercourse with each other, and in our wants, 
observing what is suitable for each in every kind of action 
and passion. But all these appear to be human. Some of 
them even seem to result from the body, and moral virtue 
seems in many respects to be intimately connected with the 
passions. Prudence 11 also is united to moral virtue, and this 
to prudence; ifLthe principles of prudence are acquired by 
the moral virtues, and the perfection of the moral virtues by 
prudence. But these are connected with the passions, and 
must relate to the whole compound of man 5 and the virtues 
of the compound are human; and therefore the life accord¬ 
ing to them and the happiness are human. But the happi¬ 
ness of the intellect is separate; for let thus much be said 
about it, since extreme accuracy is beyond the subject pro¬ 
posed. 

% It would also seem to require external aid in a small 
degree, or in a less degree than moral happiness. For let it 
be granted that both are in need of necessary things: (al¬ 
though the man engaged in civil science is employed more 
about the body and things connected with that;) for in this 
there is but little difference, but with respect to the energies 
there will be a great difference; for the liberal man will 
want money, in order to perform liberal acts ; and the just 
man will want means to make returns 5 the courageous maa 
also will want power, if he is to perform any thing connected 


h Prudence is the connecting link between the intellectual and moral 
virtues ; it being itself intellectual, and serving as a guide in moral action. 



CHAP. yin. 


ETHICS. 


263 


with virtue j and the temperate man will want an opportu¬ 
nity [to shew his temperance.] For otherwise how will he 
or any other character be known. For wishes are uncertain, 
and even the unjust pretend that they wish to act justly»: 
aud there is a question k , whether the principle or the actions 
themselves have the greater influence over virtue, since it 
consists iu both: it is evident therefore that the perfection 
[of virtue] must reside in both ; but with a view to actions, 
it is in want of many things 5 and by how much greater and 
nobler the actions are, so many the more will it want. But 
the contemplative man requires no such things, at least to 
perform his energy; but as we might say they are even im¬ 
pediments to his contemplation. But in his capacity of man 
and of associating with many, he will choose to perform acts 
of moral virtue. He will therefore require such things in 
order to fulfil his human character. 

$. But that perfect happiness is a kind of contemplative 
energy might be shewn also from hence j that we suppose 
the gods to be preeminently blessed and happy. But what 
moral acts can we attribute to them } shall they be just 
acts ? or will they not appear ridiculous making bargains, 
and restoring deposits, or any such things as these ? But 
shall we give them courageous acts, that they may undergo 
formidable things and meet danger, because it is honourable } 
or liberal acts } but to whom will they give } and it is ab¬ 
surd if they are to have money, or any thing of that sort. 
But if they are temperate, what would follow ? is not the 
praise absurd, because they have not bad desires } And if 
we went through every case of moral action, they would 
seem small, and unworthy of gods. But yet all suppose that 
they live, and therefore energize; for they do not sleep, like 
Endymion. To him therefore who lives, but is abstracted 
frona moral action, and still more so from production, what 
is left besides contemplation } So that the energy of the 
Deity, as it exceeds in blessedness, must be contemplative : 

i A slight transposition of the sentences has been made here. 

k Tide book iii. c. 2. sect 1. 

S 4 



264 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK 


and therefore of human energies that which is nearest allied 
to this, must be the happiest. 

4. A proof of it also is, that other animals do not partake 
of happiness, which are deprived altogether of such an 
energy. For to the gods, their whole life is happy; and to 
men, as far as there is some resemblance to such an energy : 
but no other animal is happy, because they in no way par¬ 
take of contemplation. As far therefore as contemplation 
extends, so far does happiness ,* and in whom there is more 
contemplation, in them there is more happiness, not from 
accident, but in consequence of the contemplation ; for this 
is honourable of itself. So that happiness must be a kind of 
contemplation. 

5. But the happy man will want external prosperity, as 
far as he is man ; for nature is not sufficient of itself to con¬ 
template j but the body must be in health, and food and 
other necessaries must be present. We must not however 
imagine that the person who is to be happy, because it is 
impossible for him to be so without external goods, will 
therefore want many and great goods; for independence 
does not consist in excess, nor does decision, nor action 1 . 
But it is possible for men to perform noble things without 
being lords of earth and sea ; for a man may be able to act 
according to virtue with moderate means. We may see an 
evident proof of this: for private individuals seem to per¬ 
form good acts no less than men in power, but even more 
so. And it is sufficient that so many [goods] are present, 
[as enable him to energize without interruption :] for the 
life of that man will be happy, who energizes according to 
virtue. 

6. Solon also perhaps gave a good description of happy 
men, when he said that in his opinion they were those who 
were moderately supplied with external goods, who had 
done the most noble deeds, and lived temperately ; for it is 


l A person is not independent then only when he possesses every thing 
to excess: nor do wc decide in favour of a thing, because it is in excess; 
nor does the perfection of a moral act consist in its being done to excess. 



CHAP. VIII. 


ETHICS. 


%65 


possible that men who have moderate possessions should do 
what they ought. It seems also that Anaxagoras conceived 
the happy man to be neither the rich nor the powerful, when 
he said, that he should not be surprised if he appeared in an 
absurd light to the multitude ; for these judge by externals, 
having a perception only of such things m . The opinions of 
wise men also seem to agree with what has been said j such 
facts therefore carry with them some credit. But truth in 
practical matters is decided from facts and from life 5 for 
the important part of them depends upon these : and we 
ought to try all that has been said, by applying it to facts 
and to life 3 and if our arguments agree with facts, we may 
receive them; but if they are at variance, we must consider 
them as mere words. 

7. Also he that energizes according to intellect, and pays 
attention to that, and has it in the best state, is likely to be 
most beloved by the gods : for if any regard is paid to human 
things by the gods, as there seems to be, it must be rea¬ 
sonable that they would take pleasure in what is the best 
and nearest allied to themselves j but this must be intellect 3 
and that they would be kind in return to those who love and 
honour this most, as to persons who take care of what is 
dear to them, and who act rightly and nobly. But that all 
these things exist most in the wise man requires no proof 3 
he is therefore most beloved by the gods. It is probable 
also that the same person is most happy. So that in this 
way also the wise man must be most happy. 

m If the multitude thought Anaxagoras absurd, because they judged 
from external things; it is plain that Anaxagoras differed from them, and 
did not j udge from external things, and so far agreed with Aristotle in his 
opinion of happiness. 



m 


ARISTOTLE'S 


BOOK X. 


CHAP. IX. 

As no moral precepts are attended to unless the hearer has be§n 
previously disposed to virtue , the subject of education is con¬ 
sidered, If children could be educated by the laws, as in 
Sparta , it would be better ; but as that is not the case , eveyy 
one who has the care of education , should study legislation as 
much as he can. But as the science of legislation has not been 
taught like other sciences, or has been taught erroneously , the 
author himself promises to write a treatise upon politics . 

1. If then we have treated sufficiently of these matters, 
and the virtues, and also of friendship and pleasure, must 
we think that our original plan is completed } or is the end 
in practical matters, according to common saying, not the 
contemplating and knowing every thing, but rather the 
practising them } and therefore it is not sufficient to have 
knowledge of virtue, but we must endeavour to possess and 
employ it ,* or if we become good in any other way. 

<2. Now if precepts were sufficient of themselves to make 
men good, justly ^ would they have received many and great 
a rewards,” as Theognis says, and we should be obliged to 
provide ourselves with them. But the case is, that they seem 
to have power to urge on and to excite young men of liberal 
minds, and to make a character that is generous and truly 
fond of what is noble easily led by virtue ; but that they 
have no power to excite the multitude to what is virtuous 
and noble. For it is not the nature of such men to obey a 
sense jof shame, but fear; nor to abstain from vicious things 
because it is disgraceful, but on account of the punishments; 
for they live according to passion, and pursue their peculiar 
pleasures, and any thing which will create them; they fly 
also from the contrary pains : but of what is honourable and 
truly pleasant, they have no idea, as they never tasted them. 
What reasoning then can bring back such characters as 
these ? for it is not possible, or at least not easy, to change 
what has been for a long time impressed upon the cha- 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


967 


racier; but it is perhaps a great thing, if when every thing 
is present by which we are thought to become good, we can 
arrive at virtue. 

S. But it is thought that men become good either by na¬ 
ture, or practice, or teaching. Now it is evident that what 
comes from nature does not belong to ourselves, but exists 
by some divine cause in those who are truly fortunate. But 
reasoning and teaching perhaps does not avail in every case, 
but the mind of the hearer must be previously formed by 
practice to feel pleasure and aversion properly, like the soil 
which nourishes the seed. For he that lives in obedience to 
passion, would not listen to reasoning which turns him from 
it, nor would he understand it. And how is it possible to 
bring back by persuasion such a man as this ? On the 
whole, it appears that passion does not submit to reasoning, 
but to force. There must therefore previously exist a cha¬ 
racter in some way connected with virtue, loving what is 
noble, and abhorring what is disgraceful. 

4 . But for a person to meet with a good guidance to¬ 
wards virtue from his childhood is difficult, unless he is 
brought up under such laws : for to live temperately and 
patiently is not pleasant to the generality, particularly when 
young. Wherefore education and institutions ought to be 
regulated by laws for they will not be disagreeable when 
they are familiar. But perhaps it is not sufficient that they 
should meet with good education and attention when young 5 
but since when they are arrived at manhood they ought also 
to make them their study, and practise them, we should re¬ 
quire laws also for this purpose: in short, we should want 
them for the whole life 5 for the generality are obedient to 
necessity rather than to reason, and to punishments rather 
than to any noble principle. Wherefore some think that in 
legislating we ought to exhort to virtue, and to urge them on 
upon a principle of honour, since those who are good in 
their practice will obey when they are led: but to appoint 
chastisements and punishments for those who are xlisobedienfc 
and untoward, and utterly to expel the incurable; because 
he that is good and lives after a principle of honour .will 



26s 


ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X. 


obey reason 3 but the bad man aims at pleasure,, and is 
corrected by pain like a beast. Wherefore it is a common 
saying, that there ought to be such pains as are most op¬ 
posed to the pleasures which are loved. 

5 . If then, as has been said, he that is to be a good man 
must be educated well, and habituated to it, and thus con¬ 
tinue to live in good institutions, and never practise what is 
bad, either involuntarily or voluntarily 3 and if this is to be 
done by their living in obedience to some intelligent principle, 
and some right regulation, which has strength; now the 
authority of a father hath no strength, nor compulsory 
force 3 nor, in short, the authority of any one man, unless he 
is a king, or something of that sort; but the law possesses 
a compulsory power, being reason proceeding from a certain 
prudence and intelligence. Besides, men bate those indi¬ 
viduals who oppose their appetites, even if they do it rightly; 
but the law is not offensive when it prescribes what is good. 

6. But in the city of Lacedaemon alone, with a few others, 
the legislator seems to have paid attention to education and 
institutions 5 but in most states such matters have been ne¬ 
glected, and each lives as he pleases, like the Cyclops, 

Making laws for his children and wife. 

It would be best therefore that attention to these matters 
should be public, and on right principles, and that it should 
have power to effect this : but since it has been neglected as 
a public measure, it would seem to be incumbent upon every 
individual to contribute to the virtue of their children and 
friends, or at least to intend to do it. But from what has 
been 1 said, it would seem that he would have most power 
to do this if he made himself acquainted with legislation: 
for public institutions for education are evidently made by 
the laws,* and those are good which are made by good laws. 
But whether these laws be written or unwritten would seem 
to make no difference ; nor whether they are those by which 
one or many persons are to be educated, as it does not in 
music, in the gymnastic, and other lessons. For in the same 
way that legal enactments, together with moral dispositions. 



CHAP. IX. 


ETHICS. 


269 


have authority in states,, so also the words of a father, to¬ 
gether with moral dispositions, have authority in private 
families 5 and still greater on account of the relationship, 
and the benefits conferred: for the parties previously love 
each other, and are naturally docile. 

7 . But yet the education of separate individuals differs 
from public systems of education, as is the case in medicine: 
for generally abstinence and rest are good for a man in a 
fever 3 but to a particular individual perhaps they are not 3 
and the teacher of boxing perhaps does not teach the same 
style of fighting to all. And it would seem that he might 
practise greater accuracy in individual cases, if the education 
was private 5 for then each is more likely to meet with what 
suits him. But a physician, or a gymnastic, or any other 
master, would take the best care of the individual, if he knew 
the universal, viz. what is good for all men, or for all of a 
certain class : for the sciences are said to belong, and really 
do belong, to what is general. Nevertheless there is nothing 
to hinder a person from taking good care of an individual, 
even if he has no general knowledge 3 but if he accurately 
examines by experience what happens to each individual, as 
some physicians seem to be the best towards themselves, 
when they are not able to assist another person in any respect. 
But perhaps it would still be not less advisable for him, who 
wishes to become an artist or a projector, to have recourse 
to the universal, and to make himself acquainted with all the 
contingencies of that; for we have observed that sciences 
are connected with that: and perhaps he who wishes to 
make men better by education, whether many or few, should 
endeavour to become acquainted with legislation, if it is by 
laws that we become good. For to give a good disposition 
to any one and to the particular person entrusted to him 
does not belong to every one, but if to any, to him who pos¬ 
sesses the knowledge: as is the case in medicine and other 
arts of which there is any study and discernment. 

8. Should we not then after this investigate from what 
quarter or by what means a man might make himself ac¬ 
quainted with legislation, or, as in other eases, must he learn 



ARISTOTLE’S 


BOOK X. 


no 

it from politicians ? for it seemed to be a part of political 
science. Or does it appear to be different in political science 
from the other sciences and faculties ? for in the others the 
same men seem to teach the faculties, and to act from them ; 
as physicians and painters. But the sophists pretend to 
teach political matters, but not one of them practises them ; 
those who manage the state do this, who would seem to do 
it in consequence of possessing the faculty n , and from ex¬ 
perience rather than from reasoning upon it: for they do 
not appear to write or to speak upon such matters: (and yet it 
would perhaps be a nobler task, than to make speeches in a 
court of justice, or before the people:) nor do they make 
their own sons, nor any others of their friends, politicians. 
But it would be reasonable for them to do it if they could ; 
for neither coultl they leave anything better to their citizens °, 
nor could they wish any better thing to belong to them¬ 
selves, than this faculty, nor consequently to their best 
friends. However, experience seems to contribute not a 
little; for otherwise men would not become better politicians 
by being accustomed to political affairs. Wherefore it seems 
that those who are desirous of knowledge on political science 
require also experience. But those sophists who profess it, 
seem to be very far from teaching it: for they do not at all 
know either what is its specific difference, nor what is its 
subject: for then they would not have held it to be the same 
witRrhetoric, nor worse; nor would they have thought that 
it is easy to legislate, if a man makes a collection of approved 
laws ; for they say that lie should select the best 5 as if this 
selection was not a work of understanding, or judgment was 


n A man who has studied any science, and practises it strictly according 
to the rules of the science, without modifying them in any way according 
to his own ideas, is said to practise that science h 'buv&fiti : if he changes 
them in any way, so as to be no longer following the rules of the science, 
he is then said to act h vrgoxigitrth This will explain why and 

are so often made synonimous in this treatise. See the distinction 
of 'bvvosfits and itperigtats in Bhet. 1 . i. c. 1 . 

0 Vide Polyb. 1 . xii. c. $8. ed. Schweigh. 



CHAP. IX. 


. ETHICS. 


271 


not really the most important thing p , as it is in music. For 
the experienced form a right judgment of works in every 
case, and understand by what means or how they are per¬ 
formed, and what things harmonize with what; but the inex¬ 
perience! may be contented, if they are not ignorant whether 
the work is performed well or ill, as in the case of painting. 
But the laws resemble political compositions. How then 
can a man become acquainted with legislation from these, 
or select the best ? for men do not appear to become physi¬ 
cians from writings; and yet they endeavour to explain by 
words not only the remedies, but even in what manner they 
may be cured, and how they ought to treat them, distin¬ 
guishing the habits of each. But these things seem to be 
useful to the experienced; but to those who have no know¬ 
ledge upon the subject, useless. Perhaps then collections of 
laws and forms of government would be useful to those who 
are able to contemplate, and to decide what is done well, or 
the contrary, or what kind of things suit what: but to those 
who go through such things without any habit, the power 
of making a good selection cannot exist in them, except it 
comes of its own accord; but perhaps they may be more able 
to understand these matters. 

9 . Since therefore former writers have left the subject of 
legislation uninvestigated, it would perhaps be better for 
ourselves to examine it, and, in short, the whole subject of 
government, that the philosophy of human affairs may as far 
as is in our power be completed. First then, if any thing 
has been well said by former writers in any particular, let 
us endeavour to understand it; then from the different forms 
of government being brought together, let us see what kind 
of things preserve and destroy states and individual govern¬ 
ments, and for what reasons some are administered well, and 
others the contrary : for if these points were considered, we 

P The sophists say that in order to learn legislation, a man has nothing 
to do but to make a collection of the best laws; i. e. they assume that he 
knows what are the best laws, when he is only learning them. 



272 


ARISTOTLE’S ETHICS. 


BOOK X. 


should perhaps be better able to see at one view what form 
of government is best* and how each is arranged, and what 
laws and customs it uses. Let us then begin our treatise. 


THE END. 


BAXTER, PRINTER, OXFORD* 



