KERS  OF  ALL  COUNTRIES,  UNITE 


KARL  MARX 

CAP  I TAL 

A  CRITIQUE  OF  POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 

Volume  II 


Book  II: 

The  Process 

of  Circulation  of  Capital 


Edited  by  F,  Engels 


PROGRESS  PUBLISHERS 
Moscow 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN 
EDITED  BY  THE  LATE  I.  LASKER 


K.  MAPKC 
KAI1MTAJI 
Tom  II 

Ha  ausAuUcKOM  xeuxe 


First  published  1956 
Second  printing  1957 
Third  printing  1962 
Fourth  printing  1967 
Fifth  printing  1971 
Sixth  printing  1974 


Printed  in  the  Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics 
10101-456 


M 


014(011-75 


2-75 


Das  KapitaL 

Kritik  der  politisehen  Oekonomie 


Von 


Karl  Marx. 


Zweiter  Band. 

Bach  II:  Der  Cirkulttionsprocess  dec  K&pitals. 


Zweite  Auflage. 

Herausgegelen  von  Friedrich  Engels. 


Dts  Heeht  der  Uebenetzug  lit  vorbehaiun. 


Hamburg 

Verlag  von  Otto  Meissner. 
1893. 


PUBLISHERS’  NOTE 


The  second  volume  of  Capital  was  put  in  shape  and  finally 
edited  by  Frederick  Engels  after  the  death  of  Karl  Marx.  The 
first  German  edition  of  it  appeared  in  1885. 

A  second  German  edition,  that  of  1893,  was  likewise  pre¬ 
pared  by  Engels. 

The  present  English  edition  follows  the  German  1893  ed¬ 
ition  carefully  checked  with  the  manuscript  edited  by  Engels 
and  now  preserved  at  the  Institute  of  Marxism-Leninism 
under  the  C.G.,  C.P.S  U.  The  few  misprints  and  inaccuracies 
in  the  text,  in  figures  and  bibliographical  data  discovered  in 
the  1893  edition,  have  been  corrected. 

The  book  includes  Engels’s  Prefaces  to  the  first  and  second 
German  editions  of  Capital,  Volume  II,  and  is  provided  with 
bibliographical,  name,  and  subject  indexes. 

All  quotations  from  English  and  American  authors  have 
been  checked  with  the  original  sources. 

An  effort  has  been  made  to  preserve  in  this  volume  the 
terminology  elaborated  in  the  Engels-authorised  English  trans¬ 
lation  of  the  first  volume  of  Capital. 

Extensive  use  has  been  made  of  the  English  translation 
of  the  second  volume  of  Capital  published  by  Charles  H.  Kerr 
&  Co.,  Chicago,  1919. 

All  quotations  from  the  English  text  of  the  first  volume  of 
Capital  refer  to  the  publication:  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Volume  I, 
Foreign  Languages  Publishing  House,  Moscow,  1954. 


CONTENTS 


Page 


Preface .  1 

BOOK  II 

THE  PROCESS  OF  CIRCULATION  OF  CAPITAL 

PART  I 

THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

CHAPTER  I.  The  Circuit  of  Money-Capital . .  .  25 

I.  First  Stage.  M — C . 26 

II.  Second  Stage.  Function  of  Productive  Capital . 34 

III.  Third  Stage.  C'— M'  . 38 

IV.  The  Circuit  as  a  Whole  . 48 

CHAPTER  II.  The  Circuit  of  Productive  Capital . 65 

I.  Simple  Reproduction . 66 

II.  Accumulation  and  Reproduction  on  an  Extended  Scale  .  .  80 

III.  Accumulation  of  Money . 84 

IV.  Reserve  Fund . 86 

CHAPTER  III.  The  Circuit  of  Commodity-Capital . 89 

CHAPTER  IV.  The  Three  Formulas  of  the  Circuit . 103 

Natural,  Money  arid  Credit  Economy . — 

The  Meeting  of  Demand  and  Supply . — 

CHAPTER  V.  The  Time  of  Circulation  . 124 

CHAPTER  VI.  The  Costs  of  Circulation  . 132 

I.  Genuine  Costs  of  Circulation . 132 

1.  The  Time  of  Purchase  and  Sale . 132 


vrn 


2.  Book-Keeping  . 136 

3.  Money  . 138 

II.  Costs  of  Storage . 139 

1.  Formation  of  Supply  in  General  . 140 

2,  The  Commodity-Supply  Proper . 146 

III.  Costs  of  Transportation  . 152 


PART  II 

TIIE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 

CHAPTER  VII.  The  Turnover  Time  and  the  Number  of  Turnovers  156 

CHAPTER  VIII.  Fixed  Capital  and  Circulating  Capital  ....  160 

I.  Distinctions  of  Form . 160 

II.  Components,  Replacement,  Repair,  and  Accumulation  of 

Fixed  Capital . 172 

CHAPTER  IX.  The  Aggregate  Turnover  of  Advanced  Capital.  Cycles 

of  Turnover . -  .  .  .  .  186 

CHAPTER  X.  Theories  of  Fixed  and  Circulating  Capital.  The 

Physiocrats  and  Adam  Smith  . 193 

CHAPTER  XI.  Theories  of  Fixed  and  Circulating  Capital.  Ricardo  219 

CHAPTER  XII.  The  Working  Period  . 232 

CHAPTER  XIII.  The  Time  of  Production . 242 

CHAPTER  XIV.  The  Time  of  Circulation . 252 

CHAPTER  XV.  Effect  of  the  Time  of  Turnover  on  the  Magnitude 

of  Advanced  Capital . 261 

I.  The  Working  Period  Equal  to  the  Circulation  Period  270 

II.  The  Working  Period  Greater  Than  the  Period  of  Circula¬ 
tion  . 274 

III.  The  Working  Period  Smaller  Than  the  Circulation  Period  279 

IV.  Conclusions . 283 

V.  The  Effect  of  a  Change  of  Prices . 289 

CHAPTER  XVI.  The  Turnover  of  Variablo  Capital  .  .  .  .  297 

I.  The  Annual  Rate  of  Surplus-Value  . 297 

II.  The  Turnover  of  the  Individual  Variable  Capital  .  .  .  312 
HI.  The  Turnover  of  the  Variable  Capital  from  the  Social  Point 

of  View . . . 316 


IX 


CHAPTER  XVII-  The  Circulation  of  Surplus-Value  . 323 

I.  Simple  Reproduction  . 329 

II.  Accumulation  and  Reproduction  on  an  Extended  Scale  348 

PART  III 

THE  REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  AGGREGATE 
SOCIAL  CAPITAL 

CHAPTER  XVIII.  Introduction . 355 

I.  The  Subject  Investigated . 355 

II.  The  Role  of  Money-Capital . 358 

CHAPTER  XIX.  Former  Presentations  of  the  Subject . 363 

I.  The  Physiocrats . 363 

II.  Adam  Smith  . 366 

1.  Smith's  General  Points  o]  View  .........  366 

2.  Adam  Smith  Resolves  Exchange-Value  into  ,  .  .  374 

3.  The  Constant  Part  of  Capital . 377 

4.  Capital  and  Revenue  in  Adam  Smith  .......  382 

6.  Recapitulation  . 389 

III.  Later  Economists  . 393 

CHAPTER  XX.  Simple  Reproduction  . 396 

I.  The  Formulation  of  the  Question . 396 

II.  The  Two  Departments  of  Social  Production . 399 

III.  Exchange  Between  the  Two  Departments  I(e-|-<)  versus  lie  402 

IV.  Exchange  Within  Department  II.  Necessities  of  Life  and 

Articles  of  Luxury . 406 

V.  The  Mediation  of  Exchange  by  the  Circulation  of  Money  415 

VI.  The  Constant  Capital  of  Department  I . 426 

VII.  Variable  Capital  and  Surplus-Value  in  Both  Departments  429 

VIII.  The  Constant  Capital  in  Both  Departments . 433 

IX.  A  Retrospect  to  Adam  Smith,  Storch,  and  Ramsay  .  .  .  437 

X.  Capital  and  Revenue:  Variable  Capital  and  Wages  .  ,  .  441 

XI.  Replacement  of  the  Fixed  Capital  . 453 

1.  Replacement  of  the  Wear  and  Tear  Portion  of  the  Value  in 

the  Form  of  Money . 457 

2.  Replacement  of  Fixed  Capital  in  Kind  . 462 

3.  Results . 471 

XII.  The  Reproduction  of  the  Money  Material  . 473 

XIII.  Destutt  de  Tracy's  Theory  of  Reproduction  . 484 


CHAPTER  XXL  Accumulation  and  Reproduction  on  an  Extended 


Scale . 493 

I.  Accumulation  in  Department  I . 496 

1.  The  Formation  of  a  Hoard  . 496 

S.  The  Additional  Constant  Capital  . 500 

3.  The  Additional  Variable  Capital . 505 

II.  Accumulation  in  Department  II  .  . . 506 

III.  Schematic  Presentation  of  Accumulation . 510 

1.  First  Illustration . 514 

2.  Second  I llustration . 518 

3.  Replacement  of  lie  in  Accumulation . 523 

IV.  Supplementary  Remarks  . 526 

Home  Index  . 529 

Index  of  Authorities  Quoted  in  Capital,  Vol.  11  ....  531 

Subject  Index  . . 535 


PREFACE 


It  was  no  easy  task  to  put  the  second  book  of  Capital  in  shape 
for  publication,  and  do  it  in  a  way  that  on  the  one  hand  would 
make  it  a  connected  and  as  far  as  possible  complete  work,  and 
on  the  other  would  represent  exclusively  the  work  of  its  author, 
not  of  its  editor.  The  great  number  of  available,  mostly  frag¬ 
mentary,  texts  worked  on  added  to  the  difficulties  of  this  task. 
At  best  one  single  manuscript  (No.  IV)  had  been  revised  through¬ 
out  and  made  ready  for  press.  But  the  greater  part  had  become 
obsolete  through  subsequent  revision.  The  bulk  of  the  material 
was  not  finally  polished,  in  point  of  language,  although  in  sub¬ 
stance  it  was  for  the  greater  part  fully  worked  out.  The  language 
was  that  in  which  Marx  used  to  make  his  extracts:  careless  style 
full  of  colloquialisms,  often  containing  coarsely  humorous  ex¬ 
pressions  and  phrases  interspersed  with  English  and  French  tech¬ 
nical  terms  or  with  whole  sentences  and  even  pages  of  English. 
Thoughts  were  jotted  down  as  they  developed  in  the  brain  of  the 
author.  Some  parts  of  the  argument  would  be  fully  treated,  others 
of  equal  importance  only  indicated.  Factual  material  for  illus¬ 
tration  would  be  collected,  but  barely  arranged,  much  less  worked 
out.  At  conclusions  of  chapters,  in  the  author’s  anxiety  to  get 
to  the  next,  there  would  often  be  only  a  few  disjointed  sentences 
to  mark  the  further  development  here  left  incomplete.  And 
finally  there  was  the  well-known  handwriting  which  the  author 
himself  was  sometimes  unable  to  decipher. 

1  have  contented  myself  with  reproducing  these  manuscripts 
as  literally  as  possible,  changing  the  style  only  in  places  where 
Marx  would  have  changed  it  himself  and  interpolating  explan¬ 
atory  sentences  or  connecting  statements  only  where  this  was 
absolutely  necessary,  and  where,  besides,  the  meaning  was  clear 
beyond  any  doubt.  Sentences  whose  interpretation  was  suscep¬ 
tible  of  the  slightest  doubt  were  preferably  copied  word  for  word. 
The  passages  which  I  have  remodelled  or  interpolated  cover 
barely  ten  pages  in  print  and  concern  only  matters  of  form. 


1  —  1752 


2 


PREFACE 


The  mere  enumeration  of  the  manuscript  material  left  by 
Marx  for  Book  II  proves  the  unparalleled  conscientiousness  and 
strict  self-criticism  with  which  he  endeavoured  to  elaborate  his 
great  economic  discoveries  to  the  point  of  utmost  completion 
before  he  published  them.  This  self-criticism  rarely  permitted 
him  to  adapt  his  presentation  of  the  subject,  in  content  as  well 
as  in  form,  to  his  ever  widening  horizon,  the  result  of  incessant 
study.  The  above  material  consists  of  the  following: 

First,  a  manuscript  entitled  Zur  Kritik  der  politischen  Oeko- 
notnie*  containing  1472  quarto  pages  in  23  notebooks,  written 
in  August  1861  to  June  1863.  It  is  the  continuation  of  a  work 
of  the  same  title,  the  first  part  of  which  appeared  in  Berlin, 
in  1859.  It  treats,  on  pages  1-220  (Notebooks  I-V)  and  again 
on  pages  1159-1472  (Notebooks  XIX-XXIII),  of  the  subjects  ex¬ 
amined  in  Book  I  of  Capital,  from  the  transformation  of  money 
into  capital  to  the  end,  and  is  the  first  extant  draft  there  of. 
Pages  973-1158  (Notebooks  XVI-XVIII)  deal  with  capital  and 
profit,  rate  of  profit,  merchant’s  capital  and  money-capital, 
that  is  to  say  with  subjects  which  later  were  developed  in  the 
manuscript  for  Book  III.  The  themes  treated  in  Book  II  and 
very  many  of  those  which  are  treated  later,  in  Book  III,  are  not 
yet  arranged  separately.  They  are  treated  in  passing,  to  be  spe¬ 
cific,  in  the  section  which  makes  up  the  main  body  of  the  manu¬ 
script,  viz.,  pages  220-972  (Notebooks  VI-XV),  entitled  “Theories 
of  Surplus- Value.  ”  This  section  contains  a  detailed  critical  his¬ 
tory  of  the  pith  and  marrow  of  Political  Economy,  the  theory 
of  surplus-value  and  develops  parallel  with  it,  in  polemics  against 
predecessors,  most  of  the  points  later  investigated  separately  and 
in  their  logical  connection  in  the  manuscript  for  Books  II  and  III. 
After  eliminating  the  numerous  passages  covered  by  Books  II 
and  III,  I  intend  to  publish  the  critical  part  of  this  manuscript 
as  Capital,  Book  IV.**  This  manuscript,  valuable  though  it  is, 

•  Hereafter  referred  to  as  Zur  Kritik. — Ed. 

••  Death  prevented  Engels  from  publishing  the  Theories  of  Surplus- 
Value  as  the  fourth  volume  of  Capital  In  1905-10  Kautsky  put  out  a  Ger¬ 
man  edition  of  the  book  which  contained  a  number  of  arbitrary  deviations 
from  the  original,  transpositions  and  omissions.  The  first  authentic  edition 
of  the  Theories  of  Surplus-Value  was  put  out  in  Russian  by  the  Institute 
of  Marxism-Leninism  of  the  C.C.,  C.P.S.U.  in  1954-61  With  a  few  necessary 
corrections  in  the  translation  and  additions  to  the  auxiliary  material  of  the 
book,  it  comprised  the  three  parts  of  Volume  26  of  the  second  Russian 
edition  of  Marx’s  and  Engels's  Collected  I Vorks  (Moscow,  1962-64)  In  1956- 
62,  a  German  edition  patterned  on  the  1954-61  Russian  edition  was  published 
in  the  German  Democratic  Republic.  At  present  work  is  in  progress  in 


PREFACE 


3 


could  be  used  only  very  little  in  the  present  edition  of  Book  II. 

The  manuscript  chronologically  following  next  is  that  of 
Book  III.  It  was  written,  at  least  the  greater  part  of  it,  in  1864 
and  1865.  Only  after  this  manuscript  had  been  completed  in  its 
essential  parts  did  Marx  undertake  the  elaboration  of  Book  I 
which  was  published  in  1867.  I  am  now  getting  this  manuscript 
of  Book  III  in  shape  for  press. 

The  following  period— after  the  publication  of  Book  ,1  — is 
represented  bv  a  collection  of  four  folio  manuscripts  for  Book  II, 
numbered  I-IV  by  Marx  himself.  Manuscript  I  (150  pages),  pre¬ 
sumably  written  in  1865  or  1867,  is  the  first  separate,  but  more 
or  less  fragmentary,  elaboration  of  Book  II  as  now  arranged. 
Here  too  nothing  could  be  used.  Manuscript  III  is  partly  a  com¬ 
pilation  of  quotations  and  references  to  the  notebooks  contain¬ 
ing  Marx’s  extracts,  most  of  them  relating  to  Part  I  of  Book  II, 
partly  elaborations  of  particular  points,  especially  a  critique 
of  Adam  Smith’s  propositions  on  fixed  and  circulating  capital 
and  the  source  of  profit;  furthermore  an  exposition  of  the  rela¬ 
tion  of  the  rate  of  surplus-value  to  the  rate  of  profit,  which  be¬ 
longs  in  Book  III.  Little  that  was  new  could  be  garnered  from  the 
references,  while  the  elaborations  for  volumes  II  and  III  were 
superseded  by  subsequent  revisions  and  h»d  also  to  be  discarded 
for  the  greater  part. 

Manuscript  IV  is  an  elaboration,  ready  for  press,  of  Part  I 
and  the  first  chapters  of  Part  II  of  Book  II,  and  has  been  used 
where  suitable.  Although  it  was  found  that  this  manuscript  had 
been  written  earlier  than  Manuscript  II,  yet,  being  far  more 
finished  in  form,  it  could  be  used  with  advantage  for  the  corre¬ 
sponding  part  of  this  book.  All  that  was  needed  was  a  few  addenda 
from  Manuscript  II.  The  latter  is  the  only  somewhat  complete 
elaboration  of  Book  II  and  dates  from  the  year  1870.  The  notes 
for  the  final  editing,  which  I  shall  mention  immediately,  say  ex¬ 
plicitly:  “The  second  elaboration  must  be  used  as  the  basis.” 

There  was  another  intermission  after  1870,  due  mainly  to 
Marx’s  ill  health.  Marx  employed  this  time  in  his  customary  way, 
by  studying  agronomics,  rural  relations  in  America  and,  espe¬ 
cially,  Russia,  the  money-market  and  banking,  and  finally 
natural  sciences  such  as  geology  and  physiology.  Independent 
mathematical  studies  also  Ggure  prominently  in  the  numerous 

the  G.D.H.  on  a  new  edition  of  the  Theories  of  Surplus-Value  as  Volume  26 
of  the  Collected  Works  of  Marx  and  Engels.  Progress  Publishers  in  Moscow 
have  already  put  out  an  English  edition  of  the  Brst  part  of  the  book,  and 
arc  preparing  the  second  and  third  parts  for  publication. — Ed. 


i* 


PREFACE 


extract  notebooks  of  this  period.*  In  the  beginning  of  1877  he 
had  recovered  sufficiently  to  resume  his  main  work.  Dating  back 
to  the  end  of  March  1877  thero  are  references  and  notes  from 
the  above-named  four  manuscripts  intended  as  the  basis  of  a  new 
elaboration  of  Book  IJ,  the  beginning  of  which  is  represented  by 
Manuscript  V  (56  folio  pages).  It  comprises  the  first  four  chapters 
and  is  still  little  worked  out.  Essential  points  are  treated  in 
footnotes.  The  material  is  rather  collected  than  sifted,  but  it  is 
the  last  complete  presentation  of  this,  the  most  important  sec¬ 
tion  of  Part  I. 

A  first  attempt  to  prepare  from  it  a  manuscript  ready  for  press 
was  made  in  Manuscript  VI  (after  October  1877  and  before  July 
1878),  embracing  only  17  quarto  pages,  the  greater  part  of  the 
first  chapter.  A  second  and  last  attempt  was  made  in  Manuscript 
VII,  “July  2,  1878,”  only  7  folio  pages. 

About  this  time  Marx  seems  to  have  realised  that  he  would 
never  be  able  to  finish  the  elaboration  of  the  second  and  third 
books  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  himself  unless  a  complete  revo¬ 
lution  in  his  health  took  place.  Indeed,  manuscripts  V-VIII 
show  far  too  frequent  traces  of  an  intense  struggle  against  depress¬ 
ing  ill  health.  The  most  difficult  bit  of  Part  I  had  been  worked 
over  in  Manuscript  V„The  remainder  of  Part  I  and  all  of  Part  II, 
with  the  exception  of  Chapter  XVII,  presented  no  great  theoretical 
difficulties.  But  Part  III,  dealing  with  the  reproduction  and  cir¬ 
culation  of  social  capital,  seemed  to  him  to  be  very  much  in  need 
of  revision;  for  Manuscript  II  had  first  treated  reproduction 
without  taking  into  consideration  money-circulation,  which  is 
instrumental  in  effecting  it,  and  then  gone  over  the  same  ques¬ 
tion  again,  but  with  money-circulation  taken  into  account.  This 
was  to  be  eliminated  and  the  whole  part  to  be  reconstructed 
in  such  a  way  as  to  conform  to  the  author’s  enlarged  horizon. 
Thus  Manuscript  VIII  came  into  existence,  a  notebook  contain¬ 
ing  only  70  quarto  pages.  But  the  vast  amount  of  matter  Marx 
was  able  to  compress  into  this  space  is  clearly  demonstrated  on 
comparing  that  manuscript  with  Part  III,  in  print,  after  leaving 
out  the  pieces  inserted  from  Manuscript  II. 

This  manuscript  is  likewise  merely  a  preliminary  treatment 
of  the  subject,  its  main  object  having  been  to  ascertain  and  develop 
the  points  of  view  newly  acquired  in  comparison  with  Manuscript 

*  The  Institute  of  Marxism-Leninism  under  the  C.C.,  C.P.S.U.  has 
published  part  of  the  extracts  made  by  Marx  from  Russian  sources  (see  A rkhiv 
Marksa  i  Engelsa  (Marx  and  Engels  Archive],  Vol.  XI,  Moscow,  1948; 
Vol,  XII,  Moscow,  1952,  and  Vol,  XIII,  Moscow,  1955). — Ed. 


PREFACE 


5 


II,  with  those  points  ignored  about  which  there  was  nothing 
new  to  say.  An  essential  portion  of  Chapter  XVII,  Part  II,  which 
anyhow  is  more  or  less  relevant  to  Part  III,  was  once  more  re¬ 
worked  and  expanded.  The  logical  sequence  is  frequently  inter¬ 
rupted,  the  treatment  of  the  subject  gappy  in  places  and  very 
fragmentary,  especially  the  conclusion.  But  what  Marx  intended 
to  say  on  the  subject  is  said  there,  somehow  or  other. 

This  is  the  material  for  Book  II,  out  of  which  I  was  supposed 
“to  make  something,”  as  Marx  remarked  to  his  daughter  Eleanor 
shortly  before  his  death.  I  have  construed  this  task  in  its  narrow¬ 
est  meaning.  So  far  as  this  was  at  all  possible,  I  have  confined 
my  work  to  the  mere  selection  of  a  text  from  the  available  vari¬ 
ants.  I  always  based  my  work  on  the  last  available  edited  manu¬ 
script,  comparing  this  with  the  preceding  ones.  Only  the  first 
and  third  parts  offered  any  real  difficulties,  i.e.,  of  more  than 
a  mere  technical  nature,  and  these  were  indeed  considerable. 
I  have  endeavoured  to  solve  them  exclusively  in  the  spirit  of 
the  author. 

I  have  translated  quotations  in  the  text  whenever  they  are 
cited  in  confirmation  of  facts  or  when,  as  ia  passages  from  Adam 
Smith,  the  original  is  available  to  everyone  who  wants  to  go 
thoroughly  into  the  matter.  This  was  impossible  only  in  Chapter 
X,  because  there  it  is  precisely  the  English  text  that  is  criticised. 

The  quotations  from  Book  I  are  paged  according  to  its  second 
edition,  the  last  one  to  appear  in  Marx's  lifetime. 

For  Book  III,  only  the  following  materials  are  available, 
apart  from  the  first  elaboration  in  manuscript  form  of  Zur  Kri- 
tik,  from  the  above-mentioned  parts  of  Manuscript  III,  and  from 
a  few  occasional  short  notes  scattered  through  various  extract 
notebooks:  The  folio  manuscript  of  1864-65,  referred  to  previously, 
which  is  about  as  fully  worked  out  as  Manuscript  II  of  Book  II; 
furthermore,  a  notebook  dated  1875:  The  Relation  of  the  Rate 
of  Surplus-Value  to  the  Rate  of  Profit,  which  treats  the  subject 
mathematically  (in  equations).  The  preparation  of  this  Book  for 
publication  is  proceeding  rapidly.  So  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge 
up  to  now,  it  will  present  mainly  technical  difficulties,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  but  very  important  sections. 


I  consider  this  an  opportune  place  to  refute  a  certain  charge 
which  has  been  raised  against  Marx,  first  only  in  whispers, 
sporadically,  but  more  recently,  after  his  death,  proclaimed  an  es¬ 
tablished  fact  by  German  Socialists  of  the  Chair  and  of  the  State 


6 


PREFACE 


and  by  their  hangers-on.  It  is  claimed  that  Marx  plagiarised  the 
work  of  Rodbertus.  I  have  already  stated  elsewhere1  what  was 
most  urgent  in  this  regard,  but  not  until  now  have  I  been  able 
to  adduce  conclusive  proof. 

As  far  as  I  know  this  charge  was  made  for  the  first  time  in 
R.  Meyer’s  Emancipationskampf  des  vierten  Slandes,  p.  43:  “It 
can  be  proved  that  Marx  has  gathered  the  greater  part  of  his 
critique  from  these  publications”— meaning  the  works  of  Rodber¬ 
tus  dating  back  to  the  last  half  of  the  thirties.  I  may  well  as¬ 
sume,  until  further  evidence  is  produced,  that  the  “whole  proof” 
of  this  assertion  consists  in  Rodbertus  having  assured  Herr  Meyer 
that  this  was  so. 

In  1879  Rodbertus  himself  appears  on  the  scene  and  writes 
the  following  to  J.  Zeller  ( Zeitschrift  fiir  die  gesamte  Staatswis- 
senschaft,  Tubingen,  1879,  p.  219),*  with  reference  to  his  work 
Zur  Erkenntniss  unsrer  staatswirtschaftlichen  Zustande,  1842: 

“You  will  find  that  this”  (the  line  of  thought  developed  in 
it)  “has  been  very  nicely  used  ...  by  Marx,  without,  however, 
giving  me  credit  for  it.”  The  posthumous  publisher  of  Rodber- 
tus’s  works,  Th.  Kozak,  repeats  his  insinuation  without  further 
ceremony.  (Das  Kapital  von  Rodbertus.  Berlin,  1884,  Intro¬ 
duction,  p.  XV.) 

Finally  in  the  Briefe  und  Sozialpolitische  Aufsatze  von  Dr. 
Rodbertus- Jagetzow,  published  by  R.  Meyer  in  1881,  Rodbertus 
says  point-blank:  “To-day  I  find  I  have  been  robbed  by  Schaffle 
and  Marx  without  having  my  name  mentioned.”  (Letter  No.  CO, 
p.  134.)  And  in  another  place,  Rodbertus’s  claim  assumes  a 
more  definite  form:  “In  my  third  social  letter  I  have  shown  vir¬ 
tually  in  the  same  way  as  Marx,  only  more  briefly  and  clearly, 
what  the  source  of  the  surplus  value  of  the  capitalist  is.”  (Letter 
No.  48,  p.  111.) 

Marx  had  never  heard  anything  about  any  of  these  charges 
of  plagiarism.  In  his  copy  of  the  Emancipationskampf  only  that 
part  had  been  cut  open  which  related  to  the  International.  The 
remaining  pages  were  not  opened  until  I  cut  them  myself  after 
his  death.  He  never  looked  at  the  Tubingen  Zeitschrift.  The 


1  In  the  preface  to  Das  Elend  der  Philosophic.  Antwort  auf  Proudhon' s 
Philosophic  des  E lends  von  Karl  Marx.  Deutsch  von  E.  Bernstein  und  K.  Kaut- 
sky.  Stuttgart,  1885.  [English  edition:  K.  Marx,  The  Poverty  o)  Philosophy. 
Answer  to  the  "Philosophy  of  Poverty"  by  M.  Proudhon,  Moscow  1962,  pp  7- 
23.— Ed.  ] 

*  Rodbertus  died  in  1875.  In  1879  was  published  his  letter  to  Zeller 
referred  to  by  Engels.— Ed. 


PREFACE 


7 


Briefe,  etc.,  to  R.  Meyer  likewise  remained  unknown  to  him, 
and  I  did  not  learn  of  the  passage  referring  to  the  robbery” 
until  Dr.  Meyer  himself  was  good  enough  to  call  my  attention 
to  it  in  1884.  However,  Marx  was  familiar  with  letter  No.  48. 
Dr.  Meyer  had  been  so  kind  as  to  present  the  original  to  the 
youngest  daughter  of  Marx.  When  some  of  the  mysterious  whisper¬ 
ing  about  the  secret  source  of  his  criticism  having  to  be  sought  in 
Rodbertus  reached  the  ear  of  Marx,  he  showed  me  that  letter 
with  the  remark  that  here  he  had  at  last  authentic  information 
as  to  what  Rodbertus  himself  claimed;  if  that  was  all  Rodber¬ 
tus  asserted  he,  Marx,  had  no  objection,  and  he  could  well  afford 
to  let  Rodbertus  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  considering  his  own  ver¬ 
sion  the  briefer  and  clearer  one.  In  fact,  Marx  considered  the 
matter  settled  by  this  letter  of  Rodbertus. 

He  could  so  all  the  more  since  I  know  for  certain  that  he 
was  not  in  the  least  acquainted  with  the  literary  activity  of  Rod¬ 
bertus  until  about  1859,  when  his  own  critique  of  Political  Econ¬ 
omy  had  been  completed,  not  only  in  its  fundamental  outlines, 
but  also  in  its  more  important  details.  Marx  began  his  economic 
studies  in  Paris,  in  1843,  starting  with  the  great  Englishmen 
and  Frenchmen.  Of  German  economists  he  knew  only  Rau  and 
List,  and  he  did  not  want  any  more  of  them.  Neither  Marx  nor 
I  heard  a  word  of  Rodbertus’s  existence  until  we  had  to  criti¬ 
cise,  in  the  Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung,*  1848,  the  speeches  he  made 
as  Berlin  Deputy  and  his  actions  as  Minister.  We  were  both  so 
ignorant  that  we  had  to  ask  the  Rhenish  deputies  who  this  Rod¬ 
bertus  was  that  had  become  a  Minister  so  suddenly.  But  these 
deputies  too  could  not  tell  us  anything  about  the  economic  writ¬ 
ings  of  Rodbertus.  That  on  the  other  hand  Marx  had  known 
very  well  already  at  that  time,  without  the'  help  of  Rodbertus, 
not  only  whence  but  also  how  “the  surplus-value  of  the  capital¬ 
ist”  came  into  existence  is  proved  by  his  Poverty  of  Philosophy, 
1847,**  and  by  his  lectures  on  wage-labour  and  capital,  delivered 
in  Brussels  the  same  year  and  published  in  Nos.  264-69  of  the 
Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung,  in  1849.***  It  was  only  in  1859,  through 


•  Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung.  Organ  der  Demokralie — a  daily  newspaper 
published  under  Marx’s  editorship  in  Cologne  from  June  1,  1848  to  May 
19,  1849.  The  editors  included  Frederick  Engels,  Wilhelm  Wolff,  Georg 
Weerth,  Ferdinand  Wolff,  Ernst  Dronke,  Ferdinand  Freiligrath  and  Hein¬ 
rich  Burgers.  The  publication  of  the  newspaper  was  discontinued  owing  to 
persecution  of  Marx  and  others  by  the  Prussian  government. — Ed. 

•*  K.  Marx,  The  Poverty  of  Philosophy,  Moscow,  1962. — Ed. 

***  K.  Marx,  Wage  Labour  and  Capital,  Moscow,  1961. — Ed. 


8 


PI1EFACE 


Lassalle,  that  Marx  learned  of  the  existence  of  a  certain 
economist  named  Rodbertus  and  thereupon  Marx  looked  up  the 
“third  social  letter”  in  the  British  Museum. 

These  were  the  actual  circumstances.  And  now  let  us  seo 
what  there  is  to  the  content,  of  which  Marx  is  charged  with  “rob¬ 
bing”  Rodbertus.  Says  Rodbertus:  “In  my  third  social  letter 
I  have  shown  in  the  same  way  as  Marx,  only  more  briefly  and 
clearly,  what  the  source  of  the  surplus-value  of  the  capitalist 
is.”  This,  then,  is  the  crux  of  the  matter:  The  theory  of  surplus- 
value.  And  indeed,  it  would  be  difficult  to  say  what  else  there 
is  in  Marx  that  Rodbertus  might  claim  as  his  property.  Thus 
Rodbertus  declares  here  he  is  the  real  originator  of  the  theory 
of  surplus-valuo  and  that  Marx  robbed  him  of  it. 

And  what  has  the  third  social  letter  to  say  in  regard  to  the 
origin  of  surplus-value?  Simply  this:  That  “rent,”  his  term  which 
lumps  together  ground-rent  and  profit,  does  not  arise  from  an 
“addition  of  value”  to  the  value  of  a  commodity,  but  “from  a 
deduction  of  value  from  wages;  in  other  words,  because  wages 
represent  only  a  part  of  the  value  of  a  product,”  and  if  labour 
is  sufficiently  productive  wages  need  not  be  “equal  to  the  natu¬ 
ral  exchange-value  of  the  product  of  labour  in  order  to  leave 
enough  of  this  value  for  the  replacing  of  capital  (!)  and  for  rent.  ”* 
We  are  not  informed  however  what  sort  of  a  “natural  exchange- 
value”  of  a  product  it  is  that  leaves  nothing  for  the  “replacing  of 
capital,”  consequently,  for  the  replacement  of  raw  material  and 
the  wear  and  tear  of  tools. 

It  is  our  good  fortune  to  be  able  to  state  what  impression  was 
produced  on  Marx  by  this  stupendous  discovery  of  Rodbertus. 
In  the  manuscript  Zar  Kritik,  notebook  X,  pp.  445  et  seqq.  we 
find  a  “Digression.  Herr  Rodbertus.  A  New  Ground-Rent  Theo¬ 
ry.”  This  is  the  only  point  of  view  from  which  Marx  there  looks 
upon  the  third  social  letter.  The  Rodbertian  theory  of  surplus- 
value  in  general  is  dismissed  with  the  ironical  remark:  “Mr.  Rod¬ 
bertus  first  analyses  the  state  of  affairs  in  a  country  where  property 
in  land  and  property  in  capital  are  not  separated  and  then  ar¬ 
rives  at  the  important  conclusion  that  rent  (by  which  he  means 
the  entire  surplus- value)  is  only  equal  to  the  unpaid  labour  or 
to  the  quantity  of  products  in  which  this  labour  is  expressed.”** 


*  Rodbertus- Jagetzow  Karl,  Soziate  Driefe  an  von  Kirchmann  Dritter 
Brief :  Wtderlegung  der  Ricardoschen  Lehre  von  der  Grundrente  und  Begrund- 
ung  einer  neuen  Rententheorie,  Berlin,  1851,  S.  87. — Ed. 

**  K  Marx,  Theonen  iiber  den  Mehrwert  (Vierter  Band  des  Kapitals ) 
2.  Tail,  Berlin,  1959,  SS.  7-8 .—Ed. 


PREFACE 


9 


Capitalistic  man  has  been  producing  surplus-value  for  sever¬ 
al  hundred  years  and  has  gradually  arrived  at  the  point  of  pon¬ 
dering  over  its  origin.  The  view  first  propounded  grew  directly 
out  of  commercial  practice:  surplus-value  arises  out  of  an  addi¬ 
tion  to  the  value  of  the  product.  This  idea  was  current  among 
the  mercantilists.  But  James  Steuart  already  realised  that  in 
that  case  the  one  would  necessarily  lose  what  the  other  would 
gain.  Nevertheless,  this  view  persisted  for  a  long  time  afterwards, 
especially  among  the  Socialists.  But  it  was  thrust  out  of  classical 
science  by  Adam  Smith. 

He  says  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations ,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  VI:  “As  soon 
as  stock  has  accumulated  in  the  hands  of  particular  persons, 
some  of  them  will  naturally  employ  it  in  setting  to  work  indus¬ 
trious  people,  whom  they  will  supply  with  materials  and  sub¬ 
sistence,  in  order  to  make  a  profit  by  the  sale  of  their  work,  or 
by  what  their  labour  adds  to  the  value  of  the  materials.  .  .  .  The 
value  which  the  workmen  add  to  the  materials,  therefore,  re¬ 
solves  itself  in  this  case  into  two  parts,  of  which  the  one  pays 
their  wages,  the  other  the  profits  of  their  employer  upon  the  whole 
stock  of  materials  and  wages  which  he  advanced.  ”*  And  a  little 
further  on  he  says:  “As  soon  as  the  land  of  any  country  has  all 
become  private  property,  the  landlords,  like  all  other  men,  love 
to  reap  where  they  never  sowed,  and  demand  a  rent  even  for 
its  natural  produce....”  The  labourer  “must  give  up  to  the 
landlord  a  portion  of  what  his  labour  either  collects  or  produces. 
This  portion,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  price  of  this 
portion,  constitutes  the  rent  of  land."** 

Marx  comments  on  this  passage  in  the  above-named  manu¬ 
script  Zur  Kritik,  etc.,  p.  253: 

“Thus  Adam  Smith  conceives  surplus-value — that  is,  surplus- 
labour,  the  excess  of  labour  performed  and  realised  in  the  com¬ 
modity  over  and  above  the  paid  labour,  the  labour  which  has 
received  its  equivalent  in  the  wages — as  the  general  category, 
of  which  profit  in  the  strict  sense  and  rent  of  land  are 
merely  branches.”*** 

Adam  Smith  says  furthermore  (Vol.  I,  Ch.  VIII):  “As  soon 
as  land  becomes  private  property,  the  landlord  demands  a  share 
of  almost  all  the  produce  which  the  labourer  can  either  raise 

*  A.  Smith,  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of 
Nations,  London,  1843,  Vol.  I,  pp.  131-32.—  Ed. 

**  ibid  ,  -p.  134. — Ed. 

***  Karl  Marx,  Theories  of  Surplus-Value  (Volume  IV  of  Capital), 
Moscow,  1963,  Part  1,  pp.  80-81.— Ed. 


10 


PREFACE 


or  collect  from  it.  His  rent  makes  the  first  deduction  from  the 
produce  of  the  labour  which  is  employed  upon  land.  It  seldom  hap¬ 
pens  that  the  person  who  tills  the  ground  has  the  wherewithal 
to  maintain  himself  till  he  reaps  the  harvest.  His  maintenance 
is  generally  advanced  to  him  from  the  stock  of  a  master,  the 
farmer  who  employs  him,  and  who  would  have  no  interest  to 
employ  him,  unless  he  was  to  share  in  the  produce  of  his  labour, 
or  unless  his  stock  was  to  be  replaced  to  him  with  a  profit.  This 
profit  makes  a  second  deduction  from  the  produce  of  the  labour 
which  is  employed  upon  land.  The  produce  of  almost  all  other 
labour  is  liable  to  the  like  deduction  of  profit.  In  all  arts  and 
manufactures  the  greater  part  of  the  workmen  stand  in  need  of 
a  master  to  advance  them  the  materials  of  their  work,  and  their 
wages  and  maintenance  till  it  be  completed.  He  shares  in  the 
produce  of  their  labour,  or  in  the  value  which  it  adds  to  the  mate¬ 
rials  upon  which  it  is  bestowed;  and  in  this  share  consists  his 
profit.  ”* 

Marx’s  comment  (Manuscript,  p.  256):  “Here  therefore  Adam 
Smith  in  plain  terms  describes  rent  and  profit  on  capital  as  mere 
deductions  from  the  workman’s  product  or  the  value  of  his  prod¬ 
uct,  which  is  equal  to  the  quantity  of  labour  added  by  him  to 
the  material.  This  deduction  however,  as  Adam  Smith  has  him¬ 
self  previously  explained,  can  only  consist  of  that  part  of  the 
labour  which  the  workman  adds  to  the  materials,  over  and  above 
the  quantity  of  labour  which  only  pays  his  wages,  or  which  only 
provides  an  equivalent  for  his  wages;  that  is,  the  surplus-labour, 
the  unpaid  part  of  his  labour.”** 

Thus  even  Adam  Smith  knew  “the  source  of  the  surplus-value 
of  the  capitalist,  ”  and  furthermore  also  of  that  of  the  landlord. 
Marx  acknowledged  this  as  early  as  1861,  while  Rodbertus  and 
the  swarming  mass  of  his  admirers,  who  grew  like  mushrooms 
under  the  warm  summer  showers  of  state  socialism,  seem  to  have 
forgotten  all  about  that. 

“Nevertheless,”  Marx  continues,  “he  [Adam  Smith]  does  not 
distinguish  surplus-value  as  such  as  a  category  on  its  own,  dis¬ 
tinct  from  the  specific  forms  it  assumes  in  profit  and  rent.  This 
is.  the  source  of  much  error  and  inadequacy  in  his  inquiry,  and 
of  even  more  in  the  work  of  Ricardo.”*** 

*  A.  Smith,  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth 
of  Nations,  London,  1843,  Vol.  I,  pp.  172-73. — Ed. 

**  Karl  Marx,  Theories  of  Surplus-Value  (Volume  IV  'of  Capital), 
Moscow,  1963,  Part  I,  p.  83. — Ed. 

*•*  ibid.,  p.  81.— Ed. 


PREFACE 


11 


This  statement  fits  Rodbertus  to  a  T.  His  “rent”  is  simply 
the  sum  of  ground-rent  and  profit.  He  builds  up  an  entirely  erro¬ 
neous  theory  of  ground-rent,  and  he  accepts  profit  without  any 
examination  of  it,  just  as  he  finds  it  among  his  predecessors. 

Marx’s  surplus-value,  on  the  contrary,  represents  the  general 
form  of  the  sum  of  values  appropriated  without  any  equivalent 
by  the  owners  of  the  means  of  production,  and  this  form  splits 
into  the  distinct,  converted  forms  of  profit  and  ground-rent  in 
accordance  with  very  peculiar  laws  which  Marx  was  the  first  to 
discover.  These  laws  will  be  expounded  in  Book  III.  We  shall 
see  there  that  many  intermediate  links  are  required  to  arrive  from 
an  understanding  of  surplus-value  in  general  at  an  understanding 
of  its  transformation  into  profit  and  ground-rent;  in  other  words 
at  an  understanding  of  the  laws  of  the  distribution  of  surplus- 
value  within  the  capitalist  class. 

Ricardo  goes  considerably  further  than  Adam  Smith.  He 
bases  his  conception  of  surplus-value  on  a  new  theory  of  value 
contained  in  embryo  in  Adam  Smith,  but  generally  forgotten 
when  it  comes  to  applying  it.  This  theory  of  value  became  the 
starting-point  of  all  subsequent  economic  science.  From  the 
determination  of  the  value  of  commodities  by  the  quantity  of 
labour  embodied  in  them  he  derives  the  distribution,  between 
the  labourers  and  capitalists,  of  the  quantity  of  value  added  by 
labour  to  the  raw  materials,  and  the  division  of  this  value  into 
wages  and  profit  (i.e.,  here  surplus-value).  He  shows  that  the 
value  of  the  commodities  remains  the  same  no  matter  what  may 
be  the  proportion  of  these  two  parts,  a  law  which  he  holds  has 
but  few  exceptions.  He  even  establishes  a  few  fundamental  laws, 
although  couched  in  too  general  terms,  on  the  mutual  relations 
of  wages  and  surplus-value  (taken  in  the  form  of  profit)  (Marx, 
Das  Kapital,  Buch  I,  Kap.  XV,  A),*  and  shows  that  ground-rent 
is  a  surplus  over  and  above  profit,  which  under  certain  circum¬ 
stances  does  not  accrue. 

In  none  of  these  points  did  Rodbertus  go  beyond  Ricardo.  He 
either  remained  wholly  unfamiliar  with  the  internal  contradic¬ 
tions  of  the  Ricardian  theory  which  caused  the  downfall  of  that 
school,  or  they  only  misled  him  into  raising  utopian  demands 
(his  Zur  Erkenntnis,  etc.,  p.  130)  instead  of  inducing  him  to  find 
economic  solutions. 

But  the  Ricardian  theory  of  value  and  surplus-value  did  not 


*  English  edition:  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  XVII,  1,  Moscow, 
4  .—Ed. 


12 


PREFACE 


have  to  wait  for  Rodbertus’s  Zur  Erkenntnis  in  order  to  be  uti¬ 
lised  for  socialist  purposes.  On  page  609  of  the  first  volume  (Das 
Kapital ,  2nd  ed.)*  we  find  the  following  quotation,  “The  pos¬ 
sessors  of  surplus-produce  or  capital,”  taken  from  a  pamphlet 
entitled  The  Source  and  Remedy  of  the  National  Difficulties. 
A  Letter  to  Lord  John  Russell.  London,  1821.  In  this  pamphlet 
of  40  pages,  the  importance  of  which  should  have  been  noted  if 
only  on  account  of  the  one  expression  “surplus-produce  or  capi¬ 
tal,”  and  which  Marx  saved  from  falling  into  oblivion,  we  read 
the  following  statements: 

“...whatever  may  be  due  to  the  capitalist”  (from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  capitalist)  “he  can  only  receive  the  surplus-labour 
of  the  labourer;  for  the  labourer  must  live”  (p.  23).  But  how  the 
labourer  lives  and  hence  how  much  the  surplus-labour  appro¬ 
priated  by  the  capitalist  can  amount  to  are  very  relative  things. 

if  capital  does  not  decrease  in  value  as  it  increases  in  amount, 
the  capitalists  will  exact  from  the  labourers  the  produce  of  every 
hour’s  labour  beyond  what  it  is  possible  for  the  labourer  to  sub¬ 
sist  on  the  capitalist  may  ...  eventually  say  to  the  labourer,  'You 
shan’t  eat  bread  ...  because  it  is  possible  to  subsist  on  beet  root 
and  potatoes.’  And  to  this  point  have  we  cornel”  (Pp.  23-24.) 
“Why,  if  the  labourer  can  be  brought  to  feed  on  potatoes  instead 
of  bread,  it  is  indisputably  true  that  more  can  be  exacted  from 
his  labour;  that  is  to  say,  if  when  he  fed  on  bread,  he  was  obliged 
to  retain  for  the  maintenance  of  himself  and  family  the  labour 
of  Monday  and  Tuesday,  he  will,  on  potatoes,  require  only  the 
half  of  Monday,  and  the  remaining  half  of  Monday  and  the  whole 
of  Tuesday  are  available  either  for  the  service  of  the  state  or 
the  capitalist."  (P.  26.)  “It  is  admitted  that  the  interest  paid 
to  the  capitalists,  whether  in  the  nature  of  rents,  interests  on 
money,  or  profits  of  trade,  is  paid  out  of  the  labour  of  others.” 
(P.  23.)  Here  we  have  exactly  the  same  idea  of  “rent”  as  Rod- 
bertus  has,  except  that  “interest”  is  used  instead  of  “rent.” 

Marx  makes  the  following  comment  (manuscript  Zur  Kritik, 
p.  852):  “This  little  known  pamphlet— published  at  a  time  when 
the  ‘incredible  cobbler’**  MacCulloch  began  to  be  talked  about— 
represents  an  essential  advance  over  Ricardo.  It  directly  desig¬ 
nates  surplus-value,  or  ‘profit’  in  the  language  of  Ricardo  (often 


*  English  edition:  page  588. — Ed. 

•*  A  nickname  given  to  MacCulloch  by  the  author  of  the  pamphlet  Some 
Illustrations  of  Mr.  M'Culloch's  Principles  of  Political  Economy  which 
appeared  in  Edinburgh  in  1826;  the  author  given  as  M.  Mullion,  the  pen 
name  of  John  Wilson. — Ed. 


PREFACE 


13 


also  surplus-produce),  or  interest,  as  the  author  of  this  pamphlet 
calls  flS  surplus-labour,  the  labour  which  the  labourer  per¬ 
forms  gratuitously,  which  he  performs  in  excess  of  that  quantity 
of  labour  by  which  the  value  of  his  labour-power  is  replaced, 
i.e.,  an  equivalent  of  his  wages  is  produced.  It  was  no  more  im¬ 
portant  to  reduce  value  to  labour  than  to  reduce  surplus-value, 
represented  by  a  surplus-produce,  to  surplus- labour.  This  has 
already  been  stated  by  Adam  Smith  and  forms  a  main  factor  in 
Ricardo's  analysis..  But  they  did  not  say  so  nor  fix  it  anywhere 
in  absolute  form.”*  We  read  furthermore,  on  page  859  of  the 
manuscript:  “Moreover,  the  author  is  a  prisoner  of  the  economic 
categories  as  they  have  come  down  to  him.  Just  as  the  confound¬ 
ing  of  surplus-value  and  profit  misleads  Ricardo  into  unpleas¬ 
ant  contradictions,  so  this  author  fares  no  better  by  baptising 
surplus-value  with  the  name  of  ‘interest  of  capital.’  True,  he  ad¬ 
vances  beyond  Ricardo  by  having  been  the  first  to  reduce  all 
surplus-value  to  surplus-labour.  Furthermore,  while  calling 
surplus-value  ‘interest  of  capital,’  he  emphasises  at  the  same  time 
that  by  this  term  he  means  the  general  form  of  surplus-labour 
as  distinguished  from  its  special  forms:  rent,  interest  on 
money,  and  profit  of  enterprise.  And  yet  he  picks  the  name  of  one 
of  these  special  forms,  interest,  for  the  general  form.  And  this 
sufficed  to  cause  his  relapse  into  economic  slang.”** 

This  last  passage  fits  Rodbertus  like  a  glove.  He,  too,  is  a 
prisoner  of  the  economic  categories  as  they  have  come  down  to 
him.  He,  too,  applies  to  surplus-value  the  name  of  one  of  its 
converted  sub-forms,  rent,  and  makes  it  quite  indefinite  at  that. 
The  result  of  these  two  mistakes  is  that  he  relapses  into  economic 
slang,  that  he  does  not  follow  up  his  advance  over  Ricardo  crit¬ 
ically,  and  that  instead  he  is  misled  into  using  his  unfinished 
theory,  even  before  it  got  rid  of  its  egg-shell,  as  the  basis  for 
a  utopia  with  which,  as  always,  he  comes  too  late.  The  pamphlet 
appeared  in  1821  and  anticipated  completely  Rodbertus’s  “rent” 
of  1842. 

Our  pamphlet  is  but  the  farthest  outpost  of  an  entire  litera¬ 
ture  which  in  the  twenties  turned  the  Ricardian  theory  of  value 
and  surplus-value  against  capitalist  production  in  the  interest 
of  the  proletariat,  fought  the  bourgeoisie  with  its  own  weapons. 
The  entire  communism  of  Owen,  so  far  as  it  engages  in  polemics 


*  K.  Marx,  Theorien  uier  den  Mehrwert  (Vierter  Band  des  Kapilalt), 
3.  Teil,  Berlin,  1962,  SS.  236-37.— Ed. 

V  ibid.,  SS.  252-53. — Ed. 


14 


PREFACE 


on  economic  questions,  is  based  on  Ricardo.  Apart  from  him, 
there  are  still  numerous  other  writers,  some  of  whom  Marx  quot¬ 
ed  as  early  as  1847  against  Proudhon  ( Misere  de  la  Philosophic , 
p.  49*),  such  as  Edmonds,  Thompson,  Hodgskin,  etc.,  etc.,  “and 
four  more  pages  of  etceteras.  ”  I  select  the  following  at  random 
from  among  this  multitude  of  writings:  An  Inquiry  into  the 
Principles  of  the  Distribution  of  Wealth ,  Most  Conducive  to  Hu¬ 
man  Happiness,  by  William  Thompson;  a  new  edition,  London, 
1850.  This  work,  written  in  1822,  first  appeared  in  1824.  Here 
likewise  the  wealth  appropriated  by  the  non-producing  classes 
is  described  everywhere  as  a  deduction  from  the  product  of  the 
labourer  and  rather  strong  words  are  used.  The  author  says: 
“The  constant  effort  of  what  has  been  called  society,  has  been 
to  deceive  and  induce,  to  terrify  and  compel,  the  productive 
labourer  to  work  for  the  smallest  possible  portion  of  the  produce 
of  his  own  labour”  (p.  28).  “Why  not  give  him  the  whole  abso¬ 
lute  produce  of  his  labour?”  (P.  32.)  “This  amount  of  compen¬ 
sation,  exacted  by  capitalists  from  the  productive  labourers, 
under  the  name  of  rent  or  profits,  is  claimed  for  the  use  of  land 
or  other  articles....  For  all  the  physical  materials  on  whick, 
or  by  means  of  which,  his  productive  powers  can  be  made  avail¬ 
able,  being  in  the  hands  of  others  with  interests  opposed  to  his, 
and  their  consent  being  a  necessary  preliminary  to  any  exer¬ 
tion  on  his  part,  is  he  not,  and  must  he  not  always  remain,  at 
the  mercy  of  these  capitalists  for  whatever  portion  of  the  fruits 
of  his  own  labour  they  may  think  proper  to  leave  at  his  disposal 
in  compensation  for  his  toils?”  (P.  125.)  “...  in  proportion  to 
the  amount  of  products  withheld,  whether  called  profits,  or  taxes, 
or  theft”  (p.  126),  etc. 

I  must  admit  that  I  do  not  write  these  lines  without  a  certain 
mortification.  I  will  not  make  so  much  of  the  fact  that  the  anti¬ 
capitalist  literature  of  England  of  the  twenties  and  thirties  is 
so  totally  unknown  in  Germany,  in  spite  of  Marx’s  direct  refer¬ 
ences  to  it  even  in  his  Poverty  of  Philosophy,  and  his  repeated 
quotations  from  it,  as  for  instance  the  pamphlet  of  1821,  Ra- 
venstone,  Hodgskin,  etc.,  in  Volume  I  of  Capital.  But  it  is  proof 
of  the  grave  deterioration  of  official  Political  Economy  that  not 
only  the  Literatus  vulgaris,**  who  clings  desperately  to  the  coat¬ 
tails  of  Rodbertus  and  “really  has  not  learned  anything,”  but 
also  the  officially  and  ceremoniously  installed  professor,***  who 

*  Marx,  The  Poverty  of  Philosophy,  Moscow,  1962. — Ed. 

**  Engels  refers  to  R.  Meyer.— Erf. 

***  Engels  refers  to  the  -  German  vulgar  economist  A.  Wagner.— Erf. 


PREFACE 


15 


“boasts  of  his  erudition,”  has  forgotten  his  classical  Political 
Economy  to  such  an  extent  that  he  seriously  charges  Marx  with 
having  purloined  things  from  Rodbertus  which  may  be  found 
even  in  Adam  Smith  and  Ricardo. 

But  what  is  there  new  in  Marx’s  utterances  on  surplus-value? 
How  is  it  that  Marx’s  theory  of  surplus-value  struck  home  like 
a  thunderbolt  out  of  a  clear  sky,  and  that  in  all  civilised  coun¬ 
tries,  while  the  theories  of  all  his  socialist  predecessors,  Rodber¬ 
tus  included,  vanished  without  having  produced  any  effect? 

The  history  of  chemistry  offers  an  illustration  which  explains 
this. 

We  know  that  late  in  the  past  century  the  phlogistic  theory 
still  prevailed.  It  assumed  that  combustion  consisted  essentially 
in  this:  that  a  certain  hypothetical  substance,  an  absolute  com¬ 
bustible  named  phlogiston,  separated  from  the  burning  body. 
This  theory  sufficed  to  explain  most  of  the  chemical  phenomena 
then  known,  although  it  had  to  he  considerably  strained  in 
some  cases.  But  in  1774  Priestley  produced  a  certain  kind  of  air 
“which  he  found  to  be  so  pure,  or  so  free  from  phlogiston,  that 
common  air  seemed  adulterated  in  comparison  with  it.”  He 
called  it  “dephlogisticated  air.”  Shortly  after  him  Scheele  ob¬ 
tained  the  same  kind  of  air  in  Sweden  and  demonstrated  its 
existence  in  the  atmosphere.  He  also  found  that  this  kind  of  air 
disappeared  whenever  some  body  was  burned  in  it  or  in  ordinary 
air  and  therefore  he  called  it  “fire-air.”  “From  these  facts  he 
drew  the  conclusion  that  the  combination  arising  from  the  union 
of  phlogiston  with  one  of  the  components  of  the  atmosphere” 
(that  is  to  say,  from  combustion)  “was  nothing  but  Ere  or  heat 
which  escaped  through  the  glass.”2 

Priestley  and  Scheele  had  produced  oxygen  without  knowing 
what  they  had  laid  their  hands  on.  They  “remained  prisoners  of 
the”  phlogistic  “categories  as  they  came  down  to  them.”  The 
element  which  was  destined  to  upset  all  phlogistic  views  and  to 
revolutionise  chemistry  remained  barren  in  their  hands.  But 
Priestley  had  immediately  communicated  his  discovery  to  La¬ 
voisier  in  Paris,  and  Lavoisier,  by  means  of  this  discovery,  now 
analysed  the  entire  phlogistic  chemistry  and  came  to  the  con¬ 
clusion  that  this  new  kind  of  air  was  a  new  chemical  element, 
and  that  combustion  was  not  a  case  of  the  mysterious  phlogiston 
departing  from  the  burning  body,  but  of  this  new  element 


1  Roscoe-Schorlemmer,  Aus/iihrliches  Lehrbuch  der  Chemie.  Braunschweig, 
1877,  I,  pp.  13  and  18. 


10 


PREFACE 


combining  with  that  body.  Thus  he  was  the  first  to  place  all  chemis¬ 
try,  which  in  its  phlogistic  form  had  stood  on  its  head,  square¬ 
ly  on  its  feet.  And  although  he  did  not  produce  oxygen  simul¬ 
taneously  and  independently  of  the  other  two,  as  he  claimed 
later  on,  he  nevertheless  is  the  real  discoverer  of  oxygen  vis-a-vis 
the  others  who  had  only  produced  it  without  knowing  what  they 
had  produced. 

Marx  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  his  predecessors  in  the 
theory  of  surplus-value  as  Lavoisier  stood  to  Priestley  and 
Scheele.  The  existence  of  that  part  of  the  value  of  products  which 
we  now  call  6urplus-value  had  been  ascertained  long  before 
Marx.  It  had  also  been  stated  with  more  or  less  precision  what 
it  consisted  of,  namely,  of  the  product  of  the  labour  for  which 
its  appropriator  had  not  given  any  equivalent.  But  one  did  not 
get  any  further.  Some— the  classical  bourgeois  economists — in¬ 
vestigated  at  most  the  proportion  in  which  the  product  of  labour 
was  divided  between  the  labourer  and  the  owner  of  the  means 
of  production.  Others— the  Socialists— found  that  this  division 
was  unjust  and  looked  for  utopian  means  of  abolishing  this  in¬ 
justice.  They  all  remained  prisoners  of  the  economic  categories 
as  they  had  come  down  to  them. 

Now  Marx  appeared  upon  the  scene.  And  he  took  a  view  di¬ 
rectly  opposite  to  that  of  all  his  predecessors.  What  they  had  re¬ 
garded  as  a  solution,  he  considered  but  a  problem.  He  saw  that 
he  had  to  deal  neither  with  dephlogisticated  air  nor  with  fire- 
air,  but  with  oxygen— that  here  it  was  not  simply  a  matter  of 
stating  an  economic  fact  or  of  pointing  out  the  conflict  between 
this  fact  and  eternal  justice  and  true  morality,  but  of  explaining 
a  fact  which  was  destined  to  revolutionise  all  economics,  and 
which  offered  to  him  who  knew  how  to  use  it  the  key  to  an  under¬ 
standing  of  all  capitalist  production.  With  this  fact  as  his  start¬ 
ing-point  he  examined  all  the  economic  categories  which  he  found 
at  hand,  just  as  Lavoisier  proceeding  from  oxygen  had  exam¬ 
ined  the  categories  of  phlogistic  chemistry  which  he  found  at. 
hand.  In  order  to  understand  what  surplus-value  was,  Marx  had 
to  find  out  what  value  was.  He  had  to  criticise  above  all  the 
Ricardian  theory  of  value.  Hence  he  analysed  labour’s  value- 
producing  property  and  was  the  first  to  ascertain  what  labour 
it  was  that  produced  value,  and  why  and  how  it  did  so.  He  found 
that  value  was  nothing  but  congealed  labour  of  this  kind,  and 
this  is  a  point  which  Rodbertus  never  grasped  to  his  dying  day. 
Marx  then  investigated  the  relation  of  commodities  to  money 
and  demonstrated  how  and  why,  thanks  to  the  property  of  value 


PREFACE 


17 


immanent  in  commodities,  commodities  and  commodity-exchange 
must  engender  the  opposition  of  commodity  and  money.  His 
theory  of  money,  founded  on  this  basis,  is  the  first  exhaustive 
one  and  has  been  tacitly  accepted  everywhere.  He  analysed  the 
transformation  of  money  into  capital  and  demonstrated  that  this 
transformation  is  based  on  the  purchase  and  sale  of  labour-power. 
By  substituting  labour-power,  the  value-producing  property, 
for  labour  he  solved  with  one  stroke  one  of  the  difficulties  which 
brought  about  the  downfall  of  the  Ricardian  school,  viz.,  the 
impossibility  of  harmonising  the  mutual  exchange  of  capital 
and  labour  with  the  Ricardian  law  that  value  is  determined 
by  labour.  By  establishing  the  distinction  of  capital  into  con¬ 
stant  and  variable  he  was  enabled  to  trace  the  real  course  of 
the  process  of  the  formation  of  surplus-value  in  its  minutest 
details  and  thus  to  explain  it,  a  feat  which  none  of  his  prede¬ 
cessors  had  accomplished.  Consequently  he  established  a  distinc¬ 
tion  inside  of  capital  itself  with  which  neither  Rodbertus  nor 
the  bourgeois  economists  knew  in  the  least  what  to  do,  but  which 
furnishes  the  key  for  the  solution  of  the  most  complicated  eco¬ 
nomic  problems,  as  is  strikingly  proved  again  by  Book  II  and  will 
be  proved  still  more  by  Book  III.  He  analysed  surplus-value 
further  and  found  its  two  forms,  absolute  and  relative  surplus- 
value.  And  he  showed  that  they  had  played  a  different,  and  each 
time  a  decisive  role,  in  the  historical  development  of  capitalist 
production.  On  the  basis  of  this  surplus-value  he  developed  the 
first  rational  theory  of  wages  we  have,  and  for  the  first  time 
drew  up  an  outline  of  the  history  of  capitalist  accumulation  and 
an  exposition  of  its  historical  tendency. 

And  Rodbertus?  After  he  has  read  all  that,  he — like  the  ten¬ 
dentious  economist  he  always  is— regards  it  as  “an  assault  on 
society,”*  finds  that  he  himself  has  said  much  more  briefly  and 
clearly  what  surplus-value  evolves  from,  and  finally  declares 
that  all  this  does  indeed  apply  to  “the  present  form  of  capital,” 
that  is  to  say  to  capital  as  it  exists  historically,  but  not  to  the 
“conception  of  capital,”  namely  the  utopian  idea  which  Herr 
Rodbertus  has  of  capital.  Just  like  old  Priestley,  who  swore  by 
phlogiston  to  the  end  of  his  days  and  refused  to  have  anything 
to  do  with  oxygen.  The  only  thing  is  that  Priestley  had  actually 
produced  oxygen  first,  while  Rodbertus  had  merely  rediscovered 
a  commonplace  in  his  surplus-value,  or  rather  his  “rent,”  and 


*  K.  Rodbertus- Jagetzow,  Drieje  und  sozia  Ipo  li tisohe  Aufsatze.  Heraus- 
gegeben  von  Dr.  R.  Meyer.  Berlin,  1881,  Bd.  1,  S.  111. — Ed. 


18 


PREFACE 


that  Marx,  unlike  Lavoisier,  disdained  to  claim  that  he  was  the 
first  to  discover  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  surplus-value. 

The  other  economic  feats  performed  by  Rodbertus  are  on  about 
the  same  plane.  His  elaboration  of  surplus-value  into  a  utopia 
has  already  been  unintentionally  criticised  by  Marx  in  his  Pov¬ 
erty  of  Philosophy.  What  else  may  be  said  about  it  I  have  said 
in  my  preface  to  the  German  edition  of  that  work.*  Rodbertus ’s 
explanation  of  commercial  crises  as  outgrowths  of  the  undercon¬ 
sumption  of  the  working-class  may  already  be  found  in  Sismon- 
di’s  Nouveaux  Principes  de  VEconomie  Politique,  book  IV,  ch. 
IV.8  However,  Sismondi  always  had  the  world-market  in  mind, 
while  Rodbertus ’s  horizon  does  not  extend  beyond  the  Prussian 
border.  His  speculations  as  to  whether  wages  are  derived  from 
capital  or  income  belong  to  the  domain  of  scholasticism  and  are 
definitely  settled  in  Part  III  of  this  second  book  of  Capital.  His 
theory  of  rent  has  remained  his  exclusive  property  and  may  rest 
in  peace  until  the  manuscript  of  Marx  criticising  it  is  published.** 
Finally  his  suggestions  for  the  emancipation  of  the  old  Prussian 
landed  property  from  the  oppression  of  capital  are  also  entirely 
utopian;  for  they  evade  the  only  practical  question  raised  in  this 
connection,  viz.:  How  can  the  old  Prussian  landed  junker  have 
a  yearly  income  of,  say,  20,000  marks  and  a  yearly  expenditure 
of,  say,  30,000  marks,  without  running  into  debt? 

The  Ricardian  school  suffered  shipwreck  about  the  year  1830 
on  the  rock  of  surplus-value.  And  what  this  school  could  not 
solve  remained  still  more  insoluble  for  its  successor,  Vulgar 
Economy.  The  two  points  which  caused  its  failure  were  these: 

1.  Labour  is  the  measure  of  value.  However,  living  labour 
in  its  exchange  with  capital  has  a  lower  value  than  materialised 
labour  for  which  it  is  exchanged  Wages,  the  value  of  a  definite 
quantity  of  living  labour,  are  always  less  than  the  value  of  the 
product  begotten  by  this  same  quantity  of  living  labour  or  in 
which  this  quantity  is  embodied.  The  question  is  indeed  insol¬ 
uble,  if  put  in  this  form.  It  has  been  correctly  formulated  by 
Marx  and  thereby  been  answered.  It  is  not  labour  which  has  a 

*  K.  Marx,  The  Poverty  oj  Philosophy,  Moscow,  1962. — Ed. 

3  “Thus  the  concentration  of  wealth  in  the  hands  of  a  small  nunjber  of 
proprietors  narrows  the  home  market  more  and  more,  and  industry  is  more 
and  more  compelled  to  look  for  foreign  markets  to  dispose  of  its  goods,  where 
great  revolutions  threaten  it”  (namely,  the  crisis  of  1817,  which  is  described 
immediately  afterwards).  Nouveaux  Principes ,  edition  of  1819,  I,  p.  336. 

•*  The  reference  is  to  a  manuscript  published  later  under  the  title  Theo- 
rien  iiber  den  Mehrwert.  See:  K.  Marx,  Theorien  iiber  den  Mehrwert  (Vierter 
Band  des  Kapitals),  2.  Teil,  Berlin,  1959,  SS.  7-151. — Ed. 


PREFACE 


19 


value.  As  an  activity  which  creates  values  it  can  no  more  have 
any  special  value  than  gravity  can  have  any  special  weight, 
heat  any  special  temperature,  electricity  any  special  strength  of 
current.  It  is  not  labour  which  is  bought  and  sold  as  a  commodity, 
but  labour-power.  As  soon  as  labour-power  becomes  a  commod¬ 
ity,  its  value  is  determined  by  the  labour  embodied  in  this 
commodity  as  a  social  product.  This  value  is  equal  to  the  labour 
socially  necessary  for  the  production  and  reproduction  of  this 
commodity.  Hence  the  purchase  and  sale  of  labour-power  on  the 
basis  of  its  value  thus  defined  does  not  at  all  contradict  the  eco¬ 
nomic  law  of  value. 

2.  According  to  the  Ricardian  law  of  value,  two  capitals  em¬ 
ploying  equal  quantities  of  equally  paid  living  labour,  all  oth¬ 
er  conditions  being  equal,  produce  commodities  of  equal  value 
and  likewise  surplus-value,  or  profit,  of  equal  quantity  in  equal 
periods  of  time.  But  if  they  employ  unequal  quantities  of  living 
labour,  they  cannot  produce  equal  surplus-values,  or,  as  the 
Ricardians  say,  equal  profits.  Now  in  reality  the  opposite  takes 
place.  In  actual  fact,  equal  capitals,  regardless  of  how  much 
or  how  little  living  labour  is  employed  by  them,  produce  equal 
average  profits  in  equal  times.  Here  there  is  therefore  a  con¬ 
tradiction  of  the  law  of  value  which  had  been  noticed  by  Ricardo 
himself,  but  which  his  school  also  was  unable  to  reconcile.  Rod- 
bertus  likewise  could  not  but  note  this  contradiction.  But  in¬ 
stead  of  resolving  it,  he  made  it  one  of  the  starting-points  of 
his  utopia.  ( Zur  Erkenntnis,  p.  131.)  Marx  had  resolved  this 
contradiction  already  in  the  manuscript  of  his  Zur  Kritik*  Ac¬ 
cording  to  the  plan  of  Capital,  this  solution  will  be  provided  in 
Book  III.**  Months  will  pass  before  that  will  be  published. 
Hence  those  economists  who  claim  to  have  discovered  in  Rod- 
bertus  the  secret  source  and  a  superior  predecessor  of  Marx  have 
now  an  opportunity  to  demonstrate  what  the  economics  of  a 
Rodbertus  can  accomplish.  If  they  can  show  in  which  way  an 
equal  average  rate  of  profit  can  and  must  come  about,  not  only 
without  a  violation  of  the  law  of  value,  but  on  the  very  basis 
of  it,  I  am  willing  to  discuss  the  matter  further  with  them.  In 
the  meantime  they  had  better  make  haste.  The  brilliant  investi¬ 
gations  of  the  present  Book  II  and  their  entirely  new  results  in 
fields  hitherto  almost  untrod  are  merely  introductory  to  the 

*  K.  Marx,  Theorien  uber  den  Mehrwert  (Vierter  Band  des  Kapitals), 
2.  Teil,  Berlin,  1959. — Ed 

**  English  edition:  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  Ill,  Part  I  and  Part  II, 
Moscow,  1959. — Ed. 


20 


PREFACE 


contents  of  Book  III,  which  develops  the  final  conclusions  of  Marx’s 
analysis  of  the  process  of  social  reproduction  on  a  capitalist  basis. 
When  this  Book  III  appears,  little  mention  will  be  made  of  the 
economist  called  Rodbertus. 

The  second  and  third  books  of  Capital  were  to  be  dedicated, 
as  Marx  had  stated  repeatedly,  to  his  wife. 

Frederick  Engels 

London,  on  Marx's  birthday,  May  5,  1885 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION* 

The  present  second  edition  is,  in  the  main,  a  faithful  reprint 
of  the  first.  Typographical  errors  have  been  corrected,  a  few 
stylistic  blemishes  eliminated,  and  several  short  paragraphs 
containing  only  repetitions  struck  out. 

The  third  book,  which  presented  quite  unforeseen  difficul¬ 
ties,  is  now  almost  finished  in  manuscript.  If  my  health  holds 
out  it  will  be  ready  for  press  this  autumn. 

Frederick  Engels 

London,  July  15,  1893 


For  the  sake  of  convenience  there  follows  here  a  short  compi¬ 
lation  of  passages,  each  with  an  indication  of  the  particular 
manuscript  (II-VIII)  taken  from. 


PARTI 

Pp.  23-24  from  Ms.  II;  pp.  24-34,  Ms.  VII;  pp.  34-38,  Ms. 
VI;  pp.  38-117,  Ms.  V;  pp.  117-120,  note  found  among  extracts 
from  books;  p.  121  to  end,  Ms.  IV;  there  have  been  inserted  how¬ 
ever:  pp.  129-130,  passage  from  Ms.  VIII;  pp.  134  and  140-141, 
notes  from  Ms.  II. 


PART  II 

Beginning,  pp.  153-163,  is  end  of  Ms.  IV.  From  here  to  end 
of  this  part,  pp.  163-350,  all  from  Ms.  II. 


Title  provided  by  the  editor. — Ed. 


PREFACE 


21 


r 

PART  III 

Chapter  18:  (pp.  351-358)  from  Ms.  II. 

Chapter  19:  I  and  II  (pp.  359-389)  from  Ms.  VIII;  III  (pp.  389- 
391)  from  Ms.  II. 

Chapter  20:  I  (pp.  392-394)  from  Ms.  11,  only  the  concluding 
paragraph  from  Ms.  VIII 

II  (pp.  395-398)  in  the  main  from  Ms.  II. 

Ill,  IV,  V  (pp.  398-421)  from  Ms.  VIII. 

VI,  VII,  VIII,  IX  (pp.  422-437)  from  Ms.  II. 

X,  XI,  XII  (pp.  437-480)  from  Ms.  VIII. 

XIII  (pp.  480-488)  from  Ms.  II. 

Chapter  21:  (pp.  489-522)  entirely  from  Ms.  VIII. 


BOOK  II 

THE  PROCESS 
OF  CIRCULATION 
OF  CAPITAL 


PART  I 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL 
AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 

The  circular  movement1  of  capital  takes  place  in  three  stages, 
which,  according  to  the  presentation  in  Volume  I,  form  the  fol¬ 
lowing  series: 

First  stage:  The  capitalist  appears  as  a  buyer  on  the  commodity- 
and  the  labour-market;  his  money  is  transformed  into  commodi¬ 
ties,  or  it  goes  through  the  circulation  act  M— C. 

Second  stage:  Productive  consumption  of  the  purchased  com¬ 
modities  by  the  capitalist.  He  acts  as  a  capitalist  producer  of 
commodities;  his  capital  passes  through  the  process  of  production. 
The  result  is  a  commodity  of  more  value  than  that  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  entering  into  its  production. 

Third  stage:  The  capitalist  returns  to  the  market  as  a  seller; 
his  commodities  are  turned  into  money,  or  they  pass  through  the 
circulation  act  C — M. 

Hence  the  formula  for  the  circuit  of  money-capital  is:  M — C... 
P  ...  C' — M',  the  dots  indicating  that  the  process  of  circulation 
is  interrupted,  and  G'  and  M'  designating  C  and  M  increased 
by  surplus-value. 

The  first  and  third  stages  were  discussed  in  Book  I  only  in 
so  far  as  this  was  necessary  for  an  understanding  of  the  second 
stage,  the  process  of  production  of  capital.  For  this  reason,  the 
various  forms  which  capital  takes  on  in  its  different  stages,  and 
which  it  now  assumes  and  now  strips  off  in  the  repetition  of  its 
circuit,  were  not  considered.  These  forms  are  now  the  direct 
object  of  our  study. 

In  order  to  conceive  these  forms  in  their  pure  state,  one  must 
first  of  all  discard  all  factors  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 


1  From  Manuscript  II. — F.B, 


26 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


changing  or  building  of  forms  as  such.  It  is  therefore  taken  for 
granted  here  not  only  that  the  commodities  are  sold  at  their 
values  but  also  that  this  takes  place  under  the  same  conditions 
throughout.  Likewise  disregarded  therefore  are  any  changes  of 
value  which  might  occur  during  the  movement  in  circuits. 


I.  FIRST  STAGE.  M-C* 

M— C  represents  the  conversion  of  a  sum  of  money  into  a  sum 
of  commodities;  the  purchaser  transforms  his  money  into  com¬ 
modities,  the  sellers  transform  their  commodities  into  money. 
What  renders  this  act  of  the  general  circulation  of  commodities 
simultaneously  a  functionally  definite  section  in  independent 
circuit  of  some  individual  capital  is  primarily  not  the  form  of 
the  act  but  its  material  content,  the  specific  use-character  of  the 
commodities  which  change  places  with  the  money.  These  com¬ 
modities  are  on  the  one  hand  means  of  production,  on  the  other 
labour-power,  material  and  personal  factors  in  the  production 
of  commodities  whose  specific  nature  must  of  course  correspond 
to  the  special  kind  of  articles  to  be  manufactured.  If  we  call 
labour-power  L,  and  the  means  of  production  MP,  then  the  sum 
of  commodities  to  be  bought,  C,  is  equal  to  L+MP,  or  more 
briefly  C<^p.  M— C,  considered  as  to  its  substance,  is  therefore 
represented  by  M— C<^p  that  is  to  say  M— C  is  composed  of 
M — L  and  M — MP.  The  sum  of  money  M  is  separated  into  two 
parts,  one  of  which  buys  labour-power,  the  other  means  of 
production.  These  two  series  of  purchases  belong  to  entirely 
different  markets,  the  one  to  the  commodity-market  proper,  the 
other  to  the  labour-market. 

Aside  from  this  qualitative  division  of  the  sum  of  commodi¬ 
ties  into  which  M  is  transformed,  the  formula  M — C<Jjp  also 
represents  a  most  characteristic  quantitative  relation. 

We  know  that  the  value,  or  price,  of  labour-power  is  paid 
to  its  owner,  who  offers  it  for  sale  as  a  commodity,  in  the  form 
of  wages,  that  is  to  say  as  the  price  of  a  sum  of  labour  contain¬ 
ing  surplus-labour.  For  instance  if  the  daily  value  of  labour- 
power  is  equal  to  the  product  of  five  hours’  labour  valued  at 
three  shillings,  this  sum  figures  in  the  contract  between  the 
buyer  and  seller  as  the  price,  or  wages,  for,  say,  ten  hours  of 


1  Beginning  of  Manuscript  VII,  started  July  2,  1878 ,—F.E. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OP  MONEY-CAPITAL 


27 


labour.  If  such  a  contract  is  made  for  instance  with  50  labourers, 
thej'  are  supposed  to  work  altogether  500  hours  per  day  for  the 
purchaser,  and  one  half  of  this  time,  or  250  hours  equal  to  25 
days  of  labour  of  10  hours  each,  represents  nothing  but  surplus- 
labour.  The  quantity  and  the  volume  of  the  means  of  production 
to  be  purchased  must  be  sufficient  for  the  utilisation  of  this  mass 
of  labour. 

M — then,  does  not  merely  express  the  qualitative  re¬ 
lation  indicating  that  a  certain  sum  of  money,  say  £422,  is 
exchanged  for  a  corresponding  sum  of  means  of  production  and 
labour-power,  but  also  a  quantitative  relation  between  L,  the 
part  of  the  money  spent  for  labour-power,  and  MP,  the  part 
spent  for  means  of  production.  This  relation  is  determined  at 
the  outset  by  the  quantity  of  excess  labour,  of  surplus-labour 
to  be  expended  by  a  certain  number  of  labourers. 

If  for  instance  in  a  spinning-mill  the  weekly  wage  of  its  50 
labourers  amounts  to  £50,  £372  must  be  spent  for  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  if  this  is  the  value  of  the  means  of  production  which 
a  weekly  labour  of  3,000  hours,  1,500  of  which  are  surplus- 
labour,  transforms  into  yarn. 

It  is  immaterial  here  how  much  additional  value  in  the  form 
of  means  of  production  is  required  in  the  various  lines  of  industry 
by  the  utilisation  of  additional  labour.  The  point  merely  is  that 
the  part  of  the  money  spent  for  means  of  production— the  means 
of  production  bought  in  M—  MP— must  absolutely  suffice,  i.e., 
must  at  the  outset  be  calculated  accordingly,  must  be  procured 
in  corresponding  proportion.  To  put  it  another  way,  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  means  of  production  must  suffice  to  absorb  the  amount  of 
labour,  to  be  transformed  by  it  into  products.  If  the  means  of 
production  at  hand  were  insufficient,  the  excess  labour  at  the 
disposal  of  the  purchaser  could  not  be  utilised;  his  right  to  dis¬ 
pose  of  it  would  be  futile.  If  there  were  more  means  of  production 
than  available  labour,  they  would  not  be  saturated  with  labour, 
would  not  be  transformed  into  products. 

As  soon  as  M — C<^p  is  completed,  the  purchaser  has  at  his 
disposal  more  than  simply  the  means  of  production  and  labour- 
power  required  for  the  production  of  some  useful  article.  He 
disposes  of  a  greater  capacity  to  render  labour-power  fluent, 
or  a  greater  quantity  of  labour  than  is  necessary  for  the  replace¬ 
ment  of  the  value  of  this  labour-power,  and  he  has  at  the  same 
time  the  means  of  production  requisite  for  the  realisation  or 
materialisation  of  this  quantity  of  labour.  In  other  words,  he 


28 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


has  at  his  disposal  the  factors  making  for  the  production  of  ar¬ 
ticles  of  a  greater  value  than  that  of  the  elements  of  production — 
the  factors  of  production  of  a  mass  of  commodities  containing  sur¬ 
plus-value.  The  value  advanced  by  him  in  money-form  has  now 
assumed  a  bodily  form  in  which  it  can  be  incarnated  as  a  value 
generating  surplus-value  (in  the  shape  of  commodities).  In  brief, 
value  exists  here  in  the  condition  or  form  of  productive  capital, 
which  has  the  faculty  of  creating  value  and  surplus-value.  Let 
us  call  capital  in  this  form  P. 

Now  the  value  of  P  is  equal  to  that  of  L+MP,  it  is  equal  to 
M  exchanged  for  L  and  MP.  M  is  the  same  capital-value  as  P, 
only  it  has  a  different  mode  of  existence,  it  is  capital-value  in 
the  state  or  form  of  money — money-capital. 

M— CcJjjp,  or  its  general  form  M— C,  a  sum  of  purchases  of 

commodities,  an  act  of  the  general  circulation  of  commodities, 
is  therefore  at  the  same  time— as  a  stage  in  the  independent  cir¬ 
cuit  of  capital — a  transformation  of  capital-value  from  its  money- 
form  into  its  productive  form.  More  briefly,  it  is  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  money-capital  into  productive  capital.  In  the  diagram  of 
the  circuit  which  we  are  here  discussing,  money  appears  as  the 
first  depository  of  capital-value,  and  money-capital  therefore 
represents  the  form  in  which  capital  is  advanced. 

Capital  in  the  form  of  money-capital  is  in  a  state  in  which 
it  can  perform  the  functions  of  money,  in  the  present  case  the 
functions  of  a  universal  means  of  purchase  and  universal  means 
of  payment.  (The  last-named  inasmuch  as  labour-power  though 
first  bought  is  not  paid  for  until  it  has  been  put  into  operation. 
To  the  extent  that  the  means  of  production  are  not  found  ready 
on  the  market  but  have  to  be  ordered  first,  money  in  M— MP 
likewise  serves  as  a  means  of  payment.)  This  capacity  is  not  due 
to  the  fact  that  money-capital  is  capital  but  that  it  is  money. 

On  the  other  hand  capital-value  in  the  form  of  money  can¬ 
not  perform  any  other  functions  but  those  of  money.  What  turns 
the  money-functions  into  functions  of  capital  is  the  definite 
role  they  play  in  the  movement  of  capital,  and  therefore  also 
the  interrelation  of  the  stage  in  which  these  functions  are  per¬ 
formed  with  the  other  stages  of  the  circuit  of  capital.  Take,  for 
instance,  the  case  with  which  we  are  here  dealing.  Money  is  here 
converted  into  commodities  the  combination  of  which  represents 
the  bodily  form  of  productive  capital,  and  this  form  already  con¬ 
tains  latently,  potentially,  the  result  of  the  process  of  capitalist 
production. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


29 


A  part  of  the  money  performing  the  function  of  money- 
capital  in  M— C<Iflp  assumes,  by  consummating  this  act  of 
circulation,  a  function  in  which  it  loses  its  capital  character  but 
preserves  its  money  character.  The  circulation  of  money-capital 
M  is  divided  into  M— MP  and  M— L,  into  the  purchase  of  means 
of  production  and  the  purchase  of  labour-power.  Let  us  consider 
the  last-named  process  by  itself.  M  — L  is  the  purchase  of  labour- 
power  by  the  capitalist.  It  is  also  the  sale  of  labour-power— we 
may  here  say  of  labour,  since  the  form  of  wages  is  assumed  — 
by  the  labourer  who  owns  it.  What  is  M— C  (=M  — L)  for  the 
buyer  is  here,  as  in  every  other  purchase,  L— M  (=C— M)  for  the 
seller  (the  labourer).  It  is  the  sale  of  his  labour-power.  This  is 
the  first  stage  of  circulation,  or  the  first  metamorphosis,  of  the 
commodity  (Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill,  2a).*  It  is  for  the  seller  of  labour 
a  transformation  of  his  commodity  into  the  money-form.  The  la¬ 
bourer  spends  the  money  so  obtained  gradually  for  a  number 
of  commodities  required  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  needs,  for 
articles  of  consumption.  The  complete  circulation  of  his  commod¬ 
ity  therefore  appears  as  L— M— C,  that  is  to  say  first  as  L— M 
( =C— M)  and  secondly  as  M— G;  hence  in  the  general  form  of  the 
simple  circulation  of  commodities,  C— M — C.  Money  is  in  this 
case  merely  a  passing  means  of  circulation,  a  mere  medium  in 
the  exchange  of  one  commodity  for  another. 

M  — L  is  the  characteristic  moment  in  the  transformation  of 
money-capital  into  productive  capital,  because  it  is  the  essen¬ 
tial  condition  for  the  real  transformation  of  value  advanced  in 
the  form  of  money  into  capital,  into  a  value  producing  surplus- 
value.  M — MP  is  necessary  only  for  the  purpose  of  realising  the 
quantity  of  labour  bought  in  the  process  M  — L,  which  was  dis¬ 
cussed  from  this  point  of  view  in  Book  I,  Part  II,  under  the  head 
of  “The  Transformation  of  Money  into  Capital.”  We  shall  have 
to  consider  the  matter  at  this  point  also  from  another  angle, 
relating  especially  to  money-capital  as  the  form  in  which  capital 
manifests  itself. 

Generally  M— L  is  regarded  as  characteristic  of  the  capital¬ 
ist  mode  of  production.  However  not  at  all  for  the  reason  given 
above,  that  the  purchase  of  labour-power  represents  a  contract 
of  purchase  which  stipulates  for  the  delivery  of  a  quantity  of 
labour  in  excess  of  that  needed  to  replace  the  price  of  the 
labour-power,  the  wages;  hence  delivery  of  surplus-labour, 
the  fundamental  condition  for  the  capitalisation  of  the  value 

*  English  edition:  Ch.  Ill,  2a  —  Ed. 


30 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


advanced,  or  for  the  production  of  surplus-value,  which  is  the 
same  thing.  On  the'  contrary,  it  is  so  regarded  because  of  its 
form,  since  money  in  the  form  of  wages  buys  labour,  and  this 
is  the  characteristic  mark  of  the  money  system. 

Nor  is  it  the  irrationality  of  the  form  which  is  taken  as 
characteristic.  On  the  contrary,  one  overlooks  the  irrational.  The 
irrationality  consists  in  the  fact  that  labour  itself  as  a  value- 
creating  element  cannot  have  any  value,  nor  can  therefore  any 
definite  amount  of  labour  have  any  value  expressed  in  its  price, 
in  its  equivalence  to  a  definite  quantity  of  money.  But  we  know 
that  wages  are  but  a  disguised  form,  a  form  in  which  for  instance 
the  price  of  one  day's  labour-power  presents  itself  as  the  price 
of  the  labour  rendered  fluent  by  this  labour-power  in  one  day. 
The  value  produced  by  this  labour-power  in,  say,  six  hours  of 
labour  is  thus  expressed  as  the  value  of  twelve  hours’  function¬ 
ing  or  operation  of  the  labour-power. 

M — L  is  regarded  as  the  characteristic  feature,  the  hallmark 
of  the  so-called  money  system,  because  labour  there  appears  as 
the  commodity  of  its  owner,  and  money  therefore  as  the  buyer — 
hence  on  account  of  the  money-relation  (i.e.,  the  sale  and  pur¬ 
chase  of  human  activity).  Money  however  appears  very  early 
as  a  buyer  of  so-called  services,  without  the  transformation  of  M 
into  money-capital,  and  without  any  change  in  the  general 
character  of  the  economic  system. 

It  makes  no  difference  to  money  into  what  sort  of  commodi¬ 
ties  it  is  transformed.  It  is  the  universal  equivalent  of  all  commod¬ 
ities  which  show,  if  only  by  their  prices,  that  ideally  they  rep¬ 
resent  a  certain  sum  of  money,  anticipate  their  transformation 
into  money,  and  do  not  acquire  the  form  in  which  they  may  be 
converted  into  use-values  for  their  owners  until  they  change 
places  with  money.  Once  labour-power  has  come  into  the  market 
as  the  commodity  of  its  owner  and  its  sale  takes  the  form  of  pay¬ 
ment  for  labour,  assumes  the  shape  of  wages,  its  purchase  and 
sale  is  no  more  startling  than  the  purchase  and  sale  of  any  oth¬ 
er  commodity.  The  characteristic  thing  is  not  that  the  commodity 
labour-power  is  purchasable  but  that  labour-power  appears  as  a 
commodity. 

By  means  of  M — C<Jjp,  the  transformation  of  money-capital 
into  productive  capital,  the  capitalist  effects  the  combination 
of  the  objective  and  personal  factors  of  production  so  far  as  they 
consist  of  commodities.  If  money  is  transformed  into  produc¬ 
tive  capital  for  the  first  time  or  if  it  performs  for  the  first  time 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


31 


the  function  of  money-capital  for  its  owner,  he  must  begin  by 
buying  means  of  production,  such  as  buildings,  machinery,  etc., 
before  he  buys  any  labour-power.  For  as  soon  as  he  compels 
labour-power  to  act  in  obedience  to  his  sway,  he  must  have 
means  of  production  to  which  he  can  apply  it  as  labour-power. 

This  is  the  capitalist’s  presentation  of  the  case. 

The  labourer’s  case  is  as  follows:  The  productive  application 
of  his  labour-power  is  not  possible  until  it  is  sold  and  brought 
into  connection  with  means  of  production.  Before  its  sale,  la¬ 
bour-power  exists  therefore  separately  from  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  from  the  material  conditions  of  its  application.  In  this 
state  of  separation  it  cannot  be  used  either  directly  for  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  use-values  for  its  owner  or  for  the  production  of  com¬ 
modities,  by  the  sale  of  which  he  could  live.  But  from  the  moment 
that  as  a  result  of  its  sale  it  is  brought  into  connection  with  means 
of  production,  it  forms  part  of  the  productive  capital  of  its  pur¬ 
chaser,  the  same  as  the  means  of  production. 

True,  in  the  act  M  —  L  the  owner  of  money  and  the  owner  of 
labour-power  enter  only  into  the  relation  of  buyer  and  seller, 
confront  one  another  only  as  money-owner  and  commodity- 
owner.  In  this  respect  they  enter  merely  into  a  money-relation. 
Yet  at  the  same  time  the  buyer  appears  also  from  the  outset  in 
the  capacity  of  an  owner  of  means  of  production,  which  are  the 
material  conditions  for  the  productive  expenditure  of  labour- 
power  by  its  owner.  In  other  words,  these  means  of  production 
are  in  opposition  to  the  owner  of  the  labour-power,  being  prop¬ 
erty  of  another.  On  the  other  hand  the  seller  of  labour  faces  its 
buyer  as  labour-power  of  another  which  must  be  made  to  do 
his  bidding,  must  be  integrated  into  his  capital,  in  order  that 
it  may  really  become  productive  capital.  The  class  relation  be¬ 
tween  capitalist  and  wage-labourer  therefore  exists,  is  presup¬ 
posed  from  the  moment  that  the  two  face  each  other  in  the  act 
M  — L  (L— M  on  the  part  of  the  labourer).  It  is  a  purchase  and 
sale,  a  money-relation,  but  a  purchase  and  sale  in  which  the  buyer 
is  assumed  to  be  a  capitalist  and  the  seller  a  wage-labourer. 
And  this  relation  arises  out  of  the  fact  that  the  conditions  re¬ 
quired  for  the  realisation  of  labour-power,  viz.,  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence  and  means  of  production,  are  separated  from  the  owner 
of  labour-power,  being  the  property  of  another. 

We  are  not  concerned  here  with  the  origin  of  this  separation. 
It  exists  as  soon  as  M— L  goes  on.  The  thing  which  interests 
us  here  is  this:  If  M  —  L  appears  here  as  a  function  of  money- 
capital  or  money  as  the  form  of  existence  of  capital,  it  is  not  for 


32  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

the  sole  reason  that  money  here  assumes  the  role  of  a  means  of 
paying  for  a  useful  human  activity  or  service;  hence  by  no  means 
in  consequence  of  the  function  of  money  as  a  means  of  payment. 
Money  can  be  expended  in  this  form  only  because  labour-power 
finds  itself  in  a  state  of  separation  from  its  means  of  production 
(including  the  means  of  subsistence  as  means  of  production  of 
the  labour-power  itself),  and  because  this  separation  can  be 
overcome  only  by  the  sale  of  the  labour-power  to  the  owner  of 
the  means  of  production;  because  therefore  the  functioning  of 
labour-power,  which  is  not  at  all  limited  to  the  quantity  of 
labour  required  for  the  reproduction  of  its  own  price,  is  likewise 
the  concern  of  its  buyer.  The  capital-relation  during  the  process 
of  production  arises  only  because  it  is  inherent  in  the  act  of  cir¬ 
culation,  in  the  different  fundamental  economic  conditions  in 
which  buyer  and  seller  confront  each  other,  in  their  class  re¬ 
lation.  It  is  not  money  which  by  its  nature  creates  this  relation; 
it  is  rather  the  existence  of  this  relation  which  permits  of  the 
transformation  of  a  mere  money-function  into  a  capital-function. 

In  the  conception  of  money-capital  (for  the  time  heing  we 
deal  with  the  latter  only  within  the  confines  of  the  special  func¬ 
tion  in  which  it  faces  us  here)  two  errors  run  parallel  to  each 
other  or  cross  each  other.  In  the  first  place  the  functions  per¬ 
formed  by  capital-value  in  its  capacity  of  money-capital,  which  it 
can  perform  precisely  owing  to  its  money-form,  are  erroneously 
derived  from  its  character  as  capital,  whereas  they  are  due  only 
to  the  money-form  of  capital-value,  to  its  form  of  appearance  as 
money.  In  the  second  place,  on  the  contrary,  the  specific  content 
of  the  money-function,  which  renders  it  simultaneously  a  capital- 
function,  is  traced  to  the  nature  of  money  (money  being  here 
confused  with  capital),  while  the  money-function  premises  so¬ 
cial  conditions,  such  as  are  here  indicated  by  the  act  M—L, 
which  do  not  at  all  exist  in  the  mere  circulation  of  commodities 
and  the  corresponding  circulation  of  money. 

The  purchase  and  sale  of  slaves  is  formally  also  a  purchase 
and  sale  of  commodities.  But  money  cannot  perform  this  func¬ 
tion  without  the  existence  of  slavery.  If  slavery  exists,  then 
money  can  be  invested  in  the  purchase  of  slaves.  On  the  other 
hand  the  mere  possession  of  money  cannot  make  slavery  possible. 

In  order  that  the  sale  of  one’s  own  labour-power  (in  the  form 
of  the  sale  of  one’s  own  labour  or  in  the  form  of  wages)  may 
constitute  not  an  isolated  phenomenon  but  a  socially  decisive 
premise  for  the  production  of  commodities,  in  order  that  money- 
capital  may  therefore  perform,  on  a  social  scale,  the  above- 


THE  CIRCUIT  OP  MONEY-CAPITAL 


33 


discussed  function  M— C<^p,  historical  processes  are  assumed  by 
which  the  original  connection  of  the  means  of  production  with 
labour-power  was  dissolved— processes  in  consequenco  of  which 
the  mass  of  the  people,  the  labourers,  have,  as  non-owners,  come 
face  to  face  with  the  non-labourers  as  the  owners  of  these  means 
of  production.  It  makes  no  difference  in  this  case  whether  the 
connection  before  its  dissolution  was  such  in  form  that  the  labour¬ 
er,  being  himself  a  means  of  production,  belonged  to  the  other 
means  of  production  or  whether  he  was  their  owner. 

What  lies  back  of  M— C<^p  is  distribution;  not  distribution 
in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  a  distribution  of  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion,  but  the  distribution  of  the  elements  of  production  itself, 
the  material  factofs  of  which  are  concentrated  on  one  side,  and 
labour-power,  isolated,  on  the  other. 

The  means  of  production,  the  material  part  of  productive  cap¬ 
ital,  must  therefore  face  the  labourer  as  such,  as  capital,  before 
the  act  M  — L  can  become  a  universal,  social  one. 

We  have  seen  on  previous  occasions*  that  in  its  further 
development  capitalist  production,  once  it  is  established,  not  only 
reproduces  this  separation  but  extends  its  scope  further  and 
further  until  it  becomes  the  prevailing  social  condition.  However, 
there  is  still  another  side  to  this  question.  In  order  that  capital 
may  be  able  to  arise  and  take  control  of  production,  a  definite 
stage  in  the  development  of  trade  is  assumed.  This  applies  there¬ 
fore  also  to  the  circulation  of  commodities,  and  hence  to  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  commodities;  for  no  articles  can  enter  circulation 
as  commodities  unless  they  are  produced  for  sale,  hence  as  com¬ 
modities.  But  the  production  of  commodities  does  not  become 
the  normal,  dominant  type  of  production  until  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  serves  as  its  basis. 

The  Russian  landowners,  who  as  a  result  of  the  so-called  eman¬ 
cipation  of  the  peasants  are  now  compelled  to  carry  on  agricul¬ 
ture  with  the  help  of  wage-labourers  instead  of  the  forced  labour 
of  serfs,  complain  about  two  things:  First,  about  the  lack  of  mon¬ 
ey-capital  They  say  for  instance  that  comparatively  large  sums 
must  be  paid  to  wage-labourers  before  the  crops  are  sold,  and  just 
then  there  is  a  dearth  of  ready  cash,  the  prime  condition.  Capi¬ 
tal  in  the  form  of  money  must  always  be  available,  particularly 
for  the  payment  of  wages,  before  production  can  be  carried  on. 


*  English  edition:  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  Part  VII,  Moscow,  1954. 

— Ed. 


2—1752 


34 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


capitalistically.  But  the  landowners  may  take  hope.  Everything 
comes  to  those  who  wait,  and  in  due  time  the  industrial  capitalist 
will  have  at  his  disposal  not  alone  his  own  money  but  also  that 
of  others. 

The  second  complaint  is  more  characteristic.  It  is  to  the  effect 
that  even  if  one  has  money,  not  enough  labourers  are  to  be  had 
at  any  time.  The  reason  is  that  the  Russian  farm-labourer,  owing 
to  the  common  ownership  of  land  in  the  village  community, 
has  not  yet  been  fully  separated  from  his  means  of  production 
and  hence  is  not  yet  a  “free  wage-labourer”  in  the  full  sense 
of  the  word.  But  the  existence  of  the  latter  on  a  social  scale  is 
a  sine  qua  non  for  M — C,  the  conversion  of  money  into  commod¬ 
ities,  to  be  able  to  represent  the  transformation  of  money-capi¬ 
tal  into  productive  capital. 

It  is  therefore  quite  clear  that  the  formula  for  the  circuit  of 
money-capital,  M — C...  P...  C'— M',  is  the  matter-of-course  form 
of  the  circuit  of  capital  only  on  the  basis  of  already  developed 
capitalist  production,  because  it  presupposes  the  existence  of 
a  class  of  wage-labourers  on  a  social  scale.  We  have  seen  that 
capitalist  production  does  not  only  create  commodities  and 
surplus-value,  but  also  reproduces  to  an  ever  increasing  extent 
the  class  of  wage-labourers,  into  whom  it  transforms  the  vast 
majority  of  direct  producers.  Since  the  first  condition  for  its 
realisation  is  the  permanent  existence  of  a  class  of  wage-labourers, 
M — C  ...  P...  C'— M'  presupposes  a  capital  in  the  form  of  produc¬ 
tive  capital,  and  hence  the  form  of  the  circuit  of  productive 
capital. 


II.  SECOND  STAGE.  FUNCTION 
OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 

The  circuit  of  capital,  which  we  have  here  considered,  begins 
with  the  act  of  circulation  M — C,  the  transmutation  of  money 
into  commodities — purchase.  Circulation  must  therefore  be 
complemented  by  the  antithetical  metamorphosis  C — M,  the 
transformation  of  commodities  into  money — sale.  But  the  direct 
result  of  M— C<^p  is  the  interruption  of  the  circulation  of  the 
capital-value  advanced  in  the  form  of  money.  By  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  money-capital  into  productive  capital  the  capital-value 
has  acquired  a  bodily  form  in  which  it  cannot  continue  to  cir¬ 
culate  but  must  enter  into  consumption,  viz.,  into  productive 
consumption.  The  use  of  labour-power,  labour,  can  be  material¬ 
ised  only  in  the  labour-process.  The  capitalist  cannot  resell  the 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


35 


labourer  as  a  commodity  because  he  is  not  his  chattel  slave  and 
the  capitalist  has  not  bought  anything  except  the  right  to  use 
his  labour-power  for  a  certain  time.  On  the  other  hand  the  cap¬ 
italist  cannot  use  this  labour-power  in  any  other  way  than  by 
utilising  means  of  production  to  create  commodities  with  its 
help.  The  result  of  the  first  stage  is  therefore  entrance  into  the 
second,  the  productive  stage  of  capital 

This  movement  is  represented  by  M— C<jip  ...  P,  in  which 
the  dots  indicate  that  the  circulation  of  capital  is  interrupted, 
while  its  circular  movement  continues,  since  it  passes  from  the 
sphere  of  the  circulation  of  commodities  into  that  of  production. 
The  first  stage,  the  transformation  of  money-capital  into  produc¬ 
tive  capital,  is  therefore  merely  the  harbinger  and  introductory 
phase  of  the  second  stage,  the  functioning  of  productive  capital. 

M— C<Jjp  presupposes  that  the  individual  performing  this 
act  not  only  has  at  his  disposal  values  in  any  use-form,  but  also 
that  he  has  them  in  the  form  of  money,  that  he  is  the  owner  of 
money.  But  as  the  act  consists  precisely  in  giving  away  money, 
the  individual  can  remain  the  owner  of  money  only  in  so  far 
as  the  act  of  giving  away  money  implies  a  return  of  money. 
But  money  can  return  to  him  only  through  the  sale  of  commodi¬ 
ties.  Hence  the  above  act  assumes  him  to  be  a  producer  of  com¬ 
modities. 

M— L.  The  wage-labourer  lives  only  by  the  sale  of  his  labour- 
power.  Its  preservation— his  self-preservation — requires  daily 
consumption.  Hence  payment  for  it  must  be  continually  repeat¬ 
ed  at  rather  short  intervals  in  order  that  he  may  be  able  to  repeat 
acts  L — M — CorC — M — C,  repeat  the  purchases  needed  for  his  self- 
preservation.  For  this  reason  the  capitalist  must  always  meet 
the  wage-labourer  in  the  capacity-  of  a  money-capitalist,  and 
his  capital  as  money-capital.  On  the  other  hand  if  the  wage- 
labourers,  the  mass  of  direct  producers,  are  to  perform  the  act 
L — M — C,  they  must  constantly  be  faced  with  the  necessary 
means  of  subsistence  in  purchasable  form,  i.e.,  in  the  form  of 
commodities.  This  state  of  affairs  necessitates  a  high  degree 
of  development  of  the  circulation  of  products  in  the  form  of 
commodities,  hence  also  of  the  volume  of  commodities  produced. 
When  production  by  means  of  wage-labour  becomes  universal, 
commodity  production  is  bound  to  be  the  general  form  of  produc¬ 
tion.  This  mode  of  production,  once  it  is  assumed  to  be  general, 
carries  in  its  wake  an  ever  increasing  division  of  social  labour, 
that  is  to  say  an  ever  growing  differentiation  of  the  articles  which 


2* 


36 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


are  produced  in  the  form  of  commodities  by  a  definite  capitalist, 
ever  greater  division  of  complementary  processes  of  production 
into  independent  processes.  M— MP  therefore  develops  to  the  same 
extent  as  M — L  does,  that  is  to  say  the  production  of  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  is  divorced  to  that  extent  from  the  production  of  commodi¬ 
ties  whose  means  of  production  they  are.  And  the  latter  then  stand 
opposed  to  every  producer  of  commodities  as  commodities  which 
he  does  not  produce  but  buys  for  his  particular  process  of  produc¬ 
tion.  They  come  from  branches  of  production  which,  operated 
independently,  are  entirely  divorced  from  his  own,  enter  into  his 
own  branch  as  commodities,  and  must  therefore  be  bought. 
The  material  conditions  of  commodity  production  face  him 
more  and  more  as  products  of  other  commodity  producers,  as 
commodities.  And  to  the  same  extent  the  capitalist  must  as¬ 
sume  the  role  of  money-capitalist,  in  other  words  there  is  an 
increase  in  the  scale  on  which  his  capital  must  assume  the 
functions  of  money-capital. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  same  conditions  which  give  rise  to 
the  basic  condition  of  capitalist  production,  the  existence  of  a 
class  of  wage-workers,  facilitate  the  transition  of  all  commodity 
production  to  capitalist  commodity  production.  As  capitalist 
production  develops,  it  has  a  disintegrating,  resolvent  effect 
on  all  older  forms  of  production,  which,  designed  mostly  to 
meet  the  direct  needs  of  the  producer,  transform  only  the  ex¬ 
cess  produced  into  commodities.  Capitalist  production  makes 
the  sale  of  products  the  main  interest,  at  first  apparently  without 
affecting  the  mode  of  production  itself.  Such  was  for  instance 
the  first  effect  of  capitalist  world  commerce  on  such  nations 
as  the  Chinese,  Indians,  Arabs,  etc.  But,  secondly,  wherever 
it  takes  root  capitalist  production  destroys  all  forms  of  commod¬ 
ity  production  which  are  based  either  on  the  self-employment 
of  the  producers,  or  merely  on  the  sale  of  the  excess  product  as 
commodities.  Capitalist  production  first  makes  the  production 
of  commodities  general  and  then,  by  degrees,  transforms  all  com¬ 
modity  production  into  capitalist  commodity  production.3 

Whatever  the  social  form  of  production,  labourers  and  means 
of  production  always  remain  factors  of  it.  But  in  a  state  of  sep¬ 
aration  from  each  other  either  of  these  factors  can  be  such  only 
potentially.  For  production  to  go  on  at  all  they  must  unite.  The 
specific  manner  in  which  this  union  is  accomplished  distinguishes 
the  different  economic  epochs  of  the  structure  of  society  from 


5  End  of  Manuscript  VII.  Beginning  of  Manuscript  VI. — F.  E. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


37 


one  another.  In  the  present  case,  the  separation  of  the  free  work¬ 
er  from  his-  means  of  production  is  the  starting-point  given, 
and  we  have  seen  how  and  under  what  conditions  these  two 
elements  are  united  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist,  namely,  as 
the  productive  mode  of  existence  of  his  capital.  The  actual 
process  which  the  personal  and  material  creators  of  commodities 
enter  upon  when  thus  brought  together,  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion,  becomes  therefore  itself  a  function  of  capital,  the  capital¬ 
ist  process  of  production,  the  nature  of  which  has  been  fully 
analysed  in  the  first  book  of  this  work.  Every  enterprise  engaged 
in  commodity  production  becomes  at  the  same  time  an  enter¬ 
prise  exploiting  labour-power.  But  only  the  capitalist  production 
of  commodities  has  become  an  epoch-making  mode  of  exploi¬ 
tation,  which,  in  the  course  of  its  historical  development,  revo¬ 
lutionises,  through  the  organisation  of  the  labour-process  and  the 
enormous  improvement  of  technique,  the  entire  economic  struc¬ 
ture  of  society  in  a  manner  eclipsing  all  former  epochs. 

The  means  of  production  and  labour-power,  in  so  far  as  they 
are  forms  of  existence  of  advanced  capital-value,  are  distin¬ 
guished  by  the  different  roles  assumed  by  them  during  the  process 
of  production  in  the  creation  of  value,  hence  also  of  surplus- 
value,  into  constant  and  variable  capital.  Being  different  com¬ 
ponents  of  productive  capital  they  are  furthermore  distinguished 
by  the  fact  that  the  means  of  production  in  the  possession  of  the 
capitalist  remain  his  capital  even  outside  of  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  while  labour-power  becomes  the  form  of  existence  of 
an  individual  capital  only  within  this  process.  Whereas  labour- 
power  is  a  commodity  only  in  the  hands  of  its  seller,  the  wage- 
labourer,  it  becomes  capital  only  in  the  hands  of  its  buyer,  the 
capitalist  who  acquires  the  temporary  use  of  it.  The  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  do  not  become  the  material  forms  of  productive  capital, 
or  productive  capital,  until  labour-power,  the  personal  form  of 
existence  of  productive  capital,  is  capable  of  being  embodied 
in  them.  Human  labour-power  is  by  nature  no  more  capital 
than  are  the  means  of  production.  They  acquire  this  specific 
social  character  only  under  definite,  historically  developed 
conditions,  just  as  only  under  such  conditions  the  character  of 
money  is  stamped  upon  precious  metals,  or  that  of  money-capital 
upon  money. 

Productive  capital,  in  performing  its  functions,  consumes 
its  own  component  parts  for  the  purpose  of  transforming  them 
into  a  mass  of  products  of  a  higher  value.  Since  labour-power 
acts  merely  as  one  of  its  organs,  the  excess  of  the  product’s 


38 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


value  engendered  by  its  surplus-labour  over  and  above  the  value 
of  productive  capital’s  constituent  elements  is  also  the  fruit 
of  capital.  The  surplus-labour  of  labour-power  is  the  gratuitous 
labour  performed  for  capital  and  thus  forms  surplus-value  for 
the  capitalist,  a  value  which  costs  him  no  equivalent  return. 
The  product  is  therefore  not  only  a  commodity,  but  a  commodity 
pregnant  with  surplus-value.  Its  value  is  equal  to  P+s,  that  is 
to  say  equal  to  the  value  of  the  productive  capital  P  consumed 
in  the  production  of  the  commodity  plus  the  surplus-value  s 
created  by  it.  Let  us  assume  that  this  commodity  consists  of 
10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  and  that  means  of  production  worth  £372 
and  labour-power  worth  £50  were  consumed  in  the  fabrication  of 
this  quantity  of  yarn.  During  the  process  of  spinning,  the  spinners 
transmitted  to  the  yarn  the  value  of  the  means  of  production  con¬ 
sumed  by  their  labour,  amounting  to  £372,  and  at  the  same  time 
they  created,  in  proportion  with  the  labour-power  expended  by 
them,  new  value  to  the  amount  of,  say,  £128.  The  10,000  lbs.  of 
yarn  therefore  represent  a  value  of  £500. 


HI.  THIRD  STAGE.  C'— M' 

Commodities  become  commodity-capital  as  a  functional  form 
of  existence— stemming  directly  from  the  process  of  production 
itself— of  capital-value  which  has  already  produced  surplus- 
value.  If  the  production  of  commodities  were  carried  on  capital¬ 
istically  throughout  society,  all  commodities  would  be  elements 
of  commodity-capital  from  the  outset,  whether  they  were  crude 
iron,  Brussels  lace,  sulphuric  acid  or  cigars.  The  problem  of 
what  kinds  of  commodities  out  of  the  vast  host  available  are 
destined  by  their  nature  to  rank  as  capital  and  what  other  kinds 
to  serve  as  ordinary  commodities,  is  one  of  the  self-created  love¬ 
ly  ills  of  scholastic  political  economy. 

Capital  in  the  form  of  commodities  has  to  perform  the  func¬ 
tion  of  commodities.  The  articles  of  which  capital  is  composed 
are  produced  specially  for  the  market  and  must  be  sold,  trans¬ 
formed  into  money,  hence  go  through  the  process  C — M. 

Suppose  the  commodity  of  the  capitalist  to  consist  of  10,000 
lbs.  of  cotton  yarn.  If  £372  represent  the  value  of  the  means 
of  production  consumed  in  the  spinning  process,  and  new  value 
to  the  amount  of  £128  has  been  created,  the  yarn  has  a  value  of 
£500,  which  is  expressed  in  its  price  of  the  same  amount.  Sup¬ 
pose  further  that  this  price  is  realised  by  the  sale  C — M.  What 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


39 


is  it  that  makes  of  this  simple  act  of  all  commodity  circulation 
at  the  same  time  a  capital-function?  No  change  that  takes  place 
inside  of  it,  neither  in  the  use-character  of  the  commodity— for 
it  passes  into  the  hands  of  the  buyer  as  an  object  of  use— nor  in 
its  value,  for  this  value  has  not  experienced  any  change  of  mag¬ 
nitude,  but  only  of  form.  It  first  existed  in  the  form  of  yarn, 
while  now  it  exists  in  the  form  of  money.  Thus  a  substantial  dis¬ 
tinction  is  evident  between  the  first  stage  M— C  and  the  last 
stage  C — M.  There  the  advanced  money  functions  as  money- 
capital,  because  it  is  transformed  by  means  of  the  circulation  into 
commodities  of  a  specific  use-value.  Here  the  commodities  can 
serve  as  capital  only  to  the  extent  that  they  bring  this  character 
with  them  in  ready  shape  from  the  process  of  production  before 
their  circulation  begins.  During  the  spinning  process,  the  spin¬ 
ners  create  yarn  value  to  the  amount  of  £128.  Of  this  sum,  say 
£50  represent  to  the  capitalist  merely  an  equivalent  for  his  out¬ 
lay  for  labour-power,  while  £78— when  the  degree  of  exploita¬ 
tion  of  labour-power  is  156  per  cent — form  surplus-value.  The 
value  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  therefore  embodies  first  the 
value  of  the  consumed  productive  capital  P,  the  constant  part 
of  which  amounts  to  £372  and  the  variable  to  £50,  their  sum 
being  £422,  equal  to  8,440  lbs.  of  yarn.  Now  the  value  of  the 
productive  capital  P  is  equal  to  C,  the  value  of  its  constituent 
elements,  which  in  the  stage  M — C  confronted  the  capitalist 
as  commodities  in  the  hands  of  their  sellers. 

In  the  second  place,  however,  the  value  of  the  yarn  contains 
a  surplus-value  of  £78,  equal  to  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn.  C  as  an  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  value  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  is  therefore  equal 
to  C  plus  AC,  or  C  plus  an  increment  of  C  (equal  to  £78),  which 
we  shall  call  c,  since  it  exists  in  the  same  commodity-form  as 
now  the  original  value  C.  The  value  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn, 
equal  to  £500,  is  therefore  represented  by  C-|-c=C'.  What  turns 
C,  the  expression  of  the  value  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  into  C' 
is  not  the  absolute  magnitude  of  its  value  (£500),  for  that  is 
determined,  as  in  the  case  of  any  other  C  standing  for  the  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  value  of  some  other  sum  of  commodities,  by  the 
quantity  of  labour  embodied  in  it.  It  is  its  relative  value-mag¬ 
nitude,  its  value-magnitude  as  compared  with  that  of  capital 
P  consumed  in  its  production.  This  value  is  contained  in  it  plus 
the  surplus-value  supplied  by  the  productive  capital.  Its  value 
is  greater,  exceeds  that  of  the  capital-value  by  this  surplus-value 
c.  The  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  are  the  bearers  of  the  capital-value 
expanded,  enriched  by  this  surplus-value,  and  they  are  so  by 


40  the  metamorphoses  op  capital  and  their  circuits 

virtue  of  being  the  product  of  the  capitalist  process  of  produc¬ 
tion.  C'  expresses  a  value-relation,  the  relation  of  the  value 
of  the  commodities  produced  to  that  of  the  capital  spent  on  their 
production,  in  other  words,  expresses  the  fact  that  its  value  is 
composed  of  capital-value  and  surplus-value.  The  10,000  lbs. 
of  yarn  represent  commodity-capital,  C',  only  because  they  are 
a  converted  form  of  the  productive  capital  P,  hence  in  a  con¬ 
nection  which  exists  originally  only  in  the  circuit  of  this  individ¬ 
ual  capital,  or  only  for  the  capitalist  who  produced  the  yarn 
with  the  help  of  his  capital.  It  is,  so  to  say,  only  an  internal, 
not  an  external  relation  that  turns  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  in 
their  capacity  of  vehicles  of  value  into  a  commodity-capital. 
They  exhibit  their  capitalist  birthmark  not  in  the  absolute  mag¬ 
nitude  their  value  but  in  its  relative  magnitude,  in  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  their  value  as  compared  with  that  possessed  by  the  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  embodied  in  them  before  it  was  transformed  into 
commodities.  If,  then,  these  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  are  sold  at  their 
value  of  £500,  this  act  of  circulation,  considered  by  itself,  is 
identical  with  C— M,  a  mere  transformation  of  an  unchanging 
value  from  the  form  of  a  commodity  into  that  of  money.  But  as 
a  special  stage  in  the  circuit  of  an  individual  capital,  the  same 
act  is  a  realisation  of  the  capital-value  embodied  in  the  commod¬ 
ity  to  the  amount  of  £422  plus  the  surplus-value,  likewise  em¬ 
bodied  in  it,  of  £78.  That  is  to  say  it  represents  C'— M',  the 
transformation  of  the  commodity-capital  from  its  commodity- 
form  into  the  money-form.4 

The  function  of  C'  is  now  that  of  all  commodities,  viz.:  to 
transform  itself  into  money,  to  be  sold,  to  go  through  the  circu¬ 
lation  stage  C— M.  So  long  as  the  capital,  now  expanded,  remains 
in  the  form  of  commodity-capital,  lies  immovable  in  the  mar¬ 
ket,  the  process  of  production  is  at  rest.  The  commodity-capital 
acts  neither  as  a  creator  of  products  nor  as  a  creator  of  value.  A 
given  capital-value  will  serve,  in  widely  different  degrees,  as 
a  creator  of  products  and  value,  and  the  scale  of  reproduction 
will  be  extended  or  reduced  commensurate  with  the  particular 
speed  with  which  that  capital  throws  off  its  commodity-form  and 
assumes  that  of  money,  or  with  the  rapidity  of  the  sale.  It  was 
shown  in  Book  I  that  the  degree  of  efficiency  of  any  given  capital 
is  conditional  on  the  potentialities  of  the  productive  process, 
which  to  a  certain  extent  are  independent  of  the  magnitude  of 
its  own  value.*  Here  it  appears  that  the  process  of  circulation  sets 

4  End  of  Manuscript  VI.  Beginning  of  Manuscript  V. — F.  E. 

*  English  edition:  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  pp.  602-08.  —  Ed. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OP  MONEY-CAPITAL 


41 


in  motion  new  forces  independent  of  the  capital's  magnitude  of 
value  and  determining  its  degree  of  efficiency,  its  expansion  and 
contraction. 

The  mass  of  commodities  C',  being  the  depository  of  the  ex¬ 
panded  capital,  must  furthermore  pass  in  its  entirety  through 
the  metamorphosis  C'— M'.  The  quantity  sold  is  here  a  main 
determinant.  The  individual  commodity  figures  only  as  an  in¬ 
tegral  part  of  the  total  mass.  The  £500  worth  of  value  exists  in 
the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn.  If  the  capitalist  succeeds  in  selling  only 
7,440  lbs.  at  their  value  of  £372,  he  has  replaced  only  the  value 
of  his  constant  capital,  the  value  of  the  expended  means  of  pro¬ 
duction.  If  he  sells  8,440  lbs.  he  recovers  only  the  value  of  the 
total  capital  advanced.  He  must  sell  more  in  order  to  realise  some 
surplus- value,  ;and  he  must  sell  the  entire  10,000  lbs.  in  order 
to  realise  the  entire  surplus-value  of  £78  (1,560  lbs.  of  yarn). 
In  £500  in  money  he  receives  merely  an  equivalent  for  the  com¬ 
modity  sold.  His  transaction  within  the  circulation  is  simply 
C— M.  If  he  had  paid  his  labourers  £64  in  wages  instead  of  £50 
his  surplus-value  would  be  only  £64  instead  of  78,  and  the  degree 
of  exploitation  would  have  been  only  100  per  cent  instead  of  156. 
But  the  value  of  the  yarn  would  not  change;  only  the  relation 
between  its  component  parts  would  be  different.  The  circula¬ 
tion  act  C— M  would  still  represent  the  sale  of  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn 
for  £500,  their  value. 

C'  is  equal  to  C+c  (or  £422  plus  £78).  C  equals  the  value  of 
P,  the  productive  capital,  and  this  equals  the  value  of  M,  the 
money  advanced  in  M — C,  the  purchase  of  the  elements  of  produc¬ 
tion,  amounting  to  £422  in  our  example.  If  the  mass  of  commodi¬ 
ties  is  sold  at  its  value,  then  C  equals  £422  and  c  equals.  £78, 
the  value  of  the  surplus-product  of  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn.  If  we  call 
c,  expressed  in  money,  m,  then  C' — M'=(C+c) — (M+m),  and 
the  circuit  M — C  ...  P  ...  C' — M',  in  its  expanded  form,  is  there¬ 
fore  represented  by  M — C<^lp  ...  P  ...  (C+c) — (M+m). 

In  the  first  stage  the  capitalist  takes  articles  of  consumption 
out  of  the  commodity-market  proper  and  the  labour-market. 
In  the  third  stage  he  throws  commodities  back,  but  only  into 
one  market,  the  commodity-market  proper.  However  the  fact 
that  he  extracts  from  the  market,  by  means  of  his  commodities, 
a  greater  value  than  he  threw  upon  it  originally  is  due  only  to 
the  circumstance  that  he  throws  more  commodity-value  back 
upon  it  than  he  first  drew  out  of  it.  He  threw  value  M  upon  it 
and  drew  out  of  it  the  equivalent  C;  he  throws  C+c  back  upon 
it,  and  draws  out  of  it  the  equivalent  M+m. 


42  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

M  was  in  our  example  equal  to  the  value  of  8,440  lbs.  of  yarn. 
But  he  throws  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  on  the  market,  consequently  he 
returns  a  greater  value  than  he  took  from  it.  On  the  other  hand 
he  threw  this  increased  value  on  the  market  only  because 
through  the  exploitation  of  labour-power  in  the  process  of 
production  he  had  created  surplus-value  (as  an  aliquot  part  of  the 
product  expressed  in  surplus-product).  It  is  only  by  virtue  of 
being  the  product  of  this  process  that  the  mass  of  commodities 
becomes  commodity-capital,  the  bearer  of  the  expanded  capital- 
value.  By  performing  C' — M'  the  advanced  capital-value  as  well 
as  the  surplus-value  are  realised.  The  realisation  of  both  takes 
place  simultaneously  in  a  series  of  sales  or  in  a  lump  sale  of  the 
entire  mass  of  commodities  which  is  expressed  by  C' — M'.  But 
the  same  circulation  act  C' — M'  is  different  for  capital-value 
and  for  surplus-value,  as  it  expresses  for  each  of  them  a  differ¬ 
ent  stage  of  their  circulation,  a  different  section  of  the  series  of 
metamorphoses  through  which  they  must  pass  in  the  sphere  of 
circulation.  The  surplus-value  c  came  into  the  world  only  during 
the  process  of  production.  It  appeared  for  the  first  time  in  the 
commodity-market,  in  the  form  of  commodities.  This  is  its  first 
form  of  circulation,  hence  the  act  c— m  is  its  first  circulation 
act,  or  its  first  metamorphosis,  which  remains  to  be  supplement¬ 
ed  by  the  antithetical  act  of  circulation,  or  the  reverse  meta¬ 
morphosis,  m— c.6 

It  is  different  with  the  circulation  which  the  capital-value 
C  performs  in  the  same  circulation  act  C' — M',  and  which  consti¬ 
tutes  for  it  the  circulation  act  C— M,  in  which  C  is  equal  to  P, 
equal  to  the  M  originally  advanced.  Capital-value  has  opened  its 
first  circulation  act  in  the  form  of  M,  money-capital,  and  returns 
through  the  act  C— M  to  the  same  form.  It  has  therefore  passed 
through  the  two  antithetical  stages  of  the  circulation,  first  M — C, 
second  C — M,  and  finds  itself  once  more  in  the  form  in  which  it 
can  begin  its  circular  movement  anew.  What  for  surplus-value 
constitutes  the  first  transformation  of  the  commodity-form  into 
that  of  money,  constitutes  for  capital-value  its  return,  or  retrans¬ 
formation,  into  its  original  money-form. 

By  means  of  M — C<^p  money-capital  is  transformed  into 
an  equivalent  mass  of  commodities,  L  and  MP.  These  commodi- 

*  This  is  true  no  matter  how  we  separate  capital-value  and  surplus-value. 
10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  contain  1,560  lbs.,  or  £78  worth  of  surplus-value;  like¬ 
wise  one  lb.,  or  one  shilling's  worth  of  yarn,  contains  2.496  ounces,  or  1.872 
pence  worth,  of  surplus-value. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


43 


1 


ties  no  longer  perform  the  function  of  commodities,  of  articles 
for  sale.  Their  value  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist  who 
bought  them;  they  represent  the  value  of  his  productive  capi¬ 
tal  P-  And  in  the  function  of  P,  productive  consumption,  they 
are  transformed  into  a  kind  of  commodity  differing  materially 
from  the  means  of  production,  into  yarn,  in  which  their  value 
is  not  only  preserved  but  increased,  from  £422  to  £500.  By 
means  of  this  real  metamorphosis,  the  commodities  taken  from 
the  market  in  the  first  stage,  M— C,  are  replaced  by  commodities 
of  different  substance  and  value,  which  now  must  perform  the 
function  of  commodities,  must  be  transformed  into  money  and 
sold.  The  process  of  production  therefore  appears  to  be  only  an 
interruption  of  the  process  of  circulation  of  capital-value,  of 
which  up  to  that  point  only  the  first  phase,  M  — C,  has  been  passed 
through.  It  passes  through  the  second  and  concluding  phase, 
C— M,  after  C  has  been  altered  in  substance  and  value.  But  so 
far  as  capital-value,  considered  by  itself,  is  concerned,  it  has 
merely  suffered  an  alteration  of  its  use-form  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction.  It  existed  in  the  form  of  £422  worth  of  L  and  MP,  while 
now  it  exists  in  the  form  of  £422  worth,  or  8,440  lbs.  of  yarn. 
If  we  therefore  consider  merely  the  two  circulation  phases  of 
capital-value,  apart  from  its  surplus-value,  we  find  that  it  passes 
through  1)  M— C  and  2)  C— M,  in  which  the  second  C  has  a  dif¬ 
ferent  use-form  but  the  same  value  as  the  first  C.  Hence  it  passes 
through  M— C— M,  a  form  of  circulation  which,  because  the  com¬ 
modity  here  changes  place  twice  and  in  the  opposite  direction — 
transformation  from  money  into  commodities  and  from  commodi¬ 
ties  into  money— necessitates  the  return  of  the  value  advanced  in 
the  form  of  money  to  its  money-form  — its  reconversion  into 
money. 

The  same  circulation  act  C'— M'  that  constitutes  the  second 
and  concluding  metamorphosis,  a  return  to  the  money-form, 
for  the  capital-value  advanced  in  money,  represents  for  the  sur¬ 
plus-value— borne  along  by  the  commodity-capital  and  simul¬ 
taneously  realised  by  its  change  into  the  money-form  — its  first 
metamorphosis,  its  transformation  from  the  commodity-  to  the 
money-form,  C— M,  its  first  circulation  phase. 

We  have,  then,  two  kinds  of  observations  to  make  here.  First, 
the  ultimate  reconversion  of  capital-value  into  its  original 
money-form  is  a  function  of  commodity-capital.  Secondly,  this 
function  includes  the  first  transformation  of  surplus-value  from 
*ts  original  commodity-form  to  its  money-form.  The  money-form, 
then,  plays  a  double  role  here.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  the 


44 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


form  to  which  a  value  originally  advanced  in  money  returns, 
hence  a  return  to  that  form  of  value  which  opened  the  process. 
On  the  other  hand  it  is  the  first  converted  form  of  a  value  which 
originally  enters  the  circulation  in  commodity-form.  If  the  com¬ 
modities  composing  the  commodity-capital  are  sold  at  their 
values,  as  we  assume,  then  C  plus  c  is  transformed  into  M  plus 
m,  its  equivalent.  The  realised  commodity-capital  now  exists 
in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist  in  this  form:  M  plus  m  (£422  plus 
£78=£500).  Capital-value  and  surplus-value  are  now  present 
in  the  form  of  money,  the  form  of  the  universal  equivalent. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  process  capital-value  has  therefore 
resumed  the  form  in  which  it  entered  it,  and  as  money-capital 
can  now  open  and  go  through  a  new  process.  Just  because  the  ini¬ 
tial  and  final  forms  of  this  process  are  those  of  money-capital, 
M,  we  call  this  form  of  the  circulation  process  the  circuit  of 
money-capital.  It  is  not  the  form  but  merely  the  magnitude  of 
the  advanced  value  that  is  changed  at  the  close. 

M  plus  m  is  nothing  but  a  sum  of  money  of  a  definite  magni¬ 
tude,  in  this  case  £500.  But  as  a  result  of  the  circulation  of  cap¬ 
ital,  as  realised  commodity-capital,  this  sum  of  money  contains 
the  capital-value  and  the  surplus-value.  And  these  values  are 
now  no  longer  inseparably  united  as  they  were  in  the  yarn;  they 
now  lie  side  by  side.  Their  sale  has  given  both  of  them  an 
independent  money-form;  au/250  of  this  money  represent  the 
capital-value  of  £422  and  S*/2S0  constitute  the  surplus-value  of  £78. 
This  separation,  effected  by  the  realisation  of  the  commodity- 
capital,  has  not  only  the  formal  content  to  which  we  shall  refer 
presently.  It  becomes  important  in  the  process  of  the  repro¬ 
duction  of  capital,  depending  on  whether  m  is  entirely  or  par¬ 
tially  or  not  at  all  lumped  together  with  M,  i.e.,  depending  on 
whether  or  not  it  continues  to  function  as  a  component  part  of 
the  advanced  capital-value.  Both  m  and  M  may  pass  through 
quite  different  processes  of  circulation. 

In  M'  capital  has  returned  to  its  original  form  M,  to  its 
money-form,  a  form  however  in  which  it  is  materialised  as 
capital. 

There  is  in  the  first  place  a  difference  of  quantity.  It  was  M, 
£422.  It  is  now  M',  £500,  and  this  difference  is  expressed  by 
M  ...  M',  the  quantitatively  different  extremes  of  the  circuit, 
whose  movement  is  indicated  only  by  the  three  dots.  M'>M, 
and  M' — M  =s,  the  surplus-value.  But  as  a  result  of  this  circular 
movement  M  ...  M'  it  is  only  M'  which  exists  now;  it  is  the  prod¬ 
uct  in  which  its  process  of  formation  has  become  extinct.  M' 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


45 


now  exists  by  itself,  independently  of  the  movement  which 
brought  it  into  existence.  That  movement  is  gone;  M'  is  there  in 
its  place. 

But  M',  being  M  plus  m,  €500,  composed  of  £422  advanced 
capital  plus  an  increment  of  the  same  amounting  to  £78,  repre¬ 
sents  at  the  same  time  a  qualitative  relation,  although  this  qual¬ 
itative  relation  itself  exists  only  as  a  relation  between  the  parts 
of  one  and  the  same  sum,  hence  as  a  quantitative  relation.  M, 
the  advanced  capital,  which  is  now  once  more  present  in  its 
original  form  (£422),  exists  as  realised  capital.  It  has  not  only  pre¬ 
served  itself  but  also  realised  itself  as  capital  by  being  distin¬ 
guished  as  such  from  m  (£78),  to  which  it  stands  in  the  same 
relation  as  to  an  increase  of  its  own,  to  a  fruit  of  its  own,  to  an 
increment  to  which  it  has  given  birth  itself.  It  has  been  realised 
as  capital  because  it  has  been  realised  as  a  value  which  has  creat¬ 
ed  value.  M'  exists  as  a  capital-relation.  M  no  longer  appears 
as  mere  money,  but  expressly  plays  the  part  of  money-capital, 
expressed  as  a  self-expanded  value,  hence  possessing  the  prop¬ 
erty  of  self-expansion,  of  hatching  a  higher  value  than  it  it¬ 
self  has.  M  became  capital  by  virtue  of  its  relation  to  the  other 
part  of  M',  which  it  has  brought  about,  which  has  been  effected 
by  it  as  the  cause,  which  is  the  consequence  of  it  as  the  ground. 
Thus  M'  appears  as  a  sum  of  values  differentiated  within  itself, 
functionally  (conceptually)  distinguished  within  itself,  expressing 
the  capital-relation. 

But  this  is  expressed  only  as  a  result,  without  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  the  process  of  which  it  is  the  result. 

Parts  of  value  as  such  are  not  qualitatively  different  from 
one  another,  except  in  so  far  as  they  appear  as  values  of  different 
articles,  of  concrete  things,  hence  in  various  use-forms  and  there¬ 
fore  as  values  of  different  commodities — a  difference  which  does 
not  originate  with  them  themselves  as  mere  parts  of  value.  In 
money  all  differences  between  commodities  are  extinguished, 
because  it  is  the  equivalent  form  common  to  all  of  them.  A  sum 
of  money  in  the  amount  of  £500  consists  solely  of  uniform  ele¬ 
ments  of  £1  each.  Since  the  intermediate  links  of  its  origin 
are  obliterated  in  the  simple  existence  of  this  sum  of  money 
and  every  trace  has  been  lost  of  the  specific  difference  between 
the  different  component  parts  of  capital  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  there  exists  now  only  the  distinction  between  the  con¬ 
ceptual  form  of  a  principal  equal  to  £422,  the  capital  advanced, 
and  an  excess  value  of  £78.  Let  M'  be  equal  to,  say,  £110,  of 
which  100  may  be  equal  to  M,  the  principal,  and  10  equal  to  s, 


46 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


the  surplus-value.  There  is  an  absolute  homogeneity,  an  absence 
of  conceptual  distinctions,  between  the  two  constituent  parts 
of  the  sum  of  £110.  Any  £10  of  this  sum  always  constitute  1/]1 
of  the  total  sum  of  £l  10,  whether  they  are  Vl0  of  the  advanced 
principal  of  £100  or  the  excess  of  £10  above  it.  Principal  and 
excess  sum,  capital  and  surplus-sum,  may  therefore  be  expressed 
as  fractional  parts  of  the  total  sum.  In  our  illustration, 10/n 
form  the  principal,  or  the  capital,  and  llu  the  surplus-sum.  In 
its  money-expression  realised  capital  appears  therefore  at  the 
end  of  its  process  as  an  irrational  expression  of  the  capital- 
relation. 

True,  this  applies  also  to  C'  (C  plus  c).  But  there  is  this  differ¬ 
ence:  that  C',  of  which  C  and  c  are  only  proportional  value- 
parts  of  the  same  homogeneous  mass  of  commodities,  indicates 
its  origin  P,  whose  immediate  product  it  is,  while  in  M',  a  form 
derived  directly  from  circulation,  the  direct  relation  to  P  is 
obliterated. 

The  irrational  distinction  between  the  principal  and  the  in¬ 
cremental  sum,  which  is  contained  in  M',  so  far  as  that  expresses 
the  result  of  the  movement  M  ...  M',  disappears  as  soon  as  it 
once  more  functions  actively  as  money-capital  and  is  therefore 
not  fixed  as  a  money-expression  of  expanded  industrial  capital. 
The  circuit  of  money-capital  can  never  begin  with  M'  (although 
M'  now  performs  the  function  of  M).  It  can  begin  only  with  M, 
that  is  to  say  it  can  never  begin  as  an  expression  of  the  capital- 
relation,  but  only  as  a  form  of  advance  of  capital-value.  As  soon 
as  the  £500  are  once  more  advanced  as  capital,  in  order  again 
to  produce  s,  they  constitute  a  point  of  departure,  not  one  of 
return.  Instead  of  a  capital  of  £422,  a  capital  of  £500  is  now 
advanced.  It  is  more  money  than  before,  more  capital-value, 
but  the  relation  between  its  two  constituent  parts  has  disap¬ 
peared  In  fact  a  sum  of  £500  instead  of  the  £422  might  originally 
have  served  as  capital. 

It  is  not  an  active  function  of  money-capital  to  appear  as 
M';  to  appear  as  M'  is  rather  a  function  of  C'.  Even  in  the  simple 
circulation  of  commodities,  first  in  C,  —  M,  secondly  in  M— C2, 
money  M  does  not  figure  actively  until  the  second  act,  M — C2. 
Its  appearance  in  the  form  of  M  is  only  the  result  of  the  first  act, 
by  virtue  of  which  it  only  then  appears  as  a  converted  form  of  C,. 
True,  the  capital-relation  contained  in  M',  the  relation  of  one 
of  its  parts  as  the  capital-value  to  the  other  as  its  value  incre¬ 
ment,  acquires  functional  importance  in  so  far  as,  with  the  con¬ 
stantly  repeated  circuit  M  ...  M',  M'  splits  into  two  circulations, 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


47 


one  of  them  a  circulation  of  capital,  the  other  of  surplus-value. 
Consequently  these  two  parts  perform  not  only  quantitatively 
but  also  qualitatively  different  functions,  M  others  than  m.  But 
considered  by  itself,  the  form  M  ■...  M'  does  not  include  what 
the  capitalist  consumes,  but  explicitly  only  the  self-expansion  and 
accumulation,  so  far  as  the  latter  expresses  itself  above  all  as  a 
periodical  augmentation  of  ever  renewed  advances  of  money- 
capital. 

Although  M',  equal  to  M  plus  m,  is  the  irrational  form  of  cap¬ 
ital,  it  is  at  the  same  time  only  money-capital  in  its  realised  form, 
in  the  form  of  money  which  has  generated  money.  But  this  is  dif¬ 
ferent  from  the  function  of  money-capital  in  the  first  stage, 

M— C<Jap.  In  this  first  stage,  M  circulates  as  money.  It  assumes 

the  functions  of  money-capital  because  only  in  its  money  state  can 
it  perform  a  money-function,  can  it  transform  itself  into  the 
elements  of  P,  into  L  and  MP,  which  stand  opposed  to  it  as  com¬ 
modities.  In  this  circulation  act  it  functions  only  as  money. 
But  as  this  act  is  the  first  stage  of  capital-value  in  process,  it  is 
simultaneously  a  function  of  money-capital,  by  virtue  of  the 
specific  use-form  of  the  commodities  L  and  MP  which  are  bought. 
M',  on  the  other  hand,  composed  of  M,  the  capital-value,  and  m, 
the  surplus-value  begotten  of  M,  stands  for  self-expanded  capital- 
value — the  purpose  and  the  outcome,  the  function  of  the 
total  circuit  of  capital.  The  fact  that  it  expresses  this  outcome 
in  the  form  of  money,  as  realised  money-capital,  does  not  derive 
from  its  being  the  money-form  of  capital,  money-capital,  but  on 
the  contrary  from  its  being  money -capital,  capital  in  the  form 
of  money,  from  capital  having  opened  the  process  in  this  form, 
from  its  having  been  advanced  in  the  money-form.  Its  reconversion 
into  the  money-form  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  function  of  commodity- 
capital  C',  not  of  money-capital.  As  for  the  difference  between 
M  and  M',  it  (m)  is  simply  the  money-form  of  c,  the  increment 
of  C.  M'  is  composed  of  M  plus  m  only  because  C'  was  com¬ 
posed  of  C  plus  c.  In  C'  therefore  this  difference  and  the  relation  of 
the  capital-value  to  the  surplus-value  generated  by  it  is  pres¬ 
ent  and  expressed  before  both  of  them  are  transformed  into 
M',  into  a  sum  of  money  in  which  both  parts  of  the  value  come 
face  to  face  with  each  other  independently  and  may,  there¬ 
fore,  be  employed  in  separate  and  distinct  functions. 

M'  is  only  the  result  of  the  realisation  of  C'.  Both  M'  and  C' 
are  merely  different  forms  of  self-expanded  capital-value,  one  of 
them  the  commodity-form,  the  other  the  money-form.  Both  of 


48 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


them  have  this  in  common:  that  they  are  self-expanded  capital- 
value.  Both  of  them  are  materialised  capital,  because  capital- 
value  as  such  exists  here  together  with  the  surplus-value,  the 
fruit  obtained  through  it  and  differing  from  it,  although  this 
relation  is  expressed  only  in  the  irrational  form  of  the  relation 
between  two  parts  of  a  sum  of  money  or  of  a  commodity-value. 
But  as  expressions  of  capital  in  relation  and  contradistinction 
to  the  surplus-value  produced  by  it,  hence  as  expressions  of 
self-expanded  value,  M'  and  C'  are  the  same  and  express  the  same 
thing,  only  in  different  forms.  They  do  not  differ  as  money-capi¬ 
tal  and  commodity-capital  but  as  money  and  commodities.  In  so 
far  as  they  represent  self-expanded  value,  capital  acting  as  capi¬ 
tal,  they  only  express  the  result  of  the  functioning  of  productive 
capital,  the  only  function  in  which  capital-value  generates  value. 
What  they  have  in  common  is  that  both  of  them,  money-capital 
as  well  as  commodity-capital,  are  modes  of  existence  of  capital. 
The  one  is  capital  in  money-form,  the  other  in  commodity-form. 
The  specific  functions  that  distinguish  them  cannot  therefore 
be  anything  else  but  differences  between  the  functions  of  money 
and  of  commodities.  Commodity-capital,  the  direct  product  of 
the  capitalist  process  of  production,  is  reminiscent  of  its  origin 
and  is  therefore  more  rational  and  less  incomprehensible  in 
form  than  money-capital,  in  which  every  trace  of  this  process 
has  vanished,  as  in  general  all  special  use-forms  of  commodities 
disappear  in  money.  It  is  there^re  only  when  M'  itself  functions 
as  commodity-capital,  when  it  is  the  direct  product  of  a  produc¬ 
tive  process  instead  of  being  the  converted  form  of  this  product, 
that  it  loses  its  bizarre  form,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  production  of 
the  money  material  itself.  In  the  production  of  gold  for  instance 
the  formula  would  be  M — C<^p  ...  P  ...  M'  (M  plus  m),  where 
M'  would  figure  as  a  commodity  product,  because  P  furnishes 
more  gold  than  was  advanced  for  the  elements  of  production  of 
the  gold  in  the  first  M,  the  money-capital.  In  this  case  the  irra¬ 
tional  nature  of  the  expression  M  ...  M'  (M  plus  m)  disappears. 
Here  a  part  of  a  sum  of  money  appears  as  the  mother  of  another 
part  of  the  same  sum  of  money. 

IV.  THE  CIRCUIT  AS  A  WHOLE 

We  have  seen  that  the  process  of  circulation  is  interrupted 
at  the  end  of  its  first  phase,  M — C<^p,  by  P,  in  which  the  com¬ 
modities  L  and  MP  bought  in  the  market  are  consumed  as  the 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


49 


material  and  value  components  of  productive  capital.  The  prod¬ 
uct  of  this  consumption  is  a  new  commodity,  C',  altered  in  re¬ 
spect  of  substance  and  value.  The  interrupted  process  of  circu¬ 
lation,  M— C,  must  be  completed  by  C— M.  But  the  bearer  of  this 
second  and  concluding  phase  of  circulation  is  C',  a  commodity 
different  in  substance  and  value  from  the  original  C.  The  circula¬ 
tion  series  therefore  appears  as  1)  M— C,;  2)  Cj— M',  where  in 
the  second  phase  of  the  first  commodity,  C1,  another  commodity 
of  greater  value  and  different  use-form,  Cj,  is  substituted  during 
the  interruption  caused  by  the  functioning  of  P,  the  production 
of  C'  from  the  elements  of  C,  the  forms  of  existence  of  productive 
capital  P.  However,  the  first  form  of  appearance  in  which  capi¬ 
tal  faced  us  (Buch  I,  Kap.  IV,  1),*  viz.,  M— C— M'  (extended: 
1)  M— Ci ;  2)  Ci — M')  shows  the  same  commodity  twice.  Both 
times  it  is  the  same  commodity  into  which  money  is  transformed 
in  the  first  phase  and  reconverted  into  more  money  in  the  second 
phase.  In  spite  of  this  essential  difference,  both  circulations 
share  this  much:  that  in  their  first  phase  money  is  transformed 
into  commodities,  and  in  the  second  commodities  into  money, 
that  the  money  spent  in  the  first  phase  returns  in  the  second.  On 
the  one  hand  both  have  in  common  this  reflux  of  the  money  to 
its  starting-point,  on  the  other  hand  also  the  excess  of  the  return¬ 
ing  money  over  the  money  advanced.  To  that  extent  the  formula 
M — C  ...  C' — M'  is  contained  in  the  general  formula  M— C — M'. 

It  follows  furthermore  that  each  time  equally  great  quantities 
of  simultaneously  existing  values  face  and  replace  each  other 
in  the  two  metamorphoses  M — C  and  C' — M'  belonging  in  circu¬ 
lation.  The  change  of  value  pertains  exclusively  to  the  meta¬ 
morphosis  P,  the  process  of  production,  which  thus  appears  as 
a  real  metamorphosis  of  capital,  as  compared  with  the  merely 
formal  metamorphosis  of  circulation. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  total  movement,  M — C  ...  P  ...  C' — M', 
or,  M— CcJ^p  ...  P  ...  C'(C+c)— M'(M-f m),  its  more  expanded 
form.  Capital  here  appears  as  a  value  which  goes  through  a  series 
of  interconnected,  interdependent  transformations,  a  series  of 
metamorphoses  which  form  just  as  many  phases,  or  stages,  of 
the  process  as  a  whole.  Two  of  these  phases  belong  in  the  sphere 
of  circulation,  one  of  them  in  that  of  production.  In  each  one 
of  these  phases  capital-value  has  a  different  form  for  which  there 
is  a  correspondingly  different,  special  function.  Within  this 


English  edition:  Ch.  IV. — Ed. 


50 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


movement  the  advanced  value  does  not  only  preserve  itself  but 
grows,  increases  in  magnitude.  Finally,  in  the  concluding  stage, 
it  returns  to  the  same  form  which  it  had  at  the  beginning  of  the 
process  as  a  whole.  This  process  as  a  whole  constitutes  therefore 
the  process  of  moving  in  circuits. 

The  two  forms  assumed  by  capital-value  at  the  various  stages 
of  its  circulation  are  those  of  money-capital  and  commodity- 
capital.  The  form  pertaining  to  the  stage  of  production  is  that 
of  productive  capital.  The  capital  which  assumes  these  forms 
in  the  course  of  its  total  circuit  and  then  discards  them  and  in 
eaoh  of  them  performs  the  function  corresponding  to  the  par¬ 
ticular  form,  is  industrial  capital,  industrial  here  in  the  sense 
that  it  comprises  every  branch  of  industry  run  on  a  capitalist 
basis. 

Money-capital,  commodity-capital,  and  productive  capital  do 
not  therefore  designate  independent  kinds  of  capital  whose  func¬ 
tions  form  the  content  of  likewise  independent  branches  of 
industry  separated  from  one  another.  They  denote  here  only 
special  functional  forms  of  industrial  capital,  which  assumes 
all  three  of  them  one  after  the  other. 

Capital  describes  its  circuit  normally  only  so  long  as  its  var¬ 
ious  phases  pass  uninterruptedly  into  one  another.  If  capital 
stops  short  in  its  first  phase  M — C,  money-capital  assumes  the 
rigid  form  of  a  hoard;  if  it  stops  in  the  phase  of  production,  the 
means  of  production  lie  without  functioning  on  the  one  side, 
while  labour-power  remains  unemployed  on  the  other;  and  if 
capital  is  stopped  short  in  its  last  phase  C'— M',  piles  of  unsold 
commodities  accumulate  and  clog  the  flow  of  circulation. 

However,  it  is  in  the  nature  of  things  that  the  circuit  itself 
necessitates  the  fixation  of  capital  for  certain  lengths  of  time  in 
its  various  phases.  In  each  of  its  phases  industrial  capital  is 
tied  up  with  a  definite  form:  money-capital,  productive  capital, 
commodity-capital.  It  does  not  acquire  the  form  in  which  it  may 
enter  a  new  transformation  phase  until  it  has  performed  the 
function  corresponding  to  each  particular  form.  To  make  this 
plain,  we  have  assumed  in  our  illustration  that  the  capital-value 
of  the  quantity  of  commodities  created  at  the  stage  of  produc¬ 
tion  is  equal  to  the  total  sum  of  the  value  originally  advanced  in 
the  form  of  money;  or,  in  other  words,  that  tho  entire  capital- 
value  advanced  in  tho  form  of  money  passes  on  in  bulk  from 
one  stage  to  the  next.  But  we  have  seen  (Buch  I,  Kap.  VI)*  that 


English  edition:  Ch.  VI 11. — lid. 


M^’tr  uTl^-^V>  ‘i’^'S^uL  _ *wK— -.a.*"4*- 

•*--*- ^JCyg^-  ^  ** ~"wv‘  *^t^i^~ 

^fr»  >■>..  .  T  > C-S^'W-  >^-Uj,tx,  w»— «Mk  “-•*■ *ra*^ 

•U .Hwy -^WSEftwU*  .WU.fcAUAS*- ^ 

<-L  -  -  £I'AwVi'Mt1 *>A"-**.  ^ - 

wau«,^ Y^*4  £a£<.—«— **-1^  .*•»>>-«•*  •— >• — 


-7.tr 


MikkVU^ 

U,-no-, 


aCMmlle  °f  8  Pa8e  °f  the  ““OUscript  of  Cap/,,,/  by  Karl  M 

( Heduced )  *  Kar^  ^arx,  Voi.  I], 


THE  CIRCUIT  OP  MONEY-CAPITAL 


53 


a  part  of  the  constant  capital,  the  labour  instruments  proper 
(e.g.,  machinery),  continually  serve  anew,  with  more  or  less 
numerous  repetitions  of  the  same  processes  of  production,  hence 
transfer  their  values  piecemeal  to  the  products.  It  will  be  seen 
later  to  what  extent  this  circumstance  modifies  the  circular 
movement  of  capital.  For  the  present  the  following  suffices:  In 
our  illustration  the  value  of  the  productive  capital  amounting 
to  £422  contained  only  the  average  wear  and  tear  of  factory 
buildings,  machinery,  etc.,  that  is  to  say  only  that  part  of  value 
which  they  transferred  to  the  yarn  in  the  transformation  of 
10,600  lbs.  of  cotton  into  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  which  represented 
the  product  of  one  week’s  spinning  of  60  hours.  In  the  means  of 
production,  into  which  the  advanced  constant  capital  of  £372  was 
transformed,  the  instruments  of  labour,  buildings,  machinery, 
etc.,  figured  as  if  they  had  only  been  rented  in  the  market  at 
a  weekly  rate.  But  this  does  not  change  the  gist  of  the  matter 
in  any  way.  We  have  but  to  multiply  the  quantity  of  yarn  pro¬ 
duced  in  ope  week,  i.e.,  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  by  the  number  of 
weeks  contained  in  a  certain  number  of  years,  in  order  to  transfer 
to  the  yarn  the  entire  value  of  the  instruments  of  labour  bought 
and  consumed  during  this  period.  It  is  then  plain  that  the 
advanced  money-capital  must  first  be  transformed  into  these 
instruments,  hence  must  have  gone  through  the  first  phase  M — C 
before  it  can  function  as  productive  capital  P.  And  it  is  likewise 
plain  in  our  illustration  that  the  capital-value  of  £422,  embodied 
in  the  yarn  during  the  process  of  production,  cannot  become 
a  part  of  the  value  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  and  enter  the  circu¬ 
lation  phase  C'— M'  until  it  is  ready.  It  cannot  be  sold  until 
it  has  been  spun. 

In  the  general  formula  the  product  of  P  is  regarded  as  a  ma¬ 
terial  thing  different  from  the  elements  of  the  productive  capi¬ 
tal,  as  an  object  existing  apart  from  the  process  of  production 
and  having  a  use-form  different  from  that  of  the  elements  of  pro¬ 
duction.  This  is  always  the  case  when  the  result  of  the  productive 
process  assumes  the  form  of  a  thing,  even  when  a  part  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  re-enters  the  resumed  production  as  one  of  its  elements. 
Grain  for  instance  serves  as  seed  for  its  own  production,  but 
the  product  consists  only  of  grain  and  hence  has  a  shape  different 
from  those  of  related  elements  such  as  labour-power,  implements, 
fertiliser.  But  there  are  certain  independent  branches  of  industry 
in  which  the  product  of  the  productive  process  is  not  a  new  ma¬ 
terial  product,  is  not  a  commodity.  Among  these  only  the  com¬ 
munications  industry,  whether  engaged  in  transportation  proper, 


54 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


of  goods  and  passengers,  or  in  the  mere  transmission  of  commu¬ 
nications,  letters,  telegrams,  etc.,  is  economically  important. 

A.  Ctuprov*  says  on  this  score:  “The  manufacturer  may  first 
produce  articles  and  then  look  for  consumers”  [his  product, 
thrust  out  of  the  process  of  production  when  finished,  passes  into 
circulation  as  a  commodity  separated  from  it].  “Production 
and  consumption  thus  appear  as  two  acts  separated  in  space  and 
time.  In  the  transportation  industry,  which  does  not  create  any 
new  products  but  merely  transfers  men  and  things,  these  two 
acts  coincide;  its  services”  [change  of  place  ]  “are  consumed  the 
moment  they  are  produced.  For  this  reason  the  area  within  which 
railways  can  sell  their  services  extends  at  best  50  versts  (53  kilo¬ 
metres)  on  either  side  of  their  tracks.  ” 

The  result,  whether  men  or  goods  are  transported,  is  a  change 
in  their  whereabouts.  Yarn,  for  instance,  may  now  be  in  India 
instead  of  in  England,  where  it  was  produced. 

However,  what  the  transportation  industry  sells  is  change 
of  location.  The  useful  effect  is  inseparably  connected  with  the 
process  of  transportation,  i.e.,  the  productive  process  of  the 
transport  industry.  Men  and  goods  travel  together  with  the  means 
of  transportation,  and  this  travelling,  this  locomotion,  consti¬ 
tutes  the  process  of  production  effected  by  these  means.  The  useful 
effect  can  be  consumed  only  during  this  process  of  production. 
It  does  not  exist  as  a  utility  different  from  this  process,  a  use- 
thing  which  does  not  function  as  an  article  of  commerce,  does 
not  circulate  as  a  commodity,  until  after  it  has  been  produced. 
But  the  exchange-value  of  this  useful  effect  is  determined,  like 
that  of  any  other  commodity,  by  the  value  of  the  elements  of 
production  (labour-power  and  means  of  production)  consumed 
in  it  plus  the  surplus-value  created  by  the  surplus-labour  of 
the  labourers  employed  in  transportation.  This  useful  effect 
also  entertains  the  very  same  relations  to  consumption  that  other 
commodities  do.  If  it  is  consumed  individually  its  value  disap¬ 
pears  during  its  consumption;  if  it  is  consumed  productively  so 
as  to  constitute  by  itself  a  stage  in  the  production  of  the  commod¬ 
ities  being  transported,  its  value  is  transferred  as  an  additional 
value  to  the  commodity  itself.  The  formula  for  the  transport  in¬ 
dustry  would  therefore  be  M — C<JjP  ...  P — M',  since  it  is  the 
process  of  production  itself  that  is  paid  for  and  consumed,  not  a 
product  separate  and  distinct  from  it.  Hence  this  formula  has 

6  A.  MynpoB:  tTKenesHOAopowHoe  xo3hhctbo»  (A.  Chuprov,  Railroad¬ 
ing),  Moscow,  1875,  pp.  69  and  70. 


*» 


*>**<.,«  ■  f-aJL-AJ&r/i^i.  jl,  K/.jfon  .' 

/(»-»  AS &*A 

/^■■»  /oX/  ^  ^Jftry  /7 

»'<*7-/pSJ,/*~  A  '  f>'*~'  •*—  ~P~^ 
u — •  '*  ■ 

Z/^^/UkUy^^ - -V-^V 


"77* 


>JLU> 


y(t3%2.....y><r^V^4 

%£l£££2?z£2z 

ZL~  vyi,  .  <*r,*-*~M.s, 

4***  ». 


r  ^ - >'A&*y',+th 

^W«  Jir^+tt+jlff,  /  »c!^^ 


•*>  *** 


Facsimile  of  a  page  of  the  manuscript  of  Capital,  Vol.  II, 
edited  and  copied  by  Frederick  Engels. 

( Reduced ) 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


57 


almost  the  same  form  as  that  of  the  production  of  precious  metals, 
the  only  difference  being  that  in  this  case  M'  represents  the  con¬ 
verted  form  of  the  useful  effect  created  during  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  and  not  the  bodily  form  of  the  gold  or  silver  produced 
in  this  process  and  extruded  from  it. 

Industrial  capital  is  the  only  mode  of  existence  of  capital  in 
which  not  only  the  appropriation  of  surplus-value,  or  surplus- 
product,  but  simultaneously  its  creation  is  a  function  of  capital. 
Therefore  with  it  the  capitalist  character  of  production  is  a  ne¬ 
cessity.  Its  existence  implies  the  class  antagonism  between  capi¬ 
talists  and  wage-labourers.  To  the  extent  that  it  seizes  control  of 
social  production,  the  technique  and  social  organisation  of  the 
labour-process  are  revolutionised  and  with  them  the  economieo- 
historical  type  of  society.  The  other  kinds  of  capital,  which  ap¬ 
peared  before  industrial  capital  amid  conditions  of  social  produc¬ 
tion  that  have  receded  into  the  past  or  are  now  succumbing,  are 
not  only  subordinated  to  it  and  the  mechanism  of  their  functions 
altered  in  conformity  with  it,  but  move  solely  with  it  as  their 
basis,  hence  live  and  die,  stand  and  fall  with  this  basis.  Money- 
capital  and  commodity-capital,  so  far  as  they  function  as  vehicles 
of  particular  branches  of  business,  side  by  side  with  industrial 
capital,  are  nothing  but  modes  of  existence  of  the  different  func¬ 
tional  forms  now  assumed,  now  discarded  by  industrial  capital, 
in  the  sphere  of  circulation— modes  which,  due  to  social  division 
of  labour,  have  attained  independent  existence  and  been  devel¬ 
oped  one-sidedly. 

The  circuit  M  ...  M'  on  the  one  hand  intermingles  with  the 
general  circulation  of  commodities,  proceeds  from  it  and  flows 
back  into  it,  is  a  part  of  it.  On  the  other  hand  it  forms  an  inde¬ 
pendent  movement  of  the  capital-value  for  the  individual  capi¬ 
talist,  a  movement  of  its  own  which  takes  place  partly  within 
the  general  circulation  of  commodities,  partly  outside  of  it,  but 
which  always  preserves  its  independent  character.  First,  because 
its  two  phases  that  take  place  in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  M — C 
and  C'— M',  being  phases  of  the  movement  of  capital,  have  func¬ 
tionally  definite  characters.  In  M— C  C  is  materially  determined 
as  labour-power  and  means  of  production;  in  C' — M'  the  capital- 
value  is  realised  plus  the  surplus-value.  Secondly,  because  P, 
the  process  of  production,  embraces  productive  consumption. 
Thirdly,  because  the  return  of  the  money  to  its  starting-point 
makes  of  the  movement  M  ...  M'  a  circuit  complete  in  itself. 

Every  individual  capital  is  therefore,  on  the  one  hand,  in 
its  two  circulation-halves  M— C  and  C'— M',  an  agent  of  the 


58 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


general  circulation  of  commodities,  in  which  it  either  functions 
or  lies  concatenated  as  money  or  as  a  commodity,  thus  forming 
a  link  in  the  general  chain  of  metamorphoses  taking  place  in  the 
world  of  commodities.  On  the  other  hand  it  describes  within 
the  general  circulation  its  own  independent  circuit  in  which  the 
sphere  of  production  forms  a  transitional  stage  and  in  which  this 
capital  returns  to  its  starting-point  in  the  same  form  in  which  it 
left  that  point.  Within  its  own  circuit,  which  includes  its  real 
metamorphosis  in  the  process  of  production,  it  changes  at  the 
same  time  the  magnitude  of  its  value.  It  returns  not  simply  as 
money-value,  but  as  augmented,  increased  money-value. 

Let  us  finally  consider  M — C  ...  P  ...  C' — M'  as  a  special  form 
of  the  circular  course  of  capital,  alongside  the  other  forms  which 
we  shall  analyse  later.  We  shall  find  that  it  is  distinguished 
by  the  following  features: 

1.  It  appears  as  the  circuit  of  money-capital ,  because  industrial 
capital  in  its  money-form,  as  money-capital,  forms  the  starting- 
point  and  the  point  of  return  of  its  total  process.  The  formula 
itself  expresses  the  fact  that  the  money  is  not  expended  here  as 
money  but  is  merely  advanced,  hence  is  merely  the  money-form 
of  capital,  money-capital.  It  expresses  furthermore  that  exchange- 
value,  not  use-value,  is  the  determining  aim  of  this  movement. 
Just  because  the  money-form  of  value  is  the  independent,  tan¬ 
gible  form  in  which  value  appears,  the  form  of  circulation 
M  ...  M',  the  initial  and  terminal  points  of  which  are  real  money, 
expresses  most  graphically  the  compelling  motive  of  capitalist 
production— money-making.  The  process  of  production  appears 
merely  as  an  unavoidable  intermediate  link,  as  a  necessary  evil 
for  the  sake  of  money-making.  All  nations  with  a  capitalist 
mode  of  production  are  therefore  seized  periodically  by  a  fever¬ 
ish  attempt  to  make  money  without  the  intervention  of  the 
process  of  production. 

2.  The  stage  of  production,  the  function  of  P,  represents  in 
this  circuit  an  interruption  between  the  two  phases  of  circulation 
M— C  ...  C' — M',  which  in  its  turn  represents  only  the  interme¬ 
diate  link  in  the  simple  circulation  M — C— M'.  The  process  of 
production  appears  in  the  form  of  a  circuit-describing  process, 
formally  and  explicitly  as  that  which  it  is  in  the  capitalist  mode 
of  production,  as  a  mere  means  of  expanding  the  advanced  value, 
hence  enrichment  as  such  as  the  purpose  of  production. 

3.  Since  the  series  of  phases  is  opened  by  M  — C,  the  second 
link  of  the  circulation  is  C' — M'.  In  other  words,  the  starting- 
point  is  M,  the  money-capital  that  is  to  be  self-expanded;  the 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


59 


terminal  point  is  M',  the  self-expanded  money-capital  M  plus 
m,  in  which  M  figures  as  realised  capital  along  with  its  offspring 
m.  This  distinguishes  the  circuit  of  M  from  that  of  the  two 
other  circuits  P  and  C',  and  does  so  in  two  ways.  On  the  one 
hand  by  the  money-form  of  the  two  extremes.  And  money  is 
the  independent,  tangible  form  of  existence  of  value,  the  value 
of  the  product  in  its  independent  value-form,  in  which  every  trace 
of  the  use-value  of  the  commodities  has  been  extinguished.  On  the 
other  hand  the  form  P  ...  P  does  not  necessarily  become  P  ...  P' 
(P  plus  p),  and  in  the  form  C'  ...  C'  no  difference  whatever 
in  value  is  visible  between  the  two  extremes.  It  is,  therefore, 
characteristic  of  the  formula  M— M'  that  for  one  thing  capital- 
value  is  its  starting-point  and  expanded  capital-value  its  point 
of  return,  so  that  the  advance  of  capital-value  appears  as  the 
means  and  expanded  capital-value  as  the  end  of  the  entire  opera¬ 
tion;  and  that  for  another  thing  this  relation  is  expressed  in 
money-form,  in  the  independent  value-form,  hence  money-capital  as 
money  begetting  money.  The  generation  of  surplus-value  by 
value  is  not  only  expressed  as  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  the  process, 
but  explicitly  in  the  form  of  glittering  money. 

4.  Since  M',  the  money-capital  realised  as  a  result  of  C'— M', 
the  complementary  and  concluding  phase  of  M— C,  has  absolute¬ 
ly  the  same  form  as  that  in  which  it  began  its  first  circuit,  it 
can,  as  soon  as  it  emerges  from  the  latter,  begin  the  same  circuit 
over  again  as  an  increased  (accumulated)  money-capital: 
M'=M+m.  And  at  least  it  is  not  expressed  in  the  form  M  ...  M' 
that, in  the  repetition  of  the  circuit, the  circulation  of  m  separates 
from  that  of  M.  Considered  in  its  one-time  form,  formally,  the 
circuit  of  money-capital  expresses  therefore  simply  the  process 
of  self-expansion  and  of  accumulation.  Consumption  is  expressed 

in  it  only  as  productive  consumption,  by  M— C<^p,  and  it  is 

only  this  consumption  that  is  included  in  this  circuit  of  individ¬ 
ual  capital.  M  —  L  is  L— M  or  C— M  on  the  part  of  the  labour¬ 
er.  It  is  therefore  the  first  phase  of  circulation  which  brings 
about  his  individual  consumption,  thus:  L — M  — C  (means  of 
subsistence).  The  second  phase,  M — C,  no  longer  falls  within 
the  circuit  of  individual  capital,  but  is  initiated  and  premised 
by  it,  since  the  labourer  must  above  all  live,  hence  maintain 
himself  by  individual  consumption,  in  order  to  be  always  in 
the  market  a3  material  that  the  capitalist  can  exploit.  But 
this  consumption  itself  is  here  only  assumed  as  a  condition 
for  the  productive  consumption  of  labour-power  by  capital, 


60  the  metamorphoses  of  capital  and  their  circuits 

hence  only  to  the  extent  that  the  worker  maintains  and  repro¬ 
duces  himself  as  labour-power  by  means  of  his  individual  con¬ 
sumption.  However  the  MP,  the  commodities  proper  which  enter 
into  the  circuit  of  capital,  are  nutriment  for  the  productive 
consumption  only.  The  act  L— M  promotes  the  individual  con¬ 
sumption  of  the  labourer,  the  transformation  of  the  means  of 
subsistence  into  his  flesh  and  blood.  True,  the  capitalist  must 
also  be  there,  must  also  live  and  consume  to  be  able  to  perform 
the  function  of  a  capitalist.  To  this  end,  he  has,  indeed,  to 
consume  only  as  much  as  the  labourer,  and  that  is  all  this  form 
of  the  circulation  process  presupposes.  But  even  this  is  not 
formally  expressed,  since  the  formula  concludes  with  M',  i.e., 
a  result  which  can  at  once  resume  its  function  of  money-capital, 
now  augmented. 

C'— M'  directly  contains  the  sale  of  C';  but  C'— M',  a  sale 
on  the  one  part,  is  M — C,  a  purchase,  on  the  other  part,  and  in 
the  last  analysis  a  commodity  is  bought  only  for  its  use-value,  in 
order  to  enter  (leaving  intermediate  sales  out  of  consideration) 
the  process  of  consumption,  whether  this  is  individual  or  produc¬ 
tive,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  article  bought.  But  this  con¬ 
sumption  does  not  enter  the  circuit  of  individual  capital,  the 
product  of  which  is  C'.  This  product  is  eliminated  from  the  cir¬ 
cuit  precisely  because  it  is  a  commodity  for  sale.  C'  is  expressly 
designed  for  consumption  by  others  than  the  producer.  Thus 
we  find  that  certain  exponents  of  the  mercantile  system  (which  is 
based  on  the  formula  M— C  ...  P  ...  C' — M')  deliver  lengthy 
sermons  to  the  effect  that  the  individual  capitalist  should  consume 
only  as  much  as  the  labourer,  that  the  nation  of  capitalists  should 
leave  the  consumption  of  their  own  commodities,  and  the  con¬ 
sumption  process  in  general,  to  the  other,  less  intelligent  nations 
but  that  they  themselves  should  make  productive  consumption 
their  life’s  task.  These  sermons  frequently  remind  one  in  form 
and  content  of  analogous  ascetic  expostulations  of  the  fathers 
of  the  church. 


Capital’s  movement  in  circuits  is  therefore  the  unity  of  cir¬ 
culation  and  production;  it  includes  both.  Since  the  two  phases 
M — C  and  C' — M'  are  acts  of  circulation,  the  circulation 
of  capital  is  a  part  of  the  general  circulation  of  commodities.  But 
as  functionally  they  are  deGnite  sections,  stages  in  capital’s  cir¬ 
cuit,  which  pertains  not  only  to  the  sphere  of  circulation  but  also 
to  that  of  production,  capital  goes  through  its  own  circuit  in 


THB  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


01 


the  general  circulation  of  commodities.  The  general  circulation 
of  commodities  serves  capital  in  the  first  stage  as  a  means  of 
assuming  that  shape  in  which  it  can  perform  the  function  of 
productive  capital;  in  the  second  stage  it  serves  to  strip  off  the 
commodity-function  in  which  capital  cannot  renew  its  circuit;  at 
the  same  time  it  opens  up  to  capital  the  possibility  of  separating 
its  own  circuit  from  the  circulation  of  the  surplus-value  that 
accrued  to  it. 

The  circuit  made  by  money-capital  is  therefore  the  most  one¬ 
sided,  and  thus  the  most  striking  and  typical  form  in  which  the 
circuit  of  industrial  capital  appears,  the  capital  whose  aim  and 
compelling  motive — the  self-expansion  of  value,  the  making  of 
money,  and  accumulation  — is  thus  conspicuously  revealed  (buy¬ 
ing  to  sell  dearer).  Owing  to  the  fact  that  the  first  phase  is  M— C 
it  is  also  revealed  that  the  constituents  of  productive  capital 
originate  in  the  commodity-market,  and  in  general  that  the  capi¬ 
talist  process  of  production  depends  on  circulation,  on  commerce. 
The  circuit  of  money-capital  is  not  merely  the  production  of  com¬ 
modities;  it  is  itself  possible  only  through  circulation  and  presup¬ 
poses  it.  This  is  plain,  if  only  from  the  fact  that  the  form  M  belong¬ 
ing  in  circulation  appears  as  the  first  and  pure  form  of  advanced 
capital-value,  which  is  not  the  case  in  the  other  two  circuit 
forms. 

The  money-capital  circuit  always  remains  the  general  expres¬ 
sion  of  industrial  capital,  because  it  always  includes  the  self¬ 
expansion  of  the  advanced  value.  In  P  ...  P,  the  money-expression 
of  capital  appears  only  as  the  price  of  the  elements  of  production, 
hence  only  as  a  value  expressed  in  money  of  account  and  is  fixed 
in  this  form  in  book-keeping. 

M  ...  M'  becomes  a  special  form  of  the  industrial  capital  cir¬ 
cuit  when  newly  active  capital  is  first  advanced  in  the  form  of 
money  and  then  withdrawn  in  the  same  form,  either  in  pass¬ 
ing  from  one  branch  of  industry  to  another  or  in  retiring  industrial 
capital  from  a  business.  This  includes  the  functioning  as  capital 
of  the  surplus-value  first  advanced  in  the  form  of  money,  and  be¬ 
comes  most  evident  when  surplus-value  functions  in  some  other 
business  than  the  one  in  which  it  originated.  M  ...  M'  may  be  the 
first  circuit  of  a  certain  capital;  it  may  be  tbe  last;  it  may  be  regard¬ 
ed  as  the  form  of  the  total  social  capital;  it  is  the  form  of  capital 
that  is  newly  invested,  either  as  capital  recently  accumulated 
in  the  form  of  money,  or  as  some  old  capital  which  is  entirely 
transformed  into  money  for  the  purpose  of  transfer  from  one 
branch  of  industry  to  another. 


62  the  metamorphoses  of  capital  and  their  circuits 

Being  a  form  always  contained  in  all  circuits,  money-capital 
performs  this  circuit  precisely  for  that  part  of  capital  which  pro¬ 
duces  surplus-value,  viz.,  variable  capital.  The  normal  form  of 
advancing  wages  is  payment  in  money;  this  process  must  be  re¬ 
newed  in  comparatively  short  intervals,  because  the  labourer 
lives  from  hand  to  mouth.  The  capitalist  must  therefore  always 
confront  the  labourer  as  money-capitalist,  and  his  capital  as 
money-capital.  There  can  be  no  direct  or  indirect  balancing  of 
accounts  in  this  case  such  as  we  find  in  the  purchase  of  means 
of  production  and  in  the  sale  of  produced  commodities  (so  that 
the  greater  part  of  the  money-capital  actually  figures  only  in  the 
form  of  commodities,  money  only  in  the  form  of  money  of  account 
and  finally  in  cash  only  in  the  balancing  of  accounts).  On  the 
other  hand,  a  part  of  the  surplus-value  arising  out  of  variable 
capital  is  spent  by  the  capitalist  for  his  individual  consumption, 
which  pertains  to  the  retail  trade  and,  however  circuitous  the  route 
may  be,  this  part  is  always  spent  in  cash,  in  the  money-form  of 
surplus-value.  It  does  not  matter  how  large  or  small  this  part  of 
surplus-value  is.  Variable  capital  always  appears  anew  as 
money-capital  invested  in  wages  (M  — L)  and  m  as  surplus-value 
spent  to  defray  the  cost  of  the  individual  consumption  of  the 
capitalist.  Hence  M,  advanced  variable  capital-value,  and  m,  its 
increment,  are  necessarily  held  in  the  form  of  money  to  be  spent 
in  this  form. 

The  formula  M— C  ...  P  ...  C'  —  M',  with  its  result  M'=M-f-m, 
is  deceptive  in  form,  is  illusory  in  character,  owing  to  the  existence 
of  the  advanced  and  self-expanded  value  in  its  equivalent  form, 
money.  The  emphasis  is  not  on  the  self-expansion  of  value  but 
on  the  money-form  of  this  process,  on  the  fact  that  more  value 
in  money-form  is  finally  drawn  out  of  the  circulation  than  was 
originally  advanced  to  it;  hence  on  the  multiplication  of  the 
mass  of  gold  and  silver  belonging  to  the  capitalist.  The  so-called 
monetary  system  is  merely  an  expression  of  the  irrational  form 
M— C — M',  a  movement  which  takes  place  exclusively  in  circula¬ 
tion  and  therefore  can  explain  the  two  acts  M— C  and  C — M'  in 
no  other  way  than  as  a  sale  of  C  above  its  value  in  the  second 
act  and  therefore  as  C  drawing  more  money  out  of  the  circula¬ 
tion  than  was  put  into  it  by  its  purchase.  Oh  the  other  hand 
M — C  ...  P  ...  C'—  M',  fixed  as  the  exclusive  form,  constitutes 
the  basis  of  the  more  highly  developed  mercantile  system,  in 
which  not  only  the  circulation  of  commodities  but  also  their 
production  appears  as  a  necessary  element. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 


63 


The  illusory  character  of  M — C  ...  P  ...  C' — M'  and  the  corre¬ 
spondingly  illusory  interpretation  exists  whenever  this  form  is 
fixed  as  occurring  once,  not  as  fluent  and  ever  renewed;  hence 
whenever  this  form  is  considered  not  as  one  of  the  forms  of  the 
circuit  but  as  its  exclusive  form.  But  it  itself  points  toward  other 
forms. 

In  the  first  place  this  entire  circuit  is  premised  on  the  capital¬ 
ist  character  of  the  process  of  production,  and  therefore  consid¬ 
ers  this  process  together  with  the  specific  social  conditions 
brought  about  by  it  as  the  basis.  M — G=M— C<^p;  but  M — L 
assumes  the  existence  of  the  wage-labourer,  and  hence  the  means 
of  production  as  part  of  productive  capital.  It  assumes  therefore 
that  the  process  of  labour  and  self-expansion,  the  process  of 
production,  is  a  function  of  capital. 

In  the  second  place,  if  M  ...  M'  is  repeated,  the  return  to  the 
money-form  appears  just  as  evanescent  as  the  money-form  in  the 
firgt  stage.  M — C  disappears  to  make  room  for  P.  The  constantly 
recurrent  advance  in  the  form  of  money  and  its  constant  return 
in  the  form  of  money  appear  merely  as  fleeting  moments  in  the 
circuit. 

In  the  third  place 


M-C  ...  P  ...  C'— M.M.— C...  P...  C'—M'.M— C...  P  ...  etc. 


Beginning  with  the  second  repetition  of  the  circuit,  the  cir¬ 
cuit  P...  C' — M'.  M — C  ...  P  appears  before  the  second  circuit 
of  M  is  completed,  and  all  subsequent  circuits  may  thus  be  con¬ 
sidered  under  the  form  of  P  ...  C' — M— C  ...  P,  so  that  M— C, 
being  the  first  phase  of  the  first  circuit,  is  merely  the  passing 
preparation  for  the  constantly  repeated  circuit  of  the  productive 
capital.  And  this  indeed  is  so  in  the  case  of  industrial  capital 
invested  for  the  first  time  in  the  form  of  money-capital. 

On  the  other  hand  before  the  second  circuit  of  P  is  complet¬ 
ed,  the  first  circuit,  that  of  commodity-capital,  C'— M'.  M— C... 
P  ...  C'  (abridged  C'...  C')  has  already  been  made.  Thus  the 
first  form  already  contains  the  other  two,  and  the  money-form  thus 
disappears,  so  far  as  it  is  not  merely  an  expression  of  value  but 
an  expression  of  value  in  the  equivalent  form,  in  money. 

Finally,  if  we  consider  some  newly  invested  individual  capital 
describing  for  the  first  time  the  circuit  M— C  ...  P  ...  C'— M', 
(lien  M — C  is  the  preparatory  phase,  the  forerunner  of  the  first 


64 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


process  of  production  gone  through  by  this  individual  capital. 
This  phase  M— C  is  consequently  not  presupposed  but  rather  called 
for  or  necessitated  by  the  process  of  production.  But  this  applies 
only  to  this  individual  capital.  The  general  form  of  the  circuit 
of  industrial  capital  is  the  circuit  of  money-capital,  whenever  the 
capitalist  mode  of  production  is  taken  for  granted,  hence  in  so¬ 
cial  conditions  determined  by  capitalist  production.  Therefore 
the  capitalist  process  of  production  is  assumed  as  a  pre-condition, 
if  not  in  the  first  circuit  of  the  money-capital  of  a  newly  invested 
industrial  capital,  then  outside  of  it.  The  continuous  existence 
of  this  process  of  production  presupposes  the  constantly  renewed 
circuit  P  ...  P.  Even  in  the  first  stage,  M— C<yp,  this  premise 
plays  a  part,  for  this  assumes  on  the  one  hand  the  existence  of  the 
class  of  wage-labourers;  and  then,  on  the  other,  that  which  is  M — C, 
the  first  stage,  for  the  buyer  of  means  of  production,  is  C'— M'  for 
their  seller;  hence  C'  presupposes  commodity-capital,  and  thus 
the  commodities  themselves  as  a  result  of  capitalist  production, 
and  thereby  the  function  of  productive  capital. 


CHAPTER  II 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 

The  circuit  of  productive  capital  has  the  general  formula 
P  ...  C' — M' — C  ...  P.  It  signifies  the  periodical  renewal  of  the 
functioning  of  productive  capital,  hence  its  reproduction,  or  its 
process  of  production  as  a  process  of  reproduction  aiming  at  the 
self-expansion  of  value;  not  only  production  but  a  periodical  repro¬ 
duction  of  surplus-value;  the  function  of  industrial  capital  in  its 
productive  form,  and  this  function  performed  not  once  but 
periodically  repeated,  so  that  the  renewal  is  determined  by  the 
starting-point.  A  portion  of  C'  may  (in  certain  cases,  in  various 
branches  of  investment  of  industrial  capital)  re-enter  directly 
as  means  of  production  into  the  same  labour-process  out  of  which 
it  came  in  the  shape  of  a  commodity.  This  merely  saves  the  transfor¬ 
mation  of  the  value  of  this  portion  into  real  money  or  token- 
money  or  else  the  commodity  finds  an  independent  expression  only 
as  money  of  account.  This  part  of  value  does  not  enter  into  the  circu¬ 
lation.  Thus  values  enter  into  the  process  of  production  which 
do  not  enter  into  the  process  of  circulation.  The  same  is  true 
of  that  part  of  C'  which  is  consumed  by  the  capitalist  in  kind 
as  part  of  the  surplus-product.  But  this  is  insignificant  for 
capitalist  production.  It  deserves  consideration,  if  at  all,  only 
in  agriculture. 

Two  things  are  at  once  strikingly  apparent  in  this  form. 

For  one  thing,  while  in  the  first  form,  M  ...  M',  the  process 
of  production,  the  function  of  P,  interrupts  the  circulation  of 
money-capital  and  acts  only  as  a  mediator  between  its  two  phases 
M — G  and  C'— M',  here  the  entire  circulation  process  of  industrial 
capital,  its  entire  movement  within  the  phase  of  circulation, 
constitutes  only  an  interruption  and  consequently  only  the  con¬ 
necting  link  between  the  productive  capital,  which  as  the  first 
extreme  opens  the  circuit,  and  that  which  closes  it  as  the  other 


S — 1752 


66 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


extreme  in  the  same  form,  hence  in  the  form  in  which  it  starts 
again.  Circulation  proper  appears  but  as  an  instrument  promoting 
the  periodically  renewed  reproduction,  rendered  continuous  by 
the  renewal. 

For  another  thing,  the  entire  circulation  presents  itself  in 
a  form  which  is  the  opposite  of  that  which  it  has  in  the  circuit 
of  money-capital.  There  it  was:  M— C— M  (M— C.  C— M),  apart 
from  the  determination  of  value;  here  it  is,  again  apart  from  the 
value  determination:  C— M — C  (C — M.  M— C),  i.e.,  the  form 
of  the  simple  circulation  of  commodities. 


I.  SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 

Let  us  first  consider  the  process  C'— M'— C,  which  takes  place 
in  the  sphere  of  circulation  between  the  two  extremes  P  ...  P. 

The  starting-point  of  this  circulation  is  commodity-capital: 
C'  =C+c  =P+c.  The  function  of  commodity-capital  C' — M' 
(the  realisation  of  the  capital-value  contained  in  it  equals  P, 
which  now  exists  as  the  constituent  part  C  of  C',  as  well  as  of  the 
surplus-value  contained  in  it,  which  exists  as  a  constituent  part 
of  the  same  quantity  of  commodities  and  has  the  value  c)  was 
examined  in  the  first  form  of  the  circuit.  But  there  this  function 
formed  the  second  phase  of  the  interrupted  circulation  and  the 
concluding  phase  of  the  entire  circuit.  Here  it  forms  the  second 
phase  of  the  circuit  but  the  first  phase  of  the  circulation.  The 
first  circuit  ends  with  M',  and  since  M'  as  well  as  the  original 
M  can  again  open  the  second  circuit  as  money-capital,  it  was 
not  necessary  at  first  to  see  whether  M  and  m  (surplus-value) 
contained  in  M'  continue  in  their  course  together  or  whether 
each  of  them  pursues  its  own  course.  This  would  only  have  be¬ 
come  necessary  if  we  had  followed  up  further  the  first  circuit 
in  its  renewed  course.  But  this  point  must  be  decided  in  the 
circuit  of  the  productive  capital,  because  the  determination 
of  its  very  first  circuit  depends  on  it  and  because  C'— M'  ap¬ 
pears  in  it  as  the  first  phase  of  the  circulation,  which  has  to 
be  complemented  by  M— C.  It  depends  on  this  decision  whether 
the  formula  represents  simple  reproduction  or  reproduction  on 
an  extended  scale.  The  character  of  the  circuit  changes  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  decision  made. 

Let  us,  then,  consider  first  the  simple  reproduction  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital,  assuming  that,  as  in  the  first  chapter,  condi¬ 
tions  remain  constant  and  that  commodities  are  bought  and 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


67 


sold  at  their  values.  On  this  assumption  the  entire  surplus-value 
enters  into  the  individual  consumption  of  the  capitalist.  As  soon 
as  the  transformation  of  the  commodity-capital  C'  into  money 
has  taken  place,  that  part  of  the  money  which  represents  the 
capital-value  continues  to  circulate  in  the  circuit  of  industrial 
capital;  the  other  part,  which  is  surplus-value  changed  into 
money,  enters  into  the  general  circulation  of  commodities,  con¬ 
stitutes  a  circulation  of  money  emanating  from  the  capitalist 
but  taking  place  outside  of  the  circulation  of  his  individual 
capital. 

In  our  illustration  we  had  a  .commodity-capital  C'  of  10,000 
lbs.  of  yarn,  valued  at  £500;  £422  of  this  represent  the  value 
of  the  productive  capitaL  and  continue,  as  the  money-form  of 
8,440  lbs.  of  yarn,  the  capital  circulation  begun  by  C',  while 
the  surplus-value  of  £78,  the  money-form  of  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn, 
the  excess  of  the  commodity-product,  leaves  this  circulation 
and  describes  a  separate  course  within  the  general  circulation 
of  commodities. 


-C<MP 


m — c  represents  a  series  of  purchases  by  means  of  money 
which  the  capitalist  spends  either  for  commodities  proper  or 
for  personal  services  to  his  cherished  self  or  family.  These  pur¬ 
chases  are  made  piecemeal  at  various  times.  The  money  therefore 
exists  temporarily  in  the  form  of  a  supply,  or  hoard,  destined 
for  current  consumption,  since  money  whose  circulation  has 
been  interrupted  assumes  the  form  of  a  hoard.  Its  function  as 
a  medium  of  circulation,  which  includes  its  transient  form  of 
a  hoard,  does  not  enter  the  circulation  of  capital  in  its  money- 
form  M.  This  money  is  not  advanced  but  spent. 

We  have  assumed  that  the  total  advanced  capital  always 
passes  wholly  from  one  of  its  phases  to  the  other;  and  so  here 
too  we  assume  that  the  commodities  produced  by  P  represent 
the  total  value  of  the  productive  capital  P,  or  £422  plus  £78 
of  surplus-value  created  in  the  process  of  production.  In  our 
illustration,  which  deals  with  a  discrete  commodity,  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  exists  in  the  form  of  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn;  if  computed 
on  the  basis  of  one  pound  of  yarn,  it  would  exist  in  the  form 
of  2.496  ounces  of  yarn.  But  if  the  commodity  were  for  instance 
a  machine  valued  at  £500  and  having  the  same  value-compo- 


5> 


68 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


sition,  one  part  of  the  value  of  this  machine,  £78,  would  be  sur¬ 
plus-value,  but  these  £78  would  exist  only  in  the  machine  as 
a  whole.  This  machine  cannot  be  divided  into  capital-value  and 
surplus-value  without  breaking  it  to  pieces  and  thus  destroying 
its  value  together  with  its  use-value.  For  this  reason  the  two 
value-components  can  be  represented  only  ideally  as  compo¬ 
nents  of  the  commodity,  not  as  independent  elements  of  the 
commodity  C',  like  any  pound  of  yarn,  which  represents  a  separa¬ 
ble  independent  element  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  commodity.  In  the 
first  case  the  aggregate  commodity,  the  commodity-capital, 
the  machine,  must  be  sold  in  its  entirety  before  m  can  enter 
upon  its  separate  circulation.  Oh  the  other  hand  when  the  capi¬ 
talist  has  sold  8,440  lbs.,  the  sale  of  the  remaining  1,560  lbs. 
would  represent  a  wholly  separate  circulation  of  the  surplus- 
value  in  the  form  of  c  (1,560  lbs.  of  yarn) — m  (£78) — c  (articles 
of  consumption).  But  the  elements  of  value  of  each  individual 
portion  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  the  product,  can  be  repre¬ 
sented  by  parts  of  the  product  as  well  as  by  the  total  product. 
Just  as  the  latter,  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  can  be  divided  into  the 
value  of  the  constant  capital  (c),  7,440  lbs  of  yarn  worth  £372, 
variable  capital-value  (v)  of  1,000  lbs:  of  yarn  worth  £50,  and  sur¬ 
plus-value  (s)  of  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £78,  so  every 
pound  of  yarn  may  be  divided  into  c,  equal  to  11.904  ounces  worth 
8.928  d.,  v  equal  to  1.600  ounces  of-  yarn  worth  1.200  d.,  and 
s  equal  to  2.496  ounces  of  yarn  worth  1.872  d  The  capitalist 
might  also  sell  various  portions  of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  succes¬ 
sively  and  successively  consume  the  successive  portions  of  the 
surplus-value  elements  contained  in  them,  thus  realising,  also 
successively,  the  sum  of  c  plus  v.  But  in  the  final  analysis  this 
operation  likewise  premises  the  sale  of  the  entire  lot  of  10,000 
lbs.,  that  therefore  the  value  of  c  and  v  will  be  replaced  by  the 
sale  of  8,440  lbs.  (Buch  I,  Kap.  VII,  2.)* 

However  that  may  be,  by  means  of  C' — M'  both  the  capital- 
value  and  surplus-value  contained  in  C'  acquire  a  separable 
existence,  the  existence  of  different  sums  of  money.  In  both 
cases  M  and  m  are  really  a  converted  form  of  the  value  which 
originally  in  C'  had  only  a  peculiar,  an  ideal  expression  as  the 
price  of  the  commodity. 

c — m — c  represents  the  simple  circulation  of  commodities, 
the  first  phase  of  which,  c — m,  is  included  in  the  circulation  of 
commodity-capital,  C' — M',  i.e.,  included  in  the  circuit  of  cap- 


English  edition:  Ch.  IX,  2. — Ed. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


69 


ital;  its  complementary  phase  m — c  falls,  on  the  contrary, 
outside  of  this  circuit,  being  a  separate  act  in  the  general  cir¬ 
culation  of  commodities.  The  circulation  of  C  and  c,  of  capital- 
value  and  surplus-value,  splits  after  the  transformation  of  C' 
into  M'.  Hence  it  follows: 

First,  while  the  commodity-capital  is  realised  by  C' — M'  = 
_C'  —  (M  +  m),  the  movement  of  capital-value  and  surplus-value, 
which  in  C'—  M'  is  still  united  and  carried  on  by  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  of  commodities,  becomes  separable,  both  of  them  henceforth 
possessing  independent  forms  as  separate  sums  of  money. 

Secondly,  if  this  separation  takes  place,  m  being  spent  as 
the  revenue  of  the  capitalist,  while  M  as  a  functional  form  of 
capital-value  continues  its  course  determined  by  the  circuit,  the 
first  act,  C'—  M',  in  connection  with  the  subsequent  acts,  M— C 
and  m— c,  may  be  represented  as  the  two  different  circulations 
C— M— C  and  c— m— c;  and  both  of  these  series,  so  far  as  their 
general  form  is  concerned,  belong  in  the  usual  circulation  of 
commodities. 

By  the  way,  in  the  case  of  continuous,  indivisible  commodi¬ 
ties,  it  is  a  matter  of  practice  to  isolate  the  value  constituents 
ideally.  For  instance  in  the  London  building-business,  which 
is  carried  on  mainly  on  credit,  the  building  contractor  receives 
advances  in  accordance  with  the  stage  of  construction  reached. 
None  of  these  stages  is  a  house,  but  only  a  really  existing  con¬ 
stituent  part  of  an  inchoate  future  house;  hence,  in  spite  of  its 
reality,  it  is  but  an  ideal  fraction  of  the  entire  house,  but  real 
enough  to  serve  as  security  for  an  additional  advance.  (See  on 
this  point  Chapter  XII  below.*) 

Thirdly,  if  the  movement  of  capital-value  and  surplus-value, 
which  still  proceeds  unitedly  in  C  and  M,  is  separated  only  in 
part  (a  portion  of  the  surplus-value  not  being  spent  as  revenue) 
or  not  at  all,  a  change  takes  place  in  the  capital-value  itself 
within  its  circuit,  before  it  is  completed.  In  our  illustration 
the  value  of  the  productive  capital  was  equal  to  £422.  If  that 
capital  continues  M  —  C,  as,  say,  £480  or  £500,  then  it  strides 
through  the  latter  stages  of  its  circuit  with  an  increase  of  £58 
or  £78  over  its  initial  value.  This  may  also  go  hand  in  hand 
with  a  change  in  the  composition  of  its  value. 

C' — M',  the  second  stage  of  the  circulation  and  the  final 
stage  of  circuit  I  (M  ...  M'),  is  the  second  stage  in  our  circuit  and 
the  first  in  the  circulation  of  commodities.  So  far  as  the  circula- 


*  See  pp.  237-38  of  this  book. — Ed. 


70  the  metamorphoses  op  capital  and  their  circuits 

tion  is  concerned,  it  must  be  complemented  by  M'— C'.  But  not 
only  has  C'— M'  the  process  of  self-expansion  already  behind 
it  (in  this  case  the  function  of  P,  the  first  stage),  but  its  result, 
the  commodity  C'-,  has  already  been  realised.  The  process  of  the 
self-expansion  of  capital  and  the  realisation  of  the  commodities 
representing  the  expanded  capital-value  are  therefore  completed 
in  C'-M'. 

And  so  we  have  premised  simple  reproduction,  i.e.,  that 
m— c  separates  entirely  from  M— C.  Since  both  circulations, 
c— m— c  as  well  as  C— M— C,  belong  in  the  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities,  so  far  as  their  general  form  is  concerned  (and  for  this 
reason  do  not  show  any  value  differences  in  their  extremes),  it 
is  easy  to  conceive  the  process  of  capitalist  production,  after 
the  manner  of  vulgar  economy,  as  a  mere  production  of  commod¬ 
ities,  of  use-values  designed  for  consumption  of  some  sort,  which 
the  capitalist  produces  for  no  other  purpose  than  that  of  getting 
in  their  place  commodities  with  different  use-values,  or  of  ex¬ 
changing  them  for  such,  as  vulgar  economy  erroneously  states. 

C'  acts  from  the  very  outset  as  commodity-capital,  and  the 
purpose  of  the  entire  process,  enrichment  (the  production  of 
surplus-value),  does  not  by  any  means  exclude  increasing  con¬ 
sumption  on  the  part  of  the  capitalist  as  his  surplus-value  (and 
hence  his  capital)  increases;  on  the  contrary,  it  emphatically 
includes  it. 

Indeed,  in  the  circulation  of  the  revenue  of  the  capitalist, 
the  produced  commodity  c  (or  the  fraction  of  the  produced  com¬ 
modity  C'  ideally  corresponding  to  it)  serves  only  to  transform 
it,  first  into  money,  and  from  money  into  a  number  of  other 
commodities  serving  private  consumption.  But  we  must  not, 
at  this  point,  overlook  the  trifling  circumstance  that  c  is  com¬ 
modity-value  which  did  not  cost  the  capitalist  anything,  an 
incarnation  of  surplus-labour,  for  which  reason  it  originally 
stepped  on  the  stage  as  a  component  part  of  commodity-capi¬ 
tal  C'.  This  c  is,  by  the  very  nature  of  its-  existence,  bound  to 
the  circuit  of  capital-value  in  process,  and  if  this  circuit  begins 
to  stagnate  or  is  otherwise  disturbed,  not  only  is  the  consump¬ 
tion  of  c  restricted  or  entirely  arrested,  but  also  the  disposal 
of  that  series  of  commodities  which  serve  to  replace  c.  The  same 
is  true  when  C' — M'  ends  in  failure,  or  only  a  part  of  C'  can 
be  sold. 

We  have  seen  that  c — m— c,  representing  the  circulation  of 
the  revenue  of  the  capitalist,  enters  into  the  circulation  of  cap¬ 
ital  only  so  long  as  c  is  a  part  of  the  value  of  C',  of  capital  in 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


71 


its  functional  form  of  commodity-capital;  but,  as  soon  as  it 
acquires  independence  through  m— c,  hence  throughout  the  form 
c— m — c,  the  circulation  of  that  revenue  does  not  enter  into  the 
movement  of  the  capital  advanced  by  the  capitalist,  although 
it  stems  from  it.  This  circulation  is  connected  with  the  move¬ 
ment  of  advanced  capital  inasmuch  as  the  existence  of  capital 
presupposes  the  existence  of  the  capitalist,  and  his  existence  is 
conditioned  on  his  consuming  surplus-value. 

Within  the  general  circulation  C',  for  example  yarn,  functions 
only  as  a  commodity;  but  as  an  element  in  the  circulation  of 
capital  it  performs  the  function  of  commodity-capital ,  a  form 
which  capital-value  alternately  assumes  and  discards.  After  the 
sale  of  the  yarn  to  a  merchant,  it  is  extruded  out  of  the  circular 
movement  of  the  capital  whose  product  it  is,  but  nevertheless, 
as  a  commodity,  it  moves  always  in  the  sphere  of  the  general 
circulation.  The  circulation  of  one  and  the  same  mass  of  commod¬ 
ities  continues,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  has  ceased  to  be  a 
phase  in  the  independent  circuit  of  the  spinner’s  capital.  Hence 
the  real  definitive  metamorphosis  of  the  mass  of  commodities 
thrown  into  circulation  by  the  capitalist,  C— M,  their  final  exit 
into  consumption  may  be  completely  separated  in  time  and 
space  from  that  metamorphosis  in  which  this  mass  of  commodi¬ 
ties  functions  as  his  commodity-capital.  The  same  metamorphosis 
which  has  been  accomplished  in  the  circulation  of  capital  still 
remains  to  be  accomplished  in  the  sphere  of  the  general  circu¬ 
lation. 

This  state  of  things  is  not  changed  a  bit  if  this  yarn  enters 
the  circuit  of  some  other  industrial  capital.  The  general  circu¬ 
lation  comprises  as  much  the  intertwining  of  the  circuits  of  the 
various  independent  fractions  of  social  capital,  i.e.,  the  total¬ 
ity  of  the  individual  capitals,  -as  the  circulation  of  those  values 
which  are  not  thrown  on  the  market  as  capital  but  enter  into 
individual  consumption. 

The  relation  between  a  circuit  of  capital  forming  part  of  a 
general  circulation  and  a  circuit  forming  links  in  an  independ¬ 
ent  circuit  is  shown  further  on  when  we  examine  the  circulation 
of  M  ,  which  is  equal  to  M  plus  m.  M  as  money-capital  continues 
capital’s  circuit;  m,  being  spent  as  revenue  (m— c),  enters  into 
the  general  circulation,  but  comes  flying  out  of  the  circuit  of  cap¬ 
ital.  Only  that  part  enters  the  latter  circuit  which  performs 
the  function  of  additional  money-capital.  In  c — m — c  money 
serves  only  as  coin;  the  object  of  this  circulation  is  the  individ¬ 
ual  consumption  of  the  capitalist.  It  is  typical  of  the  idiocy 


72  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

of  vulgar  economy  that  it  gives  out  this  circulation,  which  does 
not  enter  into  the  circuit  of  capital— the  circulation  of  that  part 
of  the  value  produced  which  is  consumed  as  revenue — as  the 
characteristic  circuit  of  capital. 

In  the  second  phase,  M— C,  the  capital-value  M,  which  is 
equal  to  P  (the  value  of  the  productive  capital  that  at  this  point 
opens  the  circuit  of  industrial  capital),  is  again  present,  deliv¬ 
ered  of  its  surplus-value,  therefore  having  the  same  magnitude 
of  value  as  it  had  in  the  first  stage  of  the  circuit  of  money-capital 
M — C.  In  spite  of  the  difference  in  place  the  function  of  the 
money-capital  into  which  the  commodity-capital  has  now  been 
transformed  is  the  same:  its  transformation  into  MP  and  L, 
into  means  of  production  and  labour-power. 

In  the  functioning  of  commodity-capital  C' — M',  the  capi¬ 
tal-value,  simultaneously  with  c— m,  has  consequently  gone 
through  the  phase  C— M  and  enters  now  into  the  complemen¬ 
tary  phase  M— C<^  Its  complete  circulation  is  therefore 
C-M-C<„p. 

First:  Money-capital  M  appeared  in  Form  I  (circuit  M  ...  M') 
as  the  original  form  in  which  capital-value  is  advanced;  it  ap¬ 
pears  here  from  the  outset  as  a  part  of  that  sum  of  money  into 
which  commodity-capital  transformed  itself  in  the  first  circu¬ 
lation  phase  C'—  M\  therefore  from  the  outset  as  the  transfor¬ 
mation  of  P,  the  productive  capital,  through  the  medium  of 
the  sale  of  commodities,  into  the  money-form.  Money-capital 
exists  here  from  the  outset  as  that  form  of  capital-value  which 
is  neither  its  original  nor  its  final  one,  since  the  phase  M — C, 
which  concludes  the  phase  C— M,  can  only  be  performed  by  again 
discarding  the  money-form.  Therefore  that  part  of  M— C  which 
is  at  the  same  time  M  — L  appears  now  no  longer  as  a  mere  ad¬ 
vance  of  money  by  the  purchase  of  labour-power,  but  as  an  ad¬ 
vance  by  means  of  which  the  same  1,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  valued  at 
£50,  which  form  a  part  of  the  commodity-value  created  by 
labour-power,  are  advanced  to  labour-power  in  the  form  of 
money.  The  money  advanced  here  to  the  labourer  is  only  a 
converted  equivalent  form  of  a  part  of  the  commodity-value  pro¬ 
duced  by  himself.  And  for  that  reason  if  no  other  the  act  M — C, 
so  far  as  it  means  M  — L,  is  by  no  means  simply  a  replacement 
of  a  commodity  in  the  form  of  money  by  a  commodity  in  the 
use-form,  but  it  includes  other  elements  which  are  independent 
of  the  general  commodity  circulation  as  such. 

M'  appears  as  a  converted  form  of  C',  which  is  itself  a  prod- 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


73 


uct  of  a  previous  function  of  P,  the  process  of  production.  The 
entire  sum  of  money  M'  is  therefore  a  money-expression  of  past 
labour.  In  our  illustration,  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £500  are 
the  product  of  the  spinning  process.  Of  this  quantity,  7,440  lbs. 
of  yarn  are  equal  to  the  advanced  constant  capital  c  worth  £372; 
1,000  lbs.  of  yarn  are  equal  to  the  advanced  variable  capital 
v  worth  £50;  and  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn  represent  the  surplus-value 
s  worth  £78.  If  of  M'  only  the  original  capital  of  £422  is  again 
advanced,  other  conditions  remaining  the  same,  then  the  labour¬ 
er  is  advanced  the  following  week,  in  M  —  L,  only  a  part  of  the 
10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  produced  in  the  given  week  (the  money-value 
of  1,000  lbs.  of  yarn).  As  a  result  of  C— M,  money  is  always  the 
expression  of  past  labour.  If  the  complementary  act  M— C  takes 
place  at  once  in  the  commodity-market,  i.e.,  M  is  given  in  re¬ 
turn  for  commodities  existing  in  the  market,  this  is  again  a  trans¬ 
formation  of  past  labour,  from  one  form  (money)  into  another 
form  (commodities).  But  M— C  differs  in  the  matter  of  time  from 
C — M.  They  may  exceptionally  take  place  at  the  same  time, 
for  instance  when  the  capitalist  who  performs  M— C  and  the 
capitalist  to  whom  this  act  means  C— M  ship  their  commodities 
to  each  other  at  the  same  time  and  M  is  used  only  to  square  the 
balance.  The  difference  in  time  between  the  performance  of  C— M 
and  M— C  may  be  more  or  less  considerable.  Although  M,  as 
the  result  of  C— M,  represents  past  labour,  it  may,  in  the  act 
M-— C,  represent  the  converted  form  of  commodities  which  are 
not  as  yet  in  the  market,  but  will  be  thrown  upon  it  in  the  future, 
since  M— C  need  not  take  place  until  C  has  been  produced  anew. 
M  may  likewise  stand  for  commodities  which  are  produced  si¬ 
multaneously  with  the  C  whose  money-expression  it  is.  For 
instance  in  the  exchange  M — G  (purchase  of  means  of  production) 
coal  may  be  bought  before  it  has  been  mined.  In  so  far  as  m  figures 
as  an  accumulation  of  money,  is  not  spent  as  revenue,  it  may 
stand  for  cotton  which  will  not  be  produced  until  the  following 
year.  The  same  holds  good  on  spending  the  revenue  of  the  capi¬ 
talist,  m — c.  It  also  applies  to  wages,  to  L  equal  to  £50.  This 
money  is  not  only  the  money-form  of  the  past  labour  of  the  labour¬ 
ers  but  at  the  same  time  a  draft  on  simultaneous  or  future  la¬ 
bour  which  is  just  being  realised  or  should  be  realised  in  the 
future.  The  labourer  may  buy  with  his  wages  a  coat  which  will 
not  be  made  until  the  following  week.  This  applies  especially 
to  the  vast  number  of  necessary  means  of  subsistence  which 
must  be  consumed  almost  as  soon  as  they  have  been  produced  to 
prevent  spoilage.  Thus  the  labourer  receives,  in  the  money  which 


74 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


is  paid  to  him  as  his  wages,  the  converted  form  of  his  own  future 
labour  or  that  of  other  labourers.  By  giving  the  labourer  a  part 
of  his  past  labour,  the  capitalist  gives  him  a  draft  on  his  own 
future  labour.  It  is  the  labourer’s  own  simultaneous  or  future 
labour  that  constitutes  the  not  yet  existing  supply  out  of  which 
he  will  be  paid  for  his  past  labour.  In  this  case  the  idea  of  hoard¬ 
ing  disappears  altogether.* 

Secondly  in  the  circulation  C— M— C<^p  the  same  money 
changes  place  twice;  the  capitalist  first  receives  it  as  a  seller 
and  passes  it  on  as  a  buyer;  the  transformation  of  commodities 
into  the  money-form  serves  only  for  the  purpose  of  retransform¬ 
ing  it  from  the  money-form  into  the  commodity-form;  the  money- 
form  of  capital,  its  existence  as  money-capital,  is  therefore  only 
a  transient  phase  in  this  movement;  or,  so  far  as  the  movement  is 
fluent,  money-capital  appears  only  as  a  medium  of  circulation 
when  it  serves  as  a  means  of  purchase;  it  acts  as  a  paying  medium 
proper  when  capitalists  buy  from  one  another  and  therefore  only 
have  to  square  accounts. 

Thirdly,  the  function  of  money-capital,  whether  it  is  a  mere 
circulating  medium  or  a  paying  medium,  effects  only  the  replace¬ 
ment  of  C  by  L  and  MP,  i.e.,  the  replacement  of  the  yarn,  the 
commodity  which  represents  the  result  of  the  productive  capital 
(after  deducting  the  surplus-value  to  be  used  as  revenue),  by 
its  elements  of  production,  in  other  words,  the  retransformation 
of  capital-value  from  its  form  as  a  commodity  into  the  elements 
that  build  this  commodity.  In  the  last  analysis,  the  function 
of  money-capital  promotes  only  the  retransformation  of  commod¬ 
ity-capital  into  productive  capital. 

In  order  that  the  circuit  may  be  completed  normally,  C'  must 
be  sold  at  its  value  and  in  its  entirety.  Furthermore,  C — M — C 
includes  not  merely  replacement  of  one  commodity  by  another, 
but  replacement  with  value-relations  remaining  the  same.  We 
assume  that  this  takes  place  here.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however, 
the  values  of  the  means  of  production  vary.  It  is  precisely  capi¬ 
talist  production  to  which  continuous  change  of  value-relations 
is  peculiar,  if  only  because  of  the  ever  changing  productivity 
of  labour  that  characterises  this  mode  of  production.  This  change 
in  the  value  of  the  elements  of  production  will  be  discussed  later 
on,**  and  we  merely  mention  it  here.  The  transformation  of  the 

*  Here  Marx  made  the  following  noto  in  the  manuscript:  “All  this, 
however,  belongs  to  the  last  part  of  Book  Two.  ” — Ed 

**  See  Section  V  of  Chapter  XV  of  this  volume. — Ed. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OP  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


75 


elements  of  production  into  commodity-products,  of  P  into  C', 
takes  place  in  the  sphere  of  production,  while  the  retransfor¬ 
mation  from  C'  into  P  occurs  in  the  sphere  of  circulation.  It 
is  brought  about  by  a  simple  metamorphosis  of  commodities, 
but  its  content  is  a  phase  in  the  process  of  reproduction,  regarded 
as  a  whole.  C— M — G,  being  a  form  of  the  circulation  of  capital, 
involves  a  functionally  determined  exchange  of  matter.  The 
transformation  C— M— G  requires  further  that  C  should  be  equal 
to  the  elements  of  production  of  the  commodity-quantum  C', 
and  that  these  elements  should  retain  their  original  value-rela¬ 
tions  to  one  another.  It  is  therefore  assumed  that  the  commodities 
are  not  only  bought  at  their  respective  values,  but  also  do  not 
undergo  any  change  of  value  during  the  circular  movement. 
Otherwise  this  process  cannot  run  normally. 

In  M  ...  M',  M  represents  the  original  form  of  the  capital-value, 
which  is  discarded  only  to  be  resumed.  In  P  ...  C'— M'— C  ...  P, 
M  represents  a  form  which  is  only  assumed  in  the  process  and 
which  is  discarded  before  this  process  is  over.  The  money-form 
appears  here  only  as  a  transient  independent  form  of  capital- 
value.  Capital  in  the  form  of  C'  is  just  as  anxious  to  assume  the 
money-form  as  it  is  to  discard  it  in  M',  after  barely  assuming 
that  garb  in  order  again  to  transform  itself  into  productive  capital. 
So  long  as  it  remains  in  the  garb  of  money,  it  does  not  function 
as  capital  and  its  value  does  not  therefore  expand.  The  capital 
lies  fallow.  M  serves  here  as  a  circulating  medium,  but  as  a  cir¬ 
culating  medium  of  capital.*  The  semblance  of  independence 
which  the  money-form  of  capital-value  possesses  in  the  Erst  form 
of  its  circuit  (the  form  of  money-capital)  disappears  in  this  sec¬ 
ond  form,  which  thus  is  a  criticism  of  Form  I  and  reduces  it 
to  merely  a  special  form.  If  the  second  metamorphosis,  M — C, 
meets  with  any  obstacles — for  instance  if  there  are  no  means  of 
production  in  the  market — the  circuit,  the  flow  of  the  process 
of  reproduction,  is  interrupted  quite  as  much  as  when  capital  is 
held  fast  in  the  form  of  commodity-capital.  But  there  is  this 
difference:  It  can  remain  longer  in  the  money-form  than  in  the 
transitory  form  of  commodities.  It  does  not  cease  to  be  money, 
if  it  does  not  perform  the  functions  of  money-capital;  but  it 
does  cease  to  be  a  commodity,  or  a  use-value  in  general,  if  it 
is  delayed  too  long  in  the  exercise  of  its  function  of  commodity- 
capital.  Furthermore,  in  its  money-form  it  is  capable  of  assuming 


*  Here  Marx  made  the  following  note  in  the  manuscript:  “Against  Tooke.  * 


76 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL.  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


another  form  in  place  of  its  original  one  of  productive  capital, 
while  it  cannot  budge  at  all  if  held  in  the  form  of  C'. 

C' — M' — C  includes  acts  of  circulation  only  for  C'  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  its  form,  acts  which  are  phases  of  its  reproduction; 
but  the  real  reproduction  of  C,  into  which  C'  transforms  itself, 
is  necessary  for  the  performance  of  C' — M'— C.  This  however 
is  conditioned  on  processes  of  reproduction  which  lie  outside 
of  the  process  of  reproduction  of  the  individual  capital  repre¬ 
sented  by  C'. 

In  Form  I  the  act  M — C<^p  prepares  only  the  first  trans¬ 
formation  of  money-capital  into  productive  capital;  in  Form  II  it 
prepares  the  retransformation  from  commodity-capital  into 
productive  capital;  that  is  to  say,  so  far  as  the  investment  of 
industrial  capital  remains  the  same,  retransformation  of  the 
commodity-capital  into  the  same  elements  of  production  as  those 
from  which  it  originated.  Consequently  here  as  well  as  in  Form  I, 
that  act  appears  as  a  preparatory  phase  of  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion,  but  as  a  return  to  it,  as  a  renewal  of  it,  hence  as  a  pre¬ 
cursor  of  the  process  of  reproduction,  hence  also  of  a  repetition 
of  the  process  of  self-expansion  of  value. 

It  must  be  noted  once  more  that  M — L  is  not  a  simple  exchange 
of  commodities  but  the  purchase  of  a  commodity,  L,  which  is  to 
serve  for  the  production  of  surplus-value,  just  as  M — MP  is  only 
a  procedure  which  is  materially  indispensable  for  the  attainment 
of  this  end. 

With  the  completion  of  M— C<^p  M  is  reconverted  into  pro¬ 
ductive  capital,  into  P,  and  the  circuit  begins  anew. 

The  expanded  form  of  P  ...  C' — M' — C  ...  P  is  therefore: 


(  M 


P...  C 


V  c  /  —  \m  /  — 


~C<MP 


The  transformation  of  money-capital  into  productive  capital 
is  the  purchase  of  commodities  for  the  production  of  commodi¬ 
ties.  Consumption  falls  within  the  circuit  of  capital  itself  only 
in  so  far  as  it  is  productive  consumption;  its  premise  is  that 
surplus-value  is  produced  by  means  of  the  commodities  so  con¬ 
sumed.  And  this  is  something  very  different  from  production  and 
even  commodity  production,  which  has  for  its  end  the  existence 
of  the  producer.  A  replacement — commodity  by  commodity — 


i 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


77 


thus  contingent  on  the  production  of  surplus-value  is  quite  a 
different  matter  from  a  bare  exchange  of  products  brought  about 
merely  by  means  of  money.  But  the  economists  take  this  matter 
as  proof  that  no  overproduction  is  possible. 

Apart  from  the  productive  consumption  of  M,  which  is  trans¬ 
formed  into  L  and  MP,  the  circuit  contains  the  first  member 
M —  L,  which  signifies,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  labourer, 
L— M,  which  equals  C—M.  In  the  labourer’s  circulation,  L— M— G, 
which  includes  his  consumption,  only  the  first  member  falls 
within  the  circuit  of  the  capital  as  a  result  of  M  — L.  The  second 
act,  M— C,  does  not  fall  within  the  circulation  of  individual 
capital,  although  it  springs  from  it.  But  the  continuous  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  working-class  is  necessary  for  the  capitalist  class, 
and  so  is  therefore  the  consumption  of  the  labourer  made  pos¬ 
sible  by  M— C. 

The  only  condition  which  the  act  C'— M'  stipulates  for  capi¬ 
tal-value  to  continue  its  circuit  and  for  surplus-value  to  be  con¬ 
sumed  by  the  capitalist  is  that  C'  shall  have  been  converted  into 
money,  shall  have  been  sold.  Of  course,  C'  is  bought  only  because 
the  article  is  a  use-value,  hence  serviceable  for  consumption  of 
any  kind,  productive  or  individual.  But  if  C'  continues  to  cir¬ 
culate  for  instance  in  the  hands  of  the  merchant  who  bought  the 
yarn,  this  at  first  does  not  in  the  least  affect  the  continuation 
of  the  circuit  of  the  individual  capital  which  produced  the  yarn 
and  sold  it  to  the  merchant.  The  entire  process  continues  and 
with  it  the  individual  consumption  of  the  capitalist  and  the 
labourer  made  necessary  by  it.  This  point  is  important  in  a 
discussion  of  crises. 

For  as  soon  as  C'  has  been  sold,  been  converted  into  money, 
it  can  be  reconverted  into  the  real  factors  of  the  labour-process, 
and  thus  of  the  reproductive  process.  Whether  C'  is  bought  by 
the  ultimate  consumer  or  by  a  merchant  for  resale  does  not  affect 
the  case.  The  quantity  of  commodities  created  in  masses  by  capi¬ 
talist  production  depends  on  the  scale  of  production  and  on  the 
need  for  constantly  expanding  this  production,  and  not  on  a  pre¬ 
destined  circle  of  supply  and  demand,  on  wants  that  have  to  be 
satisfied.  Mass  production  can  have  no  other  direct  buyer,  apart 
from  other  industrial  capitalists,  than  the  wholesaler.  Within 
certain  limits,  the  process  of  reproduction  may  take  place  on  the 
same  or  on  an  increased  scale  even  when  the  commodities  ex¬ 
pelled  from  it  did  not  really  enter  individual  or  productive 
consumption.  The  consumption  of  commodities  is  not  included 
In  the  circuit  of  the  capital  from  which  they  originated.  For 


78 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


Instance,  as  soon  as  the  yarn  is  sold  the  circuit  of  the  capital- 
value  represented  by  the  yarn  may  begin  anew,  regardless  of  what 
may  next  become  of  the  sold  yarn.  So  long  as  the  product  is  sold, 
everything  is  taking  its  regular  course  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  capitalist  producer.  The  circuit  of  the  capital-value  he  is 
identified  with  is  not  interrupted.  And  if  this  process  is  expanded 
— which  includes  increased  productive  consumption  of  the  means 
of  production — this  reproduction  of  capital  may  be  accompanied 
by  increased  individual  consumption  (hence  demand)  on  the  part 
of  the  labourers,  since  this  process  is  initiated  and  effected  by 
productive  consumption.  Thus  the  production  of  sivplus-value, 
and  with  it  the  individual  consumption  of  the  capitalist,  may 
increase,  the  entire  process  of  reproduction  may  be  in  a  flourish¬ 
ing  condition,  and  yet  a  large  part  of  the  commodities  may 
have  entered  into  consumption  only  apparently,  while  in  reality 
they  may  still  remain  unsold  in  the  hands  of  dealers,  may  in  fact 
still  be  lying  in  the  market.  Now  one  stream  of  commodities  fol¬ 
lows  another,  and  finally  it  is  discovered  that  the  previous  streams 
had  been  absorbed  only  apparently  by  consumption. The  commod¬ 
ity-capitals  compete  with  one  another  for  a  place  in  the  market. 
Late-comers,  to  sell  at  all,  sell  at  lower  prices.  The  former  streams 
have  not  yet  been  disposed  of  when  payment  for  them  falls  due. 
Their  owners  must  declare  their  insolvency  or  sell  at  any  price 
to  meet  their  obligations.  This  sale  has  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  the  actual  state  of  the  demand.  It  only  concerns 
the  demand  for  payment,  the  pressing  necessity  of  transforming 
commodities  into  money.  Then  a  crisis  breaks  out.  It  becomes 
visible  not  in  the  direct  decrease  of  consumer  demand,  the 
demand  for  individual  consumption,  but  in  the  decrease  of 
exchanges  of  capital  for  capital,  of  the  reproductive  process 
of  capital. 

If  the  commodities  MP  and  L,  into  which  M  is  transformed 
to  perform  its  function  of  money-capital,  of ‘capital-value  des¬ 
tined  to  be  retransformed  into  productive  capital — if  those  com¬ 
modities  are  to  be  bought  or  paid  for  on  different  terms,  so  that 
M — C  represents  a  series  of  successive  purchases  and  payments, 
then  a  part  of  M  performs  the  act  M — C,  while  another  part  persists 
in  the  form  of  money  and  does  not  serve  to  perform  simultaneous 
or  successive  acts  of  M — C  until  such  time  as  the  conditions  of 
this  process  itself  may  determine.  This  part  is  only  temporarily 
withheld  from  circulation,  in  order  to  go  into  action,  perform  its 
function,  in  due  time.  This  storing  of  it  is  then  in  its  turn  a  func¬ 
tion  determined  by  its  circulation  and  intended  for  circulation. 


> 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


79 


Its  existence  as  a  fund  for  purchase  and  payment,  the  suspension 
of  its  movement,  the  interrupted  state  of  its  circulation,  will 
then  constitute  a  state  in  which  money  exercises  one  of  its  func¬ 
tions  as  money-capital.  As  money-capital;  for  in  this  case  the 
money  temporarily  remaining  at  rest  is  itself  a  part  of  money- 
capital  M  (of  M'  minus  m,  equal  to  M),  of  that  portion  of  the 
value,  of  commodity-capital  which  is  equal  to  P,  to  that  value 
of  productive  capital  from  which  the  circuit  starts.  On  the  other 
hand  all  money  withdrawn  from  circulation  has  the  form  of  a 
hoard.  Money  in  the  form  of  a  hoard  therefore  becomes  here  a 
function  of  money-capital,  just  as  in  M— G  the  function  of  money 
as  a  means  of  purchase  or  payment  becomes  a  function  of  money- 
capital.  This  is  so  because  capital-value  exists  here  in  the  form 
of  money,  because  the  money  state  here  is  a  state  in  which  in¬ 
dustrial  capital  finds  itself  at  one  of  its  stages  and  which  is  pre¬ 
scribed  by  the  interconnections  within  the  circuit.  At  the  same 
time  it  is  here  proved  true  once  more  that  money-capital  within 
the  circuit  of  industrial  capital  performs  no  other  functions  than 
those  of  money  and  that  these  money-functions  assume  the  signif¬ 
icance  of  capital-functions  only  by  virtue  of  their  interconnec¬ 
tions  with  the  other  stages  of  this  circuit. 

The  representation  of  M'  as  a  relation  of  m  to  M,  as  a  capital- 
relation,  is  not  directly  a  function  of  money-capital  but  of 
commodity-capital  C',  which  in  its  turn,  as  a  relation  of  c  and  C, 
expresses  but  the  result  of  the  process  of  production,  of  the  self¬ 
expansion  of  capital-value  which  took  place  in  it. 

If  the  continuation  of  the  process  of  circulation  meets  with 
obstacles,  so  that  M  must  suspend  its  function  M— C  on  account 
of  external  circumstances,  such  as  the  conditions  of  the  market, 
etc.,  and  if  it  therefore  remains  for  a  shorter  or  longer  time  in 
its  money-form,  then  we  have  once  more  money  in  the  form  of 
a  hoard,  which  happens  also  in  simple  commodity  circulation 
whenever  the  transition  from  C — M  to  M — C  is  interrupted  by 
external  circumstances.  It  is  an  involuntary  formation  of  a  hoard. 
In  the  case  at  hand  money  has  the  form  of  fallow,  latent  money- 
capital.  But  we  will  not  discuss  this  point  any  further  for  the 
present. 

In  either  case  however  persistence  of  money-capital  in  its 
money  state  appears  as  the  result  of  interrupted  movement,  no 
matter  whether  this  is  expedient  or  inexpedient,  voluntary 
or  involuntary,  in  accordance  with  its  functions  or  contrary  to 
them. 


80 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


II.  ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION 
ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE 

Since  the  proportions  which  the  expansion  of  the  productive 
process  may  assume  are  not  arbitrary  but  prescribed  by  technol¬ 
ogy,  the  realised  surplus-value,  though  intended  for  capitalisa¬ 
tion,  frequently  can  only  by  dint  of  several  successive  circuits 
attain  such  a  size  (and  until  then  must  therefore  be  accumulated) 
as  will  suffice  for  its  effective  functioning  as  additional  capital 
or  for  entrance  into  the  circuit  of  functioning  capital-value.  Sur¬ 
plus-value  thus  congeals  into  a  hoard  and  in  this  form  constitutes 
latent  money-capital — latent  because  it  cannot  act  as  capital  so 
long  as  it  persists  in  the  money-form. 6a  The  formation  of  a  hoard 
thus  appears  here  as  a  factor  included  in  the  process  of  capitalist 
accumulation,  accompanying  it  but  nevertheless  essentially  differ¬ 
ing  from  it;  for  the  process  of  reproduction  itself  is  not  expanded 
by  the  formation  of  latent  money-capital.  On  the  contrary,  lat¬ 
ent  money-capital  is  formed  here  because  the  capitalist  producer 
cannot  directly  expand  the  scale  of  his  production.  If  he  sells 
his  surplus-product  to  a  producer  of  gold  or  silver,  who  puts 
new  gold  or  silver  into  circulation  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same 
thing,  to  a  merchant  who  imports  additional  gold  or  silver  from 
foreign  countries  for  a  part  of  the  national  surplus-product,  then 
his  latent  money-capital  forms  an  increment  of  the  national  gold 
or  silver  hoard.  In  all  other  cases,  the  £78  for  instance,  which 
were  a  circulating  medium  in  the  hands  of  the  purchaser,  assume 
only  the  form  of  a  hoard  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist.  Hence 
all  that  has  taken  place  is  a  different  distribution  of  the  national 
gold  or  silver  hoard. 

If  in  the  transactions  of  our  capitalist  the  money  serves  as 
a  means  of  payment  (the  commodities  having  to  be  paid  for  by 
the  buyer  on  longer  or  shorter  terms),  then  the  surplus-product 
intended  for  capitalisation  is  not  transformed  into  money  but 
into  creditor’s  claims,  into  titles  of  ownership  of  an  equivalent 
which  the  buyer  may  already  have  in  his  possession  or  which  he 
may  expect  to  possess.  It  does  not  enter  into  the  reproductive 
process  of  the  circuit  any  more  than  does  money  invested  in 


‘a  The  term  “latent”  is  borrowed  from  the  idea  of  latent  heat  in  physics, 
which  has  now  been  almost  replaced  by  the  theory  of  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  energy  Marx  therefore  uses  in  the  third  part  (a  later  version), 
another  term,  borrowed  from  the  idea  of  potential  energy,  viz.: 
“potential.”  or  analogous  to  the  virtual  velocities  of  D’Alembert,  “virtual 
capital.  " — F.  E. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


81 


interest-bearing  securities,  etc.,  although  it  may  enter  into 
the  circuits  of  other  individual  industrial  capitals. 

The  entire  character  of  capitalist  production  is  determined 
by  the  self-expansion  of  the  advanced  capital-value,  that  is  to 
say,  in  the  first  instance  by  the  production  of  as  much  surplus- 
value  as  possible;  in  the  second  place  however  (see  Buch  I,  Kap. 
XXII)*  by  the  production  of  capital,  hence  by  the  transforma¬ 
tion  of  surplus-value  into  capital.  Accumulation,  or  production 
on  an  extended  scale,  which  appears  as  a  means  for  constantly 
more  expanded  production  of  surplus-value— hence  for  the  enrich¬ 
ment  of  the  capitalist,  as  his  personal  aim  — and  is  comprised  in 
the  general  tendency  of  capitalist  production,  becomes  later, 
however,  as  was  shown  in  Book  I,  by  virtue  of  its  development, 
a  necessity  for  every  individual  capitalist.  The  constant  augmen¬ 
tation  of  his  capital  becomes  a  condition  of  its  preservation. 
But  we  need  not  revert  more  fully  to  what  was  previously  ex¬ 
pounded. 

We  considered  first  simple  reproduction,  assuming  that  the 
entire  surplus-value  is  spent  as  revenue.  In  reality  under  normal 
conditions  a  part  of  the  surplus-value  must  always  be  spent  as 
revenue,  and  another  part  must  be  capitalised.  And  it  is  quite 
immaterial  whether  a  certain  surplus-value  produced  in  any  par¬ 
ticular  period  is  entirely  consumed  or  entirely  capitalised.  On 
the  average— and  the  general  formula  can  represent  only  the  aver¬ 
age  movement— both  cases  occur.  But  in  order  not  to  complicate 
the  formula,  it  is  better  to  assume  that  the  entire  surplus-value 
is  accumulated.  The  formula  P  ...  C'— M'— C'<^p  ...  P'  stands 
for  productive  capital,  which  is  reproduced  on  an  enlarged  scale 
and  with  greater  value,  and  which  as  augmented  productive  capi¬ 
tal  begins  its  second  circuit,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same, 
renews  its  first  circuit.  As  soon  as  this  second  circuit  is  begun, 
we  once  more  have  P  as  the  starting-point;  only  this  P  is  a  larger 
productive  capital  than  the  first  P  was.  Hence,  if  in  the  formula 
M  ...  M'  the  second  circuit  begins  with  M',  M'  functions  as  M, 
as  an  advanced  money-capital  of  a  definite  magnitude.  It  is  a 
larger  money-capital  than  the  one  with  which  the  first  circular 
movement  was  opened,  but  all  reference  to  its  augmentation  by 
the  capitalisation  of  surplus-value  ceases  as  soon  as  it  assumes 
the  function  of  advanced  money-capital.  This  origin  is  expunged 
in  its  form  of  money-capital,  which  begins  its  circuit.  This  also 


English  edition:  Ch.  XXIV.— Ed. 


82 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


applies  to  P'  as  soon  as  It  functions  as  the  starting-point  of  a 
new  circuit. 

If  we  compare  P  ...  P'  with  M  ...  M',  or  with  the  first  circuit, 
we  find  that  they  have  not  the  same  significance  at  all.  M  ...  M', 
taken  by  itself  as  an  isolated  circuit,  expresses  only  that  M,  the 
money-capital  (or  industrial  capital  in  its  circuit  as  money-capi¬ 
tal),  is  money  generating  money,  value  generating  value,  in 
other  words,  produces  surplus-value.  But  in  the  P  circuit  the 
process  of  producing  surplus-value  is  already  completed  upon 
the  termination  of  the  first  stage,  the  process  of  production,  and 
after  going  through  the  second  stage  (the  first  stage  of  the  circu¬ 
lation),  C'— M’,  the  capital-value  plus  surplus-value  already 
exist  as  realised  money-capital,  as  M',  which  appeared  as  the  last 
extreme  in  the  first  circuit.  That  surplus-value  has  been  pro¬ 
duced  is  depicted  in  the  first-considered  formula  P  ...  P  (see  ex¬ 
panded  formula,  p.  47)*  by  c— m— c,  which,  in  its  second  stage, 
falls  outside  of  the  circulation  of  capital  and  represents  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  surplus-value  as  revenue.  In  this  form,  where  the  en¬ 
tire  movement  is  represented  by  P  ...  P,  where  consequently  there 
is  no  difference  in  value  between  the  two  extremes,  the  self-expan¬ 
sion  of  the  advanced  value,  the  production  of  surplus-value,  is 
therefore  represented  in  the  same  way  as  in  M  ...  M',  except  that 
the  act  C'— M',  which  appears  as  the  last  stage  in  M  ...  M'  and 
as  the  second  stage  of  the  circuit,  serves  as  the  first  stage  of  the 
circulation  in-  P  ...  P. 

In  P  ...  P',  P'  does  not  indicate  that  surplus-value  has  been 
produced  but  that  the  produced  surplus-value  has  been  capital¬ 
ised,  hence  that  capital  has  been  accumulated  and  that  there¬ 
fore  P',  in  contrast  to  P,  consists  of  the  original  capital-value 
plus  the  value  of  the  capital  accumulated  because  of  the  capital- 
value’s  movement. 

M',  as  the  simple  close  of  M  ...  M',  and  also  C',  as  it  appears 
within  all  these  circuits,  do  not  if  taken  by  themselves  express 
the  movement  but  its  result:  the  self-expansion  of  capital-value 
realised  in  the  form  of  commodities  or  money,  and  hence  capital- 
value  as  M  plus  m,  or  C  plus  c,  as  a  relation  of  capital-value  to 
its  surplus-value,  as  its  offspring.  They  express  this  result  as 
various  circulation  forms  of  the  self-expanded  capital-value.  But 
neither  in  the  form  of  C'  nor  of  M'  is  the  self-expansion  which 
has  taken  place  itself  a  function  of  money-capital  or  of  commodity- 
capital.  As  special,  differentiated  forms,  modes  of  existence 


*  See  p.  75  of  this  book.— Ed. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


83 


corresponding  to  special  functions  of  industrial  capital,  money- 
capital  can  perform  only  money-functions  and  commodity-capital 
only  commodity-functions,  the  difference  between  them  being 
merely  that  between  money  and  commodity.  Similarly  industrial 
capital  in  its  form  of  productive  capital  can  consist  only  of  the 
same  elements  as  those  of  any  other  labour-process  which  creates 
products:  on  the  one  hand  objective  conditions  of  labour  (means 
of  production),  on  the  other  productively  (purposively)  func¬ 
tioning  labour-power.  Just  as  industrial  capital  can  exist  in  the 
sphere  of  production  only  in  a  composition  which  meets  the 
requirements  of  the  production  process  in  general,  hence  also 
of  the  non-capitalist  production  process,  so  it  can  exist  in  the 
sphere  of  circulation  only  in  the  two  forms  corresponding  to  it, 
viz.,  that  of  a  commodity  and  of  money.  But  just  as  the  totality 
of  the  elements  of  production  announces  itself  at  the  outset  as 
productive  capital  by  the  fact  that  the  labour-power  Is  labour- 
power  that  belongs  to  others  and  that  the  capitalist  purchased  it 
from  its  proprietor,  just  as  he  purchased  his  means  of  production 
from  other  commodity-owners,  just  as  therefore  the  process  of 
production  itself  appears  as  a  productive  function  of  industrial 
capital,  so  money  and  commodities  appear  as  forms  of  circula¬ 
tion  of  the  same  industrial  capital,  hence  their  functions  appear 
as  the  functions  of  its  circulation,  which  either  introduce  the 
functions  of  productive  capital  or  emanate  from  them.  Here  the 
money-function  and  th6  commodity-function  are  at  the  same 
time  functions  of  money-capital  and  commodity-capital,  but 
solely  because  they  are  interconnected  as  forms  of  functions  which 
industrial  capital  has  to  perform  at  the  different  stages  of  its 
circuit.  It  is  therefore  wrong  to  attempt  to  derive  the  specific 
properties  and  functions  which  characterise  money  as  money 
and  commodities  as  commodities  from  their  quality  as  capital, 
and  it  is  equally  wrong  to  derive  on  the  contrary  the  properties 
of  productive  capital  from  its  mode  of  existence  in  means  of 
production. 

As  soon  as  M'  or  C'  have  become  fixed  as  M  plus  m  or  C  plus 
o,  i.e.,  as  the  relation  between  the  capital-value  and  surplus- 
value,  its  offspring,  this  relation  is  expressed  in  both  of  them, 
in  the  first  case  in  the  money-form,  in  the  second  case  in  the  com¬ 
modity-form,  which  does  not  change  matters  in  the  least.  Con¬ 
sequently  this  relation  does  not  have  its  origin  in  any  properties 
or  functions  inherent  in  money  as  such  or  commodities  as  such. 
In  both  cases  the  characteristic  property  of  capital,  that  of  being 
a  value  generating  value,  is  expressed  only  as  a  result.  C'  is 


84 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


always  the  product  of  the  function  of  P,  and  M'  is  always  merely 
the  form  of  C'  changed  in  the  circuit  of  industrial  capital.  As 
soon  therefore  as  the  realised  money-capital  resumes  its  special 
function  of  money-capital,  it  ceases  to  express  the  capital-relation 
contained  in  M'=M  plus  m.  After  M  ...  M'  has  been  passed 
through  and  M'  begins  the  circuit  anew,  it  does  not  figure  as  M' 
but  as  M  even  if  the  entire  surplus-value  contained  in  M'  is  capi¬ 
talised.  The  second  circuit  begins  in  our  case  with  a  money-capi¬ 
tal  of  £500,  instead  of  £422,  as  in  the  first  circuit.  The  money- 
capital,  which  opens  the  circuit,  is  £78  larger  than  before.  This 
difference  exists  on  comparing  the  one  circuit  with  the  other, 
but  no  such  comparison  is  made  within  each  particular  circuit. 
The  £500  advanced  as  money-capital,  £78  of  which  formerly 
existed  as  surplus-value,  do  not  play  any  other  role  than  would 
some  other  £500  with  which  another  capitalist  inaugurates  his 
first  circuit.  The  same  happens  in  the  circuit  of  the  productive 
capital.  The  increased  P'  acts  as  P  on  recommencing,  just  as  P 
did  in  the  simple  reproduction  P  ...  P. 

In  the  stage  M'— C'<^p,  the  augmented  magnitude  is  indi¬ 
cated  only  by  C',  but  not  by  L'  or  MP'.  Since  C  is  the  sum  of  L 
and  MP,  C'  indicates  sufficiently  that  the  sum  of  L  and  MP  con¬ 
tained  in  it  is  greater  than  the  original  P.  In  the  second  place,  the 
terms  L'  and  MP'  would  be  incorrect,  because  we  know  that  the 
growth  of  capital  involves  a  change  in  the  constitution  of  its  value 
and  that  as  this  change  progresses  the  value  of  MP  increases,  that 
of  L  always  decreasing  relatively  and  often  absolutely. 

III.  ACCUMULATION  OF  MONEY 

Whether  or  not  m,  the  surplus-value  turned  into  money,  Is 
Immediately  added  to  the  capital-value  in  process  and  is  thus 
enabled  to  enter  the  circuit  together  with  capital  M  now  having 
the  magnitude  M',  depends  on  circumstances  which  are  independ¬ 
ent  of  the  mere  existence  of  m.  If  m  is  to  serve  as  money-capi¬ 
tal  in  a  second  independent  business,  to  be  run  side  by  side  with 
the  first,  it  is  evident  that  it  cannot  be  used  for  this  purpose  un¬ 
less  it  is  of  the  minimum  size  required  for  it.  And  if  it  is  intended 
to  be  used  for  the  expansion  of  the  original  business,  the  relations 
between  the  material  factors  of  P  and  their  value-relations  like¬ 
wise  demand  a  minimum  magnitude  for  m.  All  the  means  of 
production  employed  in  this  business  have  not  only  a  qualita¬ 
tive  but  also  a  definite  quantitative  relation  to  one  another,  are 


! 


THE  CIRCUIT  Of  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


65 


proportionate  in  quantity.  These  material  relations  as  well  as 
the  pertinent  value-relations  of  the  factors  entering  into  the 
productive  capital  determine  the  minimum  magnitude  m  must 
possess  to  be  capable  of  transformation  into  additional  means  of 
production  and  labour-power,  or  only  into  the  former,  as  an  accre¬ 
tion  to  the  productive  capital.  Thus  the  owner  of  a  spinning- 
mill  cannot  increase  the  number  of  his  spindles  without  at  the 
same  time  purchasing  a  corresponding  number  of  carders  and 
roving  frames,  apart  from  the  increased  expenditure  for  cotton 
and  wages  which  such  an  expansion  of  his  business  demands.  To 
carry  this  out  the  surplus-value  must  therefore  have  reached 
a  considerable  figure  (generally  calculated  to  be  £1  per  newly 
installed  spindle).  If  m  does  not  reach  this  minimum  size  the  cir¬ 
cuit  of  the  capital  must  be  repeated  until  the  sum  of  m  successive¬ 
ly  produced  by  it  can  function  together  with  M,  hence  M' — C'  <^p 

Even  mere  changes  of  detail,  for  instance  in  the  spinning  machin¬ 
ery,  introduced  to  make  it  more  productive,  require  greater  ex¬ 
penditures  for  spinning  material,  more  roving  machinery,  etc.  In 
the  meantime  m  is  accumulated,  and  its  accumulation  is  not  its 
own  function  but  the  result  of  repeated  P  ...  P  Its  own  function 
consists  in  persisting  in  the  money  state  until  it  receives  suffi¬ 
cient  increment  from  the  repeated  surplus-value-creating  circuits, 
i.e.,  from  outside,  to  possess  the  minimum  magnitude  necessary 
for  its  active  function,  the  magnitude  in  which  alone  it  can 
really  enter  as  money-capital  — in  the  case  at  hand  as  the  accu¬ 
mulated  part  of  the  functioning  money-capjtal  M  —  into  the  func¬ 
tion  of  M.  But  in  the  interim  it  is  accumulated  and  exists  only 
in  the  shape  of  a  hoard  in  process  of  formation,  of  growth.  Hence 
the  accumulation  of  money,  hoarding,  appears  here  as  a  process 
by  which  real  accumulation,  the  extension  of  the  scale  on  which 
industrial  capital  operates,  is  temporarily  accompanied.  Tempo¬ 
rarily,  for  so  long  as  the  hoard  remains  in  the  condition  of  a  hoard, 
it  does  not  function  as  capital,  does  not  take  part  in  the  process 
of  creating  surplus-value,  remains  a  sum  of  money  which  grows 
only  because  money,  come  by  without  its  doing  anything,  is 
thrown  into  the  same  coffer. 

The  form  of  a  hoard  is  simply  the  form  of  money  not  in  circu¬ 
lation,  of  money  whose  circulation  has  been  interrupted  and 
which  is  therefore  fixed  in  its  money-form.  As  for  the  process  of 
hoarding,  it  is  common  to  all  commodity  production  and  figures 
as  an  end  in  itself  only  in  the  undeveloped,  pre-capitalist  forms 
of  this  production.  In  the  present  case,  however,  the  hoard  ap- 


86  the  metamorphoses  of  capital  and  their  circuits 

pears  as  a  form  of  money-capital  and  the  formation  of  a  hoard  as 
a  process  which  temporarily  accompanies  the  accumulation  of 
capital  because  and  so  far  as  the  money  here  figures  as  latent 
money-capital ;  because  the  formation  of  a  hoard,  the  state  of  be¬ 
ing  a  hoard,  in  which  the  surplus-value  existing  in  money-form 
finds  itself,  is  a  functionally  determined  preparatory  stage  gone 
through  outside  of  the  circuit  described  by  the  capital  and  re¬ 
quired  for  the  transformation  of  the  surplus-value  into  really 
functioning  capital.  By  its  definition  it  is  therefore  latent  money- 
capital.  Hence  the  size  it  must  acquire  before  it  can  take  part 
in  the  process  is  determined  in  each  case  by  the  value  constitu¬ 
tion  of  the  productive  capital.  But  so  long  as  it  remains  in  the 
condition  of  a  hoard  it  does  not  yet  perform  the  functions  of 
money-capital  but  is  still  idle  money-capital;  not  money-capital 
whose  function  has  been  interrupted,  as  was  the  case  before,  but 
money-capital  not  yet  capable  of  performing  it. 

We  are  here  discussing  the  accumulation  of  money  in  its  ori¬ 
ginal  real  form  of  an  actual  hoard  of  money.  It  may  also  exist 
in  the  form  of  mere  outstanding  money,  of  claims  on  debtors 
by  capitalists  who  have  sold  C'.  As  for  other  forms  in  which  this 
latent  money-capital  may  exist  in  the  meantime  even  in  the  shape 
of  money-breeding  money,  such  as  interest-bearing  bank  depos¬ 
its,  bills  of  exchange  or  securities  of  any  description,  these  do 
not  belong  here.  Surplus-value  realised  in  the  form  of  money 
in  such  cases  performs  special  capital-functions  outside  the 
circuit  described  by  the  industrial  capital  which  originated  it — 
functions  which  in  the  first  place  have  nothing  to  do  with  that 
circuit  as  such  but  which  in  the  second  place  presuppose  capital- 
functions  which  differ  from  the  functions  of  industrial  capital 
and  which  have  not  yet  been  developed  here. 


IV.  RESERVE  FUND 

In  the  form  which  we  have  just  discussed,  the  hoard,  as  which 
the  surplus-value  exists,  is  a  fund  for  the  accumulation  of  money, 
the  money-form  temporarily  assumed  by  capital  accumulation 
and  to  that  extent  a  condition  of  this  accumulation.  However 
this  accumulation-fund  can  also  perform  special  services  of 
a  subordinate  nature,  that  is  to  say  can  enter  into  capital’s 
movement  in  circuits  without  this  process  assuming  the 
form  of  P  ...  P',  hence  without  an  expansion  of  capitalist 
reproduction. 


THE  CIRCUIT  OV  PRODUCTIVE  CAPITAL 


87 


If  the  process  C'— M'  is  prolonged  beyond  its  normal  dura¬ 
tion,  if  therefore  the  commodity-capital  is  abnormally  delayed 
in  its  transformation  into  the  money-form  or  if,  for  instance, 
after  the  completion  of  this  transformation,  the  price  of  the 
means  of  production  into  which  the  money-capital  must  be  trans¬ 
formed  has  risen  above  the  level  prevailing  at  the  beginning  of 
the  circuit,  the  hoard  functioning  as  accumulation-fund  can  be 
used  in  the  place  of  money-capital  or  of  part  of  it.  Thus  the 
money-accumulation  fund  serves  as  a  reserve  fund  for  counter¬ 
balancing  disturbances  in  the  circuit. 

As  such  a  reserve  fund  it  differs  from  the  fund  of  purchasing 
or  paying  media  discussed  in  the  circuit  P  ...  P.  These  media 
are  a  part  of  functioning  money-capital  (hence  forms  of  existence 
of  a  part  of  capital-value  in  general  going  through  the  process) 
whose  parts  enter  upon  their  functions  only  at  different  times, 
successively.  In  the  continuous  process  of  production,  reserve- 
money  capital  is  always  formed,  since  one  day  money  is  received 
and  no  payments  have  to  be  made  until  later,  and  another  day 
large  quantities  of  goods  are  sold  while  other  large  quantities 
are  not  due  to  be  bought  until  a  subsequent  date.  In  these  inter¬ 
vals  a  part  of  the  circulating  capital  exists  continuously  in  the 
form  of  money.  A  reserve  fund  on  the  other  hand  is  not  a  constit¬ 
uent  part  of  capital  already  performing  its  functions,  or,  to  be 
more  exact,  of  money-capital.  It  is  rather  a  part  of  capital  in 
a  preliminary  stage  of  its  accumulation,  of  surplus-value  not 
yet  transformed  into  active  capital.  As  for  the  rest,  it  needs  no 
explaining  that  a  capitalist  in  financial  straits  does  not  concern 
himself  about  what  the  particular  functions  of  the  money  he  has 
on  hand  are.  He  simply  employs  whatever  money  he  has  for  the 
purpose  of  keeping  his  capital  circulating.  For  instance  in  our 
illustration  M  is  equal  to  £422,  M'  to  £500.  If  a  part  of  the  cap¬ 
ital  of  £422  exists  as  a  fund  of  means  of  payment  and  purchase, 
as  a  money  reserve,  it  is  intended,  other  conditions  remaining 
the  same,  that  it  should  enter  wholly  into  the  circuit,  and  besides 
should  suffice  for  this  purpose.  The  reserve  fund  however  is  a  part 
of  the  £78  of  surplus-value.  It  can  enter  the  circular  course  of 
the  capital  worth  £422  only  to  the  extent  that  this  circuit  takes 
place  under  conditions  not  remaining  the  same;  for  it  is  a  part 
of  the  accumulation-fund,  and  figures  here  without  any  exten¬ 
sion  of  the  scale  of  reproduction. 

Money-accumulation  fund  implies  the  existence  of  latent 
money-capital,  hence  the  transformation  of  money  into  money- 
capital. 


88 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


The  following  is  the  general  formula  for  the  circuit  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital.  It  combines  simple  reproduction  and  repro¬ 
duction  on  a  progressively  increasing  scale: 

I  2 

P  -C'-M'.  “^4  ,  n 

If  P  equals  P,  then  M  in  2)  equals  M'  minus  m;  if  P  equals 
P',  then  M  in  2)  is  greater  than  M'  minus  m;  that  is  to  say  m  has 
been  completely  or  partially  transformed  into  money-capital. 

The  circuit  of  productive  capital  is  the  form  in  which  clas¬ 
sical  Political  Economy  examines  the  circular  movement  of 
industrial  capital. 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  CIRCUIT  OF  COMMODITY-CAPITAL 

The  general  formula  for  the  circuit  of  commodity-capital  is: 
C'-M'-C  ...  P  ...C'. 

C'  appears  not  alone  as  the  product  but  also  as  the  premise 
of  the  two  previous  circuits,  since  that  which  M— C  means  for 
the  one  capital  C'— M'  means  for  the  other,  inasmuch  as  at  least 
a  part  of  the  means  of  production  is  itself  the  commodity-product 
of  other  individual  capitals  describing  their  circuits.  In  our 
case  for  instance  coal,  machinery,  etc.,  represent  the  commod¬ 
ity-capital  of  the  mine-owner,  of  the  capitalist  machine-manu¬ 
facturer,  etc.  Furthermore  we  have  shown  in  Chapter  I,  4,  that 
not  only  the  circuit  P  ...  P  but  also  the  circuit  C'  ...  C'  is  as¬ 
sumed  even  in  the  Erst  repetition  of  M  ...  M',  before  this  second 
circuit  of  money-capital  is  completed. 

If  reproduction  takes  place  on  an  extended  scale,  then  the 
final  C'  is  greater  than  the  initial  C'  and  should  therefore  be 
designated  here  as  C". 

The  difference  between  the  third  form  and  the  first  two  is 
as  follows:  First,  in  this  case  the  total  circulation  with  its  two 
antithetical  phases  opens  the  circuit,  while  in  Form  I  the  circula¬ 
tion  is  interrupted  by  the  process  of  production  and  in  Form  II 
the  total  circulation  with  its  two  mutually  complementary  phases 
appears  merely  as  a  means  of  effecting  the  process  of  reproduc¬ 
tion  and  therefore  constitutes  the  movement  mediating  be¬ 
tween  P  ...  P.  In  the  case  of  M  ...  M',  the  form  of  circulation  is 
M— C  ...  C' — M'=M— C — M.  In  the  case  of  P  ...  P  it  has  the 
inverted  form  C'-M'.  M-C=C-M-C.  In  the  case  of  C'-C' 
it  likewise  has  this  last  form. 


90 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


Secondly,  when  circuits  I  and  II  are  repeated,  even  if  the 
final  points  M'  and  P'  form  the  starting-points  of  the  renewed 
circuit,  the  form  in  which  M'  and  P'  were  produced  disappears. 
M'=M  plus  m  and  P'=P  plus  p  begin  the  new  process  as  M  and 
P.  But  in  Form  III  the  starting-point  C  must  be  designated  as  C', 
even  if  the  circuit  is  renewed  on  the  same  scale,  for  the  following 
reason.  In  Form  I,  as  soon  as  M'  as  such  opens  a  new  circuit  it 
functions  as  money-capital  M,  as  an  advance  in  money-form 
of  the  capital-value  that  is  to  produce  surplu3-value.  The  size 
of  the  advanced  money-capital,  augmented  by  the  accumulation 
achieved  during  the  first  circuit,  has  increased.  But  whether 
tho  size  of  the  advanced  money-capital  is  £422  or  £500  does 
not  alter  the  fact  that  it  appears  as  simple  capital-value.  M' 
no  longer  exists  as  self-expanded  capital  or  a  capital  pregnant 
with  surplus-value,  as  a  capital-relation.  Indeed,  it  is  to  ex¬ 
pand  itself  only  during  its  process.  The  same  is  true  of  P  ...  P'; 
P'  must  steadily  continue  to  function  as  P,  as  capital-value 
which  is  to  produce  surplus-value,  and  must  renew  its  circuit. 

The  commodity-capital  circuit,  on  the  contrary,  does  not 
open  with  just  capital-value  but  with  capital-value  augmented 
in  the  commodity-form.  Hence  it  includes  from  the  start  the 
circuit  of  not  only  capital-value  existing  in  the  form  of  commod¬ 
ities,  but  also  of  surplus-value.  Consequently  if  simple  repro¬ 
duction  takes  place  in  this  form,  the  C'  at  the  terminal  point 
Is  equal  in  size  to  the  C'  at  the  starting-point.  If  a  part  of  the 
surplus-value  enters  into  the  capital  circuit,  C",  an  enlarged 
C',  appears  at  the  close  instead  of  C',  but  the  now  succeeding 
circuit  is  once  more  opened  by  C'.  This  is  merely  a  larger  C' 
than  that  of  the  preceding  circuit,  with  a  larger  accumulated 
capital-value.  Hence  it  begins  its  new  circuit  with  a  relatively 
larger,  newly  created  surplus-value.  In  any  event  C'  always 
inaugurates  the  circuit  as  a  commodity-capital  which  is  equal 
to  capital-value  plus  surplus-value. 

C'as  C  does  not  appear  in  the  circuit  of  an  individual  indus¬ 
trial  capital  as  a  form  of  this  capital  but  as  a  form  of  some  other 
industrial  capital,  so  far  as  the  means  of  production  are  the 
product  of  the  latter.  The  act  M— C  (i.e.,  M— MP)  of  the  first 
capital  is  C'— M'  for  this  second  capital. 

In  the  circulation  act  M— C<^p  L  and  MP  bear  identical 

relations,  as  they  are  commodities  in  the  hands  of  their  sellers — 
on  the  one  hand  the  labourers  who  sell  their  labour-power,  on 
the  other  the  owner  of  the  means  of  production,  who  sells  these. 


THE, CIRCUIT  OF  COMMODITY-CAPITAL 


ei 


For  the  purchaser,  whose  money  here  functions  as  money-capi¬ 
tal,  L  and  MP  function  merely  as  commodities  until  he  has 
bought  them,  hence  so  long  as  they  confront  his  capital,  existing 
in  the  form  of  money,  as  commodities  of  others.  MP  and  L  differ 
here  only  in  this  respect,  that  MP  may  be  C',  hence  capital, 
in  the  hands  of  its  seller,  if  MP  is  the  commodity-form  of  his 
capital,  while  L  is  always  nothing  else  but  a  commodity  for  the 
labourer  and  becomes  capital  only  in  the  hands  of  its  purchaser 
as  a  constituent  part  of  P. 

For  this  reason  C'  can  never  open  any  circuit  as  a  mere  C, 
as  a  mere  commodity-form  of  capital-value.  As  commodity- 
capital  it  is  always  two-fold.  From  the  point  of  view  of  use- 
value  it  is  the  product,  in  the  present  case  yarn,  of  the  function¬ 
ing  of  P  whose  elements  L  and  MP,  coming  as  commodities  from 
the  sphere  of  circulation,  have  functioned  only  as  factors  in 
the  creation  of  this  product.  Secondly,  from  the  point  of  view 
of  value,  it  is  the  capital-value  P  plus  the  surplus-value  s  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  functioning  of  P. 

It  is  only  in  the  circuit  described  by  C'  itself  that  C  equal 
to  P  and  equal  to  the  capital-value  can  and  must  separate  from 
that  part  of  C'  in  which  surplus-value  exists,  from  the  surplus- 
product  in  which  the  surplus-value  is  lodged.  It  does  not  matter 
whether  the  two  things  can  be  actually  separated,  as  in  the  case 
of  yarn,  or  whether  they  cannot,  as  in  the  case  of  a  machine. 
They  always  become  separable  as  soon  as  C'  is  transformed 
into  M'. 

If  the  entire  commodity-product  can  be  separated  into  in¬ 
dependent  homogeneous  partial  products,  as  in  the  case  of  our 
10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  and  if  therefore  the  act  C' — M'  can  be  repre¬ 
sented  by  a  number  of  successive  sales,  then  the  capital-value 
in  the  form  of  commodities  can  function  as  C,  can  be  separated 
from  C',  before  the  surplus-value,  hence  before  C'  in  its  entire¬ 
ty,  has  been  realised. 

Of  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £500,  the  value  of  8,440  lbs., 
equal  to  £422,  is  equal  to  the  capital-value  less  the  surplus- 
value.  If  the  capitalist  sells  first  8,440  lbs.  of  yarn  at  £422, 
then  these  8,440  lbs.  of  yarn  represent  C,  the  capital-value  in 
commodity-form.  The  surplus-product  of  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn, 
contained  besides  in  C'  and  equal  to  a  surplus-value  of  £78,  does 
not  circulate  until  later.  The  capitalist  could  get  through 
C — M—  CcJ^p  before  the  circulation  of  the  surplus-product 
C— m— c  is  accomplished. 


92  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

Or  if  he  sells  first  7,440  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £372,  and  then 
1,000  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £50,  he  might  replace  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  (the  constant  capital  c)  with  the  first  part  of  C,  and 
the  variable  capital  v,  the  labour-power,  with  the  second  part 
of  C,  and  then  proceed  as  before. 

But  if  such  successive  sales  take  place  and  the  conditions  of 
the  circuit  permit  it,  the  capitalist,  instead  of  separating  C' 
into  c+v-fs,  may  make  such  a  separation  also  in  the  case  of 
aliquot  parts  of  C'. 

For  example  the  7,440  lbs.  of  yarn  equal  to  £372,  which  as 
parts  of  C'  (10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £500)  represent  the  con¬ 
stant  part  of  the  capital,  may  themselves  be  separated  into 
5,535.360  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £276.768,  which  replace  only  the 
constant  part,  the  value  of  the  means  of  production  used  up  in 
producing  7,440  lbs.  of  yarn;  744  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £37.200, 
which  replace  only  the  variable  capital;  and  1  160.640  lbs.  of 
yarn  worth  £58.032,  which,  being  surplus-product,  are  the  de¬ 
positories  of  surplus-value.  Consequently  on  selling  the  7,440  lbs. 
of  yarn,  he  can  replace  the  capital-value  contained  in  them  out 
of  the  sale  of  6,279.360  lbs.  of  yarn  at  the  price  of  £313.968,  and 
he  can  spend  as  his  revenue  the  value  of  the  surplus-product 
amounting  to  1,160.640  lbs.,  or  £58.032. 

In  the  same  way,  he  may  divide  up  another  1,000  lbs.  of  yarn 
equal  to  £50,  equal  to  the  variable  capital-value,  and  sell  them 
accordingly:  744  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £37.200,  constant  capi¬ 
tal-value  contained  in  1,000  lbs.  of  yarn;  100  lbs.  of  yarn  worth 
£5.000,  variable  capital-value  ditto;  hence  844  lbs.  of  yarn 
worth  £42.200,  replacement  of  the  capital-value  contained  in 
the  1,000  lbs.  of  yarn;  finally,  156  lbs.  of  yarn  worth  £7.800, 
representing  the  surplus-product  contained  in  it,  which  may 
be.  consumed  as  such. 

Finally,  he  may  divide  the  remaining  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn  worth 
£78,  in  such  a  way,  provided  he  succeeds  in  selling  them,  that 
the  sale  of  1,160.640  lbs.  of  yarn,  worth  £58.032,  replaces  the 
value  of  the  means  of  production  contained  in  those  1,560  lbs. 
of  yarn,  and  that  156  lbs.  of  yam,  worth  £7.800,  replaces  the 
variable  capital-value;  altogether  1,316.640  lbs.  of  yarn  equal 
to  £65.832,  replacement  of  the  total  capital-value;  finally  the 
surplus-product  of  243.360  lbs.,  equal  to  £12.168,  remains  to 
be  spent  as  revenue. 

All  the  elements — c,  v,  and  s — contained  in  the  yarn  are  di¬ 
visible  into  the  same  component  parts,  and  so  is  every  indi¬ 
vidual  pound  of  yarn,  worth  1  s.,  or  12  d. 


Total  ,  .  .  .  1,000  lbs.  of  yarn  =  £50 


Of  surplus-value: 

at  the  first  sale:  1,160.640  lbs.  of  yarn  =  £58.032 

at  the  second  sale:  156.000  lbs.  of  yarn  =  £  7.800 

at  the  third  sale:  243.360  lbs.  of  yarn  =  £12.168 

Total  ....  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn  =  £78 

Grand  Total: 

Constant  capital  .  .  .  7,440  lbs.  of  yarn=£372 

Variable  capital  ....  1,000  lbs.  of  yarn  =  £  57 

Surplus-value  ....  1,560  lbs.  of  yarn  =  £  78 

Total  ....  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  =£500 

C' — M'  in  itself  stands  merely  for  the  sale  of  10,000  lbs.  of 

yarn.  These  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  like  all  other  yarn,  are  a  com¬ 
modity.  The  purchaser  is  interested  in  the  price  of  1  s.  per  lb., 
or  of  £500  for  10,000  lbs.  If  during  the  negotiations  he  goes 
into  the  value-composition  of  the  yarn,  he  does  so  simply  with 
the  insidious  intention  of  proving  that  it  could  be  sold  at  less 
than  1  s.  per  pound  and  would  still  be  a  good  bargain  for  the 
seller.  But  the  quantity  purchased  by  him  depends  on  his 


94  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

requirements.  If  he  Is  for  example  the  owner  of  a  weaving-mill, 
it  depends  on  the  composition  of  his  own  capital  functioning  in 
this  enterprise,  not  on  the  composition  of  the  spinner’s  of  whom 
he  buys.  The  proportions  in  which  C'  has  to  replace  on  the  one 
hand  the  capital  used  up  in  its  production  (or  the  various  com¬ 
ponent  parts  of  this  capital),  and  on  the  other  to  serve  as  surplus- 
product  either  for  the  spending  of  surplus-value  or  for  the  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  capital,  exist  only  in  the  circuit  of  the  capital 
which  has  as  its  commodity-form  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn.  These 
proportions  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  sale  as  such.  In  the 
present  case  it  is  assumed  besides  that  C'  is  sold  at  its  value, 
so  that  it  is  only  a  question  of  its  transformation  from  the  com¬ 
modity-form  into  the  money-form.  It  is  of  course  of  decisive 
importance  with  regard  to  C',  the  functional  form  in  the 
circuit  of  this  individual  capital  out  of  which  the  productive 
capital  is  to  be  replaced,  to  what  extent,  if  at  all,  there  is  a  dis¬ 
crepancy  between  price  and  value  in  the  sale.  But  this  does  not 
concern  us  here  in  the  examination  of  mere  distinctions  of  form. 

In  Form  I,  or  M  ...  M',  the  process  of  production  inter¬ 
venes  midway  between  the  two  complementary  and  mutually  op¬ 
posite  phases  of  the  circulation  of  capital.  It  is  past  before  the 
concluding  phase  C'— M'  begins.  Money  is  advanced  as  capital, 
is  first  transformed  into  elements  of  production  and  from  these 
into  the  commodity-product,  and  this  commodity-product  in 
its  turn  is  changed  back  into  money.  It  is  a  full  and  complete 
business  cycle  that  results  in  money,  something  everyone  can 
use  for  everything.  A  new  start  is  therefore  only  a  possibility. 
M  ...  P  ...  M'  may  be  either  the  last  circuit  that  concludes  the 
functioning  of  some,  individual  capital  being  withdrawn  from 
business,  or  the  first  circuit  of  some  new  capital  entering  upon 
its  function.  The  general  movement  is  here  M  ...  M',  from  money 
to  more  money. 

In  Form  II,  P  ...  C'— M'— C  ...  P(P'),  the  entire  circulation 
process  follows  after  the  first  P  and  precedes  the  second  P;  but 
it  takes  place  in  the  opposite  order  from  that  of  Form  I.  The 
first  P  is  the  productive  capital,  and  its  function  is  the  produc¬ 
tive  process,  the  prerequisite  of  the  succeeding  circulation  proc¬ 
ess.  The  concluding  P  on  the  other  hand  is  not  the  productive 
process;  it  is  only  the  renewed  existence  of  the  industrial  capi¬ 
tal  in  its  form  of  productive  capital.  And  it  is  such  as  a  result 
of  the  transformation,  during  the  last  phase  of  circulation,  of 
the  capital-value  into  L  plus  MP,  into  the  subjective  and  ob¬ 
jective  factors  which  by  combining  constitute  the  form  of  exist- 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  COMMODITY-CAPITAL 


95 


ence  of  the  productive  capital.  The  capital,  whether  P  or  P  , 
is  at  the  end  once  more  present  in  a  form  in  which  it  must  func¬ 
tion  anew  as  productive  capital,  must  again  perform  the  produc¬ 
tive  process.  The  general  form  of  the  movement  P  ...  P  is  the 
form  of  reproduction  and,  unlike  M  ...  M',  does  not  indicate  the 
self-expansion  of  value  as  the  object  of  the  process.  This  form 
makes  it  therefore  so  much  easier  for  classical  Political  Economy 
to  ignore  the  definite  capitalistic  form  of  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  to  depict  production  as  such  as  the  purpose  of  this  proc¬ 
ess;  namely  that  as  much  as  possible  must  be  produced  and  as 
cheaply  as  possible,  and  that  the  product  must  be  exchanged  for 
the  greatest  variety  of  other  products,  partly  for  the  renewal  of 
production  (M— C),  partly  for  consumption  (m— c).  It  is  then 
possible  to  overlook  the  peculiarities  of  money  and  money-cap¬ 
ital,  for  M  and  m  appear  here  merely  as  transient  media  of  cir¬ 
culation.  The  entire  process  seems  simple  and  natural,  i.e., 
possesses  the  naturalness  of  a  shallow  rationalism.  In  the  same 
way  profit  is  occasionally  forgotten  in  commodity-capital  and 
the  latter  figures  merely  as  a  commodity  when  the  production 
circuit  as  a  whole  is  under  discussion.  But  as  soon  as  the  con¬ 
stituents  of  value  are  debated,  commodity-capital  figures  as 
commodity-capital.  Accumulation,  of  course,  is  seen  in  the  same 
light  as  production. 

In  Form  III,  C'— M'— C  ...  P  ...  C',  the  two  phases  of  the 
circulation  process  open  the  circuit,  and  do  so  in  the  same  order 
which  obtains  in  Form  II,  P  ...  P;  next  follows  P,  with  its  func¬ 
tion,  the  productive  process,  the  same  as  in  Form  I;  the  cir¬ 
cuit  closes  with  the  result  of  the  process  of  production,  C'.  Just 
as  in  Form  II  the  circuit  closes  with  P,  the  merely  renewed  exist¬ 
ence  of  productive  capital,  so  here  it  closes  with  C',  the  renewed 
existence  of  commodity-capital.  Just  as  in  Form  II  capital,  in 
its  concluding  form  P,  must  start  the  process  over  again  as  a 
process  of  production,  so  here  upon  the  reappearance  of  indus¬ 
trial  capital  in  the  form  of  commodity-capital  the  circuit  must 
re-open  with  the  circulation  phase  C'— M'.  Both  forms  of  the 
circuit  are  incomplete  because  they  do  not  close  with  M',  the 
capital-value  retransformed  into  money  and  self-expanded.  Both 
must  therefore  be  continued  and  consequently  include  the  repro¬ 
duction.  The  total  circuit  in  Form  III  is  C'  ...  C'. 

The  third  form  is  distinguished  from  the  first  two  by  the  fact 
that  it  is  only  in  this  circuit  that  the  self-expanded  capital- 
value— and  not  the  original  one,  the  capital-value  that  must 
still  produce  surplus-value— appears  as  the  starting-point  of  its 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


self-expansion.  C  as  a  capital-relation  is  here  the  starting-point 
and  as  such  relation  has  a  determining  influence  on  the  entire 
circuit  because  it  includes  the  circuit  of  the  capital-value  as  well 
as  that  of  the  surplus-value  already  in  its  first  phase,  and  because 
the  surplus-value  must  at  least  in  the  average,  if  not  in  every 
single  circuit,  be  expended  partly  as  revenue,  go  through  the 
circulation  c — m— c,  and  must  partly  perform  the  function  of 
an  element  of  capital  accumulation. 

In  the  form  C'  ...  C'  the  consumption  of  the  entire  commodity- 
product  is  assumed  as  the  condition  of  the  normal  course  of  the 
circuit  of  capital  itself.  The  individual  consumption  of  the  la¬ 
bourer  and  the  individual  consumption  of  the  unaccumulated 
part  of  the  surplus-product  comprise  the  entire  individual  con¬ 
sumption.  Hence  consumption  in  its  totality — individual  as 
well  as  productive— enters  into  circuit  C'  as  a  condition  of  it. 
Productive  consumption  (which  essentially  includes  the  individ¬ 
ual  consumption  of  the  labourer,  since  labour-power  is  a  contin¬ 
uous  product,  within  certain  limits,  of  the  labourer’s  individual 
consumption)  is  carried  on  by  every  Individual  capital.  Individ¬ 
ual  consumption,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  required  for  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  individual  capitalist,  is  here  assumed  to  be  only 
a  social  act,  but  by  no  means  an  act  of  the  individual  capitalist. 

In  Forms  I  and  II  the  aggregate  movement  appears  as  a  move¬ 
ment  of  advanced  capital-value.  In  Form  III  the  self-expanded 
capital,  in  the  shape  of  the  total  commodity-product,  forms 
the  starting-point  and  has  the  form  of  moving  capital,  com¬ 
modity-capital.  Not  until  its  transformation  into  money  has 
been  accomplished  does  this  movement  branch  out  into  move¬ 
ments  of  capital  and  of  revenue.  The  distribution  of  the  total 
social  product,  as  well  as  the  special  distribution  of  the  product 
for  each  individual  commodity-capital,  into  an  individual  con¬ 
sumption-fund  on  the  one  hand  and  into  a  reproduction  fund 
on  the  other  is  included  in  this  form  in  the  circuit  of  capital. 

In  M  ...  M'  possible  enlargement  of  the  circuit  is  included, 
depending  on  the  volume  of  m  entering  into  the  renewed  cir¬ 
cuit. 

In  P  ...  P  the  new  circuit  may  be  started  by  P  with  the  same 
or  perhaps  even  a  smaller  value  and  yet  may  represent  a  repro¬ 
duction  on  an  extended  scale,  for  instance  when  certain  elements 
of  commodities  become  cheaper  on  account  of  increased  pro¬ 
ductivity  of  labour.  Vice  versa,  a  productive  capital  which  has 
increased  in  value  may,  in  a  contrary  case,  represent  reproduc¬ 
tion  on  a  materially  contracted  scale  as  for  instance  when  ele- 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  COMMODITY-CAPITAL 


97 


ments  of  production  have  become  dearer.  The  same  is  true  of 
C'  ...  C'. 

In  C'  ...  C'  capital  in  the  form  of  commodities  is  the  premise 
of  production.  It  re-appears  as  a  premise  within  this  circuit  in 
the  second  C.  If  this  C  has  not  yet  been  produced  or  reproduced 
the  circuit  is  obstructed.  This  C  must  be  reproduced,  for  the 
greater  part  as  C'  of  some  other  industrial  capital.  In  this  circuit 
C'  exists  as  the  point  of  departure,  of  transition,  and  of  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  the  movement;  hence  it  is  always  there.  It  is  a  per¬ 
manent  condition  of  the  process  of  reproduction. 

C'  ,..  C'  is  distinguished  from  Forms  I  and  II  by  still  another 
feature.  All  three  circuits  have  this  in  common,  that  capital 
begins  its  circular  course  in  the  same  form  in  which  it  concludes 
it,  and  thus  finds  itself  in  the  initial  form  in  which  it  opens  the 
circuit  anew.  The  initial  form  M,  P  or  C'  is  always  the  one.  in 
which  capital-value  (in  III  augmented  by  its  surplus-value) 
is  advanced,  in  other  words  its  original  form  in  regard  to  the 
circuit.  The  concluding  form  M',  P  or  C'  is  always  a  changed 
form  of  a  functional  form  which  preceded  in  the  circuit  and  is  not 
the  original  form. 

Thus  M'  in  I  is  a  changed  form  of  C',  the  final  P  in  II  is  a 
changed  form  of  M  (and  this  transformation  is  accomplished  in 
I  and  II  by  a  simple  act  of  commodity  circulation,  by  a  formal 
change  of  position  of  commodity  and  money);  in  III,  C'  is  a 
changed  form  of  the  productive  capital  P.  But  here,  in  III,  the 
transformation,  in  the  first  place,  does  not  merely  concern  the 
functional  form  of  capital  but  also  the  magnitude  of  its  value; 
in  the  second  place,  however,  the  transformation  is  not  the 
result  of  a  merely  formal  change  of  position  pertaining  to  the 
circulation  process,  but  of  a  real  transformation  experienced 
by  the  use-form  and  value  of  the  commodity  constituents  of  the 
productive  capital  in  the  process  of  production. 

The  form  of  the  initial  extreme  M,  P  or  C'  is  the  premise  of 
the  corresponding  circuit  I,  II  or  III.  The  form  returning  in 
the  final  extreme  is  premised  and  consequently  brought  about 
by  the  series  of  metamorphoses  of  the  circuit  itself.  C',  as  the 
terminal  point  in  the  circuit  of  an  individual  industrial  capital, 
presupposes  only  the  non-circulation  form  P  of  the  same  indus¬ 
trial  capital  of  which  it  is  the  product.  M',  as  the  terminal  point 
of  I,  as  the  converted  form  of  C'  (C' — M'),  presupposes  that  M 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  buyer,  exists  outside  of  the  circuit  M  ...  M', 
and  is  drawn  into  it  and  made  its  own  terminal  form  by  the 
sale  of  C'.  Thus  the  terminal  P  in  II  presupposes  that  L  and 


4—1752 


the  metamorphoses  of  capital  and  their  circuits 


MP  (C)  exist  outside  and  are  incorporated  in  it  as  its  terminal 
form  by  means  of  M— C.  But  apart  from  the  last  extreme,  the 
circuit  of  individual  money-capital  does  not  presuppose  the 
existence  of  money-capital  in  general,  nor  does  the  circuit  of 
individual  productive  capital  presuppose  the  existence  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital.  In  I,  M  may  be  the  first  money-capital;  in  II, 
P  may  be  the  first  productive  capital  appearing  on  the  historical 
scene.  But  in  III, 


C' 


M  C  <Jjp  •••  P  C* 

m  —  c 


C  is  presupposed  twice  outside  of  the  circuit.  The  first  time  in 
the  circuit  C'— M'— C<yp.  This  C,  so  far  as  it  consists  of  MP,  is 
commodity  in  the  hands  of  the  seller;  it  is  itself  commodity- 
capital,  so  far  as  it  is  the  product  of  a  capitalist  process  of  pro¬ 
duction;  and  even  if  it  is  not,  it  appears  as  commodity-capi¬ 
tal  in  the  hands  of  the  merchant.  The  second  time,  in  the  second 
c  of  c — m — c,  which  must  likewise  be  at  hand  as  a  commodity 
so  that  it  can  be  bought.  At  any  rate,  whether  they  are  com¬ 
modity-capital  or  not,  L  and  MP  are  just  as  much  commodities 
as  is  C'  and  bear  to  each  other  the  relation  of  commodities.  The 
same  is  true  of  the  second  c  in  c — m — c.  Inasmuch  therefore  as 
C'  is  equal  to  C  (L  plus  MP),  it  has  commodities  as  elements 
for  its  own  production  and  must  be  replaced  by  the  same  commod¬ 
ities  in  the  circulation.  In  the  same  way  the  second  c  in  c — m — c 
must  be  replaced  by  similar  commodities  in  the  circulation. 

On  the  basis  that  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  is  the 
prevailing  mode,  all  commodities  in  the  hands  of  the  seller  must, 
besides,  be  commodity-capital.  And  they  continue  to  be  so  in 
the  hands  of  the  merchant  or  become  such  if  they  were  not  such 
before.  Or  they  have  to  be  commodities — such  as  imported  arti¬ 
cles — which  replace  original  commodity-capital  and  hence  bestow 
upon  it  merely  another  form  of  existence. 

As  forms  of  existence  of  P  the  commodity-elements  L  and 
MP,  of  which  the  productive  capital  P  consists,  do  not  possess 
the  same  form  as  in  the  various  commodity-markets  where  they 
are  fetched.  They  are  now  united,  and  so  combined  they  can 
perform  the  functions  of  productive  capital. 

That  C  appears  as  the  premise  of  C  only  in  this  Form  III, 
within  the  circuit  itself,  is  due  to  capital  in  commodity-form 


THE  CIRCUIT  OF  COMMODITY-CAPITAL 


99 


being  its  starting-point.  The  circuit  is  opened  by  the  transfor¬ 
mation  of  C'  (in  so  far  as  it  functions  as  capital-value,  regard¬ 
less  of  whether  it  has  been  increased  by  the  addition  of 
surplus-value  or  not)  into  those  commodities  which  are  its 
elements  of  production.  But  this  transformation  comprises  the 
entire  process  of  circulation,  C— M— C  (equal  to  L  plus  MP),  and 
is  its  result.  C  here  stands  at  both  extremes,  but  the  second 
extreme,  which  receives  its  form  C  by  means  of  M— C  from  out¬ 
side,  the  commodity-market,  is  not  the  last  extreme  of  the  cir¬ 
cuit  but  only  of  its  first  two  stages  comprising  the  process  of 
circulation.  Its  result  is  P,  which  then  performs  its  function, 
the  process  of  production.  It  is  only  as  the  result  of  this  proc¬ 
ess,  hence  not  as  that  of  the  circulation  process,  that  C'  ap¬ 
pears  as  the  terminal  point  of  the  circuit  and  in  the  same  form 
as  the  starting-point,  C'.  On  the  other  hand  in  M  ...  M'  and 
P  ...  P,  the  final  extremes  M'  and  P  are  the  direct  results  of  the 
process  of  circulation.  Here  therefore  it  is  presupposed  only  at 
the  end  that  one  time  M'  and  the  other  time  P  exist  in  the  hands 
of  others.  In  so  far  as  the  circuit  is  made  between  the  extremes, 
neither  M  in  the  one  case  nor  P  in  the  other— the  existence  of 
M  as  the  money  of  another  person  and  of  P  as  the  production 
process  of  another  capital  — appears  as  the  premise  of  these  cir¬ 
cuits.  C'  ...  C'  on  the  contrary  presupposes  the  existence  of  C 
(equal  to  L  plus  MP)  as  commodities  of  others  in  the  hands  of 
others— commodities  drawn  into  the  circuit  by  the  introductory 
process  of  circulation  and  transformed  into  productive  capital, 
as  a  result  of  whose  functioning  C'  once  more  becomes  the  conclud¬ 
ing  form  of  the  circuit. 

But  just  because  the  circuit  C'  ...  C'  presupposes  within  its 
sphere  the  existence  of  other  industrial  capital  in  the  form  of 
G  (equal  to  L+MP)  — and  MP  comprises  diverse  other  capitals, 
in  our  case  for  instance  machinery,  coal,  oil,  etc.— it  clamours 
to  be  considered  not  only  as  the  general  form  of  the  circuit,  i.e., 
not  only  as  a  social  form  in  which  every  single  industrial  capi¬ 
tal  (except  when  first  invested)  can  be  studied,  hence  not  merely 
aa  a  form  of  movement  common  to  all  individual  industrial 
capitals,  but  simultaneously  also  as  a  form  of  movement  of  the 
sum  of  the  individual  capitals,  consequently  of  the  aggregate 
capital  of  the  capitalist  class,  a  movement  in  which  that  of  each 
individual  industrial  capital  appears  as  only  a  partial  move¬ 
ment  which  intermingles  with  the  other  movements  and  is  ne¬ 
cessitated  by  them.  For  instance  if  we  regard  the  aggregate  of  com¬ 
modities  annually  produced  in  a  certain  country  and  analyse 


100  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OK  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

the  movement  by  which  a  part  of  it  replaces  the  productive 
capital  in  all  individual  businesses,  while  another  part  enters 
into  the  individual  consumption  of  the  various  classes,  then  we 
consider  C'  ...  C'  as  a  form  of  movement  of  social  capital  as  well 
as  of  the  surplus-value,  or  surplus-product,  generated  by  it.  The 
fact  that  the  social  capital  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  individual 
capitals  (including  the  joint-stock  capital  or  the  state  capital, 
so  far  as  governments  employ  productive  wage-labour  in  mines, 
railways,  etc.,  perform  the  function  of  industrial  capitalists),  and 
that  the  aggregate  movement  of  social  capital  is  equal  to  the 
algebraic  sum  of  the  movements  of  the  individual  capitals,  does 
not  in  any  way  preclude  the  possibility  that  this  movement  as 
the  movement  of  a  single  individual  capital,  may  present  other 
phenomena  than  the  same  movement  does  when  considered  from 
the  point  of  view  of  a  part  of  the  aggregate  movement  of  social 
capital,  hence  in  its  interconnection  with  the  movements  of  its 
other  parts,  and  that  the  movement  simultaneously  solves  prob¬ 
lems  the  solution  of  which  must  be  assumed  when  studying  the 
circuit  of  a  separate,  individual  capital  instead  of  being  the  re¬ 
sult  of  such  study. 

C'  ...  C'  is  the  sole  circuit  in  which  the  originally  advanced 
capital-value  constitutes  only  a  part  of  the  extreme  that  opens 
the  movement  and  in  which  the  movement  from  its  inception 
thus  reveals  itself  as  the  total  movement  of  the  industrial  capi¬ 
tal — as  the  movement  of  that  part  of  the  product  which  re¬ 
places  the  productive  capital  as  well  as  of  that  part  which  forms 
surplus-product  and  which  on  the  average  is  spent  in  part  as 
revenue  and  employed  in  part  as  an  element  of  accumulation. 
Included  in  this  circuit  is  the  expenditure  of  surplus-value  as 
revenue  and  to  that  extent  individual  consumption  is  likewise 
included.  The  latter  is  furthermore  included  for  the  reason  that 
the  starting-point  C,  commodity,  exists  in  the  form  of  some 
utility;  but  every  article  produced  by  .capitalist  methods  is  com¬ 
modity-capital,  no  matter  whether  its  use-form  destines  it  for 
productive  or  for  individual  consumption,  or  for  both.  M  ...M' 
indicates  only  the  value  side,  the  self-expansion  of  the  advanced 
capital-value,  as  the  purpose  of  the  entire  process;  P  ...  P  (P') 
indicates  the  process  of  production  of  capital  as  a  process  of 
reproduction  with  a  productive  capital  of  the  same  or  of  increas¬ 
ing  magnitude  (accumulation).  Revealing  itself  already  in  its 
initial  extreme  as  a  form  of  capitalist  commodity  production, 
C'  ...  C'  comprises  productive  and  individual  consumption  from 
the  start;  productive  consumption  and  the  self-expansion  of  value 


THE  CIRCUIT  OP  COMMODITY -CAPITAL 


101 


therein  included  appear  only  as  a  branch  of  its  movement.  Fi¬ 
nally,  since  C'  may  exist  in  a  use-form  which  cannot  enter  any 
more  into  any  process  of  production,  it  is  indicated  at  the  outset 
that  C'’s  various  constituents  of  value  expressed  by  parts  of 
the  product  must  occupy  a  different  position,  according  to  wheth¬ 
er  C'  ...  C'  is  regarded  as  the  form  of  the  movement  of  the 
total  social  capital  or  as  the  independent  movement  of  an  individ¬ 
ual  industrial  capital.  All  these  peculiarities  of  the  circuit  lead 
us  beyond  its  own  confines  as  an  isolated  circuit  of  some  merely 
individual  capital. 

In  the  formula  C'  ...  C',  the  movement  of  the  commodity-cap¬ 
ital,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  total  product  created  capitalistically, 
appears  not  only  as  the  premise  of  the  independent  circuit  of 
the  individual  capital  but  also  as  required  by  it.  If  therefore 
this  formula  and  its  peculiarities  are  grasped,  it  is  no  longer 
sufficient  to  confine  oneself  to  indicating  that  the  metamor¬ 
phoses  C'— M'  and  M— C  are  on  the  one  hand  functionally  defined 
sections  in  the  metamorphosis  of  capital,  on  the  other  are  links 
in  the  general  circulation  of  commodities.  It  becomes  necessary 
to  elucidate  the  intertwining  of  the  metamorphoses  of  one  in¬ 
dividual  capital  with  those  of  other  individual  capitals  and  with 
that  part  of  the  total  product  which  is  intended  for  individual 
consumption.  On  analysing  the  circuit  of  an  individual  indus¬ 
trial  capital,  we  therefore  base  our  studies  mainly  on  the  first 
two  forms. 

The  circuit  C'  ...  C'  appears  as  the  form  of  a  single  individual 
capital,  for  instance  in  agriculture,  where  calculations  are  made 
from  crop  to  crop.  In  Formula  II,  the  sowing  is  the  starting- 
point,  in  Formula  III  the  harvest,  or,  to  speak  with  the  physi¬ 
ocrats,  Formula  II  starts  out  with  the  avarices,  and  Formula  III 
with  the  reprises.  The  movement  of  capital-value  appears  in  III 
from  the  outset  only  as  a  part  of  the  movement  of  the  general 
mass  of  products,  while  in  I  and  II  the  movement  of  C'  consti¬ 
tutes  only  a  phase  of  the  movement  of  some  isolated  capital. 

In  Formula  III  commodities  in  the  market  are  the  continuous 
premise  of  the  process  of  production  and  reproduction.  Hence, 
if  attention  is  fixed  exclusively  on  this  formula  all  elements 
of  the  process  of  production  seem  to  originate  in  commodity  cir¬ 
culation  and  to  consist  only  of  commodities.  This  one-sided  con¬ 
ception  overlooks  those  elements  of  the  process  of  production 
which  are  independent  of  the  commodity-elements. 

Since  in  C'  ...  C'  the  starting-point  is  the  total  product 
(total  value),  it  turns  out  that  (if  foreign  trade  is  disregarded) 


102  THE  METAMORPHOSIS  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

reproduction  on  an  extended  scale,  productivity  remaining  other¬ 
wise  constant,  can  take  place  only  when  the  part  of  the  surplus- 
product  to  be  capitalised  already  contains  the  material  elements  of 
the  additional  productive  capital;  that  therefore,  so  far  as  the 
production  of  one  year  serves  as  the  premise  of  the  following 
year’s  production  or  so  far  as  this  can  take  place  simultaneously 
with  the  process  of  simple  reproduction  within  one  year,  surplus- 
product  is  at  once  produced  in  a  form  which  enables  it  to  perform 
the  functions  of  additional  capital.  Increased  productivity  can 
increase  only  the  substance  of  capital  but  not  its  value;  but 
therewith  it  creates  additional  material  for  the  self-expansion 
of  that  value. 

C'  ...  C'  is  the  groundwork  for  Quesnay’s  Tableau  icono- 
mique,  and  it  shows  great  and  true  discretion  on  his  part  that  in 
contrast  to  M  ...  M'  (the  isolatedly  and  rigidly  retained  form 
of  the  mercantile  system)  he  selected  this  form  and  not  P  ...  P. 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 

The  three  formulas  may  be  set  down  In  the  following  manner, 
using  Tc  for  “total  circulation  process”: 

I.  M-C  ...  P  ...  C'-M' 

II.  P  ...  Tc  ...  P 

III.  Tc  ...  P(C'). 

If  we  combine  all  three  forms,  all  premises  of  the  process  ap¬ 
pear  as  its  result,  as  a  premise  produced  by  it  itself.  Every  ele¬ 
ment  appears  as  a  point  of  departure,  of  transit,  and  of  return. 
The  total  process  presents  itself  as  the  unity  of  the  processes 
of  production  and  circulation.  The  process  of  production  becomes 
the  mediator  of  the  process  of  circulation  and  vice  versa. 

All  three  circuits  have  the  following  in  common:  The  self¬ 
expansion  of  value  as  the  determining  purpose,  as  the  compel¬ 
ling  motive.  In  I  this  is  expressed  in  its  form.  Formula  II  begins 
with  P,  the  very  process  of  creating  surplus-value.  In  III  the 
circuit  begins  with  the  self-expanded  value  and  closes  with  new 
self-expanded  value,  even  if  the  movement  is  repeated  on  the 
same  scale. 

As  C — M  means  M— C  for  the  buyer,  and  M — C  means  C— M 
for  the  seller,  the  circulation  of  capital  presents  only  the  ordi¬ 
nary  metamorphosis  of  commodities,  and  the  laws  evolved  with 
regard  to  it  (Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill,  2)*  on  the  mass  of  money  in  cir¬ 
culation  are  valid  here.  However,  if  we  do  not  cling  to  this 
formal  aspect  but  rather  consider  the  actual  connection  be¬ 
tween  the  metamorphoses  of  the  various  individual  capitals,  in 
other  words,  if  we  study  the  connection  between  the  circuits 
of  individual  capitals  as  partial  movements  of  the  process  of 


English  edition:  Ch.  Ill,  2 .—Ed. 


104 


THB  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


reproduction  of  the  total  social  capital,  then  the  mere  change 
of  form  of  money  and  commodities  cannot  explain  the  connection. 

In  a  constantly  revolving  circle  every  point  is  simultaneously 
a  point  of  departure  and  a  point  of  return.  If  we  interrupt  the 
rotation,  not  every  point  of  departure  is  a  point  of  return.  Thus 
we  have  seen  that  not  only  does  every  individual  circuit  presup¬ 
pose  (implicite)  the  others,  but  also  that  the  repetition  of  the 
circuit  in  one  form  comprises  the  performance  of  the  circuit  in 
the  other  forms.  The  entire  difference  thus  appears  to  be  a 
merely  formal  one,  or  as  a  merely  subjective  distinction  existing 
solely  for  the  observer. 

Since  every  one  of  these  circuits  is  considered  a  special  form 
of  the  movement  in  which  various  individual  industrial  capitals 
are  engaged,  this  difference  always  exists  only  as  an  individual 
one.  But  in  reality  every  individual  industrial  capital  is  pres¬ 
ent  simultaneously  in  all  three  circuits.  These  three  circuits, 
the  forms  of  reproduction  assumed  by  the  three  forms  of  capital, 
are  made  continuously  side  by  side.  For  instance,  one  part  of 
the  capital-value,  which  now  performs  the  function  of  ccimmod- 
ity-capital,  is  transformed  into  money-capital,  but  at  the  same 
time  another  part  leaves  the  process  of  production  and  enters  the 
circulation  as  a  new  commodity-capital.  The  circuit  form  C'  ...  C' 
is  thus  continuously  described;  and  so  are  the  other  two  forms. 
The  reproduction  of  capital  in  each  one  of  its  forms  and  stages 
is  just  as  continuous  as  the  metamorphosis  of  these  forms  and 
the  successive  passage  through  the  three  stages.  The  entire  cir¬ 
cuit  is  thus  really  a  unity  of  its  three  forms. 

We  assumed  in  our  analysis  that  capital-value  in  its  entire 
magnitude  acts  either  as  money-capital,  productive  capital  or 
commodity-capital.  For  instance,  we  had  those  £422  first  en¬ 
tirely  as  money-capital,  then  we  transformed  them  wholly  into 
productive  capital,  and  finally  into  commodity-capital,  into 
yarn  of  the  value  of  £500  (containing  £78  worth  of  surplus-value). 
Here  the  various  stages  are  just  so  many  interruptions.  So  long 
as,  e.g.,  those  £422  retain  their  money-form,  that  is  to  say,  un¬ 
til  the  purchases  M— C  (L  plus  MP)  are  made,  the  entire  capi¬ 
tal  exists  and  functions  only  as  money-capital.  As  soon  as  it 
is  transformed  into  productive  capital,  it  performs  neither  the 
functions  of  money-capital  nor  of  commodity-capital.  Its  entire 
process  of  circulation  is  interrupted,  just  as  on  the  other  hand  its 
entire  process  of  production  is  interrupted,  as  soon  as  it  func¬ 
tions  in  one  of  its  two  circulation  stages,  either  as  M  or  as  C' 
Consequently,  the  circuit  P  ...  P  would  represent  not  only  a 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


105 


periodical  renewal  of  the  productive  capital  but  also  the  inter¬ 
ruption  of  its  function,  the  process  of  production,  up  to  the  time 
when  the  process  of  circulation  is  completed.  Instead  of  proceed¬ 
ing  continuously,  production  would  take  place  in  jerks  and 
would  be  renewed  only  in  periods  of  accidental  duration,  accord¬ 
ing  to  whether  the  two  stages  of  the  process  of  circulation  are 
got  through  with  quickly  or  slowly.  This  would  apply  for  instance 
to  a  Chinese  artisan  who  works  only  for  private  customers  and 
whose  process  of  production  ceases  until  he  receives  a  new 
order. 

This  is  indeed  true  of  every  single  part  of  capital  that  is  in 
motion,  and  all  parts  of  capital  go  through  this  motion  in  suc¬ 
cession.  Suppose  that  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  are  the  weekly 
product  of  some  spinner.  These  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  leave  the 
sphere  of  production  entirely  and  enter  the  sphere  of  circulation; 
the  capital-value  contained  in  it  must  all  be  converted  into 
money-capital,  and  so  long  as  this  value  continues  in  the  form 
of  money-capital  it  cannot  enter  anew  into  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction.  It  must  first  go  into  circulation  and  be  reconverted  into 
the  elements  of  productive  capital,  L  plus  MP.  The  circuit-de¬ 
scribing  process  of  capital  means  constant  interruption,  the  leav¬ 
ing  of  one  stage  and  the  entering  into  the  next,  the  discarding  of 


one  form  and  the  assuming  of  another.  Each  one  of  these  stages 
not  only  presupposes  the  next  but  also  excludes  it. 

But  continuity  is  the  characteristic  mark  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction,  necessitated  by  its  technical  basis,  although  not  always 
absolutely  attainable.  Let  us  see  then  what  happens  in  reality. 
While,  e.g.,  the  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  appear  in  the  market  as  com¬ 
modity-capital  and  are  transformed  into  money  (regardless  of 
whether  it  is  a  paying  or  purchasing  medium  or  only  money  of 
account),  new  cotton,  coal,  etc.,  take  the  place  of  the  yarn  in  the 
process  of  production,  have  therefore  already  been  reconverted 
from  the  money-form  and  commodity-form  into  that  of  productive 
capital,  and  begin  to  function  as  such.  At  the  same  time  that 
these  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  are  being  converted  into  money,  the 
preceding  10,000  lbs.  of  yarn  are  going  through  the  second  stage 
of  their  circulation  and  are  being  reconverted  from  money  into 
the  elements  of  productive  capital.  All  parts  of  capital  succes- 
sively  describe  circuits,  are  simultaneously  at  its  different 
stages.  The  industrial  capital,  continuously  progressing  along  its 
°rbit,  thus  exists  simultaneously  at  all  its  stages  and  in  the  di¬ 
verse  functional  forms  corresponding  to  these  stages.  That  part 
0  lndustrial  capital  which  is  converted  for  the  first  time  from 


106 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


commodity-capital  into  money  begins  the  circuit  C'  ...  C',  while 
industrial  capital  as  a  moving  whole  has  already  passed  through 
that  circuit.  One  hand  advances  money,  the  other  receives  it. 
The  inauguration  of  the  circuit  M  ...  M'  at  one  place  coincides 
with  the  return  of  the  money  at  another  place.  The  same  is  true 
of  productive  capital. 

The  actual  circuit  of  industrial  capital  in  its  continuity  is 
therefore  not  alone  the  unity  of  the  processes  of  circulation  and 
production  but  also  the  unity  of  all  its  three  circuits.  But  it 
can  be  such  a  unity  only  if  all  the  different  parts  of  capital  can 
go  through  the  successive  stages  of  the  circuit,  can  pass  from 
one  phase,  from  one  functional  form  to  another,  so  that  the  in¬ 
dustrial  capital,  being  the  whole  of  all  these  parts,  exists  simul¬ 
taneously  in  its  various  phases  and  functions  and  thus  describes 
all  three  circuits  at  the  same  time.  The  succession  (das  Nach- 
einander)  of  these  parts  is  here  governed  by  their  co-existence 
(das  N ebeneinander) ,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  division  of  capital.  In 
a  ramified  factory  system  the  product  is  constantly  in  the  various 
stages  of  its  process  of  formation  and  constantly  passes  from  one 
ph  ase  of  production  to  another.  As  the  individual  industrial  cap¬ 
ital  has  a  definite  size  which  depends  on  the  means  of  the  capi¬ 
talist  and  which  has  a  definite  minimum  magnitude  for  every 
branch  of  industry,  it  follows  that  its  division  must  proceed 
according  to  definite  proportions.  The  magnitude  of  the  available 
capital  determines  the  dimensions  of  the  process  of  production, 
and  this  again  determines  the  dimensions  of  the  commodity- 
capital  and  money-capital  in  so  far  as  they  perform  their  func¬ 
tions  parallel  with  the  process  of  production.  However  co-exist¬ 
ence,  by  which  continuity  of  production  is  determined,  is  only 
due  to  the  movement  of  those  parts  of  capital  in  which  they 
successively  pass  through  their  different  stages.  Co-existence 
is  itself  merely  the  result  of  succession.  If  for  instance  C' — M' 
stagnates  as  far  as  one  part  is  concerned,  if  the  commodity  can¬ 
not  be  sold,  then  the  circuit  of  this  part  is  interrupted  and  no 
replacement  by  its  means  of  production  takes  place;  the  suc¬ 
ceeding  parts,  which  emerge  from  the  process  of  production  in 
the  shape  of  C',  find  the  change  of  their  functions  blocked  by 
their  predecessors.  If  this  lasts  for  some  time,  production  is 
restricted  and  the  entire  process  brought  to  a  halt.  Every  stag¬ 
nation  in  succession  carries  disorder  into  co-existence,  every 
stagnation  in  one  stage  causes  more  or  less  stagnation  in  the" 
entire  circuit  of  not  only  the  stagnant  part  of  the  capital  but  also 
of  the  total  individual  capital. 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


107 


The  next  form  in  which  the  process  presents  itself  is  that  of 
a  succession  of  phases,  so  that  the  transition  of  capital  into  a 
new  phase  is  made  necessary  by  its  departure  from  another.  Every 
separate  circuit  has  therefore  one  of  the  functional  forms  of  cap¬ 
ital  for  its  point  of  departure  and  point  of  return.  On  the  other 
hand  the  aggregate  process  is  in  fact  the  unity  of  the  three  cir¬ 
cuits,  which  are  the  different  forms  in  which  the  continuity  of 
the  process  expresses  itself.  The  aggregate  circuit  presents  itself  to 
every  functional  form  of  capital  as  its  specific  circuit  and  every 
one  of  these  circuits  is  a  condition  of  the  continuity  of  the  total 
process.  The  cycle  of  each  functional  form  is  dependent  upon 
the  others.  It  is  a  necessary  prerequisite  of  the  aggregate  process 
of  production,  especially  for  the  social  capital,  that  it  is  at  the 
same  time  a  process  of  reproduction  and  hence  a  circuit  of  each 
one  of  its  elements.  Various  fractional  parts  of  capital  pass  suc¬ 
cessively  through  the  various  stages  and  functional  forms.  Thanks 
to  this  every  functional  form  passes  simultaneously  with  the 
others  through  its  own  circuit,  although  always  a  different  part 
of  capital  finds  its  expression  in  it.  One  part  of  capital,  contin¬ 
ually  changing,  continually  reproduced,  exists  as  a  commodity- 
capital  which  is  converted  into  money;  another  as  money-capi¬ 
tal  which  is  converted  into  productive  capital;  and  a  third  as 
productive  capital  which  is  transformed  into  commodity-capi¬ 
tal.  The  continuous  existence  of  all  three  forms  is  brought  about 
by  the  circuit  the  aggregate  capital  describes  in  passing  through 
precisely  these  three  phases. 

Capital  as  a  whole,  then,  exists  simultaneously,  spatially  side 
by  side,  in  its  different  phases.  But  every  part  passes  constantly 
and  successively  from  one  phase,  from  one  functional  form,  into 
the  next  and  thus  functions  in  all  of  them  in  turn.  Its  forms 
are  hence  fluid  and  their  simultaneousness  is  brought  about 
by  their  succession.  Every  form  follows  another  and  precedes 
it,  so  that  the  return  of  one  capital  part  to  a  certain  form  is 
necessitated  by  the  return  of  the  other  part  to  some  other  form. 
Every  part  describes  continuously  its  own  cycle,  but  it  is  always 
another  part  of  capital  which  exists  in  this  form,  and  these  special 
cycles  form  only  simultaneous  and  successive  elements  of  the 
aggregate  process. 

The  continuity — instead  of  the  above-described  interruption — 
of  the  aggregate  process  is  achieved  only  in  the  unity  of  the 
three  circuits.  The  aggregate  social  capital  always  has  this  con¬ 
tinuity  and  its  process  always  exhibits  the  unity  of  the  three 
circuits. 


108 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


The  continuity  of  the  reproduction  is  at  times  more  or  less 
interrupted  so  far  as  individual  capitals  are  concerned.  In  the 
first  place  the  masses  of  value  are  frequently  distributed  at  var¬ 
ious  periods  in  unequal  portions  over  the  various  stages  and 
functional  forms.  In  the  second  place  these  portions  may  be  dif¬ 
ferently  distributed,  according  to  the  character  of  the  commod¬ 
ity  to  be  produced,  hence  according  to  the  particular  sphere 
of  production  in  which  the  capital  is  invested.  In  the  third  place 
the  continuity  may  be  more  or  less  broken  in  those  branches  of 
production  which  are  dependent  on  the  seasons,  either  on  ac¬ 
count  of  natural  conditions  (agriculture,  herring  Batch,  etc.) 
or  on  account  of  conventional  circumstances,  as  for  instance  in 
so-called  seasonal  work.  The  process  goes  on  most  regularly 
and  uniformly  in  the  factories  and  mines.  But  this  difference  in 
the  various  branches  of  production  does  not  cause  any  difference 
in  the  general  forms  of  the  circular  process. 

Capital  as  self-expanding  value  embraces  not  only  class  re¬ 
lations,  a  society  of  a  definite  character  resting  on  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  labour  in  the  form  of  wage-labour.  It  is  a  movement, 
a  circuit-describing  process  going  through  various  stages,  which 
itself  comprises  three  different  forms  of  the  circuit-describing 
process.  Therefore  it  can  be  understood  only  as  motion,  not  as 
a  thing  at  rest.  Those  who  regard  the  gaining  by  value  of  inde¬ 
pendent  existence  as  a  mere  abstraction  forget  that  the  move¬ 
ment  of  industrial  capital  is  this  abstraction  in  actu.  Value  here 
passes  through  various  forms,  various  movements  in  which  it 
maintains  itself  and  at  the  same  time  expands,  augments.  As 
we  are  here  concerned  primarily  with  the  mere  form  of  this 
movement,  we  shall  not  take  into  consideration  the  revolutions 
which  capital-value  may  undergo  during  its  circuit.  But  it  is 
clear  that  in  spite  of  all  the  revolutions  of  value,  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction  exists  and  can  endure  only  so  long  as  capital-value  is 
made  to  create  surplus-value,  that  is,  so  long  as  it  describes 
its  circuit  as  a  value  that  has  gained  independence,  so  long  there¬ 
fore  as  the  revolutions  in  value  are  overcome  and  equilibrated 
in  some  way.  The  movements  of  capital  appear  as  the  action 
of  some  individual  industrial  capitalist  who  performs  the  func¬ 
tions  of  a  buyer  of  commodities  and  labour,  a  seller  of 
commodities,  and  an  owner  of  productive  capital,  who  therefore 
promotes  the  circuit  by  his  activity.  If  social  capital  experiences 
a  revolution  in  value,  it  may  happen  that  the  capital  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  capitalist  succumbs  to  it  and  fails,  because  it  cannot 
adapt  itself  to  the  conditions  of  this  movement  of  values.  The 


j 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


109 


more  acute  and  frequent  such  revolutions  in  value  become,  the 
more  does  the  automatic  movement  of  the  now  independent  val¬ 
ue  operate  with  the  elemental  force  of  a  natural  process,  against 
the  foresight  and  calculation  of  the  individual  capitalist,  the 
more  does  the  course  of  normal  production  become  subservient 
to  abnormal  speculation,  and  the  greater  is  the  danger  that  threat¬ 
ens  the  existence  of  the  individual  capitals.  These  periodical 
revolutions  in  value  therefore  corroborate  what  they  are  sup¬ 
posed  to  refute,  namely,  that  value  as  capital  acquires  independ¬ 
ent  existence,  which  it  maintains  and  accentuates  through  its 
movement. 

This  succession  of  the  metamorphoses  of  capital  in  process 
includes  continuous  comparison  of  the  change  in  the  magnitude 
of  value  of  the  capital  brought  about  in  the  circuit  with  the 
,  original  value.  If  value's  acquisition  of  independence  of  the 
value-creating  power,  labour-power,  is  inaugurated  by  the  act 
M— L  (purchase  of  labour-power)  and  is  effected  during  the 
process  of  production  as  exploitation  of  labour-power,  this  ac¬ 
quisition  of  independence  on  the  part  of  value  does  not  re-appear 
in  that  circuit,  in  which  money,  commodities,  and  elements  of 
production  are  merely  alternating  forms  of  capital-value  in 
process,  and  the  former  magnitude  of  value  is  compared  with 
capital’s  present  changed  magnitude  of  value. 

“Value,  ”  argues  Bailey  against  the  acquisition  of  independ¬ 
ence  by  value,  an  independence  which  is  characteristic  of  the 
capitalist  mode  of  production  and  which  he  treats  as  an  illusion 
of  certain  economists;  “value  is  a  relation  between  contemporary 
commodities,  because  such  only  admit  of  being  exchanged  for  each 
other.  ”*  This  he  says  against  the  comparison  of  commodity-values 
of  different  epochs,  a  comparison  which  amounts  only  to  compar¬ 
ing  the  expenditure  of  labour  required  in  various  periods  for 
the  production  of  the  same  sort  of  commodities,  once  the  value 
of  money  has  been  fixed  for  every  period.  This  comes  from  his 
general  misunderstanding,  for  he  thinks  that  exchange-value 
is  equal  to  value,  that  the  form  of  value  is  value  rtself;  conse¬ 
quently  commodity-values  can  no  longer  be  compared,  if  they 
do  not  function  actively  as  exchange-values  and  thus  cannot 
actually  be  exchanged  for  one  another.  He  has  not  the  least  ink¬ 
ling  of  the  fact  that  value  functions  as  capital-value  or  capital 

*  See:  Bailey,  Samael,  A  Critical  Dissertation  on  the  Nature,  Measures, 
and  Causes  of  Value;  Chiefly  in  Reference  to  the  Writings  of  Mr,  Ricardo 
ana  Hn  Followers  By  the  Author  of  Essays  on  the  Formation  and  Publication 
•/  Opinions,  London,  1825,  p.  72.—  Ed. 


110 


the  metamorphoses  of  capital  and  their  circuits 


only  in  so  far  as  it  remains  identical  with  itself  and  is  compared 
with  itself  in  the  different  phases  of  its  circuit,  which  are  not 
at  all  “contemporary”  but  succeed  one  another. 

In  order  to  study  the  formula  of  the  circuit  in  its  purity  it 
is  not  sufficient  to  postulate  that  commodities  are  sold  at  their 
value;  it  must  also  be  assumed  that  this  takes  place  with  other 
things  being  equal.  Take  for  instance  the  form  P...  P,  disregard¬ 
ing  all  technical  revolutions  within  the  process  of  production  by 
which  the  productive  capital  of  a  certain  capitalist  might  be 
depreciated;  disregarding  furthermore  all  reactions  which  a  change 
in  the  elements  of  value  of  the  productive  capital  might  have 
on  the  value  of  the  existing  commodity-capital,  which  might 
appreciate  or  depreciate  if  a  stock  of  it  is  on  hand.  Suppose  the 
10,000  lbs.  of  yarn,  C',  have  been  sold  at  their  value  of  £500; 
8,440  lbs.,  equal  to  £422,  replace  the  capital-value  contained 
in  C'.  But  if  the  value  of  cotton,  coal,  etc.,  has  increased  (we 
do  not  consider  mere  fluctuations  in  price),  these  £422  may 
not  suffice  for  the  full  replacement  of  the  elements  of  productive 
capital;  additional  money-capital  is  required,  money-capital  is 
tied  up.  The  opposite  takes  place  when  those  prices  fall.  Money 
capital  is  set  free.  The  process  takes  a  wholly  normal  course  only 
when  the  value-relations  remain  constant;  its  course  is  practi 
cally  normal  so  long  as  the  disturbances  during  the  repetitions  of 
the  circuit  balance  one  another.  But  the  greater  these  disturbances 
the  greater  the  money-capital  which  the  industrial  capitalist 
must  possess  to  tide  over  the  period  of  readjustment;  and  as  the 
scale  of  each  individual  process  of  production  and  with  it  the 
minimum  size  of  the  capital  to  be  advanced  increases  in  the 
process  of  capitalist  production,  we  have  here  another  circum¬ 
stance  to  be  added  to  those  others  which  transform  the  func¬ 
tion  of  the  industrial  capitalist  more  and  more  into  a  monop 
oly  of  big  money-capitalists,  who  may  operate  singly  or  in 
association. 

We  remark  incidentally  that  if  a  change  in  the  value  of  the 
elements  of  production  occurs  a  difference  appears  between  the 
form  M  ...  M'  on  one  side  and  of  P  ...  P  and  Ci  ...  C'  on  the 
other. 

In  M  ...  M',  the  formula  of  newly  invested  capital,  which  first 
appears  as  money-capital,  a  fall  in  the  value  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction,  such  as  raw  material,  auxiliary  material,  etc.,  will  per¬ 
mit  of  a  smaller  expenditure  of  money-capital  than  before  this 
fall  for  the  purpose  of  starting  a  business  of  a  definite  size,  because 
the  scale  of  the  process  of  production  (productive  power  develop- 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


111 


ment  remaining  the  same)  depends  on  the  mass  and  volume  of  the 
means  of  production  which  a  given  quantity  of  labour-power 
can  cope  with;  but  it  does  not  depend  on  the  value  of  these 
means  of  production  nor  on  that  of  the  labour-power  (the  latter 
value  affects  only  the  magnitude  of  self-expansion).  Take  the 
reverse  case.  If  there  is  a  rise  in  the  value  of  the  elements  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  commodities  which  constitute -the  elements  of 
the  productive  capital,  then  more  money-capital  is  needed  for 
the  establishment  of  a  business  of  definite  proportions.  In  both 
cases  it  is  only  the  amount  of  the  money-capital  required  for 
new  investment  that  is  affected.  In  the  former  case  money-capi¬ 
tal  becomes  surplus,  in  the  latter  it  is  tied  up,  provided  the 
accession  of  new  individual  industrial  capital  proceeds  in  the 
usual  way  in  a  given  branch  of  production. 

The  circuits  P  ...  P  and  C'  ...  C'  present  themselves  as  M  ...  M' 
only  to  the  extent  that  the  movement  of  P  and  C'  is  at  the 
same  time  accumulation,  hence  to  the  extent  that  additional  m, 
money,  is  converted  into  money-capital.  Apart  from  this  they 
are  affected  differently  from  M  ...  M'  by  a  change  in  value  of 
the  elements  of  productive  capital;  here,  too,  we  do  not  take 
into  consideration  the  reaction  of  such  changes  in  value  on  those 
constituent  parts  of  capital  which  are  engaged  in  the  process  of 
production.  It  is  not  the  original  expenditure  which  is  directly 
affected  here,  but  an  industrial  capital  engaged  in  its  process  of 
reproduction  and  not  in  its  first  circuit;  i.e.,  C'  ...  C<^p,  the 

reconversion  of  commodity-capital  into  its  elements  of  produc¬ 
tion,  so  far  as  they  are  composed  of  commodities.  When  values 
(or  prices)  fall  three  cases  are  possible:  The  process  of  repro¬ 
duction  is  continued  on  the  same  scale;  in  that  event  a  part  of 
the  money-capital  existing  hitherto  is  set  free  and  money-capi¬ 
tal  is  accumulated,  although  no  real  accumulation  (production 
on  an  extended  scale)  or  transformation  of  m  (surplus-value) 
into  an  accumulation-fund  initiating  and  accompanying  such 
accumulation  has  previously  taken  place.  Or  the  process  of  re¬ 
production  is  carried  on  on  a  more  extensive  scale  than  ordi¬ 
narily  would  have  been  the  case,  provided  the  technical  propor¬ 
tions  admit  it.  Or,  finally,  a  larger  stock  of  raw  materials,  etc., 
is  laid  in. 

The  opposite  occurs  if  the  value  of  the  elements  of  replace¬ 
ment  of  a  commodity-capital  increases.  In  that  case  reproduction 
no  longer  takes  place  on  its  normal  scale  (e.g.,  the  working-day 
gats  shorter);  or  additional  money-capital  mpst  be  employed  in 


112 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


order  to  maintain  the  old  volume  of  work  (money-capital  is 
tied  up);  or  the  money-fund  for  accumulation,  when  one  exists, 
is  employed  entirely  or  partially  for  the  operation  of  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  reproduction  on  its  old  scale  instead  of  for  the  enlarge¬ 
ment  of  this  process.  This  is  also  tying  up  money-capital,  except 
that  here  the  additional  money-capital  does  not  come  from  the 
outside,  from  the  money-market,  but  from  the  means  of  the  in¬ 
dustrial  capitalist  himself. 

However,  there  may  be  modifying  circumstances  in  P  ...  P 
and  C'  ...  C'.  If  our  spinning-mill  proprietor  for  example  has 
a  large  stock  of  cotton  (a  large  proportion  of  his  productive  capital 
in  the  form  of  a  stock  of  cotton),  a  part  of  his  productive  capital 
is  depreciated  by  a  fall  in  the  prices  of  cotton;  but  if  on  the 
contrary  these  prices  rise,  this  part  of  his  productive  capital 
appreciates.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  has  tied  up  huge  quantities 
in  the  form  of  commodity-capital,  for  instance  of  cotton  yarn, 
a  part  of  his  commodity-capital,  hence  of  his  circuit-describing 
capital  in  general,  is  depreciated  by  a  fall  of  cotton,  or  appreciat¬ 
ed  by  a  rise  in  its  prices.  Finally  take  the  process  C' — M — G<^p- 
If  C'— M,  the  realisation  of  the  commodity-capital,  has  taken 
place  before  a  change  in  the  value  of  the  elements  of  C,  then 
capital  is  affected  only  in  the  way  indicated  in  the  first  case, 
namely  in  the  second  act  of  circulation,  M — C<^p;  but  if  such  a 
change  has  occurred  before  C' — M  has  been  effected,  then,  other 
conditions  remaining  equal,  a  fall  in  the  price  of  cotton  causes  a 
corresponding  fall  in  the  price  of  yarn,  and  a  rise  in  the  price 
of  cotton  means  conversely  a  rise  in  the  price  of  yarn.  The  effect 
on  the  various  individual  capitals  invested  in  the  same  branch 
of  production  may  differ  widely,  according  to  the  circumstances 
in  which  they  find,  themselves. 

Money-capital  may  also  be  set  free  or  tied  up  on  account  of 
differences  in  the  duration  of  the  process  of  circulation,  hence 
also  in  the  speed  of  circulation.  But  this  belongs  in  the  discus¬ 
sion  on  turnover.  At  this  point  we  are  only  interested  in  the  real 
difference  that  becomes  evident,  with  regard  to  changes  of  val¬ 
ues  of  the  elements  of  productive  capital,  between  M  ...  M'  and 
the  other  two  circuit  forms. 

In  the  circulation  section  M— C<yp,  in  the  epoch  of  the  al¬ 
ready  developed  and  hence  prevailing  capitalist  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction,  a  large  portion  of  the  commodities  composing  MP,  the 
means  of  production,  is  itself  functioning  as  the  commodity- 
capital  of  someone  else.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  seller,  there- 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


113 


fore,  C' — M',  the  transformation  of  commodity-capital  into 
money-capital,  takes  place.  But  this  is  not  an  absolute  rule.  On 
the  contrary.  Within  its  process  of  circulation,  in  which  in¬ 
dustrial  capital  functions  either  as  money  or  as  commodities, 
the  circuit  of  industrial  capital,  whether  as  money-capital  or 
as  commodity-capital,  crosses  the  commodity  circulation  of  the 
most  diverse  modes  of  social  production,  so  far  as  they  produce 
commodities.  No  matter  whether  commodities  are  the  output  of 
production  based  on  slavery,  of  peasants  (Chinese,  Indian  ryots), 
of  communes  (Dutch  East  Indies),  of  state  enterprise  (such  as 
existed  in  former  epochs  of  Russian  history  on  the  basis  of  serf¬ 
dom)  or  of  half-savage  hunting  tribes,  etc.  —  as  commodities  and 
money  they  come  face  to  face  with  the  money  and  commodities 
in  which  the  industrial  capital  presents  itself  and  enter  as  much 
into  its  circuit  as  into  that  of  the  surplus-value  borne  in  the 
commodity-capital,  provided  the  surplus-value  is  spent  as  reve¬ 
nue;  hence  they  enter  into  both  branches  of  circulation  of  com¬ 
modity-capital.  The  character  of  the  process  of  production  from 
which  they  originate  is  immaterial.  They  function  as  commodi¬ 
ties  in  the  market,  and  as  commodities  they  enter  into  the  circuit 
of  industrial  capital  as  well  as  into  the  circulation  of  the  surplus- 
value  incorporated  in  it.  It  is  therefore  the  universal  character 
of  the  origin  of  the  commodities,  the  existence  of  the  market  as 
world-market,  which  distinguishes  the  process  of  circulation  of 
industrial  capital.  What  is  true  of  the  commodities  of  others  is 
also  true  of  the  money  of  others.  Just  as  commodity-capital 
faces  money  only  as  commodities,  so  this  money  functions  vis- 
a-vis  commodity-capital  only  as  money.  Money  here  performs 
the  functions  of  world-money. 

However  two  points  must  be  noted  here. 

First:  As  soon  as  act  M — MP  is  completed,  the  commodities 
(MP)  cease  to  be  such  and  become  one  of  the  modes  of  existence 
of  industrial  capital  in  its  functional  form  of  P,  productive  cap¬ 
ital.  Thereby  however  their  origin  is  obliterated.  They  exist 
henceforth  only  as  forms  of  existence  of  industrial  capital,  are 
embodied  in  it.  However  it  still  remains  true  that  to  replace 
them  they  must  be  reproduced,  and  to  this  extent  the  capital¬ 
ist  mode  of  production  is  conditional  on  modes  of  production 
lying  outside  of  its  own  stage  of  development.  But  it  is  the  tend¬ 
ency  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  to  transform  all  pro¬ 
duction  as  much  as  possible  into  commodity  production.  The 
mainspring  by  which  this  is  accomplished  is  precisely  the  in¬ 
volvement  of  all  production  into  the  capitalist  circulation  process. 


1 


114  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

And  developed  commodity  production  itself  is  capitalist 
commodity  production.  The  intervention  of  industrial  capital 
promotes  this  transformation  everywhere,  but  with  it  also  the 
transformation  of  all  direct  producers  into  wage-labourers. 

Secondly:  The  commodities  entering  into  the  process  of  cir¬ 
culation  of  industrial  capital  (including  the  requisite  means  of 
subsistence  into  which  variable  capital,  after  being  paid  to  the 
labourers,  is  transformed  for  the  purpose  of  reproducing  their 
labour-power),  regardless  of  their  origin  and  of  the  social  form 
of  the  productive  process  by  which  they  were  brought  into  ex¬ 
istence,  come  face  to  face  with  industrial  capital  itself  already 
in  the  form  of  commodity-capital,  in  the  form  of  commodity- 
dealer’s  or  merchant’s  capital.  And  merchant’s  capital,  by  its 
very  nature,  comprises  commodities  of  all  modes  of  production. 

The  capitalist  mode  of  production  presupposes  not  only  large- 
scale  production  but  also,  and  necessarily  so,  sales  on  a  large 
scale,  hence  sale  to  the  merchant,  not  to  the  individual  con¬ 
sumer.  If  this  consumer  is  himself  a  productive  consumer,  hence  an 
industrial  capitalist,  i.e.,  if  the  industrial  capital  of  one  branch 
of  production  supplies  some  other  branch  of  industry  with  means 
of  production,  direct  sale  by  one  industrial  capitalist  to  many 
others  takes  place  (in  the  form  of  orders,  etc.).  To  this  extent 
every  industrial  capitalist  is  a  direct  seller  and  his  own  mer¬ 
chant,  which  by  the  way  he  also  is  when  he  sells  to  a  merchant. 

Trading  in  commodities  as  the  function  of  merchant’s  capital 
is  a  premise  of  capitalist  production  and  develops  more  and  more 
in  the  course  of  development  of  such  production.  Therefore  we 
occasionally  take  its  existence  for  granted  to  illustrate  partic¬ 
ular  aspects  of  the  process  of  capitalist  circulation;  but  in  the 
general  analysis  of  this  process  we  assume  direct  sale,  without 
the  intervention  of  a  merchant,  because  this  intervention  ob¬ 
scures  various  facets  of  the  movement. 

Cf.  Sismondi,  who  presents  the  matter  somewhat  naively: 

“Commerce  employs  considerable  capital,  which  at  Drst  sight 
does  not  seem  to  be  a  part  of  that  capital  whose  movement  we 
have  described.  The  value  of  the  cloth  accumulated  in  the  stores 
of  the  cloth-merchant  seems  at  first  to  be  entirely  foreign  to 
that  part  of  the  annual  production  which  the  rich  gives  to  the 
poor  as  wages  in  order  to  make  him  work.  However  this  capital 
has  simply  replaced  the  other  of  which  we  have  spoken.  For  the 
purpose  of  clearly  understanding  the  progress  of  wealth,  we 
have  begun  with  its  creation  and  followed  it  to  its  consumption. 
Then  the  capital  employed  in  cloth  manufacturing,  for  instance, 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


115 


always  seemed  the  same  to  us;  and  when  it  was  exchanged  for 
the  revenue  of  the  consumer,  it  was  divided  into  only  two  parts, 
one  of  them  serving  as  revenue  of  the  manufacturer  in  the  form 
of  the  profit,  the  other  serving  as  revenue  of  the  labourers  in 
the  form  of  wages  for  the  time  they  were  manufacturing  new 
cloth. 

“But  it  was  soon  found  that  it  would  be  to  the  advantage  of 
all  if  the  different  parts  of  this  capital  were  to  replace  one 
another  and  that,  if  100,000  ecus  were  sufficient  for  the  entire 
circulation  between  the  manufacturer  and  the  consumer,  they 
should  be  divided  equally  between  the  manufacturer,  the  whole¬ 
sale  merchant,  and  the  retail  merchant.  The  first  then  did  with 
only  one-third  of  this  capital  the  same  work  as  he  had  done  with 
the  entire  capital,  because  as  soon  as  his  work  of  manufactur¬ 
ing  was  completed  he  found  that  a  merchant  would  rather  buy 
from  him  than  a  consumer  would.  On  the  other  hand  the  cap¬ 
ital  of  the  wholesaler  was  much  sooner  replaced  by  that  of  the 
retailer....  The  difference  between  the  sums  advanced  for  wages 
and  the  purchase  price  paid  by  the  ultimate  consumer  was  con¬ 
sidered  the  profit  of  those  capitals.  It  was  divided  between  the 
manufacturer,  the  merchant,  and  the  retailer,  from  the  moment 
that  they  had  divided  their  functions  among  themselves,  and 
the  work  performed  was  the  same,  although  it  had  required  three 
persons  and  three  parts  of  capital  instead  of  one."  (Nouveaux 
Principes ,  I,  pages  139  and  140.) 

“All  of  them  [the  merchants]  contributed  indirectly  to  the 
production;  for  having  consumption  for  its  object,  production 
cannot  be  regarded  as  completed  until  the  thing  produced  is 
placed  within  the  reach  of  the  consumer*  {Ibid.,  p.  137.) 

In  the  discussion  of  the  general  forms  of  the  circuit  and  in 
the  entire  second  book  in  general,  we  take  money  to  mean  metal¬ 
lic  money,  with  the  exception  of  symbolic  money,  mere  tokens 
of  value,  which  are  designed  for  specific  use  in  certain  states, 
and  of  credit-money,  which  is  not  yet  developed.  In  the  first 
place,  this  is  the  historical  order;  credit-money  plays  only  a  very 
minor  role,  or  none  at  all,  during  the  first  epoch  of  capitalist 
production.  In  the  second  place,  the  necessity  of  this  order  is 
demonstrated  theoretically  by  the  fact  that  everything  of  a  crit¬ 
ical  nature  which  Tooke  and  others  hitherto  expounded  in  re¬ 
gard  to  the  circulation  of  credit-money  compelled  them  to  hark 
back  again  and  again  to  the  question  of  what  would  be  the  aspect 
of  the  matter  if  nothing  but  metal-money  were  in  circulation. 
But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  metal-money  may  serve  as  a 


116  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

purchasing  medium  and  also  as  a  paying  medium.  For  the  sake 
of  simplicity,  we  consider  it  in  this  second  book  generally  only 
in  its  first  functional  form. 

The  process  of  circulation  of  industrial  capital,  which  is  only 
a  part  of  its  individual  circuit,  is  determined  by  the  general 
laws  previously  set  forth  (Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill),*  in  so  far  as  it 
is  only  a  series  of  acts  within  the  general  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities.  The  greater  the  velocity  of  the  currency  of  money,  the 
more  rapidly  therefore  every  individual  capital  passes  through 
the  series  of  its  commodity  or  money  metamorphoses,  the  more 
numerous  are  the  industrial  capitals  (or  individual  capitals  in 
the  form  of  commodity-capitals)  started  circulating  successively 
by  a  given  mass  of  money,  for  example  £500.  The  more  the  mon¬ 
ey  functions  as  a  paying  medium,  the  more  therefore — for  in¬ 
stance  in  the  replacement  of  some  commodity-capital  by  its  means 
of  production — nothing  but  balances  have  to  be  squared,  and 
the  shorter  the  periods  of  timo  when  payments  fall  due,  as  for 
instance  in  paying  wages,  the  less  money  a  given  mass  of  capi¬ 
tal-value  therefore  requires  for  its  circulation.  On  the  other  hand, 
assuming  that  the  velocity  of  the  circulation  and  all  other  condi¬ 
tions  remain  the  same,  the  amount  of  money  required  to  circu¬ 
late  as  money-capital  is  determined  by  the  sum  of  the  prices  of 
the  commodities  (price  multiplied  by  the  volume  of  commodities), 
or,  if  the  quantity  and  value  of  the  commodities  are  fixed,  by 
the  value  of  the  money  itself. 

But  the  laws  of  the  general  circulation  of  commodities  are 
valid  only  when  capital’s  circulation  process  consists  of  a  series 
of  simple  acts  of  circulation;  they  do  not  apply  when  the  latter 
constitute  functionally  determined  sections  of  the  circuit  of 
individual  industrial  capitals. 

In  order  to  make  this  plain,  it  is  best  to  study  the  process 
of  circulation  in  Its  uninterrupted  interconnection,  such  as  it 
appears  in  the  following  two  forms: 

C —  M  C  <{^p  ...  P  (P  ) 

II)  P ...  C'  —  M' 

c  —  m  —  c 

C-  M  C  <J^p  ...  P  ...  C' 

III)  C'  —  M 

c  —  m  —  c 


*  English  edition:  Ch.  Ill  — Ed . 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


117 


As  a  series  of  acts  of  circulation  in  general,  the  process  of 
circulation  (whether  in  the  form  of  C— M— C  or  of  M— C— M) 
represents  merely  the  two  antithetical  series  of  commodity  meta¬ 
morphoses,  every  single  one  of  which  in  its  turn  implies  an  oppo¬ 
site  metamorphosis  on  the  part  of  the  alien  commodity  or  alien 
money  confronting  the  commodity. 

C— M  on  the  part  of  the  owner  of  a  commodity  means  M — C 
on  the  part  of  its  buyer;  the  first  metamorphosis  of  the  commod¬ 
ity  in  G— M  is  the  second  metamorphosis  of  the  commodity  ap¬ 
pearing  in  the  form  of  M;  the  opposite  applies  to  M— C.  What 
has  been  shown  concerning  the  intertwining  of  the  metamorpho¬ 
sis  of  a  certain  commodity  in  one  stage  with  that  of  another 
in  another  stage  applies  to  the  circulation  of  capital  so  far  as  the 
capitalist  functions  as  a  buyer  and  seller  of  commodities,  and 
his  capital  on  that  account  functions  in  the  form  of  money  op¬ 
posed  to  the  commodities  of  another,  or  in  the  form  of  commodi¬ 
ties  opposed  to  the  money  of  another.  But  this  intertwining  is 
not  to  be  identified  with  the  intertwining  of  the  metamorpho¬ 
ses  of  capitals. 

In  the  first  place  M— C  (MP),  as  we  have  seen,  may  represent 
an  intermingling  of  the  metamorphoses  of  different  individual 
capitals.  For  instance  the  commodity-capital  of  the  spinning- 
mill  owner,  yarn,  is  partly  replaced  by  coal.  One  part  of  his 
capital  exists  in  the  form  of  money  and  is  converted  into  the  form 
of  commodities,  while  the  capital  of  the  capitalist  producer  of 
coal  is  in  the  form  of  commodities  and  is  therefore  converted  into 
the  form  of  money;  the  same  act  of  circulation  represents  in  this 
case  opposite  metamorphoses  of  two  industrial  capitals  (in  different 
branches  of  production),  hence  an  intertwining  of  the  series  of 
metamorphoses  of  these  capitals.  But  as  we  have  seen  the  MP 
into  which  M  is  transformed  need  not  be  commodity-capital 
in  the  categorical  sense,  i.e.,  need  not  be  a  functional  form  of 
industrial  capital,  need  not  be  produced  by  a  capitalist.  It  is 
always  M — C  on  one  side  and  C — M  on  the  other,  but  not  al¬ 
ways  an  intermingling  of  metamorphoses  of  capitals.  Further¬ 
more  M  —  L,  the  purchase  of  labour-power,  is  never  an  inter¬ 
mingling  of  metamorphoses  of  capitals,  for  labour-power,  though 
the  commodity  of  the  labourer,  does  not  become  capital  until 
it  is  sold  to  the  capitalist.  On  the  other  hand  in  the  process 
C  — M',  it  is  not  necessary  that  M'  should  represent  converted 
commodity-capital;  it  may  be  the  realisation  in  money  of  the 
commodity  labour-power  (wages),  or  of  the  product  of  some  in¬ 
dependent  labourer,  slave,  serf,  or  community. 


118 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


In  the  second  place  however  it  is  not  at  all  required  for  the  dis¬ 
charge  of  the  functionally  determined  role  played  by  every 
metamorphosis  occurring  within  the  process  of  circulation  of 
some  individual  capital  that  this  metamorphosis  should  represent 
the  corresponding  opposite  metamorphosis  in  the  circuit  of  the 
other  capital,  provided  we  assume  that  the  entire  production 
of  the  world-market  is  carried  on  capitalistically.  For  instance 
in  the  circuit  P...  P,  the  M  which  converts  C'  into  money  may 
be  to  the  buyer  only  the  realisation  in  money  of  his  surplus- 
value  (if  the  commodity  is  an.  article  of  consumption);  or,  in 
M' — C'<J|p  (where  therefore  already  accumulated  capital  enters) 
M'  may,  as  far  as  the  vendor  of  MP  is  concerned,  enter  into 
the  circulation  of  his  capital  only  to  replace  his  advanced  capital 
or  it  may  not  re-enter  at  all  by  being  diverted  into  revenue 
expenditure. 

Therefore  the  manner  in  which  the  various  component  parts 
of  the  aggregate  social  capital,  of  which  the  individual  capitals 
are  but  constituents  functioning  independently,  mutually  re¬ 
place  one  another  in  the  process  of  circulation  — in  regard  to 
capital  as  well  as  surplus-value— is  not  ascertained  from  the 
simple  intertwinings  of  the  metamorphoses  in  the  circulation  of 
commodities— intertwinings  which  the  acts  of  capital  circula¬ 
tion  have  in  common  with  all  other  circulation  of  commodities. 
That  requires  a  different  method  of  investigation.  Hitherto  one 
has  been  satisfied  with  uttering  phrases  which  upon  closer  anal¬ 
ysis  are  found  to  contain  nothing  but  indefinite  ideas  borrowed 
from  the  intertwining  of  metamorphoses  common  to  all  com¬ 
modity  circulation. 


One  of  the  most  obvious  peculiarities  of  the  movement  in 
circuits  of  industrial  capital,  and  therefore  also  of  capitalist 
production,  is  the  fact  that  on  the  one  hand  the  component  ele¬ 
ments  of  productive  capital  are  derived  from  the  commodity- 
market  and  must  be  continually  renewed  out  of  it,  bought  as 
commodities;  and  that  on  the  other  hand  the  product  of  the  la¬ 
bour-process  emerges  from  it  as  a  commodity  and  must  be  contin¬ 
ually  sold  anew  as  a  commodity.  Compare  for  instance  a  mod¬ 
ern  farmer  of  the  Scotch  lowlands  with  an  old-fashioned  small 
peasant  on  the  Continent.  The  former  sells  his  entire  product 
and  has  therefore  to  replace  all  its  elements,  even  his  seed,  in  the 
market;  the  latter  consumes  the  greater  part  of  his  product  di- 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


119 


rectly,  buys  and  sells  as  little  as  possible,  fashions  tools,  makes 
clothing,  etc.,  so  far  as  possible  himself. 

Natural  economy,  money-economy,  and  credit-economy  have 
therefore  been  placed  in  opposition  to  one  another  as  being  the 
three  characteristic  economic  forms  of  movement  in  social 
production. 

In  the  first  place  these  three  forms  do  not  represent  equiva¬ 
lent  phases  of  development.  The  so-called  credit-economy  is 
merely  a  form  of  the  money-economy,  since  both  terms  express 
functions  or  modes  of  exchange  among  the  producers  them¬ 
selves.  In  developed  capitalist  production,  the  money-economy 
appears  only  as  the  basis  of  the  credit-economy.  The  money-econ¬ 
omy  and  credit-economy  thus  correspond  only  to  different  stages 
in  the  development  of  capitalist  production,  but  they  are  by 
no  means  independent  forms  of  exchange  vis-a-vis  natural 
economy.  With  the  same  justification  one  might  contrapose  as 
equivalents  the  very  different  forms  of  natural  economy  to 
those  two  economies. 

In  the  second  place,  since  it  is  not  the  economy,  i.e.,  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  itself  that  is  emphasised  as  the  distinguish¬ 
ing  mark  of  the  two  categories,  money-economy  and  credit-econ¬ 
omy,  but  rather  the  mode  of  exchange— corresponding  to  that 
economy  — between  the  various  agents  of  production,  or  producers, 
the  same  should  apply  to  the  first  category.  Hence  exchange 
economy  instead  of  natural  economy.  A  completely  isolated 
natural  economy,  such  as  the  Inca  state  of  Peru,  would  not  come 
under  any  of  these  categories. 

In  the  third  place  the  money-economy  is  common  to  all  com¬ 
modity  production  and  the  product  appears  as  a  commodity  in 
the  most  varied  organisms  of  social  production.  Consequently 
what  characterises  capitalist  production  would  then  be  only 
the  extent  to  which  the  product  is  created  as  an  article  of  com¬ 
merce,  as  a  commodity,  and  hence  the  extent  also  to  which  its 
own  constituent  elements  must  enter  again  as  articles  of  com¬ 
merce,  as  commodities,  into  the  economy  from  which  it  emerges. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  capitalist  production  is  commodity  produc¬ 
tion  as  the  general  form  of  production.  But  it  is  so  and  becomes 
so  more  and  more  in  the  course  of  its  development  only  because 
labour  itself  appears  here  as  a  commodity,  because  the  labourer 
sells  his  labour,  that  is,  the  function  of  his  labour-power,  and 
our  assumption  is  that  he  sells  it  at  its  value,  determined  by 
its  cost  of  reproduction.  To  the  extent  that  labour  becomes  wage- 
labour,  the  producer  becomes  an  industrial  capitalist.  For  this 


120 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


reason  capitalist  production  (and  hence  also  commodity  produc¬ 
tion)  does  not  reach  its  full  scope  until  the  direct  agricultural 
producer  becomes  a  wage-labourer,  in  the  relation  of  capitalist 
and  wage-labourer,  the  money-relation,  the  relation  between  the 
buyer  and  the  seller,  becomes  a  relation  inherent  in  production. 
But  this  relation  has  its  foundation  in  the  social  character  of 
production,  not  in  the  mode  of  exchange.  The  latter  conversely 
emanates  from  the  former.  It  is,  however,  quite  in  keeping  with 
the  bourgeois  horizon,  everyone  being  engrossed  in  the  transaction 
of  shady  business,  not  to  see  in  the  character  of  the  mode  of  pro¬ 
duction  the  basis  of  the  mode  of  exchange  corresponding  to  it, 
but  vice  versa.7 


The  capitalist  throws  less  value  in  the  form  of  money  into 
the  circulation  than  he  draws  out  of  it,  because  he  throws  into 
it  more  value  in  the  form  of  commodities  than  he  withdrew  from 
it  in  the  form  of  commodities.  Since  he  functions  simply  as  a  per¬ 
sonification  of  capital,  as  an  industrial  capitalist,  his  supply 
of  commodity-value  is  always  greater  than  his  demand  for  it. 
If  his  supply  and  demand  in  this  respect  covered  each  other  it 
would  mean  that  his  capital  had  not  produced  any  surplus-value, 
that  it  had  not  functioned  as  productive  capital,  that  the  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  had  been  converted  into  commodity-capital  not 
big  with  surplus-value;  that  it  had  not  drawn  any  surplus-value 
in  commodity-form  out  of  labour-power  during  the  process  of 
production,  had  not  functioned  at  all  as  capital.  The  capitalist 
must  indeed  “sell  dearer  than  he  has  bought,"  but  he  succeeds 
in  doing  so  only  because  the  capitalist  process  of  production 
enables  him  to  transform  the  cheaper  commodity  he  bought  — 
cheaper  because  it  contains  less  value — into  a  commodity  of 
greater  value,  hence  a  dearer  one.  He  sells  dearer,  not  because 
he  sells  above  the  value  of  his  commodity,  but  because  his  com¬ 
modity  contains  value  in  excess  of  that  contained  in  the  ingre¬ 
dients  of  its  production. 

The  rate  at  which  the  capitalist  makes  the  value  of  his  capi¬ 
tal  expand  is  the  greater,  the  greater  the  difference  between  his 
supply  and  his  demand,  i.e.,  the  greater  the  excess'  of  the  commod¬ 
ity-value  he  supplies  over  the  commodity-value  he  demands 


7  End  of  Manuscript  V.  What  follows,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  is  a 
note  contained  in  a  notebook  of  1877  or  1878  amid  extracts  from  various 
books. — F.  E. 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


121 


His  aim  is  not  to  equalise  his  supply  and  demand,  but  to  make 
the  inequality  between  them,  the  excess  of  his  supply  over  his 
demand,  as  great  as  possible. 

What  is  true  of  the  individual  capitalist  applies  to  the  capi¬ 
talist  class. 

In  so  far  as  the  capitalist  merely  personifies  industrial  capital, 
his  own  demand  is  confined  to  means  of  production  and  labour- 
power.  In  point  of  value,  his  demand  for  MP  is  smaller  than  his 
advanced  capital;  he  buys  means  of  production  of  a  smaller 
value  than  that  of  his  capital,  and  therefore  of  a  still  smaller 
value  than  that  of  the  commodity-capital  which  he  supplies. 

As  regards  his  demand  for  labour-power,  it  is  determined  in 
point  of  value  by  the  relation  of  his  variable  capital  to  his  total 
capital,  hence  equals  v:C.  In  capitalist  production  this  demand 
therefore  grows  relatively  smaller  than  his  demand  for  means 
of  production.  His  purchases  of  MP  steadily  rise  above  his  pur¬ 
chases  of  L. 

Since  the  labourer  generally  converts  his  wages  into  means 
of  subsistence,  and  for  the  overwhelmingly  larger  part  into  ab¬ 
solute  necessities,  the  demand  of  the  capitalist  for  labour-power 
is  indirectly  also  a  demand  for  the  articles  of  consumption  essen¬ 
tial  to  the  working-class.  But  this  demand  is  equal  to  v  and 
not  one  iota  greater  (if  the  labourer  saves  a  part  of  hi3  wages— 
we  necessarily  discard  here  all  credit  relations— he  converts  part 
of  his  wages  into  a  hoard  and  to  that  extent  does  not  act  as  a 
bidder,  a  purchaser).  The  upper  limit  of  a  capitalist’s  demand 
is  C,  equal  to  c+v,  but  his  supply  is  c+v+s.  Consequently 
if  the  composition  of  his  commodity-capital  is  80c-f  20v+20s, 
his  demand  is  equal  to  80c+20v,  hence,  considered  from  the 
angle  of  the  value  it  contains,  one-fifth  smaller  than  his  supply. 
The  greater  the  percentage  of  the  mass  of  surplus-value  produced 
by  him  (his  rate  of  profit)  the  smaller  becomes  his  demand  in 
relation  to  his  supply.  Although  with  the  further  development 
of  production  the  demand  of  the  capitalist  for  labour-power,  and 
thus  indirectly  for  necessary  means  of  subsistence,  steadily  de¬ 
creases  compared  with  his  demand  for  means  of  production,  it 
must  not  be  forgotten  on  the  other  hand  that  his  demand  for  MP 
is  always  smaller  than  his  capital.  His  demand  for  means  of 
production  must  therefore  always  be  smaller  in  value  than  the 
commodity-product  of  the  capitalist  who,  working  with  a  capi¬ 
tal  of  equal  value  and  under  equal  conditions,  furnishes  him 
with  those  means  of  production.  That  many  capitalists  and  not 
only  one  do  the  furnishing  does  not  alter  the  case.  Take  it  that 


122 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


his  capital  is  £1,000,  and  its  constant  part  £800;  then  his 
demand  on  all  these  capitalists  is  equal  to  £800.  Together  they 
supply  means  of  production  worth  £1,200  for  each  £1,000  (regard¬ 
less  of  what  share  in  each  £1,000  may  fall  to  each  one  of  them 
and  of  the  fraction  of  his  total  capital  which  the  share  of  each 
may  represent),  assuming  that  the  rate  of  profit  is  the  same. 
Consequently  his  demand  covers  only  two-thirds  of  their  supply, 
while  his  own  total  demand  amounts  to  only  four-fifths  of  his 
own  supply,  measured  in  value. 

It  still  remains  for  us,  incidentally,  to  investigate  the  problem 
of  turnover.  Let  the  total  capital  of  the  capitalist  be  £5,000, 
of  which  £4,000  is  fixed  and  £1,000  circulating  capital;  let 
these  £1,000  be  composed  of  800c  plus  200v,  as  assumed  above. 
His  circulating  capital  must  be  turned  over  five  times  a  year 
for  his  total  capital  to  turn  over  once.  His  commodity-product 
is  then  equal  to  £6,000,  i.e.,  £1,000  more  than  his  advanced 
capital,  which  results  in  the  same  ratio  of  surplus-value  as 
above: 

5,000C  :  1,0008  =  100(c  + t):208 

This  turnover  therefore  does  not  change  anything  in  the  ratio 
of  his  total  demand  to  his  total  supply.  The  former  remains  one- 
fifth  smaller  than  the  latter. 

Suppose  his  fixed  capital  has  to  be  renewed  in  10  years.  So 
the  capitalist  pays  every  year  one-tenth,  or  £400,  into  a  sinking 
fund  and  thus  has  only  a  value  of  £3,600  of  fixed  capital  left 
plus  £400  in  money.  If  the  repairs  are  necessary  and  do  not  ex¬ 
ceed  the  average,  they  represent  nothing  but  capital  invested 
later.  We  may  look  at  the  matter  the  same  as  if  he  had  allowed 
for  the  cost  of  repairs  beforehand,  when  calculating  the  value  of 
his  investmeht  capital,  so  far  as  this  enters  into  the  annual  com¬ 
modity-product,  so  that  it  is  included  in  that  one-tenth  sink¬ 
ing  fund  payment.  (If  his  need  of  repairs  is  below  average  he 
is  so  much  money  to  the  good,  and  the  reverse  if  above.  But 
this  evens  out  for  the  entire  class  of  capitalists  engaged  in  the 
same  branch  of  industry.)  At  any  rate,  although  his  annual  de¬ 
mand  still  remains  £5,000,  equal  to  the  original  capital-value 
he  advanced  (assuming  his  total  capital  is  turned  over  once  a 
year),  this  demand  increases  with  regard  to  the  circulating  part 
of  the  capital,  while  it  steadily  decreases  with  regard  to  its  fixed 
part. 

We  now  come  to  reproduction.  Let  us  assume  that  the  capi¬ 
talist  consumes  the  entire  surplus-value  m  and  reconverts  only 


THE  THREE  FORMULAS  OF  THE  CIRCUIT 


123 


capital  C  of  the  original  magnitude  into  productive  capital. 
Then  the  demand  of  the  capitalist  is  equal  in  value  to  his  supply; 
but  this  does  not  refer  to  the  movement  of  his  capital.  As  a  cap¬ 
italist  he  exercises  a  demand  for  only  four-fifths  of  his  supply 
(in  terms  of  value).  He  consumes  one-fifth  as  a  non-capitalist, 
not  in  his  function  as  capitalist  but  for  his  private  requirements 
or  pleasures. 

His  calculation,  expressed  in  percentages,  is  then  as  follows: 

Demand  as  capitalist . 100,  supply  120 

Demand  as  man  about  town .  20,  supply  — 

Total  demand .  120,  supply  120 

This  assumption  is  tantamount  to  assuming  that  capitalist 
production  does  not  exist,  and  therefore  that  the  industrial  cap¬ 
italist  himself  does  not  exist.  For  capitalism  is  abolished  root 
and  branch  by  the  bare  assumption  that  it  is  personal  consump¬ 
tion  and  not  enrichment  that  works  as  the  compelling  motive. 

But  such  an  assumption  is  impossible  also  technically.  The 
capitalist  must  not  only  form  a  reserve-capital  to  cushion  price 
fluctuations  and  enable  him  to  wait  for  favourable  buying  and 
selling  conditions.  He  must  accumulate  capital  in  order  to  ex¬ 
tend  his  production  and  build  technical  progress  into  his  produc¬ 
tive  organism. 

In  order  to  accumulate  capital  he  must  first  withdraw  in  mon¬ 
ey-form  from  circulation  a  part  of  the  surplus-value  which  he 
obtained  from  that  circulation,  and  must  hoard  it  until  it  has 
increased  sufficiently  for  the  extension  of  his  old  business  or 
the  opening  of  a  side-line.  So  long  as  the  formation  of  the  hoard 
continues,  it  does  not  increase  the  demand  of  the  capitalist.  The 
money  is  immobilised.  It  does  not  withdraw  from  the  commodity- 
market  any  equivalent  in  commodities  for  the  money-equivalent 
withdrawn  from  it  for  commodities  supplied. 

Credit  is  not  considered  here.  And  credit  includes  for  example 
deposits  by  the  capitalist  of  accumulating  money  in  a  bank  on 
current  account  paying  interest. 


CHAPTER  V 

THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION8 

We  have  seen  that  the  movement  of  capital  through  the  sphere 
of  production  and  the  two  phases  of  the  sphere  of  circulation 
takes  place  in  a  series  of  periods  of  time.  The  duration  of  its  so¬ 
journ  in  the  sphere  of  production  is  its  time  of  production,  that  of 
its  stay  in  the  sphere  of  circulation  its  time  of  circulation.  The 
total  time  during  which  it  describes  its  circuit  is  therefore  equal 
to  the  sum  of  its  time  of  production  and  its  time  of  circulation. 

The  time  of  production  naturally  comprises  the  period  of  the 
labour-process,  but  is  not  comprised  in  it.  It  will  be  remembered 
first  of  all  that  a  part  of  the  constant  capital  exists  in  the  form 
of  instruments  of  labour,  such  as  machinery,  buildings,  etc., 
which  serve  the  same  constantly  repeated  labour-processes  un¬ 
til  they  are  worn  out.  Periodical  interruptions  of  the  labour- 
process,  by  night  for  instance,  interrupt  the  functioning  of  these 
instruments  of  labour,  but  not  their  stay  at  the  place  of  produc¬ 
tion.  They  belong  to  this  place  when  they  are  in  function  as  well 
as  when  they  are  not.  On  the  other  hand  the  capitalist  must  have 
a  definite  supply  of  raw  material  and  auxiliary  material  in  read¬ 
iness,  in  order  that  the  process  of  production  may  take  place  for 
a  longer  or  shorter  time  on  a  previously  determined  scale,  with¬ 
out  being  dependent  on  the  accidents  of  daily  supply  from  the 
market.  This  supply  of  raw  material,  etc.,  is  productively  con¬ 
sumed  only  by  degrees.  There  is,  therefore,  a  difference  between 
its  time  of  production8  and  its  time  of  functioning.  The  time  of 
production  of  the  means  of  production  in  general  comprises, 


8  Beginning  of  Manuscript  IV. — F.  E. 

8  Time  of  production  is  here  used  in  the  active  sense:  The  time  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  means  of  production  does  not  mean  in  this  case  the  time  re¬ 
quired  for  their  production,  but  the  time  during  which  they  take  part  in  the 
process  of  production  of  a  certain  commodity. — F.  E. 


THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


125 


therefore,  1)  the  time  during  which  they  function  as  means  of 
production,  hence  serve  in  the  productive  process;  2)  the  stops 
during  which  the  process  of  production,  and  thus  the  function¬ 
ing  of  the  means  of  production  embodied  in  it,  are  interrupted; 
3)  the  time  during  which  they  are  held  in  readiness  as  prerequi¬ 
sites  of  that  process,  hence  already  represent  productive  capital 
but  have  not  yet  entered  into  the  process  of  production. 

The  difference  so  far  considered  has  in  each  case  been  tho 
difference  between  the  time  which  the  productive  capital  stays 
in  the  sphere  of  production  and  that  it  stays  in  the  process  of 
production.  But  the  process  of  production  may  itself  be  respon¬ 
sible  for  interruptions  of  the  labour-process,  and  hence  of  the 
labour-time— intervals  during  which  the  subject  of  labour  is  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  action  of  physical  processes  without  the  further  in¬ 
tervention  of  human  labour.  The  process  of  production,  and  thus 
the  functioning  of  the  means  of  production,  continue  in  this  case, 
although  the  labour-process,  and  thus  the  functioning  of  the  means 
of  production  as  instruments  of  labour,  have  been  interrupted. 
This  applies,  for  instance,  to  the  grain,  after  it  has  been  sown, 
the  wine  fermenting  in  the  cellar,  the  labour-material  of  many 
factories,  such  as  tanneries,  where  the  material  is  exposed  to 
the  action  of  chemical  processes.  The  time  of  production  is  here 
longer  than  the  labour-time.  The  difference  between  the  two  con¬ 
sists  in  an  excess  of  the  production  time  over  the  labour-time. 
This  excess  always  arises  from  the  latent  existence  of  productive 
capital  in  the  sphere  of  production  without  functioning  in  the 
process  of  production  itself  or  from  its  functioning  in  the  pro¬ 
ductive  process  without  taking  part  in  the  labour-process. 

That  part  of  the  latent  productive  capital  which  is  held  in 
readiness  only  as  a  requisite  for  the  productive  process,  such  as 
cotton,  coal,  etc.,  in  a  spinning-mill,  acts  as  a  creator  of  neither 
products  nor  value.  It  is  fallow  capital,  although  its  fallowness 
is  essential  for  the  uninterrupted  flow  of  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion.  The  buildings,  apparatus,  etc.,  necessary  for  the  storage  of 
the  productive  supply  (latent  capital)  are  conditions  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  process  and  therefore  constitute  component  parts  of  the 
advanced  productive  capital.  They  perform  their  function  as 
conservators  of  the  productive  components  in  the  preliminary 
stage.  Inasmuch  as  labour-processes  are  necessary  in  this  stage, 
they  add  to  the  cost  of  the  raw  material,  etc.,  but  are  productive 
labour  and  produce  surplus-value,  because  a  part  of  this  labour, 
like  of  all  other  wage-labour,  is  not  paid  for.  The  normal  inter¬ 
ruptions  of  the  entire  process  of  production,  the  intermissions 


126 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


during  which  the  productive  capital  does  not  function,  create 
neither  value  nor  surplus-value.  Hence  the  desire  to  keep  the 
work  going  at  night,  too.  (Buch  I,  Kap.  VIII,  4.)* 

The  intervals  in  the  labour-time  which  the  subject  of  labour 
must  endure  in  the  process  of  production  itself  create  neither 
value  nor  surplus-value.  But  they  advance  the  product,  form 
a  part  of  its  life,  a  process  through  which  it  must  pass.  The  value 
of  the  apparatus,  etc.,  is  transferred  to  the  product  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  the  entire  time  during  which  they  perform  their  function; 
the  product  is  brought  to  this  stage  by  labour  itself,  and  the 
employment  of  these  apparatus  is  as  much  a  condition  of  produc¬ 
tion  as  is  the  reduction  to  dust  of  a  part  of  the  cotton  which  does 
not  enter  into  the  product  but  nevertheless  transfers  its  value 
to  that  product.  The  other  part  of  the  latent  capital,  such  as 
buildings,  machinery,  etc.,  i.e.,  the  instruments  of  labour  whose 
functioning  is  interrupted  only  by  the  regular  pauses  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  process— irregular  interruptions  caused  by  the  restriction 
of  production,  crises,  etc.,  are  total  losses — adds  value  without 
entering  into  the  creation  of  the  product.  The  total  value  which 
this  part  of  capital  adds  to  the  product  is  determined  by  its  aver¬ 
age  durability;  it  loses  value,  because  it  loses  its  use-value,  both 
during  the  time  that  it  performs  its  functions  as  well  as  during 
that  in  which  it  does  not. 

Finally  the  value  of  the  constant  part  of  capital,  which  con¬ 
tinues  in  the  productive  process  although  the  labour-process  is 
interrupted,  re-appears  in  the  result  of  the  productive  process. 
Labour  itself  has  here  placed  the  means  of  production  in  condi¬ 
tions  under  which  they  pass  of  themselves  through  certain  natu¬ 
ral  processes,  the  result  of  which  is  a  definite  useful  effect  or  a 
change  in  the  form  of  their  use-value.  Labour  always  transfers 
the  value  of  the  means  of  production  to  the  product,  in  so  far 
as  it  really  consumes  them  in  a  suitable  manner,  as  means  of 
production.  And  it  does  not  change  the  matter  whether  labour 
has  to  bear  continually  on  its  subject  by  means  of  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour,  in  order  to  produce  this  effect  or  whether  it 
merely  needs  to  give  the  first  impulse  by  providing  the  means  of 
production  with  the  conditions  under  which  they  undergo  the 
intended  alteration  of  themselves,  in  consequence  of  natural 
processes,  without  the  further  assistance  of  labour. 

Whatever  may  be  the  reason  for  the  excess  of  the  production 
time  over  the  labour-time — whether  the  circumstance  that  means 


English  edition:  Ch  X,  4 .—Ed. 


THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


127 


of  production  constitute  only  latent  productive  capital  and  hence 
are  still  in  a  stage  preliminary  to  the  actual  productive  process 
or  that  their  own  functioning  is  interrupted  within  the  process 
of  production  by  its  pauses  or  finally  that  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  itself  necessitates  interruptions  of  the  labour-process — 
in  none  of  these  cases  do  the  means  of  production  function  as 
absorbers  of  labour.  And  if  they  do  not  absorb  labour,  they  do 
not  absorb  surplus-labour,  either.  Hence  there  is  no  expansion 
of  the  value  of  productive  capital  so  long  as  it  stays  in  that  part 
of  its  production  time  which  exceeds  the  labour-time,  no  matter 
how  inseparable  from  these  pauses  the  carrying  on  of  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  self-expansion  may  be.  It  is  plain  that  the  more  the  pro¬ 
duction  time  and  labour-time  cover  each  other  the  greater  is 
tho  productivity  and  self-expansion  of  a  given  productive  cap¬ 
ital  in  a  given  space  of  time.  Hence  the  tendency  of  capitalist 
production  to  reduce  the  excess  of  the  production  time  over  the 
labour-time  as  much  as  possible.  But  while  the  time  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  a  certain  capital  may  differ  from  its  labour-time, 
it  always  comprises  the  latter,  and  this  excess  is  itself  a  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  process  of  production.  The  time  of  production,  then, 
is  always  that  time  in  which  a  capital  produces  use-values  and 
expands,  hence  functions  as  productive  capital,  although  it  in¬ 
cludes  time  in  which  it  is  either  latent  or  produces  without  ex¬ 
panding  its  value. 

Within  the  sphere  of  circulation,  capital  abides  as  commodity- 
capital  and  money-capital.  Its  two  processes  of  circulation  con¬ 
sist  in  its  transformation  from  the  commodity-form  into  that  of 
money  and  from  the  money-form  into  that  of  commodities.  The 
circumstance  that  the  transformation  of  commodities  into  money 
is  here  at  the  same  time  a  realisation  of  the  surplus-value  embod¬ 
ied  in  the  commodities,  and  that  the  transformation  of  money 
into  commodities  is  at  the  same  time  a  conversion  or  reconversion 
of  capital-value  into  the  form  of  its  elements  of  production  does 
not  in  the  least  alter  the  fact  that  these  processes,  as  processes 
of  circulation,  are  processes  of  the  simple  metamorphosis  of 
commodities. 


Time  of  circulation  and  time  of  production  mutually  exclude 
each  other.  During  its  time  of  circulation  capital  does  not  perform 
the  functions  of  productive  capital  and  therefore  produces  nei¬ 
ther  commodities  nor  surplus-value.  If  we  study  the  circuit  in 
its  simplest  form,  as  when  the  entire  capital-value  passes  in 


128  the  metamorphoses  op  capital  and  their  circuits 


one  bulk  from  one  phase  into  another,  it  becomes  palpably  evi¬ 
dent  that  the  process  of  production  and  therefore  also  the  self¬ 
expansion  of  the  capital-value  are  interrupted  so  long  as  its 
time  of  circulation  lasts,  and  that  the  renewal  of  the  process  of 
production  will  proceed  at  a  faster  or  a  slower  pace  depending 
on  the  length  of  the  circulation  time.  But  if  on  the  contrary  the 
various  parts  of  capital  pass  through  the  circuit  one  after  another, 
so  that  the  circuit  of  the  entire  capital-value  is  accomplished 
successively  in  the  circuits  of  its  various  component  parts,  then 
it  is  evident  that  the  longer  its  aliquot  parts  stay  in  the  sphere 
of  circulation  the  smaller  must  be  the  part  functioning  in  the 
sphere  of  production.  The  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  time 
of  circulation  operate  therefore  as  negative  limits  to  the  contrac¬ 
tion  or  expansion  of  the  time  of  production  or  of  the  extent  to 
which  a  capital  of  a  given  size  functions  as  productive  capital. 
The  more  the  metamorphoses  of  circulation  of  a  certain  capital 
are  only  ideal,  i.e.,  the  more  the  time  of  circulation  is  equal 
to  zero,  or  approaches  zero,  the  more  does  capital  function,  the 
more  does  its  productivity  and  the  self-expansion  of  its  value 
increase.  For  instance,  if  a  capitalist  executes  an  order  by  the 
terms  of  which  he  receives  payment  on  delivery  of  the  product, 
and  if  this  payment  is  made  in  his  own  means  of  production, 
the  time  of  circulation  approaches  zero. 

A  capital’s  time  of  circulation  therefore  limits,  generally 
speaking,  its  time  of  production  and  hence  its  process  of  generat¬ 
ing  surplus-value.  And  it  limits  this  process  in  proportion  to 
its  own  duration.  This  duration  may  considerably  increase  or 
decrease  and  hence  may  restrict  capital’s  time  of  production  in 
a  widely  varying  degree.  But  Political  Economy  sees  only  what 
is  apparent,  namely  the  effect  of  the  time  of  circulation  on  capi¬ 
tal’s  process  of  the  creation  of  surplus-value  in  general.  It  takes 
this  negative  effect  for  a  positive  one,  because  its  consequences 
are  positive.  It  clings  the  more  tightly  to  this  appearance  since 
it  seems  to  furnish  proof  that  capital  possesses  a  mystic  source  of 
self-expansion  independent  of  its  process  of  production  and  hence 
of  the  exploitation  of  labour,  a  spring  which  flows  to  it  from 
the  sphere  of  circulation.  We  shall  see  later  that  even  scientific 
Political  Economy  has  been  deceived  by  this  appearance  of  things. 
Various  phenomena,  it  will  turn  out,  give  colour  to  this  sem¬ 
blance:  1)  The  capitalist  method  of  calculating  profit,  in  which 
the  negative  cause  figures  as  a  positive  one,  since  with  capitals  in 
different  spheres  of  investment,  where  only  the  times  of  circula¬ 
tion  are  different,  a  longer  time  of  circulation  tends  to  bring 


THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


129 


about  an  increase  of  prices,  in  short,  serves  as  one  of  the  causes 
of  equalising  profits.  2)  The  time  of  circulation  is  but  a  phase  of 
the  time  of  turnover;  the  latter  however  includes  the  time  of  pro¬ 
duction  or  reproduction.  What  is  really  due  to  the  latter  seems 
to  be  due  to  the  time  of  circulation.  3)  The  conversion  of  commod¬ 
ities  into  variable  capital  (wages)  is  necessitated  by  their  pre¬ 
vious  conversion  into  money.  In  the  accumulation  of  capital,  the 
conversion  into  additional  variable  capital  therefore  takes  place 
in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  or  during  the  time  of  circulation. 
Consequently  it  seems  that  the  accumulation  thus  achieved  is 
owed  to  the  latter. 

Within  the  sphere  of  circulation  capital  passes  through  the 
two  antithetical  phases  C— M  and  M— C;  it  is  immaterial  in  what 
order.  Hence  its  time  of  circulation  is  likewise  divided  into  two 
parts,  viz.:  the  time  it  requires  for  its  conversion  from  commod¬ 
ities  into  money,  and  that  which  it  requires  for  its  conversion 
from  money  into  commodities.  We  have  already  learned  from 
the  analysis  of  the  simple  circulation  of  commodities  (Buch  I, 
Kap.  Ill)*  that  C — M,  the  sale,  is  the  most  difficult  part  of  its 
metamorphosis  and  that  therefore  under  ordinary  conditions  it 
takes  up  the  greater  part  of  its  time  of  circulation  As  money, 
value  exists  in  its  always  convertible  form.  As  a  commodity  it 
must  first  be  transformed  into  money  before  it  can  assume  this 
form  of  direct  convertibility  and  hence  of  constant  readiness 
for  action.  However,  in  capital’s  process  of  circulation,  its  phase 
M — C  has  to  do  with  its  transformation  into  commodities  which 
constitute  definite  elements  of  productive  capital  in  a  given  en¬ 
terprise.  The  means  of  production  may  not  be  available  in  the 
market  and  must  first  be  produced  or  they  must  be  procured  from 
distant  markets  or  their  ordinary  supply  has  become  irregular 
or  prices  have  changed,  etc.,  in  short  there  are  a  multitude  of 
circumstances  which  are  not  noticeable  in  the  simple  change  of 
form  M — C,  but  which  nevertheless  require  now  more,  now  less 
time  also  for  this  part  of  the  circulation  phase.  C— M  and  M— C 
may  be  separate  not  only  in  time  but  also  in  space;  the  market 
for  buying  and  the  market  for  selling  may  be  located  apart.  In 
the  case  of  factories  for  instance  buyer  and  seller  are  frequently 
different  persons.  In  the  production  of  commodities,  circulation 
is  as  necessary  as  production  itself,  so  that  circulation  agents 
are  just  as  much  needed  as  production  agents.  The  process  of 
reproduction  includes  both  functions  of  capital,  therefore  it 

|  •  English  edition:  Ch.  Ill  —Ed 


5—1752 


130 


THF  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


includes  the  necessity  of  having  representatives  of  these  func¬ 
tions,  either  in  the  person  of  the  capitalist  himself  or  of  wage- 
labourers,  his  agents.  But  this  furnishes  no  ground  for  confusing 
the  agents  of  circulation  with  those  of  production,  any  more 
than  it  furnishes  ground  for  confusing  the  functions  of  commod¬ 
ity-capital  and  money-capital  with  those  of  productive  capital. 
The  agents  of  circulation  must  be  paid  by  the  agents  of  produc¬ 
tion.  But  if  the  capitalists,  who  sell  to  and  buy  from  one  another, 
create  neither  values  nor  products  by  these  acts,  this  state  of 
affairs  is  not  changed  if  they  are  enabled  or  compelled  by  the 
volume  of  their  business  to  shift  this  function  on  to  others.  In 
some  businesses  the  buyers  and  sellers  get  paid  in  the  form  of 
percentages  on  the  profits.  All  talk  about  their  being  paid  by 
the  consumer  does  not  help  matters.  The  consumers  can  pay 
only  in  so  far  as  they,  as  agents  of  production,  produce  an  equiv¬ 
alent  in  commodities  for  themselves  or  appropriate  it  from 
production  agents  either  on  the  basis  of  some  legal  title  (as  their 
co-partners,  etc.)  or  by  personal  services. 

There  is  a  difference  between  C — M  and  M— C  which  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  difference  in  forms  of  commodities  and 
money  but  arises  from  the  capitalist  character  of  production. 
Intrinsically  both  C — M  and  M— -C  are  mere  conversions  of  given 
values  from  one  form  into  another.  But  C'— M'  is  at  the  same 
time  a  realisation  of  the  surplus-value  contained  in  C'.  M— G 
however  is  not.  Hence  selling  is  more  important  than  buying, 
l-nder  normal  conditions  M— C  is  an  act  necessary  for  the  self¬ 
expansion  of  the  value  expressed  in  M,  but  it  is  not  a  realisation 
of  surplus-value;  it  is  the  introduction  to  its  production,  not 
an  afterword. 

The  form  in  which  a  commodity  exists,  its  existence  as  a  use- 
value,  sets  definite  limits  to  the  circulation  of  commodity-capi¬ 
tal  C'— M'.  Use-values  are  perishable  by  nature.  Hence,  if  they 
are  not  productively  or  individually  consumed  within  a  certain 
time,  depending  on  what  they  are  intended  for,  in  other  words, 
if  they  are  not  sold  within  a  certain  period,  they  spoil  and  lose 
with  their  use-value  the  property  of  being  vehicles  of  exchange- 
value.  The  capital-value  contained  in  them,  hence  also  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  accrued  in  it,  gets  lost.  The  use-values  do  not  remain 
the  carriers  of  perennial  self-expanding  capital-value  unless  they 
are  constantly  renewed  and  reproduced,  are  replaced  by  new 
use-values  of  the  same  or  of  some  other  order.  The  sale  of  the 
use-values  in  the  form  of  finished  commodities,  hence  their  entry 
into  productive  or  individual  consumption  effected  through 


THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


131 


this  sale,  is  however  the  ever  recurring  condition  of  their  re¬ 
production.  They  must  change  their  old  use-form  within  a  def¬ 
inite  time  in  order  to  continue  their  existence  in  a  new  form. 
Exchange-value  maintains  itself  only  by  means  of  this  constant 
renewal  of  its  body.  The  use-values  of  various  commodities  spoil 
sooner  or  later;  the  interval  between  their  production  and  con¬ 
sumption  may  therefore  be  comparatively  long  or  short;  hence 
they  can  persist  without  spoiling  in  the  circulation  phase  C— M 
for  a  shorter  or  longer  term  in  the  fcrm  of  commodity-capital, 
can  endure  a  shorter  or  a  longer  time  of  circulation  as  commodi¬ 
ties.  The  limit  of  the  circulation  time  of  a  commodity-capital 
imposed  by  the  spoiling  of  the  body  of  the  commodity  is  the  ab¬ 
solute  limit  of  this  part  of  the  time  of  circulation,  or  of  the  time 
of  circulation  of  commodity-capital  as  such.  The  more  perishable 
a  commodity  and  the  sooner  after  its  production  it  must  therefore 
be  consumed  and  hence  sold,  the  more  restricted  is  its  capacity 
for  removal  from  its  place  of  production,  the  narrower  therefore 
is  the  spatial  sphere  of  its  circulation,  the  more  localised  are 
the  markets  where  it  can  be  sold.  For  this  reason  the  more  per¬ 
ishable  a  commodity  is  and  the  greater  the  absolute  restriction 
of  its  time  of  circulation  as  commodity  on  account  of  its  physical 
properties,  the  less  is  it  suited  to  be  an  object  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction.  Such  a  commodity  can  come  within  its  grasp  only  in 
thickly  populated  districts  or  to  the  extent  that  improved  trans¬ 
portation  facilities  eliminate  distance.  But  the  concentration  of 
the  production  of  any  article  in  the  hands  of  a  few  and  in  a  pop¬ 
ulous  district  may  create  a  relatively  large  market  even  for 
such  articles  as  are  the  products  of  large  breweries,  dairies,  etc. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 

I.  GENUINE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 
1.  The  Time  of  Purchase  and  Sale 

The  transformations  of  the  forms  of  capital  from  commodi¬ 
ties  into  money  and  from  money  into  commodities  are  at  the  same 
time  transactions  of  the  capitalist,  acts  of  purchase  and  sale. 
The  time  in  which  these  transformations  of  forms  take  place  con¬ 
stitutes  subjectively,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  capitalist,  the 
time  of  purchase  and  sale;  it  is  the  time  during  which  he  per¬ 
forms  the  functions  of  a  seller  and  buyer  in  the  market.  Just 
as  the  time  of  circulation  of  capital  is  a  necessary  segment  of 
its  time  of  reproduction,  so  the  time  in  which  the  capitalist  buys 
and  sells  and  scours  the  market  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  time 
in  which  he  functions  as  a  capitalist,  i.e.,as  personified  capital. 
It  is  a  part  of  his  business  hours. 

[Since  we  have  assumed  that  commodities  are  bought  and  sold 
at  their  values,  these  acts  constitute  merely  the  conversion  of  a 
certain  value  from  one  form  into  another,  from  the  commodity- 
form  into  the  money-form  or  from  the  money-form  into  the  com¬ 
modity-form— a  change  in  the  state  of  being.  If  commodities  are 
sold  at  their  values,  then  the  magnitudes  of  value  in  the  hands 
of  the  buyer  and  seller  remain  unchanged.  Only  the  form  of  exist¬ 
ence  of  value  is  changed.  If  the  commodities  are  not  sold  at 
their  values,  then  the  sum  of  the  converted  values  remains  un¬ 
changed;  the  plus  on  one  side  is  a  minus  on  the  other. 

The  metamorphoses  C— M  and  M — C  are  transactions  between 
buyers  and  sellers;  they  require  time  to  conclude  their  bargains, 
the  more  so  as  a  struggle  goes  on  in  which  each  seeks  to  get  the 
best  of  the  other,  and  it  is  businessmen  who  face  one  another 
here;  and  “when  Greek  meets  Greek  then  comes  the  tug  of  war.  ”* 
To  effect  a  change  in  the  state  of  being  costs  time  and  labour- 


*  A  paraphrase  of  words  from  the  17th-century  tragedy  The  Rival 
Queens,  or  the  Death  of  Alexander  the  Great  by  Nathaniel  Lee. — Ed. 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


133 


power,  not  for  the  purpose  of  creating  value,  however,  but  in 
order  to  accomplish  the  conversion  of  value  from  one  form  into 
another.  The  mutual  attempt  to  appropriate  an  extra  slice  of 
this  value  on  this  occasion  changes  nothing.  This  labour,  in¬ 
creased  by  the  evil  designs  on  either  side,  creates  no  value,  any 
more  than  the  work  performed  in  a  judicial  proceeding  increases 
the  value  of  the  subject-matter  of  the  suit.  Matters  stand  with 
this  labour — which  is  a  necessary  element  in  the  capitalist  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  as  a  whole,  including  circulation  or  included 
by  it — as  they  stand,  say,  with  the  work  of  combustion  of  some 
substance  used  for  the  generation  of  heat.  This  work  of  combus¬ 
tion  does  not  generate  any  heat,  although  it  is  a  necessary  ele¬ 
ment  in  the  process  of  combustion.  In  order,  e.g.,  to  consume 
coal  as  fuel,  I  must  combine  it  with  oxygen,  and  for  this  pur¬ 
pose  must  transform  it  from  the  solid  into  the  gaseous  state  (for 
in  the  carbonic  acid  gas,  the  result  of  the  combustion,  coal  is  in 
the  gaseous  state);  consequently,  I  must  bring  about  a  physical 
change  in  the  form  of  its  existence  or  in  its  state  of  being.  The 
separation  of  carbon  molecules,  which  are  united  into  a  solid 
mass,  and  the  splitting  up  of  these  molecules  into  their  separate 
atoms  must  precede  the  new  combination,  and  this  requires  a 
certain  expenditure  of  energy  which  thus  is  not  transformed 
into  heat  but  taken  from  it.  Therefore,  if  the  owners  of  the  com¬ 
modities  are  not  capitalists  but  independent  direct  producers, 
the  time  employed  in  buying  and  selling  is  a  diminution  of  their 
labour-time,  and  for  this  reason  such  transactions  used  to  be 
deferred  (in  ancient  and  mediaeval  times)  to  holidays. 

Of  course  the  dimensions  assumed  by  the  conversion  of  com¬ 
modities  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalists  cannot  transform  this 
labour — which  does  not  create  any  value  but  is  merely  instru¬ 
mental  in  changing  the  form  of  value — into  labour  productive 
of  value.  Nor  can  the  miracle  of  this  transubstantiation  be  accom¬ 
plished  by  a  transposition,  i.e.,  by  the  industrial  capitalists 
making  this  “work  of  combustion  ”  the  exclusive  business  of 
third  persons,  who  are  paid  by  them,  instead  of  performing 
it  themselves.  These  third  persons  will  of  course  not  tender  their 
labour-power  to  the  capitalists  out  of  sheer  love  for  them.  It 
is  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  rent  collector  of  a  real-estate 
owner  or  the  messenger  of  a  bank  that  their  labour  does  not  add 
one  iota  or  tittle  to  the  value  of  either  the  rent  or  the  gold  pieces 
carried  to  another  bank  by  the  bagful.]10 

10  The  bracketed  text  is  taken  from  a  note  at  the  end  of  Manuscript  VIII. 
—  r  E. 


134 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


To  the  capitalist  who  has  others  working  for  him,  buying 
and  selling  becomes  a  primary  function.  Since  he  appropriates 
the  product  of  many  on  a  large  social  scale,  he  must  sell  it  on  the 
same  scale  and  then  reconvert  it  from  money  into  elements  of 
production.  Now  as  before  neither  the  time  of  purchase  nor  of 
sale  creates  any  value.  The  function  of  merchant’s  capital  gives 
rise  to  an  illusion.  But  without  going  into  this  at  length  here 
this  much  is  plain  from  the  start:  If  by  a  division  of  labour  a 
function,  unproductive  in  itself  although  a  necessary  element  of 
reproduction,  is  transformed  from  an  incidental  occupation  of 
many  into  the  exclusive  occupation  of  a  few,  into  their  special 
business,  the  nature  of  this  function  itself  is  not  changed.  One 
merchant  (here  considered  a  mere  agent  attending  to  the  change 
of  form  of  commodities,  a  mere  buyer  and  seller)  may  by  his  oper¬ 
ations  shorten  the  time  of  purchase  and  sale  for  many  producers. 
In  such  case  he  should  be  regarded  as  a  machine  which  reduces 
useless  expenditure  of  energy  or  helps  to  set  production  time 
free.11 

In  order  to  simplify  the  matter  (since  we  shall  not  discuss  the 
merchant  as  a  capitalist  and  merchant’s  capital  until  later)  we 
shall  assume  that  this  buying  and  selling  agent  is  a  man  who 
sells  his  labour.  He  expends  his  labour-power  and  labour-time 
in  the  operations  C — M  and  M — C.  And  he  makes  his  living  that 
way,  just  as  another  does  by  spinning  or  by  making  pills.  He  per¬ 
forms  a  necessary  function,  because  the  process  of  reproduction 
itself  includes  unproductive  functions.  He  works  as  well  as  the 
next  man,  but  intrinsically  his  labour  creates  neither  value  nor 
product.  He  belongs  himself  to  the  faux  frais  of  production.  His 
usefulness  does  not  consist  in  transforming  an  unproductive  func- 


11  “The  costs  of  commerce,  although  necessary,  must  be  regarded  as  an 
onerous  outlay.”  (Quesnay,  Analyse  du  Tableau  Economique ,  in  Daire, 
Physiocrates ,  Part  I,  Paris,  1846,  p  71.)  According  to  Quesnay,  the  “profit" 
which  the  competition  among  merchants  produces,  in  that  it  compels  them 
“to  content  themselves  with  a  smaller  reward  or  gain. ..is,  strictly  speaking, 
nothing  but  a  prevention  of  loss  (privation  de  perte)  for  the  seller  at  first 
hand  and  for  the  buyer-consumer.  Now,  a  prevention  of  loss  on  the  costs 
of  commerco  is  not  a  real  product  or  an  accession  of  wealth  through  commerce, 
if  considered  simply  as  an  exchange,  whether  with  or  without  the  cost  of 
transportation.”  (Pp.  145  and  146.)  “The  costs  of  commerce  are  always 
paid  by  those  who  sell  the  products  and  who  would  enjoy  the  full  prices 
paid  for  them  by  the  buyers,  if  there  were  no  intermediate  expenses  ”  (P.  163.) 
The  proprietors  and  producers  are  “ salariants ”  (payers  of  wages),  the  mer¬ 
chants  are  “salaries”  (recipients  of  wages).  (P.  164,  Quesnay,  Dialogues  sur 
le  Commerce  el  sur  les  Travaux  des  Artisans.  In  Daire,  Plrysiocrates,  Part  I. 
Paris,  1846.) 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


135 


tion  into  a  productive  one,  nor  unproductive  into  productive 
labour.  It  would  be  a  miracle  if  such  a  transformation  could  be 
accomplished  by  the  mere  transfer  of  a  function.  His  useful¬ 
ness  consists  rather  in  the  fact  that  a  smaller  part  of  society’s 
labour-power  and  labour-time  is  tied  up  in  this  unproductive 
function.  More.  We  shall  assume  that  he  is  a  mere  wage-labourer, 
even  one  of  the  better  paid,  for  all  the  difference  it  makes.  What¬ 
ever  his  pay,  as  a  wage-labourer  he  works  part  of  his  time  for 
nothing.  He  may  receive  daily  the  value  of  the  product  of  eight 
working-hours,  yet  functions  ten.  But  the  two  hours  of  surplus- 
labour  he  performs  do  not  produce  value  any  more  than  his 
eight  hours  of  necessary  labour,  although  by  means  of  the  latter 
a  part  of  the  social  product  is  transferred  to  him.  In  the  first 
place,  looking  at  it  from  the  standpoint  of  society,  labour-power 
is  used  up  now  as  before  for  ten  hours  in  a  mere  function  of  cir¬ 
culation.  It  cannot  be  used  for  anything  else,  not  for  productive 
labour.  In  the  second  place  however  society  does  not  pay  for 
those  two  hours  of  surplus-labopr,  although  they  are  spent  by 
the  individual  who  performs  this  labour.  Society  does  not  ap¬ 
propriate  any  extra  product  or  value  thereby.  But  the  costs  of 
circulation,  which  he  represents,  are  reduced  by  one-fifth,  from 
ten  hours  to  eight.  Society  does  not  pay  any  equivalent  for  one- 
fifth  of  this  active  time  of  circulation,  of  which  he  is  the  agent. 
But  if  this  man  is  employed  by  a  capitalist,  then  the  non-payment 
of  these  two  hours  reduces  the  costs  of  circulation  of  his  capital, 
which  constitute  a  deduction  from  his  income.  For  the  capi¬ 
talist  this  is  a  positive  gain,  because  the  negative  limit  for  the 
self-expansion  of  his  capital-value  is  thereby  reduced.  So  long 
as  small  independent  producers  of  commodities  spend  a  part 
of  their  own  time  in  buying  and  selling,  this  represents  nothing 
but  time  spent  during  the  intervals  between  their  productive 
function  or  diminution  of  their  time  of  production. 

At  all  events  the  time  consumed  for  this  purpose  constitutes 
one  of  the  costs  of  circulation  which  adds  nothing  to  the  con¬ 
verted  values.  It  is  the  cost  of  converting  them  from  the  com¬ 
modity-form  into  the  money-form.  The  capitalist  producer  of 
commodities  acting  as  an  agent  of  circulation  differs  from  the 
direct  producer  of  commodities  only  in  the  fact  that  he  buys  and 
sells  on  a  larger  scale  and  therefore  his  function  as  such  agent 
assumes  greater  dimensions.  And  if  the  volume  of  his  business 
compels  or  enables  him  to  buy  (hire)  circulation  agents  of  his  own 
to  serve  as  wage-labourers,  the  nature  of  the  case  is  not  changed 
thereby.  A  certain  amount  of  labour-power  and  labour-time  must 


136  THE  metamorphoses  of  capital  and  their  circuits 

be  expended  in  the  process  of  circulation  (so  far  as  it  is  merely 
a  change  of  form).  But  this  now  appears  as  an  additional  invest¬ 
ment  of  capital.  A  part  of  the  variable  capital  must  be  laid  out 
in  the  purchase  of  this  labour-power  functioning  only  in  circula¬ 
tion.  This  advance  of  capital  creates  neither  product  nor  value. 
It  reduces  pro  tanto  the  dimensions  in  which  the  advanced  capital 
functions  productively.  It  is  as  though  one  part  of  the  product 
were  transformed  into  a  machine  which  buys  and  sells  the  rest 
of  the  product.  This  machine  brings  about  a  reduction  of  the 
product.  It  does  not  participate  in  the  productive  process,  al¬ 
though  it  can  diminish  the  labour-power,  etc.,  spent  on  circula¬ 
tion.  It  constitutes  merely  a  part  of  the  costs  of  circulation. 


2.  Book-Keeping 

Apart  from  the  actual  buying  and  selling,  labour-time  is  ex¬ 
pended  in  book-keeping,  which  besides  absorbs  materialised 
labour  such  as  pens,  ink,  paper,  desks,  office  paraphernalia.  This 
function,  therefore,  exacts  the  expenditure  on  the  one  hand  of 
labour-power  and  on  the  other  of  instruments  of  labour.  It  is 
the  same  condition  of  things  as  obtains  in  the  case  of  the  time  of 
purchase  and  sale. 

As  unity  within  its  circuits,  as  value  in  motion,  whether  in 
the  sphere  of  production  or  in  either  phase  of  the  sphere  of  cir¬ 
culation,  capital  exists  ideally  only  in  the  form  of  money  of 
account,  primarily  in  the  mind  of  the  producer  of  commodities, 
the  capitalist  producer  of  commodities.  This  movement  is  fixed 
and  controlled  by  book-keeping,  which  includes  the  determination 
of  prices,  or  the  calculation  of  the  prices  of  commodities.  The 
movement  of  production,  especially  of  the  production  of  surplus- 
value —  in  which  the  commodities  figure  only  as  depositories  of 
value,  as  the  names  of  things  whose  ideal  existence  as  values  is 
crystallised  in  money  of  account — thus  is  symbolically  reflected 
in  imagination.  So  long  as  the  individual  producer  of  commod¬ 
ities  keeps  account  only  in  his  head  (for  instance,  a  peasant; 
the  book-keeping  tenant-farmer  was  not  produced  until  the  rise  of 
capitalist  agriculture),  or  books  his  expenditures,  receipts,  due 
dates  of  payments,  etc.,  only  incidentally,  outside  of  his 
production  time,  it  is  palpably  clear  that  this  function  and  the 
instruments  of  labour  consumed  by  it,  such  as  paper,  etc., 
represent  additional  consumption  of  labour-time  and  instruments 
which  are  necessary,  but  constitute  a  deduction  from  the  time 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


137 


available  for  productive  consumption  as  well  as  from  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  which  function  in  the  real  process  of  production, 
enter  into  the  creation  of  products  and  value.12  The  nature  of 
the  function  is  not  changed — neither  by  the  dimensions  which  it 
assumes  on  account  of  its  concentration  in  the  hands  of  the  capi¬ 
talist  producer  of  commodities  and  the  fact  that  instead  of  appear¬ 
ing  as  the  function  of  many  small  commodity-producers  it  appears 
as  the  function  of  one  capitalist,  as  a  function  within  a  process 
of  large-scale  production;  nor  is  it  altered  by  its  divorcement  from 
those  productive  functions  of  which  it  formed  an  appendage,  nor 
by  its  conversion  into  an  independent  function  of  special  agents 
exclusively  entrusted  with  it. 

Division  of  labour  and  assumption  of  independence  do  not 
make  a  function  one  that  creates  products  and  value  if  it  was  not 
so  intrinsically,  hence  before  it  became  independent.  If  a  capi¬ 
talist  invests  his  capital  anew,  he  must  invest  a  part  of  it  in  hir¬ 
ing  a  book-keeper,  etc.,  and  in  the  wherewithal  of  book-keeping. 
If  his  capital  is  already  functioning,  is  engaged  in  the  process 
of  its  own  constant  reproduction,  he  must  continually  reconvert 
a  part  of  his  product  into  a  book-keeper,  clerks,  and  the  like,  by 
transforming  that  part  into  money.  That  part  of  his  capital  is 
withdrawn  from  the  process  of  production  and  belongs  in  the 
costs  of  circulation,  deductions  from  the  total  yield  (including 
the  labour-power  itself  that  is  expended  exclusively  for  this 
function). 

But  there  is  a  certain  difference  between  the  costs  incidental 
to  book-keeping,  or  the  unproductive  expenditure  of  labour¬ 
time  on  the  one  hand  and  those  of  mere  buying  and  selling  time 
on  the  other.  The  latter  arise  only  from  the  definite  social  form 
of  the  process  of  production,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  the  process 
of  production  of  commodities.  Book-keeping,  as  the  control  and 


**  In  the  Middle  Ages  we  find  book-keeping  for  agriculture  only  in  the 
monasteries.  But  we  have  seen  (Buch  I,  p.  343  [English  edition:  page  357. 
— Ed.  ])  that  a  book-keeper  was  installed  for  agriculture  as  early  as  the 
primitive  Indian  communities.  Book-keeping  is  there  made  the  independent 
and  exclusive  function  of  a  communal  officer.  This  division  of  labour  saves 
time,  effort,  and  expense,  but  production  and  book-keeping  in  the  sphere  of 
production  remain  as  much  two  different  things  as  the  cargo  of  a  ship  and 
the  bill  of  lading.  In  the  person  of  the  book-keeper,  a  part  of  the  labour- 
power  of  the  community  is  withdrawn  from  production,  and  the  costs  of 
his  function  are  not  made  good  by  his  own  labour  but  by  a  deduction  from 
the  communal  product.  What  is  true  of  the  book-keeper  of  an  Indian  com¬ 
munity  is  true  mutatis  mutandis  of  the  book-keeper  of  the  capitalist.  (From 
Manuscript  II.) 


138 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


ideal  synthesis  of  the  proeess,  becomes  the  more  necessary  the 
more  the  process  assumes  a  social  scale  and  loses  its  purely  in¬ 
dividual  character.  It  is  therefore  more  necessary  in  capitalist 
production  than  in  the  scattered  production  of  handicraft  and 
peasant  economy,  more  necessary  in  collective  production  than 
in  capitalist  production.  But  the  costs  of  book-keeping  drop  as 
production  becomes  concentrated  and  book-keeping  becomes 
social. 

We  are  concerned  here  only  with  the  general  character  of  the 
costs  of  circulation,  which  arise  out  of  the  metamorphosis  of 
forms  alone.  It  is  superfluous  to  discuss  here  all  their  forms  in 
detail.  But  how  forms  which  belong  in  the  sphere  of  pure  changes 
of  the  form  of  value  and  hence  originate  from  the  particular 
social  form  of  the  process  of  production,  forms  which  in  the  case 
of  the  individual  commodity-producer  are  only  transient,  barely 
perceptible  elements,  run  alongside  his  productive  functions  or 
become  intertwined  with  them — how  these  can  strike  the  eye 
as  the  huge  costs  of  circulation  can  be  seen  from  just  the  money 
taken  in  and  paid  out  when  these  operations  have  become  in¬ 
dependent  and  concentrated  on  a  large  scale  as  the  exclusive 
function  of  banks,  etc.,  or  of  cashiers  in  individual  businesses. 
But  it  must  be  firmly  borne  in  mind  that  these  costs  of  circula¬ 
tion  are  not  changed  in  character  by  their  change  in  appearance. 

3.  Money 

Whether  a  product  is  fabricated  as  a  commodity  or  not,  it 
is  always  a  material  form  of  wealth,  a  use-value  intended  for 
individual  or  productive  consumption.  Its  value  as  a  commodity 
is  ideally  expressed  in  its  price,  which  does  not  change  its  actual 
use-form  in  the  least.  But  the  fact  that  certain  commodities  like 
gold  and  silver  function  as  money  and  as  such  reside  exclusively 
in  the  process  of  circulation  (even  in  the  form  of  hoards,  reserve 
funds,  etc.,  they  remain  in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  although 
latently)  is  a  pure  product  of  the  particular  social  form  of  the 
process  of  production,  the  process  of  production  of  commodities. 
Since  under  capitalist  production  products  assume  the  general 
form  of  commodities,  and  the  overwhelming  mass  of  products  is 
created  as  commodities  and  must  therefore  assume  the  form  of 
money,  and  since  the  vast  bulk  of  the  commodities,  the  part  of 
social  wealth  functioning  as  commodities,  grows  continually,  it 
follows  that  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  functioning  as  means 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


139 


of  circulation,  paying  medium,  reserve  fund,  etc.,  likewise 
increases.  These  commodities  performing  the  function  of  money 
enter  into  neither  individual  nor  productive  consumption.  They 
represent  social  labour  fixed  in  a  form  in  which  it  serves  as  a 
mere  circulation  machine.  Besides  the  fact  that  a  part  of  the 
social  wealth  has  been  condemned  to  assume  this  unproductive 
form,  the  wearing  down  of  the  money  demands  its  constant 
replacement,  or  the  conversion  of  more  social  labour,  in  the  form  of 
products,  into  more  gold  and  silver.  These  replacement  costs  are 
considerable  in  capitalistically  developed  nations,  because  in 
general  the  portion  of  wealth  tied  up  in  the  form  of  money  is 
tremendous.  Gold  and  silver  as  money-commodities  mean  cir¬ 
culation  costs  to  society  which  arise  solely  out  of  the  social  form 
of  production.  They  are  faux  frais  of  commodity  production  in 
general,  and  they  increase  with  the  development  of  this  produc¬ 
tion,  especially  of  capitalist  production.  They  represent  a  part 
of  the  social  wealth  that  must  be  sacrificed  to  the  process  of 
circulation.13 


II.  COSTS  OF  STORAGE 

Costs  of  circulation,  which  originate  in  a  mere  change  of  form 
of  value,  in  circulation,  ideally  considered,  do  not  enter  into 
the  value  of  commodities.  The  parts  of  capital  expended  as  such 
costs  are  merely  deductions  from  the  productively  expended  cap¬ 
ital  so  far  as  the  capitalist  is  concerned.  The  costs  of  circulation 
which  we  shall  consider  now  are  of  a  different  nature.  They  may 
arise  from  processes  of  production  which  are  only  continued  in 
circulation,  the  productive  character  of  which  is  hence  merely 
concealed  by  the  circulation  form.  On  the  other  hand  they  may 
be,  from  the  standpoint  of  society,  mere  costs,  unproductive  ex¬ 
penditure  of  living  or  materialised  labour,  but  for  that  very  rea¬ 
son  they  may  become  productive  of  value  for  the  individual 
capitalist,  may  constitute  an  addition  to  the  selling  price  of  his 
commodities.  This  already  follows  from  the  fact  that  these  costs 
are  different  in  different  spheres  of  production,  and  here  and 
there  even  for  different  individual  capitals  in  one  and  the  same 


18  “The  money  circulating  in  a  country  is  a  certain  portion  of  the  capital 
of  the  country,  absolutely  withdrawn  from  productive  purposes,  in  order 
to  facilitate  or  increase  the  productiveness  of  the  remainder.  A  certain  amount 
of  wealth  is,  therefore,  as  necessary  in  order  to  adopt  gold  as  a  circulat¬ 
ing  medium,  as  it  is  to  make  a  machine,  in  order  to  facilitate  any  other 
production.  ”  (Economist,  Vol.  V,  p.  520.) 


140 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


sphere  of  production.  By  being  added  to  the  prices  of  commodities 
they  are  distributed  in  proportion  to  the  amount  to  be  borne  by 
each  individual  capitalist.  But  all  labour  which  adds  value  can 
also  add  surplus-value,  and  will  always  add  surplus-value  under 
capitalist  production,  as  the  value  created  by  labour  depends 
on  the  amount  of  the  labour  itself,  whereas  the  surplus-value 
created  by  it  depends  on  the  extent  to  which  the  capitalist  pays 
for  it.  Consequently  costs  which  enhance  the  price  of  a  commodity 
without  adding  to  its  use-value,  which  therefore  are  to  be  classed 
as  unproductive  expenses  so  far  as  society  is  concerned,  may 
be  a  source  of  enrichment  to  the  individual  capitalist.  On  the 
other  hand,  as  this  addition  to  the  price  of  the  commodity  merely 
distributes  these  costs  of  circulation  equally,  they  do  not  thereby 
cease  to  be  unproductive  in  character.  For  instance  insurance 
companies  divide  the  losses  of  individual  capitalists  among 
the  capitalist  class.  But  this  does  not  prevent  these  equalised 
losses  from  remaining  losses  so  far  as  the  aggregate  social  capital 
is  concerned. 


1.  Formation  of  Supply  in  General 

During  its  existence  as  commodity-capital  or  its  stay  in  the 
market,  in  other  words,  during  the  interval  between  the  process 
of  production,  from  which  it  emerges,  and  the  process  of  con¬ 
sumption,  into  which  it  enters,  the  product  constitutes  a  commod¬ 
ity  supply:  As  a  commodity  in  the  market,  and  therefore  in  the 
shape  of  a  supply,  commodity-capital  figures  in  a  dual  capacity 
in  each  circuit:  one.  time  as  the  commodity-product  of  that  capi¬ 
tal  in  process  whose  circuit  is  being  examined;  the  other  time 
however  as  the  commodity-product  of  another  capital,  which 
must  be  available  in  the  market  to  be  bought  and  converted  into 
productive  capital.  It  is,  indeed,  possible  that  this  last-named 
commodity-capital  is  not  produced  until  ordered.  In  that  event 
an  interruption  occurs  until  it  has  been  produced.  But  the  flow 
of  the  process  of  production  and  reproduction  requires  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  mass  of  commodities  (means  of  production)  should  always 
be  in  the  market,  should  therefore  form  a  supply.  Productive 
capital  likewise  comprises  the  purchase  of  labour-power,  and  the 
money-form  is  here  only  the  value-form  of  the  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence,  the  greater  part  of  which  the  labourer  must  find  at  hand  in 
the  market.  We  shall  discuss  this  more  in  detail  further  on  in 
this  paragraph.  But  at  this  point  the  following  is  already  clear. 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


141 


As  far  as  concerns  capital-value  in  process  which  has  been  trans¬ 
formed  into  a  commodity  and  must  now  be  sold  or  reconverted 
into  money,  which  therefore  functions  for  the  moment  as  com¬ 
modity-capital  in  the  market,  the  condition  in  which  it  consti¬ 
tutes  a  supply  is  to  be  described  as  an  inexpedient,  involuntary 
stay  there.  The  quicker  the  sale  is  effected  the  more  smoothly 
runs  the  process  of  reproduction.  Delay  in  the  form  conversion 
of  C' — M'  impedes  the  real  exchange  of  matter  which  must  take 
place  in  the  circuit  of  capital,  as  well  as  its  further  functioning 
as  productive  capital.  On  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  M — C  is  con¬ 
cerned,  the  constant  presence  of  commodities  in  the  market, 
commodity-supply,  appears  as  a  condition  of  the  flow  of  the 
process  of  reproduction  and  of  the  investment  of  new  or  additional 
capital. 

The  abidance  of  the  commodity-capital  as  a  commodity-supply 
in  the  market  requires  buildings,  stores,  storage  places,  ware¬ 
houses,  in  other  words,  an  expenditure  of  constant  capital; 
furthermore  the  payment  of  labour-power  for  placing  the  com¬ 
modities  in  storage.  Besides,  commodities  spoil  and  are  exposed 
to  the  injurious  influences  of  the  elements.  Additional  capital 
must  be  invested,  partly  in  instruments  of  labour,  in  material 
form,  and  partly  in  labour-power  to  protect  the  commodities 
against  the  above.14 

Thus  the  existence  of  capital  in  its  form  of  commodity-capi¬ 
tal  and  hence  of  commodity-supply  gives  rise  to  costs  which  must 
be  classed  as  costs  of  circulation,  since  they  do  not  come  within 
the  sphere  of  production.  These  costs  of  circulation  differ  from 
those  mentioned  under  I  by  the  fact  that  they  enter  to  a  certain 
extent  into  the  value  of  the  commodities,  i.e.,  they  increase  the 
prices  of  commodities.  At  all  events  the  capital  and  labour- 
power  which  serve  the  need  of  preserving  and  storing  the  commod¬ 
ity-supply  are  withdrawn  from  the  direct  process  of  production. 
On  the  other  hand  the  capitals  thus  employed,  including  labour- 
power  as  a  constituent  of  capital,  must  be  replaced  out  of  the 

14  Corbet  calculates,  in  1841,  that  the  cost  of  storing  wheat  for  a  season 
of  nine  months  amounts  to  a  loss  of  Vi  per  cent  in  quantity,  3  per  cent  for 
interest  on  the  price  of  wheat,  2  per  cent  for  warehouse  rental,  1  per  cent  for 
sifting  and  drayage,  1/2  per  cent  lor  delivery,  together  7  per  cent,  or  3  s.  6d. 
on  a  price  of  50  s.  per  quarter.  (Th.  Corbet,  An  Inquiry  into  the  Causes  and 
Modes  of  the  Wealth  of  Individuals,  etc.,  London,  1841.)  According  to  the 
testimony  of  Liverpool  merchants  before  the  Railway  Commission,  the 
(net)  costs  of  grain  storage  in  1865  amounted  to  about  2d.  per  quarter  per 
month,  or  9d.  or  lOd.  a  ton.  (Royal  Commission  on  Railways,  1867.  Evi¬ 
dence,  p.  19,  No.  331.) 


142 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


social  product.  Their  expenditure  has  therefore  the  effect  of  dimin¬ 
ishing  the  productive  power  of  labour,  so  that  a  greater  amount 
of  capital  and  labour  is  required  to  obtain  a  particular  useful 
effect.  They  are  unproductive  costs. 

As  the  costs  of  circulation  necessitated  by  the  formation  of 
a  commodity-supply  are  due  merely  to  the  time  required  for  the 
conversion  of  existing  values  from  the  commodity-form  into  the 
money-form,  hence  merely  to  the  particular  social  form  of  the 
production  process  (i.e.,  are  due  only  to  the  fact  that  the  product 
is  brought  forth  as  a  commodity  and  must  therefore  undergo 
the  transformation  into  money),  these  costs  completely  share 
the  character  of  the  circulation  costs  enumerated  under  I.  On  the 
other  hand  the  value  of  the  commodities  is  here  preserved  or  in¬ 
creased  only  because  the  use-value,  the  product  itself,  is  placed 
in  definite  material  conditions  which  cost  capital  outlay  and  is 
subjected  to  operations  which  bring  additional  labour  to  bear  on 
the  use-values.  However  the  computation  of  the  values  of  com¬ 
modities,  the  book-keeping  incidental  to  this  process,  the  trans¬ 
actions  of  purchase  and  sale,  do  not  affect  the  use-value  in  which 
the  commodity-value  exists.  They  have  to  do  only  with  the  form 
of  the  commodity-value.  Although  in  the  case  submitted*  the 
costs  of  forming  a  supply  (which  is  here  done  involuntarily)  arise 
only  from  a  delay  in  the  change  of  form  and  from  its  necessity, 
still  these  costs  differ  from  those  mentioned  under  I,  in  that 
their  purpose  is  not  a  change  in  the  form  of  the  value,  but  the 
preservation  of  the  value  existing  in  the  commodity  as  a  product, 
a  utility,  and  which  cannot  be  preserved  in  any  other  way  than 
by  preserving  the  product,  the  use-value,  itself.  The  use-value 
is  neither  raised  nor  increased  here;  on  the  contrary,  it  dimin¬ 
ishes.  But  its  diminution  is  restricted  and  it  is  preserved. 
Neither  is  the  advanced  value  contained  in  the  commodity 
increased  here;  but  new  labour,  materialised  and  living,  is 
added. 

We  have  now  to  investigate  furthermore  to  what  extent  these 
costs  arise  from  the  peculiar  nature  of  commodity  production 
in  general  and  from  commodity  production  in  its  general,  abso¬ 
lute  form,  i.e.,  capitalist  commodity  production;  and  to  what 
extent  on  the  other  hand  they  are  common  to  all  social  produc¬ 
tion  and  merely  assume  a  special  shape,  a  special  form  of  appear¬ 
ance,  in  capitalist  production. 

Adam  Smith  entertained  the  splendid  notion  that  the  for- 


•  i.e.,  Corbet’s  calculations  given  in  Footnote  14 .—Ed. 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


143 


mation  of  a  supply  was  a  phenomenon  peculiar  to  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction.15  More  recent  economists,  for  instance  Lalor,  insist  on 
the  contrary  that  it  declines  with  the  development  of  capitalist 
production.*  Sismondi  even  regards  it  as  one  of  the  drawbacks 
of  the  latter.** 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  supplies  exist  in  three  forms:  in  the  form 
of  productive  capital,  in  the  form  of  a  fund  for  individual  con¬ 
sumption,  and  in  the  form  of  a  commodity-supply  or  commodity- 
capital.  The  supply  in  one  form  decreases  relatively  when  it 
increases  in  another,  although  its  quantity  may  increase  abso¬ 
lutely  in  all  three  forms  simultaneously. 

It  is  plain  from  the  outset  that  wherever  production  is  carried 
on  for  the  direct  satisfaction  of  the  needs  of  the  producer  and 
only  to  a  minor  extent  for  exchange  or  sale,  hence  where  the 
social  product  does  not  assume  the  form  of  commodities  at  all 
or  only  to  a  rather  small  degree,  the  supply  in  the  form  of  com¬ 
modities,  or  commodity-supply,  forms  only  a  small  and  insig¬ 
nificant  part  of  wealth.  But  here  the  consumption-fund  is  rela¬ 
tively  large,  especially  that  of  the  means  of  subsistence  proper. 
One  need  but  take  a  look  at  old-fashioned  peasant  economy. 
There  the  overwhelming  part  of  the  product  is  transformed  directly 
into  supplies  of  means  of  production  or  means  of  subsistence, 
without  becoming  supplies  of  commodities,  for  the  very  reason 
that  it  remains  in  the  hands  of  its  owner.  It  does  not  assume  the 
form  of  a  commodity-supply  and  for  this  reason  Adam  Smith 
declares  that  there  is  no  supply  in  societies  based  on  this  mode  of 
production.  He  confuses  the  form  of  the  supply  with  the  supply 
itself  and  believes  that  society  hitherto  lived  from  hand  to 
mouth  or  trusted  to  the  hap  of  the  morrow.16  This  is  a  naive 
misunderstanding. 


14  Book  II,  Introduction.  [A.  Smith,  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and 
Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations.  A  new  edition  in  four  volumes,  London, 
1843,  Vol.  II,  pp  249-52.—  Ed.  ] 

*  See:  J.  Lalor,  Money  and  Morals',  a  Book  for  the  Times,  London,  1852, 
pp.  43,  44. — Ed. 

**  See:  J.C.L.  Sismonde  de  Sismondi,  Etudes  sur  Teconomie  politique, 
Tome  I.  Bruxelles,  1837,  p.  49,  etc.—  Ed. 

16  Instead  of  a  supply  arising  only  upon  and  from  the  conversion  of  the 
product  into  a  commodity,  and  of  the  consumption-supply  into  a  commodity- 
supply,  as  Adam  Smith  wrongly  imagines,  this  change  of  form,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  causes  most  violent  crises  in  the  economy  of  the  producers  duringthe 
transition  from  production  for  one’s  own  needs  to  commodity  production, 
jn  India,  for  instance,  “the  disposition  to  hoard  largely  the  grain  for  which 
little  could  be  got  in  years  of  abundance”  was  observed  until  very  recent 
times.  (Return.  Bengal  and  Orissa  Famine  H.  of  C.,  1867,  1,  pp.  230-31, 


144 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


A  supply  in  the  form  of  productive  capital  exists  in  the  shape 
of  means  of  production,  which  already  are  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  or  at  least  in  the  hands  of  the  producer,  hence  latently 
already  in  the  process  of  production.  It  was  seen  previously  that 
with  the  development  of  the  productivity  of  labour  and  therefore 
also  with  the  development  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production  — 
which  develops  the  social  productive  power  of  labour  more  than 
all  previous  modes  of  production— there  is  a  steady  increase  in 
the  mass  of  means  of  production  (buildings,  machinery,  etc.) 
which  are  embodied  once  and  for  all  in  the  process  in  the  form 
of  instruments  of  labour,  and  perform  with  steady  repetition  their 
function  in  it  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time.  It  was  also  observed 
that  this  increase  is  at  the  same  time  the  premise  and  conse¬ 
quence  of  the  development  of  the  social  productive  power  of 
labour.  The  growth,  not  only  absolute  but  also  relative,  of  wealth 
in  this  form  (cf.  Buch  I,  Kap.  XXIII,  2)*  is  characteristic  above 
all  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production.  The  material  forms 
of  existence  of  constant  capital,  the  means  of  production,  do 
not  however  consist  only  of  such  instruments  of  labour  but  also 
of  materials  of  labour  in  various  stages  of  processing,  and  of 
auxiliary  materials.  With  the  enlargement  of  the  scale  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  the  increase  in  the  productive  power  of  labour  through 
co-operation,  division  of  labour,  machinery,  etc.,  grows  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  raw  materials,  auxiliary  materials,  etc.,  entering  into 
the  daily  process  of  reproduction.  These  elements  must  be  ready 
at  hand  in  the  place  of  production.  The  volume  of  this  supply 
existing  in  the  form  of  productive  capital  increases  therefore 
absolutely.  In  order  that  the  process  may  keep  going — apart 
from  the  fact  whether  this  supply  can  be  renewed  daily  or  only  at 
fixed  intervals — there  must  always  be  a  greater  accumulation  of 
ready  raw  material,  etc.,  at  the  place  of  production  than  is  used 
up,  say,  daily  or  weekly.  The  continuity  of  the  process  requires 
that  the  presence  of  its  conditions  should  not  be  jeopardised  by 
possible  interruptions  when  making  purchases  daily,  nor  depend 

No.  74.)  The  sudden  increase  in  the  demand  for  cotton,  jute,  etc.,  due  to 
the  American  Civil  War  led  in  many  parts  of  India  to  a  severe  restriction 
of  rice  culture,  a  rise  in  the  price  of  rice,  and  a  sale  of  the  producers’  old 
rice  supplies.  To  this  must  be  added  the  unexampled  export  of  rice  to  Aus¬ 
tralia,  Madagascar,  etc.,  after  1864-66  This  accounts  for  the  acute  character 
of  the  famine  of  1866,  which  cost  the  lives  of  a  million  people  in  the  district 
of  Orissa  alone  (loc.  cit.,  174,  175,  213,  214,  and  III:  Papers  relating  to  the 
Famine  in  Behar,  pp.  32,  33,  where  the  “drain  of  old  stocks”  is  emphasised 
as  one  of  the  causes  of  the  famine).  (From  Manuscript  II.) 

*  English  edition:  Ch.  XXV,  2 .—Ed. 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


145 


on  whether  the  product  is  sold  daily  or  weekly,  and  hence  is  re¬ 
convertible  into  its  elements  of  production  only  irregularly.  But 
it  is  evident  that  productive  capital  may  be  latent  or  form  a  sup¬ 
ply  in  quite  different  proportions.  There  is  for  instance  a  great 
difference  whether  a  spinning-mill  owner  must  have  on  hand 
a  supply  of  cotton  or  coal  for  three  months  or  for  one.  Patently 
this  supply,  while  increasing  absolutely,  may  decrease  relatively. 

This  depends  on  various  conditions,  all  of  which  practically 
amount  to  a  demand  for  greater  rapidity,  regularity,  and  relia¬ 
bility  in  furnishing  the  necessary  amount  of  raw  material,  so 
that  no  interruption  will  ever  occur.  The  less  these  conditions  are 
complied  with,  hence  the  less  rapid,  regular,  and  reliable  the 
supplies,  the  greater  must  be  the  latent  part  of  the  productive  ca¬ 
pital,  that  is  to  say,  the  supply  of  raw  material,  etc.,  in  the  hands 
of  the  producer,  waiting  to  be  worked  up.  These  conditions 
are  inversely  proportional  to  the  degree  of  development  of  capi¬ 
talist  production,  and  hence  of  the  productive  power  of  social 
labour.  The  same  applies  therefore  to  the  supply  in  this  form. 

However  that  which  appears  here  as  a  decrease  of  the  supply 
(for  instance,  in  Lalor)  is  in  part  merely  a  decrease  of  the  supply 
in  the  form  of  commodity-capital,  or  of  the  commodity-supply 
proper;  it  is  consequently  only  a  change  of  form  of  the  same  sup¬ 
ply.  If  for  instance  the  quantity  of  coal  daily  produced  in  a  cer¬ 
tain  country,  and  therefore  the  scale  and  energy  of  operation  of 
the  coal  industry,  are  great,  the  spinner  does  not  need  a  large 
store  of  coal  in  order  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  his  production. 
The  steady  and  certain  renewal  of  the  coal  supply  makes  this 
unnecessary.  In  the  second  place  the  rapidity  with  which  the 
product  of  one  process  may  be  transferred  as  means  of  production 
to  another  process  depends  on  the  development  of  the  transport 
and  communication  facilities.  The  cheapness  of  transportation  is 
of  great  importance  in  this  question.  The  continually  renewed 
transport  of  coal  from  the  mine  to  the  spinning-mill  for  instance 
would  be  more  expensive  than  the  storing  up  of  a  larger  supply 
of  coal  for  a  longer  time  when  the  price  of  transportation  is 
relatively  cheaper.  These  two  circumstances  examined  so  far 
arise  from  the  process  of  production  itself.  In  the  third  place  the 
development  of  the  credit-system  also  exerts  an  influence.  The 
less  the  spinner  is  dependent  on  the  direct  sale  of  his  yarn  for 
the  renewal  of  his  supply  of  cotton,  coal,  etc. — and  this  direct 
dependence  will  be  the  smaller,  the  more  developed  the  credit- 
system  is — the  smaller  relatively  these  supplies  can  be  and  yet 
ensure  a  continuous  production  of  yarn  on  a  given  scale,  a 


146  THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 

production  independent  of  the  hazards  of  the  sale  of  yarn.  In  the 
fourth  place,  however,  many  raw  materials,  semi-Gnished  goods, 
etc.,  require  rather  long  periods  of  time  for  their  production. 
This  applies  especially  to  all  raw  materials  furnished  by  agricul¬ 
ture.  If  no  interruption  of  the  process  of  production  is  to  take 
place,  a  certain  amount  of  raw  materials  must  be  on  hand  for 
the  entire  period  in  which  no  new  products  can  take  the  place  of 
the  old.  If  this  supply  decreases  in  the  hands  of  the  industrial 
capitalist,  it  proves  merely  that  it  increases  in  the  hands  of  the 
merchant  in  the  form  of  commodity-supply.  The  development  of 
transportation  for  instance  makes  it  possible  rapidly  to  ship  the 
cotton  lying,  say,  in  Liverpool’s  import  warehouses  to  Man¬ 
chester,  so  that  the  manufacturer  can  renew  his  supply  in  com¬ 
paratively  small  portions,  as  and  when  needed.  But  in  that  case 
the  cotton  remains  in  so  much  larger  quantities  as  commodity- 
supply  in  the  hands  of  the  Liverpool  merchants.  It  is  therefore 
merely  a  change  in  the  form  of  the  supply,  and  this  Lalor  and 
others  overlooked.  And  if  you  consider  the  social  capital,  the 
same  quantity  of  products  exists  in  either  case  in  the  form  of 
supply.  The  quantity  required  for  a  single  country  during  the 
period  of,  say,  one  year  decreases  as  transportation  improves. 
If  a  large  number  of  sailing  vessels  and  steamers  ply  between 
America  and  England,  England’s  opportunities  to  renew  its 
cotton  supply  are  increased  while  the  average  quantity  to  be 
held  in  storage  in  England  decreases.  The  same  effect  is  produced 
by  the  development  of  the  world-market  and  the  consequent 
multiplication  of  the  sources  of  supply  of  the  same  merchandise. 
The  article  is  supplied  piecemeal  from  various  countries  and  at 
various  intervals. 


2.  The  Commodity-Supply  Proper 

We  have  already  seen  that  under  capitalist  production  the 
product  assumes  the  general  form  of  a  commodity,  and  the  more 
so  the  more  that  production  grows  in  size  and  depth.  Consequent¬ 
ly,  even  if  production  retains  the  same  volume,  the  far  greater 
part  of  the  products  exists  in  the  shape  of  commodities,  compared 
with  either  the  former  modes  of  production  or  the  capitalist 
mode  of  production  at  a  less  developed  stage.  And  every  com¬ 
modity — therefore  also  every  commodity-capital,  which  is  only 
commodities,  but  commodities  serving  as  the  form  of  existence 
of  capital-value— constitutes  an  element  of  the  commodity-supply, 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


147 


unless  it  passes  immediately  from  its  sphere  of  production  into 
productive  or  individual  consumption,  that  is,  does  not  lie  in 
the  market  in  the  interval.  If  the  volume  of  production  remains 
the  same,  the  commodity-supply  (i  e.,  this  isolation  and  fixation 
of  the  commodity-form  of  the  product)  grows  therefore  of  itself 
concomitantly  with  capitalist  production.  We  have  seen  above 
that  this  is  merely  a  change  of  form  of  the  supply,  that  is  to 
say,  the  supply  in  the  form  of  commodities  increases  on  the 
one  hand  because  on  the  other  the  supply  in  the  form  intended 
directly  for  production  or  consumption  decreases.  It  is  merely  a 
changed  social  form  of  the  supply.  If  at  the  same  time  it  is  not 
only  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  commodity-supply  com¬ 
pared  with  the  aggregate  social  product  that  increases  but  also 
its  absolute  magnitude,  that  is  so  because  the  mass  of  the  ag¬ 
gregate  product  grows  with  the  growth  of  capitalist  production. 

With  the  development  of  capitalist  production,  the  scale 
of  production  is  determined  less  and  less  by  the  direct  demand 
for  the  product  and  more  and  more  by  the  amount  of  capital 
available  in  the  hands  of  the  individual  capitalist,  by  the  urge 
for  self-expansion  inherent  in  his  capital  and  by  the  need  of  con¬ 
tinuity  and  expansion  of  the  process  of  production.  Thus  in  each 
particular  branch  of  production  there  is  a  necessary  increase  in 
the  mass  of  products  available  in  the  market  in  the  shape  of 
commodities,  i.e.,  in  search  of  buyers.  The  amount  of  capital 
fixed  for  a  shorter  or  longer  period  in  the  form  of  commodity- 
capital  grows.  Hence  the  commodity-supply  also  grows. 

Finally  the  majority  of  the  members  of  society  are  trans¬ 
formed  into  wage-labourers,  into  people  who  live  from  hand  to 
mouth,  who  receive  their  wages  weekly  and  spend  them  daily, 
who  therefore  must  have  their  means  of  subsistence  made  avail¬ 
able  to  them  in  the  shape  of  a  supply.  Although  the  separate 
elements  of  this  supply  may  be  in  continuous  flow,  a  part  of 
them  must  always  stagnate  in  order  that  the  supply  as  a  whole 
may  remain  in  a  state  of  flux. 

All  these  characteristics  have  their  origin  in  the  form  of  pro¬ 
duction  and  in  the  incident  change  of  form  which  the  product 
must  undergo  in  the  process  of  circulation. 

Whatever  may  be  the  social  form  of  the  products-supply,  its 
preservation  requires  outlays  for  buildings,  vessels,  etc.,  which 
are  facilities  for  storing  the  product;  also  for  means  of  production 
and  labour,  more  or  less  of  which  must  be  expended,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  product,  in  order  to  combat  injurious  influ¬ 
ences.  The  more  concentrated  socially  the  supply  is,  the  smaller 


148 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


relatively  are  the  costs.  These  outlays  always  constitute  a  part 
of  the  social  labour,  in  either  materialised  or  living  form— hence 
in  the  capitalist  form  outlays  of  capital— which  do  not  enter 
into  the  formation  of  the  product  itself  and  thus  are  deductions 
from  the  product.  They  are  necessary,  these  unproductive  ex¬ 
penses  of  social  wealth.  They  are  the  costs  of  preserving  the  social 
product  regardless  of  whether  its  existence  as  an  element  of  the 
commodity-supply  stems  merely  from  the  social  form  of  produc¬ 
tion,  hence  from  the  commodity-form  and  its  necessary  change 
of  form,  or  whether  we  regard  the  commodity-supply  merely 
as  a  special  form  of  the  supply  of  products,  which  is  common  to 
all  societies,  although  not  in  the  form  of  a  commodity-supply, 
that  form  of  products-supply  belonging  in  the  process  of  cir¬ 
culation. 

It  may  now  be  asked  to  what  extent  these  costs  enhance  the 
values  of  commodities. 

If  the  capitalist  has  converted  the  capital  advanced  by  him  in 
the  form  of  means  of  production  and  labour-power  into  a  product, 
into  a  definite  quantity  of  commodities  ready  for  sale,  and  these 
commodities  remain  in  stock  unsold,  then  we  have  a  case  of  not 
only  the  stagnation  of  the  process  of  self-expansion  of  his  capi¬ 
tal-value  during  this  period.  The  costs  of  preserving  this  supply 
in  buildings,  of  additional  labour,  etc.,  mean  a  positive  loss. 
The  buyer  he  would  ultimately  find  would  laugh  in  his  face  if 
he  were  to  say  to  him:  “I  could  not  sell  my  goods  for  six  months, 
and  their  preservation  during  that  period  did  not  only  keep  so 
and  so  much  of  my  capital  idle,  but  also  cost  me  so  and  so  much 
extra  expense.”  “ Tant  pis  pour  vous!"  the  buyer  would  say. 
“Right  here  alongside  of  you  is  another  seller  whose  wares  were 
completed  only  the  day  before  yesterday.  Your  articles  are  shop¬ 
worn  and  probably  more  or  less  damaged  by  the  ravages  of  time. 
Therefore  you  will  have  to  sell  cheaper  than  your  competitor.  ” 

The  conditions  under  which  a  commodity  exists  are  not  in 
the  least  affected  by  whether  its  producer  is  the  real  producer 
or  a  capitalist  producer,  hence  actually  only  a  representative 
of  the  real  producer.  He  has  to  turn  his  product  into  money.  The 
expenses  incurred  by  him  because  of  the  fixation  of  the  product 
in  the  form  of  commodities  are  a  part  of  his  individual  specula¬ 
tions  with  which  the  buyer  of  the  commodities  has  no  concern. 
The  latter  does  not  pay  him  for  the  time  of  circulation  of  his  com¬ 
modities.  Even  when  the  capitalist  keeps  his  goods  intentionally 
off  the  market,  in  times  of  an  actual  or  anticipated  revolution  of 
values,  it  depends  on  the  advent  of  this  revolution  of  values, 


THE  COSTS  OP  CIRCULATION 


149 


on  the  correctness  or  incorrectness  of  his  speculation,  whether  he 
will  recover  his  additional  costs  or  not.  But  the  revolution  in 
values  does  not  ensue  in  consequence  of  his  additional  costs. 
Hence  in  so  far  as  the  formation  of  a  supply  entails  a  stagnation 
of  circulation,  the  expense  incurred  thereby  does  not  add  to 
the  value  of  the  commodities.  On  the  other  hand  there  cannot 
be  any  supply  without  a  stay  in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  with¬ 
out  capital  staying  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  in  its  commodity- 
form;  hence  no  supply  without  stagnation  of  circulation,  just 
as  no  money  can  circulate  without  the  formation  of  a  money- 
reserve.  Hence  no  commodity  circulation  without  commodity- 
supply.  If  the  capitalist  does  not  come  face  to  face  with  this 
necessity  in  C' — M',  he  will  encounter  it  in  M — C;  if  not  with 
regard  to  his  own  commodity-capital,  then  with  regard  to  that 
of  other  capitalists,  who  produce  means  of  production  for  him 
and  means  of  subsistence  for  his  labourers. 

Whether  the  formation  of  a  supply  is  voluntary  or  involun¬ 
tary,  that  is  to  say,  whether  the  commodity-producer  keeps  a 
supply  intentionally  or  whether  his  products  form  a  supply  in 
consequence  of  the  sales  resistance  offered  by  the  conditions 
of  the  process  of  circulation  itself  cannot  affect  the  matter  essen¬ 
tially,  it  would  seem.  But  for  the  solution  of  this  problem  it  is 
useful  to  know  what  distinguishes  voluntary  from  involuntary 
supply  formation.  Involuntary  supply  formation  arises  from,  or  is 
identical  with,  a  stagnation  of  the  circulation  which  is  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  knowledge  of  the  commodity-producer  and  thwarts 
his  will.  And  what  characterises  the  voluntary  formation  of  a 
supply?  In  both  instances  the  seller  seeks  to  get  rid  of  his  com¬ 
modity  as  fast  as  ever.  He  always  offers  his  product  for  sale  as  a 
commodity.  If  he  were  to  withdraw  it  from  sale,  it  would  be 
only  a  potential  (Bovajist),  not  an  actual  (evepfsia)  element 
of  the  commodity-supply.  To  him  the  commodity  as  such  is  as 
much  a  depository  of  exchange-value  as  ever  and  as  such  can  act 
only  by  and  after  stripping  off  its  commodity-form  and  assuming 
the  money- form. 

The  commodity-supply  must  be  of  a  certain  volume  in  order 
to  satisfy  the  demand  during  a  given  period.  A  continual  exten¬ 
sion  of  the  circle  of  buyers  is  counted  upon.  For  instance,  in  order 
to  last  for  one  day,  a  part  of  the  commodities  in  the  market  must 
constantly  remain  in  the  commodity-form  while  the  remainder 
is  fluent,  turns  into  money.  True,  the  part  which  stagnates  while 
the  rest  is  fluent  decreases  steadily,  just  as  the  size  of  the  supply 
itself  decreases  until  it  is  all  sold.  The  stagnation  of  commodities 


150 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


thus  counts  as  a  requisite  condition  of  their  sale.  The  volume  must 
furthermore  be  larger  than  the  average  sale  or  the  average  demand. 
Otherwise  the  excess  over  these  averages  could  not  be  satisfied. 
On  the  other  hand  the  supply  must  constantly  be  renewed,  because 
it  is  constantly  being  drawn  on.  This  renewal  cannot  come  from 
anywhere  in  the  last  instance  except  from  production,  from  a 
supply  of  commodities.  It  is  immaterial  whether  this  comes  from 
abroad  or  not.  The  renewal  depends  on  the  periods  required  by 
the  commodities  for  their  reproduction.  The  commodity-supply 
must  last  all  that  time.  The  fact  that  it  does  not  remain  in  the 
hands  of  the  original  producer  but  passes  through  various  reser¬ 
voirs,  from  the  wholesaler  to  the  retailer,  changes  merely  the 
appearance  and  not  the  nature  of  the  thing.  From  the  point  of 
view  of  society,  a  part  of  the  capital  retains  in  both  instances  the 
form  of  a  commodity-supply  until  the  commodities  enter  produc¬ 
tive  or  individual  consumption.  The  producer  tries  to  keep  a 
stock  corresponding  to  his  average  demand  in  order  not  to  depend 
directly  on  production  and  to  ensure  for  himself  a  steady  clien¬ 
tele.  Purchase  periods  corresponding  to  the  periods  of  production 
are  formed  and  the  commodities  constitute  supplies  for  longer  or 
shorter  times,  until  they  can  be  replaced  by  new  commodities 
of  the  same  kind.  Constancy  and  continuity  of  the  process  of 
circulation,  and  therefore  of  the  process  of  reproduction,  which 
includes  the  process  of  circulation,  are  safeguarded  only  by  the 
formation  of  such  supplies. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  C' — M'  may  have  been  transacted 
for  the  producer  of  C,  even  if  C  is  still  in  the  market.  If  the  pro¬ 
ducer  were  to  keep  his  own  commodities  in  stock  until  they  are 
sold  to  the  ultimate  consumer,  he  would  have  to  set  two  capi¬ 
tals  in  motion,  one  as  the  producer  of  the  commodities  and  one 
as  a  merchant.  As  far  as  the  commodity  itself  is  concerned, 
whether  we  look  upon  it  as  an  individual  commodity  or  as  a 
component  part  of  social  capital,  it  is  immaterial  whether  the 
costs  of  forming  the  supply  must  be  borne  by  its  producer  or  by 
a  series  of  merchants,  from  A  to  Z. 

Since  the  commodity-supply  is  nothing  but  the  commodity- 
form  of  the  product  which  at  a  particular  level  of  social  produc¬ 
tion  would  exist  either  as  a  productive  supply  (latent  production 
fund)  or  as  a  consumption-fund  (reserve  of  means  of  consumption) 
if  it  did  not  exist  as  a  commodity-supply,  the  expenses  required 
for  its  preservation,  that  is,  the  costs  of  supply  formation — i.e., 
materialised  or  living  labour  spent  for  this  purpose— are  mere¬ 
ly  expenses  incurred  for  maintaining  either  the  social  fund  for 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


151 


production  or  the  social  fund  for  consumption.  The  increase  in 
the  value  of  commodities  caused  by  them  distributes  these  costs 
simply  pro  rata  over  the  different  commodities,  since  the  costs 
differ  with  different  kinds  of  commodities.  And  the  costs  of  supply 
formation  are  as  much  as  ever  deductions  from  the  social 
wealth,  although  they  constitute  one  of  the  conditions  of  its 
existence. 

Only  to  the  extent  that  the  commodity-supply  is  a  premise 
of  commodity  circulation  and  is  itself  a  form  necessarily  arising 
in  commodity  circulation,  only  in  so  far  as  this  apparent  stag¬ 
nation  is  therefore  a  form  of  the  movement  itself,  just  as  the  for¬ 
mation  of  a  money-reserve  is  a  premise  of  money  circulation — 
only  to  that  extent  is  such  stagnation  normal.  But  as  soon  as  the 
commodities  ’ying  in  the  reservoirs  of  circulation  do  not  make 
room  for  the  swiftly  succeeding  wave  of  production,  so  that  the 
reservoirs  become  over-stocked,  the  commodity-supply  expands 
in  consequence  of  the  stagnation  in  circulation  just  as  the  hoards 
increase  when  money-circulation  is  clogged.  It  does  not  make 
any  difference  whether  this  jam  occurs  in  the  warehouses  of  the 
industrial  capitalist  or  in  the  storerooms  of  the  merchant.  The 
commodity-supply  is  in  that  case  not  a  prerequisite  of  uninter¬ 
rupted  sale,  but  a  consequence  of  the  impossibility  of  selling  the 
goods.  The  costs  are  the  same,  but  since  they  now  arise  purely 
out  of  the  form,  that  is  to  say,  out  of  the  necessity  of  transform¬ 
ing  the  commodities  into  money  and  out  of  the  difficulty  of  going 
through  this  metamorphosis,  they  do  not  enter  into  the  values 
of  the  commodities  but  constitute  deductions,  losses  of  value  in 
the  realisation  of  the  value.  Since  the  normal  and  abnormal 
forms  of  the  supply  do  not  differ  in  form  and  both  clog  circula¬ 
tion,  these  phenomena  may  be  confused  and  deceive  the  agent  of 
production  himself  so  much  the  more  since  for  the  producer  the 
process  of  circulation  of  his  capital  may  continue  while  that  of 
his  commodities  which  have  changed  hands  and  now  belong  to 
merchants  may  be  arrested.  If  production  and  consumption  swell, 
other  things  being  equal,  then  the  commodity-supply  swells 
likewise.  It  is  renewed  and  absorbed  just  as  fast,  but  its  size  is 
greater.  Hence  the  bulging  size  of  the  commodity-supply,  for 
which  stagnant  circulation  is  responsible,  may  be  mistaken  for 
a  symptom  of  the  expansion  of  the  process  of  reproduction,  espe¬ 
cially  when  the  development  of  the  credit-system  makes  it  pos¬ 
sible  to  wrap  the  real  movement  in  mystery. 

The  costs  of  supply  formation  consist:  1)  of  a  quantitative 
diminution  of  the  mass  of  the  products  (for  instance  in  the  case 


152 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OP  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


of  a  Cour  supply);  2)  of  a  deterioration  of  quality;  3)  of  the  mate¬ 
rialised  and  living  labour  required  for  the  preservation  of  the 
supply. 

III.  COSTS  OF  TRANSPORTATION 

It  is  not  necessary  to  go  here  into  all  the  details  of  the  costs 
of  circulation,  such  as  packing,  sorting,  etc.  The  general  law  is 
that  all  costs  of  circulation  which  arise  only  from  changes  in  the 
forms  of  commodities  do  not  add  to  their  value.  They  are  merely 
expenses  incurred  in  the  realisation  of  the  value  or  in  its  conver¬ 
sion  from  one  form  into  another.  The  capital  spent  to  meet  those 
costs  (including  the  labour  done  under  its  control)  belongs  among 
the  faux  frais  of  capitalist  production.  They  must  be  replaced 
from  the  surplus-product  and  constitute,  as  far  as  the  entire 
capitalist  class  is  concerned,  a  deduction  from  the  surplus-value 
or  surplus-product,  just  as  the  time  a  labourer  needs  for  the  pur¬ 
chase  of  his  means  of  subsistence  is  lost  time.  But  the  costs  of 
transportation  play  a  too  important  part  to  pass  them  by  without 
a  few  brief  remarks. 

Within  the  circuit  of  capital  and  the  metamorphosis  of  com¬ 
modities,  which  forms  a  part  of  that  circuit,  an  interchange  of 
matter  takes  place  in  social  labour.  This  interchange  of  matter 
may  necessitate  a  change  of  location  of  products,  their  real  mo¬ 
tion  from  one  place  to  another.  Still,  circulation  of  commodities 
can  take  place  without  physical  motion  by  them,  and  there  can 
be  transportation  of  products  without  circulation  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  and  even  without  a  direct  exchange  of  products.  A  house 
sold  by  A  to  B  does  not  wander  from  one  place  to  another,  al¬ 
though  it  circulates  as  a  commodity.  Movable  commodity-values, 
such  as  cotton  or  pig  iron,  may  lie  in  the  same  storage  dump  at 
a  time  when  they  are  passing  through  dozens  of  circulation  proc¬ 
esses,  are  bought  and  resold  by  speculators.17  What  really  does 
move  here  is  the  title  of  ownership  in  goods,  not  the  goods  them¬ 
selves.  On  the  other  hand,  transportation  played  a  prominent 
role  in  the  land  of  the  Incas,  although  the  social  product  neither 
circulated  as  a  commodity  nor  was  distributed  by  means  of 
barter. 

Consequently,  although  the  transportation  industry  when 
based  on  capitalist  production  appears  as  a  cause  of  circulation 
costs,  this  special  form  of  appearance  does  not  alter  the  matter 
in  the  least. 

17  Storch  calls  this  “circulation  factice”  (fictitious  circulation). 


THE  COSTS  OP  CIRCULATION 


153 


Quantities  of  products  are  not  increased  by  transportation. 
Nor,  with  a  few  exceptions,  is  the  possible  alteration  of  their 
natural  qualities,  brought  about  by  transportation,  an  intention¬ 
al  useful  effect;  it  is  rather  an  unavoidable  evil.  But  the  use- 
value  of  things  is  materialised  only  in  their  consumption,  and 
their  consumption  may  necessitate  a  change  of  location  of  these 
things,  hence  may  require  an  additional  process  of  production, 
in  the  transport  industry.  The  productive  capital  invested  in 
this  industry  imparts  value  to  the  transported  products,  partly 
by  transferring  value  from  the  means  of  transportation,  partly 
by  adding  value  through  the  labour  performed  in  transport.  This 
last-named  increment  of  value  consists,  as  it  does  in  all  capi¬ 
talist  production,  of  a  replacement  of  wages  and  of  surplus- 
value. 

Within  each  process  of  production,  a  great  role  is  played  by  the 
change  of  location  of  the  subject  of  labour  and  the  required 
instruments  of  labour  and  labour-power— such  as  cotton  trucked 
from  the  carding  to  the  spinning  room  or  coal  hoisted  from  the 
shaft  to  the  surface.  The  transition  of  the  finished  product  as 
finished  goods  from  one  independent  place  of  production  to  anoth¬ 
er  located  at  a  distance  shows  the  same  phenomenon,  only  on 
a  larger  scale.  The  transport  of  the  products  from  one  productive 
establishment  to  another  is  furthermore  followed  by  the  passage 
of  the  finished  products  from  the  sphere  of  production  to  that  of 
consumption.  The  product  is  not  ready  for  consumption  until 
it  has  completed  these  movements. 

As  was  shown  above,  the  general  law  of  commodity  produc¬ 
tion  holds:  The  productivity  of  labour  is  inversely  proportional 
to  the  value  created  by  it.  This  is  true  of  the  transport  industry 
as  well  as  of  any  other.  The  smaller  the  amount  of  dead  and  liv¬ 
ing  labour  required  for  the  transportation  of  commodities  over 
a  certain  distance,  the  greater  the  productive  power  of  labour, 
and  vice  versa.18 


18  Ricardo  quotes  Say,  who  Considers  it  one  of  the  blessings  of  com¬ 
merce  that  by  means  of  the  costs  of  transportation  it  increases  the  price, 
or  the  value,  of  products.  “Commerce,”  writes  Say,  “enables  us  to  obtain 
a  commodity  in  the  place  where  it  is  to  be  found,  and  to  convey  it  to  another 
where  it  is  to  be  consumed;  it  therefore  gives  us  the  power  of  increasing  the 
value  of,  the  commodity,  by  tho  whole  difference  between  its  price  in  the 
first  of  these  places,  and  its  price  in  the  second.”  [J.  B.  Say,  Traite  d' econo- 
mie  politique,  Troisieme  edition,  Paris,  1817,  Tome  II,  p.  433. — Ed.]  Ricardo 
remarks  with  reference  to  this;  “True,  but  how  is  this  additional  value 
given  to  it?  By  adding  to  the  cost  of  production,  first,  the  expenses  of 
conveyance;  secondly,  the  profit  on  the  advances  of  capital  made  by  the 


154 


THE  METAMORPHOSES  OF  CAPITAL  AND  THEIR  CIRCUITS 


The  absolute  magnitude  of  the  value  which  transportation  adds 
to  the  commodities  stands  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  produc¬ 
tive  power  of  the  transport  industry  and  in  direct  proportion  to 
the  distance  travelled,  other  conditions  remaining  the  same. 

The  part  of  the  value  added  to  the  prices  of  commodities  by 
the  costs  of  transportation,  other  conditions  remaining  the  same, 
is  directly  proportional  to  their  cubic  content  and  weight,  and 
inversely  proportional  to  their  value.  But  there  are  many  modi¬ 
fying  factors.  Transportation  requires,  for  instance,  more  or  less 
important  precautionary  measures,  and  therefore  more  or  less 
expenditure  of  labour  and  instruments  of  labour,  depending  on 
how  fragile,  perishable,  explosive,  etc.,  the  articles  are.  Here 
the  railway  kings  show  greater  ingenuity  in  the  invention  of 
fantastic  species  than  do  botanists  and  zoologists.  The  classifica¬ 
tion  of  goods  on  English  railways,  for  example,  fills  volumes 
and,  in  principle,  rests  on  the  general  tendency  to  transform  the 
diversified  natural  properties  of  goods  into  just  as  many  ills  of 
transportation  and  routine  pretexts  for  fraudulent  charges. 
“Glass,  which  was  formerly  worth  £11  per  crate,  is  now  worth 
only  £2  since  the  improvements  which  have  taken  place  in  manu¬ 
factures,  and  since  the  abolition  of  the  duty;  but  the  rate  for 
carriage  is  the  same  as  it  was  formerly,  and  higher  than  it  was 
previously,  when  carried  by  canal.  Formerly,  manufacturers 
inform  me  that  they  had  glass  and  glass  wares  for  the  plumbers' 
trade  carried  at  about  10  s.  per  ton,  within  50  miles  of  Birming¬ 
ham.  At  the  present  time,  the  rate  to  cover  risk  of  breakage, 
which  we  can  very  rarely  get  allowed,  is  three  times  that 
amount....  The  companies  always  resist  any  claim  that  is 
made  for  breakages.  ”19  The  fact  that  furthermore  the  part  of  the 
value  added  to  an  article  by  the  costs  of  transportation  is  inversely 
proportional  to  its  value  furnishes  special  grounds  to  the  railway 
kings  to  tax  articles  in  direct  proportion  to  their  values.  The 
complaints  of  the  industrialists  and  merchants  on  this  score  are 
found  on  every  page  of  the  testimony  given  in  the  report  quoted. 

The  capitalist  mode  of  production  reduces  the  costs  of  trans¬ 
portation  of  the  individual  commodity  by  the  development  of 


merchant.  The  commodity  is  only  more  valuable,  for  the  same  reason  that 
every  other  commodity  may  become  more  valuable,  because  more  labour 
is  expended  on  its  production  and  conveyance  before  it  is  purchased  by 
the  consumer.  This  must  not  be  mentioned  as  one  of  the  advantages  of 
commerce.”  (Ricardo,  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  3rd  ed.,  London, 
1821,  pp  309,  310  ) 

19  Royal  Commission  on  Railways,  p.  31,  No.  630. 


THE  COSTS  OF  CIRCULATION 


155 


the  means  of  transportation  and  communication,  as  well  as  by 
the  concentration  —  increasing  scale— of  transportation.  It  in¬ 
creases  that  part  of  the  living  and  materialised  social  labour 
•  which  is  expended  in  the  transport  of  commodities,  firstly  by 
converting  the  great  majority  of  all  products  into  commodities, 
secondly,  by  substituting  distant  for  local  markets. 

The  circulation,  i.e.,  the  actual  locomotion  of  commodities 
in  space,  resolves  itself  into  the  transport  of  commodities.  The 
transport  industry  forms  on  the  one  hand  an  independent  branch 
of  production  and  thus  a  separate  sphere  of  investment  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital.  On  the  other  hand  its  distinguishing  feature  is 
that  it  appears  as  a  continuation  of  a  process  of  production  within 
the  process  of  circulation  and  /or  the  process  of  circulation. 


PART  II 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  TURNOVER  TIME  AND  THE  NUMBER 
OF  TURNOVERS 

We  have  seen  that  the  entire  time  of  turnover  of  a  given  capital 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  its  time  of  circulation  and  its  time  of  pro¬ 
duction.  It  is  the  period  of  time  from  the  moment  of  the  advance 
of  capital-value  in  a  definite  form  to  the  return  of  the  function¬ 
ing  capital-value  in  the  same  form. 

The  compelling  motive  of  capitalist  production  is  always 
the  creation  of  surplus-value  by  means  of  the  advanced  value, 
no  matter  whether  this  value  is  advanced  in  its  independent  form, 
i.e.,  in  the  money-form,  or  in  commodities,  in  which  case  its 
value-form  possesses  only  ideal  independence  in  the  price  of  the 
advanced  commodities.  In  both  cases  this  capital-value  passes 
through  various  forms  of  existence  during  its  circular  movement. 
Its  identity  with  itself  is  fixed  in  the  books  of  the  capitalists,  or 
in  the  form  of  money  of  account. 

Whether  we  take  the  form  M  ...  M'  or  the  form  P  ...  P,  the 
implication  is  (1)  that  the  advanced  value  performs  the  function 
of  capital-value  and  has  created  surplus-value;  (2)  that  after 
completing  its  process  it  has  returned  to  the  form  in  which  it 
began  it.  The  self-expansion  of  the  advanced  value  M  and  at  the 
same  time  the  return  of  capital  to  this  form  (the  money-form)  is 
plainly  visible  in  M  ...  M'.  But  the  same  takes  place  in  the  second 
form.  For  the  starting-point  of  P  is  the  existence  of  the  elements 
of  production,  of  commodities  having  a  given  value.  The  form  in¬ 
cludes  the  self-expansion  of  this  value  (C'  and  M')  and  the  return 
to  the  original  form,  for  in  the  second  P  the  advanced  value  has 
again  the  form  of  the  elements  of  production  in  which  it  was 
originally  advanced. 

We  have  seen  previously:  “If  production  be  capitalistic  in 
form,  so,  too,  will  be  reproduction.  Just  as  in  the  former  the 
labour-process  figures  but  as  a  means  towards  the  self-expansion 


THE  TURNOVER  TIME  AND  THE  NUMBER  OF  TURNOVERS 


157 


of  capital,  so  in  the  latter  it  figures  but  as  a  means  of  reproduc¬ 
ing  as  capital — i.e.,  as  self-expanding  value— the  value  advanced.  ” 
(Buch  I,  Kap.  XXI,  S.  588.)* 

The  three  forms  (I)  M  ...  M',  (II),  P  ...  P,  and  (III)  C'  ...  C', 
present  the  following  distinctions:  in  form  II,  P  ...  P,  the  re¬ 
newal  of  the  process,  the  process  of  reproduction,  is  expressed  as 
a  reality,  while  in  form  I  only  as  a  potentiality.  But  both  differ 
from  form  III  in  that  with  them  the  advanced  capital-value — 
advanced  either  in  the  form  of  money  or  of  material  elements  of 
production — is  the  starting-point  and  therefore  also  the  returning 
point.  In  M  ...  M'  the  return  is  expressed  by  M'=M+m.  If  the 
process  is  renewed  on  the  same  scale,  M  is  again  the  starting- 
point  and  m  does  not  enter  into  it,  but  shows  merely  that  M  has 
self-expanded  as  capital  and  hence  created  a  surplus-value,  m, 
but  cast  it  off.  In  the  form  P  ...  P  capital-value  P  advanced  in 
the  form  of  elements  of  production  is  likewise  the  starting-point. 
This  form  includes  its  self-expansion.  If  simple  reproduction 
takes  place,  the  same  capital-value  renews  the  same  process  in 
the  same  form  P.  If  accumulation  takes  place,  then  P'  (equal 
in  magnitude  of  value  to  M',  equal  to  C')  re-opens  the  process 
as  an  expanded  capital-value.  But  the  process  begins  again  with 
the  advanced  capital-value  in  its  initial  form,  although  with 
a  greater  capital-value  than  before.  In  form  III,  on  the  contrary, 
the  capital-value  does  not  begin  the  process  as  an  advance,  but 
as  a  value  already  expanded,  as  the  aggregate  wealth  existing 
in  the  form  of  commodities,  of  which  the  advanced  capital- 
value  is  but  a  part.  This  last  form  is  important  for  Part  III,  in 
which  the  movements  of  the  individual  capitals  are  discussed 
in  connection  with  the  movement  of  the  aggregate  social  capital. 
But  it  is  not  to  be  used  in  connection  with  the  turnover  of  capital, 
which  always  begins  with  the  advance  of  capital-value,  whether 
in  the  form  of  money  or  commodities,  and  which  always  necessi¬ 
tates  the  return  of  the  rotating  capital-value  in  the  form  in  which 
it  was  advanced.  Of  the  circuits  I  and  II,  the  former  is  of  service 
in  a  study  primarily  of  the  influence  of  the  turnover  on  the  for¬ 
mation  of  surplus-value  and  the  latter  in  a  study  of  its  influence 
on  the  creation  of  the  product. 

Economists  have  little  distinguished  between  the  different 
forms  of  circuits,  nor  have  they  examined  them  individually  with 
relation  to  the  turnover  of  capital.  They  generally  consider  the 
form  M  ...  M',  because  it  dominates  the  individual  capitalist 


•  English  edition:  Ch.  XXIII,  p.  566. — Ed. 


158 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


and  aids  him  in  his  calculations,  even  if  money  is  the  starting- 
point  only  in  the  shape  of  money  of  account.  Others  start  with 
outlays  in  the  form  of  elements  of  production  to  the  point  when 
returns  are  received,  without  alluding  at  all  to  the  form  of  the 
returns,  whether  made  in  commodities  or  money.  For  instance, 
“the  Economic  Cycle,...  the  whole  course  of  production,  from 
the  time  that  outlays  are  made  till  returns  are  received.  In  agricul¬ 
ture,  seedtime  is  its  commencement,  and  harvesting  its  ending.  ” 
S.  P.  Newman,  Elements  of  Political  Economy,  Andover  and 
New  York,  p.  81.  Others  begin  with  C'  (the  third  form):  Says 
Th.  Chalmers,  in  his  work  On  Political  Economy,  2nd  ed.,  Glas¬ 
gow,  1832,  p.  85  et  seq.:  “The  world  of  trade  may  be  conceived 
to  revolve  in  what  we  shall  call  an  economic  cycle,  which  ac¬ 
complishes  one  revolution  by  business,  coming  round  again, 
through  its  successive  transactions,  to  the  point  from  which  it 
set  out.  Its  commencement  may  be  dated  from  the  point  at  which 
the  capitalist  has  obtained  those  returns  by  which  his  capital 
is  replaced  to  him:  whence  he  proceeds  anew  to  engage  his  work¬ 
men;  to  distribute  among  them,  in  wages,  their  maintenance, 
or  rather,  the  power  of  lifting  it;  to  obtain  from  them,  in  finished 
work,  the  articles  in  which  he  specially  deals;  to  bring  these 
articles  to  market  and  there  terminate  the  orbit  of  one  set  of 
movements,  by  effecting  a  sale,  and  receiving,  in  its  proceeds, 
a  return  for  the  whole  outlays  of  the  period: 

As  soon  as  the  entire  capital-value  invested  by  some  individual 
capitalist  in  any  branch  of  production  whatever  has  described 
its  circuit,  it  finds  itself  once  more  in  its  initial  form  and  can  now 
repeat  the  same  process.  It  must  repeat  it,  if  the  value  is  to  per¬ 
petuate  itself  as  capital-value  and  to  create  surplus-value.  An 
individual  circuit  is  but  a  constantly  repeated  section  in  the  life 
of  a  capital;  hence  a  period.  At  the  end  of  the  period  M  ...  M' 
capital  has  once  more  the  form  of  money-capital,  which  passes 
anew  through  that  series  of  changes  of  form  in  which  its  process 
of  reproduction,  or  self-expansion,  is  included.  At  the  end  of  the 
period  P...  P  capital  resumes  the  form  of  elements  of  production, 
which  are  the  prerequisites  for  a  renewal  of  its  circuit.  A  circuit 
performed  by  a  capital  and  meant  to  be  a  periodical  process, 
not  an  individual  act,  is  called  its  turnover.  The  duration  of  this 
turnover  is  determined  by  the  sum  of  its  time  of  production  and 
its  time  of  circulation.  This  time  total  constitutes  the  time  of  turn¬ 
over  of  the  capital.  It  measures  the  interval  of  time  between  one 
circuit  period  of  the  entire  capital-value  and  the  next,  the  pe¬ 
riodicity  in  the  process  of  life  of  capital  or,  if  you  like,  the  time 


THE  TURNOVER  TIME  AND  THE  NUMBER  OP  TURNOVERS 


159 


of  the  renewal,  the  repetition,  of  the  process  of  self-expansion, 
or  production,  of  one  and  the  same  capital-value. 

Apart  from  the  individual  adventures  which  may  accelerate  or 
shorten  the  time  of  turnover  of  certain  capitals,  this  time  differs 
in  the  different  spheres  of  investment. 

Just  as  the  working-day  is  the  natural  unit  for  measuring  the 
function  of  labour-power,  so  the  year  is  the  natural  unit  for  meas¬ 
uring  the  turnovers  of  functioning  capital.  The  natural  basis 
of  this  unit  is  the  circumstance  that  the  most  important  crops 
of  the  temperate  zone,  which  is  the  mother  country  of  capitalist 
production,  are  annual  products. 

If  we  designate  the  year  as  the  unit  of  measure  of  the  turnover 
time  by  T,  the  time  of  turnover  of  a  given  capital  by  t,  and  the 

T 

number  of  its  turnovers  by  n,  then  n=-.  If,  for  instance,  the  time 

of  turnover  t  is  3  months,  then  n  is  equal  to  1*/s,  or  4;  capital  is 
turned  over  four  times  per  year.  If  t  =18  months,  then  n  =12/18  =2/s, 
or  capital  completes  only  two-thirds  of  its  turnover  in  one  year. 
If  its  time  of  turnover  is  several  years,  it  is  computed  in  mul¬ 
tiples  of  one  year. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  the  capitalist,  the  time  of  turnover 
of  his  capital  is  the  time  for  which  he  must  advance  his  capital 
in  order  to  create  surplus-value  with  it  and  receive  it  back  in 
its  original  shape. 

Before  examining  more  closely  the  influence  of  the  turnover 
on  the  processes  of  production  and  self-expansion,  we  must  investi¬ 
gate  two  new  forms  which  accrue  to  capital  from  the  process  of  cir¬ 
culation  and  affect  the  form  of  its  turnover. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 
I.  DISTINCTIONS  OF  FORM 

We  have  seen  (Buch  I,  Kap.  VI)*  that,  in  relation  to  the  prod¬ 
ucts  toward  the  creation  of  which  it  contributes,  a  portion  of 
the  constant  capital  retains  that  definite  use-form  in  which  it  en¬ 
ters  into  the  process  of  production.  Hence  it  performs  the  same 
functions  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period,  in  ever  repeated  labour- 
processes.  This  applies  for  instance  to  industrial  buildings,  ma¬ 
chinery,  etc.  — in  short  to  all  things  which  we  comprise  under  the 
name  of  instruments  of  labour.  This  part  of  constant  capital  yields 
up  value  to  the  product  in  proportion  as  it  loses  its  own  exchange- 
value  together  with  its  own  use-value.  This  delivery  of  value, 
or  this  transition  of  the  value  of  such  a  means  of  production  to  the 
product  which  it  helps  to  create  is  determined  by  a  calculation 
of  averages.  It  is  measured  by  the  average  duration  of  its  function, 
from  the  moment  that  the  means  of  production  enters  into  the 
process  of  production  to  the  moment  that  it  is  completely  spent, 
dead  and  gone,  and  must  be  replaced  by  a  new  sample  of  the  same 
kind,  or  reproduced. 

This,  then,  is  the  peculiarity  of  this  part  of  constant  capital, 
of  the  labour  instruments  proper: 

A  part  of  capital  has  been  advanced  in  the  form  of  constant 
capital,  i.e.,  of  means  of  production,  which  function  as  factors 
of  the  labour-process  so  long  as  they  retain  the  independent  use- 
form  in  which  they  enter  this  process.  The  finished  product,  and 
therefore  also  the  creators  of  the  product,  so  far  as  they  have 
been  transformed  into  product,  is  thrust  out  of  the  process  of 
production  and  passes  as  a  commodity  from  the  sphere  of 
production  to  the  sphere  of  circulation.  But  the  instruments  of 
labour  never  leave  the  sphere  of  production,  once  they  have 


English  edition:  Ch.  VIII.— Ed. 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


181 


entered  it.  Their  function  holds  them  there.  A  portion  of  the 
advanced  capital-value  becomes  fixed  in  this  form  determined  by 
the  function  of  the  instruments  of  labour  in  the  process.  In  the 
performance  of  this  function,  and  thus  by  the  wear  and  tear  of 
the  instruments  of  labour,  a  part  of  their  value  passes  on  to  the 
product,  while  the  other  remains  fixed  in  the  instruments  of 
labour  and  thus  in  the  process  of  production.  The  value  fixed 
in  this  way  decreases  steadily,  until  the  instrument  of  labour 
is  worn  out,  its  value  having  been  distributed  during  a  shorter 
or  longer  period  over  a  mass  of  products  originating  from  a  series 
of  constantly  repeated  labour-processes.  But  so  long  as  they  are 
still  effective  as  instruments  of  labour  and  need  not  yet  be  re¬ 
placed  by  new  ones  of  the  same  kind,  a  certain  amount  of  constant 
capital-value  remains  fixed  in  them,  while  the  other  part  of  the 
value  originally  fixed  in  them  is  transferred  to  the  product  and 
therefore  circulates  as  a  component  part  of  the  commodity- 
supply.  The  longer  an  instrument  lasts,  the  slower  it  wears  out, 
the  longer  will  its  constant  capital-value  remain  fixed  in  this 
use-form.  But  whatever  may  be  its  durability,  the  proportion  in 
which  it  yields  value  is  always  inverse  to  the  entire  time  it  func¬ 
tions.  If  of  two  machines  of  equal  value  one  wears  out  in  five 
years  and  the  other  in  ten,  then  the  first  yields  twice  as  much 
value  in  the  same  time  as  the  second. 

This  portion  of  the  capital-value  fixed  in  the  instrument  of 
labour  circulates  as  well  as  any  other.  We  have  seen  in  general 
that  all  capital-value  is  constantly  in  circulation,  and  that  in  this 
sense  all  capital  is  circulating  capital.  But  the  circulation  of  the 
portion  of  capital  which  we  are  now  studying  is  peculiar.  In  the 
first  place  it  does  not  circulate  in  its  use-form,  but  it  is  merely 
Its  value  that  circulates,  and  this  takes  place  gradually,  piece¬ 
meal,  in  proportion  as  it  passes  from  it  to  the  product,  which  cir¬ 
culates  as  a  commodity.  During  the  entire  period  of  its  function¬ 
ing,  a  part  of  its  value  always  remains  fixed  in  it,  independently 
of  the  commodities  which  it  helps  to  produce.  It  is  this  peculiarity 
which  gives  to  this  portion  of  constant  capital  the  form  of  fixed 
capital  All  other  material  parts  of  the  capital  advanced  in  the 
process  of  production  form  by  way  of  contrast  the  circulating , 
or  fluid,  capital. 

Some  means  of  production  do  not  enter  materially  into  the 
product.  Such  are  auxiliary  materials,  which  are  consumed  by  the 
instruments  of  labour  themselves  in  the  performance  of  their 
functions,  like  coal  consumed  by  a  steam-engine;  or  which  merely 
assist  in  the  operation,  like  gas  for  lighting,  etc.  It  is  only  their 


s— 1752 


162 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


value  which  forms  a  part  of  the  value  of  the  products.  The  product 
circulates  in  its  own  circulation  the  value  of  these  means  of  pro¬ 
duction.  This  feature  they  have  in  common  with  fixed  capital. 
But  they  are  entirely  consumed  in  every  labour-process  which 
they  enter  and  must  therefore  be  wholly  replaced  by  new  means 
of  production  of  the  same  kind  in  every  new  labour-process.  They 
do  not  preserve  their  independent  use-form  while  performing  their 
function.  Hence  while  they  function  no  portion  of  capital-value 
remains  fixed  in  their  old  use-form,  their  bodily  form,  either. 
The  circumstance  that  this  portion  of  the  auxiliary  materials 
does  not  pass  bodily  into  the  product  but  enters  into  the  value  of 
the  product  only  according  to  its  own  value,  as  a  portion  of  that 
value,  and  what  hangs  together  with  this,  namely,  that  the 
function  of  these  substances  is  strictly  confined  to  the  sphere  of 
production,  has  misled  economists  like  Ramsay  (who  at  the  same 
time  got  fixed  capital  mixed  up  with  constant  capital)  to  classify 
them  as  fixed  capital.* 

That  part  of  the  means  of  production  which  bodily  enters  into 
the  product,  i.e.,  raw  materials,  etc.,  thus  assumes  in  part  forms 
which  enable  it  later  to  enter  into  individual  consumption  as  ar¬ 
ticles  of  use.  The  instruments  of  labour  properly  so  called,  the 
material  vehicles  of  the  fixed  capital,  are  consumed  only  produc¬ 
tively  and  cannot  enter  into  individual  consumption,  because 
they  do  not  enter  into  the  product,  or  the  use-value,  which  they 
held  to  create  but  retain  their  independent  form  with  reference 
to  it  until  they  are  completely  worn  out.  The  means  of  trans¬ 
portation  are  an  exception  to  this  rule.  The  useful  effect  which 
they  produce  during  the  performance  of  their  productive  func¬ 
tion,  hence  during  their  stay  in  the  sphere  of  production,  the 
change  of  location,  passes  simultaneously  into  the  individual 
consumption  of,  for  instance,  the  passenger.  He  pays  for  their 
use  in  the  same  way  in  which  he  pays  for  the  use  of  other  articles 
of  consumption.  We  have  seen**  that  for  instance  in  chemical 
manufacture  raw  and  auxiliary  materials  blend.  The  same  ap¬ 
plies  to  instruments  of  labour  and  auxiliary  and  raw  materials. 
Similarly  in  agriculture  the  substances  added  for  the  improve¬ 
ment  of  the  soil  pass  partly  into  the  plants  raised  and  help  to 
form  the  product.  On  the  other  hand  their  effect  is  distributed 
over  a  lengthy  period,  say  four  or  five  years.  A  portion  of  them 


*  Karl  Marx,  Theorien  uber  den  Mehrwert  (Vierter  Band  des  A  apitals), 
3.  Tail,  Berlin,  1962,  SS.  323-25.— Ed. 

*»  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  1,  pp.  181-82.— Ed, 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


163 


therefore  passes  bodily  Into  the  product  and  thus  transfers  its 
value  to  the  product  while  the  other  portion  remains  fixed  in  its 
old  use-form  and  retains  its  value.  It  persists  as  a  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  and  consequently  keeps  the  form  of  fixed  capital.  As  a 
beast  of  toil  an  ox  is  fixed  capital.  If  he  is  eaten,  he  no  longer 
functions  as  an  instrument  of  labour,  nor  as  fixed  capital  either. 

What  determines  that  a  portion  of  the  capital-value  invested 
in  means  of  production  is  endowed  with  the  character  of  fixed 
capital  is  exclusively  the  peculiar  manner  in  which  this  value 
circulates.  This  specific  manner  of  circulation  arises  from  the 
specific  manner  in  which  the  instrument  of  labour  transmits  its 
value  to  the  product,  or  in  which  it  behaves  as  a  creator  of  values 
during  the  process  of  production.  This  manner  again  arises  from 
the  special  way  in  which  the  instruments  of  labour  function  in 
the  labour-process. 

We  know  that  a  use-value  which  emerges  as  a  product  from 
one  labour-process  enters  into  another  as  a  means  of  production.* 
It  is  only  the  functioning  of  a  product  as  an  instrument  of  labour 
in  the  process  of  production  that  makes  it  fixed  capital.  But  when 
it  itself  only  just  emerges  from  a  process,  it  is  by  no  means  fixed 
capital.  For  instance  a  machine,  as  a  product  or  commodity  of 
the  machine-manufacturer,  belongs  to  his  commodity-capital.  It 
does  not  become  fixed  capital  until  it  is  employed  productively 
in  the  hands  of  its  purchaser,  the  capitalist. 

All  other  circumstances  being  equal,  the  degree  of  fixity  in¬ 
creases  with  the  durability  of  the  instrument  of  labour.  It  is  this 
durability  that  determines  the  magnitude  of  the  diherence  be¬ 
tween  the  capital-value  fixed  in  instruments  of  labour  and  that 
part  of  its  value  which  it  yields  to  the  product  in  repeated  la¬ 
bour-processes.  The  slower  this  value  is  yielded — and  value  is 
given  up  by  the  instrument  of  labour  in  every  repetition  of  the 
labour-process — the  larger  is  the  fixed  capital  and  the  greater 
the  difference  between  the  capital  employed  in  the  process  of 
production  and  the  capital  consumed  in  it.  As  soon  as  this  differ¬ 
ence  has  disappeared  the  instrument  of  labour  has  outlived  its 
usefulness  and  has  lost  with  its  use-value  also  its  value.  It  has 
ceased  to  be  the  depository  of  value.  Since  an  instrument  of  la¬ 
bour,  like  every  other  material  carrier  of  constant  capital,  parts 
with  value  to  the  product  only  to  the  extent  that  together  with 
its  use-value  it  loses  its  value,  it  is  evident  that  the  more  slowly 
its  use-value  i3  lost,  the  longer  it  lasts  in  the  process  of  produc- 


0  Karl  Marx,  Capital ,  Vol.  I,  p.  181.— Ed. 


6* 


164 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


tion,  the  longer  is  the  period  in  which  constant  capital-value 
remains  fixed  in  it. 

If  a  means  of  production  which  is  not  an  instrument  of  labour 
strictly  speaking,  such  as  auxiliary  substances,  raw  material, 
partly  finished  articles,  etc.,  behaves  with  regard  to  value  yield 
and  hence  manner  of  circulation  of  its  value  in  the  same  way  as 
the  instruments  of  labour,  then  it  is  likewise  a  material  deposi¬ 
tory,  a  form  of  existence,  of  fixed  capital.  This  is  the  case  with  the 
above-mentioned  improvements  of  the  soil,  which  add  to  it 
chemical  substances  whose  influence  is  distributed  over  several 
periods  of  production  or  years.  Here  a  portion  of  the  value  contin¬ 
ues  to  exist  alongside  the  product,  in  its  independent  form  or 
in  the  form  of  fixed  capital,  while  the  other  portion  of  the  value 
has  been  delivered  to  the  product  and  therefore  circulates  with  it. 
In  this  case  it  is  not  alone  a  portion  of  the  value  of  the  fixed  cap¬ 
ital  which  enters  into  the  product,  but  also  the  use-value,  the 
substance,  in  which  this  portion  of  value  exists. 

Apart  from  the  fundamental  mistake — the  mixing  up  of  the 
categories  “fixed”  and  “circulating  capital”  with  the  categories 
“constant”  and  “variable  capital” — the  confusion  of  the  econo¬ 
mists  hitherto  in  the  definitions  of  concepts  is  based  first  of  all 
on  the  following  points: 

One  turns  certain  properties  materially  inherent  in  instruments 
of  labour  into  direct  properties  of  fixed  capital;  for  instance  phys¬ 
ical  immobility,  say,  of  a  house.  However  it  is  always  easy  to 
prove  in  such  case  that  other  instruments  of  labour,  which  as 
such  are  likewise  fixed  capital,  possess  the  opposite  property; 
for  instance  physical  mobility,  say,  of  a  ship. 

Or  one  confuses  the  economic  definiteness  of  form  which 
arises  from  the  circulation  of  value  with  an  objective  property; 
as  if  objects  which  in  themselves  are  not  capital  at  all  but  rather 
become  so  only  under  definite  social  conditions  could  in  them¬ 
selves  and  in  their  very  nature  be  capital  in  some  definite  form, 
fixed  or  circulating.  We  have  seen  (Buch  I,  Kap.  V)*  that  the 
means  of  production  in  every  labour-process,  regardless  of  the 
social  conditions  in  which  it  takes  place,  are  divided  into  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  and  subjects  of  labour.  But  both  of  them  become 
capital  only  under  the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  when  they 
become  “productive  capital,”  as  shown  in  the  preceding  part. 
Thus  the  distinction  between  instruments  of  labour  and  subject  of 
labour,  which  is  grounded  on  the  nature  of  the  labour-process, 


English  edition:  Ch,  VII.— Ed. 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


185 


is  reflected  in  a  new  form:  the  distinction  between  fixed  capital 
and  circulating  capital.  It  is  only  then  that  a  thing  which  performs 
the  function  of  an  instrument  of  labour  becomes  fixed  capital.  If 
owing  to  its  material  properties  it  can  function  also  in  other 
capacities  than  that  of  instrument  of  labour,  it  may  be  fixed  cap¬ 
ital  or  not,  depending  on  the  specific  function  it  performs.  Cattle 
as  beasts  of  toil  are  fixed  capital;  as  beef  cattle  thby  are  raw 
material  which  finally  enters  into  circulation  as  a  product;  hence 
they  are  circulating,  not  fixed  capital. 


The  mere  fixation  of  a  means  of  production  for  a  considerable 
length  of  time  in  repeated  labour-processes,  which  however  are 
connected,  continuous,  and  therefore  form  a  production  period  — 
i.e.,  the  entire  time  of  production  required  to  finish  a  certain 
product — obliges  the  capitalist,  just  as  fixed  capital  does,  to 
make  his  advances  for  a  longer  or  shorter  term,  but  this  does 
not  make  his  capital  fixed  capital.  Seeds  for  instance  are  not 
fixed  capital,  but  only  raw  material  which  is  held  for  about  a 
year  in  the  process  of  production.  All  capital  is  held  in  the  process 
of  production  so  long  as  it  functions  as  productive  capital,  and 
so  are  therefore  all  elements  of  productive  capital,  whatever 
their  material  forms,  their  functions  and  the  modes  of  circulation 
of  their  values.  Whether  this  period  of  fixation  lasts  a  long  or 
a  short  time — a  matter  depending  on  the  kind  of  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  involved  or  the  useful  effect  aimed  at— this  does  not  effect 
the  distinction  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital.20 

A  part  of  the  instruments  of  labour,  which  includes  the  general 
conditions  of  labour,  Is  either  localised  as  soon  as  it  enters  the 
process  of  production  as  an  instrument  of  labour,  i.e.,  is  prepared 
for  its  productive  function,  such  as  for  instance  machinery,  or  is 
produced  from  the  outset  in  its  immovable,  localised  form,  such 
as  improvements  of  the  soil,  factory  buildings,  blast  furnaces, 
canals,  railways,  etc.  The  constant  attachment  of  the  instrument 
of  labour  to  the  process  of  production  in  which  it  is  to  function 
is  here  also  due  to  its  physical  mode  of  existence.  On  the  other 
hand  an  instrument  of  labour  may  physically  change  continually 
from  place  to  place,  may  move  about,  and  nevertheless  be  con¬ 
stantly  in  the  process  of  production;  for  instance  a  locomotive,  a 
ship,  beasts  of  burden,  etc.  Neither  does  immobility  in  the  one 

**  On  account  of  the  difficulty  of  determining  what  is  fixed  and  what 
circulating  capital,  Herr  Lorenz  Stein  thinks  that  this  distinction  is  meant 
only  to  facilitate  the  treatment  of  the  subject. 


168 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


case  bestow  upon  it  the  character  of  fixed  capital,  nor  does  mo¬ 
bility  in  the  other  case  deprive  it  of  this  character.  But  the  fact 
that  some  instruments  of  labour  are  localised,  attached  to  the 
soil  by  their  roots,  assigns  to  this  portion  of  fixed  capital  a  peculiar 
role  in  the  economy  of  nations.  They  cannot  be  sent  abroad,  can¬ 
not  circulate  as  commodities  in  the  world-market.  Title  to  this 
fixed  capital  may  change,  it  may  be  bought  and  sold,  and  to 
this  extent  may  circulate  ideally.  These  titles  of  ownership  may 
even  circulate  in  foreign  markets,  for  instance  in  the  form  of 
stocks.  But  a  change  of  the  persons  owning  this  class  of  fixed 
capital  does  not  alter  the  relation  of  the  immovable,  materially 
fixed  part  of  the  national  wealth  to  its  movable  part.21 


The  peculiar  circulation  of  fixed  capital  results  in  a  peculiar 
turnover.  That  part  of  the  value  which  it  loses  in  its  bodily  form 
by  wear  and  tear  circulates  as  a  part  of  the  value  of  the  product. 
The  product  converts  itself  by  means  of  its  circulation  from  com¬ 
modities  into  money;  hence  the  same  applies  to  the  value-part  of 
the  instrument  of  labour  circulated  by  the  product,  and  this 
value  drips  down  in  the  form  of  money  from  the  process  of  circula¬ 
tion  in  proportion  as  this  instrument  of  labour  ceases  to  be  a 
depository  of  value  in  the  process  of  production.  Its  value  thus 
acquires  a  double  existence.  One  part  of  it  remains  attached  to  its 
use-form  or  bodily  form  belonging  in  the  process  of  production. 
The  other  part  detaches  itself  from  that  form  in  the  shape  of  mon¬ 
ey.  In  the  performance  of  its  function  that  part  of  the  value  of  an 
instrument  of  labour  which  exists  in  its  bodily  form  constantly 
decreases,  while  that  which  is  transformed  into  money  constantly 
increases  until  the  instrument  is  at  last  exhausted  and  its  entire 
value,  detached  from  its  corpse,  is  converted  into  money.  Here 
the  peculiarity  in  the  turnover  of  this  element  of  productive 
capital  becomes  apparent.  The  transformation  of  its  value  into 
money  keeps  pace  with  the  pupation  into  money  of  the  commodity 
which  is  the  carrier  of  its  value.  But  its  reconversion  from  the 
money-form  into  a  use-form  proceeds  separately  from  the  recon¬ 
version  of  the  commodities  into  other  elements  of  their  produc¬ 
tion  and  is  determined  rather  by  its  own  period  of  reproduction, 
that  Is,  by  the  time  during  which  the  instrument  of  labour  wears 
out  and  must  be  replaced  by  another  of  the  same  kind.  If  a  ma¬ 
chine  worth  £10,000  lasts  for,  say,  a  period  of  ten  years,  then 


21  End  of  Manuscript  IV,  beginning  of  Manuscript  II. — F.  E 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


107 


the  period  of  turnover  of  the  value  originally  advanced  for  it 
amounts  to  ten  years.  It  need  not  be  renewed  and  continues  to 
function  in  its  bodily  form  until  this  period  has  expired.  In  the 
meantime  its  value  circulates  piecemeal  as  a  part  of  the  value 
of  the  commodities  whose  continuous  production  it  serves  and  it 
is  thus  gradually  transformed  into  money  until  finally  at  the 
end  of  ten  years  it  entirely  assumes  the  form  of  money  and  is 
reconverted  from  money  into  a  machine,  in  other  words,  has 
completed  its  turnover.  Until  this  time  of  reproduction  arrives, 
its  value  is  gradually  accumulated,  in  the  form  of  a  money  re¬ 
serve  fund  to  start  with. 

The  remaining  elements  of  productive  capital  consist  partly 
of  those  elements  of  constant  capital  which  exist  as  auxiliary 
and  raw  materials,  partly  of  variable  capital  invested  in  labour- 
power. 

The  analysis  of  the  labour-process  and  of  the  process  of  pro¬ 
ducing  surplus-value  (Buch  I,  Kap.  V)*  showed  that  these  differ¬ 
ent  components  behave  quite  differently  as  creators  of  products 
and  as  creators  of  values.  The  value  of  that  part  of  constant  capi¬ 
tal  which  consists  of  auxiliary  and  raw  materials— the  same  as 
of  that  part  which  consists  of  instruments  of  labour— re-appears 
in  the  value  of  the  product  as  only  transferred  value,  while  la¬ 
bour-power  adds  an  equivalent  of  its  value  to  the  product  by 
means  of  the  labour-process,  in  other  words,  actually  reproduces 
its  value.  Furthermore,  one  part  of  the  auxiliary  substances — fuel, 
lighting  gas,  etc.  —  is  consumed  in  the  process  of  labour  without 
entering  bodily  into  the  product,  while  the  other  part  of  them 
enters  bodily  into  the  product  and  forms  its  material  substance. 
But  all  these  differences  are  immaterial  so  far  as  the  circulation 
and  therefore  the  mode  of  turnover  is  concerned.  Since  auxiliary 
and  raw  materials  are  entirely  consumed  in  the  creation  of  the 
product,  they  transfer  their  value  entirely  to  the  product.  Hence 
this  value  is  circulated  in  its  entirety  by  the  product,  transforms 
itself  into  money  and  from  money  back  into  the  elements  of 
production  of  the  commodity.  Its  turnover  is  not  interrupted, 
as  is  that  of  fixed  capital,  but  passes  uninterruptedly  through  the 
entire  circuit  of  its  forms,  so  that  these  elements  of  productive 
capital  are  continually  renewed  in  kind. 

As  for  the  variable  component  of  productive  capital,  which 
is  invested  in  labour-power,  be  it  noted  that  labour-power  is 
purchased  for  a  definite  period  of  time.  As  soon  as  the  capitalist 


English  edition:  Ch.  VII  —  Ed. 


168 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


has  bought  it  and  embodied  it  in  the  process  of  production,  it 
forms  a  component  part  of  his  capital,  its  variable  component. 
Labour  power  acts  daily  during  a  period  of  time  in  which  it  adds 
to  the  product  not  only  its  own  value  for  the  whole  day  but  also 
a  surplus-value  in  excess  of  it.  We  shall  not  consider  this  sur- 
plus-valuo  for  the  present.  After  labour-power  has  been  bought 
and  it  has  performed  its  function,  say  for  a  week,  its  purchase 
must  be  constantly  renewed  within  the  customary  intervals  of 
time.  The  equivalent  of  its  value,  which  the  labour-power  adds 
to  the  product  during  its  functioning  and  which  is  transformed 
into  money  in  consequence  of  the  circulation  of  tho  product, 
must  continually  be  reconverted  from  money  into  labour-power 
or  continually  pass  through  the  complete  circuit  of  its  forms, 
that  is,  must  be  turned  over,  if  the  circuit  of  continuous  produc¬ 
tion  is  not  to  be  interrupted. 

Hence  that  part  of  the  value  of  the  productive  capital  which 
has  been  advanced  for  labour-power  is  entirely  transferred  to  the 
product  (we  constantly  leave  the  question  of  surplus-value  out 
of  consideration  here),  passes  with  it  through  the  two  metamor¬ 
phoses  belonging  in  the  sphere  of  circulation  and  always  remains 
incorporated  in  the  process  of  production  by  virtue  of  this  contin¬ 
uous  renewal.  Hence,  however  different  otherwise  may  be  the 
relation  between  labour-power,  so  far  as  the  creation  of  value 
is  concerned,  and  the  component  parts  of  constant  capital  which 
do  not  constitute  fixed  capital,  this  kind  of  turnover  of  its  value 
labour-power  shares  with  them,  in  contradistinction  to  fixed  capi¬ 
tal.  These  components  of  the  productive  capital — the  parts  of  its 
value  invested  in  labour-power  and  in  means  of  production  which 
do  not  constitute  fixed  capital  — by  reason  of  their  common  turn¬ 
over  characteristics  confront  the  fixed  capital  as  circulating  or 
fluent  capital. 

We  have  already  shown*  that  the  money  which  the  capitalist 
pays  to  the  labourer  for  the. use  of  his  labour-power  is  nothing 
more  or  less  than  the  form  of  the  general  equivalent  for  the  means 
of  subsistence  required  by  the  labourer.  To  this  extent,  tho  vari¬ 
able  capital  consists  in  substance  of  means  of  subsistence.  But  in 
this  case,  where  we  are  discussing  turnover,  it  is  a  question  of 
form.  Tho  capitalist  does  not  buy  the  labourer's  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  but  his  labour-power.  And  that  which  forms  the  variable 
part  of  his  capital  is  not  the  labourer's  means  of  subsistence  but 
his  labour-power  In  action.  What  the  capitalist  consumes  pro- 


*  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  VI,  pp  167-76.— Erf. 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


160 


ductively  in  the  labour-process  is  the  labour-power  itself  and 
not  the  labourer's  means  of  subsistence.  It  is  the  labourer  him¬ 
self  who  converts  the  money  received  for  his  labour-power  into 
means  of  subsistence,  in  order  to  reconvert  them  into  labour- 
power,  to  keep  alive,  just  as  the  capitalist  for  instance  converts 
a  part  of  the  surplus-value  of  the  commodities  he  sells  for  money 
into  means  of  subsistence  for  himself  without  thereby  warranting 
the  statement  that  the  purchaser  of  his  commodities  pays  him 
in  means  of  subsistence.  Even  if  the  labourer  is  paid  a  part  of 
his  wages  in  means  of  subsistence,  in  kind,  this  nowadays  amounts 
to  a  second  transaction.  He  sells  his  labour-power  at  a  certain 
price,  with  the  understanding  that  he  shall  receive  a  part  of  this 
price  in  means  of  subsistence.  This  changes  merely  the  form  of 
the  payment,  but  not  the  fact  that  what  he  actually  sells  is  his 
labour-power.  It  is  a  second  transaction,  which  does  not  take 
place  between  the  labourer  and  the  capitalist,  but  between  the 
labourer  as  a  buyer  of  commodities  and  the  capitalist  as  a  seller 
of  commodities,  while  in  the  first  transaction  the  labourer  is  a 
seller  of  a  commodity  (his  labour-power)  and  the  capitalist  its 
buyer.  It  is  exactly  the  sameras  if  a  capitalist,  on  selling  his  com¬ 
modity,  say,  a  machine,  to  an  iron  works,  has  it  replaced  by 
some  other  commodity,  say,  iron.  It  is  therefore  not  the  labour¬ 
er’s  means  of  subsistence  which  acquire  the  definite  character 
of  circulating  capital  as  opposed  to  fixed  capital.  Nor  is  it  his 
labour-power.  It  is  rather  that  part  of  the  value  of  productive 
capital  which  is  invested  in  labour-power  and  which,  by  virtue 
of  the  form  of  its  turnover,  receives  this  character  in  common 
with  some,  and  in  contrast  with  other,  component  parts  of  the 
constant  capital. 

The  value  of  the  circulating  capital — in  labour-power  and  means 
of  production — is  advanced  only  for  the  time  during  which  the 
product  is  in  process  of  production,  in  accordance  with  the  scale 
of  production  determined  by  the  volume  of  the  fixed  capital. 
This  value  enters  entirely  into  the  product,  is  therefore  fully 
returned  by  its  sale  from  the  sphere  of  circulation,  and  can  be 
advanced  anew.  The  labour-power  and  means  of  production, 
in  which  the  circulating  component  of  capital  exists,  are  with¬ 
drawn  from  circulation  to  the  extent  required  for  the  creation 
and  sale  of  the  finished  product,  but  they  must  be  continually 
replaced  and  renewed  by  purchasing  them  back,  by  reconvert¬ 
ing  them  from  the  money-form  into  the  elements  of  production. 
They  are  withdrawn  from  the  market  in  smaller  quantities  at  a 
time  than  the  elements  of  fixed  capital,  but  they  must  be  with- 


170 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


drawn  again  from  it  so  much  the  more  frequently  and  the  advance 
of  capital  invested  in  them  must  be  renewed  at  shorter  intervals. 
This  constant  renewal  is  effected  by  the  continuous  conversion 
of  the  product  which  circulates  their  entire  value.  And  finally, 
they  pass  through  the  entire  circuit  of  metamorphoses,  not  only 
so  far  as  their  value  is  concerned  but  also  their  material  form. 
They  are  perpetually  reconverted  from  commodities  into  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  production  of  the  same  commodities. 

Together  with  its  own  value,  labour-power  always  adds  to  the 
product  surplus-value,  the  embodiment  of  unpaid  labour.  This 
is  continuously  circulated  by  the  finished  product  and  converted 
into  money  just  as  are  other  elements  of  its  value.  But  here,  where 
we  are  primarily  concerned  with  the  turnover  of  capital-value, 
and  not  with  that  of  the  surplus-value  occurring  at  the  same  time, 
we  dismiss  the  latter  for  the  present. 

From  the  foregoing  one  may  conclude  the  following: 

1.  The  definiteness  of  form  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital 
arises  merely  from  the  different  turnovers  of  the  capital-value, 
functioning  in  the  process  of  production,  or  of  the  productive  cap¬ 
ital.  This  difference  in  turnover  arises  in  its  turn  from  the  differ¬ 
ent  manner  in  which  the  various  components  of  productive  capi¬ 
tal  transfer  their  value  to  the  product;  it  is  not  due  to  the  different 
parts  played  by  these  components  in  the  generation  of  product 
value,  nor  to  their  characteristic  behaviour  in  the  process  of 
self-expansion.  Finally  the  difference  in  the  delivery  of  value 
to  the  product— and  therefore  the  different  manner  in  which  this 
value  is  circulated  by  the  product  and  is  renewed  in  its  original 
bodily  form  through  the  metamorphoses  of  the  product  — arises 
from  the  difference  of  the  material  shapes  in  which  the  productive 
capital  exists,  one  portion  of  it  being  entirely  consumed  during 
the  creation  of  an  individual  product  and  the  other  being  used 
up  only  gradually.  Hence  it  is  only  the  productive  capital  which 
can  be  divided  into  fixed  and  circulating  capital.  But  this  an¬ 
tithesis  does  not  apply  to  the  other  two  modes  of  existence  of 
industrial  capital,  that  is  to  say,  commodity-capital  and  money- 
capital,  nor  does  it  exist  as  an  antithesis  of  these  two  modes 
to  productive  capital.  It  exists  only  for  productive  capital  and 
within  its  sphere.  No  matter  how  much  money-capital  and  com¬ 
modity-capital  may  function  as  capital  and  no  matter  how  flu¬ 
ently  they  may  circulate,  they  cannot  become  circulating  capital 
as  distinct  from  fixed  capital  until  they  are  transformed  into 
circulating  components  of  productive  capital.  But  because  these 
two  forms  of  capital  dwell  in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  Political 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


171 


Economy  as  we  shall  see  has  been  misled  since  the  time  of  Adam 
Smith  into  lumping  them  together  with  the  circulating  part  of 
productive  capital  and  assigning  them  to  the  category  of  cir¬ 
culating  capital.  They  are  indeed  circulation  capital  in  contrast 
to  productive  capital,  but  they  are  not  circulating  capital  in  con¬ 
trast  to  fixed  capital. 

2.  The  turnover  of  the  fixed  component  part  of  capital,  and 
therefore  also  the  time  of  turnover  necessary  for  it,  comprises  sev¬ 
eral  turnovers  of  the  circulating  constituents  of  capital.  In  the 
time  during  which  the  fixed  capital  turns  over  once,  the  circulating 
capital  turns  over  several  times.  One  of  the  component  parts  of 
the  value  of  the  productive  capital  acquires  the  definiteness  of 
form  of  fixed  capital  only  in  case  the  means  of  production  in  which 
it  exists  is  not  wholly  worn  out  in  the  time  required  for  the  fabri¬ 
cation  of  the  product  and  its  expulsion  from  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion  as  a  commodity.  One  part  of  its  value  must  remain  tied  up 
in  the  form  of  the  still  preserved  old  use-form,  while  the  other  part 
is  circulated  by  the  finished  product,  and  this  circulation  on  the 
contrary  simultaneously  circulates  the  entire  value  of  the  fluent 
component  parts  of  the  capital. 

3.  The  value-part  of  the  productive  capital,  the  part  invested 
in  fixed  capital,  is  advanced  in  one  lump  sum  for  the  entire  period 
of  employment  of  that  part  of  the  means  of  production  of  which 
the  fixed  capital  consists.  Hence  this  value  is  thrown  into  the 
circulation  by  the  capitalist  all  at  one  time.  But  it  is  withdrawn 
again  from  the  circulation  only  piecemeal  and  gradually  by  real¬ 
ising  the  parts  of  value  which  the  fixed  capital  adds  piecemeal 
to  the  commodities.  On  the  other  hand  the  means  of  production 
themselves,  in  which  a  component  part  of  the  productive  capital 
becomes  fixed,  are  withdrawn  from  the  circulation  all  at  one  time 
to  be  embodied  in  the  process  of  production  for  the  entire  period 
in  which  they  function.  But  they  do  not  require  for  this  period  any 
replacement  by  new  samples  of  the  same  kind,  do  not  require 
reproduction.  They  continue  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period  to 
contribute  to  the  creation  of  the  commodities  thrown  into  circu¬ 
lation  without  withdrawing  from  circulation  the  elements  of 
their  own  renewal.  Hence  they  do  not  require  from  the  capitalist 
a  renewal  of  his  advance  during  this  period.  Finally  the  capital- 
value  invested  in  fixed  capital  does  not  pass  bodily  through 
the  circuit  of  its  forms,  during  the  functioning  period  of  the 
means  of  production  in  which  this  capital-value  exists,  but  only 
as  concerns  its  value,  and  even  this  it  does  only  in  parts  and 
gradually.  In  other  words,  a  portion  of  its  value  is  continually 


172 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


circulated  and  converted  into  money  as  a  part  of  the  value  of 
the  commodities,  without  being  reconverted  from  money  into 
its  original  bodily  form.  This  reconversion  of  money  into  the 
bodily  form  of  the  means  of  production  does  not  take  place  until 
the  end  of  its  functioning  period,  when  the  means  of  production 
has  been  completely  consumed. 

4.  The  elements  of  circulating  capital  are  as  permanently 
fixed  in  the  process  of  production  — if  it  is  to  be  uninterrupted  — as 
the  elements  of  fixed  capital.  But  the  elements  of  circulating 
capital  thus  fixed  are  continually  renewed  in  kind  (the  means  of 
production  by  new  products  of  the  same  kind,  labour-power  by 
constantly  renewed  purchases)  while  in  the  case  of  the  elements 
of  fixed  capital  neither  they  themselves  are  renewed  nor  need 
their  purchases  be  renewed  so  long  as  they  continue  to  exist. 
There  are  always  raw  and  auxiliary  materials  in  the  process  of 
production,  but  always  new  products  of  the  same  kind,  after  the 
old  elements  have  been  consumed  in  the  creation  of  the  finished 
product.  Labour-power  likewise  always  exists  in  the  process  of 
production,  but  only  by  means  of  ever  new  purchases,  frequently 
involving  changes  of  persons.  But  the  same  identical  buildings, 
machines,  etc.,  continue  to  function,  during  repeated  turnovers 
of  the  circulating  capital,  in  the  same  repeated  processes  of 
production. 


II.  COMPONENTS,  REPLACEMENT,  REPAIR, 

AND  ACCUMULATION  OF  FIXED  CAPITAL 

In  any  investment  of  capital  the  separate  elements  of  the  fixed 
capital  have  different  lifetimes,  and  therefore  different  turn¬ 
over  times.  In  a  railway,  for  instance,  the  rails,  sleepers,  earth¬ 
works,  terminals,  bridges,  tunnels,  locomotives,  and  carriages 
have  different  functional  periods  and  times  of  reproduction, 
hence  the  capital  advanced  for  them  has  different  times  of 
turnover.  For  a  great  number  of  years,  buildings,  platforms, 
water  tanks,  viaducts,  tunnels,  cuttings,  dams,  in  short 
everything  called  “works  of  art”  in  English  railroading,  do  not 
require  any  renewal.  The  things  which  wear  out  most  are  the 
tracks  and  rolling  stock. 

Originally  in  the  construction  of  modern  railways  it  was  the 
prevailing  opinion,  nursed  by  the  most  prominent  practical  en¬ 
gineers,  that  a  railway  would  last  a  century  and  that  the  wear  and 
tear  of  the  rails  was  so  imperceptible  that  it  could  be  ignored 
for  all  financial  and  other  practical  purposes;  100  to  150  years 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


173 


was  supposed  to  be  the  life  of  good  rails.  But  it  was  soon  found 
that  the  life  of  a  rail,  which  naturally  depends  on  the  speed  of 
the  locomotives,  the  weight  and  number  of  trains,  the  diameter 
of  the  rails,  and  on  a  multitude  of  other  attendant  circumstances, 
did  not  exceed  an  average  of  20  years.  In  some  railway  terminals, 
great  traffic  centres,  the  rails  even  wear  out  every  year.  About 
1867  began  the  introduction  of  steel  rails,  which  cost  about  twice 
as  much  as  iron  rails  but  which  last  more  than  twice  as  long. 
The  lifetime  of  wooden  sleepers  was  from  12  to  15  years.  It  was 
also  ascertained  with  regard  to  the  rolling  stock  that  freight 
cars  wear  out  faster  than  passenger  cars.  The  life  of  a  locomotive 
was  estimated  in  1867  to  be  about  10  to  12  years. 

The  wear  and  tear  is  first  of  all  a  result  of  use.  As  a  rule  “the 
wear  of  the  rails  is  proportionate  to  the  number  of  trains.  ’ 
(R.  C.,  No.  17645.) 2 2  With  increased  speed  the  wear  and  tear 
of  a  railway  increased  in  a  higher  ratio  than  the  square  of  the 
speed;  that  is  to  say,  if  you  doubled  the  speed  of  the  engine, 
you  more  than  quadrupled  the  cost  of  wear  and  tear  of  the  road. 
(R.  C.,  No.  17046.) 

Wear  and  tear  is  furthermore  caused  by  the  action  of  natural 
forces.  For  instance  sleepers  suffer  not  only  from  actual  wear 
but  also  from  rot.  “The  cost  of  maintaining  the  road  does  not 
depend  so  much  upon  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  traffic  passing  over 
it,  as  upon  the  quality  of  wood,  iron,  bricks  and  mortars  exposed 
to  the  atmosphere.  A  month  of  severe  water  would  do  more 
damage  to  the  road  of  a  railway  than  a  year’s  traffic. "  (R.  P.  Wil¬ 
liams,  “On  the  Maintenance  of  Permanent  Way."  Paper  read 
at  the  Institute  of  Civil  Engineers,  Autumn,  1867.*) 

Finally,  here  as  everywhere  else  in  modern  industry,  the  moral 
depreciation  plays  a  role.  After  the  lapse  of  ten  years,  one  can 
generally  buy  the  same  number  of  cars  and  locomotives  for 
£30,000  that  would  previously  have  cost  £40,000.  Depreciation 
in  the  rolling  stock  must  be  set  at  25  per  cent  of  the  market  price 
even  when  there  is  no  depreciation  whatever  in  its  use-value. 
(Lardner,  Railway  Economy.) 

“Tube  bridges  will  not  be  replaced  in  their  present  form." 
(Because  now  there  are  better  forms  for  such  bridges.)  “Ordinary 


11  The  quotations  marked  R.  C  are  from:  Royal  Commission  on  Rail¬ 
ways.  Minutes  of  Evidence  taken  before  the  Commissioners.  Presented  to 
both  Houses  of  Parliament,  London,  1867  The  questions  and  answers  are 
numbered  and  the  numbers  given  here. 

*  R.  P.  Williams's  paper  was  published  In  Money  Market  Review  of 
December  2,  1867.— Ed. 


174 


THB  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


repairs,  taking  away  gradually,  and  replacing  are  not  practicable.  ” 
(W.  P.  Adams,  Roads  and  Rails,  London,  1862.)  The  instruments 
of  labour  are  largely  modified  all  the  time  by  the  progress  of 
industry.  Hence  they  are  not  replaced  in  their  original,  but  in 
their  modified  form.  On  the  one  hand  the  mass  of  the  fixed  capital 
invested  in  a  certain  bodily  form  and  endowed  in  that  form  with 
a  certain  average  life  constitutes  one  reason  for  the  only  gradual 
pace  of  the  introduction  of  new  machinery,  etc.,  and  therefore  an 
obstacle  to  the  rapid  general  introduction  of  improved  instruments 
of  labour.  On  the  other  hand  competition  compels  the  replacement 
of  the  old  instruments  of  labour  by  new  ones  before  the  expira¬ 
tion  of  their  natural  life,  especially  when  decisive  changes  occur. 
Such  premature  renewals  of  factory  equipment  on  a  rather  large 
social  scale  are  mainly  enforced  by  catastrophes  or  crises. 

By  wear  and  tear  (moral  depreciation  excepted)  is  meant  that 
part  of  value  which  the  fixed  capital,  on  being  used,  gradually 
transmits  to  the  product,  in  proportion  to  its  average  loss  of 
use-value. 

This  wear  and  tear  takes  place  partly  in  such  a  way  that  the 
fixed  capital  has  a  certain  average  durability.  It  is  advanced  for 
this  entire  period  in  one  sum.  After  the  termination  of  this  period 
it  must  be  totally  replaced.  So  far  as  living  instruments  of  labour 
are  concerned,  for  instance  horses,  their  reproduction  is  timed 
by  nature  itself.  Their  average  lifetime  as  instruments  of  labour 
is  determined  by  laws  of  nature.  As  soon  as  this  term  has  expired 
they  must  be  replaced  by  new  ones.  A  horse  cannot  be  replaced 
piecemeal;  it  must  bo  replaced  by  another  horse. 

Other  elements  of  fixed  capital  permit  of  a  periodical  or  par¬ 
tial  renewal.  In  Ibis  instance  partial  or  periodical  replacement 
must  be  distinguished  from  gradual  extension  of  the  business. 

The  fixed  capital  consists  in  part  of  homogeneous  constitu¬ 
ents  which  do  not  however  last  the  same  length  of  time  but  are 
renewed  piecemeal  at  various  intervals.  This  is  true  for  instance 
of  the  rails  in  railway  stations,  which  must  bo  replaced  more 
often  than  those  of  tho  remainder  of  the  trackage.  It  also  applies 
to  the  sleepers,  which  on  tho  Belgian  railways  bad  to  be  renewed 
in  the  forties  at  the  rate  of  8  per  cent  annually,  according  to  Lard- 
ner,  so  that  all  the  sleepers  were  renewed  in  the  course  of  12'/,  years. 
Hence  we  havo  here  the  following  situation:  a  certain  sum  is 
advanced  for  a  certain  kind  of  fixed  capital  for  say  ten  years. 
This  expenditure  is  made  at  ono  time.  But  a  definite  part  of 
this  fixed  capital,  the  value  of  which  has  entered  into  the  value 
of  the  product  and  been  converted  with  it  into  money,  is  replaced 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


175 


In  kind  every  year,  while  the  remainder  continues  to  exist  in 
its  original  bodily  form.  It  is  this  advance  in  one  sum  and  the 
only  partial  reproduction  in  bodily  form  which  distinguish  this 
capital,  as  fixed,  from  circulating  capital. 

Other  pieces  of  the  fixed  capital  consist  of  heterogeneous  com¬ 
ponents,  which  wear  out  in  unequal  periods  of  time  and  must 
so  be  replaced.  This  applies  particularly  to  machines.  What 
we  have  just  said  concerning  the  different  durabilities  of  differ¬ 
ent  constituent  parts  of  a  fixed  capital  applies  in  this  case  to  the 
durability  of  different  component  parts  of  any  machine  figuring 
as  a  piece  of  this  fixed  capital. 

With  regard  to  the  gradual  extension  of  the  business  in  the 
course  of  the  partial  renewal,  we  make  the  following  remarks: 
Although,  as  we  have  seen,  the  fixed  capital  continues  to  per¬ 
form  its  functions  in  the  process  of  production  in  kind,  a  part 
of  its  value,  proportionate  to  the  average  wear  and  tear,  has 
circulated  with  the  product,  has  been  converted  into  money,  and 
forms  an  element  in  the  money  reserve  fund  intended  for  the 
replacement  of  the  capital  pending  its  reproduction  in  kind.  This 
part  of  the  value  of  the  fixed  capital  transformed  into  money  may 
serve  to  extend  the  business  or  to  make  improvements  in  the 
machinery  which  will  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  latter.  Thus 
reproduction  takes  place  in  larger  or  smaller  periods  of  time,  and 
this  is,  from  the  standpoint  of  society,  reproduction  on  an  en¬ 
larged  scale— extensive  if  the  field  of  production  is  extended; 
intensive  if  the  means  of  production  is  made  more  effective.  This 
reproduction  on  an  extended  scale  does  not  result  from  accumu¬ 
lation —  transformation  of  surplus-value  into  capital — but  from 
the  reconversion  of  the  value  which  has  branched  off,  detached 
itself  in  the  form  of  money  from  the  body  of  the  fixed  capital 
into  new  additional  or  at  least  more  effective  fixed  capital  of  the 
same  kind.  Of  course  it  depends  partly  on  the  specific  nature 
of  the  business,  to  what  extent  and  in  what  proportions  it  is 
capable  of  such  gradual  addition,  hence  also  in  what  amount 
a  reserve  fund  must  be  collected  to  be  reinvested  in  this  way, 
and  what  period  of  time  this  requires.  To  what  extent  further¬ 
more  improvements  in  the  details  of  existing  machinery  can 
be  made,  depends  of  course  on  the  nature  of  these  improvements 
and  the  construction  of  the  machine  itself.  Hqw  well  this  point 
is  considered  at  the  very  outset  in  the  construction  of  railways 
is  shown  by  Adams:  “The  whole  structure  should  be  set  out  on 
the  principle  which  governs  the  beehive— capacity  for  indefinite 
extension.  Any  fixed  and  decided  symmetrical  structure  is  to 


]7(5  THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


be  deprecated,  as  needing  subsequent  pulling  down  in  case  of 
enlargement.”  (P.  123.) 

This  depends  largely  on  the  available  space.  In  the  case  of 
some  buildings  additional  storeys  may  be  built;  in  the  case  of 
others  lateral  extension,  hence  more  land,  is  required.  Within 
capitalist  production  there  is  on  the  one  side  much  waste  of  mate¬ 
rial,  on  the  other  much  impracticable  lateral  extension  of  this 
sort  (partly  to  the  injury  of  the  labour-power)  in  the  gradual  ex¬ 
pansion  of  the  business,  because  nothing  is  undertaken  according 
to  a  social  plan,  but  everything  depends  on  the  infinitely  differ¬ 
ent  conditions,  means,  etc.,  with  which  the  individual  capital¬ 
ist  operates.  This  results  in  a  great  waste  of  the  productive  forces. 

This  piecemeal  re-investment  of  the  money  reserve  fund  (i.e., 
of  that  part  of  the  fixed  capital  which  has  been  reconverted  into 
money)  is  easiest  in  agriculture.  A  field  of  production  of  a  given 
area  is  here  capable  of  the  greatest  possible  gradual  absorption  of 
capital.  The  same  applies  to  where  there  is  natural  reproduction, 
as  in  cattle  breeding. 

Fixed  capital  entails  special  maintenance  costs.  A  part  of  this 
maintenance  is  provided  by  the  labour-process  itself;  fixed  capi¬ 
tal  spoils,  if  it  is  not  employed  in  the  labour-process  (Buch  I,  Kap. 
VI,  S.  196  and  Kap.  XIII,  S.  423,*  on  wear  and  tear  of  machinery 
when  not  in  use).  The  English  law  therefore  explicitly  treats  it 
as  waste,  if  rented  lands  are  not  cultivated  according  to  the  cus¬ 
tom  of  the  land.  (W.  A.  Holdsworth,  Barrister  at  Law,  The  Law 
of  Landlord  and  Tenant,  London,  1857,  p.  96.)  This  maintenance 
resulting  from  use  in  the  labour-process  is  a  free  gift  inherent 
in  the  nature  of  living  labour.  Moreover  the  preservative  power 
of  labour  is  of  a  two-fold  character.  On  the  one  hand  it  preserves 
the  value  of  the  materials  of  labour  by  transferring  it  to  the  prod¬ 
uct,  on  the  other  hand  it  preserves  the  value  of  the  instruments 
of  labour  without  transferring  this  value  to  the  product,  by 
preserving  their  use-value  through  their  activity  in  the  process 
of  production. 

The  fixed  capital  however  requires  also  a  positive  expenditure 
of  labour  for  its  maintenance  in  good  repair.  The  machinery  must 
be  cleaned  from  time  to  time.  It  is  a  question  here  of  additional 
labour  without  which  the  machinery  becomes  useless,  of  merely 
warding  off  the  noxious  influences  of  the  elements,  which  are 
inseparable  from  the  process  of  production;  hence  it  is  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  keeping  the  machinery  literally  in  working  order.  It  goes 


English  edition:  Ch.  VIII  and  XV. — Ed. 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


177 


without  saying  that  the  normal  durability  of  fixed  capital  is 
calculated  on  the  supposition  that  all  the  conditions  under  which 
it  can  perform  its  functions  normally  during  that  time  are  ful¬ 
filled,  just  as  we  assume,  in  placing  a  man’s  life  at  30  years  on 
the  average,  that  he  will  wash  himself.  It  is  here  not  a  ques¬ 
tion  of  replacing  the  labour  contained  in  the  machine,  but  of 
constant  additional  labour  made  necessary  by  its  use.  It  is  not 
a  question  of  labour  performed  by  the  machine,  but  of  labour 
spent  on  it,  of  labour  in  which  it  is  not  an  agent  of  production 
but  raw  material.  The  capital  expended  for  this  labour  must 
be  classed  as  circulating  capital,  although  it  does  not  enter  into 
the  labour-process  proper  to  which  the  product  owes  its  exist¬ 
ence.  This  labour  must  be  continually  expended  in  production, 
hence  its  value  must  be  continually  replaced  by  that  of  the  prod¬ 
uct.  The  capital  invested  in  it  belongs  in  that  part  of  circulat¬ 
ing  capital  which  has  to  cover  the  unproductive  costs  and  is 
to  be  distributed  over  the  produced  values  according  to  an 
annual  average  calculation.  We  have  seen*  that  in  industry 
proper  this  labour  of  cleaning  is  performed  by  the  working-men 
gratis,  during  the  rest  periods,  and  for  that  very  reason  often  also 
during  the  process  of  production  itself,  and  most  accidents  can 
be  traced  to  this  source.  This  labour  does  not  figure  in  the  price 
of  the  product.  As  far  as  that  goes  the  consumer  receives  it  gratis. 
On  the  other  hand  the  capitalist  thus  does  not  pay  the  main¬ 
tenance  costs  of  his  machine.  The  labourer  pays  in  persona ,  and 
this  is  one  of  the  mysteries  of  the  self-preservation  of  capital, 
which  in  point  of  fact  constitute  a  legal  claim  by  the  labourer 
on  the  machinery,  on  the  strength  of  which  he  is  a  co-owner  of  the 
machine  even  from  the  standpoint  of  bourgeois  law.  However, 
in  various  branches  of  production,  in  which  the  machinery  must 
be  removed  from  the  process  of  production  for  the  purpose  of 
cleaning  and  where  therefore  the  cleaning  cannot  be  performed 
in-between,  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  locomotives,  this  main¬ 
tenance  work  counts  as  current  expenses  and  is  therefore  an  ele¬ 
ment  of  circulating  capital.  For  instance  a  goods  engine  should 
not  run  more  than  3  days  without  being  kept  one  day  in  the 
shed....  If  you  attempt  to  wash  out  the  boiler  before  it  has  cooled 
down  that  is  very  injurious.  (R.  C.,  No.  17823.) 

The  actual  repairs  or  patchwork  require  expenditures  of  capi¬ 
tal  and  labour  which  are  not  contained  in  the  originally  advanced 
capital  and  cannot  therefore  be  replaced  and  covered,  at  least  not 


Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  p.  426,  Note  1. — Ed. 


178 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


always,  by  the  gradual  replacement  of  the  value  of  the  fixed 
capital.  For  instance  if  the  value  of  the  fixed  capital  is  £10,000 
and  its  total  life  10  years,  then  these  £10,000,  having  been  entire¬ 
ly  converted  into  money  after  the  lapse  of  ten  years,  will  replace 
only  the  value  of  the  capital  originally  invested,  but  they  do 
not  replace  the  capital,  or  labour,  added  in  the  meantime  for 
repairs.  This  is  an  additional  component  part  of  the  value,  which 
is  not  advanced  all  at  one  time  but  whenever  a  need  for  it  arises, 
and  the  various  times. for  advancing  it  are  in  the  very  nature 
of  things  accidental.  All  fixed  capital  demands  such  subsequent, 
dosed  out,  additional  outlay  of  capital  for  instruments  of  labour 
and  labour-power. 

The  damage  which  separate  parts  of  the  machinery,  etc.,  may 
incur  is  naturally  accidental  and  so  are  therefore  the  repairs 
involved-.  Nevertheless  two  kinds  of  repairs  are  to  be  distinguished 
in  the  general  mass,  which  are  of  a  more  or  less  fixed  character 
and  fall  within  various  periods  of  the  life  of  fixed  capital.  These 
are  the  ailments  of  childhood  and  the  far  more  numerous  ail¬ 
ments  of  the  post-middle  durability  period.  A  machine  for  instance 
may  be  commissioned  in  ever  so  perfect  a  condition,  still  actual 
use  will  reveal  shortcomings  which  must  be  remedied  by  subse¬ 
quent  labour.  On  the  other  hand  the  more  a  machine  passes  beyond 
the  mid-durability  point,  the  more  therefore  the  normal  wear 
and  tear  has  accumulated  and  the  more  the  material  of  which  it 
consists  has  been  worn  out  and  become  decrepit,  the  more 
numerous  and  considerable  will  be  the  repairs  required  to  keep  it 
going  for  the  remainder  of  its  average  durability.  It  is  the  same 
with  an  old  man,  who  incurs  more  medical  expenses  to  keep  from 
dying  prematurely  than  a  young  and  strong  man.  So  in  spite  of 
its  accidental  character  repair  work  is  unevenly  distributed  over 
the  various  periods  of  life  of  fixed  capital. 

From  the  foregoing  and  from  the  generally  accidental  charac¬ 
ter  of  repair  work  on  machines  it  follows: 

In  one  respect  the  actual  expenditure  of  labour-power  and 
instruments  of  labour  on  repairs  is  accidental,  like  the  circum¬ 
stances  which  necessitate  these  repairs;  the  amount  of  the  re¬ 
pairs  needed  is  unevenly  distributed  over  the  different  periods 
of  fixed  capital’s  life.  In  other  respects  it  is  taken  for  granted 
in  estimating  the  average  life  of  fixed  capital  that  it  is  constantly 
kept  in  good  working  order,  partly  by  cleaning  (including  the 
cleaning  of  the  premises),  partly  by  repairs  as  often  as  required. 
The  transfer  of  value  through  wear  and  tear  of  fixed  capital  is 
calculated  on  its  average  life,  but  this  average  life  itself  is  based 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


179 


on  the  assumption  that  the  additional  capital  required  for  main¬ 
tenance  purposes  is  continually  advanced. 

But  then  it  is  also  evident  that  the  value  added  by  this  ex¬ 
tra  expenditure  of  capital  and  labour  cannot  enter  into  the  price 
of  the  commodities  concerned  at  the  same  time  as  it  is  incurred. 
For  example,  a  manufacturer  of  yam  cannot  sell  his  yarn  dearer 
this  week  than  last,  merely  because  one  of  his  wheels  broke  or 
a  belt  tore  this  week.  The  general  costs  of  spinning  have  not 
been  changed  in  any  way  by  this  accident  in  some  individual 
factory.  Here,  as  in  all  determinations  of  value,  the  average 
decides.  Experience  shows  the  average  occurrence  of  such  acci¬ 
dents  and  the  average  volume  of  the  maintenance  and  repair 
work  necessary  during  the  average  life  of  the  fixed  capital  invest¬ 
ed  in  a  given  branch  of  business.  This  average  expense  is  dis¬ 
tributed  over  the  average  life  and  added  to  the  price  of  the  product 
in  corresponding  aliquot  parts;  hence  it  is  replaced  by  means  of 
its  sale. 

The  additional  capital  which  is  thus  replaced  belongs  to  the 
circulating  capital,  although  the  manner  of  its  expenditure  is 
irregular.  As  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  remedy  every  dam¬ 
age  to  machinery  immediately,  every  comparatively  large  factory 
employs  in  addition  to  the  regular  factory  force  special  per¬ 
sonnel-engineers,  carpenters,  mechanics,  lock-smiths,  etc.  Their 
wages  are  a  part  of  the  variable  capital  and  the  value  of  their 
labour  is  distributed  over  the  product.  On  the  other  hand  the 
expenses  for  means  of  production  are  calculated  on  the  basis  of 
the  above-mentioned  average,  according  to  which  they  form  con¬ 
tinually  a  part  of  the  value  of  the  product,  although  they  are 
actually  advanced  in  irregular  periods  and  therefore  enter  into 
the  product  or  the  fixed  capital  in  irregular  periods.  This  capi¬ 
tal,  expended  in  repairs  properly  so  called,  is  in  many  respects 
a  capital  sui  generis,  which  can  be  classed  neither  as  circulating 
nor  as  fixed  capital,  but  belongs  with  greater  justification  to 
the  former,  since  it  figures  among  the  running  expenses. 

The  manner  of  book-keeping  does  not  of  course  change  in  any 
way  the  actual  state  of  affairs  booked.  But  it  is  important  to 
note  that  customarily  many  lines  of  business  figure  the  costs 
of  repairs  together  with  the  actual  wear  and  tear  of  the  fixed 
capital  in  the  following  manner:  Let  the  advanced  fixed  cap¬ 
ital  be  £10,000  and  its  durability  15  years.  The  annual  wear 
and  tear  is  then  £666%.  But  the  depreciation  is  calculated  on 
a  durability  of  only  ten  years;  in  other  words,  £1,000  are  added 
annually  to  the  price  of  the  produced  commodities  for  wear  and 


180 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


tear  of  the  fixed  capital,  instead  of  £666%.  Thus  £333%  are 
reserved  for  repairs,  etc.  (The  figures  10  and  15  are  chosen  only 
by  way  of  illustration.)  This  amount  is  spent  on  an  average 
for  repairs,  so  that  the  fixed  capital  may  last  15  years.  Such  a 
calculation  naturally  does  not  prevent  the  fixed  capital  and  the 
additional  capital  spent  on  repairs  from  belonging  to  different 
categories.  On  the  strength  of  this  mode  of  calculation  it  was 
assumed  for  instance  that  the  lowest  cost  estimate  for  the  mainte¬ 
nance  and  replacement  of  steamships  was  15  per  cent  annually, 
the  time  of  reproduction  being  therefore  6%  years.  In  the  sixties, 
the  English  government  indemnified  the  Peninsular  and  Oriental 
Co.  at  the  annual  rate  of  16  per  cent,  corresponding  to  a  repro¬ 
duction  time  of  6V4  years.  On  railways  the  average  life  of  a  lo¬ 
comotive  is  10  years,  but  the  depreciation,  counting  in  repairs, 
is  taken  as  12%  per  cent,  which  brings  down  its  durability  to 
8  years.  In  the  case  of  passenger  and  goods  cars,  the  estimate 
is  9  per  cent,  or  a  durability  of  11%  years. 

Legislation  has  everywhere  drawn  a  distinction,  in  leases  of 
houses  and  other  objects  which  represent  fixed  capital  to  their 
owners  and  are  leased  as  such,  between  normal  depreciation,  which 
is  the  result  of  time,  the  action  of  the  elements,  and  normal  wear 
on  the  one  hand  and  on  the  other  those  occasional  repairs  which 
arc  required  from  time  to  time  for  maintenance  during  the  nor¬ 
mal  life  of  the  house  and  during  its  normal  use.  As  a  rule,  the  for¬ 
mer  are  borne  by  the  owner,  the  latter  by  the  tenant.  Repairs 
are  further  divided  into  ordinary  and  substantial  ones.  The  last- 
named  are  partly  a  renewal  of  the  fixed  capital  in  its  bodily 
form,  and  they  fall  likewise  on  the  shoulders  of  the  owner,  un¬ 
less  the  lease  explicitly  states  the  contrary.  Take  for  instance 
the  English  law:  “A  tenant  from  year  to  year,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  not  bound  to  do  more  than  keep  the  premises  wind  and  water¬ 
tight,  when  that  can  be  done  without  ‘substantial’  repairs;  and 
generally  to  do  repairs  coming  fairly  under  the  head  ‘ordinary  ’ 
Even  with  respect  to  those  parts  of  the  premises  which  are  the 
subject  of  ‘ordinary’  repairs,  regard  must  be  had  to  their  age 
and  general  state,  and  condition,  when  he  took  possession,  for 
he  is  not  bound  to  replace  old  and  worn-out  materials  with  new 
ones,  nor  to  make  good  the  inevitable  depreciation  resulting 
from  time  and  ordinary  wear  and  tear.  ”  (Holdsworth,  Law  of 
Landlord  and  Tenant,  pp.  90  and  91.) 

Entirely  different  from  the  replacement  of  wear  and  tear  and 
from  the-  work  of  maintenance  and  repair  is  insurance,  which 
relates  to  destruction  caused  by  extraordinary  phenomena  of 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


181 


nature,  fire,  flood,  etc.  This  must  be  made  good  out  of  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  and  is  a  deduction  from  it.  Or,  considered  from  the 
point  of  view  of  society  as  a  whole,  there  must  be  continuous 
over-production,  that  is,  production  on  a  larger  scale  than  is 
necessary  for  the  simple  replacement  and  reproduction  of  the 
existing  wealth,  quite  apart  from  the  increase  in  population,  so 
as  to  be  in  possession  of  the  means  of  production  required  to 
compensate  for  the  extraordinary  destruction  caused  by  accidents 
and  natural  forces. 

In  point  of  fact  only  the  smallest  part  of  the  capital  needed 
for  replacement  consists  of  the  money  reserve  fund.  The  most 
substantial  part  consists  in  the  extension  of  the  scale  of  production 
itself,  which  partly  is  actual  expansion  and  partly  belongs  to 
the  normal  volume  of  production  in  those  branches  of  industry 
which  produce  the  fixed  capital.  For  instance  a  machine  factory 
must  arrange  things  so  that  the  factories  of  its  customers  can 
annually  be  extended  and  that  a  number  of  them  will  always 
stand  in  need  of  total  or  partial  reproduction. 

On  determining  the  wear  and  tear  as  well  as  the  costs  of  re¬ 
pairs,  according  to  the  social  average,  great  disparity  necessarily 
appears,  even  in  the  case  of  capital  investments  of  equal  size, 
operating  otherwise  under  equal  conditions  and  in  the  same 
branch  of  industry.  In  practice  a  machine,  etc.,  lasts  with  one 
capitalist  longer  than  the  average  period,  while  with  another 
it  does  not  last  so  long.  With  the  one  the  costs  of  repairs  are  above, 
with  the  other  below  average,  etc.  But  the  addition  to  the  price 
of  the  commodities  resulting  from  wear  and  tear  and  from  costs 
of  repairs  is  the  same  and  is  determined  by  the  average.  The  one 
therefore  gets  more  out  of  this  additional  price  than  he  really 
added,  the  other  less.  This  circumstance  as  well  as  all  others 
which  result  in  different  gains  for  different  capitalists  in  the 
same  line  of  business  with  the  same  degree  of  exploitation  of 
labour-power  tends  to  enhance  the  difficulty  of  understanding 
the  true  nature  of  surplus-value. 

The  line  between  repairs  proper  and  replacement,  between 
costs  of  maintenance  and  costs  of  renewal,  is  rather  flexible. 
Hence  the  eternal  dispute,  for  instance  in  railroading,  whether 
certain  expenses  are  for  repairs  or  for  replacement,  whether  they 
must  be  defrayed  from  current  expenditures  or  from  the  origi¬ 
nal  stock.  A  transfer  of  expenses  for  repairs  to  capital  account 
instead  of  revenue  account  is  the  familiar  method  by  which 
railway  boards  of  directors  artificially  inflate  their  dividends. 
However,  experience  has  already  furnished  the  most  Important 


182 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


clues  for  this.  According  to  Lardner,  the  subsequent  labour  re¬ 
quired  during  the  early  life  of  a  railway  for  example  “ought 
not  to  be  denominated  repairs ,  but  should  be  considered  as  an 
essential  part  of  the  construction  of  the  railway,  and  in  the  finan¬ 
cial  accounts  should  be  debited  to  capital,  and  not  to  revenue, 
not  being  expenses  due  to  wear  and  tear,  or  to  the  legitimate 
operation  of  the  traffic,  but  to  the  original  and  inevitable  incom¬ 
pleteness  of  the  construction  of  the  line.”  (Lardner,  loc.  cit., 
p.  40.)  “The  only  sound  way  is  to  charge  each  year’s  revenue  with 
the  depreciation  necessarily  suffered  to  earn  the  revenue,  whether 
the  amount  is  actually  spent  or  not.”  (Captain  Fitzmaurice, 
“Committee  of  Inquiry  on  Caledonian  Railway,”  published  in 
Money  Market  Review,  1867.) 

The  separation  of  the  replacement  and  maintenance  of  fixed 
capital  becomes  practically  impossible  and  purposeless  in  agri¬ 
culture,  at  least  when  not  operated  by  steam.  According  to 
Kirchhof  (Handbuch  der  landwirtschajt  lichen  Betriebslehre , 
Dresden,  1852,  p.  137),  "wherever  there  is  a  complete,  though  not 
excessive,  supply  of  implements  (of  agricultural  and  other 
implements  and  farm  appliances  of  every  description)  it  is  the 
custom  to  estimate  the  annual  wear  and  tear  and  maintenance  of 
the  implements,  according  to  the  different  existing  conditions, 
at  a  general  average  of  15  to  25  per  cent  of  the  original 
stock. ” 

In  the  case  of  the  rolling  stock  of  a  railway,  repairs  and  re¬ 
placement  cannot  be  separated  at  all.  “We  maintain  our  stock 
by  number.  Whatever  number  of  engines  we  have  we  maintain 
that.  If  one  is  destroyed  by  age,  and  it  is  better  to  build  a  new 
one,  we  build  it  at  the  expense  of  revenue,  of  course,  taking 
credit  for  the  materials  of  the  old  one  as  far  as  they  go  ...  there 
is  a  great  deal  left;  there  are  the  wheels,  the  axles,  the  boilers, 
and  in  fact  a  great  deal  of  the  old  engine  is  left.”  (T.  Gooch, 
Chairman  of  Great  Western  Railway  Co.,  R.  C.  on  Railways, 
p.  858,  Nos.  17327-17329.)  "...  Repairing  means  renewing;  I 
do  not  believe  in  the  word  replacement...;  once  a  railway  com¬ 
pany  has  bought  a  vehicle  or  an  engine,  it  ought  to  be  repaired, 
and  in  that  way  admit  of  going  on  for  ever.  ”  (No.  17784.)  "...  The 
engines  are  maintained  for  ever  out  of  this  81/2  d.  We  rebuild 
our  engines.  If  you  purchase  an  engine  entirely  it  would  be  spend¬ 
ing  more  money  than  is  necessary  ...  yet  there  is  always  a  pair 
of  wheels  or  an  axle  or  some  portion  of  the  engine  which  comes 
in,  and  hence  it  cheapens  the  cost  of  producing  a  practically 
new  engine.  ”  (No.  17790.)  “I  am  at  this  moment  turning  out  a 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


183 


new  engine  every  week,  or  practically  a  new  engine,  for  it  has 
a  new  boiler,  cylinder,  or  framing.”  (No.  17823.  Archibald 
Sturrock,  Locomotive  Superinfendent  of  Great  Northern  Rail¬ 
way,  in  R.  C.,  1867.) 

The  same  with  coaches:  “In  the  course  of  time  the  stock  of 
engines  and  vehicles  is  continually  repaired.  New  wheels  are 
put  on  at  one  time,  and  a  new  body  at  another.  The  different 
moving  parts  most  subject  to  wear  are  gradually  renewed;  and 
the  engines  and  vehicles  may  be  conceived  even  to  be  subject 
to  such  a  succession  of  repairs,  that  in  many  of  them  not  a  ves¬ 
tige  of  the  original  materials  remains....  Even  in  this  case,  how¬ 
ever,  the  old  materials  of  coaches  or  engines  are  more  or  less 
worked  up  into  other  vehicles  or  engines,  and  never  totally 
disappear  from  the  road.  The  movable  capital  therefore  may  be 
considered  to  be  in  a  state  of  continual  reproduction;  and  that 
which,  in  the  case  of  the  permanent  way,  must  take  place  alto¬ 
gether  at  a  future  epoch,  when  the  entire  road  will  have  to  be 
relaid,  takes  place  in  the  rolling  stock  gradually  from  year  to 
year.  Its  existence  is  perennial,  and  it  is  in  a  constant  state  of 
rejuvenescence.”  (Lardner,  op.  cit .,  pp.  115-16.) 

This  process,  which  Lardner  here  describes  relative  to  a  rail¬ 
way,  does  not  fit  the  case  of  an  individual  factory,  but  may  well 
serve  as  an  .illustration  of  continuous,  partial  reproduction  of 
fixed  capital  intermingled  with  repairs  within  an  entire  branch 
of  industry  or  even  within  the  aggregate  production  considered 
on  a  social  scale. 

Here  is  proof  of  the  lengths  to  which  adroit  boards  of  direc¬ 
tors  may  go  in  manipulating  the  terms  repairs  and  replacement 
for  the  purpose  of  extracting  dividends.  According  to  the  above- 
quoted  paper  read  by  R.  P.  Williams,  various  English  railway 
companies  wrote  off  the  following  sums  from  the  revenue  account, 
as  averages  over  a  number  of  years,  for  repairs  and  maintenance 
of  the  permanent  way  and  buildings  (per  English  mile  of  track 
annually). 


London  &  North  Western . £370 

Midland  . £225 

London  &  South  Western  . £257 

Great  Northern . £360 

Lancashire  &  Yorkshire . £377 

South  Eastern . £263 

Brighton . £266 

Manchester  &  Sheffield  . £200 


184 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


These  differences  arise  only  to  a  very  minor  degree  from  dif¬ 
ferences  in  the  actual  expenses;  they  are  due  almost  exclusively 
to  different  methods  of  calculation,  according  to  whether  items 
of  expense  are  debited  to  the  capital  or  the  revenue  account. 
Williams  says  in  so  many  words  that  a  lesser  charge  is  booked 
because  this  is  necessary  for  a  good  dividend,  and  a  higher  charge 
is  booked  because  there  is  a  greater  revenue  which  can  bear  it. 

In  certain  cases  the  wear  and  tear,  and  therefore  its  replace¬ 
ment,  is  practically  infinitesimal  so  that  nothing  but  costs  of 
repairs  have  to  be  charged.  Lardner’s  statements  below  relative 
to  works  of  art  in  railroading  apply  in  general  to  all  such  du¬ 
rable  structures  as  docks,  canals,  iron  and  stone  bridges,  etc. 
“That  wear  and  tear  which,  being  due  to  the  slow  operation  of 
time  acting  upon  the  more  solid  structures,  produces  an  effect 
altogether  insensible  when  observed  through  short  periods,  but 
which,  after  a  long  interval  of  time,  such,  for  example,  as  cen¬ 
turies,  must  necessitate  the  reconstruction  of  some  or  all  even  of 
the  most  solid  structures.  These  changes  may  not  unaptly  be 
assimilated  to  the  periodical  and  secular  inequalities  which 
take  place  in  the  movements  of  the  great  bodies  of  the  universe. 
The  operation  of  time  upon  the  more  massive  worlcs  of  art  upon 
the  railway,  such  as  the  bridges,  tunnels,  viaducts,  etc.,  afford 
examples  of  what  may  be  called  the  secular  wear  and  tear.  The 
more  rapid  and  visible  deterioration,  which  is  made  good  by 
repairs  or  reconstruction  effected  at  shorter  intervals,  is  analo¬ 
gous  to  the  periodic  inequalities.  In  the  annual  repairs  is  includ¬ 
ed  the  casual  damage  which  the  exterior  of  the  more  solid  and 
durable  works  may  from  time  to  time  sustain;  but,  independently 
of  these  repairs,  age  produces  its  effects  even  on  these  structures, 
and  an  epoch  must  arrive,  however  remote  it  be,  at  which  they 
would  be  reduced  to  a  state  which  will  necessitate  their  recon¬ 
struction.  For  financial  and  economic  purposes  such  an  epoch 
is  perhaps  too  remote  to  render  it  necessary  to  bring  it  into  prac¬ 
tical  calculation,  and  therefore  it  need  here  only  be  noticed 
in  passing.”  (Lardner,  loc.  cit .,  pp.  38,  39.) 

This  applies  to  all  similar  structures  of  secular  duration,  in 
which  cases  therefore  the  capital  advanced  need  not  be  gradually 
replaced  commensurate  with  their  wear  and  tear,  but  only  the 
annual  average  costs  of  maintenance  and  repair  need  be  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  prices  of  the  product. 

Although,  as  we  have  seen,  a  greater  part  of  the  money  re¬ 
turning  for  the  replacement  of  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  fixed 
capital  is  annually,  or  even  in  shorter  intervals,  reconverted  into 


FIXED  CAPITAL  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


185 


its  bodily  form,  nevertheless  every  single  capitalist  requires  a 
sinking  fund  for  that  part  of  his  fixed  capital  which  falls  due  for 
reproduction  only  after  a  lapse  of  years  but  must  then  be 
entirely  replaced.  A  considerable  component  part  of  the  fixed 
capital  precludes  gradual  reproduction  because  of  its  peculiar 
properties.  Besides,  in  cases  where  the  reproduction  takes  place 
piecemeal  in  such  a  way  that  at  short  intervals  new  stock  is  added 
to  the  depreciated  old  stock,  a  previous  accumulation  of  money  of 
a  greater  or  smaller  amount,  depending  on  the  specific  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  branch  of  industry,  is  necessary  before  the  replace¬ 
ment  can  be  effected.  Not  just  any  sum  of  money  will  suffice 
for  this  purpose;  a  definite  amount  is  needed. 

If  we  study  this  question  on  the  assumption  of  simple  circu¬ 
lation  of  money,  without  regard  to  the  credit  system,  of  which 
we  shall  treat  later,*  then  the  mechanism  of  this  movement  is 
as  follows:  It  was  shown  (Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill,  3a)**  that  the  pro¬ 
portion  in  which  the  aggregate  mass  of  money  is  distributed  over 
a  hoard  and  means  of  circulation  varies  steadily,  if  one  part 
of  the  money  available  in  society  constantly  lies  fallow  as  a 
hoard,  while  another  performs  the  functions  of  a  medium  of 
circulation  or  of  an  immediate  reserve  fund  of  the  directly  cir¬ 
culating  money.  Now  in  our  case  money  that  must  be  accumulat¬ 
ed  as  a  hoard  in  the  hands  of  a  relatively  big  capitalist  in  rather 
large  amounts  is  thrown  all  at  once  into  circulation  on  the 
purchase  of  the  fixed  capital.  It  then  divides  again  in  society  into 
medium  of  circulation  and  hoard.  By  means  of  the  sinking  fund, 
in  which  the  value  of  the  fixed  capital  flows  back  to  its  starting- 
point  in  proportion  to  its  wear  and  tear,  a  part  of  the  circulat¬ 
ing  money  again  forms  a  hoard,  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period, 
in  the  hands  of  the  same  capitalist  whose  hoard  had,  upon  the 
purchase  of  the  fixed  capital,  been  transformed  into  a  medium 
of  circulation  and  passed  away  from  him.  It  is  a  continually 
changing  distribution  of  the  hoard  which  exists  in  society  and 
alternately  functions  as  a  medium  of  circulation  and  then  is 
separated  again,  as  a  hoard,  from  the  mass  of  the  circulating 
money.  With  the  development  of  the  credit-system,  which  neces¬ 
sarily  runs  parallel  with  the  development  of  modern  industry 
and  capitalist  production,  this  money  no  longer  serves  as  a  hoard 
but  as  capital;  however  not  in  the  hands  of  its  qwner  but  of  other 
capitalists  at  whose  disposal  it  has  been  placed. 

*  The  capitalist  credit  system  is  treated  in  parts  IV  and  V  of  the  third 
volume  of  Capital  — Ed. 

**  English  edition:  Ch.  Ill,  3a  —Ed. 


CHAPTER  IX 

THE  AGGREGATE  TURNOVER  OF  ADVANCED  CAPITAL. 

CYCLES  OF  TURNOVER 

W.e  have  seen  that  the  fixed  and  circulating  component  parts  of 
productive  capital  are  turned  over  in  various  ways  and  at  various 
periods,  also  that  the  different  constituents  of  the  fixed  capital 
of  a  business  have  different  periods  of  turnover,  depending  on 
their  different  durabilities  and  therefore  on  their  different  times 
of  reproduction.  (On  the  real  or  apparent  difference  in  the  turn¬ 
over  of  different  constituents  of  circulating  capital  in  the  same 
business,  see  the  close  of  this  chapter,  under  6.) 

1)  The  aggregate  turnover  of  an  advanced  capital  is  the  aver¬ 
age  turnover  of  its  various  constituent  parts;  the  mode  of  its 
calculation  is  given  later.  Inasmuch  as  it  is  merely  a  question 
of  different  periods  of  time,  nothing  is  easier  than  to  compute 
their  average.  But 

2)  We  have  here  not  alone  quantitative  hut  also  qualitative 
difference. 

The  circulating  capital  entering  into  the  process  of  production 
transfers  its  entire  value  to  the  product  and  must  therefore  be 
continually  replaced  in  kind  by  the  sale  of  the  product,  if  the 
process  of  production  is  to  proceed  without  interruption.  The 
fixed  capital  entering  into  the  process  of  production  transfers 
only  a  part  of  its  value  (the  wear  and  tear)  to  the  product  and 
despite  this  wear  and  tear  continues  functioning  in  the  process 
of  production.  Therefore  it  need  not  be  replaced  in  kind  until 
the  lapse  of  intervals  of  various  duration,  at  any  rate  not  as 
frequently  as  the  circulating  capital.  This  necessity  of  replace¬ 
ment,  the  reproduction  term,  is  not  only  quantitatively  different 
for  the  various  constituent  parts  of  fixed  capital,  but,  as  we  have 
seen,  a  part  of  the  perennial  fixed  capital,  that  which  lasts  long¬ 
er,  may  be  replaced  annually  or  at  shorter  intervals  and  added 


THE  AGGREGATE  TURNOVER  OF  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


187 


in  kind  to  the  old  Gxed  capital.  In  the  case  of  fixed  capital  of 
different  properties  the  replacement  can  take  place  only  all  at 
once  at  the  end  of  its  period  of  durability. 

It  is  therefore  necessary  to  reduce  the  specific  turnovers  of 
the  various  parts  of  fixed  capital  to  a  homogeneous  form  of  turn¬ 
over,  so  that  they  will  remain  different  only  quantitatively, 
namely,  according  to  duration  of  turnover. 

This  qualitative  identity  does  not  come  about  if  we  take  as 
our  starting-point  P  ...  P,  the  form  of  the  continuous  process  of 
production.  For  definite  elements  of  P  must  be  constantly  re¬ 
placed  in  kind  while  others  need  not.  However  the  form  M  ...  M 
undoubtedly  yields  this  identity  of  turnover.  Take  for  instance 
a  machine  worth  £10,000,  which  lasts  ten  years  of  which  one- 
tenth,  or  £1,000,  is  annually  reconverted  into  money.  These 
£1,000  have  been  converted  in  the  course  of  one  year  from  money- 
capital  into  productive  capital  and  commodity-capital,  and  then 
reconverted  from  this  into  money-capital.  They  have  returned 
to  their  original  f«rm,  the  money-form,  just  like  the  circulat¬ 
ing  capital,  if  we  study  the  latter  in  this  form,  and  it  is  imma¬ 
terial  here  whether  this  money-capital  of  £1,000  is  once  more 
converted  at  the  end  of  the  year  into  the  bodily  form  of  a  machine 
or  not.  In  calculating  the  aggregate  turnover  of  the  advanced 
productive  capital  we  therefore  fix  all  its  elements  in  the  money- 
form,  so  that  the  return  to  that  form  concludes  the  turnover. 
We  assume  that  value  is  always  advanced  in  money,  even  in 
the  continuous  process  of  production,  where  this  money-form  of 
value  is  only  that  of  money  of  account.  Thus  we  can  compute  the 
average. 

3)  It  follows  that  even  if  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  ad¬ 
vanced  productive  capital  consists  of  fixed  capital  whose  period  of 
reproduction,  hence  also  of  turnover,  comprises  a  cycle  of  many 
years,  the  capital-value  turned  over  during  the  year  may,  on 
account  of  the  repeated  turnovers  of  the  circulating  capital 
within  the  same  year,  be  larger  than  the  aggregate  value  of  the 
advanced  capital. 

Suppose  the  fixed  capital  is  £80,000  and  its  period  of  repro¬ 
duction  10  years,  so  that  £8,000  of  it  annually  return  to  their 
money-form,  or  it  completes  one-tenth  of  its  turnover.  Suppose 
further  the  circulating  capital  is  £20,000,  and  its  turnover  is 
completed  five  times  per  year.  The  total  capital  would  then 
be  £100,000.  The  turned-over  fixed  capital  is  £8,000,  the  turned 
over  circulating  capital  five  times  £20,000,  or  £100,000.  Then 
the  capital  turned  over  during  one  year  is  £108,000,  or  £8,000 


188 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


more  than  the  advanced  capital.  1  -t-2/2&  of  the  capital  have  been 
turned  over. 

4)  Therefore  the  turnover  time  of  the  value  of  the  advanced 
capital  differs  from  its  actual  time  of  reproduction  or  from  the 
actual  time  of  turnover  of  its  component  parts.  Take  for  instance 
a  capital  of  £4,000  and  let  it  turn  over,  say,  Eve  times  a  year. 
The  turned-over  capital  is  then  five  times  £4,000,  or  £20,000.  But 
what  returns  at  the  end  of  each  turnover  to  be  advanced  anew 
is  the  originally  advanced  capital  of  £4,000.  Its  magnitude 
is  not  changed  by  the  number  of  turnover  periods,  during  which 
it  performs  anew  its  functions  as  capital.  (Apart  from  surplus- 
value.) 

In  the  illustration  under  No.  3,  then,  the  sums  assumedly 
returned  into  the  hands  of  the  capitalist  at  the  end  of  one  year 
are  (a)  a  sum  of  values  amounting  to  £20,000  which  he  invests 
again  in  the  circulating  constituents  of  the  capital,  and  (b)  a 
sum  of  £8,000  which  has  been  set  free  by  wear  and  tear  from 
the  value  of  the  advanced  fixed  capital;  simultaneously  this  same 
fixed  capital  remains  in  the  process  of  production,  but  with 
the  reduced  value  of  £72,000  instead  of  £80,000.  The  process 
of  production  therefore  would  have  to  be  continued  for  nine 
years  more,  before  the  advanced  fixed  capital  outlived  its  term 
and  ceased  to  function  as  a  creator  of  products  and  values,  so 
that  it  would  have  to  be  replaced.  The  advanced  capital-value, 
then,  has  to  pass  through  a  cycle  of  turnovers,  in  the  present 
case  a  cycle  of  ten  annual  ones,  and  this  cycle  is  determined  by 
the  life,  hence  the  reproduction  or  turnover  time  of  the  applied 
fixed  capital. 


As  the  magnitude  of  the  value  and  the  durability  of  the  ap¬ 
plied  fixed  capital  develop  with  the  development  of  the  capital¬ 
ist  mode  of  production,  the  lifetime  of  industry  and  of  industrial 
capital  lengthens  in  each  particular  field  of  investment  to  a 
period  of  many  years,  say  of  ten  years  on  an  average.  Whereas 
the  development  of  fixed  capital  extends  the  length  of  this  life 
on  the  one  hand  it  is  shortened  on  the  other  by  the  continuous 
revolution  in  the  means  of  production,  which  likewise  incessantly 
gains  momentum  with  the  development  of  the  capitalist  mode  of 
production.  This  involves  a  change  in  the  means  of  production 
and  the  necessity  of  their  constant  replacement,  on  account  of 
moral  depreciation,  long  before  they  expire  physically.  One 
may  assume  that  in  the  essential  branches  of  modern  industry 


THE  AGGREGATE  TURNOVER  OF  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


189 


this  life-cycle  now  averages  ten  years.  However  we  are  not  con¬ 
cerned  here  with  the  exact  figure.  This  much  is  evident:  the  cycle 
of  interconnected  turnovers  embracing  a  number  of  years,  in 
which  capital  is  held  fast  by  its  fixed  constituent  part,  fur¬ 
nishes  a  material  basis  for  the  periodic  crises.  During  this  cycle 
business  undergoes  successive  periods  of  depression,  medium 
activity,  pr^ipitancy,  crisis.  True,  periods  in  which  capital 
is  invested  differ  greatly  and  far  from  coincide  in  time.  But 
a  crisis  always  forms  the  starting-point  of  large  new  invest¬ 
ments.  Therefore,  from  the  point  of  view  of  society  as  a  whole, 
more  or  less,  a  new  material  basis  for  the  next  turnover  cycle. ,2a 

5)  On  the  way  to  calculate  the  turnovers,  an  American  econ¬ 
omist  states:  “In  some  trades  the  whole  capital  embarked  is 
turned,  or  circulated  several  times  within  the  year.  In  others 
a  part  is  turned  oftener  than  once  a  year,  another  part  less  often. 
It  is  the  average  period  which  his  entire  capital  takes  in  pass¬ 
ing  through  his  hands,  or  making  one  revolution,  from  which 
a  capitalist  must  calculate  his  profits.  Suppose  for  example 
that  a  person  engaged  in  a  particular  business  has  one  half  of 
his  capital  invested  in  buildings  and  machinery;  so  as  to  be 
turned  only  once  in  ten  years;  that  one-fourth  more,  the  cost  of 
his  tools,  etc.,  is  turned  once  in  two  years;  and  the  remaining 
fourth,  employed  in  paying  wages  and  purchasing  material,  is 
turned  twice  in  one  year.  Say  that  his  entire  capital  is  $50,000. 
Then  his  annual  expenditure  will  be, 

$25,000  :  10=$  2,500 
12,500:  2=  6,250 
12,500  X  2=  25,000 

$33,750 

...  the  mean  term  in  which  his  capital  is  turned  being  about 
sixteen  months*....  Take  another  case,  ...  say  that  one-fourth 


“Urban  proauction  is  bound  to  a  cycle  of  days,  rural  production 
on  the  conlrary  to  one  of  years.”  (Adam  G.  Muller,  Die  Elemente  der  Staats- 
kunst,  Berlin,  1809,  Ill,  p.  178.)  This  is  the  naive  conception  of  industry 
and  agriculture  held  by  the  romantic  school. 

*  In  the  manuscript  Marx  points  out  the  fallacy  of  such  a  method  of 
calculating  the  period  of  the  turnover  of  capital.  The  mean  term  of  turnover 
(16  months)  given  in  the  Quotation  was  calculated  with  account  taken  of 
a  profit  of  7.5  per  cent  on  tne  aggregate  capital  of  $50,000.  Profit  discount¬ 
ing,  the  turnover  of  capital  is  equal  to  18  months. — Ed. 


190 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


of  the  entire  capital  circulates  in  ten  years,  one-fourth  in  one 
year,  and  one  half  twice  in  the  year.  Then  the  annual  expend¬ 
iture  will  be, 

$12,500  :  10= $1 ,250 
12,500  =12,500 

25,000  X  2=  50,000  % 

Turned  over  in  1  year  $63,750 

(Scrope,  Pol.  Econ.,  edit.  Alonzo  Potter,  New  York,  1841, 
pp.  142,  143.)* 

6)  Real  and  apparent  differences  in  the  turnover  of  the  vari¬ 
ous  parts  of  capital. 

The  same  Scrope  says  in  the  same  passage:  “The  capital  laid 
out  by  a  manufacturer,  farmer,  or  tradesman  in  the  payment  of 
his  labourer’s  wages,  circulates  most  rapidly,  being  turned  per¬ 
haps  once  a  week  (if  his  men  are  paid  weekly),  by  the  weekly 
receipts  on  his  bills  or  sales.  That  invested  in  his  materials  and 
stock  in  hand  circulates  less  quickly,  being  turned  perhaps  twice, 
perhaps  four  times  in  the  year,  according  to  the  time  consumed 
between  his  purchases  of  the  one  and  sales  of  the  other,  suppos¬ 
ing  him  to  buy  and  sell  on  equal  credits.  The  capital  invested 
in  his  implements  and  machinery  circulates  still  more  slowly, 
being  turned,  that  is,  consumed  and  renewed,  on  the  average, 
perhaps  but  once  in  five  or  ten  years;  though  there  are  many 
tools  that  are  worn  out  in  one  set  of  operations.  The  capital 
which  is  embarked  in  buildings,  as  mills,  shops,  warehouses, 
barns,  in  roads,  irrigation,  etc.,  may  appear  scarcely  to  circulate 
at  all.  But,  in  truth,  these  things  are,  to  the  full,  as  much  as 
those  we  have  enumerated,  consumed  in  contributing  to  produc¬ 
tion,  and  must  be  reproduced  in  order  to  enable  the  producer  to 
continue  his  operations;  with  this  only  difference,  that  they  are 
consumed  and  reproduced  by  slower  degrees  than  the  rest  ...  and 
the  capital  invested  in  them  may  be  turned  perhaps  every  twenty 
or  fifty  years.”  (Pp.  141-42.1 

Scrope  confuses  here  the  difference  in  the  flow  of  certain  parts 
of  the  circulating  capital,  brought  about  for  the  individual  capi- 


•  The  book  referred  to  is  A.  Potter's  Political  Economy ,  Its  Objects, 
Uses,  and  Principles,  New  York,  1840.  According  to  the  author’s  “Adver¬ 
tisement,"  the  second  part  of  the  book  is  substantially  a  reprint  (with  many 
alterations  made  by  A.  Potter)  of  G.  J.  P.  Scrope's  The  Principles  oj  Polit¬ 
ical  Economy,  London,  1833. — Ed. 


THE  AGGREGATE  TURNOVER  OF  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


191 


talist  by  terms  of  payment  and  conditions  of  credit,  with  the 
difference  in  the  turnovers  due  to  the  nature  of  capital.  He  says 
that  wages  must  be  paid  weekly  out  of  the  weekly  receipts  from 
paid  sales  or  bills.  It  must  be  noted  here  in  the  Erst  place  that 
certain  differences  occur  relative  to  wages  themselves,  depend¬ 
ing  on  the  length  of  the  term  of  payment,  that  is,  the  length  of 
time  for  which  the  labourer  must  give  credit  to  the  capitalist, 
whether  wages  are  payable  every  week,  month,  three  months, 
six  months,  etc.  In  this  case,  the  law  expounded  before,  holds 
good,  to  the  effect  that  “the  quantity  of  the  means  of  payment 
required  for  all  periodical  payments”  (hence  of  the  money-capital 
to  be  advanced  at  one  time)  “is  in  inverse*  proportion  to  the 
length  of  their  periods.  ”  (Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill,  3b,  Seite  124.)** 
In  the  second  place,  it  is  not  only  the  new  value  added  in  the 
process  of  production  by  the  week’s  labour  which  enters  com¬ 
pletely  into  the  weekly  product,  but  also  the  value  of  the  raw 
and  auxiliary  materials  consumed  by  the  weekly  product.  This 
value  circulates  with  the  product  containing  it.  It  assumes  the 
form  of  money  through  the  sale  of  the  product  and  must  be  recon¬ 
verted  into  the  same  elements  of  production.  This  applies  as  much 
to  the  labour-power  as  to  the  raw  and  auxiliary  materials.  But 
we  have  already  seen  (Chapter  VI,  II,  1)  that  continuity  of  pro¬ 
duction  requires  a  supply  of  means  of  production  different  for 
different  branches  of  industry,  and  different  within  one  and  the 
same  branch  of  business  for  different  component  parts  of  this  ele¬ 
ment  of  the  circulating  capital,  for  instance,  for  coal  and  cotton. 
Hence,  although  these  materials  must  be  continually  replaced  in 
kind,  they  need  not  always  be  bought  anew.  The  frequency  of 
purchases  depends  on  the  size  of  the  available  stock,  on  the 
time  it  takes  to  exhaust  it.  In  the  case  of  labour-power  there 
is  no  such  storing  of  a  supply.  The  reconversion  into  money  of 
the  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  labour-power  goes  hand  in  hand 
with  that  of  the  capital  invested  in  raw  and  auxiliary  materials. 
But  the  reconversion  of  the  money,  on  the  one  hand  into  labour- 
power,  on  the  other  into  raw  materials,  proceeds  separately  on 
account  of  the  special  terms  of  purchase  and  payment  of  these 
two  constituents,  one  of  them  being  bought  as  a  productive 
supply  for  long  periods,  the  other,  labour-power,  for  shorter 
periods,  for  instance  a  week.  On  the  other  hand  the  capitalist 


*  This  is  evidently  a  slip  of  the  pen,  the  proportion  being  direct  and  not 
inverse  —  Ed 

**  English  edition:  Ch.  Ill,  3b,  p.  141.— Ed. 


192 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


must  keep  a  stock  of  finished  commodities  besides  a  stock  of 
materials  for  production.  Let  us  leave  sales  difficulties  aside. 
A  certain  quantity  of  goods  must  be  produced,  say,  on  order. 
While  the  last  portion  of  this  lot  is  being  produced,  the  finished 
products  are  waiting  in  the  warehouse  until  the  order  can  be 
completely  filled.  Other  differences  in  the  turnover  of  circulat¬ 
ing  capital  arise  whenever  some  of  its  separate  elements  must 
stay  in  some  preliminary  stage  of  the  process  of  production  (dry¬ 
ing  of  wood,  etc.)  longer  than  others. 

The  credit  system,  to  which  Scrope  here  refers,  as  well  as 
commercial  capital,  modifies  the  turnover  for  the  individual  cap¬ 
italist.  On  a  social  scale  it  modifies  the  turnover  only  in  so  far 
as  it  does  not  accelerate  merely  production  but  also  consumption. 


CHAPTER  X 

THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL. 

THE  PHYSIOCRATS  AND  ADAM  SMITH 

In  Quesnay  the  distinction  between  fixed  and  circulating 
capital  presents  itself  as  avances  primitives  and  avarices  annuelles. 
He  correctly  represents  this  distinction  as  one  existing  with¬ 
in  productive  capital,  capital  directly  engaged  in  the  process 
of  production.  As  he  regards  the  capital  employed  in  agriculture, 
the  capital  of  the  farmer,  as  the  only  really  productive  capital, 
he  draws  these  distinctions  only  for  the  capital  of  the  farmer. 
This  also  accounts  for  the  annual  period  of  turnover  of  one  part 
of  the  capital,  and  the  more  than  annual  (decennial)  period  of 
the  other  part.  In  the  course  of  the  development  the  physiocrats 
incidentally  applied  these  distinctions  also  to  other  kinds  of 
capital  and  to  industrial  capital  in  general.  The  distinction 
between  annual  advances  and  others  of  longer  duration  has  re¬ 
tained  such  importance  for  society  that  many  economists,  even 
after  Adam  Smith,  return  to  this  definition. 

The  difference  between  these  two  kinds  of  advances  does  not 
arise  until  advanced  money  has  been  transformed  into  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  productive  capital.  It  is  a  difference  that  exists  solely 
within  productive  capital.  It  therefore  never  occurs  to  Quesnay 
to  classify  money  either  among  the  original  or  the  annual  ad¬ 
vances.  As  advances  for  production,  i.e.,  as  productive  capital, 
both  of  them  stand  opposed  to  money  as  well  as  the  commodities 
existing  in  the  market.  Furthermore  the  difference  between  these 
two  elements  of  productive  capital  is  correctly  reduced  in  Ques¬ 
nay  to  the  different  manner  in  which  they  enter  into  the  value 
of  the  finished  product,  hence  to  the  different  manner  in  which 
their  values  are  circulated  together  with  those  of  the  products, 
and  hence  to  the  different  manner  of  their  replacement  or  their 


7—1752 


194 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


reproduction,  the  value  of  the  one  being  wholly  replaced  an¬ 
nually,  that  of  the  other  partly  and  at  longer  intervals. 43 

The  only  progress  made  by  Adam  Smith  is  the  generalisation 
of  the  categories.  With  him  it  no  longer  applies  to  one  special 
form  of  capital,  the  farmer’s  capital,  but  to  every  form  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital.  Hence  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the 
distinction  derived  from  agriculture  between  an  annual  turnover 
and  one  of  two  or  more  years’  duration  is  superseded  by  the 
general  distinction  into  different  periods  of  turnover,  one  turn¬ 
over  of  the  fixed  capital  always  comprising  more  than  one 
turnover  of  the  circulating  capital,  regardless  of  the  periods  of 
turnover  of  the  circulating  capital,  whether  they  be  afinual, 
more  than  annual,  or  less  than  annual.  Thus  in  Adam  Smith  the 
avarices  annuelles  transform  themselves  into  circulating  capital, 
and  the  avarices  primitives  into  fixed  capital.  But  his  progress  is 
confined  to  this  generalisation  of  the  categories.  His  implemen¬ 
tation  is  far  inferior  to  that  of  Quesnay. 

The  crudely  empirical  manner  in  which  Smith  broaches  the 
investigation  engenders  at  the  very  outset  a  lack  of  clarity: 
“There  are  two  different  ways  in  which  a  capital  may  be  employed 
so  as  to  yield  a  revenue  or  profit  to  its  employer.”  (Wealth  of 
Nations ,  Book  II,  Chap.  I,  p.  189,  Aberdeen  edition,  1848.*) 

The  ways  in  which  value  may  be  invested  so  as  to  perform 
the  functions  of  capital,  to  yield  surplus-value  to  its  owner,  are 
as  different  and  varied  as  the  spheres  of  investment  of  capital. 


**  Cf.  Quesnay,  Analyse  du  Tableau  Economique  ( Physiocrates ,  ed.  Daire, 
1.  partie,  Paris,  1846).  There  we  read,  for  instance:  “The  annual  advances 
consist  of  the  expenses  incurred  annually  for  the  labour  of  cultivation:  these 
advances  must  be  distinguished  from  the  original  advances,  which  form 
the  fund  for  the  establishment  of  the  farming  enterprise.”  (P.  59.)  In  the 
works  of  the  later  physiocrats  these  advances  are  sometimes  termed  directly 
capital:  Capital  ou  avances  Dupont  de  Nemours,  Maximes  du  Docteur  Ques¬ 
nay,  ou  Resume  de  ses  Principes  d' Economie  Sociale  (Daire,  I,  p.  391); 
furthermore  Le  Trosne  writes:  “As  a  result  of  the  greater  or  smaller  durability 
of  the  works  of  human  labour,  a  nation  possesses  a  substantial  fund  of 
wealth  independent  of  its  annual  reproduction,  this  fund  forming  a  capital — 
accumulated  over  a  long  period  and  originally  paid  with  products — which 
is  continually  preserved  and  augmented.”  (Daire,  II,  pp.  928-29  )  Turgot 
employs  the  term  capital  more  regularly  for  avances,  and  identifies  the 
avances  of  the  manufacturers  still  more  with  those  of  the  farmers.  (Turgot, 
Riflexions  sur  la  Formation  et  la  Distribution  des  Rickesses,  1766.) 

*  Wherever  Marx  did  not  give  a  page  reference  to  quotations  from  Smith’s 
work,  editorial  page  references  are  given  in  square  brackets  to  the  London 
1843  edition  of  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Na¬ 
tions  A  new  edition  in  four  volumes.  This  and  all  the  following  quotations 
from  Smith  have  been  checked  with  this  edition. — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


195 


It  is  a  question  of  the  different  branches  of  production  in  which 
capital  may  be  invested.  If  put  in  this  way,  the  question  implies 
still  more.  It  includes  the  question  of  the  way  in  which  value, 
even  if  it  is  not  invested  as  productive  capital,  can  function 
as  capital  for  its  owner,  for  instance  as  interest-bearing  capi¬ 
tal,  merchants’  capital,  etc.  At  this  point  we  are  already  miles 
away  from  the  real  subject  of  the  analysis,  viz.,  the  question  of 
how  the  division  of  productive  capital  into  its  different  elements, 
apart  from  their  different  spheres  of  investment,  affects  their 
turnover. 

Adam  Smith  immediately  continues:  “First,  it  may  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  raising,  manufacturing,  or  purchasing  goods,  and  selling 
them  again  with  a  profit.”  [Vol.  II,  p.  254.]  He  does  not  tell 
us  anything  else  here  than  that  capital  may  be  employed  in  agri¬ 
culture,  manufacture,  and  commerce.  He  speaks  therefore  only 
of  the  different  spheres  of  investment  of  capital,  including  such 
in  which,  as  in  commerce,  capital  is  not  directly  embodied  in 
the  process  of  production,  hence  does  not  function  as  productive 
capital.  In  so  doing  he  abandons  the  foundation  on  which  the 
physiocrats  base  the  distinctions  within  productive  capital  and 
their  effect  on  the  turnover.  More.  He  uses  merchants’  capital 
as  an  illustration  in  a  problem  which  concerns  exclusively  dif¬ 
ferences  within  the  productive  capital  in  the  product-  and  value- 
creating  process,  which  in  turn  cause  differences  in  its  turnover 
and  reproduction. 

He  continues:  “The  capital  employed  in  this  manner  yields 
no  revenue  or  profit  to  its  employer,  while  it  9ither  remains  in 
his  possession  or  continues  in  the  same  shape.  ”  [Vol.  II,  p.  254.  ] 
“The  capital  employed  in  this  manner!  ”  But  Smith  speaks  of 
capital  invested  in  agriculture,  in  industry,  and  he  tells  us  later 
that  a  capital  so  employed  divides  into  fixed  and  circulating 
capital!  Hence  investment  of  capital  in  this  manner  cannot  make 
fixed  or  circulating  capital  of  it. 

Or  does  he  mean  to  say  that  capital  employed  in  order  to  pro¬ 
duce  goods  and  to  sell  these  at  a  profit  must  be  sold  after  its 
transformation  into  goods  and  by  means  of  the  sale  must  in 
the  first  place  pdss  from  the  possession  of  the  seller  into  that  of 
the  buyer,  and  in  the  second  place  change  from  its  bodily  form, 
goods,  into  its  money-form,  so  that  it  is  of  no  use  to  its  owner 
so  long  as  it  either  remains  in  his  possession  or  continues  in  the 
same  shape?  In  that  case,  the  whole  thing  amounts  to  this:  The 
capital-value  that  formerly  functioned  in  the  form  of  productive 
capital,  in  a  form  peculiar  to  the  process  of  production,  now 


196 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


functions  as  commodity-capital  and  money-capital,  in  forms 
peculiar  to  the  process  of  circulation,  where  it  is  no  longer  either 
fixed  or  circulating  capital.  And  this  applies  equally  to  those 
elements  of  value  which  are  added  by  raw  and  auxiliary  mate¬ 
rial,  i.e.,  by  circulating  capital,  and  to  those  which  are  added 
by  the  wear  and  tear  of  instruments  of  labour  hence  by  fixed 
capital.  We  do  not  get  any  nearer  to  the  difference  between  fixed 
and  circulating  capital  in  this  way. 

Further:  “The  goods  of  the  merchant  yield  him  no  revenue  or 
profit  till  he  sells  them  for  money,  and  the  money  yields  him 
as  little  till  it  is  again  exchanged  for  goods.  His  capital  is  con-> 
tinually  going  from  him  in  one  shape,  and  returning  to  him  in 
another,  and  it  is  only  by  means  of  such  circulation,  or  succes¬ 
sive  exchanges,  that  it  can  yield  him  any  profit.  Such  capitals 
therefore  may  very  properly  be  called  circulating  capitals." 
[Vol.  II,  p.  254.] 

What  Adam  Smith  here  defines  as  circulating  capital  is  what 
I  want  to  call  capital  of  circulation ,  capital  in  a  form  pertinent  to 
the  process  of  circulation,  to  a  change  of  form  by  means  of  ex¬ 
change  (a  change  of  substance  and  change  of  hands),  hence  com¬ 
modity-capital  and  money-capital,  as  distinguished  from  its 
form  pertinent  to  the  process  of  production,  that  of  productive 
capital.  These  are  not  different  kinds  into  which  the  industrial 
capitalist  divides  his  capital,  but  different  forms  over  and  over 
again  assumed  and  stripped  off  successively  by  the  same  advanced 
capital-value  during  its  curriculum  vitae.  Adam  Smith  lumps 
this  together — and  this  is  a  big  step  back  compared  to  the  phys¬ 
iocrats — with  the  distinctions  in  form  which  arise  in  the  sphere 
of  circulation  of  capital-value,  in  its  circular  course  through  its 
successive  forms,  while  the  capital-value  exists  in  the  form  of 
productive  capital;  and  they  arise  because  of  the  different  ways  in 
which  the  different  elements  of  productive  capital  take  part  in 
the  formation  of  values  and  transfer  their  value  to  the  product. 
We  shall  see  below  the  consequences  of  this  basic  confusion 
of  productive  capital  and  capital  in  the  sphere  of  circulation 
(commodity-capital  and  money-capital)  on  the  one  hand,  with 
fixed  and  circulating  capital  on  the  other.  The  capital-value 
advanced  in  fixed  capital  is  as  much  circulated  by  the  product 
as  that  which  has  been  advanced  in  the  circulating  capital, 
and  both  are  equally  converted  into  money-capital  by  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  the  commodity-capital.  The  difference  evolves  only 
from  the  fact  that  the  value  of  the  fixed  capital  circulates 
piecemeal  and  therefore  must  likewise  be  replaced  piecemeal,  at 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATINQ  CAPITAL 


197 


shorter  or  longer  intervals,  must  be  reproduced  in  its  bodily 
form. 

That  by  circulating  capital  Adam  Smith  means  here  nothing 
but  capital  of  circulation,  i.e.,  capital-value  in  the  forms  pertain¬ 
ing  to  the  process  of  circulation  (commodity-capital  and  money- 
capital)  is  shown  by  his  singularly  ill-chosen  illustration.  He 
selects  for  this  purpose  a  kind  of  capital  which  does  not  belong 
at  all  in  the  process  of  production,  but  whose  abode  is  exclusive¬ 
ly  the  sphere  of  circulation,  which  consists  solely  of  capital 
of  circulation — merchants'  capital. 

How  absurd  it  is  to  start  out  with  an  illustration  in  which 
capital  does  not  figure  altogether  as  productive  capital  is  stated 
right  afterwards  by  him  himself:  “The  capital  of  a  merchant,  for 
example,  is  altogether  a  circulating  capital.”  [Vol.  II,  p.  255.  ] 
Yet  we  are  told  later  on  that  the  difference  between  circulating 
and  fixed  capital  evolves  out  of  essential  differences  within  the 
productive  capital  itself.  On  the  one  hand  Adam  Smith  has  the 
distinction  of  the  physiocrats  in  mind,  on  the  other  the  different 
forms  assumed  by  capital-value  in  its  circuit.  And  both  these 
things  are  higgledy-piggledy  jumbled  together. 

But  how  a  profit  is  to  come  into  existence  by  changes  of  form 
of  money  and  commodities,  by  a  mere  transmutation  of  value 
from  one  of  these  forms  into  another  is  more  than  anyone  can 
tell.  And  an  explanation  becomes  absolutely  impossible  because 
he  starts  out  here  with  merchants'  capital,  which  moves  only 
in  the  sphere  of  circulation.  We  shall  return  to  this  later.  Let 
us  first  hear  what  he  has  to  say  about  fixed  capital.  [Vol.  II, 
pp.  254-55.  ] 

“Secondly,  it  (capital)  may  be  employed  in  the  improvement 
of  land,  in  the  purchase  of  useful  machines  and  instruments  of 
trade,  or  in  suchlike  things  as  yield  a  revenue  or  profit  without 
changing  masters,  or  circulating  any  further.  Such  capitals  there¬ 
fore  may  very  properly  be  called  fixed  capitals.  Different  oc¬ 
cupations  require  very  different  proportions  between  the  fixed 
and  circulating  capitals  employed  in  them....  Some  part  of  the 
capital  of  every  master  artificer  or  manufacturer  must  be  fixed 
in  the  instruments  of  his  trade.  This  part,  however,  is  very  small 
in  some,  and  very  great  in  others....  The  far  greater  part  of  the 
capital  of  all  such  master  artificers  (such  as  tailors,  shoemakers, 
weavers)  however  is  circulated,  either  in  the  wages  of  their  work¬ 
men,  or  in  the  price  of  their  materials,  and  to  be  repaid  with 
a  profit  by  the  price  of  the  work.” 

Apart  from  the  naive  determination  of  the  source  of  profit, 


198 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


weakness  and  confusion  become  at  once  apparent  from  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  To  a  machine  manufacturer  for  example  the  machine 
is  his  product,  which  circulates  as  commodity-capital,  or  in  Adam 
Smith’s  words,  “is  parted  with,  changes  masters,  circulates  fur¬ 
ther.  ”  According  to  his  own  definition  therefore  this  machine 
would  not  be  fixed  but  circulating  capital.  This  confusion  is 
again  due  to  the  fact  that  Smith  mixes  up  the  distinction  between 
fixed  and  circulating  capital  evolved  out  of  the  manifold  circu¬ 
lation  of  the  various  elements  of  productive  capital,  with  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  form  assumed  by  the  same  capital  which  functions 
as  productive  capital  within  the  process  of  production  and  as 
circulation  capital,  that  is  to  say,  as  commodity-capital  or  as 
money-capital,  within  the  sphere  of  circulation.  Consequently 
with  Adam  Smith  things  can  function  as  fixed  capital  (as  in¬ 
struments  of  labour,  elements  of  productive  capital),  or  as  “cir¬ 
culating”  capital,  commodity-capital  (as  products  thrust  out 
of  the  sphere  of  production  into  that  of  circulation),  all  depend¬ 
ing  on  the  position  they  occupy  in  the  life-process  of  capital. 

But  Adam  Smith  suddenly  changes  the  entire  basis  of  his  clas¬ 
sification,  and  contradicts  the  text  with  which  he  had  opened 
the  entire  investigation  a  few  lines  previously.  This  refers  partic¬ 
ularly  to  the  statement:  “There  are  two  different  ways  in  which 
a  capital  may  be  employed  so  as  to  yield  a  revenue  or  a  profit 
to  its  employer,”  [Vol.  II,  p.  254]  namely,  as  circulating  or 
as  fixed  capital.  According  to  that  these  are  therefore  different 
methods  of  employing  different  capitals  independent  of  one  an¬ 
other,  such  as  capitals  that  can  be  employed  either  in  industry  or 
in  agriculture.  And  then  we  read  [Vol.  II,  p.  255]:  “Different 
occupations  require  very  different  proportions  between  the  fixed 
and  circulating  capitals  employed  in  them.  ”  Fixed  and  circulat¬ 
ing  capital  are  now  no  longer  different,  independent  investments 
of  capital  but  different  portions  of  the  same  productive  capital, 
which  form  different  parts  of  the  total  value  of  this  capital  in 
different  spheres  of  investment.  Hence  we  have  here  differences 
arising  from  an  appropriate  division  of  the  productive  capital 
itself  and  therefore  valid  only  with  respect  to  it.  But  this  runs 
counter  to  the  circumstance  that  merchants’  capital,  being 
merely  circulating  capital,  is  opposed  to  fixed  capital,  for  Adam 
Smith  says  himself:  “The  capital  of  a  merchant  for  example  is 
altogether  a  circulating  capital.”  [Vol.  II,  p.  255.]  It  is  indeed 
a  capital  performing  its  functions  solely  within  the  sphere  of 
circulation  and  as  such  stands  opposed  in  general  to  productive 
capital,  the  capital  embodied  in  the  process  of  production.  But 


THEORIES  OP  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


199 


for  this  very  reason  it  cannot  be  contrasted,  as  the  circulating 
component  part  of  productive  capital,  to  its  fixed  component  part. 

In  the  illustrations  Smith  gives  he  designates  the  “instru¬ 
ments  of  trade”  as  fixed  capital,  and  the  portion  of  capital  laid 
out  in  wages  and  raw  materials,  including  auxiliary  materials, 
as  circulating  capital  (“repaid  with  a  profit  by  the  price  of  the 
work”). 

And  so  he  starts  out,  in  the  first  place,  from  the  various  con¬ 
stituents  of  the  labour-process,  from  labour-power  (labour)  and 
raw  materials  on  the  one  hand,  and  instruments  of  labour  on 
the  other.  But  these  are  constituents  of  capital,  because  a  sum 
of  value  which  is  to  function  as  capital  is  invested  in  them. 
To  this  extent  they  are  material  elements,  modes  of  existence  of 
productive  capital,  that  is  to  say,  of  capital  functioning  in  the 
process  of  production.  But  why  is  one  of  these  parts  called  fixed? 
Because  “some  parts  of  the  capital  must  be  fixed  in  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  trade.”  [Vol.  II,  p.  254.]  But  the  other  part  is  also 
fixed  —  in  wages  and  raw  materials.  Machines  however  and  “in¬ 
struments  of  trade  ...  or  suchlike  things  ...  yield  a  revenue  or  prof¬ 
it  without  changing  masters,  or  circulating  any  further.  Such 
capitals,  therefore,  may  very  properly  be  called  fixed  capitals.  ” 
(Vol.  II,  p.  254.] 

Take  for  instance  the  mining  industry.  No  raw  material  at 
all  is  used  there,  because  the  subject  of  labour,  such  as  cop¬ 
per,  is  a  product  of  nature,  which  must  first  be  appropriated  by 
labour.  The  copper  to  be  first  appropriated,  the  product  of  the 
process,  which  circulates  later  as  a  commodity,  or  commodity- 
capital,  does  not  form  an  element  of  productive  capital.  No  part 
of  its  value  is  invested  in  it.  On  the  other  hand  the  other  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  productive  process,  labour-power  and  auxiliary 
materials  such  as  coal,  water,  etc.,  do  not  enter  materially  into 
the  product,  either.  The  coal  is  entirely  consumed  and  only  its 
value  enters  into  the  product,  just  as  a  part  of  the  value  of  the 
machine,  etc.,  enters  into  it.  Finally,  the  labourer  remains  ps 
independent  vis-a-vis  the  product,  the  copper,  as  the  machine; 
except  that  the  value  which  he  produces  by  means  of  his  labour 
is  now  a  component  part  of  the  value  of  the  copper.  Hence  in 
this  illustration  not  a  single  constituent  of  productive  capital 
changes  "masters,”  nor  is  any  of  them  circulated  further,  be¬ 
cause  none  of  them  enter  materially  into  the  product.  What 
becomes  of  the  circulating  capital  in  this  case?  According  to 
Adam  Smith’s  own  definition  the  entire  capital  employed  in  a 
copper  mine  consists  of  fixed  capital  and  nothing  else. 


200 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


Let  us  take  on  the  other  hand  a  different  industry,  one  which 
utilises  raw  materials  that  form  the  substance  of  its  product, 
and  auxiliary  materials  that  enter  into  the  product  bodily  and 
not  only  as  so  much  value,  as  is  the  case  with  fuel  coal.  The 
product,  for  instance  the  yarn,  changes  hands  together  with 
the  raw  material,  the  cotton,  composing  it,  and  passes  from  the 
process  of  production  into  that  of  consumption.  But  so  long  as 
the  cotton  functions  as  an  element  of  productive  capital,  its 
master  does  not  sell  it,  but  processes  it,  has  it  made  into  yarn. 
He  does  not  part  with  it.  Or,  to  use  Smith’s  crudely  erroneous 
and  trivial  terms,  he  does  not  make  any  profit  “by  parting  with 
it,  by  its  changing  masters,  or  by  circulating  it.  ”  He  does  not 
permit  his  materials  to  circulate  any  more  than  his  machines. 
They  are  fixed  in  the  process  of  production,  the  same  as  the 
spinning  machines  and  the  factory  buildings.  Indeed,  a  part  of 
the  productive  capital  must  be  just  as  continually  fixed  in  the 
form  of  coal,  cotton,  etc.,  as  in  the  form  of  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour.  The  difference  is  only  that  for  instance  the  cotton,  coal, 
etc.,  required  for  one  week’s  yarn  production,  are  always  en¬ 
tirely  consumed  in  the  manufacture  of  the  weekly  product,  so 
that  new  cotton,  coal,  etc.,  must  be  supplied  in  their  place;  in 
other  words,  these  elements  of  productive  capital,  although  re¬ 
maining  identical  in  kind,  always  consist  of  new  specimens  of 
the  same  kind,  while  the  same  individual  spinning  machine 
or  the  same  individual  factory  building  continues  its  participa¬ 
tion  in  a  whole  series  of  weekly  productions  without  being 
replaced  by  a  new  specimen  of  its  kind.  As  elements  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  all  its  constituent  parts  are  continually  fixed  in 
the  process  of  production,  for  it  cannot  proceed  without  them. 
And  all  the  elements  of  productive  capital,  whether  fixed  or 
circulating,  equally  confront,  as  productive  capital,  the  capital 
of  circulation,  i.e.,  commodity-capital  and  money-capital. 

It  is  the  same  with  labour-power.  A  part  of  the  productive 
capital  must  be  continually  fixed  in  it,  and  it  is  the  same  iden¬ 
tical  labour-powers,  just  as  it  is  the  same  machines,  that  are 
everywhere  employed  for  a  certain  length  of  time  by  the  same 
capitalist.  The  difference  between  labour-power  and  machines 
in  this  case  is  not  that  the  machines  are  bought  once  and  for 
all  (which  is  not  so  when  they  are  paid  for  in  instalments),  while 
the  labourer  is  not.  The  difference  is  rather  that  the  labour  ex¬ 
pended  by  the  labourer  enters  wholly  into  the  value  of  the 
product,  while  the  value  of  the  machines  enters  only  piecemeal. 

Smith  confuses  different  definitions  when  he  says  of  circulat- 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


201 


ing  capital  as  opposed  to  fixed:  “The  capital  employed  in  this 
manner  yields  no  revenue  or  profit  to  its  employer,  while  it  either 
remains  in  his  possession  or  continues  in  the  same  shape.”  [Vol. 
II,  p.  254.)  He  places  the  merely  formal  metamorphosis  of  the 
commodity,  which  the  product,  the  commodity-capital,  under¬ 
goes  in  the  sphere  of  circulation  and  which  brings  about  the  change 
of  hands  of  the  commodities,  on  the  same  level  as  the  bodily 
metamorphosis,  which  the  various  elements  of  productive  capital 
undergo  during  the  process  of  production.  He  indiscriminately 
jumbles  together  the  transformation  of  commodities  into  money 
and  of  money  into  commodities,  or  purchase  and  sale,  with  the 
transformation  of  elements  of  production  into  products.  His 
illustration  for  circulating  capital  is  merchants'  capital,  which 
is  converted  from  commodities  into  money  and  from  money 
into  commodities — the  change  of  form  C — M — C  pertaining  to 
the  circulation  of  commodities.  But  this  change  of  form  within 
the  circulation  signifies  for  the  industrial  capital  in  action  that 
the  commodities  into  which  the  money  is  reconverted  are  ele¬ 
ments  of  production  (instruments  of  labour  and  labour-power), 
that,  therefore,  the  change  of  form  renders  the  function  of  in¬ 
dustrial  capital  continuous,  renders  the  process  of  production 
a  continuous  one,  or  a  process  of  reproduction.  This  entire  change 
of  form  takes  place  in  circulation.  It  is  this  change  of  form  that 
brings  about  the  real  passage  of  the  commodities  from  hand  to 
hand.  But  the  metamorphoses  gone  through  by  productive  capi¬ 
tal  within  its  process  of  production  are  on  the  contrary  meta¬ 
morphoses  that  pertain  to  the  labour-process  and  are  necessary 
to  transform  the  elements  of  production  into  the  desired  prod¬ 
uct.  Adam  Smith  clings  to  the  fact  that  a  part  of  the  means 
of  production  (the  instruments  of  labour  proper)  serve  In  the 
labour-process  (“yield  a  profit  to  their  master,”  as  he  errone¬ 
ously  expresses  it)  without  changing  their  bodily  form  and  wear 
out  only  by  degrees;  while  the  other  part,  the  materials,  change 
and  by  virtue  of  this  very  change  attain  their  destination  as 
means  of  production.  This  difference  in  the  behaviour  of  the 
elements  of  productive  capital  in  the  labour-process  forms  how¬ 
ever  only  the  point  of  departure  of  the  difference  between  fixed 
and  non-fixed  capital,  not  this  difference  itself.  That  follows 
from  the  fact  alone  that  this  different  behaviour  exists  in  equal 
measure  under  all  modes  of  production,  capitalist  and  non¬ 
capitalist.  To  this  different  behaviour  of  material  elements 
corresponds  however  the  transmission  of  value  to  the  product, 
and  to  this  in  turn  corresponds  the  replacement  of  value  by  the 


202 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


sale  of  the  product.  That  and  that  alone  is  what  constitutes 
the  difference  in  question.  Hence  capital  is  not  called  fixed  be¬ 
cause  it  is  fixed  in  the  instruments  of  labour  but  because  a  part 
of  its  value  laid  out  in  instruments  of  labour  remains  fixed  in 
them,  while  the  other  part  circulates  as  a  component  part  of  the 
value  of  the  product. 

“If  it  (the  stock)  is  employed  in  procuring  future  profit,  it 
must  procure  this  profit  either  by  staying  with  him  (the  employer), 
or  by  going  from  him.  In  the  one  case  it  is  a  fixed,  in  the  other  it 
is  a  circulating  capital.”  (P.  189.) 

What  strikes  one  here  above  all  is  the  crudely  empirical  con¬ 
ception  of  profit  derived  from  the  outlook  of  the  ordinary  cap¬ 
italist,  which  wholly  contradicts  the  better  esoteric  understanding 
of  Adam  Smith.  Not  only  the  price  of  the  materials  and  that  of 
the  labour-power  is  replaced  in  the  price  of  the  product,  but  also 
that  part  of  value  which  is  transferred  by  wear  and  tear  from  the 
instruments  of  labour  to  the  product.  Under  no  circumstances 
does  this  replacement  yield  profit.  Whether  a  value  advanced 
for  the  production  of  a  commodity  is  replaced  entirely  or  piece¬ 
meal,  at  one  time  or  gradually,  by  the  sale  of  that  commodity, 
cannot  change  anything  except  the  manner  and  time  of  replace¬ 
ment.  But  in  no  event  can  it  transform  that  which  is  common 
to  both,  the  replacement  of  value,  into  a  creation  of  surplus- 
value.  At  the  bottom  of  it  all  lies  the  commonly  held  idea  that, 
because  surplus-value  is  not  realised  until  the  product  is  sold, 
until  it  circulates,  it  originates  only  from  sales,  from  the  cir¬ 
culation.  Indeed  the  different  manner  of  origination  of  profit 
is  in  this  case  but  a  wrong  way  of  expressing  the  fact  that  the 
different  elements  of  productive  capital  serve  differently,  that 
as  productive  elements  they  act  differently  in  the  labour-process. 
In  the  end,  the  difference  is  not  derived  from  the  process  of  la¬ 
bour  or  self-expansion,  not  from  the  function  of  productive 
capital  itself,  but  it  is  supposed  to  apply  only  subjectively  to 
the  individual  capitalist,  to  whom  one  part  of  capital  serves 
a  useful  purpose  in  one  way,  while  another  part  does  so  in  an¬ 
other  way. 

Quesnay,  on  the  other  hand,  had  derived  these  differences 
from  the  process  of  reproduction  and  its  necessities.  In  order 
that  this  process  may  be  continuous,  the  value  of  the  annual 
advances  must  annually  be  replaced  in  full  out  of  the  value  of  the 
annual  product,  while  the  value  of  the  investment  capital  need 
be  replaced  only  piecemeal,  so  that  it  requires  complete  replace¬ 
ment  and  therefore  complete  reproduction  only  in  a  period  of. 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


203 


say,  ten  years  (by  new  material  of  the  same  kind).  Consequently 
Adam  Smith  falls  far  below  Quesnay. 

So  there  is  therefore  absolutely  nothing  left  to  Adam  Smith 
for  a  definition  of  fixed  capital  except  that  it  is  instruments  of 
labour  which  do  not  change  their  shape  in  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  continue  to  serve  in  production  until  they  are  worn  out, 
as  opposed  to  the  products  in  the  formation  of  which  they  assist. 
He  forgets  that  all  elements  of  productive  capital  continually  con¬ 
front  in  their  bodily  form  (as  instruments  of  labour,  materials, 
and  labour-power)  the  product  and  the  product  circulating  as  a 
commodity,  and  that  the  difference  between  the  part  consisting 
of  materials  and  labour-power  and  that  consisting  of  instruments 
of  labour  is  only  this:  with  regard  to  labour-power,  that  it  is  al¬ 
ways  purchased  afresh  (not  bought  for  the  time  it  lasts,  as  are 
the  instruments  of  labour);  with  regard  to  the  materials,  that  it 
is  not  the  same  identical  materials  that  function  in  the  labour- 
process  throughout,  but  always  new  materials  of  the  same  kind. 
At  the  same  time  the  false  impression  is  created  that  the  value 
of  the  fixed  capital  does  not  participate  in  the  circulation,  although 
of  course  Adam  Smith  previously  explained  the  wear  and  tear  of 
fixed  capital  as  a  part  of  the  price  of  the  product. 

In  opposing  circulating  capital  to  fixed,  no  emphasis  is  placed 
on  the  fact  that  this  opposition  exists  solely  because  it  is  that 
constituent  part  of  productive  capital  which  must  be  wholly  re¬ 
placed  out  of  the  value  of  the  product  and  must  therefore  fully 
share  in  its  metamorphoses,  while  this  is  not  so  in  the  case  of  the 
fixed  capital.  Instead  the  circulating  capital  is  jumbled  together 
with  those  forms  which  capital  assumes  on  passing  from  the 
sphere  of  production  to  that  of  circulation,  as  commodity-capital 
and  money-capital.  But  both  forms,  commodity-capital  as  well  as 
money-capital,  are  carriers  of  the  value  of  both  the  fixed  and  the 
circulating  component  parts  of  productive  capital.  Both  of  them 
•  are  capital  of  circulation,  as  distinguished  from  productive  cap¬ 
ital,  but  not  circulating  (fluent)  capital  as  distinguished  from 
fixed  capital. 

Finally,  owing  to  the  wholly  erroneous  explanation  that  prof¬ 
it  is  made  by  fixed  capital  staying  in  the  process  of  production, 
and  by  circulating  capital  leaving  it  and  being  circulated,  and  also 
on  account  of  the  identity  of  form  assumed  in  the  turnover  by  the 
variable  capital  and  the  circulating  constituent  of  the  constant 
capital,  their  essential  difference  in  the  process  of  self-expan¬ 
sion  and  of  the  formation  of  surplus-value  is  hidden,  so  that  the 
entire  secret  of  capitalist  production  is  obscured  still  more.  The 


204 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


common  designation  “circulating  capital”  abolishes  this  essential 
difference.  Polltioal  Economy  subsequently  went  still  farther  by 
holding  fast  not  to  the  antithesis  between  variable  and  constant 
capital  but  to  the  antithesis  between  fixed  and  circulating  cap¬ 
ital  as  the  essential  and  sole  delimitation. 

After  Adam  Smith  has  designated  fixed  and  circulating  cap¬ 
ital  as  two  particular  ways  of  investing  capital,  each  of  which 
yields  a  profit  by  itself,  he  says:  “No  fixed  capital  can  yield  any 
revenue  but  by  means  of  a  circulating  capital.  The  most  useful 
machines  and  instruments  of  trade  will  produce  nothing  without 
the  circulating  capital  which  affords  the  materials  they  are  em¬ 
ployed  upon,  and  the  maintenance  of  the  workmen  who  employ 
them.”  (P.  188.) 

Here  it  becomes  apparent  what  the  previously  used  expres¬ 
sions  “yield  a  revenue,"  “make  a  profit,”  etc.,  signify,  viz.,  that 
both  parts  of  capital  serve  as  creators  of  product. 

Adam  Smith  then  gives  the  following  illustration:  “That  part 
of  the  capital  of  the  farmer  which  is  employed  in  the  instruments 
of  agriculture  is  a  fixed,  that  which  is  employed  in  the  wages  and 
maintenance  of  his  labouring  servants  is  a  circulating  capital.’* 
(Here  the  difference  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital  is  cor¬ 
rectly  applied  only  to  difference  in  circulation,  to  the  turnovers 
of  different  constituent  parts  of  productive  capital.)  “He  makes 
a  profit  of  the  one  by  keeping  it  in  his  own  possession,  and  of  the 
other  by  parting  with  it.  The  price  or  value  of  his  labouring  cattle 
is  a  fixed  capital”  (here  he  is  again  correct  when  he  says  it  is  the 
value,  not  the  material  element,  to  which  the  difference  applies) 
“in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  instruments  of  husbandry; 
their  maintenance”  (that  of  the  labouring  cattle)  “is  a  circulat¬ 
ing  capital  in  the  same  manner  as  that  of  the  labouring  servants. 
The  farmer  makes  his  profit  by  keeping  the  labouring  cattle,  and 
by  parting  with  their  maintenance."  (The  farmer  keeps  the  fodder 
of  the  cattle,  he  does  not  sell  it.  He  uses  it  to  feed  the  cattle,  while 
he  uses  up  the  cattle  themselves  as  instruments  of  labour.  The 
difference  is  only  this:  The  fodder  that  goes  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  labouring  cattle  is  consumed  wholly  and  must  be  continu¬ 
ally  replaced  by  new  cattle  fodder  out  of  the  products  of  agri¬ 
culture  or  by  their  sale;  the  cattle  themselves  are  replaced  only 
as  each  head  becomes  incapacitated  for  work.)  “Both  the  price 
and  the  maintenance  of  the  cattle  which  are  bought  in  and  fat¬ 
tened,  not  for  labour  but  for  sale,  are  a  circulating  capital.  The 
farmer  makes  his  profit  by  parting  with  them.”  [Vol.  II,  pp. 
255-56.  ]  (Every  producer  of  commodities,  hence  likewise  the 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


205 


capitalist  producer,  sells  his  product,  the  result  of  his  process 
of  production,  but  this  is  no  reason  why  this  product  should 
form  a  part  of  either  the  fixed  or  the  circulating  component 
of  his  productive  capital.  The  product  now  exists  rather  in  that 
form  in  which  it  is  thrust  out  of  the  process  of  production  and 
must  function  as  commodity-capital.  The  fattened  stock  function 
in  the  process  of  production  as  raw  material,  not  as  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  like  the  labouring  cattle.  Hence  the  fattened 
cattle  enter  into  the  product  as  substance,  and  their  whole 
value  enters  into  it,  just  as  that  of  the  auxiliary  material  [its 
fodder].  The  fattened  cattle  are  therefore  a  circulating  part  of 
the  productive  capital,  but  not  because  the  sold  product,  the  fat¬ 
tened  cattle,  have  the  same  bodily  form  as  the  raw  material,  the 
cattle  not  yet  fattened.  This  is  accidental.  At  the  same  time  Adam 
Smith  might  have  seen  by  this  illustration  that  it  is  not  the  ma¬ 
terial  form  of  the  element  of  production  but  its  function  within 
the  process  of  production  that  determines  the  value  contained  in 
it  as  fixed  or  circulating.)  “The  whole  value  of  the  seed  too  is 
properly  a  fixed  capital.  Though  it  goes  backwards  and  forwards 
between  the  ground  and  the  granary,  it  never  changes  masters, 
and  therefore  it  does  not  properly  circulate.  The  farmer  makes 
his  profit  not  by  its  sale,  but  by  its  increase.”  [Vol.  II,  p.  256.  ] 

At  this  point  the  utter  thoughtlessness  of  the  Smithian  distinc¬ 
tion  reveals  itself.  According  to  him  seed  would  be  fixed  capital, 
if  there  would  be  no  “change  of  masters,”  that  is  to  say,  if  the 
seed  is  directly  replaced  out  of  the  annual  product,  is  deducted 
from  it.  On  the  other  hand  it  would  be  circulating  capital,  if  the 
entire  product  were  sold  and  with  a  part  of  its  value  seed  of 
another  owner  we^e  bought.  In  the  one  case  there  is  a  “change  of 
masters,”  in  the  other  there  is  not.  Smith  once  more  confuses  here 
circulating  and  commodity-capital.  The  product  is  the  material 
vehicle  of  the  commodity-capital,  but  of  course  only  that  part 
of  it  which  actually  enters  into  the  circulation  and  does  not  re¬ 
enter  directly  into  the  process  of  production  from  which  it 
emerged  as  a  product. 

Whether  the  seed  is  directly  deducted  from  the  product  as  a 
part  of  it  or  the  entire  product  is  sold  and  a  part  of  its  value  con¬ 
verted  in  the  purchase  of  another  man’s  seed  — in  either  case  it  is 
mere  replacement  that  takes  place  and  no  profit  is  made  by  this 
replacement.  In  the  one  case  the  seed  enters  into  circulation 
as  a  commodity  together  with  the  remainder  of  the  product;  in 
the  other  it  figures  only  in  book-keeping  as  a  component  part 
of  the  value  of  the  advanced  capital.  But  in  both  cases  it  remains 


206 


THR  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


a  circulating  constituent  of  the  productive  capital.  The  seed  is 
entirely  consumed  to  get  the  product  ready,  and  it  must  be  en¬ 
tirely  replaced  out  of  the  product  to  make  reproduction  possible. 

“Hence  raw  material  and  auxiliary  substances  lose  the  char¬ 
acteristic  form  with  which  they  are  clothed  on  entering  the  la¬ 
bour-process.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  instruments  of  labour.  Tools, 
machines,  workshops,  and  vessels,  are  of  use  in  the  labour-proc¬ 
ess,  only  so  long  as  they  retain  their  original  shape,  and  are  ready 
each  morning  to  renew  the  process,  with  their  shape  unchanged. 
And  just  as  during  their  lifetime,  that  is  to  say,  during  the  con¬ 
tinued  labour-process  in  which  they  serve,  they  retain  their  shape 
independent  of  the  product,  so  too,  they  do  after  their  death. 
The  corpses  of  machines,  tools,  workshops,  etc.,  are  always  sepa¬ 
rate  and  distinct  from  the  product  they  helped  to  turn  out.  ”  (Buch 
I,  Kap.  VI,  S.  192.)* 

These  different  ways  in  which  means  of  production  are  con¬ 
sumed  to  form  the  product,  some  of  them  preserving  their  inde¬ 
pendent  shape  vis-a-vis  the  product,  others  changing  or  losing  it 
entirely— this  difference  pertaining  to  the  labour-process  as  such 
and  therefore  just  as  well  to  labour-processes  aimed  at  satisfy¬ 
ing  merely  one’s  own  needs,  e.g.,  the  needs  of  the  patriarchal 
family,  without  any  exchange,  without  production  of  com¬ 
modities— are  falsified  by  Adam  Smith.  He  does  so  1)  by  intro¬ 
ducing  here  the  totally  irrelevant  definition  of  profit,  claiming 
that  some  of  the  means  of  production  yield  a  profit  to  their 
owner  by  preserving  their  form,  while  the  others  do  so  by  losing 
it;  2)  by  jumbling  together  the  alterations  of  a  part  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  of  production  in  the  labour-process  with  the  change  of 
form  (purchase  and  sale)  that  is  characteristic  of  the  exchange 
of  products,  of  commodity  circulation,  and  which  at  the  same 
time  includes  a  change  in  the  ownership  of  the  circulating 
commodities. 

The  turnover  presupposes  reproduction  effected  by  circula¬ 
tion,  hence  by  the  sale  of  the  product,  by  its  conversion  into  money 
and  its  reconversion  from  money  into  its  elements  of  production. 
But  since  a  part  of  the  capitalist  producer’s  own  product  serves 
him  directly  as  means  of  production,  he  appears  as  a  seller  of 
it  to  himself,  and  that  is  how  the  matter  figures  in  his  books.  In 
that  case  this  part  of  the  reproduction  is  not  brought  about  by 
circulation  but  proceeds  directly.  However  the  part  of  the  product 
thus  serving  again  as  means  of  production  replaces  circulating, 


•  English  edition:  Ch.  VIII,  p  203. — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


207 


not  Gxed  capital,  since  1)  its  value  passes  wholly  into  the  prod¬ 
uct,  and  2)  it  itself  has  been  wholly  replaced  in  kind  by  a  new 
specimen  out  of  the  new  product. 

Adam  Smith  tells  us  now  what  circulating  and  fixed  capital 
consist  of.  He  enumerates  the  things,  the  material  elements,  which 
form  fixed,  and  those  which  form  circulating  capital,  as  if  this 
definiteness  were  inherent  in  these  things  materially,  by  nature, 
and  did  not  rather  spring  from  their  definite  function  within  the 
capitalist  process  of  production.  And  yet  in  the  same  chapter  (Book 
II,  Chapter  I)  he  makes  the  remark  that  although  a  certain  thing, 
e.g.,  a  dwelling,  which  is  reserved  as  “stock”  for  “immediate 
consumption,”  “may  yield  a  revenue  to  its  proprietor,  and  thereby 
serve  in  the  function  of  a  capital  to  him,  it  cannot  yield  any 
to  the  public,  nor  serve  in  the  function  of  a  capital  to  it,  and 
the  revenue  of  the  whole  body  of  the  people  can  never  be  in  the 
smallest  degree  increased  by  it.  ”  (P.  186.)  Here,  then,  Adam 
Smith  clearly  states  that  the  property  of  being  capital  is  not  inher¬ 
ent  in  things  as  such  and  in  any  case,  but  is  a  function  with  which 
they  may  or  may  not  be  invested,  according  to  circumstances. 
But  what  is  true  of  capital  in  general  is  also  true  of  its  subdi¬ 
visions. 

Things  form  constituent  parts  of  the  circulating  or  fixed  cap¬ 
ital,  depending  on  what  function  they  perform  in  the  labour- 
process.  A  head  of  cattle  for  instance,  as  labouring  cattle  (instru¬ 
ment  of  labour),  represents  the  material  mode  of  existence  of  fixed 
capital,  while  as  cattle  for  fattening  (raw  material)  it  is  a  con¬ 
stituent  part  of  the  farmer’s  circulating  capital.  On  the  other 
hand  the  same  thing  may  now  function  as  a  constituent  part  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  and  now  belong  to  the  fund  for  direct  consump¬ 
tion.  A  house  for  instance  when  performing  the  function  of  a 
workshop,  is  a  fixed  component  part  of  productive  capital;  when 
serving  as  a  dwelling  it  is  in  no  wise  a  form  of  capital.  The  same 
instruments  of  labour  may  in  many  cases  serve  either  as  means 
of  production  or  as  means  of  consumption. 

It  was  one  of  the  errors  following  from  Adam  Smith’s  idea 
that  the  property  of  being  fixed  or  circulating  capital  was  con¬ 
ceived  as  inherent  in  the  things  themselves.  The  mere  analysis 
of  the  labour-process  (Buch  I,  Rap.  V)*  shows  that  the  definitions 
of  instruments  of  labour,  materials  of  labour,  and  product  change 
according  to  the  various  roles  played  by  one  and  the  same  thing 
in  the  process.  The  definitions  of  fixed  and  non-fixed  capital  are 


English  edition:  Ch.  Vli. — Ed. 


208 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


based  in  their  turn  on  the  definite  roles  played  by  these  elements 
in  the  labour-process,  and  therefore  also  in  the  value  formation 
process. 

In  the  second  place,  on  enumerating  the  things  fixed  and 
circulating  capitals  consist  of,  it  becomes  fully  apparent  that 
Smith  lumps  together  the  distinction — valid  and  making  sense 
only  with  regard  to  productive  capital  (capital  in  its  productive 
form) — between  the  fixed  and  circulating  components  of  the  same, 
with  the  distinction  between  productive  capital  and  those 
forms  which  pertain  to  capital  in  its  process  of  circulation,  viz., 
commodity-capital  and  money-capital.  He  says  in  the  same  pas¬ 
sage  (pp.  187  and  188):  “The  circulating  capital  consists  ...  of  the 
provisions,  materials,  and  finished  work  of  all  kinds  that  are  in 
the  hands  of  their  respective  dealers,  and  of  the  money  that  is 
necessary  for  circulating  and  distributing  them,  etc.  ” 

Indeed,  if  we  look  more  closely  we  observe  that  here,  contra¬ 
ry  to  his  previous  statements,  circulating  capital  is  again  equat¬ 
ed  to  commodity-capital  and  money-capital,  that  is  to  say, 
to  two  forms  of  capital  which  do  not  belong  in  the  process  of 
production  at  all,  which  do  not  form  circulating  (fluent)  cap¬ 
ital  as  opposed  to  fixed,  but  capital  of  circulation  as  opposed 
to  productive  capital.  It  is  only  alongside  these  that  the  con¬ 
stituents  of  productive  capital  advanced  in  materials  (raw  ma¬ 
terials  or  semi-finished  products)  and  really  incorporated  in  the 
process  of  production  then  play  a  role  again.  He  says: 

“...  The  third  and  last  of  the  three  portions  into  which  the 
general  stock  of  the  society  naturally  divides  itself,  is  the  cir¬ 
culating  capital,  of  which  the  characteristic  is,  that  it  affords  a 
revenue  only  by  circulating  or  changing  masters.  It  is  composed 
likewise  of  four  parts:  first  of  the  money...”  (but  money  is  never 
a  form  of  productive  capital,  of  capital  functioning  in  the  pro¬ 
ductive  process;  it  is  always  only  one  of  the  forms  assumed  by 
capital  within  its  process  of  circulation);  “secondly,  of  the  stock 
of  provisions  which  are  in  the  possession  of  the  butcher,  the  gra¬ 
zier,  the  farmer  ...  from  the  sale  of  which  they  expect  to  derive 
a  profit....  Fourthly  and  lastly,  of  the  work  which  is  made  up  and 
completed,  but  which  is  still  in  the  hands  of  the  merchant  and 
manufacturer.  And,  thirdly,  of  the  materials,  whether  altogether 
rude,  or  more  or  less  manufactured,  of  clothes,  furniture,  and 
buildings,  which  are  not  yet  made  up  into  any  of  those  three 
shapes,  but  which  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  growers,  the  manu¬ 
facturers,  the  mercers  and  drapers,  the  timber-merchants,  the 
carpenters  and  joiners,  the  brick-makers,  etc.  ” 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


209 


Nos.  2  and  4  contain  nothing  but  products  which  have  been 
thrust  out  as  such  from  the  process  of  production  and  must  be 
sold,  in  short,  which  now  function  as  commodities,  hence  as 
commodity-capital,  and  which  therefore  have  a  form  and  occupy 
a  place  in  the  process  in  which  they  are  not  elements  of  productive 
capital,  no  matter  what  may  be  their  eventual  destination,  i.e., 
whether,  in  order  to  answer  their  purpose  (use-value),  they  should 
finally  be  allotted  to  individual  or  productive  consumption.  The 
products  mentioned  in  2  are  foodstuffs,  in  4  all  other  finished 
products,  which  in  turn  consist  only  of  finished  instruments  of 
labour  or  finished  articles  of  consumption  (foodstuffs  other  than 
those  mentioned  under  2). 

The  fact  that  Smith  at  the  same  time  speaks  of  the  merchant 
shows  his  confusion.  Once  the  producer  sells  his  product  to  the 
merchant,  it  no  longer  constitutes  any  form  of  his  capital.  From 
the  point  of  view  of  society,  it  is  indeed  still  commodity-capi¬ 
tal,  although  in  other  hands  than  those  of  its  producer;  but  for 
the  very  reason  that  it  is  a  commodity-capital  it  is  neither  fixed 
nor  circulating  capital. 

In  every  kind  of  production  not  meant  for  the  satisfaction  of 
the  producer’s  direct  needs,  the  product  must  circulate  as  a  com¬ 
modity,  i.e.,  it  must  be  sold,  not  in  order  to  make  a  profit  on  it, 
but  that  the  producer  may  be  able  to  live  at  all.  Under  capital¬ 
ist  production  there  is  to  be  added  the  circumstance  that  when 
a  commodity  is  sold  the  surplus-value  embodied  in  it  is  also 
realised.  The  product  emerges  as  a  commodity  from  the  process 
of  production  and  is  therefore  neither  a  fixed  nor  a  circulating 
element  of  this  process. 

Incidentally,  Smith  here  argues  against  himself.  The  finished 
products,  whatever  their  material  form  or  their  use-value,  their 
useful  effect,  are  all  commodity-capital  here,  hence  capital  in 
a  form  characteristic  of  the  process  of  circulation.  Being  in  this 
form,  they  are  not  constituent  parts  of  any  productive  capital 
their  owner  may  have.  This  does  not  in  the  least  prevent  them 
from  becoming,  right  after  their  sale,  in  the  hands  of  their  pur¬ 
chaser,  constituent  parts  of  productive  capital,  either  fixed  or 
circulating.  Here  it  is  evident  that  things  which  for  a  certain 
time  appear  in  the  market  as  commodity-capital,  as  opposed  to 
productive  capital,  may  or  may  not  function  as  circulating  or 
fixed  constituents  of  productive  capital  after  they  have  been 
removed  from  the  market. 

The  product  of  the  cotton  spinner,  yarn,  is  the  commodity- 
form  of  his  capital,  is  commodity-capital  as  far  as  he  is  concerned. 


210 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


It. cannot  function  again  as  a  constituent  part  of  his  productive 
capital,  neither  as  material  of  labour  nor  as  an  instrument  of 
labour.  But  in  the  hands  of  the  weaver  who  buys  it  it  is  incorpo¬ 
rated  in  the  productive  capital  of  the  latter  as  one  of  its  circulat¬ 
ing  constituent  parts.  For  the  spinner,  however,  the  yarn  is  the 
depository  of  the  value  of  part  of  his  fixed  as  well  as  circulating 
capital  (apart  from  the  surplus-value).  In  the  same  way  a  ma¬ 
chine,  the  product  of  a  machine-manufacturer,  is  the  commodity- 
form  of  his  capital,  is  commodity-capital  to  him.  And  so  long 
as  it  stays  in  this  form  it  is  neither  circulating  nor  fixed  capital. 
But  if  sold  to  a  manufacturer  for  use  it  becomes  a  fixed  compo¬ 
nent  part  of  a  productive  capital.  Even  if  by  virtue  of  its  use- 
form  the  product  can  partly  re-enter  as  means  of  production 
into  the  process  from  which  it  originated,  e.g.,  coal  into  coal 
production,  precisely  that  part  of  the  output  of  coal  which  is 
intended  for  sale  represents  neither  circulating  nor  fixed  capital 
but  commodity-capital. 

On  the  other  hand  a  product,  due  to  its  use-form,  may  be  whol¬ 
ly  incapable  of  forming  any  element  of  productive  capital,  either 
as  material  of  labour  or  as  an  instrument  of  labour.  For  instance 
any  means  of  subsistence.  Nevertheless  it  is  commodity-capital 
for  its  producer,  is  the  carrier  of  the  value  of  his  fixed  as  well  as 
circulating  capital;  and  of  the  one  or  the  other  according  to 
whether  the  capital  employed  in  its  production  has  to  be  replaced 
in  whole  or  in  part,  has  transferred  its  value  to  the  product  in 
whole  or  in  part. 

With  Smith,  in  No.  3,  the  raw  material  (material  not  worked 
up,  semi-finished  products,  auxiliary  substances)  does  not  figure 
on  the  one  hand  as  a  component  part  embodied  in  the  productive 
capital,  but  actually  only  as  a  special  kind  of  use-values  of  which 
the  social  product  can  at  all  consist,  as  a  special  kind  of  commodi¬ 
ties  existing  alongside  the  other  material  constituent  parts,  means 
of  subsistence,  etc.,  enumerated  under  Nos.  2  and  4.  On  the  other 
hand  these  materials  are  indeed  cited  as  incorporated  in  the  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  and  therefore  as  elements  of  it  in  the  hands  of 
the  producer.  The  confusion  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  they 
are  partly  conceived  as  functioning  in  the  hands  of  the  producer 
(“in  the  hands  of  the  growers,  the  manufacturers,  etc.”),  and 
partly  in  the  hands  of  merchants  (“mercers,  drapers,  timber- 
merchants”),  where  they  are  merely  commodity-capital,  not  com¬ 
ponent  parts  of  productive  capital. 

Indeed,  Adam  Smith  wholly  forgets  here,  in  enumerating  the 
elements  of  circulating  capital,  the  distinction — applying  only 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


211 


to  the  productive  capital — between  fixed  and  circulating  capital. 
He  rather  places  commodity-capital  and  money-capital,  i.e., 
the  two  forms  of  capital  typical  of  the  process  of  circulation,  in 
opposition  to  the  productive  capital,  but  that  quite  unconsciously. 

Finally,  it  is  a  striking  fact  that  Adam  Smith  forgets  to  men¬ 
tion  labour-power  when  counting  off  the  constituent  parts  of 
circulating  capital.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this. 

We  have  just  seen  that,  apart  from  money-capital,  circulating 
capital  is  only  another  name  for  commodity-capital.  But  to  the 
extent  that  labour-power  circulates  in  the  market,  it  is  not  capital, 
no  form  of  commodity-capital.  It  is  not  capital  at  all;  the  labourer 
is  not  a  capitalist,  although  he  brings  a  commodity  to  market, 
namely  his  own  skin.  Not  until  labour-power  has  been  sold,  been 
incorporated  in  the  process  of  production,  hence  not  until  it  has 
ceased  to  circulate  as  a  commodity,  does  it  become  a  constituent 
of  productive  capital — variable  capital  as  the  source  of  surplus- 
value,  a  circulating  component  part  of  productive  capital  with 
reference  to  the  turnover  of  the  capital-value  invested  in  it. 
Since  Smith  here  confuses  the  circulating  capital  with  commodity- 
capital,  he  cannot  bring  labour-power  under  the  head  of  circulat¬ 
ing  capital.  Hence  the  variable  capital  here  appears  in  the  form 
of  the  commodities  the  labourer  buys  with  his  wages,  viz.,  means 
of  subsistence.  In  this  form  the  capital-value  invested  in  wages 
is  supposed  to  belong  to  circulating  capital.  That  which  is  incor¬ 
porated  in  the  process  of  production  is  labour-power,  the  labourer 
himself,  not  the  means  of  subsistence  wherewith  the  labourer 
maintains  himself.  True,  we  have  seen  (Buch  I,  Kap.  XXI)* 
that  from  the  point  of  view  of  society  the  reproduction  of  the 
labourer  himself  by  means  of  his  individual  consumption  is 
likewise  part  of  the  process  of  reproduction  of  social  capital. 
But  this  does  not  apply  to  the  individual,  isolated  process  of 
production  which  we  are  studying  here.  The  “acquired  and  use¬ 
ful  abilities”  (p.  187)  which  Smith  mentions  under  the  head  of 
fixed  capital  are  on  the  contrary  component  parts  of  circulating 
capital,  since  they  are  “abilities”  of  the  wage-labourer  and  he 
has  sold  his  labour  together  with  its  “abilities.  ” 

It  is  a  great  mistake  on  the  part  of  Adam  Smith  to  divide  the 
entire  social  wealth  into  1)  a  fund  for  immediate  consumption, 
2)  fixed  capital,  and  3)  circulating  capital.  According  to  the  above, 
wealth  would  have  to  be  divided  into  1)  a  consumption-fund 
which  does  not  form  any  part  of  functioning  social  capital  al- 


English  edition:  Ch.  XXIII. — Ed. 


212 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


though  parts  of  it  can  continually  function  as  capital;  and  2)  capi¬ 
tal.  Accordingly  one  part  of  the  wealth  functions  as  capital,  the 
other  as  non-capital,  or  consumption-fund.  And  here  appears  the 
absolute  necessity  that  all  capital  be  either  fixed  or  circulating, 
somewhat  like  the  natural  necessity  that  a  mammal  be  male  or 
female.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  antithesis  between  fixed  and 
circulating  capital  applies  solely  to  the  elements  of  productive 
capital,  that  consequently  there  is  besides  these  a  considerable 
amount  of  capital— commodity-capital  and  money-capital — that 
exists  in  a  form  in  which  it  can  be  neither  fixed  nor  circulating. 

Inasmuch  as  under  capitalist  production  the  entire  mass  of 
social  products  circulates  in  the  market  as  commodity-capital, 
with  the  exception  of  that  part  of  the  products  which  is  directly 
used  up  again  by  the  individual  capitalist  producers  in  its  bodily 
form  as  means  of  production  without  being  sold  or  bought,  it  is 
evident  that  not  only  the  fixed  and  circulating  elements  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital,  but  likewise  all  the  elements  of  the  consump¬ 
tion-fund  are  derived  from  the  commodity-capital.  This  is  tanta¬ 
mount  to  saying  that  on  the  basis  of  capitalist  production  both 
means  of  production  and  articles  of  consumption  first  appear  as 
commodity-capital,  even  though  they  are  intended  for  later  use 
as  means  of  production  or  articles  of  consumption,  just  as  labour- 
power  itself  is  found  in  the  market  as  a  commodity,  although 
not  as  commodity-capital. 

This  accounts  for  the  following  new  confusion  in  Adam  Smith. 
He  says: 

“Of  these  four  parts”  (of  the  “circulating”  capital,  i.e.,  of 
capital  in  its  forms  of  commodity-capital  and  money-capital 
belonging  in  the  process  of  circulation,  two  parts  which  are  turned 
into  four  by  the  material  distinctions  Adam  Smith  makes  be¬ 
tween  the  constituent  parts  of  commodity-capital)  “three— pro¬ 
visions,  materials,  and  finished  work,  are  either  annually  or  in 
a  longer  or  shorter  period,  regularly  withdrawn  from  it  and  placed 
either  in  the  fixed  capital,  or  in  the  stock  reserved  for  imme¬ 
diate  consumption.  Every  fixed  capital  is  both  originally  derived 
from,  and  requires  to  be  continually  supported  by,  a  circulating 
capital.  All  useful  machines  and  instruments  of  trade  are 
originally  derived  from  a  circulating  capital  which  furnishes  the 
materials  of  which  they  are  made  and  the  maintenance  of  the 
workmen  who  make  them.  They  require,  too,  a  capital  of  the 
same  kind  to  keep  them  in  constant  repair.”  (P.  188.) 

With  the  exception  of  that  part  of  the  product  which  is  con¬ 
stantly  consumed  again  as  means  of  production  directly  by  its 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


213 


producers,  the  following  general  proposition  applies  to  capital¬ 
ist  production:  All  products  reach  the  market  as  commodities 
and  therefore  circulate  for  the  capitalist  as  the  commodity-form 
of  his  capital,  as  commodity-capital,  regardless  of  whether  these 
products  must  or  can  function  in  their  bodily  form,  in  accordance 
with  their  use-values,  as  elements  of  productive  capital  (of 
the  process  of  production),  as  means  of  production  and  therefore 
as  fixed  or  circulating  elements  of  productive  capital;  or  whether 
they  can  serve  only  as  means  of  individual,  not  of  productive, 
consumption.  All  products  are  thrown  upon  the  market  as  com¬ 
modities;  all  means  of  production  or  consumption,  all  elements 
of  productive  and  individual  consumption,  must  therefore  be 
extracted  from  the  market  by  purchasing  them  as  commodities. 
This  truism  is  of  course  correct.  It  applies  for  this  reason  to  the 
fixed  as  well  as  the  circulating  elements  of  productive  capital, 
to  instruments  of  labour  as  well  as  material  of  labour  in  all  forms. 
(This,  iporeover,  ignores  the  fact  that  there  are  elements  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  which  are  furnished  by  nature,  are  not  products.) 
A  machine  is  bought  in  the  market,  as  is  cotton.  But  it  does  not 
foHow  from  this  by  any  means  that  every  fixed  capital  stems  orig¬ 
inally  from  some  circulating  capital;  that  follows  only  from  the 
Smithian  confusion  of  capital  of  circulation  with  circulating  or 
fluent,  i.e.,  non-fixed  capital.  Besides,  Smith  actually  refutes 
himself.  According  to  him  himself,  machines,  as  commodities, 
form  a  part  of  No.  4  of  the  circulating  capital.  Hence  to  say  that 
they  come  from  the  circulating  capital  means  only  that  they  func¬ 
tioned  as  commodity-capital  before  they  functioned  as  machines, 
but  that  materially  they  are  derived  from  themselves;  so  is 
cotton,  as  the  circulating  element  of  some  spinner’s  capital, 
derived  from  the  cotton  in  the  market.  But  if  Adam  Smith  in  his 
further  exposition  derives  fixed  capital  from  circulating  capital 
for  the  reason  that  labour  and  raw  material  are  required  to  build 
machines,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  the  first  place,  in¬ 
struments  of  labour,  hence  fixed  capital,  are  also  required  to 
build  machines,  and  in  the  second  place  fixed  capital,  such  as 
machinery,  etc.,  is  likewise  required  to  make  raw  materials, 
since  productive  capital  always  includes  instruments  of  labour, 
but  not  always  material  of  labour.  He  himself  says  immediately 
afterwards:  “Land,  mines,  and  fisheries,  require  all  both  a  fixed 
and  a  circulating  capital  to  cultivate  them;”  (thus  he  admits 
that  not  only  circulating  but  also  fixed  capital  is  required  for 
the  production  of  raw  material)  “and  ”  (new  error  at  this  point) 
“their  produce  replaces  with  a  profit,  not  only  those  capitals, 


i. 


214 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


but  all  the  others  in  the  society."  (P.  188.)  This  is  entirely  wrong. 
Their  produce  furnishes  tho  raw  material,  auxiliary  material, 
etc.,  for  all  other  branches  of  industry.  But  their  value  does  not 
replace  the  value  of  all  other  social  capitals;  it  replaces  only 
their  own  capital-value  (plus  the  surplus-value).  Adam  Smith 
is  here  again  in  the  grip  of  his  physiocratic  reminiscences. 

Considered  socially  it  is  true  that  that  part  of  the  commodity- 
capital  which  consists  of  products  that  can  serve  only  as  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  must  — unless  they  have  been  produced  to  no  pur¬ 
pose,  cannot  be  sold— sooner  or  later  function  as  instruments  of 
labour,  i.e. ,  with  capitalist  production  as  their  basis,  they  must, 
whenever  they  cease  to  be  commodities,  form  real,  as  before  they 
formed  prospective,  elements  of  the  fixed  part  of  the  social  pro¬ 
ductive  capital. 

But  there  is  a  distinction  here,  arising  from  the  bodily  form 
of  the  product. 

A  spinning  machine  for  instance  has  no  use-value,  unless  it 
is  used  for  spinning,  unless  therefore  it  functions  as  an  element 
of  production  and  consequently,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
capitalist,  as  a  fixed  component  part  of  a  productive  capital. 
But  a  spinning  machine  is  movable.  It  may  be  exported  from  the 
country  in  which  it  was  produced  and  sold  abroad  directly  or  in¬ 
directly  for  raw  materials,  etc.,  or  for  champagne.  In  that  case 
it  has  functioned  only  as  commodity-capital  in  the  country  in 
which  it  was  produced,  but  never  as  fixed  capital,  not  even  after 
its  sale. 

Products  however  which  are  localised  by  being  anchored  in 
the  soil,  and  can  therefore  be  used  only  locally,  such  as  factory 
buildings,  railways,  bridges,  tunnels,  docks,  etc.,  soil  improve¬ 
ments,  etc.,  cannot  be  exported  bodily,  neck  and  crop.  They  are 
not  movable.  They  are  either  useless,  or  as  soon  as  they  have 
been  sold  must  function  as  fixed  capital  in  the  country  that  pro¬ 
duced  them.  To  their  capitalist  producer,  who  builds  factories 
or  improves  land  for  speculative  sale,  these  things  are  forms  of 
his  commodity-capital,  or,  according  to  Adam  Smith,  forms  of 
circulating  capital.  But  viewed  socially  these  things— if  they 
are  not  to  be  useless— must  ultimately  function  as  fixed  capital 
in  that  very  country,  in  some  local  process  of  production.  From 
this  it  does  not  follow  in  the  least  that  immovables  are  in  them¬ 
selves  fixed  capital.  They  may  belong,  as  dwelling  houses,  etc., 
to  the  consumption-fund,  and  in  that  case  they  are  no  part  what¬ 
ever  of  the  social  capital,  although  they  constitute  an  element 
of  the  social  wealth  of  which  capital  is  only  a  part.  The  producer 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


215 


of  these  things,  to  speak  in  the  language  of  Adam  Smith,  makes 
a  profit  by  their  sale.  And  so  they  are  circulating  capital!  Their 
practical  utiliser,  their  ultimate  purchaser,  can  use  them  only 
by  applying  them  in  the  process  of  production.  And  so  they  are 
fixed  capital! 

Titles  to  property,  for  instance  railway  shares,  may  change 
hands  every  day,  and  their  owner  may  make  a  profit  by  their 
sale  even  in  foreign  countries,  so  that  titles  to  property  are  ex¬ 
portable,  although  the  railway  itself  is  not.  Nevertheless  these 
things  must  either  lie  fallow  in  the  very  country  in  which  they 
are  localised,  or  function  as  a  fixed  component  of  some  productive 
capital.  In  the  same  way  manufacturer  A  may  make  a  profit  by 
selling  his  factory  to  manufacturer  B,  but  this  does  not  prevent 
the  factory  from  functioning  as  fixed  capital  the  same  as  before. 

Therefore,  while  the  locally  fixed  instruments  of  labour,  which 
cannot  be  detached  from  the  soil,  will  nevertheless,  in  all  proba¬ 
bility,  have  to  function  as  fixed  capital  in  that  very  country, 
though  they  may  function  as  commodity-capital  for  their  produc¬ 
er  and  not  constitute  any  elements  of  his  fixed  capital  (which  is 
made  up  as  far  as  he  is  concerned  of  the  instruments  of  labour 
he  needs  for  the  construction  of  buildings,  railways,  etc.),  one 
should  not  by  any  means  draw  the  contrary  conclusion  that  fixed 
capital  necessarily  consists  of  immovables.  A  ship  and  a  locomo¬ 
tive  are  effective  only  through  their  motion;  yet  they  function, 
not  for  him  who  produced  them,  but  for  him  who  applies  them  as 
fixed  capital.  On  the  other  hand  things  which  are  most  decidedly 
fixed  in  the  process  of  production,  live  and  die  in  it  and  never 
leave  it  any  more  after  once  entering  it,  are  circulating  compo¬ 
nent  parts  of  the  productive  capital.  Such  are  for  instance  the 
coal  consumed  to  drive  the  machine  in  the  process  of  production, 
the  gas  used  to  light  the  factory,  e|,c.  They  are  circulating  capital 
not  because  they  bodily  leave  the  process  of  production  together 
with  the  product  and  circulate  as  commodities,  but  because 
their  value  enters  wholly  into  that  of  the  commodity  which  they 
help  to  produce  and  which  therefore  must  be  entirely  replaced 
out  of  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  the  commodity. 

In  the  passage  last  quoted  from  Adam  Smith,  notice  must 
also  be  taken  of  the  following  phrase:  “A  circulating  capital 
which  furnishes  ...  the  maintenance  of  the  workmen  who  make 
them”  (machines,  etc.). 

With  the  physiocrats  that  part  of  capital  which  is  advanced 
for  wages  figures  correctly  under  the  avarices  annuelles  as  distin¬ 
guished  from  the  avarices  primitives.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  not 


216 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


the  labour-power  itself  that  appears  with  them  as  a  constituent 
part  of  the  productive  capital  employed  by  the  farmer,  but  the 
means  of  subsistence  (the  maintenance  of  the  workmen,  as  Smith 
calls  it)  given  to  the  farm-labourers.  This  hangs  together  exactly 
with  their  specific  doctrine.  For  according  to  them  the  value- 
part  added  to  the  product  by  labour  (quite  like  the  value-part 
added  to  the  product  by  raw  material,  instruments  of  labour, 
etc.,  in  short,  by  all  the  material  components  of  constant  capital) 
is  equal  only  to  the  value  of  the  means  of  subsistence  paid  to 
the  labourers  and  necessarily  consumed  for  the  maintenance  of 
their  ability  to  function  as  labour-power.  Their  very  doctrine 
stands  in  the  way  of  their  discovering  the  distinction  between 
constant  and  variable  capital.  If  it  is  labour  that  produces  sur¬ 
plus-value  (in  addition  to  reproducing  its  own  price),  then  it 
does  so  in  industry  as  well  as  in  agriculture.  But  since,  according 
to  their  system,  labour  produces  surplus-value  only  in  one  branch 
of  production*  namely  agriculture,  it  does  not  arise  out  of  labour 
but  out  of  the  special  activity  (assistance)  of  nature  in  this  branch. 
And  only  for  this  reason  agricultural  labour  is  to  them  productive 
labour,  as  distinct  from  other  kinds  of  labour. 

Adam  Smith  classifies  the  means  of  subsistence  of  labourers 
as  circulating  capital  in  contradistinction  to  fixed  capital: 

1)  Because  he  confuses  circulating  as  distinguished  from  fixed 
capital  with  forms  of  capital  pertaining  to  the  sphere  of  circula¬ 
tion,  with  capital  of  circulation— a  confusion  uncritically  accept¬ 
ed.  He  therefore  mixes  up  commodity-capital  and  the  circu¬ 
lating  component  of  productive  capital,  and  in  that  case  it  is  a 
matter  of  course  that  whenever  the  social  product  assumes  the 
form  of  commodities,  the  means  of  subsistence  of  the  labourers 
as  well  as  those  of  the  non-labourers,  the  materials  as  well  as  the 
instruments  of  labour  themselves,  must  be  supplied  out  of  the 
commodity-capital. 

2)  But  the  physiocratic  conception  too  lurks  in  Smith’s  anal¬ 
ysis,  although  it  contradicts  the  esoteric — really  scientific — 
part  of  his  own  exposition. 

Generally  speaking  the  advanced  capital  is  converted  into 
productive  capital,  i.e.,  it  assumes  the  form  of  elements  of  pro¬ 
duction  which  are  themselves  the  products  of  past  labour.  (Among 
them  labour-power.)  Capital  can  function  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  only  in  this  form.  Now,  if  instead  of  labour-power  itself, 
into  which  the  variable  part  of  capital  has  been  converted,  we 
take  the  labourer’s  means  of  subsistence,  it  is  evident  that  these 
means  as  such  do  not  differ,  so  far  as  the  formation  of  value  is 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL 


217 


concerned,  from  the  other  elements  of  productive  capital,  from 
the  raw  materials  and  the  food  of  the  labouring  cattle,  on  which 
ground  Smith  in  one  of  the  passages  quoted  above  places  them, 
after  the  manner  of  the  physiocrats,  on  the  same  level.  The  means 
of  subsistence  cannot  themselves  expand  their  own  value  or  add 
any  surplus-value  to  it.  Their  value,  like  that  of  the  other  ele¬ 
ments  of  the  productive  capital,  can  re-appear  only  in  the  value 
of  the  product.  They  cannot  add  any  more  to  its  value  than  they 
have  themselves.  Like  raw  materials,  semi-finished  goods,  etc., 
they  differ  from  fixed  capital  composed  of  instruments  of  labour 
only  in  that  they  are  entirely  consumed  in  the  product  (at  least 
as  far  as  concerns  the  capitalist  who  pays  for  them)  in  the  for¬ 
mation  of  which  they  participate  and  that  therefore  their  value 
must  be  replaced  as  a  whole,  while  in  the  case  of  the  fixed  capital 
this  takes  place  only  gradually,  piecemeal.  The  part  of  productive 
capital  advanced  in  labour-power  (or  in  the  labourer’s  means  of 
subsistence)  differs  here  only  materially  and  not  in  respect  of 
the  process  of  labour  and  production  of  surplus-value  from  the 
other  material  elements  of  productive  capital.  It  differs  only  in 
so  far  as  it  falls  into  the  category  of  circulating  capital  together 
with  one  part  of  the  objective  creators  of  the  product  (“mate¬ 
rials”  Adam  Smith  calls  them  generally),  as  opposed  to  the  other 
part  of  these  objective  product  creators,  which  belong  in  the 
category  of  fixed  capital. 

The  fact  that  the  capital  laid  out  in  wages  belongs  in  the 
circulating  part  of  productive  capital  and,  unlike  the  fixed  com¬ 
ponent  of  productive  capital,  shares  the  quality  of  fluency  with 
a  part  of  the  objective  product  creators,  the  raw  materials,  etc., 
has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  role  played  in  the  process 
of  self-expansion  by  this  variable  part,  as  distinct  from  the 
constant  part  of  capital.  This  refers  only  to  how  this  part  of 
the  advanced  capital-value  is  to  be  replaced,  renewed,  hence 
reproduced  out  of  the  value  of  the  product  by  means  of  the  cir¬ 
culation.  The  purchase  and  repurchase  of  labour-power  belong  in 
the  process  of  circulation.  But  it  is  only  within  the  process  of 
production  that  the  value  laid  out  in  labour-power  is  converted 
(not  for  the  labourer  but  for  the  capitalist)  from  a  definite,  con¬ 
stant  magnitude  into  a  variable  one,  and  only  thus  the  advanced 
value  is  converted  altogether  into  capital-value,  into  capital, 
into  self-expanding  value.  But  by  classing,  like  Smith,  the  value 
expended  for  the  means  of  subsistence  of  the  labourers,  instead 
of  the  value  laid  out  in  labour-power,  as  the  circulating  compo¬ 
nent  of  productive  capital,  the  understanding  of  the  distinction 


218 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


between  variable  and  constant  capital,  and  thus  the  understand¬ 
ing  of  the  capitalist  process  of  production  in  general,  is  rendered 
impossible.  The  determination  that  this  part  of  capital  is  varia¬ 
ble  capital  in  contrast  to  the  constant  capital,  spent  for  material 
creators  of  the  product,  is  buried  beneath  the  determination 
that  the  part  of  the  capital  invested  in  labour-power  belongs, 
as  far  as  the  turnover  is  concerned,  in  the  circulating  part  of 
productive  capital.  And  the  burial  is  brought  to  completion  by 
enumerating  the  labourer’s  means  of  subsistence  instead  of  his 
labour-power  as  an  element  of  productive  capital.  It  is  immate¬ 
rial  whether  the  value  of  the  labour-power  is  advanced  in  money 
or  directly  in  means  of  subsistence.  However  under  capitalist 
production  the  latter  can  be  but  an  exception. s* 

By  thus  establishing  the  definition  of  circulating  capital  as 
being  the  determinant  of  the  capital-value  laid  out  for  labour- 
power — this  physiocratic  definition  without  the  premise  of  the 
physiocrats— Adam  Smith  fortunately  killed  among  his  follow¬ 
ers  the  understanding  that  that  part  of  capital  which  is  spent  on 
labour-power  is  variable  capital.  The  more  profound  and  cor¬ 
rect  ideas  developed  by  him  elsewhere  did  not  prevail,  but  this 
blunder  of  his  did.  Indeed,  other  writers  after  him  went  even  fur¬ 
ther.  They  were  not  content  to  make  it  the  decisive  definition  of 
the  part  of  capital  invested  in  labour-power  to  be  circulating 
as  opposed  to  fixed  capital;  they  made  it  the  essential  definition 
of  circulating  capital  to  be  invested  in  means  of  subsistence  for 
labourers.  Naturally  associated  with  this  is  the  doctrine  that  the 
labour-fund,*  consisting  of  the  necessary  means  of  subsistence, 
is  of  a  definite  magnitude,  which  on  the  one  hand  physically 
limits  the  share  of  the  labourers  in  the  social  product,  but  on  the 
other  has  to  be  fully  expended  in  the  purchase  of  labour-power. 


24  To  what  extent  Adam  Smith  has  blocked  his  own  way  to  an  under¬ 
standing  of  the  role  of  labour-power  in  the  process  of  self-expansion  of  value 
is  proven  by  the  following  sentence,  which  in  the  manner  of  the  physiocrats 
places  the  labour  of  labourers  on  a  level  with  that  of  labouring  cattle.  “Not 
only  his  (the  farmer’s)  labouring  servants,  but  his  labouring  cattle  are  pro¬ 
ductive  labourers.”  (Book  II,  Ch.  V,  p.  243.) 

*  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  pp.  609-11. — Ed. 


CHAPTER  XI 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL. 

RICARDO 

Ricardo  introduces  the  distinction  between  fixed  and  circu¬ 
lating  capital  merely  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  excep¬ 
tions  to  the  rule  of  value,  namely,  cases  where  the  rate  of  wages 
affects  prices.  The  discussion  of  this  point  is  reserved  for  Book 

III* 

But  the  original  lack  of  clarity  is  apparent  at  the  outset  in  the 
following  immaterial  juxtaposition:  “This  difference  in  the  degree 
of  durability  of  fixed  capital,  and  this  variety  in  the  proportions 
in  which  the  two  sorts  of  capital  may  be  combined.”25 

And  if  we  ask  him  which  two  sorts  of  capital  he  is  referring 
to,  we  are  told:  “The  proportions,  too,  in  which  the  capital  that 
is  to  support  labour,  and  the  capital  that  is  invested  in  tools, 
machinery,  and  buildings,  may  be  variously  combined.”26 
In  other  words,  fixed  capital  equals  instruments  of  labour  and 
circulating  capital  equals  capital  laid  out  in  labour.  “Capital 
that  is  to  support  labour”  is  a  senseless  term  culled  from  Adam 
Smith.  On  the  one  hand  the  circulating  capital  is  here  lumped 
together  with  the  variable  capital,  i.e.,  with  that  part  of  produc¬ 
tive  capital  which  is  laid  out  in  labour.  But  on  the  other  hand 
doubly  erroneous  definitions  arise  for  the  reason  that  the  an¬ 
tithesis  is  not  derived  from  the  process  of  self-expansion  of  value — 
constant  and  variable  capital  — but  from  the  process  of  circulation 
(Adam  Smith’s  old  confusion). 

First:  The  differences  in  the  degree  of  durability  of  fixed  cap¬ 
ital  and  the  differences  arising  from  capital  being  composed  of 
constant  and  variable  capital  are  conceived  as  being  of  equal 
significance.  But  the  last-named  difference  determines  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  production  of  surplus-value;  the  first-named  on  the 
other  hand,  so  far  as  the  process  of  self-expansion  is  concerned, 
refers  only  to  the  manner  in  which  a  particular  value  is  trans- 

*  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  Ill,  Ch.  XI,  pp.  196-200.  —  Ed. 

25  Ricardo,  Principles,  etc.,  p.  25. 

Loc.  cit. 


220 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


ferred  from  a  means  of  production  to  the  product;  so  far  as  the 
process  of  circulation  is  concerned,  this  difference  refers  only  to 
the  period  of  the  renewal  of  the  expended  capital,  or,  from  another 
point  of  view,  to  the  time  for  which  it  has  been  advanced.  If  in¬ 
stead  of  seeing  through  the  internal  machinery  of  the  capitalist 
process  of  production  one  considers  merely  the  accomplished 
phenomena,  then  these  distinctions  actually  coincide.  In  the 
distribution  of  the  social  surplus-value  among  the  various  capitals 
invested  in  different  branches  of  industry,  the  differences  in  the 
different  periods  of  time  for  which  capital  is  advanced  (for  in¬ 
stance  the  various  degrees  of  durability  of  fixed  capital)  and  the 
different  organic  compositions  of  capital  (and  therefore  also  the 
different  circulations  of  constant  and  variable  capital)  contribute 
equally  toward  an  equalisation  of  the  general  rate  of  profit 
and  the  conversion  of  values  into  prices  of  production. 

Secondly:  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  process  of  circula¬ 
tion,  we  have  on  one  side  the  instruments  of  labour — fixed  capital, 
on  the  other  the  material  of  labour  and  wages— circulating  capi¬ 
tal.  But  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  process  of  labour  and  self- 
expansion,  we  have  on  one  side  means  of  production  (instruments 
of  labour  and  material  of  labour)— constant  capital;  on  the  other, 
labour-power— variable  capital.  It  is  wholly  immaterial  for  the 
organic  composition  of  capital  (Buch  I,  Kap.  XXIII,  2,  p.  647)* 
whether  a  specified  quantity  of  value  of  constant  capital  consists 
of  many  instruments  of  labour  and  little  material  of  labour  or  of 
much  material  of  labour  and  few  instruments  of  labour,  while 
everything  depends  on  the  ratio  of  the  capital  laid  out  in  means 
of  production  to  that  laid  out  in  labour-power.  Vice  versa:  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  process  of  circulation,  of  the  distinction 
between  fixed  and  circulating  capital,  it  is  just  as  immaterial 
in  what  proportions  a  particular  quantity  of  value  of  circulating 
capital  divides  into  material  of  labour  and  wages.  From  one  of 
these  points  of  view  the  material  of  labour  is  classed  in  the  same 
category  with  the  instruments  of  labour,  as  opposed  to  the  capi¬ 
tal-value  laid  out  in  labour-power;  from  the  other  view-point 
the  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  labour-power  ranges  with  that  laid 
out  in  material  of  labour,  as  opposed  to  that  laid  out  in  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour. 

For  this  reason  the  part  of  the  capital-value  laid  out  in  ma¬ 
terial  of  labour  (raw  and  auxiliary  materials)  does  not  appear  on 
either  side  in  Ricardo.  It  disappears  entirely;  for  it  will  not  do 


•  English  edition:  Ch.  XXV,  2,  pp.  622-23. — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL.  RICARDO  221 


to  class  it  with  fixed  capital,  because  its  mode  of  circulation  co¬ 
incides  entirely  with  that  of  the  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  labour- 
power.  And  on  the  other  hand  it  should  not  be  placed  alongside 
circulating  capital,  because  in  that  event  the  identification  of 
the  antithesis  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital  with  that  of  con¬ 
stant  and  variable  capital,  which  had  been  handed  down  by 
Adam  Smith  and  is  tacitly  retained,  would  abolish  itself.  Ricardo 
has  too  much  logical  instinct  not  to  feel  this,  and  for  this  reason 
that  part  of  capital  vanishes  entirely  from  his  sight. 

It  is  to  be  noted  at  this  point  that  the  capitalist,  to  use  the 
jargon  of  Political  Economy,  advances  the  capital  laid  out  in 
wages  for  various  periods  of  time,  according  to  whether  he  pays 
these  wages  weekly,  monthly,  or  quarterly.  But  as  a  matter  of 
fact  the  reverse  takes  place.  It  is  the  labourer  who  advances  his 
labour  to  the  capitalist  for  a  week,  a  month,  or  three  months, 
according  to  whether  he  is  paid  by  the  week,  by  the  month,  or 
every  three  months.  If  the  capitalist  bought  labour-power  instead 
of  paying  for  it,  in  other  words,  if  he  paid  the  labourer  his  wages 
in  advance  for  a  day,  a  week,  a  month,  or  a  quarter,  he  would  be 
justified  in  claiming  that  he  advanced  wages  for  those  periods. 
But  since  he  pays  after  the  labour  has  lasted  for  days,  weeks, 
or  months,  instead  of  buying  it  and  paying  for  the  time  which  it 
is  to  last,  the  whole  thing  amounts  to  a  capitalist  quid  pro  quo, 
and  the  advance  which  the  labourer  gives  to  the  capitalist  in 
labour  is  turned  into  an  advance  of  money  given  to  the  labourer 
by  the  capitalist.  It  does  not  alter  the  case  in  the  least  that  the 
capitalist  gets  back  the  product  itself  or  its  value  (together  with 
the  surplus-value  embodied  in  it)  from  circulation,  or  realises 
it,  only  after  a  relatively  long  or  short  period  of  time,  according 
to  the  different  periods  required  for  its  manufacture  or  for  its 
circulation.  The  seller  of  a  commodity  does  not  care  a  rap  what 
its  buyer  is  going  to  do  with  it.  The  capitalist  does  not  get  a 
machine  cheaper  because  he  must  advance  its  entire  value  at  one 
shot,  while  this  value  returns  to  him  only  gradually  and  piece¬ 
meal  from  circulation;  nor  does  he  pay  more,  for  cotton  because 
its  value  enters  entirely  into  the  value  of  the  product  into  which 
it  is  made  and  is  therefore  replaced  fully  and  at  one  time  by  the 
sale  of  the  product. 

Let  us  return  to  Ricardo. 

1.  The  characteristic  feature  of  variable  capital  is  that  a  def¬ 
inite,  given  (and  as  such  constant)  part  of  capital,  a  given  sum 
of  values  (assumed  to  be  equal  in  value  to  the  labour-power, 
although  it  does  not  matter  here  whether  the  wages  are  equal, 


222 


THF  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


more  or  less  than  the  value  of  the  labour-power)  is  exchanged 
for  a  self-expanding,  value-creating  power,  viz.,  labour-power, 
which  not  only  reproduces  its  value,  paid  by  the  capitalist,  but 
simultaneously  produces  a  surplus-value,  a  value  not  existing 
previously  and  not  paid  for  by  any  equivalent.  This  characteris¬ 
tic  property  of  the  part  of  capital  laid  out  for  wages,  which  dis¬ 
tinguishes  it  toto  coelo  as  variable  capital  from  constant  capital, 
disappears  whenever  the  part  of  capital  expended  on  wages  is 
considered  solely  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  process  of  circu¬ 
lation  and  thus  appears  as  circulating  capital  in  contradistinction 
to  the  fixed  capital  laid  out  in  instruments  of  labour.  This  is  ap¬ 
parent  if  only  from  the  fact  that  it  is  then  brought  under  one 
head — that  of  circulating  capital — together  with  the  component 
part  of  the  constant  capital  laid  out  in  material  of  labour  and 
opposed  to  the  other  component  of  the  constant  capital — that  laid 
out  in  instruments  of  labour.  Surplus-value,  hence  the  very  cir¬ 
cumstance  which  converts  the  laid-out  sum  of  value  into  capital, 
is  entirely  ignored  thereby.  Similarly  the  fact  is  ignored  that  the 
part  of  the  value  added  to  the  product  by  the  capital  laid  out 
in  wages  is  newly  produced  (and  therefore  really  reproduced), 
while  the  part  of  the  value  which  the  raw  material  adds  to  the 
product  is  not  newly  produced,  not  really  reproduced,  but  only 
preserved  in  the  value  of  the  product,  conserved,  and  hence  mere¬ 
ly  reappears  as  a  component  part  of  the  value  of  the  product. 
The  distinction,  as  now  seen  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  con¬ 
trast  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital,  consists  simply  in 
this:  The  value  of  the  instruments  of  labour  used  for  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  a  commodity  enters  only  partially  into  the  value  of 
the  commodity  and  is  therefore  only  partially  replaced  by  its 
sale,  hence  is  replaced  altogether  only  piecemeal  and  gradually. 
On  the  other  hand  the  value  of  the  labour-power  and  subjects 
of  labour  (raw  materials,  etc.)  used  for  the  production  of  a  com¬ 
modity  entirely  enters  into  it  and  is  therefore  entirely  replaced  by 
its  sale.  In  this  respect,  as  far  as  the  process  of  circulation  is  con¬ 
cerned,  one  part  of  capital  presents  itself  as  fixed,  the  other  as 
fluent,  or  circulating.  In  both  cases  it  is  a  matter  of  transferring 
given,  advanced  values  to  the  product  and  of  their  replacement 
by  the  sale  of  the  product.  The  difference  now  depends  only  on 
whether  the  transfer  of  value,  and  consequently  the  replacement 
of  the  value,  takes  place  piecemeal  and  gradually,  or  in  bulk. 
By  this  means  the  distinction  between  the  variable  and  constant 
capital,  which  decides  everything,  is  blotted  out,  hence  the  whole 
secret  of  the  production  of  surplus-value  and  of  capitalist  produc- 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL.  RICARDO  223 


tion,  the  circumstances  which  transform  certain  values  and  the 
things  in  which  they  present  themselves  into  capital,  are  oblit¬ 
erated.  All  constituent  parts  of  capital  are  then  distinguished 
merely  by  their  mode  of  circulation  (and,  of  course,  circulation 
of  commodities  concerns  itself  solely  with  already  existing  given 
values);  and  the  capital  laid  out  in  wages  shares  a  peculiar  mode 
of  circulation  with  the  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  raw  materials, 
semi-finished  products,  auxiliary  materials,  as  opposed  to  the 
part  of  capital  laid  out  in  instruments  of  labour. 

It  is  therefore  understandable  why  bourgeois  Political  Econ¬ 
omy  instinctively  clung  to  Adam  Smith’s  confusion  of  the  cat¬ 
egories  “constant  and  variable  capital”  with  the  categories 
“fixed  and  circulating,”  and  repeated  it  parrotlike,  without  crit¬ 
icism,  from  generation  to  generation  for  a  century.  The  part  of 
capital  laid  out  for  wages  is  no  longer  in  the  least  distinguished 
by  bourgeois  Political  Economy  from  the  part  of  capital  laid  out 
for  raw  materials,  and  differs  only  formally  from  constant  capi¬ 
tal— on  the  point  of  whether  it  is  circulated  piecemeal  or  in  one 
lump  by  the  product.  Thereby  the  basis  for  an  understanding  of 
the  real  movement  of  capitalist  production,  and  hence  of  capital¬ 
ist  exploitation,  is  buried  at  one  stroke.  It  is  but  a  question  of 
the  reappearance  of  advanced  values. 

In  Ricardo  the  uncritical  adoption  of  the  Smithian  confusion 
is  more  disturbing  not  only  than  in  the  later  apologists,  in  whom 
the  confusion  of  ideas  is  rather  something  not  disturbing,  but 
than  in  Adam  Smith  himself,  because  Ricardo,  in  contrast  to  the 
latter,  is  more  consistent  and  incisive  in  his  analysis  of  value  and 
surplus-value,  and  indeed  upholds  the  esoteric  Adam  Smith 
against  the  exoteric  Adam  Smith. 

Among  the  physiocrats  there  is  no  such  confusion.  The  distinc¬ 
tion  between  avarices  annuelles  and  avarices  primitives  refers 
only  to  the  different  periods  of  reproduction  of  the  different  com¬ 
ponents  of  capital,  especially  of  agricultural  capital,  while  their 
views  on  the  production  of  surplus-value  form  a  part  of  their 
theory  that  is  independent  of  these  distinctions,  a  part  they  hold 
up  as  the  strong  point  of  the  theory.  The  formation  of  surplus- 
value  is  not  explained  as  originating  from  capital  as  such,  but 
is  attributed  to  one  particular  sphere  of  the  production  of  capi¬ 
tal,  agriculture. 

Secondly.  The  essential  point  in  the  definition  of  variable 
capital — and  therefore  for  the  conversion  of  any  sum  of  values 
into  capital  — is  that  the  capitalist  exchanges  a  definite,  given 
(and  in  this  sense  constant)  magnitude  of  value  for  value-creat- 


224 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


ing  power,  a  magnitude  of  value  for  the  production,  self-expan¬ 
sion,  of  value.  Whether  the  capitalist  pays  the  labourer  in  money 
or  in  means  of  subsistence  does  not  affect  this  basic  definition.  It 
only  alters  the  mode  of  existence  of  the  value  advanced  by  the 
capitalist  which  in  one  case  exists  in  the  form  of  money  for  which 
the  labourer  buys  himself  his  means  of  subsistence  in  the  market, 
in  the  other  case  in  the  form  of  means  of  subsistence  which  he 
consumes  directly.  Developed  capitalist  production  rests  indeed 
on  the  assumption  that  the  labourer  is  paid  in  money,  just  as 
in  general  it  presupposes  the  process  of  production  brought  about 
by  the  process  of  circulation,  hence  presupposes  the  monetary 
system.  But  the  creation  of  surplus-value — and  consequently 
the  capitalisation  of  the  advanced  sum  of  values— has  its  source 
neither  in  the  money-form  of  wages  nor  in  the  form  of  wages  paid 
in  kind,  nor  in  the  capital  laid  out  in  the  purchase  of  labour- 
power.  It  arises  out  of  the  exchange  of  value  for  value-creating 
power,  out  of  the  conversion  of  a  constant  into  a  variable 
magnitude. 

The  greater  or  smaller  fixity  of  the  instruments  of  labour  de¬ 
pends  on  their  degree  of  durability,  hence  on  a  physical  property. 
Other  circumstances  being  equal,  they  will  wear  out  sooner 
or  later,  will  therefore  function  a  longer  or  a  shorter  time  as  fixed 
capital,  according  to  their  durability.  But  it  is  by  no  means  sole¬ 
ly  on  account  of  this  physical  property  of  durability  that  they 
function  as  fixed  capital.  The  raw  material  in  metal  factories  is 
just  as  durable  as  the  machines  used  in  manufacturing,  and  more 
durable  than  many  component  parts  of  these  machines,  such  as 
leather  and  wood.  Nevertheless  the  metal  serving  as  raw  mate¬ 
rial  forms  a  part  of  the  circulating  capital,  while  the  instrument 
of  labour,  although  probably  built  of  the  same  metal,  is  a  part 
of  the  fixed  capital  when  in  use.  Consequently  it  is  not  because  of 
the  material,  physical  nature,  nor  the  relatively  great  or  small 
speed  with  which  it  wears  out  that  a  metal  is  put  now  in  the  cat¬ 
egory  of  fixed,  now  in  that  of  circulating  capital.  This  distinc¬ 
tion  is  rather  due  to  the  role  played  by  it  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  being  a  subject  of  labour  in  one  case  and  an  instrument 
of  labour  in  the  other. 

The  function  of  an  instrument  of  labour  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  requires  that  on  the  average  it  should  serve  for  a  long¬ 
er  or  shorter  period  in  ever  renewed  labour-processes.  Its  very 
function  therefore  prescribes  that  the  stuff  of  which  it  is  com¬ 
posed  should  be  more  or  less  durable.  But  it  is  not  the  durability 
of  the  material  of  which  it  is  fabricated  that  by  itself  makes  it 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL.  RICARDO  225 


fixed  capital.  The  same  stuff,  when  raw  material,  becomes  cir¬ 
culating  capital,  and  among  economists  who  confuse  the  distinc¬ 
tion  between  commodity-capital  and  productive  capital  with 
the  distinction  between  circulating  and  fixed  capital,  the  same 
stuff,  the  same  machine,  is  circulating  capital  as  product  and 
fixed  capital  as  instrument  of  labour. 

Although  it  is  not  the  durability  of  the  material  of  which  it 
is  fabricated  that  makes  an  instrument  of  labour  fixed  capital, 
nevertheless  its  role  as  such  an  instrument  requires  that  it  should 
be  composed  of  relatively  durable  material.  The  durability  of 
its  material  is  therefore  a  condition  of  its  function  as  an  instru¬ 
ment  of  labour,  and  consequently  the  material  basis  of  the  mode 
of  circulation  which  renders  it  fixed  capital.  Other  things  being 
equal,  the  higher  or  lower  degree  of  wear  and  tear  of  the  stuff 
it  is  made  of  impresses  upon  it  in  a  higher  or  lower  degree  the 
stamp  of  fixedness,  is  therefore  very  closely  interwoven  with  its 
quality  of  being  fixed  capital. 

If  the  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  labour-power  is  considered 
exclusively  from  the  point  of  view  of  circulating  capital,  hence 
in  contrast  with  fixed  capital,  and  if  consequently  the  distinc¬ 
tions  between  constant  and  variable  capital  are  lumped  with 
those  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital,  then  it  is  natural- 
supposing  that  material  reality  of  the  instrument  of  labour  forms 
an  essential  basis  of  its  character  of  fixed  capital  — to  derive  its 
character  of  circulating  capital,  in  contrast  with  the  fixed  capi¬ 
tal,  from  the  material  reality  of  the  capital  invested  in  labour- 
power,  and  then  again  to  determine  the  circulating  capital  with 
the  aid  of  the  material  reality  of  the  variable  capital. 

The  real  substance  of  the  capital  laid  out  in  wages  is  labour 
itself,  active,  value-creating  labour-power,  living  labour,  which 
the  capitalist  exchanges  for  dead,  materialised  labour  and  em¬ 
bodies  in  his  capital,  by  which  means,  and  by  which  alone,  the 
value  in  his  hands  turns  into  self-expanding  value.  But  this  power 
of  self-expansion  is  not  sold  by  the  capitalist.  It  is  always  only 
a  constituent  part  of  his  productive  capital,  the  same  as  his  in¬ 
struments  of  labour;  it  is  never  a  part  of  his  commodity-capital, 
as  for  instance  the  finished  product  which  he  sells.  In  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  the  instruments  of  labour,  as  components  of 
the  productive  capital,  are  not  opposed  to  labour-power  as  fixed 
capital  any  more  than  materials  of  labour  and  auxiliary  sub¬ 
stances  are  identified  with  it  as  circulating  capital.  Labour-power 
confronts  both  of  them  as  a  personal  factor,  while  those  are  ob¬ 
jective  factors— speaking  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  labour- 


H—  I 


226 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


process.  Both  of  them  stand  opposed  to  labour-power,  as  constant 
capital  to  variable  capital — speaking  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  process  of  self-expansion  of  value.  Or,  if  mention  is  to  be  made 
here  of  a  material  difference,  so  far  as  it  affects  the  process  of 
circulation,  it  is  only  this:  It  follows  from  the  nature  of  value, 
which  is  nothing  but  materialised  labour,  and  from  the  nature 
of  active  labour-power,  which  is  nothing  but  labour  in  process 
of  materialisation,  that  labour-power  continually  creates  value 
and  surplus-value  during  the  time  it  functions;  that  what  on 
the  part  of  labour-power  appears  as  motion,  as  a  creation  of 
value,  appears  on  the  part  of  its  product  in  a  state  of  rest,  as 
created  value.  If  the  labour-power  has  performed  its  function 
capital  no  longer  consists  of  labour-power  on  the  one  side  and 
means  of  production  on  the  other.  The  capital-value  that  was 
invested  in  labour-power  is  now  value  which  (+surplus-value)  was 
added  to  the  product.  In  order  to  repeat  the  process,  the  product 
must  be  sold  and  new  labour-power  constantly  bought  with  the 
proceeds  and  incorporated  in  the  productive  capital.  This  then 
gives  to  the  part  of  capital  invested  in  labour-power,  and  to  that 
invested  in  material  of  labour,  etc.,  the  character  of  circulating 
capital  as  opposed  to  the  capital  remaining  fixed  in  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour. 

But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  secondary  definition  of  the  circu¬ 
lating  capital,  which  it  shares  with  a  part  of  the  constant  capital 
(raw  and  auxiliary  materials),  is  made  the  essential  definition 
of  the  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  labour-power,  to  wit,  that  the 
value  laid  out  in  it  is  transferred  in  full  to  the  product  in  whose 
creation  it  is  consumed,  and  not  gradually  and  piecemeal  as  in 
the  case  of  the  fixed  capital,  and  that  consequently  it  must  be 
replaced  in  full  by  the  sale  of  the  product — then  the  part  of  the 
capital  laid  out  in  wages  must  likewise  consist,  materially,  not 
of  active  labour-power  but  of  the  material  elements  which  the 
labourer  buys  with  his  wag«s,  i.e.,  it  must  consist  of  that  part  of 
the  social  commodity-capital  which  passes  into  the  consumption 
of  the  labourer,  viz.,  of  means  of  subsistence.  In  that  case  the 
fixed  capital  consists  of  the  more  slowly  perishable  instruments 
of  labour  which  therefore  have  to  be  replaced  more  slowly,  and 
the  capital  laid  out  in  labour-power  consists  of  the  means  of 
subsistence,  which  must  be  replaced  more  rapidly. 

However,  the  border-line  between  greater  or  lesser  perishable¬ 
ness  is  very  vague  and  indistinct. 

“The  food  and  clothing  consumed  by  the  labourer,  the  build¬ 
ings  in  which  he  works,  the  implements  with  which  his  labour 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL.  RICARDO  227 


is  assisted,  are  all  of  a  perishable  nature.  There  is  however  a 
vast  difference  in  the  time  for  which  these  different  capitals  will 
endure:  a  steam-engine  will  last  longer  than  a  ship,  a  ship  than 
the  clothing  of  the  labourer,  and  the  clothing  of  the  labourer 
longer  than  the  food  which  he  consumes.”27 

Ricardo  forgets  to  mention  the  house  in  which  the  labourer 
lives,  his  furniture,  his  tools  of  consumption,  such  as  knives, 
forks,  dishes,  etc.,  all  of  which  have  the  same  quality  of  durabil¬ 
ity  as  the  instruments  of  labour.  The  same  things,  the  same  kinds 
of  things,  appear  in  one  place  as  articles  of  consumption  and  in 
another  as  instruments  of  labour. 

The  difference,  as  stated  by  Ricardo,  is  this:  “According  as 
capital  is  rapidly  perishable  and  requires  to  be  frequently  re¬ 
produced,  or  is  of  slow  consumption,  it  is  classed  under  the  heads 
of  circulating  or  fixed  capital.”28 

And  he  adds  this  note:  “A  division  not  essential,  and  in  which 
the  line  of  demarcation  cannot  be  accurately  drawn.”2* 

Thus  we  have  once  more  happily  arrived  in  the  camp  of  the 
physiocrats,  where  the  distinction  between  avarices  annuelles  and 
avarices  primitives  was  one  referring  to  the  time  of  consumption, 
and  consequently  also  to  the  different  times  of  reproduction  of 
the  capital  employed.  Only,  what  with  them  constitutes  an  im¬ 
portant  phenomenon  of  social  production  and  is  described  in  the 
Tableau  Economique  in  connection  with  the  process  of  circulation, 
becomes  here  a  subjective  and,  in  Ricardo’s  own  words,  super¬ 
fluous  distinction. 

Once  the  part  of  capital  invested  in  labour  differs  from  that 
invested  in  instruments  of  labour  only  by  its  period  of  repro¬ 
duction  and  hence  its  term  of  circulation,  and  once  one  part 
consists  of  means  of  subsistence  and  the  other  of  instruments 
of  labour  so  that  those  differ  from  these  only  in  being  more  rap¬ 
idly  perishable,  there  being  various  degrees  of  durability  with¬ 
in  the  first  group  itself,  all  differentia  specifica  between  capital 
invested  in  labour-power  and  capital  invested  in  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  is  naturally  obliterated. 

This  wholly  contradicts  Ricardo’s  doctrine  of  value,  likewise 
his  theory  of  profit,  which  is  in  fact  a  theory  of  surplus-value. 
In  general  he  considers  the  distinction  between  fixed  and  circu¬ 
lating  capital  only  to  the  extent  that  different  proportions  of 


27  Ricardo,  Principles,  etc.,  p.  26. 
29  Ibid. 

29  Ibid. 


8* 


228 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


both  of  them  in  equally  large  capitals  invested  in  different 
branches  of  production  influence  the  law  of  value,  particularly  the 
extent  to  which  an  increase  or  decrease  of  wages  in  consequence 
of  these  conditions  affects  prices.  But  even  within  this  restrict¬ 
ed  investigation  he  commits  the  gravest  errors  on  account  of  his 
confusing  fixed  and  circulating  with  constant  and  variable  cap¬ 
ital.  Indeed,  he  starts  his  analysis  on  an  entirely  wrong  basis. 
In  the  first  place,  in  so  far  as  the  part  of  the  capital-value  laid 
out  in  labour-power  has  to  be  classified  under  the  head  of  circu¬ 
lating  capital,  the  definitions  of  circulating  capital  itself  are 
wrongly  developed,  particularly  the  circumstances  which  place 
the  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  labour  under  this  head.  In  the  sec¬ 
ond  place  there  is  a  confusion  of  the  definition  according  to 
which  the  part  of  capital  invested  in  labour  is  variable  capital 
with  the  definition  according  to  which  it  is  circulating  capital, 
as  opposed  to  fixed  capital. 

It  is  evident  at  the  outset  that  the  definition  of  capital  invest¬ 
ed  in  labour-power  as  circulating  or  fluent  capital  is  a  secondary 
one,  obliterating  its  differentia  specifica  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction.  For  in  this  definition,  on  the  one  hand,  the  capitals 
invested  in  labour  are  of  the  same  importance  as  those  invested 
in  raw  material,  etc.  A  classification  which  identifies  a  part  of 
the  constant  capital  with  the  variable  capital  does  not  deal  with 
the  differentia  specifica  of  variable  capital  in  opposition  to  con¬ 
stant  capital.  On  the  other  hand  the  parts  of  capital  laid  out 
in  labour  are  indeed  opposed  to  those  invested  in  instruments 
of  labour,  but  not  in  the  least  with  reference  to  the  fact  that 
these  parts  enter  into  the  production  of  value  in  quite  different 
ways,  but  with  reference  to  the  fact  that  both  transfer  their 
value  to  the  product,  but  in  different  periods  of  time. 

In  all  of  these  cases  the  point  at  issue  is  how  a  given  value, 
laid  out  in  the  process  of  production  of  commodities,  whether 
it  be  wages,  the  price  of  raw  materials,  or  that  of  instruments  of 
labour,  is  transferred  to  the  product,  hence  is  circulated  by  the 
product,  and  returned  to  its  starting-point  by  the  sale  of  the  prod¬ 
uct,  or  is  replaced.  The  only  difference  lies  here  in  the  "how," 
in  the  particular  manner  of  the  transfer,  and  therefore  also  of 
the  circulation  of  this  value. 

Whether  the  price  of  labour-power  previously  stipulated  by 
contract  in  each  individual  case  is  paid  in  money  or  means  of 
subsistence  does  not  alter  in  any  way  its  character  of  being  a 
fixed  price.  However  it  is  evident  in  the  case  of  wages  paid  in 
money  that  the  money  itself  does  not  pass  into  the  process  of 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL.  RICARDO  229 


production  in  the  way  that  the  value  as  well  as  the  material 
of  the  means  of  production  do.  But  if  on  the  other  hand  the  means 
of  subsistence  which  the  labourer  buys  with  his  wages  are  direct¬ 
ly  classed  in  the  same  category,  alongside  raw  materials,  etc., 
as  the  material  form  of  circulating  capital  and  are  opposed  to 
the  instruments  of  labour,  then  the  matter  assumes  a  different 
aspect.  If  the  value  of  these  things,  of  the  means  of  production, 
is  transferred  to  the  product  in  the  labour-process,  the  value  of 
those  other  things,  the  means  of  subsistence,  reappears  in  the 
labour-power  that  consumes  them  and  is  likewise  transferred  to 
the  product  by  the  functioning  of  this  power.  In  both  these  cases 
it  is  equally  a  question  of  the  mere  reappearance,  in  the  product, 
of  the  values  advanced  during  production.  (The  physiocrats  took 
this  seriously  and  therefore  denied  that  industrial  labour  created 
surplus-value.)  Thus  the  previously  quoted*  passage  from  Way- 
land.  “The  form,  however,  is  of  no  consequence _  The  vari¬ 

ous  kinds  of  food,  clothing,  and  shelter,  necessary  for  the  exist¬ 
ence  and  comfort  of  the  human  being,  are  also  changed.  They 
are  consumed,  from  time  to  time,  and  their  value  reappears....” 
( Elements  of  Pol.  Econ .,  pp.  31,  32.)  The  capital-values  advanced 
for  production  in  the  form  of  both  means  of  production  and 
means  of  subsistence  reappear  here  equally  in  the  value  of  the 
product.  Thus  the  transformation  of  the  capitalist  process  of 
production  into  a  complete  mystery  is  happily  accomplished 
and  the  origin  of  the  surplus-value  existing  in  the  product  is 
entirely  withdrawn  from  view. 

Furthermore  this  brings  to  completion  the  fetishism  peculiar 
to  bourgeois  Political  Economy,  the  fetishism  which  metamor¬ 
phoses  the  social,  economic  character  impressed  on  things  in  the 
process  of  social  production  into  a  natural  character  stemming 
from  the  material  nature  of  those  things.  For  instance,  “instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  are  fixed  capital,”  is  a  scholastic  definition, 
which  leads  to  contradictions  and  confusion.  Just  as  was  demon¬ 
strated  in  the  case  of  the  labour-process  (Buch  I,  Kap.  V),**  that 
it  depends  wholly  on  the  role  which  the  material  components  play 
in  a  particular  labour-process,  on  their  function— whether  they 
function  as  instruments  of  labour,  material  of  labour,  or  products 
—so  instruments  of  labour  are  fixed  capital  only  if  the  process 
of  production  is  really  a  capitalist  process  of  production  and  the 
means  of  production  are  therefore  really  capital  and  possess 


*  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  p.  207,  Note  3. — Ed. 

**  English  edition:  Ch.  VII.— Ed. 


230 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


economic  definiteness,  the  social  character  of  capital.  And  in 
the  second  place,  they  are  fixed  capital  only  if  they  transfer 
their  value  to  the  product  in  a  particular  way.  If  not,  they  re¬ 
main  instruments  of  labour  without  being  fixed  capital.  In  the 
same  way  if  auxiliary  materials  like  manure  give  up  value  in  the 
same  peculiar  manner  as  the  greater  part  of  the  instruments 
of  labour,  they  become  fixed  capital  although  they  are  not  in¬ 
struments  of  labour.  It  is  not  a  question  here  of  definitions,  which 
things  must  be  made  to  fit.  We  are  dealing  here  with  definite 
functions  which  must  be  expressed  in  definite  categories. 

If  to  be  capital  laid  out  in  wages  is  considered  one  of  the  qual¬ 
ities  of  means  of  subsistence  as  such  under  all  circumstances, 
then  it  will  also  be  a  quality  of  this  “circulating”  capital  “to 
support  labour.”  (Ricardo,  p.  25.)  If  the  means  of  subsistence 
were  not  “capital”  they  would  not  support  labour-power;  whereas 
it  is  precisely  their  quality  of  capital  that  endows  them  with  the 
faculty  of  supporting  capital  by  foreign  labour. 

If  means  of  subsistence  as  such  are  circulating  capital  — after 
the  latter  has  been  converted  into  wages  — it  follows  further 
that  the  magnitude  of  wages  depends  on  the  ratio  of  the  number 
of  labourers  to  the  given  amount  of  circulating  capital  — a  favour¬ 
ite  economic  proposition  — while  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  quantity 
of  means  of  subsistence  withdrawn  from  the  market  by  the  labour¬ 
er,  and  the  quantity  of  means  of  subsistence  available  for  the 
consumption  of  the  capitalist,  depend  on  the  ratio  of  the  surplus- 
value  to  the  price  of  labour. 

Ricardo,  like  Barton,293  everywhere  confounds  the  relation 
of  variable  to  constant  capital  with  that  of  circulating  to  fixed 
capital.  We  shall  see  later  to  what  extent  this  vitiates  his  inves¬ 
tigation  of  the  rate  of  profit.* 

Ricardo  furthermore  identifies  the  differences  which  arise  in 
the  turnover  from  other  causes  than  the  distinction  between 
fixed  and  circulating  capital  with  this  distinction:  “It  is  also 
to  be  observed  that  the  circulating  capital  may  circulate,  or  be 
returned  to  its  employer,  in  very  unequal  times.  The  wheat  bought 
by  a  farmer  to  sow  is  comparatively  a  fixed  capital  to  the  wheat 
purchased  by  a  baker  to  make  into  loaves.  The  one  leaves  it  in 
the  ground,  and  can  obtain  no  return  for  a  year;  the  other  can  get 
it  ground  into  flour,  sell  it  as  bread  to  his  customers,  and  have 

29a  Observations  on  the  Circumstances  Which  Influence  the  Condition 
of  the  Labouring  Classes  of  Society,  London,  1817.  A  pertinent  passage  is 
quoted  in  Book  I,  p.  655,  Note  79.  [English  edition:  p.  631,  Note  1.) 

*  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  Ill,  Ch.  MIL  —Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  FIXED  AND  CIRCULATING  CAPITAL.  RICARDO  231 


his  capital  free,  to  renew  the  same,  or  commence  any  other  em¬ 
ployment  in  a  week.”30 

It  is  characteristic  here  that  wheat,  although  not  serving  as 
a  means  of  subsistence  but  as  raw  material  when  used  for  sowing, 
is  in  the  first  place  circulating  capital,  because  in  itself  it  is  a 
means  of  subsistence,  and  in  the  second  place  fixed  capital,  be¬ 
cause  its  return  takes  over  a  year.  However  it  is  not  only  the 
more  or  less  slow  or  rapid  return  which  makes  a  fixed  capital  of 
a  means  of  production,  but  also  the  definite  manner  in  which  it 
transfers  its  value  to  the  product. 

The  confusion  created  by  Adam  Smith  has  brought  about  the 
following  results: 

1.  The  distinction  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital  is 
confused  with  that  between  productive  capital  and  commodity- 
capital.  For  instance  a  machine  is  considered  circulating  capital 
when  in  the  market  as  a  commodity,  and  fixed  capital  when  in¬ 
corporated  in  the  process  of  production.  Moreover,  it  is  abso¬ 
lutely  impossible  to  ascertain  why  one  kind  of  capital  should  be 
more  fixed  or  circulating  than  another. 

2.  All  circulating  capital  is  identified  with  capital  laid  out  or 
to  be  laid  out  in  wages.  This  is  so  in  John  Stewart  Mill,*  and  others. 

3.  The  distinction  between  variable  and  constant  capital, 
which  was  previously  mistaken  by  Barton,  Ricardo,  and  others 
for  that  between  circulating  and  fixed  capital,  is  finally  wholly 
reduced  to  this  last-named  distinction,  for  instance  in  Ramsay, 
where  all  means  of  production,  raw  materials,  etc.,  as  well  as 
instruments  of  labour  are  fixed  capital,  and  only  capital  laid 
out  in  wages  is  circulating  capital.**  But  because  the  reduction 
takes  place  in  this  form,  the  real  distinction  between  constant 
and  variable  capital  is  not  understood. 

4.  The  latter-day  British,  especially  Scotch,  economists,  who 
look  upon  all  things  from  the  inexpressibly  narrow-minded  point 
of  view  of  a  bank  clerk,  such  as  MacLeod,***  Patterson,****  and 
others,  transform  the  distinction  between  fixed  and  circulating 
capital  into  one  between  money  at  call  and  money  not  at  call. 

30  Principles,  etc.,  pp.  26  and  27 

*  J.  St  Mill,  Essays  on  Some  Unsettled  Questions  of  Political  Economy, 
London,  1844,  p.  164. — Ed. 

**  G.  Hamsay,  An  Essay  on  the  Distribution  of  Wealth,  Edinburgh, 
1833,  pp  21-24. — Ed. 

***  H.  1).  MacLeod,  The  Elements  of  Political  Economy,  London,  1858, 
pp.  76-80.  —  Ed. 

****  H.  H.  Patterson.  The  Science  of  Finance.  A  Practical  Treatise, 
Edinburgh  and  London,  1868,  pp.  129-44. — Ed. 


CHAPTER  XII 


THE  WORKING  PERIOD 

Let  us  take  two  branches  of  business  with  working-days  of 
equal  length,  say,  of  ten  hours  each,  one  of  them  a  cotton  spin¬ 
ning  mill,  the  other  a  locomotive  works.  In  one  of  these  branches 
a  definite  quantity  of  finished  product,  cotton  yarn,  is  turned 
out  daily  or  weekly;  in  the  other,  the  labour-process  has  to  be 
repeated  for  perhaps  three  months  in  order  to  manufacture  a  fin¬ 
ished  product,  a  locomotive.  In  one  case  the  product  is  discrete  in 
nature,  and  each  day  or  week  the  same  labour  starts  over  again. 
In  the  other  case  the  labour-process  is  continuous  and  extends 
over  a  rather  great  number  of  daily  labour-processes  which,  in 
their  inter-connection,  in  the  continuity  of  their  operation,  bring 
forth  a  finished  product  only  after  a  rather  long  period  of  time. 
Although  the  duration  of  the  daily  labour-process  is  the  same 
here,  there  is  a  very  marked  difference  in  the  duration  of  the  pro¬ 
ductive  act,  i.e.,  in  the  duration  of  the  repeated  labour-processes 
required  to  get  out  a  finished  product,  to  market  it  as  a  commod¬ 
ity,  hence  to  convert  it  from  productive  into  commodity-capital. 
The  distinction  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital  has  nothing 
to  do  with  this.  The  distinction  indicated  would  exist  even  if 
the  very  same  proportions  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital  were 
employed  in  both  branches  of  production. 

These  differences  in  the  duration  of  the  productive  act  can  be 
observed  not  alone  between  different  spheres  of  production,  but 
also  within  one  and  the  same  sphere  of  production,  depending 
on  the  amount  of  product  to  be  turned  out.  An  ordinary  dwelling 
house  is  built  in  less  time  than  a  large  factory  and  therefore  re¬ 
quires  fewer  continuous  labour-processes.  While  the  building  of  a 
locomotive  takes  three  months,  that  of  an  armoured  man-of-war 
requires  one  year  or  more.  It  takes  nearly  a  year  to  produce  grain 
and  several  years  to  raise  big  cattle,  while  timber-growing  needs 


THE  WORKING  PERIOD 


233 


from  twelve  to  one  hundred  years.  A  few  months  will  suffice  for  a 
country  road,  while  a  railway  is  a  job  of  years.  An  ordinary  car¬ 
pet  is  made  in  about  a  week,  but  a  Gobelin  takes  years,  etc.  Hence 
the  time  consumed  in  the  performance  of  the  productive  act 
varies  infinitely. 

The  difference  in  the  duration  of  the  productive  act  must  evi¬ 
dently  give  rise  to  a  difference  in  the  velocity  of  the  turnover, 
if  invested  capitals  are  equal,  in  other  words,  must  make  a  dif¬ 
ference  in  the  time  for  which  a  certain  capital  is  advanced.  As¬ 
sume  that  a  spinning-mill  and  a  locomotive  works  employ  the 
same  amount  of  capital,  that  the  ratio  of  their  constant  to  their 
variable  capital  is  the  same,  likewise  the  proportion  between  the 
fixed  and  circulating  parts  of  the  capitals,  and  that  lastly  their 
working-day  is  of  equal  length  and  its  division  into  necessary 
and  surplus-labour  the  same.  In  order  to  eliminate,  furthermore, 
all  the  circumstances  arising  out  of  the  process  of  circulation  and 
having  no  bearing  on  the  present  case,  let  us  suppose  that  both 
the  yarn  and  the  locomotive  are  made  to  order  and  will  be  paid 
on  delivery  of  the  finished  product.  At  the  end  of  the  week,  on 
delivery  of  the  finished  yarn,  the  spinning-mill  owner  recovers 
his  outlay  for  circulating  capital  (leaving  the  surplus-value  out 
of  consideration),  likewise  the  fixed  capital’s  wear  and  tear  in¬ 
corporated  in  the  value  of  the  yarn.  He  can  therefore  repeat  the 
same  circuit  anew  with  the  same  capital.  It  has  completed  its 
turnover.  The  locomotive  manufacturer  on  the  other  hand  must 
lay  out  ever  new  capital  for  wages  and  raw  material  every  week 
for  three  months  in  succession,  and  it  is  only  after  three  months, 
after  the  delivery  of  the  locomotive,  that  the  circulating  capital, 
meanwhile  gradually  laid  out  in  one  and  the  same  productive  act 
for  the  manufacture  of  one  and  the  same  commodity,  once  more 
exists  in  a  form  in  which  it  can  renew  its  circuit.  The  wear  and 
tear  of  his  machinery  during  these  three  months  is  likewise  re¬ 
placed  only  now.  The  expenditure  of  the  one  is  made  for  one  week, 
that  of  the  other  is  the  weekly  expenditure  multiplied  by  twelve. 
All  other  circumstances  being  assumed  as  equal,  the  one  must 
have  twelve  times  as  much  circulating  capital  at  his  disposal 
as  the  other. 

It  is  however  immaterial  here  that  the  capitals  advanced  weekly 
are  equal.  Whatever  the  amount  of  the  advanced  capital,  it  is 
advanced  for  only  one  week  in  the  one  case  and  for  twelve  weeks 
in  the  other,  and  the  above  periods  must  respectively  elapse 
before  it  can  be  used  for  a  new  operation,  before  the  same  opera¬ 
tion  can  be  repeated  with  it,  or  a  different  one  inaugurated. 


234 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


The  difference  in  the  velocity  of  the  turnover,  or  in  the  length 
of  time  for  which  the  individual  capital  must  be  advanced  before 
the  same  capital-value  can  be  employed  in  a  new  labour- or  self¬ 
expansion  process,  arises  here  from  the  following  circumstances: 

Granted  the  manufacture  of  a  locomotive  or  of  any  other  ma¬ 
chine  requires  100  working-days.  So  far  as  the  labourers  employed 
in  the  manufacture  of  yarn  or  the  building  of  locomotives  are 
concerned,  100  working-days  constitute  in  either  case  a  discon¬ 
tinuous  (discrete)  magnitude,  consisting,  according  to  our  as¬ 
sumption,  of  100  consecutive  separate  ten-hour  labour-processes. 
But  so  far  as  the  product— the  machine— is  concerned,  these  100 
working-days  form  a  continuous  magnitude,  a  working-day  of 
1,000  working-hours,  one  single  connected  act  of  production. 

I  call  such  a  working-day  which  is  composed  of  a  more  or  less  nu¬ 
merous  succession  of  connected  working-days  a  working  period. 
When  we  speak  of  a  working-day  we  mean  the  length  of  working 
time  during  which  the  labourer  must  daily  spend  his  labour- 
power,  must  work  day  by  day.  But  when  we  speak  of  a  working 
period  we  mean  the  number  of  connected  working-days  required 
in  a  certain  branch  of  industry  for  the  manufacture  of  a  finished 
product.  In  this  case  the  product  of  every  working-day  is  but 
a  partial  one,  which  is  further  worked  upon  from  day  to  day  and 
only  at  the  end  of  the  longer  or  shorter  working  period  receives 
its  finished  form,  is  a  finished  use-value. 

Interruptions,  disturbances  of  the  process  of  social  production, 
in  consequence  for  instance  of  crises,  have  therefore  very  differ¬ 
ent  effects  on  labour-products  of  a  discrete  nature  and  on  those 
that  require  for  their  production  a  prolonged  connected  period. 
In  the  one  case  all  that  happens  is  that  today’s  production  of  a 
certain  quantity  of  yarn,  coal,  etc.,  is  not  followed  by  tomor¬ 
row’s  new  production  of  yarn,  coal,  etc.  Not  so  in  the  case  of 
ships,  buildings,  railways,  etc.  Here  it  is  not  only  the  day’s 
work  but  an  entire  connected  act  of  production  that  is  inter¬ 
rupted.  If  the  job  is  not  continued,  the  means  of  production  and 
labour  already  consumed  in  its  production  are  wasted.  Even  if  it 
is  resumed,  a  deterioration  has  inevitably  set  in  in  the  meantime. 

For  the  entire  length  of  the  working  period,  the  part  of  the 
value  daily  transferred  to  the  product  by  the  fixed  capital  ac¬ 
cumulates  in  layers,  as  it  were,  until  the  product  is  finished. 
And  here  the  difference  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital  is 
revealed  at  the  same  time  in  its  practical  significance.  Fixed 
capital  is  advanced  in  the  process  of  production  for  a  compara¬ 
tively  long  period;  it  need  not  be  renewed  until  after  the  ex- 


THE  WORKING  PERIOD 


235 


piration  of  perhaps  a  period  of  several  years.  Whether  a  steam- 
engine  transfers  its  value  daily  piecemeal  to  some  yarn,  the 
product  of  a  discrete  labour-process,  or  for  three  months  to  a  loco¬ 
motive,  the  product  of  a  continuous  act  of  production,  is  immate¬ 
rial  as  far  as  laying  out  the  capital  required  for  the  purchase  of 
the  steam-engine  is  concerned.  In  the  one  case  its  value  flows 
back  in  small  doses,  for  instance  weekly,  in  the  other  case  in 
larger  quantities,  for  instance  quarterly.  But  in  either  case  the 
renewal  of  the  steam-engine  may  take  place  only  after  twenty 
years.  So  long  as  every  individual  period  within  which  the  value 
of  the  steam-engine  is  returned  piecemeal  by  the  sale  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  is  shorter  than  the  lifetime  of  the  engine  itself,  the  latter 
continues  to  function  in  the  process  of  production  for  several 
working  periods. 

It  is  different  with  the  circulating  components  of  the  advanced 
capital  The  labour-power  bought  for  a  definite  week  is  expend¬ 
ed  in  the  course  of  the  same  week  and  is  materialised  in  the  prod¬ 
uct.  It  must  be  paid  for  at  the  end  of  the  week.  And  this  invest¬ 
ment  of  capital  in  labour-power  is  repeated  every  week  during 
the  three  months;  yet  the  expenditure  of  this  part  of  the  capital 
during  the  one  week  does  not  enable  the  capitalist  to  settle  for 
the  purchase  of  the  labour  the  following  week.  Every  week  addi¬ 
tional  capital  must  be  expended  to  pay  for  labour-power,  and, 
leaving  aside  the  question  of  credit,  the  capitalist  must  be  able 
to  lay  out  wages  for  three  months,  even  if  he  pays  them  only  in 
weekly  doses.  It  is  the  same  with  the  other  portion  of  circulat¬ 
ing  capital,  the  raw  and  auxiliary  materials.  One  layer  of  labour 
after  another  is  piled  up  on  the  product.  It  is  not  alone  the  value 
of  the  expended  labour-power  that  is  continually  being  trans¬ 
ferred  to  the  product  during  the  labour-process,  but  also  sur¬ 
plus-value.  This  product,  however,  is  unfinished,  it  has  not  yet 
the  form  of  a  finished  commodity,  hence  it  cannot  yet  circulate. 
This  applies  likewise  to  the  capital-value  transferred  in  layers 
from  the  raw  and  auxiliary  materials  to  the  product. 

Depending  on  the  length  of  the  working  period  exacted  by 
the  specific  nature  of  the  product  or  by  the  useful  effect  to  be 
achieved  in  its  manufacture,  a  continuous  additional  investment 
of  circulating  capital  (wages  and  raw  and  auxiliary  materials) 
is  required,  no  part  of  which  is  in  a  form  capable  of  circulation 
and  hence  of  promoting  a  renewal  of  the  same  operation.  Every 
part  is  on  the  contrary  held  fast  successively  in  the  sphere  of 
production  as  a  component  of  the  nascent  product,  tied  up  in 
the  form  of  productive  capital.  Now,  the  time  of  turnover  is 


230 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


equal  to  the  sum  of  the  time  of  production  and  the  time  of  cir¬ 
culation  of  the  capital.  Hence  a  prolongation  of  the  time  of 
production  reduces  the  velocity  of  the  turnover  quite  as  much 
as  a  prolongation  of  the  time  of  circulation.  In  the  present  case 
however  the  following  two  points  must  be  noted: 

Firstly:  The  prolonged  stay  in  the  sphere  of  production.  The 
capital  advanced  for  instance  for  labour,  raw  material,  etc.,  dur¬ 
ing  the  first  week,  as  well  as  the  portions  of  value  transferred 
to  the  product  by  the  fixed  capital,  are  held  fast  in  the  sphere  of 
production  for  the  entire  term  of  three  months,  and,  being  incor¬ 
porated  in  an  only  nascent,  still  unfinished  product,  cannot  pass 
into  circulation  as  commodities. 

Secondly:  Since  the  working  period  required  for  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  the  productive  act  lasts  three  months,  and  forms  in  fact 
only  one  connected  labour-process,  a  new  dose  o.f  circulating  cap¬ 
ital  must  be  continually  added  week  after  week  to  the  preceding 
amount.  The  total  of  the  successively  advanced  additional  capi¬ 
tal  grows  therefore  with  the  length  of  the  working  period. 

We  have  assumed  that  capitals  of  equal  size  are  invested  in 
spinning  and  machine-building,  that  these  capitals  contain  equal 
proportions  of  constant  and  variable,  fixed  and  circulating  capi¬ 
tal,  that  the  working-days  are  of  equal  length,  in  brief,  that  all 
conditions  are  equal  except  the  duration  of  the  working  period. 
In  the  first  week,  the  outlay  for  both  is  the  same,  but  the  product 
of  the  spinner  can  be  sold  and  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  used  to 
buy  new  labour-power,  new  raw  materials,  etc.;  in  short,  produc¬ 
tion  can  be  resumed  on  the  same  scale.  The  machine-manufacturer 
on  the  other  hand  cannot  reconvert  the  circulating  capital  ex¬ 
pended  in  the  first  week  into  money  and  resume  operations  with 
it  until  three  months  later,  when  his  product  is  finished.  There 
is  therefore  first  a  difference  in  the  return  of  the  identical  quan¬ 
tities  of  capital  invested.  But  in  the  second  place  identical  amounts 
of  productive  capital  are  employed  during  the  three  months  in 
both  spinning  and  machine-building.  However  the  magnitude 
of  the  outlay  of  capital  in  the  case  of  the  yarn  manufacturer  is 
quite  different  from  that  of  the  machine-builder;  for  in  the  one 
case  the  same  capital  is  rapidly  renewed  and  the  same  operation 
can  therefore  be  repeated,  while  in  the  other  case  the  renewal 
of  the  capital  is  relatively  slow,  so  that  ever  new  quantities  of 
capital  must  be  added  to  the  old  up  to  the  time  of  its  renewal. 
Consequently  there  is  a  difference  not  only  in  the  length  of  time 
of  renewal  of  definite  portions  of  capital,  or  in  the  length  of  time 
for  which  the  capital  is  advanced,  but  also  in  the  quantity  of  the 


THE  WORKING  PERIOD 


237 


capital  to  be  advanced  according  to  the  duration  of  the  labour- 
process  (although  the  capitals  employed  daily  or  weekly  are 
equal).  This  circumstance  is  worthy  of  note  for  the  reason  that 
the  term  of  the  advance  may  be  prolonged,  as  we  shall  see  in  the 
cases  treated  in  the  next  chapter,  without  thereby  necessitating  a 
corresponding  increase  in  the  amount  of  the  capital  to  be  advanced. 
The  capital  must  be  advanced  for  a  longer  time,  and  a  larger 
amount  of  capital  is  tied  up  in  the  form  of  productive  capital. 

At  the  less  developed  stages  of  capitalist  production,  under¬ 
takings  requiring  a  long  working  period,  and  hence  a  large  invest¬ 
ment  of  capital  for  a  long  time,  such  as  the  building  of  roads, 
canals,  etc.,  especially  when  they  can  be  carried  out  only  on  a 
large  scale,  are  either  not  carried  out  on  a  capitalist  basis  at  all, 
but  rather  at  communal  or  state  expense  (in  earlier  times  gener¬ 
ally  by  forced  labour,  so  far  as  the  labour-power  was  concerned). 
Or  objects  whose  production  requires  a  lengthy  working  period 
are  fabricated  only  for  the  smallest  part  by  recourse  to  the  private 
means  of  the  capitalist  himself.  For  instance,  in  the  building  of 
a  house,  the  private  person  for  whom  it  is  built  makes  a  number 
of  partial  advance  payments  to  the  building  contractor.  He  there¬ 
fore  actually  pays  for  the  house  piecemeal,  in  proportion  as  the 
productive  process  progresses.  But  in  the  advanced  capitalist  era, 
when  on  the  one  hand  huge  capitals  are  concentrated  in  the  hands 
of  single  individuals,  while  on  the  other  the  associated  capitalist 
(joint-stock  companies)  appears  side  by  side  with  the  individual 
capitalist  and  a  credit  system  has  simultaneously  been  devel¬ 
oped,  a  capitalist  building  contractor  builds  only  in  exceptional 
cases  on  the  order  of  private  individuals.  His  business  nowa¬ 
days  is  to  build  whole  rows  of  houses  and  entire  sections  of  cities 
for  the  market,  just  as  it  is  the  business  of  individual  capitalists 
to  build  railways  as  contractors. 

To  what  extent  capitalist  production  has  revolutionised  the 
building  of  houses  in  London  is  shown  by  the  testimony  of  a 
builder  before  the  banking  committee  of  1857.  When  he  was 
young,  he  said,  houses  were  generally  built  to  order  and  the  pay¬ 
ments  made  in  instalments  to  the  contractor  as  certain  stages  of 
the  building  were  being  completed.  Very  little  was  built  on 
speculation.  Contractors  used  to  assent  to  such  operations  mainly 
to  keep  their  men  in  constant  employment  and  thus  hold  them 
together.  In  the  last  forty  years  all  that  has  changed.  Very  little 
is  now  built  to  order.  Anyone  wanting  a  new  house  picks  one  from 
among  those  built  on  speculation  or  still  in  process  of  construc¬ 
tion.  The  builder  no  longer  works  for  his  customers  but  for  the 


238 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


market.  Like  every  other  industrial  capitalist  he  is  compelled 
to  have  finished  articles  in  the  market.  While  formerly  a  builder 
had  perhaps  three  or  four  houses  building  at  a  time  for  specula¬ 
tion,  he  must  now  buy  a  large  plot  of  ground  (which  in  continen¬ 
tal  language  means  rent  it  for  ninety-nine  years,  as  a  rule), 
build  from  100  to  200  houses  on  it,  and  thus  embark  on  an  enter¬ 
prise  which  exceeds  his  resources  twenty  to  fifty  times.  The 
funds  are  procured  through  mortgaging  and  the  money  is  placed 
at  the  disposal  of  the  contractor  as  the  buildings  proceed.  Then, 
if  a  crisis  comes  along  and  interrupts  the  payment  of  the  advance 
instalments,  the  entire  enterprise  generally  collapses.  At  best, 
the  houses  remain  unfinished  until  better  times  arrive;  at  the 
worst  they  are  sold  at  auction  for  half  their  cost.  Without  spec¬ 
ulative  building,  and  on  a  large  scale  at  that,  no  contractor  can 
get  along  today.  The  profit  from  just  building  is  extremely  small. 
His  main  profit  comes  from  raising  the  ground-rent,  from  care¬ 
ful  selection  and  skilled  utilisation  of  the  building  terrain.  It 
is  by  this  method  of  speculation  anticipating  the  demand  for 
houses  that  almost  the  whole  of  Belgravia  and  Tyburnia,  and  the 
countless  thousands  of  villas  round  London  have  been  built. 
(Abbreviated  from  the  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Bank 
Acts,  Part  I,  1857,  Evidence,  Questions  5413-18;  5435-36.) 

The  execution  of  enterprises  requiring  working  periods  of  con¬ 
siderable  length  and  operations  on  a  large  scale  does  not  fall 
fully  within  the  province  of  capitalist  production  until  the  con¬ 
centration  of  capital  becomes  very  pronounced,  and  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  credit  system  offers  to  the  capitalist,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  convenient  expedient  of  advancing  and  thus  risking 
other  people’s  capital  instead  of  his  own.  It  goes  without  say¬ 
ing  that  whether  the  capital  advanced  in  production  belongs  to 
him  who  uses  it  or  does  not  has  no  effect  on  the  velocity  or  time 
of  turnover. 

Conditions  such  as  co-operation,  division  of  labour,  applica¬ 
tion  of  machinery,  which  augment  the  product  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  working-day,  shorten  at  the  same  time  the  working  period 
of  connected  acts  of  production.  Thus  machinery  shortens  the 
building  time  of  houses,  bridges,  etc.;  mowers  and  threshers 
reduce  the  working  period  required  to  transform  ripe  grain  into 
the  finished  product.  Greater  speed  due  to  improved  shipbuild¬ 
ing  cuts  the  turnover  time  of  capital  invested  in  shipping.  But 
improvements  that  shorten  the  working  period  and  thereby  the 
time  during  which  circulating  capital  must  be  advanced  gener¬ 
ally  go  hand  in  hand  with  an  increased  outlay  of  fixed  capital. 


THE  WORKING  PERIOD 


239 


On  the  other  hand  the  working  period  in  certain  branches  of 
production  may  be  diminished  by  the  mere  extension  of  co¬ 
operation.  The  completion  of  a  railway  is  expedited  by  setting 
afoot  huge  armies  of  labourers  and  thus  tackling  the  job  in  many 
spots  at  once.  The  time  of  turnover  is  lessened  in  that  case  by 
an  increase  of  the  advanced  capital.  More  means  of  production 
and  more  labour-power  must  be  united  under  the  command  of 
the  capitalist. 

Whereas  the  shortening  of  the  working  period  is  thus  most¬ 
ly  connected  with  an  increase  of  the  capital  advanced  for  this  ab¬ 
breviated  time — the  shorter  the  term  of  advance  the  greater  the 
capital  advanced — it  must  here  be  recalled  that  regardless  of 
the  existing  amount  of  social  capital,  the  essential  point  is  the 
degree  in  which  the  means  of  production  and  subsistence,  or  the 
disposal  of  them,  are  scattered  or  concentrated  in  the  hands 
of  individual  capitalists,  in  other  words,  the  degree  of  concen¬ 
tration  of  capitals  already  attained.  Inasmuch  as  credit  promotes, 
accelerates  and  enhances  the  concentration  of  capital  in  one 
hand,  it  contributes  to  the  shortening  of  the  working  period  and 
thus  of  the  turnover  time. 

In  branches  of  production  in  which  the  working  period,  wheth¬ 
er  continuous  or  discontinuous,  is  prescribed  by  definite  natural 
conditions,  no  shortening  by  the  above-mbntioned  means  can 
take  place.  Says  W.  Walter  Good,  in  his  Political ,  Agricultural , 
and  Commercial  Fallacies  (London,  1866,  p.  325):  “In  regard 
to  quicker  returns,  this  term  cannot  be  made  to  apply  to  corn 
crops,  as  one  return  only  can  be  made  per  annum.  In  respect  to 
stock,  we  will  simply  ask,  how  is  the  return  of  two-  and  three- 
year-old  sheep,  and  four-  and  five-year-old  oxen  to  be  quickened.” 

The  necessity  of  securing  ready  money  as  soon  as  possible  (for 
instance  to  meet  fixed  obligations,  such  as  taxes,  ground-rent, 
etc.)  solves  this  problem,  e  g.,  by  selling  or  slaughtering  cattle 
before  they  have  reached  the  economically  normal  age,  to  the 
great  detriment  of  agriculture.  This  also  brings  about  in  the  end 
a  rise  in  the  price  of  meat.  “Men  who  have  mainly  reared  cattle 
for  supplying  the  pastures  of  the  Midland  counties  in  summer, 
and  the  yards  of  the  eastern  counties  in  winter  ..  have  become 
so  crippled  through  the  uncertainty  and  lowness  in  the  prices 
of  corn  that  they  are  glad  to  take  advantage  of  the  high  prices 
of  butter  and  cheese;  the  former  they  take  to  market  weekly  to 
help  to  pay  current  expenses,  and  draw  on  the  other  from  some 
factor,  who  takes  the  cheese  when  fit  to  move,  and,  of  course, 
nearly  at  his  own  price.  For  this  reason,  remembering  that  farming 


240 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


is  governed  by  the  principles  of  Political  Economy,  the  calves 
which  used  to  come  south  from  the  dairying  counties  for  rearing, 
are  now  largely  sacrificed  at  times  at  a  week  and  ten  days  old, 
in  the  shambles  of  Birmingham,  Manchester,  Liverpool,  and 
other  large  neighbouring  towns.  If,  however,  malt  had  been  free 
from  duty,  not  only  would  farmers  have  made  more  profit  and 
therefore  been  able  to  keep  their  stock  till  it  got  older  and  heavier, 
but  it  would  have  been  substituted  for  milk  for  rearing  by  men 
who  did  not  keep  cows,  and  thus  the  present  alarming  scarcity 
of  young  cattle  which  has  befallen  the  nation  would  have  been 
largely  averted.  What  these  little  men  now  say,  in  reply  to  rec¬ 
ommendations  to  rear,  is,  ‘We  know  very  well  it  would  pay  to 
rear  on  milk,  but  it  would  first  require  us  to  put  our  hands  in  our 
purse,  which  we  cannot  do,  and  then  we  should  have  to  wait  a 
long  time  for  a  return,  instead  of  getting  it  at  once  by  dairying.’  ” 
(Ibid.,  pp.  11  and  12.) 

If  the  prolongation  of  the  turnover  has  such  consequences 
for  the  small  English  farmers,  it  is  easy  to  see  what  disarrange¬ 
ment  it  must  produce  among  the  small  peasants  of  the  continent. 

The  part  of  the  value  transferred  in  layers  by  the  fixed  capital 
to  the  product  accumulates,  and  the  return  of  this  part  is  delayed, 
in  proportion  to  the  length  of  the  working  period  and  thus  also 
of  the  period  of  time  required  for  the  completion  of  the  commodity 
capable  of  circulation.  But  this  delay  does  not  cause  a  renewed 
outlay  of  fixed  capital.  The  machine  continues  to  function  in 
the  process  of  production,  whether  the  replacement  of  its  wear 
and  tear  in  the  form  of  money  returns  slowly  or  rapidly.  It  is 
different  with  the  circulating  capital.  Not  only  must  capital  be 
tied  up  for  a  rather  long  time,  in  proportion  to  the  length  of  the 
working  period,  but  new  capital  must  be  continually  advanced  in 
tne  shape  of  wages,  and  raw  and  auxiliary  materials.  A  delayed 
return  has  therefore  a  different  effect  on  each.  No  matter  whether 
the  return  is  rapid  or  slow,  the  fixed  capital  continues  to  function. 
But  the  circulating  capital  becomes  unable  to  perform  its  func¬ 
tions,  if  the  return  is  delayed,  if  it  is  tied  up  in  the  form  of  un¬ 
sold,  or  unfinished  and  as  yet  unsalable  products,  and  if  no  addi¬ 
tional  capital  is  at  hand  for  its  renewal  in  kind. 

“While  the  peasant  farmer  starves,  his  cattle  thrive.  Repeated 
showers  had  fallen  in  the  country,  and  the  forage  was  abundant. 
The  Hindoo  peasant  will  perish  by  hunger  beside  a  fat  bullock. 
The  prescriptions  of  superstition,  which  appear  cruel  to  the  in¬ 
dividual,  are  conservative  for  the  community;  and  the  preserva¬ 
tion  of  the  labouring  cattle  secures  the  power  of  cultivation,  and 


THE  WORKING  PERIOD 


241 


the  sources  of  future  life  and  wealth.  It  may  sound  harsh  and  sad 
to  say  so,  but  in  India  it  is  more  easy  to  replace  a  man  than  an 
ox.”  (Return,  East  India.  Madras  and  Orissa  Famine.  No.  4, 
p.  44.)  Compare  with  the  preceding  the  utterance  of  Manava 
Dharma  Sastra,*  Chapter  X,  §  62.  “Desertion  of  life,  without 
reward,  for  the  sake  of  preserving  a  priest  or  a  cow  ...  may  cause 
the  beatitude  of  those  base-born  tribes.  ” 

Naturally,  it  is  impossible  to  deliver  a  five-year-old  animal 
before  the  lapse  of  five  years.  But  what  is  possible,  within  cer¬ 
tain  limits,  is  getting  animals  ready  for  their  destination  in  less 
time  by  changing  the  way  of  treating  them.  This  is  precisely 
what  Bakewell  accomplished.  Formerly  English  sheep,  like  the 
French  as  late  as  1855,  were  not  fit  for  the  butcher  until  four 
or  five  years  old.  According  to  the  Bakewell  system,  sheep  may  be 
fattened  when  only  one  year  old  and  in  every  case  have  reached  their 
full  growth  before  the  end  of  the  second  year.  By  careful  selection, 
Bakewell,  a  Dishley  Grange  farmer,  reduced  the  skeleton  of  sheep 
to  the  minimum  required  for  their  existence.  His  sheep  are  called 
the  New  Leicesters.  "...  the  breeder  can  now  send  three  to  market 
in  the  same  space  of  time  that  it  formerly  took  him  to  prepare 
one;  and  if  they  are  not  taller,  they  are  broader,  rounder,  and 
have  a  greater  development  in  those  parts  which  give  most  flesh. 
Of  bone,  they  have  absolutely  no  greater  amount  than  is  neces¬ 
sary  to  support  them,  and  almost  all  their  weight  is  pure  meat.  ” 
(Lavergne,  The  Rural  Economy  of  England ,  etc.,  1855,  p.  20.) 

The  methods  which  shorten  the  working  periods  are  applica¬ 
ble  in  various  branches  of  industry  to  a  widely  varying  extent 
and  do  not  eliminate  the  time  differences  of  the  various  working 
periods.  To  stick  to  our  illustration,  the  working  period  required 
for  the  building  of  a  locomotive  may  be  absolutely  shortened  by 
the  employment  of  new  machine-tools.  But  if  at  the  same  time 
the  finished  product  turned  out  daily  or  weekly  by  a  cotton¬ 
spinning  mill  is  still  more  rapidly  increased  by  improved  proc¬ 
esses,  then  the  working  period  in  machine-building,  compared 
with  that  in  spinning,  has  nevertheless  grown  relatively  in 
length. 


*  Manava  Dharma  Sastra  or  Manu  laws — an  ancient  Indian  religious, 
legal  and  ritual  code  which  determined  the  duties  of  evqry  Hindu  in  keep¬ 
ing  with  the  tenets  of  Brahmanism.  The  compilation  of  these  laws  is  tradi¬ 
tionally  attributed  to  Manu,  the  mythical  progenitor  of  man.  Marx  quotes 
from  Manava  Dharma  Sastra,  or  the  Institutes  of  Manu  According  to  the 
Gloss  of  Kulluka,  Comprising  the  Indian  System  of  Duties,  Religious  and 
Civil,  third  edition,  Madras,  1863,  p.  281. — Ed. 


CHAPTER  XIII 


THE  TIME  OF  PRODUCTION 

Working  time  is  always  production  time,  that  is  to  say,  time 
during  which  capital  is  held  fast  in  the  sphere  of  production.  But 
vice  versa,  not  all  time  during  which  capital  is  engaged  in  the 
process  of  production  is  necessarily  working  time. 

It  is  here  not  a  question  of  interruptions  of  the  labour-process 
necessitated  by  natural  limitations  of  the  labour-power  itself, 
although  we  have  seen  to  what  extent  the  mere  circumstance  that 
fixed  capital  — factory  buildings,  machinery,  etc.— lies  idle  dur¬ 
ing  pauses  in  the  labour-process,*  became  one  of  the  motives  for 
an  unnatural  prolongation  of  the  labour-process  and  for  day-and- 
night  work.  We  are  dealing  here  rather  with  interruptions  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  length  of  the  labour-process,  brought  about  by  the 
very  nature  of  the  product  and  its  fabrication,  during  which  the 
subject  of  labour  is  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  subjected  to  nat¬ 
ural  processes,  must  undergo  physical,  chemical  and  physiolog¬ 
ical  changes,  during  which  the  labour-process  is  entirely  or 
partially  suspended. 

For  instance  grape  after  being  pressed  must  ferment  awhile 
and  then  rest  for  some  time  in  order  to  reach  a  certain  degree  of 
perfection.  In  many  branches  of  industry  the  product  must  pass 
through  a  drying  process,  for  instance  in  pottery,  or  be  exposed 
to  certain  conditions  in  order  to  change  its  chemical  properties, 
as  for  instance  in  bleaching.  Winter  grain  needs  about  nine  months 
to  mature.  Between  the  time  of  sowing  and  harvesting  the  labour- 
process  is  almost  entirely  suspended.  In  timber-raising,  after  the 
sowing  and  the  incidental  preliminary  work  are  completed,  the 
seed  requires  about  100  years  to  be  transformed  into  a  finished 
product  and  during  all  that  time  it  stands  in  comparatively  very 
little  need  of  the  action  of  labour. 

In  all  these  cases  additional  labour  is  drawn  on  only  occasion- 


•  See:  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  pp.  256-63. — Ed. 


THE  TIME  OF  PRODUCTION 


243 


ally  during  a  large  portion  of  the  time  of  production.  The 
condition  described  in  the  previous  chapter,  where  additional 
capital  and  labour  must  be  supplied  to  the  capital  already  tied  up 
in  the  process  of  production,  obtains  here  only  with  longer  or 
shorter  intervals. 

In  all  these  cases  therefore  the  production  time  of  the  ad¬ 
vanced  capital  consists  of  two  periods:  one  period  during  which  the 
capital  is  engaged  in  the  labour-process  and  a  second  period  dur¬ 
ing  which  its  form  of  existence — that  of  an  unfinished  product  — 
is  abandoned  to  the  sway  of  natural  processes,  without  being  at 
that  time  in  the  labour-process.  Nor  does  it  matter  in  the  least 
that  these  tvco  periods  of  time  may  cross  or  wedge  into  one  another 
here  and  there.  The  working  period  and  the  production  period 
do  not  coincide  in  these  cases.  The  production  period  is  longer 
than  the  working  period.  But  the  product  is  not  finished,  not  ready, 
hence  not  fit  to  be  converted  from  the  form  of  productive  into 
that  of  commodity-capital  until  the  production  period  is  com¬ 
pleted.  Consequently  the  length  of  the  turnover  period  increases 
in  proportion  to  the  length  of  the  production  time  that  does  not 
consist  of  working  time.  In  so  far  as  the  production  time  in  excess 
of  the  working  time  is  not  fixed  by  natural  laws  given  once  and 
for  all,  such  as  govern  the  maturing  of  grain,  the  growth  of  an  oak, 
etc.,  the  period  of  turnover  can  often  be  more  or  less  shortened 
by  an  artificial  reduction  of  the  production  time.  Such  instances 
are  the  introduction  of  chemical  bleaching  instead  of  bleach¬ 
ing  on  the  green  and  more  efficient  drying  apparatus.  Or,  in  tan¬ 
ning,  where  the  penetration  of  the  tannic  acid  into  the  skins,  by 
the  old  method,  took  from  six  to  eighteen  months,  while  the  new 
method,  by  means  of  an  air-pump,  does  it  in  only  one  and  a  half 
to  two  months.  (J.  G.  Courcelle-Seneuil,  Traite  theorique  et  pra¬ 
tique  des  entreprises  indus  trie  lies,  etc.,  Paris,  1857,  2-me  6d.)  The 
most  magnificent  illustration  of  an  artificial  abbreviation  of  the 
time  of  production  taken  up  exclusively  with  natural  processes 
is  furnished  by  the  history  of  iron  manufacture,  more  especially 
the  conversion  of  pig  iron  into  steel  during  the  last  100  years, 
from  the  puddling  process  discovered  about  1780  to  the  modern 
Bessemer  process  and  the  latest  methods  introduced  since.  The 
time  of  production  has  been  brought  down  tremendously,  but  the 
investment  of  fixed  capital  has  increased  in  proportion. 

A  peculiar  illustration  of  the  divergence  of  the  production 
time  from  the  working  time  is  furnished  by  the  American  manu¬ 
facture  of  shoe-lasts.  In  this  case  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
unproductive  costs  arises  from  having  to  hold  the  timber  at  least 


244 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


eighteen  months  before  it  is  dry  enough  to  work,  so. as  to  prevent 
subsequent  warping.  During  this  time  the  wood  does  not  pass 
through  any  other  labour-process.  The  period  of  turnover  of  the 
invested  capital  is  therefore  not  determined  solely  by  the  time 
required  for  the  manufacture,  of  the  lasts  but  also  by  the  time 
during  which  it  lies  unproductive  in  the  shape  of  drying  wood. 
It  stays  18  months  in  the  process  of  production  before  it  can 
enter  into  the  labour-process  proper.  This  example  shows  at  the 
same  time  that  the  times  of  turnover  of  different  parts  of  the 
aggregate  circulating  capital  may  differ  in  consequence  of  con¬ 
ditions  which  do  not  arise  within  the  sphere  of  circulation  but 
owe  their  origin  to  the  production  process. 

The  difference  between  production  time  and  working  time  be¬ 
comes  especially  apparent  in  agriculture.  In  our  moderate  cli¬ 
mates  the  land  bears  grain  once  a  year.  Shortening  or  lengthening 
the  period  of  production  (for  winter  grain  it  averages  nine  months) 
itself  depends  on  the  alternation  of  good  and  bad  seasons,  and  for 
this  reason  cannot  be  accurately  determined  and  controlled  be¬ 
forehand  as  in  industry  proper.  Only  such  by-products  as  milk, 
cheese,  etc.,  can  steadily  be  produced  and  sold  in  comparatively 
short  periods.  On  the  other  hand,  working  time  data  are  as  fol¬ 
lows:  “The  number  of  working-days  in  the  various  regions  of 
Germany,  with  due  regard  to  the  climatic  and  other  determining 
conditions,  will  for  the  three  main  working  periods  presumably 
be:  For  the  spring  period,  from  the  middle  of  March  or  beginning 
of  April  to  the  middle  of  May,  about  50  to  60  working-days;  for 
the  summer  period,  from  the  beginning  of  June  to  the  end  of  Au¬ 
gust,  65  to  80;  and  for  the  autumn  period,  from  the  beginning  of 
September  to  the  end  of  October,  or  the  middle  or  end  of  No¬ 
vember,  55  to  75  working-days.  For  the  winter,  only  the  jobs 
customary  for  that  time,  such  as  the  hauling  of  manure,  wood, 
market  goods,  building  materials,  etc.,  are  to  be  noted.  ”  (F.  Kirch- 
hof,  Handbuch  der  landwirtschaft lichen  Betriebslehre,  Dessau, 
1852,  S.  160.) 

The  more  unfavourable  the  climate,  the  more  congested  is 
the  working  period  in  agriculture,  and  hence  the  shorter  is  the 
time  in  which  capital  and  labour  are  expended.  Take  Russia  for 
instance.  In  some  of  the  northern  districts  of  that  country  field 
labour  is  possible  only  from  130  to  150  days  throughout  the  year, 
and  it  may  be  imagined  what  a  loss  Russia  would  sustain  if  50 
out  of  the  65  millions  of  her  European  population  remained  with¬ 
out  work  during  the  six  or  eight  months  of  the  winter,  when 
agricultural  labour  is  at  a  standstill.  Apart  from  the  200,000 


THE  TIME  OF  PRODUCTION 


245 


peasants  who  work  in  the  10,500  factories  of  Russia,  local  domes¬ 
tic  industries  have  everywhere  developed  in  the  villages.  There 
are  villages  in  which  all  the  peasants  have  been  for  generations 
weavers,  tanners,  shoemakers,  locksmiths,  cutlers,  etc  This  is 
particularly  the  case  in  the  gubernias  of  Moscow,  Vladimir,  Ka¬ 
luga,  Kostroma,  and  Petersburg.  By  the  way,  this  domestic  in¬ 
dustry  is  being  pressed  more  and  more  into  the  service  of  capital¬ 
ist  production.  The  weavers  for  instance  are  supplied  with  warp 
and  woof  directly  by  merchants  or  through  middlemen.  (Abbre¬ 
viated  from  the  Reports  by  H.  M.  Secretaries  of  Embassy  and 
Legation,  on  the  Manufactures,  Commerce,  etc.,  No.  8,  1865, 
pp.  86  and  87.)  We  see  here  that  the  divergence  of  the  production 
period  from  the  working  period,  the  latter  being  but  a  part  of 
the  former,  constitutes  the  natural  basis  for  the  combination  of 
agriculture  with  subsidiary  rural  industries,  and  that  these 
subsidiary  industries  in  turn  offer  points  of  vantage  to  the 
capitalist,  who  intrudes  first  in  the  person  of  the  merchant.  When 
capitalist  production  later  accomplishes  the  separation  of 
manufacture  and  agriculture,  the  rural  labourer  becomes  ever 
more  dependent  on  merely  casual  accessory  employment  and  his 
condition  deteriorates  thereby.  For  capital,  as  will  be  seen  later, 
all  differences  in  the  turnover  are  evened  out.  Not  so  for  the 
labourer. 

In  most  branches  of  industry  proper,  of  mining,  transportation, 
etc.,  operations  proceed  evenly,  the  working  time  being  the  same 
year  in  year  out  and  the  outlay  of  capital  passing  daily  into  the 
circulation  process  being  uniformly  distributed,  apart  from  such 
abnormal  interruptions  as  fluctuations  of  prices,  business  dislo¬ 
cations,  etc.  Likewise  the  return  of  the  circulating  capital  or 
its  renewal  is  evenly  distributed  throughout  the  year,  market 
conditions  otherwise  remaining  the  same.  Yet  there  is  in  the  course 
of  the  various  periods  of  the  year  the  greatest  inequality  in  the 
outlay  of  circulating  capital  in  such  capital  investments  in  which 
the  working  time  constitutes  only  a  part  of  the  production  time, 
while  the  return  takes  place  only  in  bulk  at  a  time  fixed  by  nat¬ 
ural  conditions.  If  the  scale  of  business  is  the  same,  i.e.,  if  the 
amount  of  advanced  circulating  capital  is  the  same,  it  must  be 
advanced  in  larger  quantities  at  a  time  and  for  longer  periods  than 
in  enterprises  with  continuous  working  periods.  There  is  also 
a  considerably  greater  difference  here  between  the  life  of  the 
fixed  capital  and  the  time  in  which  it  really  functions  produc¬ 
tively.  Due  to  the  difference  between  working  time  and  production 
time,  the  time  of  employment  of  the  applied  fixed  capital  is  of 


ll 


246 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


course  likewise  continually  interrupted  for  a  longer  or  shorter 
time,  for  instance  in  agriculture  in  the  case  of  working  cattle, 
implements  and  machines.  In  so  far  as  this  fixed  capital  consists  of 
draught  animals,  it  requires  continually  the  same,  or  nearly  the 
same,  expenditure  for  feed,  etc.,  as  it  does  during  the  time  they 
work.  In  the  case  of  dead  stock  non-use  also  brings  on  a  certain 
amount  of  depreciation.  Hence  the  product  is  in  general  increas¬ 
ing  in  price,  since  the  transfer  of  value  to  it  is  not  calculated  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  time  during  which  the  fixed  capital  functions  but 
according  to  the  time  during  which  it  depreciates  in  value.  In 
branches  of  production  such  as  these,  the  idling  of  the  fixed  capi¬ 
tal,  whether  combined  with  current  expenses  or  not,  forms  as 
much  a  condition  of  its  normal  employment  as  for  instance  the 
loss  of  a  certain  quantity  of  cotton  in  spinning;  and  in  the  same 
way  the  labour-power  expended  unproductively  but  unavoidably 
in  any  labour-process  under  normal  technical  conditions  counts 
just  as  well  as  that  expended  productively.  Every  improvement 
which  reduces  the  unproductive  expenditure  of  instruments  of 
labour,  raw  material,  and  labour-power  also  reduces  the  value  of 
the  product. 

In  agriculture  we  have  a  combination  of  both  the  longer  work¬ 
ing  period  and  the  great  difference  between  working  time  and  pro¬ 
duction  time.  Hodgskin  rightly  remarks:  “The  difference  of  time” 
(although  he  does  not  differentiate  here  between  working  time 
and  production  time)  "required  to  complete  the  products  of  ag¬ 
riculture,  and  of  other  species  of  labour,”  is  “the  main  cause  of 
the  great  dependence  of  the  agriculturists.  They  cannot  bring 
their  commodities  to  market  in  less  time  than  a  year.  For  that 
whole  period  they  are  obliged  to  borrow  of  the  shoemaker,  the 
tailor,  the  smith,  the  wheelwright,  and  the  various  other  labour¬ 
ers,  whose  products  they  cannot  dispense  with,  but  which  are 
completed  in  a  few  days  or  weeks.  Owing  to  this  natural  circum¬ 
stance,  and  owing  to  the  more  rapid  increase  of  the  wealth  pro¬ 
duced  by  other  labour  than  that  of  agriculture,  the  monopolisers 
of  all  the  land,  though  they  have  also  monopolised  legislation, 
have  not  been  able  to  save  themselves  and  their  servants,  the 
farmers,  from  becoming  the  most  dependent  class  of  men  in  the 
community.  ”  (Thomas  Hodgskin,  Popular  Political  Economy , 
London,  1827,  p.  147,  note.) 

All  methods  by  which  in  agriculture  on  the  one  hand  the  ex¬ 
penditures  for  wages  and  instruments  of  labour  are  distributed 
more  evenly  over  the  entire  year,  while  on  the  other  the  turn¬ 
over  is  shortened  by  raising  a  greater  variety  of  crops,  thus  mak- 


r 


THE  TIME  OP  PRODUCTION 


247 


ing  different  harvests  possible  throughout  the  year,  require  an 
increase  of  the  circulating  capital  advanced  in  production,  invest¬ 
ed  in  wages,  fertilisers,  seed,  etc.  This  is  the  case  in  the  transi¬ 
tion  from  the  three-field  system  with  fallow  land  to  the  system 
of  crop  rotation  without  fallow.  It  applies  furthermore  to  the 
cultures  derobees  of  Flanders.  “The  root  crops  are  planted  in 
culture  derobee ;  the  same  field  yields  in  succession  first  grain, 
flax,  colza,  for  the  wants  of  man,  and  after  they  are  harvested  root 
crops  are  sown  for  the  maintenance  of  cattle.  This  system,  which 
permits  the  keeping  of  horned  cattle  in  the  stables,  yields  a  con¬ 
siderable  amount  of  manure  and  thus  becomes  the  pivot  of  crop 
rotation. 

“More  than  a  third  of  the  cultivated  area  in  sandy  districts  is 
taken  up  with  cultures  derobees ;  it  is  just  as  if  the  cultivated  area 
had  been  increased  by  one-third.”  Apart  from  root  crops,  clover 
and  other  fodder  plants  are  likewise  used  for  this  purpose.  “Ag¬ 
riculture,  being  thus  carried  to  a  point  where  it  turns  into  hor¬ 
ticulture,  naturally  requires  a  considerable  investment  of  capi¬ 
tal.  This  capital,  estimated  in  England  at  250  francs  per  hectare, 
must  be  almost  500  francs  in  Flanders,  a  figure  which  good  farm¬ 
ers  will  undoubtedly  consider  far  too  low,  judging  by  their  own 
lands.”  (Emile  de  Laveleye,  Essais  sur  l' economic  rurale  de  la 
Belgique,  Paris,  1863,  pp.  45,  46  and  48.) 

Take  finally  timber-growing.  “The  production  of  timber  differs 
from  most  of  the  other  branches  of  production  essentially  in  that 
here  the  forces  of  nature  act  independently  and  do  not  require 
the  power  of  man  or  capital  when  the  increase  is  natural.  Even 
in  places  where  forests  are  propagated  artificially  the  expendi¬ 
ture  of  human  and  capital  energy  is  inconsiderable  compared  with 
the  action  of  the  natural  forces.  Besides,  a  forest  will  still  thrive 
in  soils  and  on  sites  where  grain  no  longer  gets  along  or  where 
its  cultivation  no  longer  pays.  Furthermore  forestry  engaged  in  as 
a  regular  economy  requires  a  larger  area  than  grain  culture,  be¬ 
cause  small  plots  do  not  permit  of  proper  forestry  methods,  largely 
prevent  the  enjoyment  of  the  secondary  uses  to  which  the  land 
can  be  put,  make  forest  protection  more  difficult,  etc.  But  the 
productive  process  extends  over  such  long  periods  that  it  ex¬ 
ceeds  the  planning  of  an  individual  farm  and  in  certain  cases 
surpasses  the  entire  span  of  a  human  life.  The  capital  invested  in 
the  purchase  of  forest  land  ”  (in  the  case  of  communal  production 
this  capital  becomes  unnecessary,  the  question  then  being  simply 
what  acreage  the  community  can  spare  from  its  sowing  and 
grazing  area  for  forestry)  "will  not  yield  substantial  returns  until 


248 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


after  a  long  period,  and  even  then  is  turned  over  only  partially. 
With  forests  producing  certain  species  of  trees  the  complete  turn¬ 
over  takes  as  much  as  150  years.  Besides,  a  properly  managed  tim¬ 
ber-growing  establishment  itself  demands  a  supply  of  standing 
timber  which  amounts  to  ten  to  forty  times  the  annual  yield. 
Unless  a  man  has  therefore  still  other  sources  of  income  and 
owns  vast  tracts  of  forest  land,  he  cannot  engage  in  regular  for¬ 
estry.”  (Kirchhof,  p.  58.) 

The  long  production  time  (which  comprises  a  relatively  small 
period  of  working  time)  and  the  great  length  of  the  periods  of 
turnover  entailed  make  forestry  an  industry  of  little  attraction 
to  private  and  therefore  capitalist  enterprise,  the  latter  being 
essentially  private  even  if  the  associated  capitalist  takes  the  place 
of  the  individual  capitalist.  The  development  of  culture  and  of 
industry  in  general  has  ever  evinced  itself  in  such  energetic 
destruction  of  forests  that  everything  done  by  it  conversely  for 
their  preservation  and  restoration  appears  infinitesimal. 

The  following  passage  in  the  above  quotation  from  Kirchhof  is 
particularly  worthy  of  note:  “Besides,  a  properly  managed  tim¬ 
ber-growing  establishment  itself  demands  a  supply  of  standing 
timber  which  amounts  to  ten  to  forty  times  the  annual  yield.  ”  In 
other  words,  a  turnover  occurs  once  in  ten  to  forty  or  more  years. 

The  same  applies  to  stock  raising.  A  part  of  the  herd  (supply 
of  cattle)  remains  in  the  process  of  production,  while  another  part 
is  sold  annually  as  a  product.  In  this  case  only  a  part  of  the  capital 
is  turned  over  every  year,  just  as  in  the  case  of  fixed  capital:  ma¬ 
chinery,  working  cattle,  etc.  Although  this  capital  is  a  capital 
fixed  in  the  process  of  production  for  a  long  time,  and  thus 
prolongs  the  turnover  of  the  total  capital,  it  is  not  a  fixed  capital 
in  the  strict  definition  of  the  term. 

What  is  here  called  a  supply — a  certain  amount  of  standing 
timber  or  livestock— -exists  relatively  in  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion  (simultaneously  as  instruments  of  labour  and  material  of 
labour);  in  accordance  with  the  natural  conditions  of  its  repro¬ 
duction  under  proper  management,  a  considerable  part  of  this 
supply  must  always  be  available  in  this  form. 

A  similar  influence  on  the  turnover  is  exerted  by  another  kind 
of  supply,  which  is  productive  capital  only  potentially,  but 
which  owing  to  the  nature  of  this  economy,  must  be  accumulat¬ 
ed  in  more  or  less  considerable  quantities  and  hence  advanced 
for  purposes  of  production  for  a  long  term,  although  it  enters 
into  the  actual  process  of  production  only  gradually.  In  this  class 
belongs  for  instance  manure  before  it  is  hauled  to  the  field,  fur- 


THE  TIME  OF  PRODUCTION 


249 


thermore  grain,  hay,  etc.,  and  such  supplies  of  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  as  are  employed  in  the  production  of  cattle.  “A  considerable 
part  Of  the  working  capital  is  contained  in  the  farm’s  supplies. 
But  these  may  lose  more  or  less  of  their  value,  if  the  precautionary 
measures  necessary  for  their  preservation  in  good  condition  are 
not  properly  observed.  Lack  of  attention  may  even  result  in  the 
total  loss  of  a  part  of  the  produce  supplies  for  the  farm.  For  this 
reason,  a  careful  inspection  of  the  barns,  feed  and  grain  lofts,  and 
cellars  becomes  indispensable,  the  store  rooms  must  always  be 
well  closed,  kept  clean,  ventilated,  etc.  The  grain  and  other 
crops  held  in  storage  must  be  thoroughly  turned  over  from  time 
to  time,  potatoes  and  beets  must  be  protected  against  frost,  rain, 
and  rot.”  (Kirchhof,  p.  292.)  “In  calculating  one’s  own  require¬ 
ments,  especially  for  the  keeping  of  cattle,  the  distribution  must 
be  made  according  to  the  product  obtained  and  its  intended 
use.  One  must  not  only  consider  covering  one's  ordinary  needs 
but  also  see  to  it  that  there  is  a  proportionate  reserve  for  extraor¬ 
dinary  cases.  If  it  is  then  found  that  the  demand  cannot  be  fully 
met  by  one’s  own  production,  it  becomes  necessary  to  reflect 
first  whether  the  deficiency  cannot  be  covered  by  other  products 
(substitutes),  or  by  the  cheaper  procurement  of  such  in  place  of 
the  deficient  ones.  For  instance  if  there  should  happen  to  be  a 
shortage  of  hay,  this  might  be  made  good  by  roots  and  an  admix¬ 
ture  of  straw.  In  general,  the  intrinsic  value  and  market-price  of 
the  various  crops  must  always  be  kept  in  mind  in  such  cases, 
and  consumption  regulated  accordingly.  If  for  instance  oats 
are  high,  while  peas  and  rye  are  relatively  low,  it  will  pay  to 
substitute  peas  or  rye  for  a  part  of  the  oats  intended  for  horses 
and  to  sell  the  oats  thus  saved.”  (Ibid.,  p.  300.) 

It  was  previously  stated,  when  discussing  the  formation  of 
a  supply,*  that  a  definite  quantity,  big  or  small,  of  potential 
productive  capital  is  required,  i.e.,  of  means  of  production  in¬ 
tended  for  use  in  production,  which  must  be  available  in  bigger 
or  smaller  quantities  for  the  purpose  of  entering  by  and  by  into  the 
productive  process.  The  remark  was  incidentally  made  that,  given 
a  certain  business  or  capitalist  enterprise  of  definite  proportions, 
the  magnitude  of  this  productive  supply  depends  on  the  greater 
or  lesser  difficulties  of  its  renewal,  the  relative  nearness  of  markets 
of  supply,  the  development  of  transportation  and  communication 
facilities,  etc.  All  these  circumstances  affect  the  minimum  of 
capital  which  must  be  available  in  the  form  of  a  productive  sup- 


L 


See  pp.  140-46  of  this  book.— Ed. 


250 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


ply.  hence  affect  the  length  of  time  for  which  the  capital  must  be 
advanced  and  the  amount  of  capital  to  be  advanced  at  one  time. 
This  amount,  which  aSects  also  the  turnover,  is  determined  by 
the  longer  or  shorter  time  during  which  a  circulating  capital  is 
tied  up  in  the  form  of  a  productive  supply  as  merely  potential 
productive  capital.  On  the  other  hand,  inasmuch  as  this  stagna¬ 
tion  depends  on  the  greater  or  smaller  possibility  of  rapid  replace¬ 
ment.  on  market  conditions,  etc.,  it  arises  itself  out  of  the  time 
of  circulation,  out  of  circumstances  that  belong  in  the  sphere 
of  circulation.  “Furthermore,  all  such  implements  and  accessories 
as  hand  tools,  sieves,  baskets,  ropes,  wagon  grease,  nails,  etc., 
must  be  the  more  available  for  immediate  replacement,  the 
less  there  is  opportunity  for  purchasing  them  nearby  without 
delay.  Finally,  the  entire  supply  of  implements  must  be  carefully 
overhauled  every  winter,  and  new  purchases  or  repairs  found 
necessary  must  be  provided  for  at  once.  Whether  or  not  one  is  to 
keep  a  great  or  small  supply  of  articles  of  equipment  is  to  be  set¬ 
tled  mainly  by  local  conditions.  Wherever  there  are  no  artisans 
or  stores  in  the  vicinity,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  larger  supplies 
than  in  places  where  these  are  to  be  had  on  the  spot  or  nearby. 
But  if  the  necessary  supplies  are  procured  in  large  quantities  at 
a  time,  then,  other  circumstances  being  equal,  one  generally 
gets  the  benefit  of  cheaper  purchases,  provided  an  appropriate 
time  has  been  chosen  to  make  them.  True,  the  rotating  working 
capital  is  thereby  shorn  of  a  correspondingly  larger  sum,  all  at 
once,  which  cannot  always  be  well  spared  in  Ihe  business.  ”  (Kirch- 
hof.  p.  301.) 

The  difference  between  production  time  and  working  time 
admits  of  many  variations,  as  we  have  seen.  For  the  circulating 
capital  it  may  be  production  time  before  it  enters  into  the  labour- 
process  proper  (production  of  lasts);  or  it  may  be  production 
time  after  it  has  passed  through  the  labour-process  proper  (wine, 
seed  grain);  or  the  production  time  is  occasionally  interrupted 
by  working  time  (agriculture,  timber-growing).  A  large  portion 
of  the  product  fit  for  circulation  remains  incorporated  in  the 
active  process  of  production,  while  a  much  smaller  part  enters  into 
annual  circulation  (timber-growing  arid  cattle  raising);  the  longer 
or  shorter  period  of  time  for  which  a  circulating  capital  must 
be  invested  in  the  form  of  potential  productive  capital,  hence 
also  the  larger  or  smaller  amount  of  this  capital  to  be  advanced 
at  one  time,  depends  partly  on  the  kind  of  productive  process 
(agriculture),  and  partly  on  the  proximity  of  markets,  etc.,  in 
short,  on  circumstances  pertinent  to  the  sphere  of  circulation. 


THE  TIME  OF  PRODUCTION 


251 


We  shall  see  later  (Book  III),  what  senseless  theories  MacCul- 
loch,  James  Mill,  etc.,  arrived  at  as  a  result  of  the  attempt  to 
identify  the  production  time  diverging  from  working  time  with 
the  latter,  an  attempt  which  in  turn  is  due  to  a  misapplication 
of  the  theory  of  value.  _ 

The  turnover  cycle  which  we  considered  above  is  determined 
by  the  durability  of  the  fixed  capital  advanced  for  the  process 
of  production.  Since  this  cycle  extends  over  a  number  of  years, 
it  comprises  a  series  of  either  annual  turnovers  of  fixed  capital 
or  of  turnovers  repeated  during  the  year. 

In  agriculture  such  a  cycle  of  turnovers  arises  out  of  the  sys¬ 
tem  of  crop  rotation.  “The  duration  of  the  lease  must  in  no  case 
be  less  than  the  time  of  completion  of  the  adopted  system  of  crop 
rotation.  Hence  one  always  calculates  3,  6,  9,  etc.,  in  the  three- 
field  system.  In  that  system  with  clean  fallow,  a  field  is  cultivated 
only  four  times  in  six  years,  being  sown  to  winter  and  summer 
grain  in  the  years  of  cultivation,  and,  if  the  properties  of  the 
soil  require  or  permit  it,  to  wheat  and  rye,  barley  and  oats  succes¬ 
sively.  Every  species  of  grain  differs  in  its  yield  from  the  others 
on  the  same  soil,  every  one  of  them  has  a  different  value  and  is 
sold  at  a  different  price.  For  this  reason  the  yield  of  a  field  is 
different  every  year  it  is  cultivated,  and  different  in  the  first 
half  of  the  rotation  (the  first  three  years)  from  that  of  the  second. 
Even  the  average  yield  of  one  period  of  rotation  is  not  equal  to 
that  of  another,  for  fertility  does  not  depend  solely  on  the  good 
quality  of  the  soil,  but  also  on  the  weather  each  year,  just  as 
prices  depend  on  a  multitude  of  changing  conditions.  If  one  now 
calculates  the  income  from  a  field  by  taking  into  account  the 
average  fertility  and  the  average  prices  for  the  entire  six-year 
rotation  period,  one  finds  the  total  income  of  one  year  in  either 
period  of  the  rotation.  But  this  is  not  so  if  the  proceeds  are  cal¬ 
culated  only  for  half  of  the  time  of  rotation,  that  is  to  say,  for 
three  years;  for  then  the  total  income  figures  would  not  coincide. 
It  follows  from  the  foregoing  that  a  lease  of  land  worked  by  the 
three-field  system  should  run  for  at  least  six  years.  It  is  however 
always  still  more  desirable  for  lessor  and  lessee  that  the  duration 
of  the  lease  should  be  a  multiple  of  the  duration  of  the  lease  ( sicl ); 
hence  that  it  should  be  12,  18,  and  ever  more  years  instead  of 
6  years  in  a  system  of  three  fields  and  14,  28  years  instead  of  7 
in  a  system  of  seven  fields.”  (Kirchhof,  pp,  117,  118.) 

(At  this  place  the  manuscript  contains  the  note:  “The  English 
system  of  crop  rotation.  Give  a  note  here.  ”) 


CHAPTER  XIV 

THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


All  circumstances  considered  so  far  which  distinguish  the  peri¬ 
ods  of  turnover  of  different  capitals  invested  in  different  branches 
of  industry  and  hence  also  the  periods  for  which  capital  must  be 
advanced,  originate  in  the  process  of  production  itself,  such  as 
the  difference  between  fixed  and  circulating  capital,  the  difference 
in  the  working  periods,  etc.  But  the  time  of  turnover  of  capital 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  its  production  time  plus  its  circulation, 
or  rotation,  time.  It  is  therefore  a  matter  of  course  that  a  difference 
in  the  time  of  circulation  causes  a  difference  in  the  time  of  turn¬ 
over  and  hence  in  the  length  of  the  period  of  turnover.  This  be¬ 
comes  most  evident  either  on  comparing  two  different  investments 
of  capital  in  which  all  circumstances  modifying  the  turnover 
are  equal  except  the  time  of  circulation,  or  on  selecting  a  given 
capital  with  a  given  proportion  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital, 
a  given  working  period,  etc.,  with  only  the  times  of  circulation 
varying,  hypothetically. 

One  of  the  sections  of  the  time  of  circulation — relatively  the 
most  decisive— consists  of  the  time  of  selling,  the  period  during 
which  capital  exists  in  the  state  of  commodity-capital.  The  time 
of  circulation,  and  hence  the  period  of  turnover  in  general,  are 
long  or  short  depending  on  the  relative  length  of  this  selling 
time.  An  additional  outlay  of  capital  may  become  necessary  as 
a  result  of  expenses  of  storage,  etc.  It  is  clear  at  the  very  start 
that  the  time  required  for  the  sale  of  finished  goods  may  differ 
considerably  for  the  individual  capitalists  in  one  and  the  same 
branch  of  industry.  Hence  it  may  differ  not  only  for  the  aggre¬ 
gate  capitals  invested  in  the  various  branches  of  industry,  but 
also  for  the  various  independent  capitals,  which  are  in  fact  mere¬ 
ly  parts  of  the  aggregate  capital  invested  in  the  same  sphere 
of  production  but  which  have  made  themselves  independent. 


THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


253 


Other  circumstances  remaining  equal,  the  period  of  selling  will 
vary  for  the  same  individual  capital  with  the  general  fluctuations 
of  the  market  or  with  its  fluctuations  in  that  particular  line  of 
business.  We  shall  not  dwell  on  this  point  any  longer.  We  merely 
state  this  simple  fact:  All  circumstances  which  in  general  give 
rise  to  differences  in  the  periods  of  turnover  of  the  capitals  invest¬ 
ed  in  different  branches  of  industry  bring  in  their  train  differences 
also  in  the  turnover  of  the  various  individual  capitals  operating 
in  the  same  business,  provided  these  circumstances  operate 
individually  (for  instance,  if  one  capitalist  has  an  opportunity 
to  sell  more  rapidly  than  his  competitor,  if  one  employs  more 
methods  shortening  the  working  periods  than  the  other,  etc.). 

One  cause  which  acts  permanently  in  differentiating  the  times 
of  selling,  and  thus  the 'periods  of  turnover  in  general,  is  the  dis¬ 
tance  of  the  market  in  which  a  commodity  is  sold  from  its  place 
of  production.  During  the  entire  trip  to  the  market,  capital  finds 
itself  fettered  in  the  state  of  commodity-capital.  If  goods  are 
made  to  order,  up  to  the  time  of  delivery;  if  they  are  not  made  to 
order,  there  must  be  added  to  the  time  of  the  trip  to  the  mar¬ 
ket  the  time  during  which  the  goods  are  in  the  market  waiting 
to  be  sold.  The  improvement  of  the  means  of  communication 
and  transportation  cuts  down  absolutely  the  wandering  period 
of  the  commodities  but  does  not  eliminate  the  relative  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  time  of  circulation  of  different  commodity-capitals 
arising  from  their  peregrinations,  nor  that  of  different  portions 
of  the  same  commodity-capital  which  migrate  to  different 
markets.  For  instance  the  improved  sailing  vessels  and  steam¬ 
ships,  which  shorten  travelling,  do  so  equally  for  near  and  distant 
ports.  The  relative  difference  remains,  although  often  diminished. 
But  the  relative  differences  may  be  shifted  about  by  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  means  of  transportation  and  communication  in  a  way 
that  does  not  correspond  to  the  geographical  distances.  For  in¬ 
stance  a  railway  which  leads  from  a  place  of  production  to  an  in¬ 
land  centre  of  population  may  relatively  or  absolutely  lengthen 
the  distance  to  a  nearer  inland  point  not  connected  by  rail,  as 
compared  to  the  one  which  geographically  is  more  remote.  In  the 
same  way  the  same  circumstances  may  alter  the  relative  distance 
of  places  of  production  from  the  larger  markets,  which  explains 
the  deterioration  of  old  and  the  rise  of  new  centres  of  production 
because  of  changes  in  communication  and  transportation  facil¬ 
ities.  (To  this  must  be  added  the  circumstances  that  long  hauls 
are  relatively  cheaper  than  short  ones.)  Moreover  with  the  de¬ 
velopment  of  transport  facilities  not  only  is  the  velocity  of 


254 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


movement  in  space  accelerated  and  thereby  the  geographic  dis¬ 
tance  shortened  in  terms  of  time.  Not  only  is  there  a  develop¬ 
ment  of  the  mass  of  communication  facilities  so  that  for  instance 
many  vessels  sail  simultaneously  for  the  same  port,  or  several 
trains  travel  simultaneously  on  different  railways  between  the 
same  two  points,  but  freight  vessels  may  clear  on  consecutive 
days  of  the  same  week  from  Liverpool  for  New  York,  or  goods 
trains  may  start  at  different  hours  of  the  same  day  from  Manches¬ 
ter  to  London.  True,  the  absolute  velocity — hence  this  part  of  the 
time  of  circulation  — is  not  altered  by  this  latter  circumstance, 
a  certain  definite  capacity  of  the  means  of  transportation  being 
given.  But  successive  shipments  of  commodities  can  start  their 
passage  at  shorter  intervals  of  time  and  thus  reach  the  market 
one  after  another  without  accumulating  in  large  quantities  as 
potential  commodity-capital  before  actual  shipment.  Hence  the 
return  of  capital  likewise  is  distributed  over  shorter  successive 
periods  of  time,  so  that  a  part  is  continually  transformed  into 
money-capital,  while  the  other  circulates  as  commodity-capital. 
By  spreading  the  return  over  several  successive  periods  the  total 
time  of  circulation  and  hence  also  the  turnover  are  abridged. 
The  first  to  increase  is  the  frequency  with  which  the  means  of 
transportation  function,  for  instance  the  number  of  railway 
trains,  as  existing  places  of  production  produce  more,  become 
greater  centres  of  production.  The  development  tends  in  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  the  already  existing  market,  that  is  to  say,  towards  the 
great  centres  of  production  and  population,  towards  ports  of 
export,  etc.  On  the  other  hand  these  particularly  great  traffic  facil¬ 
ities  and  the  resultant  acceleration  of  the  capital  turnover  (since 
it  is  conditional  on  the  time  of  circulation)  give  rise  to  quicker 
concentration  of  both  the  centres  of  production  and  the  markets. 
Along  with  this  concentration  of  masses  of  men  and  capital  thus 
accelerated  at  certain  points,  there  is  the  concentration  of  these 
masses  of  capital  in  the  hands  of  a  few.  Simultaneously  one  may 
note  again  a  shifting  and  relocation  of  places  of  production  and 
of  markets  as  a  result  of  the  changes  in  their  relative  positions 
caused  by  the  transformations  in  transport  facilities.  A  place 
of  production  which  once  had  a  special  advantage  by  being  located 
on  some  highway  or  canal  may  now  find  itself  relegated  to  a 
single  side-track,  which  runs  trains  only  at  relatively  long  inter¬ 
vals,  while  another  place,  which  formerly  was  remote  from  the 
main  arteries  of  traffic,  may  now  be  situated  at  the  junction  of 
several  railways.  This  second  locality  is  on  the  upgrade,  the  former 
on  the  downgrade.  Changes  in  the  means  of  transportation  thus 


THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


255 


engender  local  differences  in  the  time  of  circulation  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  in  the  opportunity  to  buy,  sell,  etc. ,  or  an  already  existing 
local  differentiation  is  distributed  differently.  The  importance  of 
this  circumstance  for  the  turnover  of  capital  is  evidenced  by  the 
wrangling  of  the  commercial  and  industrial  representatives  of 
the  various  localities  with  the  railway  managements.  (See  for 
instance  the  above-quoted  Bluebook  of  the  Railway  Committee.*) 

All  branches  of  production  which  by  the  nature  of  their  product 
are  dependent  mainly  on  local  consumption,  such  as  breweries, 
are  therefore  developed  to  the  greatest  extent  in  the  principal 
centres  of  population.  The  more  rapid  turnover  of  capital  com¬ 
pensates  here  in  part  for  the  circumstance  that  a  number  of  con¬ 
ditions  of  production,  building  lots,  etc.,  are  more  expensive. 

Whereas  on  the  one  hand  the  improvement  of  the  means  of 
transportation  and  communication  brought  about  by  the  progress 
of  capitalist  production  reduces  the  time  oi  circulation  of  partic¬ 
ular  quantities  of  commodities,  the  same  progress  and  the  oppor¬ 
tunities  created  by  the  development  of  transport  and  communi¬ 
cation  facilities  make  it  imperative,  conversely,  to  work  for  ever 
more  remote  markets,  in  a  word  — for  the  world-market.  The 
mass  of  commodities  in  transit  for  distant  places  grows  enor¬ 
mously,  and  with  it  therefore  grows,  both  absolutely  and  relative¬ 
ly,  that  part  of  social  capital  which  remains  continually  for  long 
periods  in  the  stage  of  commodity-capital,  within  the  time  of  cir¬ 
culation.  There  is  a  simultaneous  growth  of  that  portion  of  social 
wealth  which,  instead  of  serving  as  direct  means  of  production, 
is  invested  in  means  of  transportation  and  communication  and 
in  the  fixed  and  circulating  capital  required  for  their  opera¬ 
tion. 

The  mere  relative  length  of  the  transit  of  the  commodities 
from  their  place  of  production  to  their  market  produces  a  differ¬ 
ence  not  only  in  the  first  part  of  the  circulation  time,  the  selling 
time,  but  also  in  its  second  part,  the  reconversion  of  the  money 
into  the  elements  of  the  productive  capital,  the  buying  time. 
Suppose  a  commodity  is  shipped  to  India.  This  requires,  say, 
four  months.  Let  us  assume  that  the  selling  time  is  equal  to  zero, 
i . e. ,  the  commodities  are  made  to  order  and  are  paid  for  on  deliv¬ 
ery  to  the  agent  of  the  producer.  The  return  of  the  money  (no 
matter  in  what  form)  requires  another  four  months.  Thus  it  takes 
altogether  eight  months  before  a  capital  can  again  function  as 
productive  capital,  renew  the  same  operation  The  differences  in 


See  p.  154  of  this  book.  —  Ed. 


256 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


the  turnover  thus  occasioned  form  one  of  the  material  bases  of  the 
various  terms  of  credit,  just  as  oversea  commerce  in  general,  for 
instance  in  Venice  and  Genoa,  is  one  of  the  sources  of  the  credit 
system,  properly  speaking.  “The  crisis  of  1847  enabled  the  banking 
and  mercantile  community  of  that  time  to  reduce  the  India  and 
China  usance”  (time  allowed  for  the  currency  of  bills  of  exchange 
between  there  and  Europe)  “from  ten  months’  date  to  six  months’ 
sight,  and  the  lapse  of  twenty  years  with  all  the  accelerations  of 
speed  and  establishment  of  telegraphs  ...  renders  necessary  ... 
a  further  reduction”  from  six  months’  sight  to  four  months’ 
date  as  a  first  step  to  four  months’  sight.  “The  voyage  of  a  sailing 
vessel  via  the  Cape  from  Calcutta  to  London  is  on  the  average 
under  90  days.  An  usance  of  four  months’  sight  would  be  equal 
to  a  currency  of  say  150  days.  The  present  usance  of  six  months’ 
sight  is  equal  to  a  currency  of  say  210  days.”  ( London  Economist , 
June  16,  1866.) 

On  the  other  hand:  “The  Brazilian  usance  remains  at  two  and 
three  months’  sight,  bills  from  Antwerp  are  drawn”  (on  London) 
“at  three  months’  date,  and  even  Manchester  and  Bradford  draw 
upon  London  at  three  months  and  longer  dates.  By  tacit  consent, 
a  fair  opportunity  is  afforded  to  the  merchant  of  realising  the 
proceeds  of  his  merchandise,  not  indeed  before,  but  within  a 
reasonable  time  of,  the  bills  drawn  against  it  fall  due.  In  this 
view,  the  present  usance  for  Indian  bills  cannot  be  considered 
excessive.  Indian  produce  for  the  most  part  being  sold  in  London 
with  three  months’  prompt,  and  allowing  for  loss  of  time  in  effect¬ 
ing  sales,  cannot  be  realised  much  within  five  months,  while 
another  period  of  five  months  will  have  previously  elapsed  (on  an 
average)  between  the  time  of  purchase  in  India  and  of  delivery  in 
the  English  warehouse.  We  have  here  a  period  of  ten  months, 
whereas  the  bill  drawn  against  the  goods  does  not  live  beyond 
seven  months.”  (Ibid.,  June  30,  1866.)  On  July  2,  1866,  five  big 
London  banks  dealing  mainly  with  India  and  China,  and  the  Paris 
Comptoir  d' Escompte,  gave  notice  that  “from  the  1st  January, 
1867,  their  branches  and.  agencies  in  the  East  will  only  buy  and 
sell  bills  of  exchange  at  a  term  not  exceeding  four  months’  sight.” 
(Ibid.,  July  7,  1866.)  However  this  reduction  miscarried  and  had 
to  be  abandoned.  (Since  then  the  Suez  Canal  has  revolutionised  all 
this.) 

It  is  a  matter  of  course  that  with  the  longer  time  of  commod¬ 
ity  circulation  the  risk  of  a  change  of  prices  in  the  market  in¬ 
creases,  since  the  period  in  which  price  changes  can  take  place  is 
lengthened. 


Differences  in  the  time  of  circulation,  partly  individual 
between  the  various  separate  capitals  of  the  same  branch  of 
business,  partly  between  different  branches  of  business  according 
to  the  different  usances,  when  payment  is  not  made  in  spot  cash, 
arise  from  the  different  terms  of  payment  in  buying  and  selling. 
We  shall  not  dwell  any  longer  here  on  this  point,  which  is  of 
importance  to  the  credit  system. 

Differences  in  the  turnover  time  arise  also  from  the  size  of 
contracts  for  the  delivery  of  goods,  and  their  size  grows  with 
the  extent  and  scale  of  capitalist  production.  A  contract  of  deliv¬ 
ery,  being  a  transaction  between  buyer  and  seller,  is  an  operation 
pertaining  to  the  market,  the  sphere  of  circulation.  The  differences 
in  the  time  of  turnover  arising  here  stem  therefore  from  the  sphere 
of  circulation,  but  react  immediately  on  the  sphere  of  production, 
and  do  so  apart  from  all  terms  of  payment  and  conditions  of  cred¬ 
it,  hence  also  in  the  case  of  cash  payment.  For  instance  coal, 
cotton,  yarn,  etc.,  are  discrete  products.  Every  day  supplies 
its  quantum  of  finished  product.  But  if  the  master-spinner  or  the 
mine-owner  accepts  contracts  for  the  delivery  of  such  large  quan¬ 
tities  of  products  as  require,  say,  a  period  of  four  or  six  weeks 
of  consecutive  working-days,  then  this  is  quite  the  same,  so  far 
as  the  time  of  advancement  of  capital  is  concerned,  as  if  a  contin¬ 
uous  working  period  of  four  or  six  weeks  had  been  introduced 
in  this  labour-process.  It  is  of  course  assumed  here  that  the  entire 
quantity  ordered  is  to  be  delivered  in  one  bulk,  or  at  least  is 
paid  for  only  after  total  delivery.  Individually  considered,  every 
day  has  thus  furnished  its  definite  quantum  of  finished  product. 
But  this  finished  quantum  is  only  a  part  of  the  quantity  contracted 
for.  While  in  this  case  the  portion  finished  so  far  is  no  longer 
in  the  process  of  production,  still  it  lies  in  the  warehouse  as  poten¬ 
tial  capital  only. 

Now  let  us  take  up  the  second  stage  of  the  time  of  circulation, 
the  buying  time,  or  that  period  in  which  capital  is  reconverted 
from  the  money-form  into  the  elements  of  productive  capital. 
During  this  period  it  must  persist  for  a  shorter  or  longer  time  in 
its  condition  of  money-capital,  hence  a  certain  portion  of  the 
total  capital  advanced  must  all  the  time  be  in  the  condition 
of  money-capital,  although  this  portion  consists  of  constantly 
changing  elements.  For  instance,  of  the  total  capital  advanced 
in  a  certain  business,  n  times  £100  must  be  available  in  the  form 
of  money-capital,  so  that,  while  all  the  constituent  parts  of  these 
n  times  £100  are  continually  converted  into  productive  capital, 
this  sum  is  nevertheless  just  as  continually  replenished  by  the 


1 752 


258 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


influx  from  the  circulation,  from  the  realised  commodity-capital. 
A  definite  part  of  the  advanced  capital-value  is  therefore  con¬ 
tinually  in  the  condition  of  money-capital,  i.e.,  a  form  not  per¬ 
taining  to  its  sphere  of  production  but  its  sphere  of  circulation. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  prolongation  of  the  time  for 
which  capital  is  fettered  in  the  form  of  commodity-capital  on 
account  of  the  distance  of  the  market  results  in  direct  delay  of  the 
return  of  the  money  and  consequently  also  the  transformation 
of  the  capital  from  money-capital  into  productive  capital. 

We  have  furthermore  seen  (Chapter  VI)  with  reference  to  the 
purchase  of  commodities,  that  the  time  of  buying,  the  greater  or 
smaller  distance  from  the  main  sources  of  the  raw  material,  makes 
it  necessary  to  purchase  raw  material  for  a  longer  period  and  have 
it  available  in  the  form  of  a  productive  supply,  of  latent  or  poten¬ 
tial  productive  capital;  that  in  consequence  it  increases  the  amount 
of  capital  to  be  advanced  at  one  time,  and  the  time  for  which 
it  must  be  advanced,  if  the  scale  of  production  remains  otherwise 
the  same. 

A  similar  effect  is  produced  in  various  branches  of  business 
by  the  more  or  less  prolonged  periods  in  which  rather  large  quan¬ 
tities  of  raw  material  are  thrown  on  the  market.  In  London  for 
example  great  auction  sales  of  wool  take  place  every  three  months, 
and  the  wool  market  is  controlled  by  them.  The  cotton  market 
on  the  other  hand  is  on  the  whole  restocked  continuously,  if  not 
uniformly,  from  harvest  to  harvest.  Such  periods  determine  the 
principal  dates  when  these  raw  materials  are  bought.  Their  effect 
is  particularly  great  on  speculative  purchases  necessitating  ad¬ 
vances  for  longer  or  shorter  periods  for  these  elements  of  produc¬ 
tion,  just  as  the  nature  of  the  produced  commodities  acts  on  the 
speculative,  intentional  withholding  of  a  product  for  a  longer  or 
shorter  term  in  the  form  of  potential  commodity-capital.  “The 
agriculturist  must  also  be  a  speculator  to  a  certain  extent  and 
therefore  hold  back  the  sale  of  his  products  if  prevailing  conditions 
so  suggest....”  Here  follow  a  few  general  rules.  “...  However 
in  the  sale  of  the  products,  it  all  depends  mainly  on  the  person, 
the  product  itself,  and  the  locality.  Anyone  who,  besides  being 
skilful  and  lucky  (1),  is  provided  with  sufficient  working  capital 
will  not  be  blamed  if  for  once  he  keeps  his  grain  crop  stored  as 
long  as  a  year  when  prices  are  unusually  low.  On  the  other  hand 
a  man  who  lacks  working  capital  or  is  altogether  devoid  (!)  of 
speculative  spirit  will  try  to  get  the  current  average  prices  and 
will  be  compelled  to  sell  as  soon  and  as  often  as  opportunity 
presents  itself.  It  will  almost  always  mean  a  loss  to  keep  wool 


THE  TIME  OF  CIRCULATION 


259 


stored  longer  than  a  year,  while  corn  and  oil  seed  jnay  be  stored 
for  several  years  without  detriment  to  their  properties  and  high 
quality.  Products  generally  subject  to  severe  fluctuation  at  short 
intervals,  for  instance  oil  seed,  hops,  teasel  and  the  like,  may 
be  stored  to  good  advantage  during  years  in  which  the  selling 
price  is  far  below  the  price  of  production.  It  is  least  permissible 
to  postpone  the  sale  of  articles  whose  preservation  involves  daily 
expense,  such  as  fatted  cattle,  or  which  are  perishable,  such  as 
fruit,  potatoes,  etc.  In  various  localities  a  certain  product  fetches 
its  lowest  average  price  in  certain  seasons,  its  highest  in  others. 
Thus,  in  some  parts  the  average  price  of  corn  is  lower  around  St. 
Martin’s  Day  than  between  Christmas  and  Easter.  Furthermore 
some  products  sell  well  in  certain  localities  only  at  certain  times, 
as  is  the  case  with  wool  in  the  wool  markets  of  those  localities 
where  the  wool  trade  at  other  times  is  dull,  etc.”  (Kirchhof, 
p.  302.) 

In  the  study  of  the  second  half  of  the  time  of  circulation,  dur¬ 
ing  which  money  is  reconverted  into  the  elements  of  productive 
capital,  it  is  not  only  this  transformation,  taken  by  itself,  that 
should  be  given  consideration,  not  only  the  time  within  which 
the  money  returns,  according  to  the  distance  of  the  market  in 
which  the  product  is  sold.  What  must  also  be  considered,  and 
primarily  so,  is  the  amount  of  that  part  of  the  advanced  capi¬ 
tal  which  is  always  to  be  available  in  the  form  of  money,  in  the 
condition  of  money-capital. 

Apart  from  all  speculation,  the  volume  of  the  purchases  of 
those  commodities  which  must  always  be  available  as  a  produc¬ 
tive  supply  depends  on  the  times  of  the  renewal  of  this  supply, 
hence  on  circumstances  which  in  their  turn  are  dependent  on  mar¬ 
ket  conditions  and  which  therefore  are  different  for  different  raw 
materials.  In  these  cases  money  must  be  advanced  from  time  to 
time  in  rather  large  quantities  and  in  lump  sums.  It  returns  more 
or  less  rapidly,  but  always  in  instalments,  according  to  the  turn¬ 
over  of  the  capital.  One  portion  of  it,  namely  the  part  recon¬ 
verted  into  wages,  is  just  as  continually  expended  again  at  short 
intervals.  But  another  portion,  namely  that  which  is  to  be  recon¬ 
verted  into  raw  material,  etc.,  must  be  accumulated  for  rather 
long  periods,  as  a  reserve  fund  for  either  buying  or  paying.  There¬ 
fore  it  exists  in  the  form  of  money-capital,  although  the  volume 
in  which  it  exists  as  such,  changes. 

We  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter  that  other  circumstances 
arising  either  from  the  process  of  production  or  that  of  circula¬ 
tion  make  it  necessary  for  a  certain  portion  of  the  advanced 


9* 


260 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


capital  to  be  available  in  the  form  of  money.  In  general  it  must 
be  noted  that  the  economists  are  very  prone  to  forget  not  only 
that  a  part  of  the  capital  required  in  a  business  passes  successively 
through  the  three  stages  of  money-capital,  productive  capital, 
and  commodity-capital,  but  also  that  different  portions  of  it 
continuously  and  simultaneously  possess  these  forms,  although 
the  relative  magnitudes  of  these  portions  vary  all  the  time.  It 
is  especially  the  part  always  available  as  money-capital  that 
is  forgotten  by  the  economists,  although  precisely  this  circum¬ 
stance  is  highly  essential  for  an  understanding  of  bourgeois 
economy  and  consequently  makes  its  importance  felt  as  such  also 
in  practice. 


CHAPTER  XV 


EFFECT  OF  THE  TIME 
OF  TURNOVER  ON  THE  MAGNITUDE 
OF  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 

In  this  chapter  and  in  the  next,  the  sixteenth,  we  shall  treat 
of  the  influence  of  the  time  of  turnover  on  the  self-expansion  of 
capital. 

Take  the  commodity-capital  which  is  the  product  of  a  working 
period  of,  say,  nine  weeks.  Let  us,  for  the  time  being,  leave  aside 
that  portion  of  the  value  of  the  product  which  is  added  to  it  by 
the  average  wear  and  tear  of  the  fixed  capital,  and  also  the  surplus- 
value  added  to  the  product  during  the  process  of  production.  The 
value  of  this  product  is  then  equal  to  that  of  the  circulating  capi¬ 
tal,  advanced  for  its  production,  i.e.,  of  the  wages  and  the  raw  and 
auxiliary  materials  consumed  in  its  production.  Let  this  value  be 
£900,  so  that  the  weekly  outlay  is  £100.  The  period  of  production, 
which  here  coincides  with  the  working  period,  is  therefore  nine 
weeks.  It  is  immaterial  whether  it  is  assumed  that  this  is  the  work¬ 
ing  period  of  a  continuous  product,  or  whether  it  is  a  continuous 
working  period  for  a  discrete  product,  so  long  as  the  quantity 
of  discrete  product  brought  to  market  at  one  time  costs  nine 
weeks’  labour.  Let  the  time  of  circulation  be  three  weeks.  Then 
the  entire  period  of  turnover  is  twelve  weeks.  At  the  end  of  nine 
weeks  the  advanced  productive  capital  is  converted  into  commod¬ 
ity-capital,  but  now  it  stays  for  three  weeks  in  the  period  of  cir¬ 
culation.  The  new  period  of  production  therefore  cannot  start 
before  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  week,  and  production 
would  be  at  a  standstill  for  three  weeks,  or  for  a  quarter  of  the 
entire  period  of  turnover.  It  again  does  not  make  any  difference 
whether  it  is  assumed  that  it  takes  so  long  on  an  average  to  sell  the 
product,  or  that  this  length  of  time  is  bound  up  with  the  remote¬ 
ness  of  the  market  or  the  terms  of  payment  for  the  goods  sold. 


262 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


Production  would  be  standing  still  for  three  weeks  every  three 
months,  making  it  four  times  three,  or  twelve  weeks  in  a  year, 
which  means  three  months,  or  one-quarter,  of  the  annual  period 
of  turnover.  Hence,  if  production  is  to  be  continuous  and  carried 
along  on  the  same  scale  week  after  week,  there  is  only  this  alter¬ 
native: 

Either  the  scale  of  production  must  be  reduced,  so  that  the 
£900  suffice  to  keep  the  work  going  both  during  the  working  period 
and  the  time  of  circulation  of  the  first  turnover.  A  second  working 
period,  hence  also  a  new  period  of  turnover,  is  then  commenced 
with  the  tenth  week,  before  the  first  period  of  turnover  is  complet¬ 
ed,  for  the  period  of  turnover  is  twelve  weeks,  and  the  working 
period  nine  weeks.  A  sum  of  £900  distributed  over  twelve  weeks 
makes  £75  per  week.  It  is  evident  in  the  first  place  that  such  a  re¬ 
duced  scale  of  business  presupposes  changed  dimensions  of  the 
fixed  capital  and  therefore,  on  the  whole,  a  curtailment  of  the 
business.  In  the  second  place,  it  is  questionable  whether  such 
a  reduction  can  take  place  at  all,  for  in  each  business  there  exists, 
commensurate  with  the  development  of  its  production,  a  normal 
minimum  of  invested  capital  essential  to  maintain  its  capacity 
to  compete.  This  normal  minimum  grows  steadily  with  the  ad¬ 
vance  of  capitalist  production,  and  hence  it  is  not  fixed.  There 
are  numerous  intermediate  grades  between  the  normal  minimum 
existing  at  any  particular  time  and  the  ever  increasing  normal 
maximum,  a  medium  which  permits  of  many  different  scales  of 
capital  investment.  Within  the  limits  of  this  medium  reductions 
may  take  place,  their  lowest  limit  being  the  prevailing  normal 
minimum. 

When  there  is  a  hitch  in  production,  when  the  markets  are 
overstocked,  and  when  raw  materials  rise  in  price,  etc.,  the  normal 
outlay  of  circulating  capital  is  restricted  —  once  the  pattern  of  the 
fixed  capital  has  been  set  — by  cutting  down  working  time  to,  say, 
one  half.  On  the  other  hand,  in  times  of  prosperity,  the  pattern 
of  the  fixed  capital  given,  there  is  an  abnormal  expansion  of 
the  circulating  capital,  partly  through  the  extension  of  working 
time  and  partly  through  its  intensification.  In  businesses  which 
have,  from  the  outset,  to  reckon  with  such  fluctuations,  the  situa¬ 
tion  is  relieved  partly  by  recourse  to  the  above  measures  and  partly 
by  employing  simultaneously  a  greater  number  of  labourers,  in 
combination  with  the  application  of  reserve  fixed  capital,  such 
as  reserve  locomotives  on  railways,  etc.  However,  such  abnormal 
fluctuations  ure  not  considered  here,  where  we  assume  normal 
conditions. 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


263 


In  order  to  make  production  continuous,  therefore,  the  expend¬ 
iture  of  the  same  circulating  capital  is  here  distributed  over 
a  longer  period,  over  twelve  weeks  instead  of  nine.  In  every  section 
of  time  there  consequently  functions  a  reduced  productive  capi¬ 
tal.  The  circulating  portion  of  the  productive  capital  is  reduced 
from  100  to  75,  or  one-quarter.  The  total  amount  by  which  the 
productive  capital  functioning  for  a  working  period  of  nine  weeks 
is  reduced  equals  9  times  25,  or  £225,  or  one-quarter  of  £900. 
But  the  ratio  of  the  time  of  circulation  to  that  of  turnover  is 
likewise  three-twelfths,  or  one-quarter.  It  follows  therefore: 
If  production  is  not  to  be  interrupted  during  the  time  of 
circulation  of  the  productive  capital  transformed  into  commodity- 
capital,  if  it  is  rather  to  be  carried  on  simultaneously  and  con¬ 
tinuously  week  after  week,  and  if  no  special  circulating  capital  is 
available  for  this  purpose,  it  can  be  done  only  by  curtailing  pro¬ 
ductive  operations,  by  reducing  the  circulating  component  of 
the  functioning  productive  capital.  The  portion  of  circulating 
capital  thus  set  free  for  production  during  the  time  of  circulation 
is  to  the  total  advanced  circulating  capital  as  the  time  of  circu¬ 
lation  is  to  the  period  of  turnover.  This  applies,  as  has  already 
been  stated,  only  to  branches  of  production  in  which  the  labour- 
process  is  carried  on  on  the  same  scale  week  after  week,  where 
therefore  no  varying  amounts  of*  capital  are  to  be  invested  in 
different  working  periods,  as  for  instance  in  agriculture. 

If  on  the  other  hand  we  assume  that  the  nature  of  the  business 
excludes  a  reduction  of  the  scale  of  production,  and  thus  of  the 
circulating  capital  to  be  advanced  each  week,  then  continuity  of 
production  can  be  secured  only  by  additional  circulating  capital, 
in  the  above-named  case  of  £300.  During  the  twelve-week  turn¬ 
over  period,  £1,200  are  successively  invested,  and  £300  is  one- 
quarter  of  this  sum  as  three  weeks  is  of  twelve.  At  the  end  of  the 
working  time  of  nine  weeks  the  capital-value  of  £900  has  been  con¬ 
verted  from  the  form  of  productive  into  that  of  commodity-capi¬ 
tal.  Its  working  period  is  concluded,  but  it  cannot  be  re-opened 
with  the  same  capital.  During  the  three  weeks  in  which  it  stays 
in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  functioning  as  commodity-capital, 
it  is  in  the  same  state,  so  far  as  the  process  of  production  is  con¬ 
cerned,  as  if  it  did  not  exist  at  all.  We  rule  out  in  the  present 
case  all  credit  relations  and  take  for  granted  that  the  capitalist 
operates  only  with  his  own  money.  But  during  the  time 
the  capital  advanced  for  the  first  working  period,  having 
completed  its  process  of  production,  stays  three  weeks  in  the 
process  of  circulation,  there  functions  an  additional  capital 


264 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


investment  of  £300,  so  that  the  continuity  of  production  is  not 
broken. 

Now,  the  following  must  be  noted  in  this  connection: 

Firstly:  The  working  period  of  the  capital  of  £900  first  ad¬ 
vanced  is  completed  at  the  close  of  nine  weeks  and  it  does  not  re¬ 
turn  until  after  three  weeks  are  up,  that  is  to  say,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  thirteenth  week.  But  a  new  working- period  is  immediately 
begun  with  the  additional  capital  of  £300.  By  this  means  con¬ 
tinuity  of  production  is  maintained. 

Secondly:  The  functions  of  the  original  capital  of  £900  and 
of  the  capital  of  £300  newly  added  at  the  close  of  the  first  nine- 
week  working  period,  inaugurating  the  second  working  period 
after  the  conclusion  of  the  first  without  any  interruption,  are,  or 
at  least  could  be,  clearly  distinguished  in  the  first  period  of  turn¬ 
over,  while  they  cross  each  other  in  the  course  of  the  second 
period  of  turnover. 

Let  us  make  this  matter  plainer. 

First  period  of  turnover  of  12  weeks.  First  working  period 
of  9  weeks;  the  turnover  of  the  capital  advanced  for  this  is  complet¬ 
ed  at  the  beginning  of  the  13th  week.  During  the  last  3  weeks 
the  additional  capital  of  £300  functions,  opening  the  second 
working  period  of  9  weeks. 

Second  period  of  turnover.  At  the  beginning  of  the  13th  week, 
£900  have  returned  and  are  able  to  begin  a  new  turnover.  But 
the  second  working  period  has  already  been  opened  in  the  10th 
week  by  the  additional  £300.  At  the  start  of  the  13th  week, 
thanks  to  this,  one-third  of  the  working  period  is  already  over 
and  £300  has  been  converted  from  productive  capital  into  product. 
Since  only  6  weeks  more  are  required  for  the  completion  of  the 
second  working  period,  only  two-thirds  of  the  returned  capital 
of  £900,  or  only  £600,  can  enter  into  the  productive  process  of 
the  second  working  period.  £300  of  the  original  £900  are  set  free 
to  play  the  same  role  which  the  additional  capital  of  £300  played 
in  the  first  working  period.  At  the  close  of  the  6th  week  of  the 
second  period  of  turnover  the  second  working  period  is  up.  The 
capital  of  £900  advanced  in  it  returns  after  3  weeks,  or  at  the  end 
of  the  9th  week  of  the  second,  12-week  period  of  turnover.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  3  weeks  of  its  period  of  circulation,  the  freed  capital 
of  £300  comes  into  action.  This  begins  the  third  working  period 
of  a  capital  of  £900  in  the  7th  week  of  the  second  period  of  turn¬ 
over,  or  the  19th  week  of  the  year. 

Third  period  of  turnover.  At  the  close  of  the  9th  week  of  the 
second  period  of  turnover  there  is  a  new  reflux  of  £900.  But  the 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


265 


third  working  period  has  already  commenced  in  the  7th  week  of 
the  previous  period  of  turnover  and  6  weeks  have  already  elapsed. 
The  third  working  period,  then,  lasts  only  another  3  weeks. 
Hence  only  £300  of  the  returned  £900  enter  into  the  productive 
process.  The  fourth  working  period  fills  out  the  remaining  9  weeks 
of  this  period  of  turnover  and  thus  the  37th  week  of  the  year 
begins  simultaneously  the  fourth  period  of  turnover  and  the  fifth 
working  period. 

In  order  to  simplify  the  calculation  in  this  case  let  us  assume 
a  working  period  of  5  weeks  and  a  period  of  circulation  of  5  weeks, 
making  a  turnover  period  of  10  weeks.  Figure  the  year  as  com¬ 
posed  of  fifty  weeks  and  the  capital  outlay  per  week  as  £100. 
A  working  period  then  requires  a  circulating  capital  of  £500  and 
the  time  of  circulation  an  additional  capital  of  £500.  The  working 
periods  and  times  of  turnover  then  are  as  follows: 

1st  wrkg.  period  1st-  5th  wk.  (£500  in  goods)  returned  end  of  10th  wk 

2nd  wrkg.  period  6th-10lh  wk.  (£500  in  goods)  returned  end  of  15tb  wk 

3rd  wrkg.  period  llth-15th  wk.  (£500  in  goods)  returned  end  of  20th  wk 

4th  wrkg.  period  16th-20th  wk.  (£500  in  goods)  returned  end  of  25th  wk. 

5th  wrkg.  period  21st-25th  wk.  (£500  in  goods)  returned  end  of  30th  wk 

and  so  forth. 

If  the  time  of  circulation  is  zero,  so  that  the  period  of  turn¬ 
over  is  equal  to  the  working  period,  then  the  number  of  turnovers 
is  equal  to  the  number  of  working  periods  of  the  year.  In  the  case 
of  a  5-week  working  period  this  would  make  80/#,  or  10,  periods 
of  turnover  per  year,  and  the  value  of  the  capital  turned  over 
would  be  500  times  10,  or  5,000.  In  our  table,  in  which  we  have 
assumed  a  circulation  time  of  5  weeks,  the  total  value  of  the  com¬ 
modities  produced  per  year  would  also  be  £5,000,  but  one-tenth 
of  this,  or  £500,  would  always  be  in  the  form  of  commodity- 
capital,  and  would  not  return  until  after  5  weeks.  At  the  end  of 
the  year  the  product  of  the  tenth  working  period  (the  46th  to  the 
50th  working  week)  would  have  completed  its  time  of  turnover 
only  by  half,  and  its  time  of  circulation  would  fall  within  the 
first  five  weeks  of  the  next  year. 

Now  let  us  take  a  third  illustration:  Working  period  6  weeks 
time  of  circulation  3  weeks,  weekly  advance  during  labour- 
process  £100. 

1st  working  period:  lst-6th  week.  At  the  end  of  the  6th  week  a 

commodity-capital  of  £600,  returned  at  the  end  of  the  9th 

week. 

2nd  working  period:  7th-l 2th  week.  During  the  7th-9th  week 


266 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


£300  of  additional  capital  is  advanced.  At  the  end  of  the  9th 
week,  return  of  £600.  Of  this,  £300  are  advanced  during  the 
10th-12th  week.  At  the  end  of  the  12th  week  therefore  £300 
are  free  and  £600  are  in  the  form  of  commodity-capital,  return¬ 
able  at  the  end  of  the  15th  week. 

3rd  working  period:  13th-18th  week.  During  the  13th-15th  week, 
advance  of  above  £300,  then  reflux  of  £600,  of  which  300  are 
advanced  for  the  16th-18th  week.  At  the  end  of  the  18th  week, 
£300  are  free  in  money-form,  £600  on  hand  as  commodity- 
capital  which  returns  at  the  end  of  the  21st  week.  (See  the  more 
detailed  presentation  of  this  case  under  II,  below.) 

In  other  words  during  9  working  periods  (54  weeks)  a  total 
of  600  times  9  or  £5,400  worth  of  commodities  are  produced. 
At  the  end  of  the  ninth  working  period  the  capitalist  has  £300 
in  money  and  £600  in  commodities  which  have  not  yet  completed 
their  term  of  circulation. 

A  comparison  of  these  three  illustrations  shows,  first,  that 
a  successive  release  of  capital  I  of  £500  and  of  additional  capital 
II  of  likewise  £500  takes  place  only  in  the  second  illustration, 
so  that  these  two  portions  of  capital  move  separately  and  apart 
from  each  other.  But  this  is  so  only  because  we  have  made  the 
very  exceptional  assumption  that  the  working  period  and  the 
time  of  circulation  form  two  equal  halves  of  the  turnover  period. 
In  all  other  cases,  whatever  the  difference  between  the  two  con¬ 
stituents  of  the  period  of  turnover,  the  movements  of  the  two 
capitals  cross  each  other,  as  in  illustrations  I  and  III,  beginning 
with  the  second  period  of  turnover.  The  additional  capital  II, 
with  a  portion  of  capital  I,  then  forms  the  capital  functioning 
in  the  second  turnover  period,  while  the  remainder  of  capital  I 
is  set  free  to  perform  the  original  function  of  capital  II.  The 
capital  operating  during  the  circulation  time  of  the  commodity- 
capital  is  not  identical,  in  this  case,  with  the  capital  II  originally 
advanced  for  this  purpose,  but  it  is  of  the  same  value  and  forms 
the  same  aliquot  part  of  the  total  capital  advanced. 

Secondly:  The  capital  which  functioned  during  the  working 
period  lies  idle  during  the  time  of  circulation.  In  the  second  illus¬ 
tration  the  capital  functions  during  the  5  weeks  of  the  working 
period  and  lies  idle  during  the  5  weeks  of  the  circulatiqn  period. 
Therefore  the  entire  time  during  which  capital  I  lies  idle  here 
amounts  to  one  half  of  the  year.  It  is  the  additional  capital  II  that 
appears  during  this  time  having,  in  the  case  before  us,  also  in  its 
turn  lain  idle  half  a  year.  But  the  additional  capital  required  to 
ensure  the  continuity  of  production  during  the  time  of  circulation 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


267 


is  not  determined  by  the  aggregate  amount,  or  sum  total,  of  the 
times  of  circulation  during  the  year,  but  only  by  the  ratio  of  the 
time  of  circulation  to  the  period  of  turnover.  (We  assume,  of 
course,  that  all  the  turnovers  take  place  under  the  same  condi¬ 
tions.)  For  this  reason  £500  of  additional  capital,  and  not  £2,500, 
are  required  in  the  second  illustration.  This  is  simply  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  additional  capital  enters  just  as  well  into  the  turn¬ 
over  as  the  capital  originally  advanced,  and  that  it  therefore 
makes  up  its  magnitude  just  as  the  other  by  the  number  of  its 
turnovers. 

Thirdly:  The  circumstances  here  considered  are  not  affected 
by  whether  the  time  of  production  is  longer  than  the  working 
time  or  not.  True,  the  aggregate  of  the  periods  of  turnover  is 
prolonged  thereby,  but  this  extension  does  not  necessitate  any 
additional  capital  for  the  labour-process.  The  additional  capital 
serves  merely  the  purpose  of  filling  the  gaps  in  the  labour-process 
that  arise  on  account  of  the  time  of  circulation.  Hence  it  is  there 
simply  to  protect  production  against  interruptions  originating 
in  the  time  of  circulation.  Interruptions  arising  from  the  specific 
conditions  of  production  are  to  be  eliminated  in  another  way, 
which  need  not  be  discussed  at  this  point.  There  are  however 
establishments  in  which  work  is  carried  on  only  intermittently, 
to  order,  so  that  there  may  be  intervals  between  the  working  peri¬ 
ods.  In  such  cases,  the  need  for  additional  capital  is  pro  tanto 
eliminated.  On  the  other  hand  in  most  cases  of  seasonal  work 
there  is  a  certain  limit  for  the  time  of  reflux.  The  same  work  can¬ 
not  be  renewed  next  year  with  the  same  capital,  if  the  circula¬ 
tion  time  of  this  capital  has  not,  in  the  meantime,  run  out.  On 
the  other  hand  the  time  of  circulation  may  also  be  shorter  than 
the  interval  between  two  periods  of  production.  In  that  event 
the  capital  lies  fallow,  unless  it  is  meanwhile  employed  oth¬ 
erwise. 

Fourthly:  The  capital  advanced  for  a  certain  working  period  — 
for  instance  the  £600  in  the  third  illustration— is  invested  partly 
in  raw  and  auxiliary  materials,  in  a  productive  supply  for  the 
working  period,  in  constant  circulating  capital,  and  partly  in 
variable  circulating  capital,  in  the  payment  of  labour  itself. 
The  portion  laid  out  in  constant  circulating  capital,  may  not 
exist  for  the  same  length  of  time  in  the  form  of  a  productive  sup¬ 
ply;  the  raw  material  for  instance  may  not  be  on  hand  for  the  entire 
working  period,  coal  may  be  procured  only  every  two  weeks. 
However,  as  credit  is  still  out  of  the  question  here,  this  portion  of 
capital,  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  available  in  the  form  of  a  productive 


268 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


supply,  must  be  kept  on  hand  in  the  form  of  money  so  that  it 
can  be  converted  into  a  productive  supply  as  and  when  needed. 
This  does  not  alter  the  magnitude  of  the  constant  circulating 
capital-value  advanced  for  6  weeks.  On  the  other  hand — regard¬ 
less  of  the  money-supply  for  unforeseen  expenses,  the  reserve 
fund  proper  for  the  elimination  of  disturbances — wages  are  paid 
in  shorter  intervals,  mostly  weekly.  Therefore  unless  the  capital¬ 
ist  compels  the  labourer  to  advance  his  labour  for  a  longer  time, 
the  capital  required  fcr  wages  must  be  on  hand  in  the  form  of 
money.  During  the  reflux  of  the  capital  a  portion  must  therefore 
be  retained  in  money-form  for  the  payment  of  the  labour,  while 
the  remaining  portion  may  be  converted  into  productive  supply. 

The  additional  capital  is  divided  exactly  like  the  original. 
But  it  is  distinguished  from  capital  I  by  the  fact  that  (apart 
from  credit  relations)  in  order  to  be  available  for  its  own  working 
period  it  must  be  advanced  during  the  entire  duration  of  the 
first  working  period  of  capital  I,  into  which  it  does  not  enter.  Dur¬ 
ing  this  time  it  can  already  be  converted,  at  least  in  part,  into 
constant  circulating  capital,  having  been  advanced  for  the  entire 
period  of  turnover.  To  what  extent  it  assumes  this  form  or  per¬ 
sists  in  the  form  of  additional  money-capital  until  this  conver¬ 
sion  becomes  necessary,  will  depend  partly  on  the  special  condi¬ 
tions  of  production  of  definite  lines  of  business,  partly  on  local 
conditions,  partly  on  the  price  fluctuations  of  raw  material,  etc. 
If  social  capital  is  viewed  in  its  entirety,  a  more  or  less  consid¬ 
erable  part  of  this  additional  capital  will  always  be  for  a  rather 
long  time  in  the  state  of  money-capital.  But  as  for  that  portion 
of  capital  II  which  is  to  be  advanced  for  wages,  it  is  always  con¬ 
verted  only  gradually  into  labour-power,  as  small  working  periods 
expire  and  are  paid  for.  This  portion  of  capital  II,  then,  is  avail¬ 
able  in  the  form  of  money-capital  during  the  entire  working 
period,  until  by  its  conversion  into  labour-power  it  takes  part  in 
the  function  of  productive  capital. 

Consequently,  the  accession  of  the  additional  capital  required 
for  the  transformation  of  the  circulation  time  of  capital  I  into 
time  of  production,  increases  not  only  the  magnitude  of  the 
advanced  capital  and  the  length  of  time  for  which  the  aggregate 
capital  must  necessarily  be  advanced,  but  also,  and  specifically 
so,  that  portion  of  the  advanced  capital  which  exists  as  money- 
supply,  which  hence  exists  in  the  state  of  money-capital  and  has 
the  form  of  potential  money-capital. 

The  same  thing  also  takes  place — as  far  as  it  concerns  both 
the  advance  in  the  form  of  a  productive  supply  and  in  that  of 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


269 


a  money-supply— when  the  separation  of  capital  into  two  parts 
made  necessary  by  the  time  of  circulation,  namely,  into  capital 
for  the  first  working  period  and  replacement  capital  for  the  time 
of  circulation,  is  not  caused  by  the  increase  of  the  capital  laid 
out  but  by  a  decrease  of  the  scale  of  production.  The  amount 
of  capital  tied  up  in  the  money-form  grows  here  still  more  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  scale  of  production. 

What  is  achieved  in  general  by  this  separation  of  capital  into 
an  originally  productive  and  an  additional  capital  is  a  con¬ 
tinuous  succession  of  the  working  periods,  the  constant  func¬ 
tion  of  an  equal  portion  of  the  advanced  capital  as  productive 
capital. 

Let  us  look  at  the  second  illustration.  The  capital  continuously 
employed  in  the  process  of  production  amounts  to  £500.  As  the 
working  period  is  5  weeks  it  operates  ten  times  during  50  weeks 
(taken  as  a  year).  Hence  its  product,  apart  from  surplus-value, 
is  10  times  £500,  or  £5,000.  From  the  standpoint  of  a  capital 
working  directly  and  uninterruptedly  in  the  process  of  production 
— a  capital-value  of  £500— the  time  of  circulation  seems  to  be 
brought  to  nought.  The  period  of  turnover  coincides  with  the 
working  period,  and  the  time  of  circulation  is  assumed  to  be 
equal  to  zero. 

But  if  the  capital  of  £500  were  regularly  interrupted  in  its 
productive  activity  by  a  5-week  circulation  time,  so  that  it  would 
again  become  capable  of  production  only  after  the  close  of  the 
entire  10-week  turnover  period,  we  should  have  5  turnovers  of  ten 
weeks  each  in  the  50  weeks  of  the  year.  These  would  comprise 
five  5-week  periods  of  production,  or  a  sum  of  25  productive  weeks 
with  a  total  product  worth  5  times  £500,  or  £2,500,  and  five 
5-week  periods  of  circulation,  or  a  total  circulation  time  of  like¬ 
wise  25  weeks.  If  we  say  in  this  case  that  the  capital  of  £500  has 
been  turned  over  5  times  in  the  year,  it  will  be  clear  and  obvious 
that  during  half  of  each  period  of  turnover  this  capital  of  £500 
did  not  function  at  all  as  a  productive  capital  and  that,  all  in  all, 
it  performed  its  function  only  during  one  half  of  the  year,  but 
did  not  function  at  all  during  the  other  half. 

In  our  illustration  the  replacement  capital  of  £500  appears 
on  the  scene  during  those  five  periods  of  circulation  and  the 
turnover  is  thus  expanded  from  £2,500  to  £5,000.  But  now  the 
advanced  capital  is  £1,000  instead  of  £500.  5,000  divided  by 
1,000  is  5.  Hence,  there  are  five  turnovers  instead  of  ten.  And 
that  is  just  the  way  people  figure.  But  when  it  is  said  that  the 
capital  of  £1,000  has  been  turned  over  five  times  during  the  year, 


270 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


the  recollection  of  the  time  of  circulation  disappears  from  the 
hollow  skulls  of  the  capitalists  and  a  confused  idea  is  formed  that 
this  capital  has  served  continuously  in  the  production  process 
during  the  five  successive  turnovers.  But  if  we  say  that  the  capital 
of  £1,000  has  been  turned  over  five  times  this  includes  both  the 
time  of  circulation  and  the  time  of  production.  Indeed,  if  £1,000 
had  really  been  continuously  active  in  the  process  of  production, 
the  product  would,  according  to  our  assumptions,  have  to  be 
£10,000  instead  of  £5,000.  But  in  order  to  have  £1,000  continu¬ 
ously  in  the  process  of  production,  £2,000  would  have  to  be  ad¬ 
vanced.  The  economists,  who  as  a  general  rule  have  nothing  clear 
to  say  in  reference  to  the  mechanism  of  the  turnover,  always  over¬ 
look  this  main  point,  to  wit,  that  only  a  part  of  the  industrial 
capital  can  actually  be  engaged  in  the  process  of  production  if 
production  is  to  proceed  uninterruptedly  While  one  part  is  in 
the  period  of  production,  another  must  always  be  in  the  period  of 
circulation.  Or  in  other  words,  one  part  can  perform  the  function 
of  productive  capital  only  on  condition  that  another  part  is  with¬ 
drawn  from  production  proper  in  the  form  of  commodity-  or  money- 
capital.  In  overlooking  this,  the  significance  and  role  of  money- 
capital  is  entirely  ignored. 

We  have  now  to  ascertain  what  differences  in  the  turnover 
arise  if  the  two  sections  of  the  period  of  turnover,  the  working 
period  and  the  circulation  period,  are  equal,  or  if  the  working 
period  is  greater  or  smaller  than  the  circulation  period,  and, 
furthermore,  what  effect  this  has  on  the  tie-up  of  capital  in  the 
form  of  money-capital. 

We  assume  the  capital  advanced  weekly  to  be  in  all  cases 
£100,  and  the  period  of  turnover  9  weeks,  so  that  the  capital 
to  be  advanced  in  each  period  of  turnover  is  £900. 


I.  THE  WORKING  PERIOD  EQUAL 
TO  THE  CIRCULATION  PERIOD 

Although  this  case  occurs  in  reality  only  as  an  accidental 
exception,  it  must  serve  as  our  point  of  departure  in  this  investi¬ 
gation,  because  here  relations  shape  themselves  in  the  simplest 
and  most  intelligible  way. 

The  two  capitals  (capital  I  advanced  for  the  first  working 
period,  and  supplemental  capital  II,  which  functions  during 
the  circulation  period  of  capital  I)  relieve  one  another  in  their 
movements  without  crossing.  With  the  exception  of  the  first 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


271 


period,  either  of  the  two  capitals  is  therefore  advanced  only  for 
its  own  period  of  turnover.  Let  the  period  of  turnover  be  9  weeks, 
as  indicated  in  the  following  illustrations,  so  that  the  working 
period  and  the  circulation  period  are  each  4l/2  weeks.  Then  we 
have  the  following  annual  diagram. 

Table  I 
CAPITAL  I 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Advance 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I.  1st-  9th  week 

1st-  4th  Vi  week 

£450 

4th >4-  9th  week 

II.  10th-18th 

10th-13th'/,  „ 

£450 

13th1/, -18th  » 

III  19th-27th 

19th -22  nd  •/,  „ 

£450 

22nd1/, -27  th  „ 

IV  28tb-36lh 

28th-31sty, 

£450 

31  sty, -36th  „ 

V.  37  th -45th 

37*  b -40th  y,  „ 

£450 

40th1/, -45  th  „ 

VI  46th-[54th)  „ 

46th-49th%  „ 

£450 

49th1/, -[54th]  „  31 

CAPITAL  II 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Advance 

Periods  of  Circu¬ 
lation 

I.  4th1/, -13th1/,  week 

4th1/,-  9th  week 

£450 

10th-13th>/,  week 

II  13th1/, -22nd  y,  „ 

13th  y, -18th  . 

£450 

19th-22ndV,  „ 

III.  22ndy,-31sty,  „ 

22nd  y, -27th  „ 

£450 

28th -31st1/, 

IV-  31sty,-40thy, 

31st  V, -36th  „ 

£450 

37th-40th1,4 

V.  40th1/, -49th1/,  „ 

40th1/,  -45  th  „ 

£450 

46th-49thy, 

VI  49th1/, -[58th1/,]  „ 

49thy,-[54th]  „ 

£450 

[55th-58th>/,]  „ 

Within  the  51  weeks  which  here  stand  for  one  year,  capital 
I  runs  through  six  full  working  periods,  producing  6  times  450, 
or  £2,700  worth  of  commodities,  and  capital  II  producing  in 
Eve  full  working  periods  5  times  £450,  or  £2,250  worth  of  com¬ 
modities.  In  addition,  capital  II  produced,  within  the  last  one 
and  a  half  weeks  of  the  year  (middle  of  the  50th  to  the  end  of  the 
51st  week),  an  extra  £150  worth.  The  aggregate  product  in  51 
weeks  is  worth  £5,100.  So  far  as  the  direct  production  of  surplus- 


31  The  weeks  falling  within  tne  second  year  of  turnover  are  put  in 
parentheses. 


272 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


value  is  concerned,  which  takes  place  only  during  the  working 
period,  the  aggregate  capital  of  £900  would  have  been  turned 
over  5S/S  times  (52/s  times  900  equals  £5,100).  But  if  we  consider 
the  real  turnover,  capital  I  has  been  turned  over  5%  times, 
since  at  the  close  of  the  51st  week  it  still  has  3  weeks  to  go  of  its 
sixth  period  of  turnover;  52/s  times  450  makes  £2,550;  and  capital 
II  turned  over  5 1/„  times,  since  it  has  completed  only  1VS  weeks 
of  its  sixth  period  of  turnover,  so  that  7 l/t  weeks  of  it  run  into 
the  next  year;  5Vg  times  450  makes  £2,325;  real  aggregate  turn¬ 
over:  £4,875. 

Let  us  consider  capital  I  and  capital  II  as  two  capitals  wholly 
independent  of  one  another.  They  are  entirely  independent  in 
their  movements;  these  movements  complement  one  another 
merely  because  their  working  and  circulating  periods  directly 
relieve  one  another.  They  may  be  regarded  as  two  totally  inde¬ 
pendent  capitals  belonging  to  different  capitalists. 

Capital  I  has  completed  five  full  turnovers  and  two-thirds  of 
its  sixth  turnover  period.  At  the  end  of  the  year  it  has  the  form 
of  commodity-capital,  which  is  three  weeks  short  of  its  normal 
realisation.  During  this  time  it  cannot  enter  into  the  process  of 
production.  It  functions  as  commodity-capital,  it  circulates.  It 
has  completed  only  two-thirds  of  its  last  period  of  turnover.  This 
is  expressed  as  follows:  It  has  been  turned  over  only  two-thirds 
of  a  time,  only  two-thirds  of  its  total  value  have  performed  a  com¬ 
plete  turnover.  We  say  that  £450  complete  their  turnover  in  9 
weeks,  hence  £300  do  in  6  weeks.  But  in  this  mode  of  expression 
the  organic  relations  between  the  two  specifically  different  compo¬ 
nents  of  the  turnover  time  are  ignored.  The  exact  meaning  of  the 
expression  that  the  advanced  capital  of  £450  has  made  5a/s  turn¬ 
overs  is  merely  that  it  has  accomplished  five  turnovers  fully 
and  only  two-thirds  of  the  sixth.  On  the  other  hand  the  expres¬ 
sion  that  the  turned-over  capital  equals  52/3  times  the  advanced 
capital— hence,  in  the  above  case,  52/s  times  £450,  making 
£2,550 — is  correct,  meaning  that  unless  this  capital  of  £450 
were  complemented  by  another  capital  of  £450,  one  portion  of  it 
would  have  to  be  in  the  process  of  production  while  another 
in  the  process  of  circulation.  If  the  time  of  turnover  is  to  be 
expressed  in  terms  of  the  capital  turned  over,  it  can  always  be 
expressed  only  in  terms  of  existing  value  (in  fact,  of  finished 
product).  The  circumstance  that  the  advanced  capital  is  not  in  a 
condition  in  which  it  may  re-open  the  process  of  production  finds 
expression  in  the  fact  that  only  a  part  of  it  is  in  a  stale  capable 
of  production  or  that,  in  order  to  be  in  a  state  of  uninterrupted 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


273 


production,  the  capital  would  have  to  be  divided  into  a  portion 
which  would  be  continually  in  the  period  of  production  and  into 
another  which  would  be  continually  in  the  period  of  circulation, 
depending  upon  the  relation  of  these  periods  to  each  other.  It  is 
the  same  law  which  determines  the  quantity  of  the  constantly 
functioning  productive  capital  by  the  ratio  of  the  time  of  circu¬ 
lation  to  the  time  of  turnover. 

By  the  end  of  the  51st  week,  which  we  regard  here  as  the  end 
of  the  year,  £150  of  capital  II  have  been  advanced  to  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  an  unfinished  lot  of  goods.  Another  part  of  it  exists  in  the 
form  of  circulating  constant  capital  — raw  materials,  etc.  —  i.e., 
in  a  form  in  which  it  can  function  as  productive  capital  in  the 
production  process.  But  a  third  part  of  it  exists  in  the  form  of 
money,  at  least  the  amount  of  the  wages  for  the  remainder  of  the 
working  period  (3  weeks),  which  is  not  paid,  however,  until  the 
end  of  each  week.  Now,  although  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  year, 
hence  of  a  new  turnover  cycle,  this  portion  of  the  capital  is  not  in 
the  form  of  productive  capital  but  in  that  of  money-capital,  in 
which  it  cannot  take  part  in  the  process  of  production,  at  the 
opening  of  the  new  turnover  circulating  variable  capital,  i.e., 
living  labour-power,  is  nevertheless  active  in  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  labour-power  is  not  paid  until 
the  end  of  the  week,  although  bought  at  the  beginning  of  the 
working  period,  say,  per  week,  and  so  consumed.  Money  serves 
here  as  a  means  of  payment.  For  this  reason  it  is  still  as  money  in 
the  hands  of  the  capitalist,  on  the  one  hand,  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  labour-power,  the  commodity  into  which  money  is  being 
transformed,  is  already  active  in  the  process  of  production,  so 
that  the  same  capital-value  appears  here  doubly. 

It  we  look  merely  at  the  working  periods, 

capital  I  produces  6  times  450,  or  £2,700 
capital  II  „  SVstimes  450,  or  £2,400 

Henco  together  57,times  900,  or  £5,100. 

Hence  the  total  advanced  capital  of  £900  has  functioned  57, 
times  throughout  the  year  as  productive  capital.  It  is  immaterial 
for  the  production  of  surplus-value  whether  there  are  always  £450 
in  the  production  process  and  always  £450  in  the  circulation 
process,  or  whether  £900  function  4Va  weeks  in  the  process  of 
production  and  the  following  4V2  weeks  in  the  process  of  cir¬ 
culation. 


274 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


On  the  other  hand,  if  we  consider  the  periods  of  turnover, 
there  has  been  turned  over: 

capital  I,  52/s  times  450,  or  £2,550 

capital  II,  5 V*  times  450,  or  £2,325 

Hence  the  total  capital  5s  !,  times  900,  or  £4,875. 

For  the  number  of  turnovers  of  the  total  capital  is  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  amounts  turned  over  by  I  and  II,  divided  by  the  sum 
of  I  and  II. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  if  capitals  I  and  II  were  independent 
of  each  other  they  would  nevertheless  form  merely  different  in¬ 
dependent  portions  of  the  social  capital  advanced  in  the  same 
sphere  of  production.  Hence  if  the  social  capital  within  this 
sphere  of  production  were  composed  solely  of  I  and  II,  the  same 
calculation  would  apply  to  the  turnover  of  the  social  capital  in 
this  sphere  as  applies  here  to  the  two  constituent  parts  I  and  II  of 
the  same  private  capital.  Going  further,  every  portion  of  the 
entire  social  capital  invested  in  any  particular  sphere  of  production 
may  be  so  calculated.  But  in  the  last  analysis,  the  number  of  turn¬ 
overs  made  by  the  entire  social  capital  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the 
capitals  turned  over  in  the  various  spheres  of  production  divided 
by  the  sum  of  the  capitals  advanced  in  those  spheres. 

It  must  further  be  noted  that  just  as  capitals  I  and  II  in  the 
same  private  business  have  here  strictly  speaking  different  turn¬ 
over  years  (the  cycle  of  turnover  of  capital  II  beginning  4l/2 
weeks  later  than  that  of  capital  I,  so  that  the  year  of  I  ends4I/, 
weeks  earlier  than  that  of  II),  so  the  various  private  capitals  in 
the  same  sphere  of  production  begin  their  operations  at  totally 
different  periods  and  therefore  conclude  their  turnover  years  at 
different  times  of  the  year.  The  same  calculation  of  averages  that 
we  employed  above  for  I  and  II  suffices  also  hero  to  bring  down  the 
turnover  years  of  the  various  independent  portions  of  the  social 
capital  to  one  uniform  turnover  year. 


II.  THE  WORKING  PERIOD  GREATER 
THAN  THE  PERIOD  OF  CIRCULATION 

The  working  and  turnover  periods  of  capitals  I  and  II  cross 
ono  another  instead  of  relieving  one  another.  Simultaneously 
some  capital  is  set  free.  This  was  not  so  in  the  previously  consid¬ 
ered  case. 

But  this  does  not  alter  the  fact  that,  as  before,  1)  the  number 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


275 


of  working  periods  of  the  total  capital  advanced  is  equal  to  the 
sum  of  the  value  of  the  annual  product  of  both  advanced  por¬ 
tions  of  capital  divided  by  the  total  capital  advanced,  and  2)  the 
number  of  turnovers  made  by  the  total  capital  is  equal  to  the  sum 
of  the  two  amounts  turned  over  divided  by  the  sum  of  the  two  ad¬ 
vanced  capitals.  Here  too  we  must  consider  both  portions  of  cap¬ 
ital  as  if  they  performed  turnover  movements  entirely  independ¬ 
ent  of  each  other. 

Thus,  we  assume  once  more,  that  £100  are  to  be  advanced 
weekly  to  the  labour-process.  Let  the  working  period  last  6  weeks, 
requiring  therefore  every  time  an  advance  of  £600  (capital  I). 
Let  the  time  of  circulation  be  3  weeks,  so  that  the  period  of  turn¬ 
over  is  9  weeks,  as  before.  Let  capital  II  of  £300  step  in  during 
the  three-week  circulation  period  of  capital  I.  Considering  both 
capitals  as  independent  of  each  other,  we  find  the  schedule  of  the 
annual  turnover  to  be  as  follows: 


Table  II 

CAPITAL  I,  £600 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Advance 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I  1st-  9th  week 

1st-  6th  week 

£600 

7th-  9th 

week 

II.  10th-18th  _ 

10th-15th  „ 

£600 

16th-18tb 

„ 

III  19th-27th  „ 

19th-24th  „ 

£600 

25th-27th 

IV.  28th-36th  . 

28th-33rd  „ 

£600 

34th-36th 

V.  37th-45th  „ 

37th-42nd  . 

£600 

43rd-45th 

„ 

VI  46th-[54th]  „ 

46th-51st  n 

£600 

[52nd-54th] 

- 

ADDITIONAL  CAPITAL  II,  £300 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Advance 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I.  7th-15th  week 

7th-  9th  week 

£300 

10th-l 5th  week 

II.  16th -24th  „ 

16th -18th  . 

£300 

19th-24th  .. 

III.  25th-33rd  . 

25th -27th 

£300 

28th -33rd  . 

IV.  34th-42nd  .. 

34th-36th 

£300 

37th-42nd  . 

V.  43rd-51st 

43rd -45  th  „ 

£300 

46th-51st 

276 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


The  process  of  production  continues  uninterruptedly  the  whole 
year  round  on  the  same  scale.  The  two  capitals  I  and  II  remain 
entirely  separate.  But  in  order  to  represent  them  as  separate, 
we  had  to  tear  apart  their  real  intersections  and  intertwinings, 
and  thus  also  to  change  the  number  of  turnovers.  For  according 
to  the  above  table  the  amounts  turned  over  would  be: 

by  capital  I,  52/s  times  000,  or  £3,400  and 

by  capital  II,  5  times  300,  or  £1,500 

Hence  by  the  total  capital  5 V,  times  900,  or  £4,900. 

But  this  is  not  correct,  for,  as  we  shall  see,  the  actual  periods 
of  production  and  circulation  do  not  absolutely  coincide  with 
those  of  the  above  schedule,  in  which  it  was  mainly  a  question 
of  presenting  capitals  I  and  II  as  independent  of  each  other. 

In  reality,  capital  II  has  no  working  and  circulating  periods 
separate  and  distinct  from  those  of  capital  I.  The  working  period 
Is  6  weeks,  the  circulation  period  3  weeks.  Since  capital  II 
amounts  to  only  £300,  it  can  suffice  only  for  a  part  of  the  working 
period.  This  is  indeed  the  case.  At  the  end  of  the  6th  week  a 
product  valued  at  £600  passes  into  circulation  and  returns  in 
money-form  at  the  close  of  the  9th  week.  Then,  at  the  opening 
of  the  7th  week,  capital  II  begins  its  activity,  and  covers  the  re¬ 
quirements  of  the  next  working  period,  the  7th  to  9th  week.  But 
according  to  our  assumption  the  working  period  is  only  half  up 
at  the  end  of  the  9th  week.  Henco  capital  I  of  £600  having  just 
returned,  at  the  beginning  of  the  10th  week,  once  more  enters 
into  operation  and  with  its  £300  supplies  the  advances  needed 
for  the  10th  to  12th  week.  This  disposes  of  the  second  working 
period.  A  product  value  of  £600  is  in  circulation  and  will  return 
at  the  close  of  the  15th  week.  At  the  same  time,  £300,  the  amount 
of  the  original  capital  II,  are  set  free  and  are  able  to  function  in 
the  first  half  of  the  following  working  period,  that  is  to  say,  in 
the  13th  to  15th  week.  After  the  lapse  of  these  weeks  the  £600 
return;  £300  of  them  suffice  for  the  remainder  of  the  working 
period,  and  £300  remain  for  the  following  working  period. 

The  thing  therefore  works  as  follows: 

First  period  of  turnover:  lst-9lh  week. 

1st  working  period:  lst-6th  week.  Capital  I,  £600,  performs 
its  function. 

1st  period  of  circulation:  7th-9th  week.  End  of  9th  week, 
£600  return. 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OP  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


277 


Second  period  of  turnover:  7th-15th  week. 

2nd  working  period:  7th-12th  week. 

First  half:  7th-9th  week.  Capital  II,  £300,  performs  its 
function. 

End  of  9th  week,  £600  return  in  money-form  (capital  I). 
Second  half:  10th-12th  week.  £300  of  capital  I  perform 
their  function.  The  other  £300  of  capital  I  remain  freed. 

2nd  period  of  circulation:  13th-l 5th  week. 

End  of  15th  week,  £600  (half  taken  from  capital  I,  half 
from  capital  II)  return  in  the  form  of  money. 

Third  period  of  turnover:  13th-21st  week. 

3rd  working  period:  13th-18th  week. 

First  half:  1 3th-l 5th  week.  The  freed  £300  perform  their 
function.  End  of  15th  week,  £600  return  in  money-form. 
Second  half:  16th-18th  week,  £300  of  the  returned  £600 
function,  the  other  £300  again  remain  freed. 

3rd  period  of  circulation:  19th-21st  week  at  the  close  of  which 
£600  again  return  in  money-form.  In  theso  £600  capital  I 
and  capital  II  are  now  indistinguishably  fused. 

And  so  there  are  eight  full  turnover  periods  of  a  capital  of 
£600  (I:  lst-9th  week;  II:  7th-15th  week;  III:  13th-21st;  IV:  19th- 
27th;  V:  25th-33rd;  VI:  31st-39th;  VII:  37th-45th;  VIII:  43rd- 
51st  week)  to  the  end  of  the  51st  week.  But  as  the  49th-51st 
weeks  fall  within  the  eighth  period  of  circulation,  the  £300  of 
freed  capital  must  step  in  and  keep  production  going.  Thus  the 
turnover  at  the  end  of  the  year  is  as  follows:  £600  have  completed 
their  circuit  eight  times,  making  £4,800.  In  addition  we  have  the 
product  of  the  last  3  weeks  (49th-51st),  which,  however,  has  com¬ 
pleted  only  one-third  of  its  circuit  of  9  weeks,  so  that  in  the  sum 
turned  over  it  counts  for  only  one-third  of  its  amount,  £100.  If, 
then,  the  annual  product  of  51  weeks  is  £5,100,  the  capital  turned 
over  is  only  4,800  plus  100,  or  £4,900.  The  total  capital  ad¬ 
vanced,  £900,  has  therefore  been  turned  over  5 4/g  times,  a  trifle 
more  than  in  the  first  case. 

In  the  present  example  we  assumed  a  case  in  which  the 
working  time  was  8/s  and  the  circulation  time  V3  of  the  period  of 
turnover,  i.e. ,  the  working  time  was  a  simple  multiple  of  the 
circulation  time.  The  question  now  is  whether  capital  is  likewise 
set  free,  in  the  way  shown  above,  when  this  assumption  is  not 
made. 

Let  us  assume  a  working  time  of  5  weeks,  a  circulation  time 
of  4  weeks,  and  a  capital  advance  of  £100  per  week. 


278 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


First  period  of  turnover:  lst-9th  week. 

1st  working  period:  lst-5th  week.  Capital  I,  or  £500,  per¬ 
forms  its  function. 

1st  circulation  period:  6th-9th  week.  End  of  9th  week,  £500 
return  in  money-form. 

Second  period  of  turnover:  6th-14th  week. 

2nd  working  period:  6th-10th  week. 

First  section:  6th-9th  week.  Capital  II,  of  £400,  performs 
its  function.  End  of  9th  week,  capital  I  of  £500  returns 
in  money-form. 

Second  section:  10th  week.  £100  of  the  returned  £500  per¬ 
form  their  function.  The  remaining  £400  are  set  free  for  the 
following  working  period. 

2nd  circulation  period:  llth-14th  week.  End  of  14th  week, 
£500  return  in  money-form. 

Up  to  the  end  of  the  14th  week  (llth-14th),  the  £400  set  free 
above  perform  their  function;  £100  of  the  £500  then  returned 
fill  the  requirements  of  the  third  working  period  (llth-15th  week) 
so  that  £400  are  once  more  released  for  the  fourth  working  period. 
The  same  thing  is  repeated  in  every  working  period;  at  its  begin¬ 
ning  £400  are  ready  at  hand,  sufficing  for  the  first  4  weeks.  End  of 
the  4th  week,  £500  return  in  money-form,  only  £100  of  which  are 
needed  for  the  last  week,  while  the  other  £400  remain  free  for 
the  next  working  period. 

Let  us  further  assume  a  working  period  of  7  weeks,  with  a 
capital  I  of  £700;  a  circulation  period  of  2  weeks,  with  a  capital 
II  of  £200. 

In  that  case  the  first  period  of  turnover  lasts  from  the  1st  to 
the  9th  week;  its  first  working  period  from  the  1st  to  the  7th  week, 
with  an  advance  of  £700,  its  first  circulation  period  from  the 
8th  to  the  9th  week.  End  of  the  9th  week,  £700  flow  back  in 
money-form. 

The  second  period  of  turnover,  from  the  8th  to  the  16th  week, 
contains  the  second  working  period  of  the  8th  to  the  14th  week. 
The  requirements  of  the  8th  and  9th  weeks  of  this  period  are  cov¬ 
ered  by  capital  II.  End  of  the  9th  week,  the  above  £700  return. 
Up  to  the  close  of  this  working  period  (10th-14th  week),  £500 
of  this  sum  are  used  up;  £200  remain  free  for  the  next  working 
period.  The  second  circulation  period  lasts  from  the  15th  to  the 
16th  week.  End  of  the  16th  week  £700  return  once  more.  From 
now  on,  the  same  thing  is  repeated  in  every  working  period.  The 
need  for  capital  during  the  first  twor  weeks  is  covered  by  the  £200 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


279 


set  free  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  working  period;  at  the  close 
of  the  second  week  £700  return;  but  only  5  weeks  remain  of  the 
working  period,  so  that  it  can  consume  only  £500;  therefore  £200 
always  remain  free  for  the  next  working  period. 

We  find,  then,  that  in  the  given  case,  where  the  working  pe¬ 
riod  has  been  assumed  to  be  greater  than  the  circulation  period, 
a  money-capital  will  at  all  events  have  been  set  free  at  the  close 
of  each  working  period,  which  is  of  the  same  magnitude  as  capi¬ 
tal  II  advanced  for  the  circulation  period.  In  our  three  illustra¬ 
tions  capital  II  was  £300  in  the  first,  £400  in  the  second,  and 
£200  in  the  third.  Accordingly,  the  capital  set  free  at  the  close  of 
each  working  period  was  £300,  £400  and  £200  respectively. 


III.  THE  WORKING  PERIOD  SMALLER 
THAN  THE  CIRCULATION  PERIOD 

We  begin  by  assuming  once  more  a  period  of  turnover  of  9 
weeks,  of  which  3  weeks  are  assigned  to  the  working  period  with 
an  available  capital  I  of  £300.  Let  the  circulation  period  be  6 
weeks.  For  these  6  weeks,  an  additional  capital  of  £600  is  required, 
which  we  may  divide  in  turn  into  two  capitals  of  £300,  each  of 
them  meeting  the  requirements  of  one  working  period.  We  then 
have  three  capitals  of  £300  each,  of  which  £300  are  always  en¬ 
gaged  in  production,  while  £600  circulate. 


Table  III 
CAPITAL  I 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I.  1st-  9th  week 

II.  10th-  18th  „ 

III.  19  th -27th  . 

IV.  28th-36th  „ 

V.  37th-45tb 

VI.  46tb-[54th]  „ 

1st-  3rd  week 
10th-l  2th  . 
19th-2ist  . 
28th-30th  „ 

37th-39th  „ 

46th-48tb 

4th-  9th  week 
13tb-18th  . 

22nd-27th  . 

31  st-36th 

40th-45th 

49th-[54th]  „ 

280 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITA! 


CAPITAL  II 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I  4th-12tb  week 

II  13th-21st  . 

III  22nd-30th  . 

IV.  31st-39th  . 

V.  40th-48th  . 

VI  49th-[57th]  „ 

4th-  6th  week 
13th-15th 

22nd-24th 

31et-33rd 

40th-42nd  „ 

49th-51st  „ 

7th-12th  week 
16th-21st  „ 

25th-30th  , 

84tb-89th  . 

43rd-48th  . 

[52nd-57th]  „ 

CAPITAL  III 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I.  7th-15th  week 

II.  16th-24th  „ 

III.  25tb-33rd 

IV.  34th-42nd  „ 

V.  43rd-5lst 

7  th-  9th  week 
16th-18th  . 

25th-27th  . 

34th -36th  . 

43rd  45th  . 

10th-l5th  week 
19th-24th  . 

28th-33rd  . 

37th-42nd  H 
46th-51st 

We  have  here  the  exact  counterpart  of  Case  I,  with  the  only 
difference  that  now  three  capitals  relieve  one  another  instead  of 
two.  There  is  no  intersection  or  intertwining  of  capitals.  Each  one 
of  them  can  be  traced  separately  to  the  end  of  the  year.  Just  as 
in  Case  I,  no  capital  is  set  free  at  the  close  of  a  working  period. 
Capital  I  is  completely  laid  out  at  the  end  of  the  3rd  week,  returns 
entirely  at  the  end  of  the  9th,  and  resumes  its  functions  at  the 
beginning  of  the  10th  week.  Similarly  with  capitals  II  and  III. 
The  regular  and  complete  relief  excludes  any  release  of  capital. 

The  total  turnover  is  as  follows: 

capital  I,  £300  times  5%,  or  £1,700 

capital  II,  £300  times  51/,,  or  £1,600 

capital  III,  £300  times  5,  or  £1,500 

Total  capital,  £900  times  5,*/g  or  £4,800. 


I 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


281 


Lot  us  now  also  take  an  illustration  in  which  the  circulation 
period  is  not  an  exact  multiple  of  the  working  period.  For  in¬ 
stance,  working  period — 4  weeks,  circulation  period — 5  weeks. 
The  corresponding  amounts  of  capital  would  then  be:  capital 
I— £400;  capital  II— £400;  capital  III  — £100.  We  present  only 
the  first  three  turnovers. 


Table  IV 
CAPITAL  I 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I.  1st-  9tb  week 

II.  9th-17th  „ 

III.  17th-25th 

1st-  4th  week 

9.  10th-12th  „ 

17.  18th-20th  . 

5th-  9th  week 
18th-17th  „ 

21st-25tb  „ 

CAPITAL  II 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I.  5th-13th  week 

II.  13th-21st  . 

III.  21st-29th  „ 

5th-  8th  week 
13.  14th-16th  „ 

21.  22nd-24th  . 

9th-13th  week 
17th-21st  „ 

25th-29th  „ 

CAPITAL  III 


Periods  of  Turnover 

Working  Periods 

Periods  of  Circulation 

I.  9th-l7th  week 

II.  17tb-25th  . 

III.  25th-33rd  „ 

9th  week 

17th  „ 

25th  „ 

10th-17th  week 
18th-25th  . 

26th-33rd  „ 

There  is  in  this  case  an  intertwining  of  capitals  in  so  far  as  the 
working  period  of  capital  III,  which  has  no  independent  working 
period,  because  it  suffices  for  only  one  week,  coincides  with  the 


282  the  turnover  of  capital 

first  working  week  of  capital  I.  On  the  other  hand  an  amount  of 
£100,  equal  to  capital  III,  is  set  free  at  the  close  of  the  working 
period  of  both  capital  I  and  II.  For  if  capital  III  fills  up  the  first 
week  of  the  second  and  all  succeeding  working  periods  of  capital  I 
and  £400,  the  entire  capital  I,  return  at  the  close  of  this  first 
week,  then  only  3  weeks  and  a  corresponding  capital  investment 
of  £300  will  remain  for  the  rest  of  the  working  period  of  capital  I. 
The  £100  thus  set  free  suffice  for  the  first  week  of  the  immediate¬ 
ly  following  working  period  of  capital  II;  at  the  end  of  that  week 
the  entire  capital  1 1  of  £400  returns.  But  since  the  working  pe¬ 
riod  already  started  can  absorb  only  another  £300,  £100  are  once 
more  disengaged  at  its  close.  And  so  forth.  We  have,  then,  a  release 
of  capital  at  the  close  of  a  working  period  whenever  the  circu¬ 
lation  period  is  not  a  simple  multiple  of  the  working  period.  And 
this  liberated  capital  is  equal  to  that  portion  of  the  capital  which 
has  to  fill  up  the  excess  of  the  circulation  period  over  the  working 
period  or  over  a  multiple  of  working  periods. 

In  all  cases  investigated  it  was  assumed  that  both  the  working 
period  and  the  circulation  period  remain  the  same  throughout 
the  year  in  any  of  the  businesses  here  examined.  This  assumption 
was  necessary  if  we  wished  to  ascertain  the  influence  of  the  time 
of  circulation  on  the  turnover  and  advancement  of  capital.  That  in 
reality  this  assumption  is  not  so  unconditionally  valid,  and  that 
it  frequently  is  not  valid  at  all  does  not  alter  the  case  in  the  least. 

In  this  entire  section  we  have  discussed  only  the  turnovers  of 
the  circulating  capital,  not  those  of  the  fixed,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  the  question  at  issue  has  nothing  to  do  with  fixed 
capital.  The  instruments  of  labour,  etc.,  employed  in  the  process 
of  production  form  only  fixed  capital,  inasmuch  as  their  time  of 
employment  exceeds  the  period  of  turnover  of  the  circulating  capi¬ 
tal;  inasmuch  as  the  period  of  time  during  which  these  instruments 
of  labour  continue  to  serve  in  perpetually  repeated  labour-proc¬ 
esses  is  greater  than  the  period  of  turnover  of  the  circulating  capi¬ 
tal,  and  hence  equal  to  n  periods  of  turnover  of  the  circulating 
capital.  Regardless  of  whether  the  total  time  represented  by  these 
n  periods  of  turnover  of  the  circulating  capital  is  longer  or  short¬ 
er,  that  portion  of  the  productive  capital  which  was  advanced 
for  this  time  in  fixed  capital  is  not  advanced  anew  during  its 
course.  It  continues  its  functions  in  its  old  use-form.  The  differ¬ 
ence  is  merely  this:  In  proportion  to  the  varying  length  of  a 
single  working  period  of  each  period  of  turnover  of  the  circulating 
capital,  the  fixed  capital  gives  up  a  greater  or  smaller  part  of  its 
original  value  to  the  product  of  that  working  period,  and  propor- 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


283 


tionally  to  the  duration  of  the  circulation  time  of  each  period 
of  turnover  this  value-part  of  the  fixed  capital  given  up  to  the 
product  returns  quicker  or  slower  in  money-form.  The  nature  of 
the  subject  we  are  discussing  in  this  section  — the  turnover  of  the 
circulating  portion  of  productive  capital— derives  from  the  very 
nature  of  this  portion.  The  circulating  capital  employed  in  a  work¬ 
ing  period  cannot  be  applied  in  a  new  working  period  until  it 
has  completed  its  turnover,  until  it  has  been  transformed  into 
commodity-capital,  from  that  into  money-capital,  and  from  that 
back  into  productive  capital.  Hence,  in  order  that  the  first  work¬ 
ing  period  may  be  immediately  followed  by  a  second,  capital 
must  be  advanced  anew  and  converted  into  the  circulating  ele¬ 
ments  of  productive  capital,  and  its  quantity  must  be  sufficient 
to  fill  the  void  occasioned  by  the  circulation  period  of  the  circulat¬ 
ing  capital  advanced  for  the  first  working  period.  This  is  the 
source  of  the  influence  exerted  by  the  length  of  the  working  period 
of  the  circulating  capital  over  the  scale  of  the  labour-process  and 
the  division  of  the  advanced  capital  or  the  addition  of  new  portions 
of  capital.  This  wa3  precisely  what  we  had  to  examine  in  this 
section. 


IV.  CONCLUSIONS 

From  the  preceding  investigation  it  follows  that 

A.  The  different  portions  into  which  capital  must  be  divided 
in  order  that  one  part  of  it  may  be  continually  in  the  working 
period  while  others  are  in  the  period  of  circulation,  relieve  one 
another,  like  different  independent  individual  capitals,  in  two 
cases:  (1)  when  the  working  period  is  equal  to  the  period  of  cir¬ 
culation,  so  that  the  period  of  turnover  is  divided  into  two  equal 
sections;  (2)  when  the  period  of  circulation  is  longer  than  the 
working  period,  but  at  the  same  time  is  a  simple  multiple  of 
the  working  period,  so  that  one  period  of  circulation  is  equal  to 
n  working  periods,  in  which  case  n  must  be  a  whole  number.  In 
these  cases  no  portion  of  the  successively  advanced  capital  is 
set  free. 

B.  On  the  other  hand  in  all  cases  in  which  (1)  the  period  of 
circulation  is  longer  than  the  working  period  without  being  a 
simple  multiple  of  it,  and  (2)  in  which  the  working  period  is 
longer  than  the  circulation  period,  a  portion  of  the  total  circulat¬ 
ing  capital  is  set  free  continually  and  periodically  at  the  close 
of  each  working  period,  beginning  with  the  second  turnover. 
This  freed  capital  is  equal  to  that  portion  of  the  total  capital 


284 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


which  has  been  advanced  for  the  circulation  period,  provided 
the  working  period  is  longer  than  the  period  of  circulation;  and 
equal  to  that  portion  of  the  capital  which  has  to  fill  up  the  excess 
of  the  circulation  period  over  the  working  period  or  over  a  mul¬ 
tiple  of  working  periods,  provided  the  circulation  period  is  longer 
than  the  working  period. 

C.  It  follows  that  for  the  aggregate  social  capital,  so  far  as 
its  circulating  part  is  concerned,  the  release  of  capital  must  be 
the  rule,  while  the  mere  alternation  of  portions  of  capital  func¬ 
tioning  successively  in  the  production  process  must  be  the  excep¬ 
tion.  For  the  equality  of  the  working  and  circulation  periods, 
or  the  equality  of  the  period  of  circulation  and  a  simple  multiple 
of  the  working  period,  this  regular  proportionality  of  the  two 
components  of  the  period  of  turnover  has  absolutely  nothing  to 
do  with  the  nature  of  the  case  and  for  this  reason  it  can  occur  on 
the  whole  only  as  a  matter  of  exception. 

A  very  considerable  portion  of  the  social  circulating  capital, 
which  is  turned  over  several  times  a  year,  will  therefore  periodi¬ 
cally  exist  in  the  form  of  released  capital  during  the  annual 
turnover  cycle. 

It  is  furthermore  evident  that,  all  other  circumstances  being 
equal,  the  magnitude  of  the  released  capital  grows  with  the  vol- 
uino  of  the  labour-process  or  with  the  scale  of  production,  hence 
with  the  development  of  capitalist  production  in  general.  In  the  case 
cited  under  B,  (2),  because  the  total  advanced  capital  increases; 
in  B,  (1),  because  with  the  development  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion  the  length  of  the  period  of  circulation  grows,  hence  also  the 
period  of  turnover  in  those  cases  where  the  working  period  is  less 
than  the  period  of  circulation,  and  there  is  no  regular  ratio 
between  the  two  periods. 

In  the  first  case  for  instance  we  had  to  invest  £100  per  week. 
This  required  £600  for  a  working  period  of  6  weeks,  £300  for  a 
circulation  period  of  3  weeks,  totalling  £900.  In  that  case  £300  are 
released  continually.  On  the  other  hand  if  £300  are  invested 
weekly,  we  have  £1,800  for  the  working  period  and  £900  for  the 
circulation  period.  Hence  £900  instead  of  £300  are  periodically 
set  free. 

D.  A  total  capital  of,  say,  £900  must  be  divided  into  two 
portions,  as  above,  £600  for  the  working  period  and  £300  for 
the  period  of  circulation.  That  portion  which  is  really  invested 
in  the  labour-process  is  thus  reduced  by  one-third,  from  £900 
to  £600;  consequently,  the  scale  of  production  is  diminished  by 
one-third.  On  the  other  hand  the  £300  function  only  to  make  the 


EFFECT  OP  TIMB  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


285 


working  period  continuous,  in  order  that  £100  may  be  invested 
every  week  of  the  year  in  the  labour-process. 

Abstractly  speaking,  it  is  all  the  same  whether  £600  work 
during  6  times  8,  or  48,  weeks  (product  £4,800)  or  whether  the 
total  capital  of  £900  is  expended  during  6  weeks  in  the  labour- 
process  and  then  lies  idle  during  the  3-week  period  of  circulation. 
In  the  latter  case,  it  would  be  working,  in  the  course  of  the  48 
weeks,  o1/,  times  6,  or  32  weeks  (product  bl/t  times  900,  or 
£4,800),  and  lie  idle  for  16  weeks.  But,  apart  from  the  greater 
spoilage  of  the  fixed  capital  during  the  idle  16  weeks  and  apart 
from  the  appreciation  of  labour,  which  must  be  paid  during  the 
entire  year,  even  if  employed  only  during  a  part  ol  It,  such  a 
regular  interruption  of  the  process  of  production  is  altogether 
Irreconcilable  with  the  operations  of  modern  big  industry.  This 
continuity  is  itself  a  productive  power  of  labour. 

Now,  if  we  take  a  closer  look  at  the  released,  or  rather  suspend¬ 
ed,  capital,  we  find  that  a  considerable  part  of  it  must  always 
be  in  the  form  of  money-capital.  Let  us  adhere  to  our  illustration: 
Working  period — 6  weeks,  period  of  circulation— 3  weeks,  in¬ 
vestment  per  week— £100.  In  the  middle  of  the  second  working 
period,  end  of  the  9th  week,  £600  return,  and  only  £300  of  them 
must  be  invested  for  the  remainder  of  the  working  period.  At 
the  end  of  the  second  working  period,  £300  are  therefore  released. 
In  what  state  are  these  £300?  We  shall  assume  that  V,  is  invested 
for  wages  and  2/s  for  raw  and  auxiliary  materials.  Then  £200 
of  the  returned  £600  exist  in  the  form  of  money  for  wages  and 
£400  in  the  form  of  a  productive  supply,  in  the  form  of  elements 
of  the  constant  circulating  productive  capital.  But  since  only 
one  half  of  this  productive  supply  is  required  for  the  second  half 
of  the  second  working  period,  the  other  half  exists  for  3  weeks 
in  the  form  of  a  surplus  productive  supply,  i.e.,  of  a  supply 
exceeding  the  requirements  of  one  working  period.  But  the  capi¬ 
talist  knows  that  he  needs  only  one  half,  or  £200,  of  this  por¬ 
tion  (£400)  of  the  returned  capital  for  the  current  working  period. 
It  will  therefore  depend  on  market  conditions  whether  he  will 
immediately  reconvert  these  £200,  in  whole  or  in  part,  into  a 
surplus  productive  supply,  or  keep  them  entirely  or  partially  in 
the  form  of  money-capital  in  anticipation  of  a  more  favourable 
market.  On  the  other  hand  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  portion 
to  be  laid  out  for  wages  (£200)  is  retained  in  the  form  of  money. 
The  capitalist  cannot  store  labour-power  in  warehouses  after  he 
has  bought  It,  as  he  may  do  with  the  raw  material.  He  must 
incorporate  it  in  the  process  of  production  and  pay  for  it  at  the 


288 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


1 


end  of  the  week.  At  any  rate  these  £100  of  the  released  capital 
of  £300  will  therefore  have  the  form  of  money-capital  set  free, 
i.e.,  not  required  for  the  working  period.  The  capital  released  in 
the  form  of  money-capital  must  therefore  be  at  least  equal  to 
the  variable  portion  of  capital  invested  in  wages.  At  a  maxi¬ 
mum,  it  may  comprise  the  entire  released  capital.  In  reality 
it  fluctuates  constantly  between  this  minimum  and  maximum. 

The  money-capital  thus  released  by  the  mere  mechanism  of 
the  turnover  movement  (together  with  that  freed  by  the  succes¬ 
sive  reflux  of  fixed  capital  and  that  required  in  every  labour-proc¬ 
ess  for  variable  capital)  must  play  an  important  role  as  soon 
as  the  credit  system  develops  and  must  at  the  same  time  form 
one  of  the  latter's  foundations. 

Let  us  assume  that  the  time  of  circulation  in  our  illustration 
Is  shortened  from  3  to  2  weeks.  This  is  not  to  be  a  normal  change, 
but  due,  say,  to  prosperous  times,  shorter  terms  of  payment,  etc. 
The  capital  of  £600,  which  is  laid  out  during  the  working  period, 
returns  one  week  earlier  than  needed.  It  is  therefore  released  for 
this  week.  Furthermore,  in  the  middle  of  the  working  period,  as 
before,  £300  are  released  (a  portion  of  those  £600),  but  for  4 
weeks  instead  of  3.  There  are,  then,  on  the  money-market  £600 
for  one  week  and  £300  for  4  instead  of  3  weeks.  As  this  concerns 
not  one  capitalist  alone  but  many  and  occurs  in  various  periods 
in  different  businesses,  more  available  money-capital  makes  its 
appearance  in  the  market.  If  this  condition  lasts  for  some  time, 
production  will  be  expanded  wherever  feasible.  Capitalists 
operating  on  borrowed  money  will  exercise  less  demand  on  the 
money-market,  which  eases  it  as  much  as  increased  supply;  or 
finally  the  sums  which  have  become  superfluous  for  the  mech¬ 
anism  are  thrown  definitely  on  the  money-market. 

In  consequence  of  the  contraction  of  the  time  of  circulation 
from  3  weeks  to  2,  and  consequently  of  the  period  of  turnover 
from  9  weeks  to  8,  one-ninth  of  the  total  capital  advanced  becomes 
superfluous.  The  6-week  working  period  can  now  be  kept  going 
as  continuously  with  £800  as  formerly  with  £900.  One  portion 
of  the  value  of  the  commodity-capital,  equal  to  £100,  once  It 
has  been  reconverted  into  money,  persists  therefore  in  the  state 
of  money-capital  without  performing  any  more  functions  as  a 
part  of  the  capital  advanced  for  the  process  of  production.  While 
the  scale  of  production  and  other  conditions,,  such  as  prices, 
etc.,  remain  the  same,  the  sum  of  value  of  the  advanced  capital 
is  reduced  from  £900  to  £800.  The  remainder  of  the  originally 
advanced  value  amounting  to  £100  is  eliminated  in  the  form  of 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


287 


money-capital.  As  such  it  enters  the  money-market  and  forms 
an  additional  portion  of  the  capitals  functioning  here. 

This  shows  the  way  in  which  a  plethora  of  money-capital  may 
arise— -and  not  only  in  the  sense  that  the  supply  of  monev-capital 
is  greater  than  the  demand;  this  is  always  only  a  relative  pletho¬ 
ra,  which  occurs  for  instance  in  the  “melancholy  period”  opening 
a  new  cycle  after  the  end  of  a  crisis.  But  also  in  the  sense  that  a 
definite  portion  of  the  capital-value  advanced  becomes  super¬ 
fluous  for  the  operation  of  the  entire  process  of  social  reproduc¬ 
tion  which  includes  the  process  of  circulation  and  is  therefore 
eliminated  in  the  form  of  money-capital— a  plethora  brought 
about  by  the  mere  contraction  of  the  period  of  turnover,  while 
the  scale  of  production  and  prices  remain  the  same.  The  amount 
of  money  in  circulation,  whether  great  or  small,  did  not  influence 
it  in  the  least. 

Let  us  assume  on  the  contrary  that  the  period  of  circulation 
is  prolonged  from,  say,  3  weeks  to  5.  In  that  case  at  the  very  next 
turnover  the  reflux  of  the  advanced  capital  takes  place  2  weeks 
too  late.  The  last  part  of  the  process  of  production  of  this  working 
period  cannot  be  carried  on  further  by  the  mechanism  of  the  turn¬ 
over  of  the  advanced  capital  itself.  Should  this  condition  last 
any  length  of  time,  a  contraction  of  the  process  of  production,  a 
reduction  of  its  volume,  might  take  place,  just  as  an  extension 
occurred  in  the  previous  case.  But  in  order  to  continue  the  proc¬ 
ess  on  the  same  scale,  the  advanced  capital  would  have  to  be 
increased  by  2/t,  or  £200,  for  the  entire  term  of  the  prolongation 
of  the  circulation  period.  This  additional  capital  can  be  obtained 
only  from  the  money-market.  If  the  lengthening  of  the  period 
of  circulation  applies  to  one  or  several  big  branches  of  business, 
it  may  exert  pressure  on  the  money-market,  unless  this  effect  is 
paralysed  by  some  counter-effect.  In  this  case  it  is  likewise  evi¬ 
dent  and  obvious  that  this  pressure,  like  that  plethora  before, 
had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  a  movement  either  of  prices  of 
the  commodities  or  the  mass  of  the  existing  circulating  medium. 

[The  preparation  of  this  chapter  for  publication  presented 
no  small  number  of  difficulties.  Firmly  grounded  as  Marx  was 
in  algebra,  he  did  not  get  the  knack  of  handling  figures,  particu¬ 
larly  commercial  arithmetic,  although  there  exists  a  thick  batch 
of  copybooks  containing  numerous  examples  of  all  kinds  of  com¬ 
mercial  computations  which  he  had  solved  himself.  But  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  various  methods  of  calculation  and  exercise  in  daily 
practical  commercial  arithmetic  are  by  no  means  the  same,  and 
consequently  Marx  got  so  tangled  up  in  his  computations  of  turn- 


288 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


overs  that  besides  places  left  uncompleted  a  number  of  things 
were  incorrect  and  contradictory.  In  the  tables  reproduced  above  I 
have  preserved  only  the  simplest  and  arithmetically  correct  data. 
My  reason  for  doing  so  was  mainly  the  following: 

The  uncertain  results  of  these  painstaking  calculations  led 
Marx  to  attach  unwarranted  importance  to  a  circumstance,  which, 
in  my  opinion,  has  actually  little  significance.  I  refer  to  what  he 
calls  the  “release”  of  money-capital.  The  actual  state  of  affairs, 
based  on  the  above  assumptions,  is  this: 

No  matter  what  may  be  the  ratio  between  the  working  pe¬ 
riod  and  circulation  time,  hence  between  capital  I  and  capital 
II,  there  is  returned  to  the  capitalist,  in  the  form  of  money,  after 
the  end  of  the  first  turnover  and  thereafter  at  regular  intervals 
equal  to  the  duration  of  one  working  period,  the  capital  required 
for  one  working  period,  i.e.,  a  sum  equal  to  capital  I. 

If  the  working  period  is  5  weeks,  the  circulation  time  4  weeks, 
and  capital  I  £500,  then  a  sum  of  money  equal  to  £500  returns 
each  time  at  the  end  of  the  9th,  14th,  19th,  24th,  29th  week,  etc. 

If  the  working  period  is  6  weeks,  the  circulation  time  3  weeks, 
and  capital  I  £600,  then  £600  return  at  the  end  of  the  9th,  15th, 
21st,  27th,  33rd  weok,  etc. 

Finally,  if  the  working  period  is  4  weeks,  the  circulation  time 
5  weeks,  and  capital  I  £400,  then  £400  are  returned  at  the  end 
of  the  9th,  13th,  17th,  21st,  25th  week,  etc. 

Whether  any,  and  if  so  how  much,  of  this  returned  money  is 
superfluous  and  thus  released  for  the  current  working  period  is 
immaterial.  It  is  assumed  that  production  continues  uninterrupt¬ 
edly  on  the  current  scale,  and  in  order  that  this  may  come  about 
money  must  be  available  and  must  therefore  return,  whether 
“released"  or  not.  If  production  is  interrupted,  release  stops 
likewise. 

In  other  words:  There  is  indeed  a  release  of  money,  a  forma¬ 
tion  therefore  of  latent,  merely  potential,  capital  in  the  form  of 
money.  But  it  takes  place  under  all  circumstances  and  not  only 
under  the  special  conditions  set  forth  in  the  text;  and  it  comes 

about  on  a  larger  scale  than  that  assumed  in  the  text.  So  far  as 

circulating  capital  I  is  concerned,  the  industrial  capitalist  is  in 
the  same  situation  at  the  end  of  each  turnover  as  when  he  estab¬ 
lished  his  business:  he  has  all  of  it  in  his  hands  in  one  bulk, 

while  he  can  convert  it  back  into  productive  capital  only 

gradually. 

The  essential  point  in  the  text  is  the  proof  that  on  the  one  hand 
a  considerable  portion  of  the  industrial  capital  must  always  be 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


289 


available  in  the  form  of  money  and  that  on  the  other  hand  a  still 
more  considerable  portion  must  temporarily  assume  the  form  of 
money.  The  proof  is,  if  anything,  rendered  stronger  by  these 
additional  remarks  of  mine.  —  F.E.  ] 


V.  THE  EFFECT  OF  A  CHANGE  OF  PRICES 

We  have  on  the  one  hand  just  assumed  unaltered  prices  and 
an  unaltered  scale  of  production,  and  a  contraction  or  expansion 
of  the  time  of  circulation  on  the  other.  Now  let  us  suppose  on  the 
contrary  an  unaltered  period  of  turnover  and  an  unaltered  scale 
of  production,  and  on  the  other  hand  price  changes,  i.e.,  rise  or 
fall  of  prices  of  raw  materials,  auxiliary  substances,  and  labour, 
or  of  the  two  first-named  elements  alone.  Take  it  that  the  price 
of  raw  and  auxiliary  materials,  as  well  as  wages,  fall  by  one 
half.  In  that  case  the  capital  to  be  advanced  in  our  example 
would  be  £50  instead  of  £100  per  week,  and  that  for  the  9-week 
turnover  period  would  be  £450  instead  of  £900.  £450  of  the  ad¬ 
vanced  capital-value  are  eliminated  first  of  all  in  the  form  of 
money-capital,  but  the  process  of  production  continues  on  the 
same  scale,  with  the  same  period  of  turnover,  and  with  the  pre¬ 
vious  division  of  the  latter.  The  annual  output  likewise  remains 
the  same  but  its  value  has  been  cut  in  half.  This  change,  which 
is  accompanied  by  a  change  in  the  supply  and  demand  of  money- 
capital,  is  brought  about  neither  by  an  acceleration  of  the  cir¬ 
culation,  nor  by  a  change  in  the  quantity  of  circulating  money. 
On  the  contrary.  A  fall  by  half  in  the  value,  or  price,  of  the 
elements  of  productive  capital  would  first  have  the  effect  of 
diminishing  by  half  the  capital-value  to  be  advanced  for  the 
continuation  of  Business  X  on  the  same  scale  as  before,  and 
hence  only  one  half  of  the  money  would  have  to  be  thrown  on  the 
market  by  Business  X,  since  Business  X  advances  this  capital- 
value  first  in  the  form  of  money,  i.e.,  as  money-capital.  The 
amount  of  money  thrown  into  circulation  would  decrease  because 
the  prices  of  the  elements  of  production  fell.  This  would  be  the 
first  effect. 

In  the  second  place  however  one  half  of  the  originally  ad¬ 
vanced  capital-value  of  £900,  or  £450,  which  (a)  passed  succes¬ 
sively  through  the  forms  of  money-capital,  productive  capital, 
and  commodity-capital,  and  (b)  existed  simultaneously  and  con¬ 
stantly  side  by  side  partly  in  the  form  of  money-capital,  partly 
in  that  of  productive  capital,  and  partly  in  that  of  commodity- 


ID—1752 


290 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


capital,  would  be  eliminated  from  the  circuit  of  Business  X  and 
thus  come  into  the  money-market  as  additional  money-capital, 
affecting  it  as  an  additional  constituent.  These  released  £450 
act  as  money-capital,  not  because  they  have  become  superfluous 
money  for  the  operation  of  Business  X  but  because  they  are 
a  constituent  part  of  the  original  capital-value,  and  hence  are 
intended  to  function  further  as  capital  and  not  to  be  expended 
as  mere  means  of  circulation.  The  best  method  of  letting  them 
operate  as  capital  is  that  of  throwing  them  as  money-capital 
on  the  money-market.  On  the  other  hand  the  scale  of  production 
(apart  from  fixed  capital)  might  be  doubled.  In  that  case  a  pro¬ 
ductive  process  of  double  the  previous  volume  would  be  carried 
on  with  the  same  advanced  capital  of  £900. 

If  on  the  other  hand  the  prices  of  the  circulation  elements  of 
productive  capital  were  to  increase  by  one  half,  £150  instead  of 
£100  or  £1,350  instead  of  £900  would  be  required  per  week.  It 
would  take  an  additional  capital  of  £450  to  carry  on  the  business 
on  the  same  scale,  and  this  would  exert  a  pro  tan  to  pressure  on 
the  money-market,  big  or  small  depending  on  its  condition.  If 
all  the  capital  available  on  this  market  were  then  already  en¬ 
gaged,  there  would  be  increased  competition  for  available  capital. 
If  a  portion  of  it  were  unemployed,  it  would  pro  tanto  be  called 
into  action. 

But,  in  the  third  place,  given  a  certain  scale  of  production, 
the  turnover  velocity  and  the  prices  of  the  elements  of  the  circu¬ 
lating  productive  capital  remaining  the  same,  the  price  of  the 
products  of  Business  X  may  rise  or  fall.  If  the  price  of  the  com- 
modities  supplied  by  Business  X  falls,  the  price  of  its  commodity- 
capital  of  £600,  which  it  constantly  threw  into  circulation,  drops 
to,  say,  £500.  Hence  one-sixth  of  the  value  of  the  advanced 
capital  does  not  return  from  the  process  of  circulation.  (The 
surplus-value  contained  in  the  commodity-capital  is  not  consid¬ 
ered  here.)  It  is  lost  in  that  process.  But  since  the  value,  or  price, 
of  the  elements  of  production  remains  the  same,  this  reflux  of 
£500  suffices  only  to  replace  */,  of  the  capital  of  £600  constantly 
engaged  in  the  process  of  production.  It  would  therefore  require 
an  additional  money-capital  of  £100  to  continue  production  on 
the  same  scale. 

Vice  versa,  if  the  price  of  the  product  of  Business  X  were  to 
rise,  then  the  price  of  the  £600  commodity-capital  would  be  in¬ 
creased,  say,  to  £700.  One-seventh  of  this  price,  or  £100,  does  not 
originate  in  the  process  of  production,  is  not  advanced  in  this 
process,  but  derives  from  the  process  of  circulation.  But  only 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


291 


£600  are  needed  to  replace  the  elements  of  production.  Hence, 
release  of  £100. 

It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  investigation  hitherto 
made  to  ascertain  why,  in  the  first  case,  the  period  of  turnover  is 
shortened  or  lengthened,  and  why  in  the  second  case  t he  prices 
of  raw  materials  and  labour,  and  in  the  third,  the  prices  of  the 
products  supplied,  rise  or  fall. 

But  the  following  does  belong  in  it: 

First  Case.  Unchanged  Scale  of  Production ,  Unchanged  Prices 
of  the  Elements  of  Production  and  of  Products ,  and  a  Change  in 
the  Period  of  Circulation  and  Thus  of  Turnover. 

According  to  the  assumptions  of  our  example,  one-ninth  less 
of  the  total  advanced  capital  is  needed  as  a  result  of  the  contrac¬ 
tion  of  the  period  of  circulation,  so  that  the  total  capital  is  reduced 
from  £900  to  £800  and  £100  of  money-capital  is  eliminated. 

Business  X  supplies,  just  as  before,  the  same  six  weeks’  prod¬ 
uct  of  the  same  value  of  £600,  and  as  work  continues  year  in  year 
out  without  interruption,  it  supplies  in  51  weeks  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  of  products,  valued  at  £5,100.  There  is,  then,  no  change  so 
far  as  the  quantity  and  price  of  the  product  thrown  into  circula¬ 
tion  by  this  business  are  concerned,  nor  in  the  times  when  it 
throws  its  product  on  the  market.  But  £100  are  eliminated  be¬ 
cause  due  to  the  contraction  of  the  circulation  period  the  require¬ 
ments  of  the  process  are  satisfied  with  only  £800  instead  of  the 
former  £900.  The  £100  of  eliminated  capital  exist  in  the  form 
of  money-capital.  But  they  do  not  by  any  means  represent  that 
portion  of  the  advanced  capital  which  would  have  to  function  con¬ 
stantly  in  the  form  of  money-capital.  Let  us  assume  that  *l6, 
or  £480,  of  the  advanced  circulating  capital  I  of  £600  are  constant¬ 
ly  invested  in  productive  materials  and  V6,  or  £120,  in  wages. 
Then  the  weekly  investment  in  materials  of  production  would  be 
£80  and  in  wages  £20.  Capital  II,  amounting  to  £300,  should 
then  also  be  divided  into  4/5,  or  £240,  for  materials  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  Vj,  or  £60,  for  wages.  The  capital  invested  in  wages 
must  always  be  advanced  in  the  form  of  money.  As  soon  as  the 
commodity-product,  worth  £600,  has  been  reconverted  into  the 
money-form,  or  sold,  £480  of  it  can  be  transformed  into  materials 
of  production  (productive  supply),  but  £120  retain  their  money- 
form  in  order  to  serve  for  the  payment  of  wages  for  six  weeks. 
These  £120  are  the  minimum  of  the  returning  capital  of  £600, 
which  must  always  be  renewed  and  replaced  in  the  form  of 
money -capital  and  therefore  must  always  be  kept  on  hand  as  that 


10* 


292 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


portion  of  the  advanced  capital  which  functions  in  the  form  of 
money. 

Now,  if  £100  of  the  £300  periodically  released  for  three 
weeks,  and  likewise  divisible  into  £240  for  productive  supply  and 
£60  for  wages,  is  entirely  eliminated,  completely  thrust  out  of 
the  turnover  mechanism,  in  the  form  of  money-capital  by  shorten¬ 
ing  the  circulation  time,  where  does  the  money  for  this  money- 
capital  of  £100  come  from?  Only  one-fifth  of  this  amount  consists 
of  money-capital  periodically  set  free  within  the  turnovers. 
But  four-fifths,  or  £80,  are  already  replaced  by  an  additional 
productive  supply  of  the  same  value.  In  what  manner  is  this 
additional  productive  supply  converted  into  money,  and  where 
does  the  money  for  this  conversion  come  from? 

If  the  abridged  period  of  circulation  has  become  a  fact,  then 
only  £400  of  the  above  £600,  instead  of  £480,  are  reconverted 
into  productive  supply.  The  remainder,  £80,  is  retained  in  its 
money-form  and  constitutes,  together  with  the  above  £20  for 
wages,  the  £100  of  eliminated  capital.  Although  these  £100  come 
from  the  sphere  of  circulation  through  the  sale  of  the  £600  worth 
of  commodity-capital  and  are  now  withdrawn  from  it  by  not 
being  re-invested  in  wages  and  elements  of  production,  it  must 
not  be  forgotten  that,  being  in  the  money-form,  they  are  once 
more  in  that  form  in  which  they  were  originally  thrown  into 
circulation.  In  the  beginning  £900  were  invested  in  productive 
supply  and  wages.  Now  only  £800  are  necessary  to  carry  out  the 
same  productive  process.  The  £100  thus  released  in  money  now 
form  a  new,  employment-seeking  money-capital,,  a  new  constit¬ 
uent  part  of  the  money-market.  True,  they  have  already  previ¬ 
ously  been  periodically  in  the  form  of  released  money-capital 
and  of  additional  productive  capital,  but  these  latent  states  were 
themselves  the  requisites  for  the  execution  of  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction,  because  they  were  the  requisites  for  its  continuity.  Now 
they  are  no  longer  needed  tor  that  purpose  and  for  this  reason 
form  new  money-capital  and  a  constituent  part  of  the  money- 
market,  although  they  by  no  means  form  either  an  additional 
element  of  the  available  social  money-supply  (for  they  existed 
at  the  beginning  of  the  business  and  were  thrown  by  it  into  the 
circulation),  or  a  newly  accumulated  hoard. 

These  £100  are  now  in  actual  fact  withdrawn  from  circulation 
inasmuch  as  they  are  a  part  of  the  advanced  money-capital  that 
is  no  longer  employed  in  the  same  business.  But  this  withdrawal 
is  possible  only  because  the  conversion  of  the  commodity-capital 
into  money,  and  of  this  money  into  productive  capital,  C'—  M— C, 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


293 


is  accelerated  by  one  week,  so  that  the  circulation  of  the  money 
operating  in  this  process  is  likewise  hastened.  They  have  been 
withdrawn  from  it  because  they  are  no  longer  needed  for  the  turn¬ 
over  of  capital  X. 

It  has  been  assumed  here  that  the  advanced  capital  belongs 
to  him  who  employs  it.  Had  he  borrowed  it  nothing  would  be 
changed.  With  the  shortening  of  the  time  of  circulation  ho  would 
have  to  borrow  only  £800  instead  of  £900.  The  £100,  if  returned 
to  the  lender,  would  as  before  form  £100  of  new  money-capital, 
only  in  the  hands  of  Y  instead  of  X.  Should  capitalist  X  receive 
£480  worth  of  materials  of  production  on  credit,  so  that  he  has 
to  advance  only  £120  in  money  for  wages  out  of  his  own  pocket, 
he  would  now  have  to  procure  £80  worth  of  materials  less  on 
credit  and  this  sum  would  constitute  superfluous  commodity- 
capital  for  the  capitalist  granting  the  credit,  while  capitalist 
X  would  have  eliminated  £20  in  money. 

The  additional  supply  for  production  is  now  reduced  by  one- 
third.  It  consisted  of  £240  constituting  four-fifths  of  £300,  the 
additional  capital  II,  but  now  it  is  only  £160,  i.e.,  additional 
supply  for  2  instead  of  3  weeks.  It  is  now  renewed  every  2  weeks 
instead  of  every  3,  but  only  for  2  instead  of  3  weeks.  The  pur¬ 
chases,  for  instance  in  the  cotton  market,  are  thus  more  frequent 
and  smaller.  The  same  amount  of  cotton  is  withdrawn  from  the 
market,  for  the  quantity  of  the  product  remains  the  same.  But 
the  withdrawals  are  distributed  differently  in  time,  extending 
over  a  longer  period.  Supposing  that  it  is  a  question  of  3  months 
or  2.  If  the  annual  consumption  of  cotton  amounts  to  1,200  bales, 
the  sales  in  the  first  case  will  be: 

January  1,  300  bales,  left  In  storage  900  bales 


April 

1,  300 

M 

«  n  ii 

600  „ 

July 

1,  300 

n 

”  n  i» 

300  „ 

October 

1,  300 

o  „ 

But  in  the  second  case: 

January  1,  sold 

200, 

in  storage 

1,000  bales 

March 

1.  „ 

200, 

800  „ 

May 

1,  „ 

200, 

ii  »i 

600  „ 

July 

1,  „ 

200, 

n  ii 

400  „ 

Septemh 

er  1,  „ 

200, 

n  ll 

200  „ 

November  1,  „ 

200, 

n  il 

o 

So  the  money  invested  in  cotton  only  returns  completely  one 
month  later,  in  November  instead  of  October.  If  therefore  one- 
ninth  of  the  advanced  capital,  or  £100,  is  eliminated  in  the 


294 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


form  of  money-capital  by  the  contraction  of  the  circulation  time 
and  thus  of  the  turnover  and  if  these  £100  are  composed  of  £20 
worth  of  periodically  superfluous  money-capital  for  the  payment 
of  weekly  wages,  and  of  £80  which  existed  as  periodically  super¬ 
fluous  productive  supply  for  one  week,  then  the  diminished  super¬ 
fluous  productive  supply  in  the  hands  of  the  manufacturer 
corresponds,  so  far  as  these  £80  are  concerned,  to  an  enlarged 
commodity-supply  in  the  hands  of  the  cotton  dealer.  The  longer 
this  cotton  lies  in  the  latter's  warehouse  as  a  commodity,  the  less 
it  lies  in  the  storeroom  of  the  manufacturer  as  a  productive  supply. 

Hitherto  we  presupposed  that  the  contraction  of  the  time  of 
circulation  in  Business  X  was  due  to  the  fact  that  X  sold  his 
articles  quicker,  received  his  money  for  them  sooner,  or,  in  the 
event  of  credit,  was  given  shorter  terms  of  payment.  The  contrac¬ 
tion  was  therefore  attributed  to  a  quicker  sale  of  the  commodities, 
to  a  quicker  transformation  of  commodity-capital  into  money- 
capital,  C' — M,  the  first  phase  of  the  process  of  circulation.  But 
it  might  also  derive  from  the  second  phase,  M — C,  and  hence  from 
a  simultaneous  change,  be  it  in  the  working  period  or  in  the 
time  of  circulation  of  capitals  Y,  Z,  etc.,  which  supply  capitalist 
X  with  the  productive  elements  of  his  circulating  capital. 

For  instance  if  cotton,  coal,  etc.,  with  the  old  methods  of  trans¬ 
port,  are  three  weeks  in  transit  from  their  place  of  production 
or  storage  to  the  place  of  production  of  capitalist  X,  then  X’s 
productive  supply  must  last  at  least  for  three  weeks,  until  the 
arrival  of  new  supplies.  So  long  as  cotton  and  coal  are  in  transit, 
they  cannot  serve  as  means  of  production.  They  are  then  rather  a 
subject  of  labour  for  the  transport  industry  and  the  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  it;  they  are  also  commodity-capital  in  process  of  cir¬ 
culation  for  the  producer  of  coal  or  the  dealer  in  cotton.  Suppose 
improvements  in  transport  reduce  the  transit  to  two  weeks.  Then 
the  productive  supply  can  be  changed  from  a  three-weekly  into 
a  fortnightly  supply.  This  releases  the  additional  advanced  capi¬ 
tal  of  £80  set*  aside  for  this  purpose  and  likewise  the  £20  for 
wages,  because  the  turned-over  capital  of  £600  returns  one  week 
sooner. 

On  the  other  hand  if  for  instance  the  working  period  of  the 
capital  which  supplies  the  raw  materials  is  cut  down  (examples 
of  which  were  given  in  the  preceding  chapters),  so  that  the  pos¬ 
sibility  arises  of  renewing  the  supply  of  raw  materials  in  less  time, 
then  the  productive  supply  may  be  reduced  and  the  interval 
between  periods  of  renewal  shortened. 

If,  vice  versa,  the  time  of  circulation,  and  thus  the  period 


EFFECT  OF  TIME  OF  TURNOVER  ON  ADVANCED  CAPITAL 


295 


of  turnover,  are  prolonged,  then  it  is  necessary  to  advance  addi¬ 
tional  capital.  This  must  come  out  of  the  pocket  of  the  capitalist 
himself  if  he  has  any  additional  capital.  But  it  will  then  be  in¬ 
vested  in  some  form  or  other  as  a  part  of  the  money-market.  To 
make  it  available,  it  must  be  pried  loose  from  its  old  form.  For 
instance  stocks  must  be  sold,  deposits  withdrawn,  so  that  in 
this  case  too  the  money-market  is  indirectly  affected.  Or  he  must 
borrow  it.  As  for  that  part  of  the  additional  capital  which  is 
needed  for  wages,  it  must  under  normal  conditions  always  be 
advanced  in  the  form  of  money-capital,  and  for  that  purpose 
the  capitalist  X  exerts  his  share  of  direct  pressure  on  the  money- 
market.  But  this  is  indispensable  for  the  part  which  must  be 
invested  in  materials  of  production  only  if  he  must  pay  for  them 
in  cash.  If  he  can  get  them  on  credit,  this  does  not  have  any  direct 
influence  on  the  money-market,  because  the  additional  capital 
is  then  advanced  directly  as  a  productive  supply  and  not  in  the 
first  instance  as  money-capital.  But  if  the  lender  throws  the  bill 
of  exchange  received  from  X  directly  on  the  market,  discounts 
it,  etc.,  this  would  influence  the  money-market  indirectly, 
through  someone  else.  If,  however,  he  uses  this  note  to  cover  a 
debt  not  yet  due  for  instance,  this  additional  advanced  capital 
does  not  affect  the  money-market  either  directly  or  indirectly. 

Second  Case.  A  Change  in  the  Price  of  Materials  of  Produc¬ 
tion ,  All  Other  Circumstances  Remaining  the  Same. 

We  just  assumed  that  the  total  capital  of  £900  was  four-fifths 
invested  in  materials  of  production  (equalling  £720)  and  one- 
fifth  in  wages  (equalling  £180). 

If  the  materials  of  production  drop  to  half,  they  require  for 
the  6-week  working  period  only  £240  instead  of  £480,  and  for 
the  additional  capital  No.  II  only  £120  instead  of  £240.  Cap¬ 
ital  I  is  thus  reduced  from  £600  to  £240  plus  £120,  or  £360, 
and  capital  II  from  £300  to  £120  plus  £60,  or  £180.  The  total 
capital  of  £900  is  therefore  reduced  to  £360  plus  £180,  or  £540. 
A  sum  of  £360  is  therefore  released. 

This  eliminated  and  now  unemployed  capital,  or  money-cap¬ 
ital,  seeking  employment  in  the  money-market,  is  nothing,  but 
a  portion  of  the  capital  of  £900  originally  advanced  as  money- 
capital,  which,  due  to  the  fall  in  the  prices  of  the  materials  of 
production,  into  which  it  is  periodically  reconverted,  has  become 
superfluous  if  the  business  is  not  to  be  expanded  but  carried  on 
on  the  same  scale.  If  this  fall  in  prices  were  not  due.  to  accidental 
circumstances  (a  particularly  rich  harvest,  over-supply,  etc.)  but 


296 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


to  an  increase  of  productive  power  in  the  branch  of  production 
which  furnishes  the  raw  materials,  then  this  money-capital  would 
be  an  absolute  addition  to  the  money-market,  and  to  the  capital 
available  in  the  form  of  money-capital  in  general,  because  it 
would  no  longer  constitute  an  integral  part  of  the  capital  already 
invested. 

Third  Case.  A  Change  in  the  Market  Price  of  the  Product 
Itself. 

In  the  case  of  a  fall  in  prices  a  portion  of  the  capital  is  lost, 
and  must  consequently  be  made  good  by  a  new  advance  of  money- 
capital.  This  loss  of  the  seller  may  be  a  gain  to  the  buyer.  Directly, 
if  the  market  price  of  the  product  has  fallen  merely  because 
of  an  accidental  fluctuation,  and  afterwards  rises  once  more  to 
its  normal  level.  Indirectly,  if  the  change  of  prices  is  caused  by 
a  change  of  value  reacting  on  the  old  product  and  if  this  product 
passes  again,  as  an  element  of  production,  into  another  sphere 
of  production  and  there  releases  capital  pro  tanto.  In  either  case 
the  capital  lost  by  X,  and  for  whose  replacement  he  exerts  pres¬ 
sure  on  the  money-market,  may  be  supplied  to  him  by  his  busi¬ 
ness  friends  as  new  additional  capital.  All  that  takes  place  then 
is  a  transfer. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  price  of  the  product  rises,  a  portion 
of  the  capital  which  was  not  advanced  is  taken  out  of  circulation. 
This  is  not  an  organic  part  of  the  capital  advanced  in  the  process 
of  production  and  unless  production  is  expanded  therefore  con¬ 
stitutes  money-capital  eliminated.  As  we  have  assumed  that 
the  prices  of  the  elements  of  the  product  were  given  before  it 
was  brought  to  market  as  commodity-capital,  a  real  change 
of  value  might  have  caused  the  rise  of  prices  since  it  acted  retro¬ 
actively,  causing  a  subsequent  rise  in  the  price  of,  say,  raw  ma¬ 
terials.  In  that  event  capitalist  X  would  realise  a  gain  on  his 
product  circulating  as  commodity-capital  and  on  his  available 
productive  supply.  This  gain  would  give  him  an  additional 
capital,  which  would  now  be  needed  for  the  continuation  of  his 
business  with  the  new  and  higher  prices  of  the  elements  of  pro¬ 
duction. 

Or  the  rise  of  prices  is  but  temporary.  What  capitalist  X  then 
needs  by  way  of  additional  capital  becomes  released  capital 
for  the  other  side,  insofar  as  X’s  product  forms  an  element  of 
production  for  other  branches  of  business.  What  the  one  has 
lost  the  othe^  has  gained. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 

I.  THE  ANNUAL  RATE  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE 

Let  us  assume  a  circulating  capital  of  £2,500  four-fifths  of 
which,  or  £2,000,  are  constant  capital  (materials  of  production) 
and  one-fifth,  or  £500,  is  variable  capital  invested  in  wages. 

Let  the  period  of  turnover  be  5  weeks:  the  working  period 
4  weeks,  the  period  of  circulation  1  week.  Then  capital  I  is  £2,000, 
consisting  of  £1,600  of  constant  capital  and  £400  of  variable 
capital;  capital  II  is  £500,  £400  of  which  are  constant  and  £100 
variable.  In  every  working  week  a  capital  of  £500  is  invested. 
In  a  year  of  50  weeks  an  annual  product  of  50  times  500,  or 
£25,000,  is  manufactured.  Capital  I  of  £2,000,  constantly  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  working  period,  is  therefore  turned  over  12l/2  times. 
12V2  times  2,000  makes  £25,000.  Of  these  £25,000  four-fifths, 
or  £20,000,  are  constant  capital  laid  out  in  means  of  production, 
and  one-fifth,  or  £5,000,  is  variable  capital  laid  out  in  wages. 

25  000 

The  total  capital  of  £2,500  is  thus  turned  over  -^r— ,  or  10, 
times. 

The  variable  circulating  capital  expended  in  production  can 
serve  afresh  in  the  process  of  circulation  only  to  the  extent  that 
the  product  in  which  its  value  is  reproduced  has  been  sold,  con¬ 
verted  from  a  commodity-capital  into  a  money-capital,  in  order 
to  be  once  more  laid  out  in  payment  of  labour-power.  But  the 
same  is  true  of  the  constant  circulating  capital  (materials  of 
production)  invested  in  production,  the  value  of  which  reap¬ 
pears  in  the  product  as  a  portion  of  its  value.  What  these  two 
portions — the  variable  and  the  constant  part  of  the  circulating 
capital  —  have  in  common  and  what  distinguishes  them  from 
the  fixed  capital  is  not  that  the  value  transferred  from  them  to 
the  product  is  circulated  by  the  commodity-capital,  i.e.,  through 
the  circulation  of  the  product  as  a  commodity.  One  portion  of 


298 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


the  value  of  the  product,  and  thus  of  the  product  circulating  as 
a  commodity,  of  the  commodity-capital,  always  consists  of  the 
wear  and  tear  of  the  fixed  capital,  that  is  to  say,  of  that  portion 
of  the  value  of  the  fixed  capital  which  is  transferred  to  the  product 
during  the  process  of  production  The  difference  is  really  this: 
The  fixed  capital  continues  to  function  in  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  in  its  old  use-form  for  a  longer  or  shorter  cycle  of  turnover 
periods  of  the  circulating  capital  (equal  to  constant  circulating 
plus  variable  circulating  capital),  while  every  single  turnover 
is  conditioned  on  the  replacement  of.  the  entire  circulating  capital 
passing  from  the  sphere  of  production — in  the  form  of  commod¬ 
ity-capital —  into  the  sphere  of  circulation.  The  constant  cir¬ 
culating  and  variable  circulating  capital  have  the  first  phase  of 
circulation,  C'—  M  ,  in  common.  In  the  second  phase  they  sepa¬ 
rate.  The  money  into  which  the  commodity  is  reconverted  is  in 
part  transformed  into  a  productive  supply  (constant  circulating 
capital).  Depending  on  the  different  terms  of  purchase  of  its 
constituent  parts,  one  portion  of  the  money  may  sooner,  another 
later,  be  converted  from  money  into  materials  of  production, 
but  finally  it  is  wholly  consumed  that  way.  Another  portion  of 
the  money  realised  by  the  sale  of  the  commodity  is  held  in  the 
form  of  a  money-supply,  in  order  to  be  gradually  expended  in 
payment  of  the  labour-power  incorporated  in  the  process  of 
production.  This  part  constitutes  the  variable  circulating  capital. 
Nevertheless  the  entire  replacement  of  either  portion  always 
originates  from  the  turnover  of  the  capital,  from  its  conversion 
into  a  product,  from  a  product  into  a  commodity,  from  a  com¬ 
modity  into  money.  This  is  the  reason  why,  in  the  preceding 
chapter,  the  turnover  of  the  circulating  capital,  constant  and 
variable,  was  treated  jointly  and  separately  without  paying 
any  regard  to  the  fixed  capital. 

In  the  question  which  we  shall  now  take  up,  we  must  go  a 
6tep  farther  and  proceed  with  the  variable  portion  of  the  cir¬ 
culating  capital  as  though  it  alone  constituted  the  circulating 
capital.  In  other  words,  we  leave  out  of  consideration  the  con¬ 
stant  circulating  capital  which  is  turned  over  together  with  it. 

A  sum  of  £2,500  has  been  advanced  and  the  value  of  the  annual 
product  is  £25,000.  But  the  variable  portion  of  the  circulating 
capital  is  £500;  therefore  the  variable  capital  contained  in 
£25,000  amounts  to  25,000  divided  by  5,  or  £5,000.  If  we  divide 
these  £5,000  by  £500,  we  find  that  the  number  of  turnovers 
is  10,  just  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  the  total  capital  of  £2,500 

Here,  where  it  is  only  a  question  of  the  production  of  sur- 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


299 


plus-value,  it  is  absolutely  correct  to  make  this  average  calcu¬ 
lation,  according  to  which  the  value  of  the  annual  product  is 
divided  by  the  value  of  the  advanced  capital  and  not  by  the 
value  of  that  portion  of  this  capital  which  is  employed  constantly 
in  one  working  period  (thus,  in  the  present  case  not  by  400  but 
by  500,  not  by  capital  I  but  by  capital  I  plus  capital  II).  We 
shall  6ee  later  that,  from  another  point  of  view,  the  calculation 
is  not  quite  exact,  just  as  this  average  calculation  generally  is 
not  quite  exact.  That  is  to  say,  it  serves  well  enough  for  the 
practical  purposes  of  the  capitalist,  but  it  does  not  express 
exactly  or  properly  all  the  real  circumstances  of  the  turnover. 

We  have  hitherto  ignored  one  part  of  the  value  of  the  com¬ 
modity-capital,  namely  the  surplus-value  contained  in  it,  which 
was  produced  during  the  process  of  production  and  incorporated 
in  the  product.  To  this  we  have  now  to  direct  our  attention. 

Suppose  the  variable  capital  of  £100  invested  weekly  pro¬ 
duces  a  surplus-value  of  100%,  or  £100,  then  the  variable  capi¬ 
tal  of  £500  invested  over  a  5-week  turnover  period  produces 
£500  of  surplus-value,  i.e.,  one  half  of  the  working-day  consists 
of  surplus-labour. 

If  £500  of  variable  capital  produce  a  surplus-value  of  £500, 
then  £5,000  produce  ten  times  £500,  or  £5,000,  in  surplus-value. 
But  the  advanced  variable  capital  amounts  to  £500.  The  ratio 
of  the  total  surplus-value  produced  during  one  year  to  the  sum 
of  value  of  the  advanced  variable  capital  is  what  we  call  the 
annual  rate  of  surplus-value.  In  the  case  at  hand  it  is  5,000  to 
500,  or  1,000%.  If  we  analyse  this  rate  more  closely,  we  find 
that  it  is  equal  to  the  rate  of  surplus-value  produced  by  the  ad¬ 
vanced  variable  capital  during  one  period  of  turnover,  multi¬ 
plied  by  the  number  of  turnovers  of  the  variable  capital  (which 
coincides  with  the  number  of  turnovers  of  the  entire  circulating 
capital). 

The  variable  capital  advanced  in  the  case  before  us  for  one 
period  of  turnover  is  £500.  The  surplus-value  produced  during 
this  period  is  likewise  £500.  The  rate  of  surplus-value  for  one 

COO, 

period  of  turnover  is  therefore  -%  or  100%.  This  100%,  mill- 
1  aUUv 

tiplied  by  10,  the  number  of  turnovers  in  one  year,  makes 
or  1,000%. 

That  refers  to  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value.  As  for  the 
amount  of  surplus-value  obtained  during  a  specified  period  of 
turnover,  it  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  variable  capital  ad- 


300 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAFITAL 


vanced  during  this  period,  or  £500  in  the  present  case,  multiplied 
by  the  rate  of  surplus-value,  in  the  present  case  therefore  500 

times  or  500  times  1,  or  £500.  If  the  advanced  variable 

capital  were  £1,500,  then  with  the  same  rate  of  surplus-value 

100 

the  amount  of  surplus-value  would  be  1,500  times  — ,  or  £1,500. 

We  shall  apply  the  term  capital  A  to  the  variable  capital 
of  £500,  which  is  turned  over  ten  times  per  year,  producing  an 
annual  surplus-value  of  £5,000  for  which,  therefore,  the  yearly 
rate  of  surplus-value  is  1,000%. 

Now  let  us  assume  that  another  variable  capital,  B,  of  £5,000, 
is  advanced  for  one  whole  year  (i.e.,  here  for  50  weeks),  so  that 
it  is  turned  over  only  once  a  year.  We  assume  furthermore  that 
at  the  end  of  the  year  the  product  is  paid  for  on  the  same  day 
that  it  is  finished,  so  that  the  money-capital,  into  which  it  is 
converted,  returns  on  the  same  day.  The  circulation  period  is 
then  zero,  the  period  of  turnover  equals  the  working  period, 
namely,  one  year.  As  in  the  preceding  case  there  is  to  be  found 
in  the  labour-process  each  week  a  variable  capital  of  £100,  or 
of  £5,000  in  50  weeks.  Let  the  rate  of  surplus-value  be  the  same, 
or  100%,  i.e.,  let  one  half  of  the  working-day  of  the  same  length 
consist  of  surplus-labour.  If  we  consider  5  weeks,  the  invested 
variable  capital  is  £500,  the  rate  of  surplus-value  100%  and 
therefore  the  amount  of  surplus-value  produced  in  5  weeks  £500. 
The  quantity  of  labour-power  here  exploited,  and  the  intensity 
of  its  exploitation,  are  assumed  to  be  exactly  the  same  as  those 
of  capital  A. 

Each  week  the  invested  variable  capital  of  £100  produces 
a  surplus-value  of  £100,  hence  in  50  weeks  the  invested  capital 
of  50 X 100  =£5,000  produces  a  surplus-value  of  £5,000.  The 
amount  of  surplus-value  produced  annually  is  the  same  as  in 
the  previous  case,  £5,000,  but  the  yearly"  rate  of  surplus-value 
is  entirely  different.  It  is  equal  to  the  surplus-value  produced 

in  one  year  divided  by  the  advanced  variable  capital: 
or  100%,  while  in  the  case  of  capital  A  it  was  1,000%. 

In  the  case  of  both  capitals  A  and  B,  we  have  invested  a  variable 
capital  of  £100  a  week.  The  degree  of  self-expahsion,  or  the  rate 
of  surplus-value,  is  likewise  the  same,  100%,  and  so  is  the  magni¬ 
tude  of  the  variable  capital,  £100.  The  same  quantity  of  labour- 
power  is  exploited,  the  volume  and  degree  of  exploitation  are 
equal  in  both  cases,  the  working-days  are  the  same  and  equally 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


301 


divided  into  necessary  labour  and  surplus-labour.  The  amount 
of  variable  capital  employed  in  the  course  of  the  year  is  £5,000 
in  either  case;  it  sets  the  same  amount  of  labour  in  motion,  and 
extracts  the  same  amount  of  surplus-value,  £5,000,  from  the 
labour-power  set  in  motion  by  these  two  equal  capitals.  Never¬ 
theless  there  is  a  difference  of  900%  in  the  annual  rate  of  surplus- 
value  of  the  two  capitals  A  and  B. 

This  phenomenon  creates  the  impression,  at  all  events,  that 
the  rate  of  surplus-value  depends  not  only  on  the  quantity  and 
intensity  of  exploitation  of  the  labour-power  set  in  motion  by 
the  variable  capital,,  but  besides  on  inexplicable  influences  aris¬ 
ing  from  the  process  of  circulation.  And  it  has  indeed  been  so 
interpreted,  and  has — if  not  in  this  its  pure  form,  then  at  least 
in  its  more  complicated  and  disguised  form,  that  of  the  annual 
rate  of  profit — completely  routed  the  Ricardian  school  since  the 
beginning  of  the  twenties. 

The  strangeness  of  this  phenomenon  disappears  at  once  when 
we  place  capitals  A  and  B  in  exactly  the  same  conditions,  not  only 
seemingly  but  actually.  These  equal  conditions  exist  only  when 
the  variable  capital  B  in  its  entire  volume  is  expended  for  the 
payment  of  labour-power  in  the  same  period  of  time  as  capital  A. 

In  that  case  the  £5,000  of  capital  B  are  invested  for  5  weeks, 
£1,000  per  week  makes  an  investment  of  £50,000  per  year.  The 
surplus-value  is  then  likewise  £50,000,  according  to  our  prem¬ 
ises.  The  turned-over  capital  of  £50,000  divided  by  the  advanced 
capital  of  £5,000  makes  the  number  of  turnovers  10.  The  rate 

of  surplus-value,  or  100%.  multiplied  by  the  number  of 

s.uuuv  50.000s 

turnovers,  10,  makes  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value  ■ , 

J.VA/UV 

or  10/j,  or  1,000%.  Now  the  annual  rates  of  surplus-value  are 
alike  for  A  and  B,  namely  1,000%,  but  the  amounts  of  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  are  £50,000  in  the  case  of  B,  and  £5,000  in  the  case 
of  A.  The  amounts  of  the  surplus-value  produced  are  now  in 
the  same  proportion  to  one  another  as  the  advanced  capital- 
values  B  and  A,  to  wit:  5,000  :  500=10:  1.  But  capital  B  has 
set  in  motion  ten  times  as  much  labour-power  as  capital  A  within 
the  same  time. 

Only  the  capital  actually  employed  in  the  labour-process 
produces  surplus-value  and  to  it  apply  all  laws  relating  to  sur¬ 
plus-value,  including  therefore  the  law  according  to  which  the 
quantity  of  surplus-value,  its  rate  being  given,  is  determined 
by  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  variable  capital.  * 

*  See:  Karl  Marx,  Capital,  Vol.  I,  Ch.  XI. — Ed. 


302 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


The  labour-process  itself  is  measured  by  time.  If  the  length 
of  the  working-day  is  given  (as  here,  where  we  assume  all  con¬ 
ditions  relating  to  A  and  B  to  be  equal,  in  .order  to  elucidate 
the  difference  in  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value),  the  working 
w'eek  consists  of  a  definite  number  of  working-days.  Or  we  may 
consider  any  working  period,  for  instance  this  working  period 
of  5  weeks,  as  one  single  working-day  of,  say,  300  hours,  if  the 
working-day  has  10  hours  and  the  week  6  days.  We  must  further 
multiply  this  number  by  the  number  of  labourers  who  are  em¬ 
ployed  conjointly  every  day  simultaneously  in  the  same  labour- 
process.  If  that  number  is  taken  as  10,  there  will  be  60  times  10. 
or  600  hours  in  one  week,  and  a  working  period  of  5  weeks  would 
have  600  times  5,  or  3,000  hours.  The  rate  of  surplus-value  and 
the  length  of  the  working-day  being  the  same,  variable  capitals 
of  equal  magnitude  are  therefore  employed,  if  equal  quantities 
of  labour-power  (a  labour-power  of  the  same  price  multiplied 
by  the  number  of  labourers)  are  set  in  motion  in  the  same  time. 

Let  us  now  return  to  our  original  examples.  In  both  cases, 
A  and  B,  equal  variable  capitals  of  £100  per  week  are  invested 
every  week  throughout  the  year.  The  invested  variable  capitals 
actually  functioning  in  the  labour-process  are  therefore  equal,  but 
the  advanced  variable  capitals  are  very  unequal.  In  the  case  of 
A,  £500  are  advanced  for  every  5  weeks,  of  which  £100  are  em¬ 
ployed  every  week.  In  the  case  of  B,  £5,000  must  be  advanced 
for  the  first  5-week  period,  of  which  only  £100  per  week,  or 
£500  in  5  weeks,  or  one-tenth  of  the  advanced  capital,  is  em¬ 
ployed.  In  the  second  5-week  period  £4,500  must  be  advanced, 
but  only  £500  of  this  is  employed,  etc.  The  variable  capital 
advanced  for  a  definite  period  of  time  is  converted  into  employed, 
hence  actually  functioning  and  operative  variable  capital  only 
to  the  extent  that  it  really  steps  into  the  sections  of  that  period 
of  time  taken  up  by  the  labour-process,  to  the  extent  that  it 
really  functions  in  the  labour-process.  In  the  intermediate  time, 
in  which  a  portion  of  it  is  advanced  in  order  to  be  employed 
later,  this  portion  is  practically  non-existent  for  the  labour- 
process  and  has  therefore  no  influence  on  the  formation  of  either 
value  or  surplus-value.  Take  for  instance  capital  A,  of  £500. 
It  is  advanced  for  5  weeks,  but  every  week  only  £100  enter  suc¬ 
cessively  into  the  labour-process.  In  the  first  week  one-fifth  of 
this  capital  is  employed;  four-fifths  are  advanced  without  being 
employed,  although  they  must  be  in  stock,  and  therefore  ad 
vanced,  for  the  labour- processes  of  the  following  4  weeks. 

The  circumstances  which  differentiate  the  relation  between 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


303 


the  advanced  and  the  employed  variable  capital  affect  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  surplus-value — the  rate  of  surplus-value  being  given 
— only  to  the  extent,  and  only  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  they 
differentiate  the  quantity  of  variable  capital  which  can  be  really 
employed  in  a  stated  period  of  time,  for  instance  in  one  week, 
5  weeks,  etc.  The  advanced  variable  capital  functions  as  vari¬ 
able  capital  only  to  the  extent  and  only  during  the  time  that  it 
is  actually  employed,  and  not  during  the  time  in  which  it  re¬ 
mains  in  stock,  is  advanced,  without  being  employed.  But  all 
the  circumstances  which  differentiate  the  relation  between 
the  advanced  and  the  employed  variable  capital  come  down  to 
the  difference  of  the  periods  of  turnover  (determined  by  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  either  the  working  period,  or  the  circulation  period,  or 
both).  The  law  of  the  production  of  surplus-value  states  that  equal 
quantities  of  functioning  variable  capital  produce  equal  quanti¬ 
ties  of  surplus-value  if  the  rate  of  surplus-value  is  the  same.  If, 
then,  equal  quantities  of  variable  capital  are  employed  by  the 
capitals  A  and  B  in  equal  periods  of  time  with  equal  rates  of 
surplus-value,  they  must  generate  equal  quantities  of  surplus- 
value  in  equal  periods  of  time,  no  matter  how  different  the  ratio 
of  this  variable  capital  employed  during  a  definite  period  of 
time  to  the  variable  capital  advanced  during  the  same  time, 
and  no  matter  therefore  how  different  the  ratio  of  the  quan¬ 
tities  of  surplus-value  produced,  not  to  the  employed  but  to  the 
advanced  variable  capital  in  general.  The  difference  of  this 
ratio,  far  from  contradicting  the  laws  of  the  production  of  sur¬ 
plus-value  that  have  been  demonstrated,  rather  corroborates  them 
and  is  one  of  their  inevitable  consequences. 

Let  us  consider  the  first  5-week  productive  period  of  capital  B. 
At  the  end  of  the  fifth  week  £500  have  been  employed  and  con¬ 
sumed.  The  value  of  the  product  is  £1,000,  hence  |^=100%. 

Just  the  same  as  with  capital  A.  The  fact  that,  in  the  case  of 
capital  A,  the  surplus-value  is  realised  together  with  the  ad¬ 
vanced  capital,  while  in  the  case  of  B  it  is  not,  does  not  con¬ 
cern  us  here,  where  it  is  only  a  question  of  the  production  of 
surplus-value  and  of  its  ratio  to  the  variable  capital  advanced 
during  its  production.  But  if  on  the  contrary  we  calculate  the 
ratio  of  surplus-value  in  B,  not  to  that  portion  of  the  advanced 
capital  of  £5,000  which  has  been  employed  and  hence  consumed 
during  its  production,  but  to  this  total  advanced  capital  itself, 

we  find  that  it  is  r  or-ir-,  or  10%.  Hence  it  is  10%  for  capital 
5,u0u  v  !o  r 


304 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


B  and  100%  for  capital  A,  i.e.,  ten-fold.  If  it  were  said:  this 
difference  in  the  rate  of  surplus-value  for  equal  capitals,  which 
have  set  in  motion  equal  quantities  of  labour  equally  divided  at 
that  into  paid  and  unpaid  labour,  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the 
production  of  surplus-value,  the  answer  would  be  simple  and 
prompted  by  a  mere  glance  at  the  actual  relations:  In  the  case 
of  A,  the  actual  rate  of  surplus-value  is  expressed,  i.e.,  the  re¬ 
lation  of  a  surplus-value  produced  in  5  weeks  by  a  variable  capi¬ 
tal  of  £500,  to  this  variable  capital  of  £500.  In  the  case  of  B  on 
the  other  hand  the  calculation  is  of  a  kind  which  has  nothing  to 
do  either  with  the  production  of  surplus-value  or  with  the  deter¬ 
mination  of  its  corresponding  rate  of  surplus-value.  For  the 
£500  of  surplus-value  produced  by  a  variable  capital  of  £500 
are  not  calculated  with  reference  to  the  £500  of  variable  capi¬ 
tal  advanced  during  their  production,  but  with  reference  to  a 
capital  of  £5,000,  nine-tenths  of  which,  or  £4,500,  have  nothing 
whatever  to  do  with  the  production  of  this  surplus-value  of 
£500,  but  are  on  the  contrary  intended  to  function  gradually  in 
the  course  of  the  following  45  weeks,  so  that  they  do  not  exist 
at  all  so  far  as  the  production  of  the  first  5  weelks  is  concerned, 
which  alone  is  at  issue  in  this  instance.  Hence  in  this  case  the 
difference  in  the  rates  of  surplus-value  of  A  and  B  presents  no 
problem  at  all. 

Let  us  now  compare  the  annual  rates  of  surplus-value  for 
capitals  B  and  A.  For  capital  B  it  is  ^4^=100%;  for  capital 

A  it  is  =1,000%  •  But  the  ratio  of  the  rates  of  surplus-value 
is  the  same  as  before.  There  we  had 

Rate  of  Surplus-Value  of  Capital  B  10% 

Rate  of  Surplus-Value  of  Capital  A  100%  ' 

Now  we  have 

Annual  Rate  of  Surplus-Value  of  Capital  B  100% 

Annual  Rate  of  Surplus-Value  of  Capital  A  =  1,000% ' 

But  10%:100%  =100%:1,000% ,  so  that  the  proportion  is 
the  same. 

But  now  the  problem  has  changed.  The  annual  rate  of  capi¬ 
tal  B,  ^41^=100%,  °®ers  not  Bie  slightest  deviation— not 
even  the  semblance  of  a  deviation— from  the  laws  of  production 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


305 


known  to  us  and  of  the  rate  of  surplus-value  corresponding  to 
this  production.  During  the  year  5,'000v  have  been  advanced 
and  productively  consumed,  and  they  have  produced  5,000s. 
The  rate  of  surplus-value  therefore  equals  the  above  fraction, 

5  000s 

r’--.-  =100%.  The  annual  rate  agrees  with  the  actual  rate  of 

5 ,  UUUV 

surplus-value.  In  this  case  it  is  therefore  not  capital  B  but  capital 
A  which  presents  an  anomaly  that  has  to  be  explained. 

5  0009 

We  have  here  the  rate  of  surplus-value  '^Iv  =  1,000  %. 

But  while  in  the  first  case  500s,  the  product  of  5  weeks,  was  cal¬ 
culated  for  an  advanced  capital  of  £5,000,  nine-tenths  of  which 
were  not  employed  in  its  production,  we  have  now  5,000s  calcu¬ 
lated  for  500v,  i.e.,  for  only  one-tenth  of  the  variable  capital 
actually  employed  in  the  production  of  5,000s;  for  the  5,000s 
are  the  product  of  a  variable  capital  of  £5,000  productively  con¬ 
sumed  during  50  weeks,  not  that  of  a  capital  of  £500  consumed 
in  one  single  period  of  5  weeks.  In  the  first  case  the  surplus- 
value  produced  in  5  weeks  had  been  calculated  for  a  capital 
advanced  for  50  weeks,  a  capital  ten  times  as  large  as  the  one 
consumed  during  the  5  weeks.  Now  the  surplus-value  produced 
in  50  weeks  is  calculated  for  a  capital  advanced  for  5  weeks, 
a  capital  ten  times  smaller  than  the  one  consumed  in  50  weeks. 

Capital  A,  of  £500,  is  never  advanced  for  more  than  5  weeks. 
At  the  end  of  this  time  it  .returns  and  can  renew  the  same  process 
in  the  course  of  the  year  ten  times,  as  it  makes  ten  turnovers. 
Two  conclusions  follow  from  this: 

Firstly:  The  capital  advanced  in  the  case  of  A  is  only  five 
times  larger  than  that  portion  of  capital  which  is  constantly  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  productive  process  of  one  week.  On  the  other  hand 
capital  B  which  is  turned  over  only  once  in  50  weeks  and  must 
therefore  be  advanced  for  50  weeks,  is  fifty  times  larger  than 
that  one  of  its  portions  which  can  constantly  be  employed  for 
one  week.  The  turnover  therefore  modifies  the  relation  between 
the  capital  advanced  during  the  year  for  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  the  capital  constantly  employable  for  a  definite  period 
of  production,  say,  a  week.  Here  we  have,  then,  the  first  case, 
in  which  the  surplus-value  of  5  weeks  is  not  calculated  for  the  capi¬ 
tal  employed  during  these  5  weeks,  but  for  a  capital  ten  times 
larger,  employed  for  50  weeks. 

Secondly:  The  5-week  period  of  turnover  of  capital  A  com¬ 
prises  only  one-tenth  of  the  year,  so  that  one  year  contains  ten 
such  turnover  periods,  in  which  capital  A  of  £500  is  succes- 


306 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


sively  re-invested.  The  employed  capital  is  here  equal  to  the  cap¬ 
ital  advanced  for  5  weeks,  multiplied  by  the  number  of  periods  of 
turnover  per  year.  The  capital  employed  during  the  year  is  500 
times  10,  or  £5,000.  The  capital  advanced  during  the  year  is 

or  £500.  Indeed,  although  the  £500  are  always  re-em- 

ployed,  the  sum  advanced  every  5  weeks  never  exceeds  these 
same  £500.  On  the  other  hand  in  case  of  capital  B  only  £500 
are  employed  during  5  weeks  and  advanced  for  these  5  weeks. 
But  as  the  period  of  turnover  in  this  case  is  50  weeks,  the  capi¬ 
tal  employed  in  one  year  is  equal  to  the  capital  advanced  for 
50  weeks  and  not  to  that  advanced  for  every  5  weeks.  The  annu¬ 
ally  produced  quantity  of  surplus-value,  given  the  rate  of  sur¬ 
plus-value,  is  however  commensurate  with  the  capital  employed 
during  the  year,  not  with  the  capital  advanced  during  the  year. 
Hence  it  is  not  larger  for  this  capital  of  £5,000,  which  is  turned 
over  once  a  year,  than  it  is  for  the  capital  of  £500,  which  is  turned 
over  ten  times  a  year.  And  it  is  so  big  only  because  the  capi¬ 
tal  turned  over  once  a  year  is  itself  ten  times  larger  than  the 
capital  turned  over  ten  times  a  year. 


The  variable  capital  turned  over  during  one  year— hence  the 
portion  of  the  annual  product,  or  of  the  annual  expenditure 
equal  to  that  portion  — is  the  variable  capital  actually  employed, 
productively  consumed,  during  that  year.  It  follows  therefore 
that  if  the  variable  capital  A  turned  over  annually  and  the  vari¬ 
able  capital  B  turned  over  annually  are  equal  and  employed 
under  equal  conditions  of  self-expansion,  so  that  the  rate  of 
surplus-value  is  the  same  for  both  of  them,  then  the  quantity 
of  surplus-value  produced  annually  must  likewise  be  the  same 
for  both  of  them.  Hence  the  rate  of  surplus-value  calculated  for 
a  year  must  also  be  the  same,  since  the  amounts  of  capital  em¬ 
ployed  are  the  same,  so  far  as  the  rate  is  expressed  by 


quantity  of  surplus-value  produced  annually  ,  ,, 

- - An - . - 3- - n - Or,  expressed  generally: 

variable  capital  turned  over  annually  r 


Whatever  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  turned-over  variable 
capitals,  the  rate  of  the  surplus-value  produced  by  them  in 
the  course  of  the  year  is  determined  by  the  rate  of  surplus-value 
at  which  the  respective  capitals  have  worked  in  average  periods 
(say,  the  average  of  a  week  or  day). 


This  is  the  only  consequence  of  the  laws  of  production  ot 
surplus-value  and  of  the  determination  of  the  rate  of  surplus- 
value. 


Let  us  now  see  further  what  is  expressed  by  the  ratio 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


307 


Capital  turned  over  annually 
capital  advanced 

(taking  into  account,  as  we  have  said  before,  only  the  variable 
capital).  The  division  shows  the  number  of  turnovers  made  by 
the  capital  advanced  in  one  year. 

In  the  case  of  capital  A  we  have: 

£5 ,000  of  capital  turned  over  annually 
£500  of  capital  advanced 

In  the  case  of  capital  B  we  have: 

£5,000  of  capital  turned  over  annually 
£jj,000  of  capital  advanced 

In  both  ratios  the  numerator  expressed  the  advanced  capital 
multiplied  by  the  number  of  turnovers;  in  the  case  of  A,  500 
times  10;  in  the  case  of  B,  5,000  times  1.  Or  it  may  be  multiplied 
by  the  inverted  time  of  turnover  calculated  for  one  year.  The 
time  of  turnover  for  A  is  ‘/to  of  a  year;  the  inverted  time  of  turn¬ 
over  is  l0/,  years;  hence  500  times  l%,  or  5,000.  In  the  case  of  B, 
5,000  times  Vj,  or  5,000.  The  denominator  expresses  the  turned- 
over  capital  multiplied  by  the  inverted  number  of  turnovers;  in 
the  case  of  A,  5,000  times  1/l0'  in  the  case  of  B,  5,000  times  1/1. 

The  respective  quantities  of  labour  (the  sum  of  the  paid  and 
unpaid  labour),  which  are  set  in  motion  by  the  two  variable 
capitals  turned  over  annually,  are  equal  in  this  case,  because 
the  turned-over  capitals  themselves  are  equal  and  their  rates  of 
self-expansion  are  likewise  equal. 

The  ratio  of  the  variable  capital  turned  over  annually  to  the 
variable  capital  advanced  indicates  1)  the  ratio  of  the  capital 
to  be  advanced  to  the  variable  capital  employed  during  a  defi¬ 
nite  working  period.  If  the  number  of  turnovers  is  10,  as  in  the 
case  of  A,  and  the  year  assumed  to  have  50  weeks,  then  the  pe¬ 
riod  of  turnover  is  5  weeks.  For  these  5  weeks  variable  capital 
must  be  advanced  and  the  capital  advanced  for  5  weeks  must  be 
5  times  as  large  as  the  variable  capital  employed  during  one 
week.  That  is  to  say,  only  one-fifth  of  the  advanced  capital  (in 
this  case  £500)  can  be  employed  in  the  course  of  one  week.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  capital  B,  where  the  number  of 
turnovers  is  1/i,  the  time  of  turnover  is  1  year,  or  50  weeks.  The 
ratio  of  the  advanced  capital  to  the  capital  employed  weekly 
is  therefore  50:1.  If  matters  were  the  same  for  B  as  they  are  for  A, 
then  B  would  have  to  invest  £1,000  per  week  instead  of  £100. 
2)  It  follows  that  B  has  employed  ten  times  as  much  capital 


308 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


(£5,000)  as  A  to  set  in  motion  the  same  quantity  of  variable 
capital  and  hence — the  rate  of  surplus-value  being  given— of 
labour  (paid  and  unpaid),  and  thus  to  produce  also  the  same 
quantity  of  surplus-value  during  the  year.  The  real  rate  of 
surplus-value  expresses  nothing  but  the  ratio  of  the  variable 
capital  employed  during  a  definite  period  to  the  surplus-value 
produced  in  the  same  time;  or  the  quantity  of  unpaid  labour  set 
in  motion  by  the  variable  capital  employed  during  this  time. 
It  has  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  that  portion  of  the  variable 
capital  which  is  advanced  during  the  time  in  which  it  is  not 
employed.  Hence  it  has  likewise  nothing  to  do  with  the  ratio 
between  that  portion  of  capital  which  is  advanced  during  a 
definite  period  of  time  and  that  portion  which  is  employed 
during  the  same  period  of  time— a  ratio  that  is  modified  and 
differentiated  for  different  capitals  by  the  turnover  period. 

It  follows  rather  from  what  has  been  set  forth  above  that 
the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value  coincides  only  in  one  single 
case  with  the  real  rate  of  surplus-value  which  expresses  the  degree 
of  exploitation  of  labour;  namely  in  the  case  when  the  advanced 
capital  is  turned  over  only  once  a  year  and  the  capital  advanced 
is  thus  equal  to  the  capital  turned  over  in  the  course  of  the  year, 
when  therefore  the  ratio  of  the  quantity  of  the  surplus-value  pro¬ 
duced  during  the  year  to  the  capital  employed  during  the  year  in 
this  production  coincides  and  is  identical  with  the  ratio  of  the 
quantity  of  surplus-value  produced  during  the  year  to  the  capital 
advanced  during  the  year. 

A)  The  annual  rate  of  surplus-value  is  equal  to  the 

quantity  of  surplus- value  produced  during  the  year 
variable  capital  advanced 


But  the  quantity  of  the  surplus-value  produced  during  the  year 
is  equal  to  the  real  rate  of  surplus-value  multiplied  by  the  variable 
capital  employed  in  its  production.  The  capital  employed  in  the 
production  of  the  annual  quantity  of  surplus-value  is  equal  to 
the  advanced  capital  multiplied  by  the  number  of  its  turnovers, 
which  we  shall  call  n.  Formula  A  is  therefore  transformed  into 
the  following: 

B)  The  annual  rate  of  surplus-value  is  equal  to  the 


real  rate  of  surplus-value  x  variable  capital  advanced  x  n 
variable  capital  advanced 


For  instance,  in  the  case  of  capital  B 


100  x  5,000x1 


or  100%. 


o,00G 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL. 


309 


Only  when  n  is  equal  to  1,  that  is,  when  the  variable  capital 
advanced  is  turned  over  only  once  a  year,  and  hence  equal  to  the 
capital  employed  or  turned  over  during  a  year,  the  annual  rate 
of  surplus-value  is  equal  to  its  real  rate. 

Let  us  call  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value  S',  the  real  rate 
of  surplus-value  s',  the  advanced  variable  capital  v,  the  number 

of  turnovers  n.  Then  S'  =^-  =s 'n.  In  other  words,  S'  is  equal 

to  s'ra,  and  it  is  equal  to  s'  only  when  n=  1,  and  hence  S' =s' 
times  1,  or  s'. 

It  follows  furthermore  that  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value 
is  always  equal  to  s'n,  i.e.,  to  the  real  rate  of  surplus-value  pro¬ 
duced  in  one  period  of  turnover  by  the  variable  capital  con¬ 
sumed  during  that  period,  multiplied  by  the  number  of  turnovers 
of  this  variable  capital  during  one  year,  or  (what  amounts  to  the 
same)  multiplied  by  its  inverted  time  of  turnover  calculated  for 
one  year.  (If  the  variable  capital  is  turned  over  ten  times  per 
year,  then  its  time  of  turnover  is  V10  of  a  year;  its  inverted  time 
of  turnover  therefore  10/i  or  10.) 

It  follows  furthermore  that  S' =s'  when  n  is  equal  to  1.  S'  is 
greater  than  s'  when  n  is  greater  than  1;  i.e.,  when  the  advanced 
capital  is  turned  over  more  than  once  a  year  or  the  turned-over 
capital  is  greater  than  the  capital  advanced. 

Finally,  S'  is  smaller  than  s'  when  n  is  smaller  than  1,  that 
is,  when  the  capital  turned  over  during  the  year  is  only  a  part 
of  the  advanced  capital,  so  that  the  period  of  turnover  is  longer 
than  one  year. 


Let  us  dwell  a  moment  on  this  last  case. 

We  retain  all  the  premises  of  our  former  illustration,  except 
that  the  period  of  turnover  is  lengthened  to  55  weeks.  The  la¬ 
bour-process  requires  a  variable  capital  of  £100  per  week,  hence 
£5,500  for  the  period  of  turnover,  and  produces  every  week  100s; 
s'  is  therefore  100%,  as  before.  The  number  of  turnovers,  n , 
is  here60/^  or  10/u,  because  the  time  of  turnover  is  1  plus  V.o  of  the 
year  (of  50  weeks),  or  n/10  years. 


S': 


100%  x5,500x*°/ii 


=ioox10/n= 


1,000 


=9010/n%.  It  is  there- 


5,500  “  li 

fore  smaller  than  100%.  Indeed,  if  the  annual  rate  of  surplus- 
value  were  100%,  then  during  the  year  5,500v  would  produce 
5,500s,  whereas  10/n  years  are  required  for  that.  The  5,500v  pro¬ 
duce  only  5,000s  during  one  year,  therefore  the  annual  rate  of 
5.000s 


surplus-value  is 


5,500v’ 


or  l0/n  or  90,0/n%. 


310 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


The  annual  rate  of  surplus-value,  or  the  comparison  between 
the  surplus-value  produced  during  one  year  and  the  variable 
capital  advanced  in  general  (as  distinguished  from  the  variable 
capital  turned  over  during  the  year),  is  therefore  no  merely  sub¬ 
jective  comparison;  the  actual  movement  of  the  capital  itself 
gives  rise  to  this  contraposition.  So  far  as  the  owner  of  capital  A  is 
concerned,  his  advanced  variable  capital  of  £500  has  returned  to 
him  at  the  end  of  the  year,  and  £5,000  of  surplus-value  in  addition. 
It  is  not  the  quantity  of  capital  employed  by  him  during  the 
year,  but  the  quantity  returning  to  him  periodically  that  ex¬ 
presses  the  magnitude  of  his  advanced  capital.  It  is  immaterial 
for  the  present  issue  whether  at  the  end  of  the  year  the  capital 
exists  partly  as  a  productive  supply,  or  partly  as  money-  or  com¬ 
modity-capital,  and  in  what  proportions  it  may  have  been  di¬ 
vided  into  these  different  parts.  So  far  as  the  owner  of  capital  B 
is  concerned,  £5,000,  his  advanced  capital,  has  returned  to  him 
besides  £5,000  in  surplus-value.  For  the  owner  of  capital  C  (the 
last  considered,  worth  £5,500)  surplus-value  to  the  amount  of 
£5,000  has  been  produced  during  the  year  (£5,000  invested  and 
rate  of  surplus-value  100%),  but  his  advanced  capital  has  not 
yet  returned  to  him,  nor  has  his  produced  surplus-value. 

S'  =s 'n  indicates  that  the  rate  of  surplus-value  valid  for  the 
variable  capital  employed  during  one  period  of  turnover,  to 
wit, 

quantity  of  s  produced  in  one  turnover  period 
v  employed  in  one  turnover  period  ’ 

must  be  multiplied  by  the  number  of  turnover  periods,  or  of 
the  periods  of  reproduction  of  the  advanced  variable  capital, 
by  the  number  of  periods  in  which  it  renews  its  circuit. 

We  have  already  seen  (Buch  I,  Kap.  IV*)  (The  Transforma¬ 
tion  of  Money  into  Capital),  and  furthermore  (Buch  I,  Kap. 
XXI**)  (Simple  Reproduction),  that  the  capital-value  is  in 
general  advanced,  not  expended,  as  this  value,  having  passed 
through  the  various  phases  of  its  circuit,  returns  to  its  point  of 
departure,  and  at  that  enriched  by  surplus-value.  This  character¬ 
ises  it  as  advanced.  The  time  that  elapses  from  the  moment  of 
its  departure  to  the  moment  of  its  return  is  the  time  for  which  it 
was  advanced.  The  entire  circular  movement  described  by  capi¬ 
tal-value,  measured  by  the  time  from  its  advance  to  its  return, 
constitutes  its  turnover,  and  the  duration  of  this  turnover  is  a 


*  English  edition:  Part  II. — Ed. 

**  English  edition:  Ch.  XXIII.— Ed. 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


311 


period  of  turnover.  When  this  period  has-  expired  and  the  cir¬ 
cuit  is  completed,  the  same  capital-value  can  renew  the  same 
circuit,  can  therefore  expand  anew,  can  create  surplus-value. 
If  the  variable  capital  is  turned  over  ten  times  in  one  year,  as  in 
the  case  of  capital  A,  then  the  same  advance  of  capital  hegets  in 
the  course  of  one  year  ten  times  the  quantify  of  surplus-value 
that  corresponds  to  one  period  of  turnover. 

One  must  get  a  clear  conception  of  the  nature  of  this  advance 
from  the  standpoint  of  capitalist  society. 

Capital  A,  which  is  annually  turned  over  ten  times,  is  advanced 
ten  times  during  one  year.  It  is  advanced  anew  for  every  new 
period  of  turnover.  But  at  the  same  time,  during  the  year  A 
never  advances  more  than  this  same  capital-value  of  £500  and 
in  actual  fact  never  disposes  of  more  than  these  £500  for  the  pro¬ 
ductive  process  examined  by  us.  As  soon  as  these  £500  have  com¬ 
pleted  one  circuit  A  makes  them  start  anew  the  same  circuit; 
by  its  very  nature  capital  preserves  its  character  of  capital  only 
because  it  always  functions  as  capital  in  successive  production 
processes.  It  is,  moreover,  never  advanced  for  more  than  five 
weeks.  Should  the  turnover  last  longer,  it  proves  inadequate. 
Should  the  turnover  be  curtailed,  a  part  becomes  superfluous. 
Not  ten  capitals  of  £500  are  advanced,  but  one  capital  of  £500 
is  advanced  ten  times  at  successive  intervals.  The  annual 
rate  of  surplus-value  is  therefore  not  calculated  for  ten 
advances  of  a  capital  of  £500  or  for  £5,000,  but  for  one  advance 
of  a  capital  of  £500.  It  is  the  same  as  if  one  shilling  circulates 
ten  times  and  yet  never  represents  more  than  one  single 
shilling  in  circulation,  although  it  performs  the  function*  of 
10  shillings.  But  in  the  pocket  which  holds  it  after  each  change 
of  hands  it  retains  the  same  identical  value  of  one  shilling  as 
before. 

In  the  same  way  capital  A  indicates  at  each  successive  return, 
and  likewise  on  its  return  at  the  end  of  the  year,  that  its  owner 
has  operated  always  with  the  same  capital-value  of  £500.  Hence 
only  £500  return  to  him  each  time.  His  advanced  capital  is  there¬ 
fore  never  more  than  £500.  Hence  the  advanced  capital  of  £500 
forms  the  denominator  of  the  fraction  which  expresses  the  annual 
rate  of  surplus-value.  We  had  for  it  the  above  formula 

S'=s-^  =s'n.  Since  the  real  rate  of  surplus-value,  s',  equals 
s 

-,  the  quantity  of  surplus-value  divided  by  the  variable  capital 


312 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


3 

which  produced  it,  we  may  substitute  —  for  the  value  of  s'  in 

s'n,  and  get  the  other  formula  S  =— . 

But  by  its  ten-fold  turnover  and  thus  the  ten-fold  renewal 
of  its  advance,  the  capital  of  £500  performs  the  function  of  a  ten 
times  larger  capital,  of  a  capital  of  £5,000,  just  as  500  shillings 
which  circulate  ten  times  per  year  perform  the  same  function 
as  5,000  shillings  which  circulate  only  once. 

II.  THE  TURNOVER  OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL 
VARIABLE  CAPITAL 

“Whatever  the  form  of  the  process  of  production  in  a  society, 
it  must  be  a  continuous  process,  must  continue  to  go  periodically 
through  the  same  phases _  When  viewed  therefore  as  a  con¬ 

nected  whole  and  as  flowing  on  with  incessant  renewal,  every 
social  process  of  production  is,  at  the  same  time,  a  process  of 
reproduction....  As  a  periodic  increment  of  the  capital  advanced, 
or  periodic  fruit  of  capital  in  process,  surplus-value  acquires 
the  form  of  a  revenue  flowing  out  of  capital.”  (Buch  I,  Kap. 
XXI,  pp.  588,  589.)* 

In  the  case  of  capital  A  we  have  10  five-week  turnover  periods. 
In  the  first  period  of  turnover  £500  of  variable  capital  are  ad¬ 
vanced;  i.e.,  £100  are  weekly  converted  into  labour-power,  so 
that  £500  are  spent  on  labour-power  at  the  end  of  the  first 
turnover  period.  These  £500,  originally  a  part  of  the  total  capi¬ 
tal  advanced,  have  ceased  to  be  capital.  They  are  paid  out  in 
wages.  The  labourers  in  their  turn  pay  them  out  in  the  purchase 
of  means  of  subsistence,  consuming  means  of  subsistence  worth 
£500.  A  quantity  of  commodities  of  that  value  is  therefore  anni¬ 
hilated;  (what  the  labourer  may  save  up  in  money,  etc.,  is  not 
capital  either).  As  far  as  concerns  the  labourer,  this  quantity  of 
commodities  has  been  consumed  unproductively,  except  inasmuch 
as  it  preserves  the  efficacy  of  his  labour-power,  an  instrument 
indispensable  to  the  capitalist. 

In  the  second  place  however  these  £500  have  been  transformed, 
for  the  capitalist,  into  labour-power  of  the  same  value  (or 
price).  Labour-power  is  consumed  by  him  productively  in  the 
labour-process.  At  the  end  of  5  weeks  a  product  valued  at  £1,000 
has  been  created.  Half  of  this,  £500,  is  the  reproduced  value  of 

*  English  edition:  pp.  566  and  567. — Ed. 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


3 !  3 


the  variable  capital  expended  in  payment  of  labour-power.  The 
other  half,  £500,  is  newly  produced  surplus-value.  But  the  5- 
weekly  labour-power,  through  exchange  for  which  a  portion  of  the 
capital  was  converted  into  variable  capital,  is  likewise  expended, 
consumed,  although  productively.  The  labour  which  was  active 
yesterday  is  not  the  same  that  is  active  today.  Its  value  plus 
that  of  the  surplus-value  created  by  it  exists  now  as  the  value  of 
a  thing  distinct  from  labour-power,  to  wit,  of  a  product.  But  by 
converting  the  product  into  money,  that  portion  of  its  value  which 
is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  variable  capital  advanced  can  once 
more  be  exchanged  for  labour-power  and  thus  again  function 
as  variable  capital.  The  fact  that  the  same  workmen,  i.e.,  the 
same  bearers  of  labour-power,  are  given  employment  not  only 
by  the  reproduced  capital-value  but  also  by  that  which  has 
been  reconverted  into  the  form  of  money  is  immaterial.  It  is  pos¬ 
sible  for  the  capitalist  to  hire  different  workmen  for  the  second 
period  of  turnover. 

In  actual  fact  therefore  a  capital  of  £5,000,  and  not  of  £500, 
is  expended  successively  in  wages  during  the  ten  periods  of  turn¬ 
over  of  5  weeks  each,  and  these  wages  will  again  be  spent  by 
the  labourers  to  buy  means  of  subsistence.  The  capital  of  £5,000 
so  advanced  is  consumed.  It  ceases  to  exist.  On  the  other  hand 
labour-power  worth  £5,000,  not  £500,  is  incorporated  succes¬ 
sively  in  the  productive  process  and  reproduces  not  only  its  own 
value  of  £5,000,  but  produces  over  and  above  that  a  surplus- 
value  of  £5,000.  The  variable  capital  of  £500  advanced  during 
the  second  period  of  turnover  is  not  the  identical  capital  of  £500 
that  had  been  advanced  during  the  first  period  of  turnover. 
That  has  been  consumed,  spent  in  wages.  But  it  is  replaced  by 
new  variable  capital  of  £500,  which  was  produced  in  the  first 
period  of  turnover  in  the  form  of  commodities,  and  reconverted 
into  money.  This  new  money-capital  of  £500  is  therefore  the 
money-form  of  the  quantity  of  commodities  newly  produced  in 
the  first  period  of  turnover.  The  fact  that  an  identical  sum  of 
money,  £500,  is  again  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist,  i.e.,  apajjt 
from  the  surplus-value,  precisely  as  much  money-capital  as 
he  had  originally  advanced,  conceals  the  circumstance  that 
he  is  operating  with  a  newly  produced  capital.  (As  for  the  other 
constituents  of  value  of  the  commodity-capital,  which  replace 
the  constant  parts  of  capital,  their  value  is  not  newly  produced, 
but  only  the  form  is  changed  in  which  this  value  exists.) 

Let  us  take  the  third  period  of  turnover.  Here  it  is  evident 
that  the  capital  of  £500,  advanced  for  a  third  time,  is  not  an 


314 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


old  but  a  newly  produced  capital,  for  it  is  the  money-form  of 
the  quantity  of  commodities  produced  in  the  second,  not  the 
first,  period  of  turnover,  i.e.,  of  that  portion  of  this  quantity 
of  commodities  whose  value  is  equal  to  that  of  the  advanced 
variable  capital.  The  quantity  of  commodities  produced  in  the 
first  period  of  turnover  is  sold.  A  part  of  its  value  equal  to  the 
variable  portion  of  the  value  of  the  advanced  capital  was  trans¬ 
formed  into  the  new  labour-power  of  the  second  period  of  turn¬ 
over;  it  produced  a  new  quantity  of  commodities,  which  were 
sold  in  their  turn  and  a  portion  of  whose  value  constitutes  the 
capital  of  £500  advanced  in  the  third  turnover  period. 

And  so  forth  during  the  ten  periods  of  turnover.  In  the  course 
of  these,  newly  produced  quantities  of  commodities  (whose  value, 
inasmuch  as  it  replaces  variable  capital,  is  also  newly  produced, 
and  does  not  merely  re-appear  as  in  the  case  of  the  constant  cir¬ 
culating  part  of  the  capital)  are  thrown  upon  the  market  every 
5  weeks,  in  order  to  incorporate  ever  new  labour-power  in  the 
process  of  production. 

Therefore  what  is  accomplished  by  the  ten-fold  turnover  of 
the  advanced  variable  capital  of  £500  is  not  that  this  capital 
of  £500  can  be  productively  consumed  ten  times,  or  that  a  vari¬ 
able  capital  lasting  for  5  weeks  can  be  employed  for  50  weeks. 
Rather,  ten  times  £500  of  variable  capital  is  employed  in  the 
50  weeks,  and  the  capital  of  £500  always  lasts  only  for  5  weeks 
and  must  be  replaced  at  the  end  of  the  5  weeks  by  a  newly  pro¬ 
duced  capital  of  £500.  This  applies  equally  to  capitals  A  and 
B.  But  at  this  point  the  difference  begins. 

At  the  end  of  the  first  period  of  5  weeks  a  variable  capital 
of  £500  has  been  advanced  and  expended  by  B  as  well  as  A. 
Both  A  and  B  have  converted  its  value  into  labour-power  and 
replaced  it  by  that  portion  of  the  value  of  the  product  newly 
created  by  this  labour-power  which  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the 
advanced  variable  capital  of  £500.  For  both  B  and  A  the  labour- 
power  has  not  only  replaced  the  value  of  the  expended  variable 
capital  of  £500  by  a  new  value  of  the  same  amount,  but  also 
added  a  surplus-value  which,  according  to  our  assumption,  is 
of  the  same  magnitude. 

But  in  the  case  of  B  the  value-product,  which  replaces  the 
advanced  variable  capital  and  adds  to  it  a  surplus-value,  is  not 
in  the  form  in  which  it  can  function  anew  as  productive,  or 
variable,  capital.  It  is  in  such  a  form  in  the  case  of  A.  And  up  to 
the  end  of  the  year  B  does  not  possess  the  variable  capital  expend¬ 
ed  in  the  first  5  and  every  subsequent  5  weeks  (although  it  has 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


315 


been  replaced  by  newly  produced  value  plus  surplus-value)  in 
the  form  in  which  it  can  again  function  as  productive,  or 
variable,  capital.  True,  its  value  is  replaced  by  new  value,  hence 
renewed,  but  the  form  of  its  value  (in  this  case  the  absolute 
form  of  value,  its  money-form)  is  not  renewed. 

For  the  second  period  of  5  weeks  (and  thus  for  every  succeed¬ 
ing  5  weeks  of  the  year)  another  £500  must  again  be  available, 
the  same  as  for  the  first  period.  Hence,  regardless  of  credit  con¬ 
ditions,  £5,000  must  be  available  at  the  beginning  of  the  year 
as  a  latent  advanced  money-capital,  although  they  are  really 
expended,  turned  into  labour-power,  only  gradually,  in  the  course 
of  the  year. 

But  because  in  the  case  of  A  the  circuit,  the  turnover  of  the 
advanced  capital,  is  consummated,  the  replacement  value  after 
the  lapse  of  the  first  5  weeks  is  already  in  the  form  in  which  it 
can  set  new  labour-power  in  motion  for  a  term  of  5  weeks — in 
its  original  form,  the  money-form. 

In  the  cases  of  both  A  and  B  new  labour-power  is  consumed 
in  the  second  5-week  period  and  a  new  capital  of  £500  is  spent 
in  payment  of  this  labour-power.  The  means  of  subsistence  of 
the  labourers,  paid  with  the  first  £500,  are  gone;  at  all  events 
their  value  has  vanished  from  the  hands  of  the  capitalist.  With 
the  second  £500  new  labour-power  is  bought,  new  means  of  sub¬ 
sistence  withdrawn  from  the  market.  In  short,  it  is  a  new  capi¬ 
tal  of  £500  that  is  being  expended,  not  the  old.  But  in  the  case 
of  A  this  new  capital  of  £500  is  the  money-form  of  the  newly 
produced  substitute  for  the  value  of  the  formerly  expended  £500, 
while  in  the  case  of  B,  this  substitute  is  in  a  form  in  which  it 
cannot  function  as  variable  capital.  It  is  there,  but  not  in  the 
form  of  variable  capital.  For  the  continuation  of  the  process  of 
production  for  the  next  5  weeks  an  additional  capital  of  £500 
must  therefore  be  available  and  advanced  in  the  here  indispen¬ 
sable  form  of  money.  Thus,  during  50  weeks,  both  A  and  B  expend 
an  equal  amount  of  variable  capital,  pay  for  and  consume  an 
equal  quantity  of  labour-power.  Only,  B  must  pay  for  it  with 
an  advanced  capital  equal  to  its  total  value  of  £5,000,  while  A 
pays  for  it  successively  with  the  ever  renewed  money-form  of 
the  value-substitute,  produced  every  5  weeks,  for  the  capital  of 
£500  advanced  for  every  5  weeks.  In  no  case  is  more  money-cap¬ 
ital  advanced  here  than  is  required  for  5  weeks,  i.e.,  never  more 
than  that  advanced  for  the  first  5  weeks,  viz.,  £500.  These  £500 
last  for  the  entire  year.  It  is  therefore  clear  that,  the  degree  of 
exploitatiort  of  labour  and  the  real  rate  of  surplus-value  being 


316 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


the  same,  the  annual  rates  (of  surplus-value)  of  A  and  B  must 
be  inversely  proportional  to  the  magnitudes  of  the  variable  mon¬ 
ey-capitals  which  have  to  be  advanced  in  order  to  set  in  motion 
the  same  amount  of  labour-power  during  the  year. 


.  5,000s 
A:  500v 


1.000% 


P  5,000s 
K:  5,000v 


100%. 


But  500v :5,000v  =  1 : 10= 100  % :  1 ,000  % . 


The  difference  is  due  to  the  difference  in  the  periods  of  turn¬ 
over,  i.e.,  the  periods  in  which  the  value-substitute  of  the  var¬ 
iable  capital  employed  for  a  definite  time  can  function  anew  as 
capital,  hence  as  a  new  capital.  In  the  case  of  B  as  well  as  A, 
there  is  the  same  replacement  of  value  for  the  variable  capital 
employed  during  the  same  periods.  There  is  also  the  same  incre¬ 
ment  of  surplus-value  during  the  same  periods.  But  in  the  case 
of  B,  while  every  5  weeks  there  is  a  replacement  of  the  value  of 
£500  and  a  surplus-value  of  £500,  this  value-substitute  does  not 
constitute  new  capital,  because  it  does  not  exist  in  the  form  of 
money.  In  the  case  of  A  the  old  capital-value  is  not  only  replaced 
by  a  new  one,  but  is  rehabilitated  in  its  money-form,  hence 
replaced  as  a  new  capital  capable  of  performing  its  function. 

The  conversion,  sooner  or  later,  of  the  value-substitute  into 
money,  and  thus  into  the  form  in  which  variable  capital  is  ad¬ 
vanced,  is  obviously  an  immaterial  circumstance,  so  far  as  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  surplus-value  itself  is  concerned.  This  production 
depends  on  the  magnitude  of  the  variable  capital  employed  and 
the  degree  of  exploitation  of  labour.  But  that  circumstance 
modifies  the  magnitude  of  the  money-capital  which  must  be  ad¬ 
vanced  in  order  to  set  a  definite  quantum  of  labour-power  in 
motion  during  the  year,  and  therefore  it  determines  the  annual 
rate  of  surplus-value. 


III.  THE  TURNOVER  OF  THE  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 
FROM  THE  SOCIAL  POINT  OF  VIEW 

Let  us  look  at  this  matter  for  a  moment  from  the  point  of 
view  of  society.  Let  the  wages  of  one  labourer  be  £1  per  week, 
the  working-day  10  hours.  In  case  of  A  as  well  as  B  100  labourers 
are  employed  during  a  year  (£100  for  100  labourers  per  week, 
or  £500  for  5  weeks,  or  £5,000  for  50  weeks),  and  each  one  of 
them  works  60  hours  per  week  of  6  days.  So  100  labourers  work 
6,000  hours  per  week  and  300,000  hours  in  50  weeks.  This  labour- 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


317 


power  is  taken  hold  of  by  A  and  B  and  therefore  cannot  be  ex¬ 
pended  by  society  for  anything  else.  To  this  extent  the  matter 
is  the  same  socially  with  both  A  and  B.  Furthermore:  In  the 
cases  of  both  A  and  B  the  100  labourers  employed  by  either  side 
receive  a  yearly  wage  of  £5,000  (or,  together  for  the  200  labour¬ 
ers,  £10,000)  and  withdraw  from  society  means  of  subsistence 
to  that  amount.  So  far  the  matter  is  therefore  socially  the  same 
in  the  case  of  both  A  and  B.  Since  the  labourers  in  either  case 
are  paid  by  the  week,  they  weekly  withdraw  their  means  of 
subsistence  from  society  and,  in  either  case,  throw  a  weekly 
equivalent  in  money  into  circulation.  But  here  the  difference 
begins. 

First.  The  money  which  the  A  labourer  throws  into  circu¬ 
lation  is  not  only,  as  it  is  for  the  B  labourer,  the  money-fdrm 
of  the  value  of  his  labour-power  (in  fact  a  means  of  payment 
for  labour  already  performed);  it  is,  counting  from  the  second 
turnover  period  after  the  opening  of  the  business,  the  money- 
form  of  his  own  value  (equal  to  the  price  of  the  labour-power  plus 
the  surplus-value)  created  during  the  first  period  of  turnover, 
by  which  his  labour  is  paid  during  the  second  period  of  turnover. 
This  is  not  the  case  with  the  B  labourer.  As  far  as  the  latter  is 
concerned,  the  money  is  here,  true  enough,  a  medium  of  payment 
for  work  already  done  by  him,  but  this  work  done  is  not  paid 
for  with  the  value  which  it  itself  produced  and  which  was  turned 
into  money  (not  with  the  money-form  of  the  value  the  labour 
itself  has  produced).  This  cannot  be  done  until  the  beginning 
of  the  second  year,  when  the  B  labourer  is  paid  with  the  value 
produced  by  him  in  the  preceding  year  and  turned  into  money. 

The  shorter  the  period  of  turnover  of  capital — the  shorter 
therefore  the  intervals  at  which  it  is  reproduced  throughout 
the  year— the  quicker  is  the  variable  portion  of  the  capital, 
originally  advanced  by  the  capitalist  in  the  form  of  money, 
transformed  into  the  money-form  of  the  value  (including,  besides, 
surplus-value)  created  by  the  labourer  to  replace  this  variable 
capital;  the  shorter  is  the  time  for  which  the  capitalist  must 
advance  money  out  of  his  own  funds,  and  the  smaller  is  the 
capital  advanced  by  him  in  general  in  proportion  to  the  given 
scale  of  production;  and  the  greater  comparatively  is  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  surplus-value  which  he  extracts  during  the  year  with  a 
given  rate  of  surplus-value,  because  he  can  buy  the  labourer 
so  much  more  frequently  with  the  money-form  of  the  value  creat¬ 
ed  by  that  labourer  and  can  so  much  more  frequently  set  his 
labour  into  motion  again. 


318 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


If  the  scale  of  production  is  given,  the  absolute  magnitude 
of  the  advanced  variable  money-capital  (and  of  the  circulating 
capital  in  general)  decreases  proportionately  to  the  decrease  of 
the  turnover  period,  while  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value  in¬ 
creases.  If  the  magnitude  of  the  advanced  capital  is  given,  the 
scale  of  production  grows;  hence,  if  the  rate  of  surplus-value 
is  given,  the  absolute  quantity  of  surplus-value  created  in  one 
period  of  turnover  likewise  grows,  simultaneously  with  the  rise 
in  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value  effected  by  the  shortening 
of  the  periods  of  reproduction.  It  generally  follows  from  the 
foregoing  investigation  that  the  different  lengths  of  the  turn¬ 
over 'periods  make  it  necessary  for  money-capital  to  be  advanced 
in  very  different  amounts  in  order  to  set  in  motion  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  of  productive  circulating  capital  and  the  same  quantity 
of  labour  with  the  same  degree  of  exploitation  of  labour. 

Second— and  this  is  interlinked  with  the  first  difference— the 
B  and  A  labourers  pay  for  the  means  of  subsistence  which  they 
buy  with  the  variable  capital  that  has  been  transformed  in  their 
hands  into  a  medium  of  circulation.  For  instance  they  not  only 
withdraw  wheat  from  the  market,  but  also  replace  it  with  an 
equivalent  in  money.  But  since  the  money  wherewith  the  B  la¬ 
bourer  pays  for  his  means  of  subsistence,  which  he  withdraws 
from  the  market,  is  not  the  money-form  of  a  value  produced  and 
thrown  by  him  on  the  market  during  the  year,  as  it  is  in  the  case  of 
the  A  labourer,  he  supplies  the  seller  of  the  means  of  subsistence 
with  money,  but  not  with  commodities — be  they  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  or  means  of  subsistence— which  this  seller  could  buy  with  the 
proceeds  of  the  sale,  as  he  can  in  the  case  of  A.  The  market  is 
therefore  stripped  of  labour-power,  means  of  subsistence  for 
this  labour-power,  fixed  capital  in  the  form  of  instruments  of 
labour  used  in  the  case  of  B,  and  of  materials  of  production,  and 
to  replace  them  an  equivalent  in  money  is  thrown  on  the  market; 
but  during  the  year  no  product  is  thrown  on  the  market  with  which 
to  replace  the  material  elements  of  productive  capital  withdrawn 
from  it.  If  we  conceive  society  as  being  not  capitalistic  but  com¬ 
munistic,  there  will  be  no  money-capital  at  all  in  the  first  place, 
nor  the  disguises  cloaking  the  transactions  arising  on  account 
of  it.  The  question  then  comes  down  to  the  need  of  society  to 
calculate  beforehand  how  much  labour,  means  of  production, 
and  means  of  subsistence  it  can  invest,  without  detriment,  in 
such  lines  of  business  as  for  instance  the  building  of  railways, 
which  do  not  furnish  any  means  of  production  or  subsistence, 
nor  produce  any  useful  effect  for  a  long  time,  a  year  or  more, 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


319 


while  they  extract  labour,  means  of  production  and  means  of 
subsistence  from  the  total  annual  production.  In  capitalist  society 
however  where  social  reason  always  asserts  itself  only  post  festurn 
great  disturbances  may  and  must  constantly  occur.  On  the  one 
hand  pressure  is  brought  to  bear  on  the  money-market,  while 
on  the  other,  an  easy  money-market  calls  such  enterprises  into 
being  en  masse,  thus  creating  the  very  circumstances  which  later 
give  rise  to  pressure  on  the  money-market.  Pressure  is  brought 
to  bear  on  the  money-market,  since  large  advances  of  money- 
capital  are  constantly  needed  here  for  long  periods  of  time.  And 
this  regardless  of  the  fact  that  industrialists  and  merchants  throw 
the  money-capital  necessary  to  carry  on  their  business  into  spec¬ 
ulative  railway  schemes,  etc.,  and  make  it  good  by  borrowing 
in  the  money-market. 

On  the  other  hand  pressure  on  society's  available  productive 
capital.  Since  elements  of  productive  capital  are  for  ever  being 
withdrawn  from  the  market  and  only  an  equivalent  in  money 
is  thrown  on  the  market  in  their  place,  the  effective  demand  rises 
without  itself  furnishing  any  element  of  supply.  Hence  a  rise 
in  the  prices  of  productive  materials  as  well  as  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence.  To  this  must  be  added  that  stock-jobbing  is  a  regular  practice 
and  capital  is  transferred  on  a  large  scale.  A  band  of  speculators, 
contractors,  engineers,  lawyers,  etc.,  enrich  themselves.  They 
create  a  strong  demand  for  articles  of  consumption  on  the  market, 
wages  rising  at  the  same  time.  So  far  as  foodstuffs  are  involved, 
agriculture  too  is  stimulated.  But  as  these  foodstuffs  cannot  be 
suddenly  increased  in  the  course  of  the  year,  their  import  grows, 
just  as  that  of  exotic  foods  in  general  (coffee,  sugar,  wine,  etc.) 
and  of  articles  of  luxury.  Hence  excessive  imports  and  specula¬ 
tion  in  this  line  of  the  import  business.  Meanwhile,  in  those 
branches  of  industry  in  which  production  can  be  rapidly  expanded 
(manufacture  proper,  mining,  etc.),  climbing  prices  give  rise 
to  sudden  expansion  soon  followed  by  collapse.  The  same  effect 
is  produced  in  the  labour-market,  attracting  great  numbers  of 
the  latent  relative  surplus-population,  and  even  of  the  employed 
labourers,  to  the  new  lines  of  business.  In  general  such  large- 
scale  undertakings  as  railways  withdraw  a  definite  quantity  of 
labour-power  from  the  labour-market,  which  can  come  only  from 
such  lines  of  business  as  agriculture,  etc.,  where  only  strong 
lads  are  needed.  This  still  continues  even  after  the  new  enter¬ 
prises  have  become  established  lines  of  business  and  the  migratory 
working-class  needed  for  them  has  already  been  formed,  as  for 
instance  in  the  case  of  a  temporary  rise  above  the  average  in  the 


320 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


scale  of  railway  construction.  A  portion  of  the  reserve  army  of 
labourers,  which  kept  wages  down,  is  absorbed.  A  general  rise 
in  wages  ensues,  even  in  the  hitherto  well  employed  sections 
of  the  labour-market.  This  lasts  until  the  inevitable  crash  again 
releases  the  reserve  army  of  labour  and  wages  are  once  more 
depressed  to  their  minimum,  and  lower.32 

Inasmuch  as  the  length,  great  or  small,  of  the  period  of  turn¬ 
over  depends  on  the  working  period  proper,  that  is,  the  period 
necessary  to  get  the  product  ready  for  the  market,  it  is  based 
on  the  existing  material  conditions  of  production  specific  for  the 
various  investments  of  capital.  In  agriculture  they  assume  more 
of  the  character  of  natural  conditions  of  production,  in  manufac¬ 
ture  and  the  greater  part  of  the  mining  industry  they  vary  with 
the  social  development  of  the  process  of  production  itself. 

Inasmuch  as  the  length  of  the  working  period  depends  on  the 
size  of  the  supply  (the  quantitative  volume  in  which  the  product 
is  generally  thrown  upon  the  market  as  commodities),  it  is  con¬ 
ventional  in  character.  But  the  convention  itself  has  its  material 
basis  in  the  scale  of  production,  and  is  therefore  accidental  only 
when  examined  singly. 

Finally,  inasmuch  as  the  length  of  the  turnover  period  hinges 
on  that  of  the  period  of  circulation,  it. is  partly  dependent  on  the 
incessant  change  of  market  conditions,  the  greater  or  lesser  ease 
of  selling,  and  the  resultant  necessity  of  disposing  of  part  of  the 
product  in  nearer  or  remoter  markets.  Apart  from  the  volume  of 
the  demand  in  general,  the  movement  of  prices  is  here  of  cardinal 
importance  since  sales  are  intentionally  restricted  when  prices 
are  falling,  while  production  proceeds;  vice  versa,  production  and 
sales  keep  pace  when  prices  are  rising  or  sales  can  be  made  in 
advance.  But  we  must  consider  the  actual  distance  of  the  place  of 
production  from  the  market  as  the  real  material  basis. 


32  In  the  manuscript,  the  following  note  is  here  inserted  for  future  am¬ 
plification:  “Contradiction  in  the  capitalist  mode  of  production:  the  labour¬ 
ers  as  buyers  of  commodities  are  important  for  the  market.  But  as  sellers 
of  their  own  commodity — labour-power — capitalist  society  tends  to  keep 
them  down  to  the  minimum  price. 

“Further  contradiction:  the  periods  in  which  capitalist  production  exerts 
all  its  forces  regularly  turn  out  to  be  periods  of  over-production,  because 
production  potentials  can  never  be  utilised  to  such  an  extent  that  more 
value  may  not  only  be  produced  but  also  realised:  but  the  sale  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  the  realisation  of  commodity-capital  and  thus  of  surplus-value,  is 
limited,  not  by  the  consumer  requiaements  of  society  in  general,  but  by  the 
consumer  requirements  of  a  society  in  which  the  vast  majority  are  always 
poor  and  must  always  remain  poor.  However,  this  pertains  to  the  next  part.” 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 


321 


For  instance  English  cotton  goods  or  yarn  are  sold  to  India. 
Suppose  the  exporter  himself  pays  the  English  cotton  manufac¬ 
turer  (the  exporter  does  so  willingly  only  if  the  money-market 
is  strong.  But  when  the  manufacturer  himself  replaces  his  money- 
capital  by  some  credit  transaction,  things  are  not  so  good). The 
exporter  sells  his  cotton  goods  later  in  the  Indian  market,  from 
where  his  advanced  capital  is  remitted  to  him.  Up  to  this  remit¬ 
tance  the  case  runs  the  very  same  course  as  when  the  length  of 
the  working  period  necessitated  the  advance  of  new  money-capi¬ 
tal  to  maintain  the  production  process  on  a  given  scale.  The  mon¬ 
ey-capital  with  which  the  manufacturer  pays  his  labourers  and 
renews  the  other  elements  of  his  circulating  capital  is  not  the 
money-form  of  the  yarn  produced  by  him.  This  cannot  be  the  oase 
until  the  value  of  this  yarn  has  returned  to  England  in  the  form 
of  money  or  products.  It  is  additional  money-capital  as  before. 
The  only  difference  is  that  instead  of  the  manufacturer,  it  is  ad¬ 
vanced  hy  the  merchant,  who  in  turn  may  well  have  obtained  it 
by  means  of  credit  operations.  Similarly,  before  this  money  is 
thrown  on  the  market,  or  simultaneously  with  this,  no  additional 
product  has  been  put  on  the  English  market  that  could  be  bought 
with  this  money  and  would  enter  the  sphere  of  productive  or 
individual  consumption.  If  this  situation  continues  for  a  rather 
long  period  of  time  and  on  a  rather  large  scale,  it  must  have 
the  same  effect  as  the  previously  mentioned  prolongation  of  the 
working  period. 

Now  it  may  be  that  in  India  the  yarn  is  again  sold  on  credit. 
With  this  credit  products  are  bought  in  India  and  sent  as  return 
shipment  to  England  or  drafts  remitted  for  this  amount.  If  this 
condition  is  protracted,  the  Indian  money-market  comes  under 
pressure  and  the  reaction  on  England  may  here  produce  a  crisis. 
This  crisis,  in  its  turn,  even  if  connected  with  bullion  export 
to  India,  calls  forth  a  new  crisis  in  that  country  on  account  of 
the  bankruptcy  of  English  firms  and  their  Indian  branches, 
which  had  received  credit  from  Indian  banks.  Thus  a  crisis  oc¬ 
curs  simultaneously  in  the  market  in  which  the  balance  of  trade 
is  favourable ,  as  well  as  in  the  one  in  which  it  is  unfavourable. 
This  phenomenon  may  be  still  more  complicated.  Assume  for 
instance  that  England  has  sent  silver  bullion  to  India  but  India’s 
English  creditors  are  now  urgently  collecting  their  debts  in  that 
country,  and  India  will  soon  after  have  to  ship  its  silver  bullion 
back  to  England. 

It  is  possible  that  the  export  trade  to  India  and  the  import 
trade  from  India  may  approximately  balance  each  other, 


11—1752 


322 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


although  the  volume  of  the  import  trade  (except  under  special 
circumstances,  such  as  a  scarcity  of  cotton,  etc.)  is  determined 
and  stimulated  by  the  export  trade.  The  balance  of  trade  be¬ 
tween  England  and  India  may  seem  equilibrated  or  may  disclose 
slight  oscillations  in  either  direction.  But  as  soon  as  the  crisis 
breaks  out  in  England  it  turns  out  that  unsold  cotton  goods  are 
stored  in  India  (hence  have  not  been  transformed  from  com¬ 
modity-capital  into  money-capital  — an  over-production  to  this 
extent),  and  that  on  the  other  hand  there  are  stored  up  in  England 
unsold  supplies  of  Indian  goods,  and,  moreover,  a  great  portion 
of  the  sold  and  consumed  supplies  is  not  yet.  paid.  Hence  what 
appears  as  a  crisis  on  the  money-market  is  in  reality  an  expres¬ 
sion  of  abnormal  conditions  in  the  very  process  of  production 
and  reproduction 

Third.  So  far  as  the  employed  circulating  capital  itself  (con¬ 
stant  and  variable)  is  concerned,  the  length  of  the  period  of  turn¬ 
over,  since  it  derives  from  the  working  period,  makes  this  differ¬ 
ence:  In  the  case  of  several  turnovers  during  one  year,  an  ele¬ 
ment  of  the  variable  or  constant  circulating  capital  may  be  supplied 
through  its  own  product,  for  instance  in  the  production  of  coal, 
the  ready-made  clothes  business,  etc.  In  other  cases  this  cannot 
occur,  at  least  not  within  the  same  year. 


CHAPTER  XVTI 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 

We  have  just  seen  that  a  difference  in  the  period  of  turnover 
causes  a  difference  in  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value,  even  if 
the  mass  of  the  annually  produced  surplus-value  is  the  same. 

But  there  are  furthermore  necessarily  differences  in  the  capi¬ 
talisation  of  surplus-value,  in  accumulation,  and  also  in  the 
quantity  of  surplus-value  produced  during  the  year,  while  the 
rate  of  surplus-value  remains  the  same. 

To  begin  with,  we  note  that  capital  A  (in  the  illustration  of 
the  preceding  chapter)  has  a  current  periodical  revenue,  so  that 
with  the  exception  of  the  period  of  turnover  inaugurating  the 
business,  it  pays  for  its  own  consumption  within  the  year  out  of 
its  production  of  surplus-value,  and  need  not  cover  it  by  advances 
out  of  its  own  funds.  But  the  latter  has  to  be  done  in  the  case  of 
B.  While  it  produces  as  much  surplus-value  in  the  same  intervals 
of  time  as  A,  the  surplus-value  is  not  realised  and  therefore  cannot 
be  consumed  either  productively  or  individually.  So  far  as  indi¬ 
vidual  consumption  is  concerned,  the  surplus-value  is  anticipated. 
Funds  for  that  purpose  must  be  advanced. 

One  portion  of  the  productive  capital,  which  it  is  difficult 
to  classify  namely  the  additional  capital  required  for  the  repair 
and  maintenance  of  the  fixed  capital,  is  now  likewise  seen  in  a 
new  light. 

In  the  case  of  A  this  portion  of  capital  is  not  advanced  — in 
full  or  for  the  greater  part— at  the  beginning  of  production.  It 
need  not  be  available  or  even  in  existence.  It  comes  out  of  the 
business  itself  by  a  direct  transformation  of  surplus-value  into 
capital,  i.e.,  by  its  direct  employment  as  capital.  A  part  of  the 
surplus-value  which  is  not  only  periodically  generated  but  also 
realised  during  the  year  can  defray  the  expenditures  that  must 


824 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


be  incurred  for  repairs,  etc.  A  portion  of  the  capital  needed  to 
carry  on  the  business  on  its  original  scale  is  thus  produced  in  the 
course  of  business  by  the  business  itself  by  means  of  capitalising 
part  of  the  surplus-value.  This  is  impossible  for  capital  B.  The 
portion  of  capital  In  question  must  in  his  case  form  a  part  of 
the  capital  originally  advanced.  In  both  cases  this  portion  will 
figure  in  the  books  of  the  capitalists  as  an  advanced  capital, 
which  it  really  is,  since  according  to  our  assumption  it  forms 
a  part  of  the  productive  capital  required  for  maintaining  the 
business  on  a  certain  scale.  But  it  makes  all  the  difference  in 
the  world  out  of  which  funds  it  is  advanced.  In  the  case  of  B 
it  is  really  a  part  of  the  capital  to  be  originally  advanced  or  held 
available.  In  the  case  of  A  on  the  other  hand  it  is  a  part  of  the 
surplus-value  used  as  capital.  This  last  case  show's  that  not  only 
the  accumulated  capital  but  also  a  portion  of  the  originally  ad¬ 
vanced  capital  may  simply  be  capitalised  surplus-value. 

As  soon  as  the  development  of  credit  interferes,  the  relation 
between  originally  advanced  capital  and  capitalised  surplus- 
value  becomes  still  more  complicated.  For  instance  from  not 
having  sufficient  capital  of  his  own  at  the  very  outset  for  this 
purpose,  A  borrows  from  banker  C  a  portion  of  the  productive 
capital  with  which  he  starts  in  business  or  continues  it  during 
the  year.  Banker  C  lends  him  a  sum  of  money  which  consists  only 
of  surplus-value  deposited  with  the  banker  by  capitalists  D, 
E,  F,  etc.  As  far  as  A  is  concerned  there  is  as  yet  no  question 
of  accumulated  capital.  But  with  regard  to  D,  E,  F,  etc.,  A  is, 
in  fact,  nothing  but  an  agent  capitalising  surplus-value  appro¬ 
priated  by  them. 

We  have  seen  (Buch  I,  Kap.  XXII)*  that  accumulation,  the 
conversion  of  surplus-value  into  capital,  is  essentially  a  process 
of  reproduction  on  a  progressively  increasing  scale,  whether 
this  expansion  is  expressed  extensively  in  the  form  of  an  ad¬ 
dition  of  new  factories  to  the  old,  or  intensively  by  the  en¬ 
largement  of  the  existing  scale  of  operation. 

The  expansion  of  the  scale  of  production  may  proceed  in  small 
portions,  a  part  of  the  surplus-value  being  used  for  improve¬ 
ments  which  either  simply  increase  the  productive  power  of  the 
labour  employed  or  permit  at  the  same  time  of  its  more  intensive 
exploitation.  Or,  where  the  working-day  is  not  legally  limited, 
an  additional  expenditure  of  circulating  capital  (in  materials  of 
production  and  wages)  suffices  to  enhance  the  production  scale 


•  English  edition:  Ch.  XXIV.— Ed. 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS- VALUE 


325 


without  an  expansion  of  the  fixed  capital,  whose  daily  time  of 
employment  is  thus  merely  lengthened,  while  its  period  of  turn¬ 
over  is  correspondingly  shortened.  Or  the  capitalised  surplus- 
value  may,  under  favourable  market  conditions,  permit  of 
speculation  in  raw  materials,  operations  for  which  the  capital 
originally  advanced  would  not  have  been  sufficient,  etc. 

However  it  is  clear  that  in  cases  where  the  greater  number 
of  periods  of  turnover  brings  with  it  a  more  frequent  realisation 
of  surplus-value  during  the  year,  there  will  be  periods  in  which 
there  can  be  neither  a  prolongation  of  the  working-day  nor  an 
introduction  of  improvements  in  details;  on  the  other  hand  a  pro¬ 
portional  expansion  of  the  whole  business,  partly  by  expanding 
its  entire  plant,  the  buildings  for  example,  partly  by  enlarging 
the  cultivated  areas  in  agriculture,  is  possible  only  within  certain 
more  or  less  narrow  limits  and,  besides,  requires  such  a  volume  of 
additional  capital  as  can  be  supplied  only  by  several  years’  accu¬ 
mulation  of  surplus-value. 

Along  with  the  real  accumulation  or  conversion  of  surplus- 
value  into  productive  capital  (and  a  corresponding  reproduction 
on  an  extended  scale),  there  is,  then,  an  accumulation  of  money, 
a  raking  together  of  a  portion  of  the  surplus-value  in  the  form 
of  latent  money-capital,  which  is  not  intended  to  function  as 
additional  active  capital  until  later,  when  it  swells  to  a  certain 
volume. 

That  is  how  the  matter  looks  from  the  standpoint  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  capitalist.  But  simultaneously  with  the  development 
of  capitalist  production  the  credit  system  also  develops.  The 
money-capital  which  the  capitalist  cannot  as  yet  employ  in  his 
own  business  is  employed  by  others,  who  pay  him  interest  for  its 
use.  It  serves  him  as  money-capital  in  its  specific  meaning,  as 
a  kind  of  capital  distinguished  from  productive  capital.  But  it 
serves  as  capital  in  another’s  hands.  It  is  plain  that  with  the 
more  frequent  realisation  of  surplus-value  and  the  rising  scale 
on  which  it  is  produced,  there  is  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of 
new  money-capital  or  money  as  capital  thrown  upon  the  money- 
market  and  then  absorbed— at  least  the  greater  part  of  it — by 
extended  production. 

The  simplest  form  in  which  the  additional  latent  money- 
capital  may  be  represented  is  that  of  a  hoard.  It  may  be  that  this 
hoard  is  additional  gold  or  silver  secured  directly  or  indirectly 
in  exchange  with  countries  producing  precious  metals.  And  only 
in  this  manner  does  the  hoarded  money  in  a  country  grow  abso¬ 
lutely.  On  the  other  hand  it  may  be — and  is  so  in  the  majority 


326 


THB  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


of  cases— that  this  hoard  is  nothing  but  money  which  has  been 
withdrawn  from  circulation  at  home  and  has  assumed  the  form 
of  a  hoard  in  the  hands  of  individual  capitalists.  It  is  furthermore 
possible  that  this  latent  money-capital  consists  only  of  tokens 
of  value — we  still  ignore  credit-money  at  this  point — or  of  mere 
claims  of  capitalists  (titles)  against  third  persons  conferred  by 
legal  documents.  In  all  such  cases,  whatever  may  be  the  form 
of  existence  of  this  additional  money-capital,  it  represents,  so 
far  as  it  is  capital  in  spe,  nothing  but  additional  and  reserved 
legal  titles  of  capitalists  to  future  annual  additional  social 
production. 

“The  mass  of  real  accumulated  wealth,  in  point  of  magnitude... 
is  so  utterly  insignificant  when  compared  with  the  powers  of 
production  of  the  same  society  in  whatever  state  of  civilisation, 
or  even  compared  with  the  actual  consumption  for  even  a  few 
years  of  that  society,  that  the  great  attention  of  legislators  and 
political  economists  should  be  directed  to  ‘productive  powers’ 
and  their  future  free  development,  and  not,  as  hitherto,  to  the 
mere  accumulated  wealth  that  strikes  the  eye.  Of  what  is  called 
accumulated  wealth,  by  far  the  greater  part  is  only  nominal, 
consisting  not  of  any  real  things,  ships,  houses,  cottons,  improve¬ 
ments  on  land,  but  of  mere  demands  on  the  future  annual  produc¬ 
tive  powers  of  society,  engendered  and  perpetuated  by  the  expe¬ 
dients  or  institutions  of  insecurity....  The  use  of  such  articles 
(accumulations  of  physical  things  or  actual  wealth)  as  a  mere 
means  of  appropriating  to  their  possessors  the  wealth  to  be  created 
by  the  future  productive  powers  of  society,  being  that  alone  of 
which  the  natural  laws  of  distribution  would,  without  force, 
gradually  deprive  them,  or,  if  aided  by  co-operative  labour,  would 
in  a  very  few  years  deprive  them.”  (William  Thompson,  An 
Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  the  Distribution  of  Wealth,  London, 
1850,  p.  453.  This  book  originally  appeared  in  1824.) 

“It  is  little  thought,  by  most  persons  not  at  all  suspected, 
how  very  small  a  proportion,  either  in  extent  or  influence,  the 
actual  accumulations  of  society  bear  to  human  productive  powers, 
even  to  the  ordinary  consumption  of  a  few  years  of  a  single  gen¬ 
eration.  The  reason  is  obvious;  but  the  effect  very  pernicious. 
The  wealth  that  is  annually  consumed,  disappearing  with  its 
consumption,  is  seen  but  for  a  moment,  and  makes  no  impression 
but  during  the  act  of  enjoyment  or  use.  But  that  part  of  wealth 
which  is  of  slow  consumption,  furniture,  machinery,  buildings, 
from  childhood  to  old  age  stand  out  before  the  eye,  the  durable 
monuments  of  human  exertion.  By  means  of  the  possession  of 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS  VALUE 


327 


this  fixed,  permanent,  or  slowly  consumed,  part  of  national 
wealth,  of  the  land  and  materials  to  work  upon,  the  tools  to  work 
with,  the  houses  to  shelter  whilst  working,  the  holders  of  these 
articles  command  for  their  own  benefit  the  yearly  productive 
powers  of  all  the  really  efficient  productive  labourers  of  society, 
though  these  articles  may  bear  ever  so  small  a  proportion  to  the 
recurring  products  of  that  labour.  The  population  of  Britain 
and  Ireland  being  twenty  millions,  the  average  consumption  of 
each  individual,  man,  woman,  and  child,  is  probably  about 
twenty  pounds,  making  four  hundred  millions  of  wealth,  the 
product  of  labour  annually  consumed.  The  whole  amount  of  the 
accumulated  capital  of  these  countries,  it  has  been  estimated, 
does  not  exceed  twelve  hundred  millions,  or  three  times  the  year’s 
labour  of  the  community;  or,  if  equally  divided,  sixty  pounds 
capital  for  every  individual.  'Tis  with  the  proportions,  rather 
than  with  the  absolute  accurate  amount  of  these  estimated  sums, 
we  are  concerned.  The  interest  of  this  capital  stock  would  sup¬ 
port  the  whole  population  in  the  same  comfort  in  which  they 
now  exist,  for  about  two  months  of  one  year,  and  the  whole  ac¬ 
cumulated  capital  itself  would  maintain  them  in  idleness  (could 
purchasers  be  found)  for  three  years!  at  the  end  of  which  time, 
without  houses,  clothes,  or  food,  they  must  starve,  or  become 
the  slaves  of  those  who  supported  them  in  the  three  years’  idle¬ 
ness.  As  three  years  to  the  life  of  one  healthy  generation,  say 
forty  years,  so  is  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  the  actual  wealth, 
the  accumulated  capital  of  even  the  wealthiest  community,  to 
the  productive  powers  of  only  one  generation;  not  of  what,  under 
judicious  arrangements  of  equal  security,  they  might  produce, 
particularly  with  the  aid  of  co-operative  labour,  but  of  what, 
under  the  defective  and  depressing  expedients  of  insecurity,  they 
do  absolutely  producel...  The  seeming  mighty  mass  of  existing 
capital  to  maintain  and  perpetuate  which  (or  rather  the  com¬ 
mand  of  the  products  of  yearly  labour  which  it  serves  as  the 
means  of  engrossing)...  in  its  present  state  of  forced  division, 
are  all  the  horrible  machinery,  the  vices,  crimes,  and  miseries 
of  insecurity,  sought  to  be  perpetuated.  As  nothing  can  be  ac¬ 
cumulated  without  Erst  supplying  necessaries,  and  as  the  great 
current  of  human  inclination  is  to  enjoyment;  hence  the  com¬ 
paratively  trifling  amount  of  the  actual  wealth  of  society  at  any 
particular  moment.  'Tis  an  eternal  round  of  production  and 
consumption.  From  the  amount  of  this  immense  mass  of  annual 
consumption  and  production,  the  handful  of  actual  accumulation 
would  hardly  be  missed;  and  yet  it  is  to  this  handful,  and  not  to 


828 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


the  mass  of  productive  powers  that  attention  has  chiefly  been 
directed.  This  handful,  however,  having  been  seized  upon  by  a 
few,  and  been  made  the  instrument  of  converting  to  their  use  the 
constantly  recurring  annual  products  of  the  labour  of  the  great  ma¬ 
jority  of  their  fellow-creatures;  hence,  in  the  opinion  of  these  few, 
the  paramount  importance  of  such  an  instrument....  About  one- 
third  part  of  the  annual  products  of  the  labour  of  these  countries 
is  now  abstracted  from  the  producers,  under  the  name  of  public 
burdens,  and  unproductively  consumed  by  those  who  give  no 
equivalent,  that  is  to  say,  none  satisfactory  to  the  producers.... 
With  the  accumulated  masses,  particularly  when  held  forth  in 
the  hands  of  a  few  individuals,  the  vulgar  eye  has  been  always 
struck.  The  annually  produced  and  consumed  masses,  like  the 
eternal  and  incalculable  waves  of  a  mighty  river,  roll  on  and  are 
lost  in  the  forgotten  ocean  of  consumption.  On  this  eternal  con¬ 
sumption,  however,  are  dependent,  not  only  for  almost  all  grat¬ 
ifications,  but  even  for  existence,  the  whole  human  race.  The 
quantity  and  distribution  of  these  yearly  products  ought  to  be  the 
paramount  objects  of  consideration.  The  actual  accumulation  is 
altogether  of  secondary  importance,  and  derives  almost  the  whole 
of  that  importance  from  its  influence  on  the  distribution  of  tho 
yearly  productions....  Actual  accumulations  and  distributions 
have  been  always  considered  (in  Thompson’s  works)  in  reference, 
and  subordinate,  to  the  power  of  producing.  In  almost  all  other 
systems,  the  power  of  producing  has  been  considered  in  reference, 
and  subordinate,  to  actual  accumulations,  and  to  the  perpetuating 
of  the  existing  modes  of  distribution.  In  comparison  to  the  pres¬ 
ervation  of  this  actual  distribution,  the  ever  recurring  misery  or 
happiness  of  the  whole  human  race  has  been  considered  as  unworthy 
of  regard.  To  perpetuate  the  results  of  force,  fraud,  and  chance, 
has  been  called  security;  and  to  the  support  of  this  spurious 
security,  have  all  the  productive  powers  of  the  human  race  been 
unrelentingly  sacrificed.”  (Ibid.,  pp.  440-43.) 


For  reproduction  only  two  normal  cases  are  possible,  apart 
from  disturbances,  which  interfere  with  reproduction  even  on 
a  fixed  scale. 

There  is  either  reproduction  on  a  simple  scale. 

Or  there  is  capitalisation  of  surplus-value,  accumulation. 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 


329 


I.  SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 

In  the  case  of  simple  reproduction  the  surplus-value  produced 
and  realised  annually,  or  periodically,  if  there  are  several  turn¬ 
overs  during  the  year,  is  consumed  individually,  that  is  to  say, 
unproductively,  by  its  owner,  the  capitalist. 

The  circumstance  that  the  value  of  the  product  consists  in  part 
of  surplus-value  and  in  part  of  that  portion  of  value  which  is 
formed  by  the  variable  capital  reproduced  in  the  product  plus  the 
constant  capital'consumed  by  it,  does  not  alter  anything  whatever 
either  in  the  quantity  or  in  the  value  of  the  total  product,  which 
constantly  steps  into  circulation  as  commodity-capital  and  is 
just  as  constantly  withdrawn  from  it,  in  order  to  be  productively 
or  individually  consumed,  i.e.,  to  serve  as  means  of  production 
or  consumption.  If  constant  capital  is  left  aside,  only  the  distri¬ 
bution  of  the  annual  product  between  the  labourers  and  the  capi¬ 
talists  is  affected  thereby. 

Even  if  simple  reproduction  is  assumed,  a  portion  of  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  must  therefore  always  exist  in  the  form  of  money  and 
not  of  products,  because  otherwise  it  could  not  be  converted 
for  purposes  of  consumption  from  money  into  products.  This 
conversion  of  the  surplus-value  from  its  original  commodity-form 
into  money  must  be  further  analysed  at  this  place  In  order  to 
simplify  the  matter,  we  shall  presuppose  the  most  elementary 
form  of  the  problem,  namely  the  exclusive  circulation  of  metal 
coin,  of  money  which  is  a  real  equivalent. 

According  to  the  laws  of  the  simple  circulation  of  commod¬ 
ities  (developed  in  Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill),*  the  mass  of  the  metal 
coin  existing  in  a  country  must  not  only  be  sufficient  to  circu¬ 
late  the  commodities,  but  must  also  suffice  to  meet  the  currency 
fluctuations,  which  arise  partly  from  fluctuations  in  the  veloc¬ 
ity  of  the  circulation,  partly  from  a  change  in  the  prices  of  com¬ 
modities,  partly  from  the  various  and  varying  proportions  in 
which  the  money  functions  as  a  medium  of  payment  or  as  a  medi¬ 
um  of  circulation  proper.  The  proportion  in  which  the  existing 
quantity  of  money  is  split  into  a  hoard  and  money  in  circula¬ 
tion  varies  continually,  but  the  total  quantity  of  money,  is  always 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  money  hoarded  and  the  money  circu¬ 
lating.  This  quantity  of  money  (quantity  of  precious  metal)  is 
a  gradually  accumulated  hoard  of  society.  Since  a  portion  of 
this  hoard  is  consumed  by  wear  and  tear,  it  must  be  replaced 


*  English  edition:  Ch.  III. — Ed 


330 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


annually,  the  same  as  any  other  product.  This  takes  place  in 
reaiity  by  a  direct  or  indirect  exchange  of  a  part  of  the  annual 
product  of  a  particular  country  for  the  product  of  countries  pro¬ 
ducing  gold  and  silver.  However,  this  international  character 
of  the  transaction  conceals  its  simple  course.  In  order  to  reduce 
the  problem  to  its  simplest  and  most  lucid  expression,  it  must 
be  assumed  that  the  production  of  gold  and  silver  takes  place 
in  that  particular  country  itself,  that  therefore  the  production 
of  gold  and  silver  constitutes  a  part  of  the  total  social  production 
within  every  country. 

Apart  from  the  gold  and  silver  produced  for  articles  of  lux¬ 
ury,  the  minimum  of  their  annual  production  must  be  equal 
to  the  wear  of  metal  coin  annually  occasioned  by  the  circula¬ 
tion  of  money.  Furthermore,  if  the  sum  of  the  values  of  the 
annually  produced  and  circulating  quantity  of  commodities  in¬ 
creases,  the  annual  production  of  gold  and  silver  must  likewise 
increase,  inasmuch  as  the  increased  sum  of  the  values  of  the  cir¬ 
culating  commodities  and  the  quantity  of  money  required  for 
their  circulation  (and  the  corresponding  formation  of  a  hoard) 
are  not  made  good  hy  a  greater  velocity  of  money  currency  and 
a  more  comprehensive  function  of  money  as  a  medium  of  payment, 
i.e.,  by  a  greater  mutual  balancing  of  purchases  and  sales  with¬ 
out  the  intervention  of  actual  money. 

A  portion  of  the  social  labour-power  and  a  portion  of  the 
social  means  of  production  must  therefore  be  expended  annually 
in  the  production  of  gold  and  silver. 

The  capitalists  who  are  engaged  in  the  production  of  gold 
and  silver  and  who,  according  to  our  assumption  of  simple  re¬ 
production,  carry  on  their  production  only  within  the  bounds 
of  the  annual  average  wear  and  tear  and  the  annual  average 
consumption  of  gold  and  silver  entailed  thereby  throw  their 
surplus-value— which  they  consume  annually,  according  to  our 
assumption,  without  capitalising  any  of  it — directly  into  circu¬ 
lation  in  the  money-form,  which  is  its  natural  form;  unlike  the 
other  branches  of  production,  where  it  is  the  converted  form  of 
the  product. 

Furthermore,  as  far  as  wages  are  concerned  —  the  money-form 
in  which  the  variable  capital  is  advanced  — they  are  also  not  re¬ 
placed  by  the  sale  of  the  product,  by  its  conversion  into  money, 
but  by  a  product  itself  whose  natural  form  is  from  the  outset 
that  of  money. 

Finally  the  same  applies  also  to  that  portion  of  the  product 
of  precious  metals  which  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  periodi- 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 


331 


cally  consumed  constant  capital,  both  the  constant  circulating 
and  the  constant  fixed  capital  consumed  during  the  year. 

Let  us  consider  the  circuit,  or  turnover,  of  the  capital  invested 
In  the  production  of  precious  metals  first  in  the  form  of  M — C... 
P  ...  M'.  Since  C  in  M— C  consists  not  only  of  labour-power  and 
means  of  production  but  also  of  fixed  capital,  only  a  part  of 
whose  value  is  consumed  in  P,  it  is  evident  that  M',  the  product, 
is  a  sum  of  money  equal  to  the  variable  capital  laid  out  in  wages 
plus  the  circulating  constant  capital  laid  out  in  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  plus  a  portion  of  the  value  equivalent  to  the  worn-out  fixed 
capital  plus  the  surplus-value.  If  the  sum  were  smaller,  the  general 
value  of  gold  remaining  the  same,  then  the  mine  would  be  unpro¬ 
ductive  or,  if  this  got  to  be  generally  the  case,  the  value  of  gold 
compared  with  the  value  of  commodities  that  remains  unchanged 
would  subsequently  rise;  i.e.,  the  prices  of  commodities  would 
fall,  so  that  henceforth  the  amount  of  money  laid  out  in  M— C 
would  be  smaller. 

If  we  consider  at  first  only  the  circulating  portion  of  capital 
advanced  in  M,  the  starting  point  of  M— C  ...  P  ...  M',  we  find 
that  a  certain  sum  of  money  is  advanced,  thrown  into  circu¬ 
lation  for  the  payment  of  labour-power  and  the  purchase  of  ma¬ 
terials  of  production.  But  this  sum  is  not  withdrawn  from  circu¬ 
lation  by  the  circuit  of  this  capital,  in  order  to  be  thrown  into  it 
anew.  The  product  is  money  even  in  its  bodily  form;  there  is 
no  need  therefore  of  transforming  it  into  money  by  means  of 
exchange,  by  a  process  of  circulation.  It  passes  from  the  process 
of  production  into  the  sphere  of  circulation,  not  in  the  form  of 
commodity-capital  which  has  to  be  reconverted  into  money-cap¬ 
ital,  but  as  a  money-capital  which  is  to  be  reconverted  into  pro¬ 
ductive  capital,  i.e.,  which  is  to  buy  fresh  labour-power  and 
materials  of  production.  The  money-form  of  the  circulating  capital 
consumed  in  labour-power  and  means  of  production  is  replaced, 
not  by  the  sale  of  the  product,  but  by  the  bodily  form  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  itself;  hence,  not  by  once  more  withdrawing  its  value  from 
circulation  in  money-form,  but  by  additional  newly  produced 
money. 

Let  us  suppose  that  this  circulating  capital  is  £500,  the  pe¬ 
riod  of  turnover  5  weeks,  the  working  period  4  weeks,  the  period 
of  circulation  only  1  week.  From  the  outset,  money  for  5  weeks 
must  be  partly  advanced  for  a  productive  supply,  and  partly 
be  ready  to  be  paid  out  gradually  in  wages.  At  the  beginning 
of  the  6th  week,  £400  will  have  returned  and  £100  will  have  been 
released.  This  is  constantly  repeated.  Here,  as  in  previous  cases, 


332 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


£100  will  always  be  found  in  released  form  during  a  certain  time 
of  the  turnover.  But  they  consist  of  additional,  newly  produced, 
money,  the  same  as  the  other  £"500.  We  have  in  this  case  10  turn¬ 
overs  per  year  and  the  annual  product  is  £5,000  in  gold.  (The 
period  of  circulation  is  not  constituted,  in  this  case,  by  the  time 
required  for  the  conversion  of  commodities  into  money,  but  by 
that  required  for  the  conversion  of  money  into  the  elements  of 
production.) 

In  the  case  of  every  other  capital  of  £500  turned  over  under 
the  same  conditions,  the  ever  renewed  money-form  is  the  convert¬ 
ed  form  of  the  commodity-capital  produced  and  thrown  into  cir¬ 
culation  every  4  weeks  and  which  by  its  sale — that  is  to  say,  by 
a  periodical  withdrawal  of  the  quantity  of  money  it  represented 
when  it  originally  entered  into  the  process — assumes  this  money- 
form  anew  over  and  over  again.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  in  every 
turnover  period  a  new  additional  £500  in  money  is  thrown  from 
the  process  of  production  itself  into  circulation,  in  order  to  with¬ 
draw  from  it  continually  materials  of  production  and  labour- 
power.  This  money  thrown  into  circulation  is  not  withdrawn 
from  it  again  by  the  circuit  which  this  capital  describes,  but 
is  rather  increased  by  quantities  of  gold  constantly  produced 
anew. 

Let  us  look  at  the  variable  portion  of  this  circulating  capital, 
and  assume  that  it  is,  as  before,  £100.  Then  these  £100  would 
be  sufficient  in  the  ordinary  production  of  commodities,  with  10 
turnovers,  to  pay  continually  for  the  labour-power.  Here,  in  the 
production  of  gold,  the  same  amount  is  sufficient.  But  the  £100 
of  the  reflux,  with  which  the  labour-power  is  paid  every  5  weeks, 
are  not  a  converted  form  of  its  product  but  a  portion  of  this  ever 
renewed  product  itself.  The  producer  of  gold  pays  his  labourers 
directly  with  a  portion  of  the  gold  they  themselves  produced.  The 
£1,000  thus  expended  annually  in  labour-power  and  thrown  by 
the  labourers  into  circulation  do  not  return  therefore  via  this 
circulation  to  their  starting-point. 

Furthermore,  so  far  as  the  fixed  capital  is  concerned,  it  re¬ 
quires  the  investment  of  a  comparatively  large  money-capital 
on  the  original  establishment  of  the  business,  and  this  capital 
Is  thus  thrown  into  circulation.  Like  all  fixed  capital  it  returns 
only  piecemeal  in  the  course  of  years.  But  it  returns  as  a  direct 
portion  of  the  product,  of  the  gold,  not  by  the  sale  of  the  product 
and  its  consequent  conversion  into  money.  In  other  words,  it 
gradually  assumes  its  money-form  not  by  a  withdrawal  of  money 
from  the  circulation  but  by  an  accumulation  of  a  corresponding 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS- VALUE 


333 


portion  of  tho  product.  The  money-capital  so  restored  is  not  a 
quantity  of  money  gradually  withdrawn  from  the  circulation  to 
compensate  for  the  sum  originally  thrown  into  it  for  the  fixed 
capital.  It  is  an  additional  sum  of  money. 

Finally,  as  concerns  the  surplus-value,  it  is  likewise  equal 
to  a  certain  portion  of  the  new  gold  product,  which  is  thrown 
into  the  circulation  in  every  new  period  of  turnover  in  order  to 
be  unproductively  expended,  according  to  our  assumption,  on 
means  of  subsistence  and  articles  of  luxury. 

But  according  to  our  assumption,  the  entire  annual  production 
of  gold — which  continually  withdraws  labour-power  and  mate¬ 
rials  of  production,  but  no  money,  from  the  market,  while 
continuously  adding  fresh  quantities  of  money  to  it— merely 
replaces  the  money  worn  out  during  the  year,  hence  only  keeps 
intact  the  quantity  of  social  money  which  exists  constantly, 
although  in  varying  portions,  in  the  two  forms  of  hoarded  money 
and  money  in  circulation. 

According  to  the  law  of  the  circulation  of  commodities,  the 
quantity  of  money  must  be  equal  to  the  amount  of  money  re¬ 
quired  for  circulation  plus  a  certain  amount  held  in  the  form  of  a 
hoard,  which  increases  or  decreases  as  the  circulation  contracts 
or  expands,  and  serves  especially  for  the  formation  of  the  requisite 
reserve  funds  of  means  of  payment.  What  must  be  paid  in  money 
in  so  far  as  there  is  no  balancing  of  accounts— is  the  value  of  the 
commodities.  The  fact  that  a  portion  of  this  value  consists  of 
surplus-value,  that  is  to  say,  did  not  cost  the  seller  of  the  com¬ 
modities  anything,  does  not  alter  the  matter  in  any  way.  Let 
us  suppose  that  the  producers  are  all  independent  owners  of  their 
means  of  production,  so  that  circulation  takes  place  between  the 
immediate  producers  themselves.  Apart  from  the  constant  por¬ 
tion  of  their  capital,  their  annual  value-product  might  then  be 
divided  into  two  parts,  analogous  with  capitalist  conditions: 
Part  a,  replacing  only  the  necessary  means  of  subsistence,  and 
part  b,  consumed  partly  in  articles  of  luxury,  partly  for  an  ex¬ 
pansion  of  production.  Part  a  then  represents  the  variable  capi¬ 
tal,  part  b  the  surplus-value.  But  this  division  would  remain 
without  influence  on  the  magnitude  of  the  sum  of  money  required 
for  the  circulation  of  their  total  product.  Other  circumstances 
remaining  equal,  the  value  of  the  circulating  mass  of  commodities 
would  be  the  same,  and  thus  also  the  amount  of  money  required 
for  that  value.  They  would  also  have  to  have  the  same  money- 
reserves  if  the  turnover  periods  are  equally  divided,  i.e.,  the 
same  portion  of  their  capital  would  always  have  to  be  held  in  the 


334 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


form  of  money,  because  their  production,  according  to  our  assump¬ 
tion,  would  be  commodity  production,  the  same  as  before.  Hence 
the  fact  that  a  portion  of  the  value  of  the  commodities  consists 
of  surplus-value  would  change  absolutely  nothing  in  the  quantity 
of  the  money  required  for  the  running  of  the  business. 

An  opponent  of  Tooke,  who  clings  to  the  formula  M— C— M', 
asks  him  how  the  capitalist  manages  always  to  withdraw  more 
money  from  circulation  than  he  throws  into  it.  Mind  you!  The 
question  at  issue  here  is  not  the  formation  of  surplus-value.  This, 
the  only  secret,  is  a  matter  of  course  from  the  capitalist  stand¬ 
point.  The  sum  of  values  employed  would  not  be  capital  if  it  did 
not  enrich  itself  by  means  of  surplus-value.  But  as  it  is  capital 
by  assumption,  surplus-value  is  taken  for  granted. 

The  question,  then,  is  not  where  the  surplus-value  comes  from 
but  whence  the  money  comes  into  which  it  is  turned. 

But  in  bourgeois  economics,  the  existence  of  surplus-value 
is  self-understood.  It  is  therefore  not  only  assumed  but  also  con¬ 
nected  with  the  further  assumption  that  a  part  of  the  mass  of 
commodities  thrown  into  circulation  is  a  surplus-product,  hence 
representing  a  value  which  the  capitalist  did  not  throw  into 
circulation  as  part  of  his  capital;  that,  consequently,  with 
his  product  the  capitalist  throws  into  circulation  a  surplus 
over  and  above  his  capital,  and  that  he  withdraws  this  surplus 
from  it. 

The  commodity-capital,  which  the  capitalist  throws  into  cir¬ 
culation,  has  a  greater  value  (it  is  not  explained  and  remains 
obscure  where  this  comes  from,  but  the  above  Political  Economy 
considers  it  a  fact)  than  the  productive  capital  which  he  with¬ 
drew  from  circulation  in  the  form  of  labour-power  plus  means  of 
production.  On  the  basis  of  this  assumption  it  is  evident  why 
not  only  capitalist  A,  but  also  B,  C,  D,  etc.,  are  always  able  to 
withdraw  more  value  from  circulation  by  the  exchange  of  their 
commodities  than  the  value  of  the  capital  originally  and  repeat¬ 
edly  advanced  by  them.  A,  B,  C,  D,  and  the  rest  continuously 
throw  a  greater  commodity-value  into  circulation  in  the  form  of 
commodity-capital — this  operation  is  as  many-sided  as  the  vari¬ 
ous  independently  functioning  capitals — than  they  withdraw  from 
it  in  the  form  of  productive  capital.  Hence  they  have  constantly 
to  divide  among  themselves  a  sum  of  values  (i.e.,  everyone,  on 
his  part,  has  to  withdraw  from  circulation  a  productive  capital) 
equal  to  the  sum  of  values  of  the  productive  capitals  they  respec¬ 
tively  advanced;  and  just  as  constantly  they  have  to  divide 
among  themselves  a  sum  of  values  which  they  all,  from  all  sides, 


THE  CIRCULATION  OP  SURPLUS-VALUE 


335 


throw  into  circulation  in  the  form  of  commodities  representing 
the  respective  excesses  of  the  commodity-values  above  the  values 
of  their  elements  of  production. 

But  the  commodity-capital  must  be  turned  into  money  be¬ 
fore  its  reconversion  into  productive  capital  and  before  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  contained  in  it  is  spent.  Where  does  the  money  for 
this  purpose  come  from?  This  question  seems  difficult  at  the 
first  glance  and  neither  Tooke  nor  any  one  else  has  answered  it 
so  far. 

Let  the  circulating  capital  of  £500  advanced  in  the  form  of 
money-capital,  whatever  its  period  of  turnover,  now  stand  for 
the  total  circulating  capital  of  society,  that  is,  of  the  capitalist 
class.  Let  the  surplus-value  be  £100.  How  can  the  entire  capital¬ 
ist  class  manage  to  draw  continually  £600  out  of  circulation, 
when  it  continually  throws  only  £500  into  it? 

After  the  money-capital  of  £500  has  been  converted  into  pro¬ 
ductive  capital,  the  latter  transforms  itself  within  the  process 
of  production  into  commodities  worth  £600  and  there  are  in  cir¬ 
culation  not  only  commodities  valued  at  £500,  equal  to  the 
money-capital  originally  advanced,  but  also  a  newly  produced 
surplus-value  of  £100. 

This  additional  surplus-value  of  £100  is  thrown  into  circu¬ 
lation  in  the  form  of  commodities.  No  doubt  about  that.  But  such 
an  operation  does  not  by  any  means  furnish  the  additional  money 
for  the  circulation  of  this  additional  commodity-value. 

It  will  not  do  to  obviate  this  difficulty  by  plausible  subter¬ 
fuges. 

For  instance:  So  far  as  the  constant  circulating  capital  is  con¬ 
cerned,  it  is  obvious  that  not  all  invest  it  simultaneously.  While 
capitalist  A  sells  his  commodities,  so  that  his  advanced  capital 
assumes  the  form  of  money,  there  is  on  the  other  hand  the  avail¬ 
able  money-capital  of  the  buyer  B  which  assumes  the  form  of 
his  means  of  production  —  precisely  what  A  is  producing.  By  the 
same  act  through  which  A  restores  the  money-form  to  his  pro¬ 
duced  commodity-capital,  B  returns  his  capital  to  its  productive 
form,  transforms  it  from  money-form  into  means  of  production 
and  labour-power;  the  same  amount  of  money  functions  in  the 
two-sided  process  as  in  every  simple  purchase  C— M.  On  the 
other  hand  when  A  reconverts  his  money  into  means  of  production, 
he  buys  from  C,  and  this  man  pays  B  with  it,  etc.,  and  thus  the 
transaction  would  be  explained.  But: 

None  of  the  laws  established  with  reference  to  the  quantity 
of  the  circulating  money  in  the  circulation  of  commodities  (Buch 


336 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


I,  Kap.  Ill),*  are  changed  in  any  way  by  the  capitalist  character 
of  the  process  of  production. 

Hence,  when  one  says  that  the  circulating  capital  of  society 
to  be  advanced  in  the  form  of  money  amounts  to  £500,  one  has 
already  taken  into  account  that  this  is  on  the  one  hand  the  sum 
simultaneously  advanced,  and  that  on  the  other  hand  it  sets  in 
motion  more  productive  capital  than  £500  because  it  serves  al¬ 
ternately  as  the  money-fund  of  various  productive  capitals.  This 
manner  of  explanation,  then,  assumes  the  money,  whose  exist¬ 
ence  it  is  called  upon  to  explain,  as  already  existing. 

It  might  be  further  said:  Capitalist  A  produces  articles  which 
capitalist  B  consumes  individually,  unproductively.  B’s  money 
therefore  turns  A’s  commodity-capital  into  money  and  thus  the 
same  sum  of  money  serves  to  realise  B’s  surplus-value  and  A’s 
circulating  constant  capital.  But  in  that  case  the  question  that 
still  awaits  solution  is  assumed  still  more  directly  to  have  been 
solved,  namely:  where  does  B  get  the  money  that  makes  up  his 
revenue?  How  did  he  himself  realise  this  portion  of  the  surplus- 
value  of  his  product? 

It  might  also  be  said  that  the  part  of  the  circulating  variable 
capital  which  A  steadily  advances  to  his  labourers  returns  to 
him  steadily  from  the  circulation,  and  only  a  varying  part  of  it 
always  stays  with  him  for  the  payment  of  wages.  But'  a  certain 
time  elapses  between  the  expenditure  and  the  reflux,  and  mean¬ 
while  the  money  paid  out  for  wages  might,  among  other  uses, 
serve  for  the  realisation  of  surplus-value. 

But  we  know  in  the  Erst  place  that  the  longer  this  time  the 
greater  must  be  the  supply  of  money  which  capitalist  A  must  keep 
constantly  in  petto.  In  the  second  place  the  labourer  spends  the 
money,  buys  commodities  for  it  and  thus  converts  into  money  pro 
tanto  the  surplus-value  contained  in  them.  Consequently  the 
same  money  that  is  advanced  in  the  form  of  variable  capital  serves 
pro  tanto  also  the  purpose  of  turning  surplus-value  into  money. 
Without  penetrating  any  further  into  the  question  at  this  point, 
let  this  suffice:  the  consumption  of  the  entire  capitalist  class  and 
its  retainers  keeps  step  with  that  of  the  working-class;  hence 
simultaneously  with  the  money  thrown  into  circulation  by  the  la¬ 
bourers  the  capitalists  too  must  throw  money  into  it,  in  order  to 
spend  their  surplus-value  as  revenue.  Hence  money  must  be  with¬ 
drawn  from  circulation  for  it.  This  explanation  would  serve 


•  English  edition:  Ch.  III.— Ed. 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 


337 


merely  to  reduce,  but  not  eliminate,  the  quantity  of  money 
required. 

Finally,  it  might  be  said:  A  large  amount  of  money  is  con¬ 
stantly  thrown  into  circulation  when  fixed  capital  is  first  invested, 
and  it  is  recovered  from  the  circulation  only  gradually,  piecemeal, 
after  a  lapse  of  years,  by  him  who  threw  it  into  circula¬ 
tion.  Cannot  this  sum  suffice  to  convert  the  surplus-value  into 
money? 

The  answer  to  this  must  be  that  perhaps  the  sum  of  £500 
(which  includes  hoard  formation  for  needed  reserve  funds)  im¬ 
plies  its  employment  as  fixed  capital,  if  not  by  him  who  threw 
it  into  circulation,  then  by  somebody  else.  Besides,  it  is  already 
assumed  in  regard  to  the  amount  expended  for  the  procurement 
of  products  serving  as  fixed  capital  that  the  surplus-value  con¬ 
tained  in  them  is  also  paid,  and  the  question  is  precisely  where 
this  money  comes  from. 

The  general  reply  has  already  been  given:  If  a  mass  of  com¬ 
modities  worth  x  times  £1,000  has  to  circulate,  it  changes  ab¬ 
solutely  nothing  in  the  quantity  of  the  money  required  for  this 
circulation  whether  the  value  of  this  mass  of  commodities  con¬ 
tains  any  surplus-value  or  not,  whether  this  mass  of  commodities 
has  been  produced  capitalistically  or  not.  The  problem  itself 
therefore  does  not  exist.  All  other  conditions  being  given,  such 
as  velocity  of  the  currency  of  money,-  etc.,  a  definite  sum  of  mon¬ 
ey  is  required  in  order  to  circulate  commodities  worth  x  times 
£1,000  quite  independently  of  how  much  or  how  little  of  this 
value  falls  to  the  share  of  the  direct  producers  of  these  commodi¬ 
ties.  So  far  as  any  problem  exists  here,  it  coincides  with  the  general 
problem:  Where  does  the  money  required  for  the  circulation  of 
the  commodities  of  a  country  come  from? 

However,  from  the  point  of  view  of  capitalist  production, 
the  semblance  of  a  special  problem  does  indeed  exist.  In  the  pres¬ 
ent  case  it  is  the  capitalist  who  appears  as  the  point  of  departure, 
who  throws  money  into  circulation.  The  money  which  the  labour¬ 
er  expends  for  the  payment  of  his  means  of  subsistence  existed 
previously  as  the  money-form  of  the  variable  capital  and  was 
therefore  thrown  originally  into  circulation  by  the  capitalist 
as  a  means  of  buying  or  paying  for  labour-power.  The  capitalist 
furthermore  throws  into  circulation  the  money  which  consti¬ 
tutes  originally  the  money-form  of  his  constant,  fixed  and  cir¬ 
culating,  capital;  he  expends  it  as  a  means  of  purchase  or  payment 
for  instruments  of  labour  and  materials  of  production.  But  be¬ 
yond  this  the  capitalist  no  longer  appears  as  the  starting-point 


338 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


of  the  quantity  of  money  in  circulation.  Now,  there  are  only  two 
points  of  departure:  the  capitalist  and  the  labourer.  All  third 
categories  of  persons  must  either  receive  money  for  their  serv¬ 
ices  from  these  two  classes  or,  to  the  extent  that  they  receive  it 
without  any  services  in  return,  they  are  joint  owners  of  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  in  the  form  of  rent,  interest,  etc.  That  the  surplus- 
value  does  not  all  stay  in  the  pocket  of  the  industrial  capitalist 
but  must  be  shared  by  him  with  other  persons,  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  present  question.  The  question  is  how  he  turns  his 
surplus-value  into  money,  not  how  the  proceeds  are  later  divided. 
For  our  purposes  the  capitalist  may  as  well  still  be  regarded  as 
the  sole  owner  of  the  surplus-value.  As  for  the  labourer,  it  has 
already  been  said  that  he  is  but  the  secondary,  while  the  capital¬ 
ist  is  the  primary,  starting-point  of  the  money  thrown  by  the  la¬ 
bourer  into  circulation.  The  money  first  advanced  as  variable 
capital  is  going  through  its  second  circulation  when  the  labourer 
spends  it  to  pay  for  means  of  subsistence. 

Th,e  capitalist  class  remains  consequently  the  sole  point  of 
departure  of  the  circulation  of  money.  If  they  need  £400  for  the 
payment  of  means  of  production  and  £100  for  the  payment  of 
labour-power,  they  throw  £500  into  circulation.  But  the  surplus- 
value  incorporated  in  the  product,  with  a  rate  of  surplus-value 
of  100%,  is  equal  in  value  to  £100.  How  can  they  continually 
draw  £600  out  of  circulation,  when  they  continually  throw  only 
£500  into  it?  Nothing  comes  from  nothing.  The  capitalist  class 
as  a  whole  cannot  draw  out  of  circulation  what  was  not  previous¬ 
ly  thrown  into  it. 

We  disregard  here  the  fact  that  the  sum  of  £400  may  suffice, 
when  turned  over  ten  times,  to  circulate  means  of  production 
valued  at  £4,000  and  labour-power  valued  at  £1,000,  and  that  the 
other  £100  may  likewise  suffice  for  the  circulation  of  £1,000 
worth  of  surplus-value.  The  ratio  of  the  sum  of  money  to  the 
value  of  the  commodities  circulated  by  it  is  immaterial  here. 
The  problem  remains  the  same.  Unless  the  same  pieces  of  money 
circulate  several  times,  a  capital  of  £5,000  must  be  thrown  into 
circulation,  and  £1,000  is  required  to  convert  the  surplus-value 
into  money.  The  question  is  where  this  money  comes  from,  wheth¬ 
er  it  is  £1,000  or  £100.  In  any  event  it  is  in  excess  of  the  money- 
capital  thrown  into  the  circulation. 

Indeed,  paradoxical  as  it  may  appear  at  first  sight,  it  is  the 
capitalist  class  itself  that  throws  the  money  into  circulation 
which  serves  for  the  realisation  of  the  surplus-value  incorporated 
in  the  commodities.  But,  nota  bene,  it  does  not  throw  it  into  cir- 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS- VALUE 


339 


culation  as  advanced  money,  hence  not  as  capital.  It  spends  it 
as  a  means  of  purchase  for  its  individual  consumption.  The 
money  is  not  therefore  advanced  by  the  capitalist  class,  although 
it  is  the  point  of  departure  of  its  circulation. 

Let  us  take  some  individual  capitalist  who  is  starting  in  busi¬ 
ness,  a  farmer  for  instance.  During  the  first  year,  he  advances 
a  money-capital  of,  say,  £5,000,  paying  £4,000  for  means  of 
production,  and  £1,000  for  labour-power.  Let  the  rate  of  sur¬ 
plus-value  be  100%,  the  amount  of  surplus-value  appropriated 
by  him  £1,000.  The  above  £5,000  comprise  all  the  money  he  ad¬ 
vances  as  money-capital.  But  the  man  must  also  live,  and  he 
does  not  take  in  any  money  until  the  end  of  the  year.  Take  it  that 
his  consumption  amounts  to  £1,000.  These  he  must  have  in  his 
possession.  He  may  say  that  he  has  to  advance  himself  these 
£1,000  during  the  first  year.  But  this  advance,  which  here  has 
only  a  subjective  meaning,  denotes  nothing  else  but  that  he 
must  pay  for  his  individual  consumption  during  the  first  year 
out  of  his  own  pocket  instead  of  defraying  it  out  of  the  gratuitous 
production  of  his  labourers.  He  does  not  advance  this  money 
as  capital.  He  spends  it,  pays  it  out  for  an  equivalent  in  means 
of  subsistence  which  he  consumes.  This  value  has  been  spent  by 
him  in  money,  thrown  into  circulation  and  withdrawn  from  it  in 
the  form  of  commodity-values.  These  commodity-values  he  has 
consumed.  He  has  thus  ceased  to  bear  any  relation  to  their  value. 
The  money  with  which  he  paid  for  this  value  exists  now  as  an 
element  of  the  circulating  money.  But  he  has  withdrawn  the 
value  of  this  money  from  circulation  in  the  form  of  products;  and 
this  value  is  now  destroyed  together  with  the  products  in  which 
it  existed.  It’s  all  gone.  But  at  the  end  of  the  year  he  throws  com¬ 
modities  worth  £6,000  into  circulation  and  sells  them.  By  this 
means  he  recovers:  1)  his  advanced  money-capital  of  £5,000; 
2)  the  realised  surplus-value  of  £1,000.  He  has  advanced  as  cap¬ 
ital,  has  thrown  into  circulation,  £5,000,  and  he  withdraws 
from  it  £6,000— £5,000  of  which  cover  his  capital,  and  £1,000 
his  surplus-value.  The  last  £1,000  are  turned  into  money  with  the 
money  which  he  himself  has  thrown  into  circulation,  which  he 
did  not  advance,  but  spent  as  a  consumer,  not  as  a  capitalist. 
They  now  return  to  him  as  the  money-form  of  the  surplus-value 
produced  by  him.  And  henceforth  this  operation  is.  repeated 
every  year.  But  beginning  with  the  second  year,  the  £1,000  which 
he  spends  are  constantly  the  converted  form,  the  money-form, 
of  the  surplus-value  produced  by  him.  He  spends  them  annually 
and  they  return  to  him  annually. 


340 


THE  TURNOVER  OP  CAPITAL 


If  his  capital  were  turned  over  more  frequently  a  year,  it 
would  not  alter  this  state  of  affairs,  but  would  affect  the  length 
of  time,  and  hence  the  amount  which  he  would  have  to  throw  into 
circulation  for  his  individual  consumption  over  and  above  his 
advanced  money-capital. 

This  money  is  not  thrown  into  circulation  by  the  capitalist 
as  capital.  But  it  is  a  decided  trait  of  the  capitalist  to  be  able 
to  live  on  means  in  his  possession  until  surplus-value  begins  to 
return. 

In  the  present  case  we  assumed  that  the  sum  of  money  which 
the  capitalist  throws  into  circulation  to  pay  for  his  individual 
consumption  until  the  first  returns  of  his  capital  is  exactly  equal 
to  the  surplus-value  which  he  produced  and  hence  must  turn  into 
money.  This  is  obviously  an  arbitrary  assumption  so  far  as  the 
individual  capitalist  is  concerned.  But  it  must  be  correct  when 
applied  to  the  entire  capitalist  class  if  simple  reproduction  is 
assumed.  It  only  expresses  the  same  thing  as  the  assumption; 
namely,  that  the  entire  surplus-value,  and  it  alone — hence  no 
fraction  of  the  original  capital  stock — is  consumed  unproduc- 
tively. 

It  had  been  previously  assumed  that  the  total  production  of 
precious  metals  (taken  to  be  equal  to  £500)  sufficed  only  for  the 
replacement  of  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  money. 

The  capitalists  producing  golcl  possess  their  entire  product 
in  gold— that  portion  which  replaces  constant  capital  as  well 
as  that  which  replace?  variable  capital,  and  also  that  consisting 
of  surplus-value.  A  portion  of  the  social  surplus-value  therefore 
consists  of  gold,  and  not  of  a  product  which  is  turned  into  gold 
only'  in  the  process  of  circulation.  It  consists  from  the  outset  of 
gold  and  is  thrown  into  circulation  in  order  to  draw  products 
out  of  it.  The  same  applies  here  to  wages,  to  variable  capital, 
and  to  the  replacement  of  the  advanced  constant  capital.  Hence, 
whereas  one  part  of  the  capitalist  class  throws  into  circulation 
commodities  greater  in  value  (greater  by  the  amount  of  the  sur¬ 
plus-value)  than  the  money-capital  advanced  by  them,  another 
part  of  the  capitalists  throws  into  circulation  money  of  greater 
value  (greater  by  the  amount  of  the  surplus-value)  than  that  of 
the  commodities  which  they  constantly  withdraw  from  circula¬ 
tion  for  the  production  of  gold.  Whereas  one  part  of  the  capi¬ 
talists  constantly  pumps  more  money  out  of  the  circulation 
than  it  pours  into  it,  the  part  that  produces  gold  constantly 
pumps  more  money  into  it  than  it  takes  out  in  means  of 
production. 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 


341 


Although  a  part  of  this  product  of  £500  in  gold  is  surplus- 
value  of  the  gold-producers,  the  entire  sum  is,  nonetheless,  in¬ 
tended  only  to  replace  thq,  money  necessary  for  the  circulation 
of  the  commodities.  It  is  immaterial  for  this  purpose  how  much 
of  this  gold  turns  into  money  the  surplus-value  incorporated  in 
the  commodities,  and  how  much  of  it  their  other  value 
constituents. 

Transferring  the  production  of  gold  from  one  country  to  an¬ 
other  produces  no  change  whatever  in  the  matter.  One  part  of  the 
social  labour-power  and  the  social  means  of  production  of  country 
A  is  converted  into  a  product,  for  instance  linen,  valued  at  £500, 
which  is  exported  to  country  B  in  order  to  buy  gold  there.  The 
productive  capital  thus  employed  in  the  country  A  throws  no 
more  commodities — as  distinct  from  money — upon  the  market  of 
country  A  than  it  would  if  it  were  employed  directly  in  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  gold.  This  product  of  A  represents  £500  in  gold  and 
enters  into  the  circulation  of  this  country  only  as  money.  That 
portion  of  the  social  surplus-value  which  is  contained  in  this 
product  exists  for  country  A  directly  in  the  form  of  money,  and 
never  in  any  other  form.  Although  for  the  gold-producing  capi¬ 
talists  only  a  part  of  the  product  represents  surplus-value,  and 
another  part  the  replacement  capital,  still  the  question  of  how 
much  of  this  gold,  outside  the  circulating  constant  capital, 
replaces  variable  capital  and  how  much  of  it  represents  surplus- 
value  depends  exclusively  on  the  respective  ratios  of  wages  and 
surplus-value  to  the  value  of  the  circulating  commodities.  The 
part  which  forms  surplus-value  is  distributed  among  the  diverse 
members  of  the  capitalist  class.  Although  that  part  is  continually 
spent  by  them  for  individual  consumption  and  recovered  by  the 
sale  of  new  products — it  is  precisely  this  purchase  and  sale  that 
circulates  among  them  the  money  required  for  the  conversion 
of  the  surplus-value  into  money— there  is  nevertheless  a  portion 
of  the  social  surplus-value,  in  the  form  of  money,  even  if  in  vary¬ 
ing  proportions,  in  the  pockets  of  the  capitalists,  just  as  a  por¬ 
tion  of  the  wages  stays  at  least  during  part  of  the  week  in  the 
pockets  of  the  labourers  in  the  form  of  money.  And  this  part  is 
not  limited  by  that  part  of  the  money  product  which  originally 
forms  the  surplus-value  of  the  gold-producing  capitalists,  but, 
as  we  have  said,  is  limited  by  the  proportion  in  which  the  above 
product  of  £500  is  generally  distributed  between  capitalists  and 
labourers,  and  in  which  the  commodity-supply  to  be  circu¬ 
lated  consists  of  surplus-value  and  the  other  constituents  of 
value. 


842 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


However  that  portion  of  surplus-value  which  does  not  exist 
in  other  commodities  but  alongside  of  them  in  the  form  of  money, 
consists  of  a  portion  of  the  annually  produced  gold  only  to  the 
extent  that  a  portion  of  the  annual  production  of  gold  circulates 
for  the  realisation  of  the  surplus-value.  The  other  portion  of 
money,  which  is  continually  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist  class 
in  varying  portions,  as  the  money-form  of  their  surplus-value, 
is  not  an  element  of  the  annually  produced  gold,  but  of  the  mass 
of  money  previously  accumulated  in  the  country. 

According  to  our  assumption  the  annual  production  of  gold, 
£500,  just  covers  the  annual  wear  of  money.  If  we  keep  in  mind 
only  these  £500  and  ignore  that  portion  of  the  annually  produced 
mass  of  commodities  which  is  circulated  by  means  of  previously 
accumulated  money,  the  surplus-value  produced  in  commodity- 
form  will  find  in  the  circulation  process  money  for  its  conversion 
into  money  for  the  simple  reason  that  on  the  other  side  surplus- 
value  is  annually  produced  in  the  form  of  gold.  The  same  applies 
to  the  other  parts  of  the  gold  product  of  £500  which  replace  the 
advanced  money-capital. 

Now,  two  things  are  to  be  noted  here. 

In  the  first  place,  it  follows  that  the  surplus-value  spent  by 
the  capitalists  as  money,  as  well  as  the  variable  and  other  produc¬ 
tive  capital  advanced  by  them  in  money,  is  actually  the  product 
of  labourers,  namely  of  the  labourers  engaged  in  the  production 
of  gold.  They  produce  anew  not  only  that  portion  of  the  gold 
product  which  is  “advanced”  to  them  as  wages  but  also  that  por¬ 
tion  of  the  gold  product  in  which  the  surplus-value  of  the  capi¬ 
talist  gold-producers  is  directly  represented.  Finally,  as  for  that 
portion  of  the  gold  product  which  replaces  only  the  constant  capi¬ 
tal-value  advanced  for  its  production,  it  re-appears  in  the  form 
of  money  (or  product  in  general)  only  through  the  annual  work  of 
the  labourers.  When  the  business  started,  it  was  originally  ex¬ 
pended  by  the  capitalist  in  the  form  of  money,  which  was  not 
newly  produced  but  formed  a  part  of  the  circulating  mass  of 
social  money.  But  to  the  extent  that  it  is  replaced  by  a  new  prod¬ 
uct,  by  additional  gold,  it  is  the  annual  product  of  the  labourer. 
The  advance  on  the  part  of  the  capitalist  appears  here,  too, 
merely  as  a  form  which  owes  its  existence  to  the  fact  that  the 
labourer  is  neither  the  owner  of  his  own  means  of  production  nor 
able  to  command,  during  production,  the  means  of  subsistence 
produced  by  other  labourers. 

In  the  second  place  however,  as  far  as  concerns  that  mass 
of  money  which  exists  independently  of  this  annual  replacement 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 


343 


of  £500  partly  in  the  form  of  a  hoard  and  partly  in  the  form  of 
circulating  money,  things  must  be,  or  rather  must  have  been  orig¬ 
inally  with  it  just  as  they  are  annually  with  regard  to  these  £500. 
We  shall  return  to  this  point  at  the  close  of  this  sub-section.*  But 
before  then  we  wish  to  .make  a  few  additional  remarks. 


We  have  seen  during  our  study  of  the  turnover  that,  other 
circumstances  remaining  equal,  changes  in  the  length  of  the 
periods  of  turnover  require  changes  in  the  amounts  of  money- 
capital,  in  order  to  carry  on  production  on  the  same  scale.  The 
elasticity  of  the  money-circulation  must  therefore  be  sufficient 
to  adapt  itself  to  this  alternation  of  expansion  and  contraction. 

If  we  furthermore  assume  other  circumstances  as  remaining 
equal  — including  the  length,  intensity,  and  productivity  of  the 
working-day  — but  a  different  division  of  the  value  of  the  product 
between  wages  and  surplus-value,  so  that  either  the  former  rises 
and  the  latter  falls,  or  vice  versa,  the  mass  of  the  circulating 
money  is  not  affected  thereby.  This  change  can  take  place  with¬ 
out  any  expansion  or  contraction  of  the  money  currency.  Let 
us  consider  particularly  the  case  in  which  there  is  a  general  rise 
in  wages,  so  that,  under  the  assumptions  made,  there  will  be  a 
general  fall  in  the  rate  of  surplus-value,  but  besides  this,  also 
according  to  our  assumption,  there  will  be  no  change  in  the 
value  of  the  circulating  mass  of  commodities.  In  this  case  there 
naturally  is  an  increase  in  the  money-capital  which  must  be  ad¬ 
vanced  as  variable  capital,  hence  in  the  amount  of  money  which 
performs  this  function.  But  the  surplus-value,  and  therefore 
also  the  amount  of  money  required  for  its  realisation,  decreases 
by  exactly  the  same  amount  by  which  the  amount  of  money  re¬ 
quired  for  the  function  of  variable  capital  increases.  The  amount 
of  money  required  for  the  realisation  of  the  commodity-value 
is  not  affected  thereby,  any  more  than  this  commodity-value  it¬ 
self.  The  cost  price  of  the  commodity  rises  for  the  individual 
capitalist  but  its  social  price  of  production  remains  unchanged. 
What  is  changed  is  the  proportion  in  which,  apart  from  the  con¬ 
stant  part  of  the  value,  the  price  of  the  production  of  commodi¬ 
ties  is  divided  into  wages  and  profit. 

But,  it  is  argued,  a  greater  outlay  of  variable  money-capital 
(the  value  of  the  money  is,  of  course,  considered  constant)  im¬ 
plies  a  larger  amount  of  money  in  the  hands  of  the  labourers. 


•  Sec:  pp.  347-48  of  this  book. — Ed. 


344 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


This  causes  a  greater  demand  for  commodities  on  the  part  of 
the  labourers.  This,  in  turn,  leads  to  a  rise  in  the  price  of  com¬ 
modities. — Or  it  is  said:  If  wages  rise,  the  capitalists  raise  the 
prices  of  their  commodities.  —  In  either  case,  the  general  rise  in 
wages  causes  a  rise  in  commodity  prices.  Hence  a  greater  amount 
of  money  is  needed  for  the  circulation  of  the  commodities,  no  mat¬ 
ter  how  the  rise  in  prices  is  explained. 

Reply  to  the  first  formulation:  in  consequence  of  a  rise  in  wages, 
the  demand  of  the  labourers  for  the  necessities  of  lifo  will  rise 
particularly.  Their  demand  for  articles  of  luxury  will  increase  to 
a  lesser  degree,  or  a  demand  will  develop  for  things  which  for¬ 
merly  did  not  come  within  the  scope  of  their  consumption.  The 
sudden  and  large-scale  increase  in  the  demand  for  the  indispen¬ 
sable  means  of  subsistence  will  doubtless  raise  their  prices  imme¬ 
diately.  The  consequence:  a  greater  part  of  the  social  capital 
will  be  employed  in  the  production  of  necessities  of  life  and  a 
smaller  in  the  production  of  luxuries,  since  these  fall  in  price 
on  account  of  the  decrease  in  surplus-value  and  the  consequent 
decrease  in  the  demand  of  the  capitalists  for  these  articles.  On 
the  other  hand  as  the  labourers  themselves  buy  articles  of  lux¬ 
ury,  the  rise  in  their  wages  does  not  promote  an  increase  in  the 
prices  of  the  necessities  of  life  but  simply  displaces  buyers  of 
luxuries.  More  luxuries  than  before  are  consumed  by  labourers, 
and  relatively  fewer  by  capitalists.  Voil'a  tout.  After  some  oscilla¬ 
tions  the  value  of  the  mass  of  circulating  commodities  is  the 
same  as  before.  As  for  the  momentary  fluctuations,  they  will  not 
have  any  other  effect  than  to  throw  unemployed  money-capital 
into  domestic  circulation,  capital  which  hitherto  sought  employ¬ 
ment  in  speculative  deals  on  the  stock-exchange  or  in  foreign 
countries. 

Reply  to  the  second  formulation:  If  it  were  in  the  power  of  the 
capitalist  producers  to  raise  the  prices  of  their  commodities 
at  will,  they  could  and  would  do  so  without  a  rise  in  wages. 
Wages  would  never  rise  if  commodity  prices  fell.  The  capitalist 
class  would  never  resist  the  trades’  unions,  if  it  could  always 
and  under  all  circumstances  do  what  it  is  now  doing  by  way  of 
exception,  under  definite,  special,  so  to  say  local,  circumstances, 
to  wit,  avail  itself  of  every  rise  in  wages  in  order  to  raise  prices 
of  commodities  much  higher  yet  and  thus  pocket  greater  profits. 

The  assertion  that  the  capitalists  can  raise  the  prices  of  lux¬ 
uries,  because  the  demand  for  them  decreases  (in  consequence 
of  the  reduced  demand  of  the  capitalists  whose  means  for  pur¬ 
chasing  such  articles  has  decreased)  would  be  a  very  unique 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS- VALUE 


345 


application  of  the  law  of  supply  and  demand.  Since  it  is  not  a 
mere  displacement  of  luxury  buyers,  a  displacement  of  capi¬ 
talists  by  labourers— and  so  far  as  this  displacement  does  occur, 
the  demand  of  the  labourers  does  not  stimulate  a  rise  in  the 
prices  of  necessities,  for  the  labourers  cannot  spend  that  portion 
of  their  increased  wages  for  necessities  which  they  spend  for  lux¬ 
uries — the  prices  of  luxuries  fall  in  consequence  of  reduced  de¬ 
mand.  Capital  is  therefore  withdrawn  from  the  production  of 
luxury  articles,  until  their  supply  is  reduced  to  dimensions 
corresponding  to  their  altered  role  in  the  process  of  social  pro¬ 
duction.  With  their  production  thus  reduced,  they  rise  in  price — 
their  value  otherwise  unchanged— to  their  normal  level.  So 
long  as  this  contraction,  or  this  process  of  levelling,  lasts  and 
the  prices  of  necessities  rise,  as  much  capital  is  supplied  to  the 
production  of  the  latter  as  is  withdrawn  from  other  branches  of 
production,  until  the  demand  is  satisfied.  Then  the  equilibrium 
is  restored  and  the  end  of  the  whole  process  is  that  the  social 
capital,  and  therefore  also  the  money-capital,  is  divided  in  a 
different  proportion  between  the  production  of  the  necessities 
of  life  and  that  of  luxury  articles. 

The  entire  objection  is  a  bugbear  set  up  by  the  capitalists 
and  their  economic  sycophants. 

The  facts  which  serve  as  the  pretext  for  this  bugbear  are  of 
three  kinds: 

1)  It  is  a  general  law  of  money-circulation  that,  other  things 
being  equal,  the  quantity  of  money  in  circulation  increases 
with  a  rise  in  the  sum  of  the  prices  of  circulating  commodities, 
irrespective  of  whether  this  augmentation  of  the  totality  of 
prices  applies  to  the  same  quantity  of  commodities  or  to  a  great¬ 
er  quantity.  The  effect  is  then  confused  with  the  cause.  Wages 
rise  (although  the  rise  is  rare,  and  proportional  only  in  excep¬ 
tional  cases)  with  the  rising  prices  of  the  necessities  of  life.  Wage 
advances  are  the  consequence,  not  the  cause,  of  advances  in  the 
prices  of  commodities. 

2)  In  the  cas6  of  a  partial,  or  local,  rise  of  wages— that  is, 
a  rise  only  in  Some  branches  of  production  — a  local  rise  in  the 
prices  of  the  products  of  these  branches  may  follow.  But  even 
this  depends  on  many  circumstances.  For  instance  that  wages 
were  not  abnormally  depressed  and  that  therefore  the  rate  of 
profit  was  not  abnormally  high;  that  the  market  for  these  goods  is 
not  narrowed  by  the  rise  in  prices  (hence  a  contraction  of  their 
supply  previous  to  raising  their  prices  is  not  necessary), 
etc. 


346 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


3)  In  the  case  of  a  general  rise  in  wages  the  price  of  the  pro¬ 
duced  commodities  rises  in  branches  of  industry  where  the 
variable  capital  preponderates,  but  falls  on  the  other  hand  in 
branches  where  the  constant,  or  fixed,  capital  preponderates. 


We  found  in  our  study  of  the  simple  circulation  of  commodi¬ 
ties  (Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill,  2)*  that,  though  the  money-form  of  any 
definite  quantity  of  commodities  is  only  transient  within  the 
sphere  of  circulation,  still  the  money  transiently  in  the  hands 
of  one  man  during  the  metamorphosis  of  a  certain  commodity 
necessarily  passes  into  the  hands  of  another,  so  that  in  the  first 
instance  commodities  are  not  only  exchanged  all-sidedly,  or 
replace  one  another,  but  this  replacement  is  promoted  and  ac¬ 
companied  by  an  all-sided  precipitation  of  money.  “When  one 
commodity  replaces  another,  the  money-commodity  always  sticks 
to  the  hands  of  some  third  person.  Circulation-  sweats  money 
from  every  pore.”  (Buch  I,  S.  92.)**  The  same  identical  fact  is 
expressed,  on  the  basis  of  the  capitalist  production  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  by  a  portion  of  capital  constantly  existing  in  the  form  of 
money-capital,  and  a  portion  of  surplus-value  constantly  being 
found  in  the  hands  of  its  owners,  likewise  in  the  form  of  money. 

Apart  from  this,  the  circuit  of  money — that  is,  the  return  of 
money  to  its  point  of  departure — being  a  phase  of  the  turnover 
of  capital,  is  a  phenomenon  entirely  different  from,  and  even 
the  opposite  of,  the  currency  of  money ,3S  which  expresses  its 


*  English  edition:  Ch.  III. — Ed. 

••  English  edition:  p.  113. — Ed. 

83  Although  the  physiocrats  still  confuse  these  two  phenomena,  they 
■were  the  first  to  emphasise  the  reflux  of  money  to  its  starting-point  as  the 
essential  form  of  circulation  of  capital,  as  that  form  of  circulation  which 
promotes  reproduction.  “Cast  a  glance  at  the  Tableau  Economique  and  you 
will  see  that  the  productive  class  provides  the  money  with  which  the  other 
classes  buy  products  from  it,  and  that  they  return  this  money  to  it  when 
they  come  back  next  year  to  make  the  same  purchases*...  You  see,  then, 
no  other  circle  here  but  that  of  expenditure  followed  by  reproduction,  and 
of  reproduction  followed  by  expenditure,  a  circle  described  by  the  circu¬ 
lation  of  money,  which  measures  expenditure  and  reproduction."  (Quesnay, 
Dialogues  sur  le  Commerce  el  sur  les  Travaux  des  Artisans,  Daire  Edition, 
Physiocrats,  I,  pp.  208,  209.)  “It  is  this  continual  advance  and  return  of 
capitals  which  should  be  called  the  circulation  of  money,  this  useful  and 
fertile  circulation  which  gives  life  to  all  the  labours  of  society,  which  main¬ 
tains  the  activity  and  life  of  the  body  politic,  and  which  is  quite  rightly 
compared  to  the  circulation  of  blood  in  the  animal  body.”  (Turgot,  Refle¬ 
xions,  etc.,  Oeuvres,  Daire  Edition,  I,  p.  45.) 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS- VALUE 


347 


steady  departure  from  the  starting-point  by  changing  hands  again 
and  again.  (Buch  I,  S.  94.)*  Nevertheless,  an  accelerated 
turnover  implies  eo  ipso  an  accelerated  currency. 

First  concerning  the  variable  capital:  If  a  certain  money- 
capital  of,  say,  £500  is  turned  over  in  the  form  of  variable  capi¬ 
tal  ten  times  a  year,  it  is  evident  that  this  aliquot  part  of  the 
quantity  of  money  in  circulation  circulates  ten  times  its  value, 
or  £5,000.  It  circulates  ten  times  a  year  between  the  capitalist 
and  the  labourer.  The  labourer  is  paid,  and  pays,  ten  times  a 
year  with  the  same  aliquot  part  of  the  circulating  quantity  of 
money.  If  the  same  variable  capital  were  turned  over  only  once 
a  year,  the  scale  of  production  remaining  the  same,  there  would 
be  only  one  capital  turnover  of  £5,000. 

Furthermore:  Let  the  constant  portion  of  the  circulating  cap¬ 
ital  be  equal  to  £1,000.  If  the  capital  is  turned  over  ten  times, 
the  capitalist  sells  his  commodity,  and  therefore  also  the  constant 
circulating  portion  of  its  value,  ten  times  a  year.  The  same  ali¬ 
quot  part  of  the  circulating  quantity  of  money  (equal  to  £1,000) 
passes  ten  times  per  annum  from  the  hands  of  its  owners  into 
those  of  the  capitalist.  This  money  changes  hands  ten  times. 
Secondly,  the  capitalist  buys  means  of  production  ten  times 
a  year.  This  again  makes  ten  circulations  of  the  money  from  one 
hand  into  another.  With  a  sum  of  money  amounting  to  £1,000, 
the  industrial  capitalist  sells  £10,000  worth  of  commodities, 
and  again  buys  £10,000  worth  of  commodities.  By  means  of 
20  circulations  of  £1,000  in  money  a  commodity-supply  of  £20,000 
is  circulated. 

Finally,  with  an  acceleration  of  the  turnover,  the  portion 
of  money  which  realises  the  surplus-value  also  circulates  faster. 

But,  conversely,  an  acceleration  in  money-circulation  does 
not  necessarily  imply  a  more  rapid  turnover  of  capital,  and 
therefore  of  money;  that  is,  it  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  con¬ 
traction  and  more  rapid  renewal  of  the  reproduction  process. 

A  more  rapid  circulation  of  money  takes  place  whenever  a 
larger  number  of  transactions  are  performed  with  the  same 
amount  of  money.  This  may  also  take  place  under  the  same  periods 
of  capital  reproduction  as  a  result  of  changes  in  the  technical  fa¬ 
cilities  for  the  circulation  of  money.  Furthermore,  there  may  be 
an  increase  in  the  number  of  transactions  in  which  money  cir¬ 
culates  without  representing  actual  exchanges  of  commodities 
(marginal  transactions  on  the  stock-exchange,  etc.).  On  the 


•  English  edition:  pp.  114-15. — Ed. 


348 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


other  hand  some  circulations  of  money  may  be  entirely  eliminat¬ 
ed,  as  for  instance  where  the  agriculturist  is  himself  a  landown¬ 
er,  there  is  no  circulation  of  money  between  the  farmer  and 
the  landlord;  where  the  industrial  capitalist  is  himself  the 
owner  of  the  capital,  there  is  no  circulation  of  money  between 
him  and  creditors. 


As  for  the  primitive  formation  of  a  money-hoaTd  in  a  coun¬ 
try,  and  its  appropriation  by  a  few,  it  is  unnecessary  to  discuss 
it  in  detail  at  this  point. 

The  capitalist  mode  of  production— its  basis  being  wage- 
labour,  the  payment  of  the  labourer  in  money,  and  in  general 
the  transformation  of  payments  in  kind  into  money  payments — 
can  assume  greater  dimensions  and  achieve  greater  perfection 
only  where  there  is  available  in  the  country  a  quantity  of  mon¬ 
ey  sufficient  for  circulation  and  the  formation  of  a  hoard  (re¬ 
serve  fund,  etc.)  promoted  by  it.  This  is  the  historical  premise, 
although  it  is  not  to  be  taken  to  mean  that  first  a  sufficient  hoard 
is  formed  and  then  capitalist  production  begins.  It  develops 
simultaneously  with  the  development  of  the  conditions  neces¬ 
sary  for  it,  and  one  of  these  conditions  is  a  sufficient  supply  of 
precious  metals.  Hence  the  increased  supply  of  precious  metals 
since  the  sixteenth  century  is  an  essential  element  in  the  his¬ 
tory  of  the  development  of  capitalist  production.  But  so  far 
as  the  necessary  further  supply  of  money  material  on  the  basis 
of  capitalist  production  is  concerned,  we  see  surplus-value  in¬ 
corporated  in  products  thrown  into  circulation  without  the 
money  required  for  their  conversion  into  money,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  on  the  other  surplus-value  in  the  form  of  gold  with¬ 
out  previous  transformation  of  products  into  money. 

The  additional  commodities  to  be  converted  into  money  find 
the  necessary  amount  of  money  at  hand,  because  on  the  other 
side  additional  gold  (and  silver)  intended  for  conversion  into 
commodities  is  thrown  into  circulation,  not  by  means  of  exchange, 
but  by  production  itself. 


II.  ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION 
ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE 

Since  accumulation  takes  place  in  the  form  of  extended  re¬ 
production,  it  is  evident  that  it  does  not  offer  any  new  problem 
with  regard  to  money-circulation.. 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 


349 


In  the  first  place,  as'  far  as  the  additional  money-capital  re¬ 
quired  for  the  functioning  of  the  increasing  productive  capital  is 
concerned,  that  is  supplied  by  the  portion  of  the  realised  surplus- 
value  thrown  into  circulation  by  the  capitalists  as  money-capi¬ 
tal,  not  as  the  money-form  of  the  revenue.  The  money  is  already 
in  the  hands  of  the  capitalists.  Only  its  employment  is  different. 

Now  however  in  consequence  of  the  additional  productive 
capital,  its  product,  an  additional  mass  of  commodities  is  thrown 
into  circulation.  Together  with  this  additional  quantity  of  com¬ 
modities,  a  part  of  the  additional  money  needed  for  its  realisa¬ 
tion  is  thrown  into  circulation,  inasmuch  as  the  value  of  this 
mass  of  commodities  is  equal  to  that  of  the  productive  capi¬ 
tal  consumed  in  their  production.  This  additional  amount  of 
money  has  been  advanced  precisely  as  additional  money-capi¬ 
tal,  and  therefore  returns  to  the  capitalist  through  the  turnover 
of  his  capital.  Here  the  same  question  as  above  re-appears.  Where 
does  the  additional  money  come  from  with  which  to  realise  the 
additional  surplus-value  now  contained  in  the  form  of  commod¬ 
ities? 

The  general  reply  is  again  the  same.  The  sum  total  of  the 
prices  of  the  circulating  commodities  has  been  increased,  not 
because  the  prices  of  a  given  quantity  of  commodities  have  ris¬ 
en,  but  because  the  mass  of  the  commodities  now  circulating  is 
greater  than  that  of  the  previously  circulating  commodities, 
without  it  being  offset  by  a  fall  in  prices.  The  additional  money 
required  for  the  circulation  of  this  greater  quantity  of  commodi¬ 
ties  of  greater  value  must  be  secured  either  by  greater  economy 
in  the  use  of  the  circulating  quantity  of  money— whether  by 
balancing  the  payments,  etc.,  by  measures  which  accelerate  the 
circulation  of  the  same  coins— or  by  the  transformation  of  money 
from  the  form  of  a  hoard  into  that  of  a  circulating  medium.  The 
latter  does  not  only  imply  that  idle  money-capital  begins  to 
function  as  a  means  of  purchase  or  payment,  or  that  money- 
capital  already  functioning  as  a  reserve  fund  while  performing 
this  function  for  its  owner,  actively  circulates  for  society  (as 
is  the  case  with  bank  deposits  which  are  continually  lent),  thus 
performing  a  double  function.  It  also  implies  that  the  stagnating 
reserve  funds  of  coins  are  economised. 

“In  order  that  money  should  flow  continuously  as  coin,  coin 
must  constantly  coagulate  as  money.  The  continual  currency  of 
coin  depends  on  its  continual  stagnation,  in  greater  or  smaller 
quantities,  in  reserve  funds  of  coin  which  spring  up  through¬ 
out  the  sphere  of  circulation  and  also  necessitate  it;  the  for- 


350 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


mation,  distribution,  dissolution,  and  re-formation  of  these 
reserve  funds  are  constantly  alternating,  their  existence  con¬ 
stantly  disappears,  their  disappearance  constantly  exists.  Adam 
Smith  expressed  this  never-ceasing  transformation  of  coin  into 
money  and  of  money  into  coin  by  saying  that  every  owner  of 
commodities  must  always  keep  in  supply,  aside  from  the  partic¬ 
ular  commodity  which  he  sells,  a  certain  quantity  of  the  univer¬ 
sal  commodity  with  which  he  buys.  We  saw  that  in  the  circu¬ 
lation  C— M— C  the  second  member  M— C  splits  up  constantly 
into  a  series  of  purchases  which  do  not  take  place  at  once  but 
at  successive  intervals  of  time,  so  that  one  part  of  M  is  current 
as  coin  while  the  other  rests  as  money.  As  a  matter  of  fact  money 
is  in  that  case  only  suspended  coin  and  the  separate  parts  of 
the  current  mass  of  coins  continuously  appear  now  in  the  one 
form,  and  now  in  the  other,  alternating  constantly.  This  first 
transformation  of  the  medium  of  circulation  into  money  repre¬ 
sents,  therefore,  but  a  technical  aspect  of  money-circulation  it¬ 
self.”  (Karl  Marx,  Zur  Kritik  der  Politischen  Oekonomie,  1859, 
SS.  105,  106.)  (“Coin”  as  distinguished  from  money  is  here  em¬ 
ployed  to  indicate  money  in  its  function  of  a  mere  medium  of 
circulation  in  contrast  with  its  other  functions.) 

When  all  these  measures  do  not  suffice,  additional  gold  must 
be  produced,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same,  a  part  of  the  addi¬ 
tional  product  exchanged,  directly  or  indirectly,  for  gold — the 
product  of  countries  in  which  precious  metals  are  mined. 

The  entire  amount  of  labour-power  and  social  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  expended  in  the  annual  production  of  gold  and  silver 
intended  as  instruments  of  circulation  constitutes  a  bulky  item 
of  the  faux  frais  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production,  of  the 
production  of  commodities  in  general.  It  is  an  equivalent-  ab¬ 
straction  from  social  utilisation  of  as  many  additional  means 
of  production  and  consumption  as  possible,  i.e.,  of  real  wealth. 
To  the  extent  that  the  costs  of  this  expensive  machinery  of  cir¬ 
culation  are  decreased,  the  given  scale  of  production  or  the  given 
degree  of  its  extension  remaining  constant,  the  productive  power 
of  social  labour  is  eo  ipso  increased.  Hence,  so  far  as  the  expe¬ 
diences  developing  with  the  credit  system  have  this  effect,  they 
increase  capitalist  wealth  directly,  either  by  performing  a  large 
portion  of  the  social  production  and  labour-process  without 
any  intervention  of  real  money,  or  by  raising  the  functional 
capacity  of  the  quantity  of  money  really  functioning. 

This  disposes  also  of  the  absurd  question  whether  capitalist 
production  in  its  present  volume  would  be  possible  without  the 


THE  CIRCULATION  OP  SURPLUS-VALUE 


351 


credit  system  (even  if  regarded  only  from  this  point  of  view), 
that  is,  with  the  circulation  of  metallic  coin  alone.  Evidently 
this  is  not  the  case.  It  would  rather  have  encountered  barriers 
in  the  volume  of  production  of  precious  metals.  On  the  other  hand 
one  must  not  entertain  any  fantastic  illusions  on  the  productive 
power  of  the  credit  system,  so  far  as  it  supplies  or  Sets  in  motion 
money-capital.  A  further  analysis  of  this  question  is  out  of  place 
here. 


We  have  now  to  investigate  the  case  in  which  there  takes 
place  no  real  accumulation,  i.e.,  no  direct  expansion  of  the  scale 
of  production,  but  where  a  part  of  the  realised  surplus-value  is 
accumulated  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  as  a  money-reserve 
fund,  in  order  to  be  transformed  later  into  productive  capital. 

Inasmuch  as  the  money  so  accumulating  is  additional  money, 
the  matter  needs  no  explanation.  It  can  only  be  a  portion  of 
the  surplus-gold  brought  from  gold-producing  countries.  In 
this  connection  it  must  be  noted  that  the  home  product,  in  ex¬ 
change  for  which  this  gold  is  imported,  is  no  longer  in  the  coun¬ 
try  in  question.  It  has  been  exported  to  foreign  countries  in  ex¬ 
change  for  gold. 

But  if  we  assume  that  the  same  amount  of  money  is  still  in 
the  country  as  before,  then  the  accumulated  and  accumulating 
money  has  accrued  from  the  circulation.  Only  its  function  is 
changed.  It  has  been  converted  from  money  in  currency  into 
latent  money-capital  gradually  taking  shape. 

The  money  which  is  accumulated  in  this  case  is  the  money- 
form  of  sold  commodities,  and  moreover  of  that  part  of  their 
value  which  constitutes  surplus-value  for  their  owner.  (The 
credit  system  is  here  assumed  to  be  non-existent.)  The  capi¬ 
talist  who  accumulates  this  money  has  sold  pro  tanto  without 
buying. 

If  we  look  upon  this  process  merely  as  an  individual  phe¬ 
nomenon,  there  is  nothing  to  explain.  A  part  of  the  capitalists 
keeps  a  portion  of  the  money  realised  by  the  sale  of  its  product 
without  withdrawing  products  from  the  market  in  return.  An¬ 
other  part  of  them  on  the  other  hand  transforms  its  money  wholly 
into  products,  with  the  exception  of  the  constantly  recurring 
money-capital  required  for  running  the  business.  One  portion 
of  the  products  thrown  upon  the  market  as  vehicles  of  surplus- 
value  consists  of  means  of  production,  or  of  the  real  elements 
of  variable  capital,  the  necessary  means  of  subsistence.  It  can 


352 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


therefore  serve  immediately  for  the  expansion  of  production. 
For  it  has  not  been  premised  in  the  least  that  one  part  of  the 
capitalists  accumulates  money-capital,  while  the  other  consumes 
its  surplus-value  entirely,  but  only  that  one  part  does  its  accu¬ 
mulating  in  the  shape  of  money,  forms  latent  money-capital, 
while  the  other  part  accumulates  genuinely,  that  is  to  say,  en¬ 
larges  the  scale  of  production,  genuinely  expands  its  productive 
capital.  The  available  quantity  of  money  remains  sufficient  for 
the  requirements  of  circulation,  even  if,  alternately,  one  part 
of  the  capitalists  accumulates  money,  while  the  other  enlarges 
the  scale  of  production,  and  vice  versa.  Moreover,  the  accumu¬ 
lation  of  money  on  one  side  may  proceed  even  without  cash 
money  by  the  mere  accumulation  of  outstanding  claims. 

But  the  difficulty  arises  when  we  assume  not  an  individual, 
but  a  general  accumulation  of  money-capital  on  the  part  of  the 
capitalist  class.  Apart  from  this  class,  according  to  our  assump¬ 
tion —  the  general  and  exclusive  domination  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction— there  is  no  other  class  at  all  except  the  working-class. 
All  that  the  working-class  buys  is  equal  to  the  sum  total  of  its 
wages,  equal  to  the  sum  total  of  the  variable  capital  advanced  by 
the  entire  capitalist  class.  This  money  flows  back  to  the  capital¬ 
ist  class  by  the  sale  of  its  product  to  the  working-class.  Its  varia¬ 
ble  capital  thus  resumes  its  money-form.  Let  the  sum  total 
of  the  variable  capital  be  x  times  £100,  i.e.,  the  sum  total  of 
the  variable  capital  employed,  not  advanced,  during  the  year. 
The  question  now  under  consideration  is  not  affected  by  how 
much  or  how  little  money,  depending  on  the  velocity  of  the  turn¬ 
over,  is  needed  to  advance  this  variable  capital-value  during 
the  year.  The  capitalist  class  buys  with  these  x  times  £100  of 
capital  a  certain  amount  of  labour-power,  or  pays  wages  to  a 
certain  number  of  labourers — first  transaction.  The  labourers 
buy  with  this  same  sum  a  certain  quantity  of  commodities  from 
the  capitalists,  whereby  the  sum  of  x  times  £100  flows  back 
into  the  hands  of  the  capitalists — second  transaction.  And  this 
is  constantly  repeated.  This  amount  of  x  times  £100,  therefore, 
can  never  enable  the  working-class  to  buy  the  part  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  which  represents  the  constant  capital,  not  to  mention  the 
part  which  represents  the  surplus-value  of  the  capitalist  class. 
With  these  x  times  £100  the  labourers  can  never  buy  more  than 
a  part  of  the  value  of  the  social  product  equal  to  that  part  of  the 
value  which  represents  the  value  of  the  advanced  variable  capital. 

Apart  from  the  case  in  which  this  universal  accumulation  of 
money  expresses  nothing  but  the  distribution  of  the  precious 


THE  CIRCULATION  OF  SURPLUS-VALUE 


353 


metal  additionally  introduced,  in  whatever  proportion,  among 
the  various  individual  capitalists,  how  is  the  entire  capitalist 
class  then  supposed  to  accumulate  money? 

They  would  all  have  to  sell  a  portion  of  their  product  with¬ 
out  buying  anything  in  return.  There  is  nothing  mysterious 
about  the  fact  that  they  all  have  a  certain  fund  of  money  which 
they  throw  into  circulation  as  a  medium  of  circulation  for  their 
consumption,  and  a  certain  portion  of  which  returns  to  each  one 
of  them  from  the  circulation.  But  in  that  case  this  money-fund 
exists  precisely  as  a  fund  for  circulation,  as  a  result  of  the  con¬ 
version  of  the  surplus-value  into  money,  and  does  not  by  any 
means  exist  as  latent  money-capital. 

If  we  view  the  matter  as  it  takes  place  in  reality,  we  find 
that  the  latent  money-capital,  which  is  accumulated  for  future 
use,  consists: 

1)  Of  deposits  in  banks;  and  it  is  a  comparatively  trifling 
sum  which  is  really  at  the  disposal  of  the  bank.  Money-capital 
is  accumulated  here  only  nominally.  What  is  actually  accumu¬ 
lated  is  outstanding  claims  which  can  be  converted  into  money 
(if  ever)  only  because  a  certain  balance  arises  between  the  money 
withdrawn  and  the  money  deposited.  It  is  only  a  relatively  small 
sum  that  the  bank  holds  in  its  hands  in  money. 

2)  Of  government  securities.  These  are  not  capital  at  all,  but 
merely  outstanding  claims  on  the  annual  product  of  the  nation. 

3)  Of  stocks.  Those  which  are  not  fakes  are  titles  of  ownership 
of  some  corporative  real  capital  and  drafts  on  the  surplus-value 
accruing  annually  from  it. 

There  is  no  accumulation  of  money  in  any  of  these  cases. 
What  appears  on  the  one  side  as  an  accumulation  of  money- 
capital  appears  on  the  other  as  a  continual  actual  expenditure 
of  money.  It  is  immaterial  whether  the  money  is  spent  hy  him 
who  owns  it,  or  by  others,  his  debtors. 

On  the  basis  of  capitalist  production  the  formation  of  a  hoard 
as  such  is  never  an  end  in  itself  but  the  result  either  of  a  stag¬ 
nation  of  the  circulation — larger  amounts  of  money  than  is 
generally  the  case  assuming  the  form  of  a  hoard — or  of  accumu¬ 
lations  necessitated  by  the  turnover;  or,  finally,  the  hoard  is 
merely  the  creation  of  money-capital  existing  temporarily  in 
latent  form  and  intended  to  function  as  productive  capital. 

If  therefore  on  the  one  hand  a  portion  of  the  surplus-value 
realised  in  money  is  withdrawil  from  circulation  and  accumulat¬ 
ed  as  a  hoard,  another  part  of  the  surplus-value  is  at  the  same 
time  continually  converted  into  productive  capital.  With  the 


12—1752 


354 


THE  TURNOVER  OF  CAPITAL 


exception  of  the  distribution  of  additional  precious  metals  among 
the  members  of  the  capitalist  class,  accumulation  in  the  form  of 
money  never  takes  place  simultaneously  at  all  points. 

What  is  true  of  the  portion  of  the  annual  product  which  repre¬ 
sents  surplus-value  in  the  form  of  commodities,  is  also  true 
of  the  other  portion  of  it.  A  certain  sum  of  money  is  required 
for  its  circulation.  This  sum  of  money  belongs  to  the  capitalist 
class  quite  as  much  as  the  annually  produced  quantity  of  com¬ 
modities  which  represents  surplus-value.  It  is  originally  thrown 
into  circulation  by  the  capitalist  class  itself.  It  is  constantly 
redistributed  among  its  members  by  means  of  the  circulation 
itself.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  the  circulation  of  coin  in  general, 
a  portion  of  this  sum  stagnates  at  ever  varying  points,  while 
another  portion  continually  circulates.  Whether  a  part  of  this 
accumulation  is  intentional,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  money- 
capital,  or  not,  does  not  alter  things. 

No  notice  has  been  taken  here  of  those  adventures  of  circula¬ 
tion  in  which  one  capitalist  grasps  a  portion  of  the  surplus- 
value,  or  even  of  the  capital,  of  another,  thereby  bringing  about 
one-sided  accumulation  and  centralisation  of  money-capital  as 
well  as  of  productive  capital.  For  instance  a  part  of  the  snatched 
surplus-value  accumulated  by  A  as  money-capital  may  be  a 
part  of  the  surplus-value  of  B  which  does  not  return  to  him. 


PART  III 


THE  REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION 
OF  THE  AGGREGATE  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


CHAPTER  XVIII84 

INTRODUCTION 

I.  THE  SUBJECT  INVESTIGATED 

The  direct  process  of  the  production  of  capital  is  its  labour 
and  self-expansion  process,  the  process  whose  result  is  the  com¬ 
modity-product  and  whose  compelling  motive  is  the  production 
of  surplus-value. 

The  process  of  reproduction  of  capital  comprises  this  direct 
process  of  production  as  well  as  the  two  phases  of  the  circula¬ 
tion  process  proper,  i.e.,  the  entire  circuit  which,  as  a  periodic 
process— a  process  which  constantly  repeats  itself  in  definite  pe¬ 
riods— constitutes  the  turnover  of  capital. 

Whether  we  study  the  circuit  in  the  form  of  M  or  that 

of  P  ...  P,  the  direct  process  of  production  P  itself  always  forms 
but  one  link  in  this  circuit.  In  the  one  form  it  appears  as  a  pro¬ 
moter  of  the  process  of  circulation;  in  the  other  the  process  of 
circulation  appears  as  its  promoter.  Its  continuous  renewal,  the 
continuous  re-appearance  of  capital  as  productive  capital,  is  in 
either  case  determined  by  its  transformations  in  the  process  of 
circulation.  On  the  other  hand  the  continuously  renewed  process 
of  production  is  the  condition  of  the  transformations  which  the 
capital  undergoes  ever  anew  in  the  sphere  of  circulation,  of  its 
alternate  appearance  as  money-capital  and  commodity-capital. 

Every  individual  capital  forms,  however,  but  an  individual¬ 
ised  fraction,  a  fraction  endowed  with  individual  life,  as  it 
were,  of  the  aggregate  social  capital,  just  as  every  individual 
capitalist  is  but  an  individual  element  of  the  capitalist  class. 
The  movement  of  the  social  capital  consists  of  the  totality  of 
the  movements  of  its  individualised  fractional  parts,  the  turn- 


84  From  Manuscript  II. — F.E. 


12* 


350 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


overs  of  the  individual  capitals.  Just  as  the  metamorphosis  of 
the  individual  commodity  is  a  link  in  the  series  of  metamor¬ 
phoses  of  the  commodity-world  —  the  circulation  of  commodities — 
so  the  metamorphosis  of  the  individual  capital,  its  turnover,  is 
a  link  in  the  circuit  described  by  social  capital. 

This  total  process  comprises  both  the  productive  consumption 
(the  direct  process  of  production)  together  with  the  conversions 
of  form  (materially  considered,  exchanges)  which  bring  it  about, 
and  the  individual  consumption  together  with  the  conversions 
of  form  or  exchanges  by  which  it  is  brought  about.  It  includes 
on  the  one  hand  the  conversion  of  variable  capital  into  labour- 
power,  and  therefore  the  incorporation  of  labour-power  in  the 
process  of  capitalist  production.  Here  the  labourer  acts  as  the 
seller  of  his  commodity,  labour-power,  and  the  capitalist  as 
its  buyer.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  sale  of  the  commodities 
embraces  also  their  purchase  by  the  working-class,  hence  their 
individual  consumption.  Here  the  working-class  appears  as  buy¬ 
er  and  the  capitalists  as  sellers  of  commodities  to  the  labourers. 

The  circulation  of  the  commodity-capital  includes  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  surplus-value,  hence  also  the  purchases  and  sales 
by  which  the  capitalists  effect  their  individual  consumption,  the 
consumption  of  surplus-value. 

The  circuit  of  the  individual  capitals  in  their  aggregate  as 
social  capital,  hence  considered  in  its  totality,  comprises  not 
only  the  circulation  of  capital  but  also  the  general  circulation 
of  commodities.  The  latter  can  originally  consist  of  only  two 
components:  1)  The  circuit  of  capital  proper  and  2)  the  circuit 
of  the  commodities  which  enter  into  individual  consumption, 
consequently  of  the  commodities  for  which  the  labourer  expends 
his  wages  and  the  capitalist  his  surplus-value  (or  a  part  of  it). 
At  any  rate,  the  circuit  of  capital  comprises  also  the  circulation 
of  the  surplus-value,  since  the  latter  is  a  part  of  the  commod¬ 
ity  capital,  and  likewise  the  conversion  of  the  variable  capital 
into  labour-power,  the  payment  of  wages.  But  the  expenditure 
of  this  surplus-value  and  wages  for  commodities  does  not  form 
a  link  in  the  circulation  of  capital,  although  at  least  the  expend¬ 
iture  of  wages  is  essential  for  this  circulation. 

In  Book  I  the  process  of  capitalist  production  was  analysed 
as  an  individual  act  as  well  as  a  process  of  reproduction:  the 
production  of  surplus-value  and  the  production  of  capital  it¬ 
self.  The  changes  of  form  and  substance  experienced  by  capi¬ 
tal  in  the  sphere  of  circulation  were  assumed  without  dwelling 
upon  them.  It  was  presupposed  that  on  the  one  hand  the  capi- 


INTRODUCTION 


357 


talist  sells  the  product  at  its  value  and  on  the  other  that  he  finds 
within  the  sphere  of  circulation  the  objective  means  of  production 
for  restarting  or  continuing  the  process.  The  only  act  within  the 
sphere  of  circulation  on  which  we  have  dwelt  was  the  purchase 
and  sale  of  labour-power  as  the  fundamental  condition  of  capi¬ 
talist  production. 

In  the  first  Part  of  this  Book  II,  the  various  forms  were  con¬ 
sidered  which  capital  assumes  in  its  circular  movement,  and 
the  various  forms  of  this  movement  itself.  The  circulation  time 
must  now  be  added  to  the  working  time  discussed  in  Book  I. 

In  the  second  Part,  the  circuit  was  studied  as  being  peri¬ 
odic,  i.e.,  as  a  turnover.  It  was  shown  on  the  one  hand  in  what 
manner  the  various  constituents  of  capital  (fixed  and  circulat¬ 
ing)  accomplish  the  circuit  of  forms  in  different  periods  of  time 
and  in  different  ways;  on  the  other  hand  the  circumstances  were 
examined  by  which  the  different  lengths  of  the  working  period 
and  circulation  period  are  conditioned.  The  influence  was  shown 
which  the  period  of  the  circuit  and  the  different  proportions 
of  its  component  parts  exert  upon  the  dimensions  of  the  pro¬ 
duction  process  itself  and  upon  the  annual  rate  of  surplus-value. 
Indeed,  while  it  was  the  successive  forms  continually  assumed 
and  discarded  by  capital  in  its  circuit  that  were  studied  in  Part  I, 
it  was  shown  in  Part  II  how  a  capital  of  a  given  magnitude  is 
simultaneously,  though  in  varying  proportions,  divided,  within 
this  flow  and  succession  of  forms,  into  different  forms:  productive 
capital,  money-capital,  and  commodity-capital,  so  that  they  not 
only  alternate  with  one  another,  but  different  portions  of  the  total 
capital-value  are  constantly  side  by  side  and  function  in  these 
different  states.  Especially  money-capital  came  forward  with 
distinctive  features  not  shown  in  Book  I.  Certain  laws  were 
found  according  to  which  diverse  large  components  of  a  given 
capital  must  be  continually  advanced  and  renewed — depending 
on  the  conditions  of  the  turnover— in  the  form  of  money-capital 
in  order  to  keep  a  productive  capital  of  a  given  size  constantly 
functioning. 

But  in  both  the  first  and  the  second  Parts  it  was  always  only 
a  question  of  some  individual  capital,  of  the  movement  of  some 
individualised  part  of  social  capital. 

However  the  circuits  of  the  individual  capitals  intertwine,  pre¬ 
suppose  and  necessitate  one  another,  and  form,  precisely  in  this 
interlacing,  the  movement  of  the  total  social  capital.  Just  as 
in  the  simple  circulation  of  commodities  the  total  metamor¬ 
phosis  of  a  commodity  appeared  as  a  link  in  the  series  of  meta- 


358 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


morphoses  of  the  world  of  commodities,  so  now  the  metamor¬ 
phosis  of  the  individual  capital  appears  as  a  link  in  the  series  of 
metamorphoses  of  the  social  capital.  But  while  simple  commodity 
circulation  by  no  means  necessarily  comprises  the  circulation  of 
capital — since  it  may  take  place  on  the  basis  of  non-capital¬ 
ist  production— the  circuit  of  the  aggregate  social  capital,  as 
was  noted,  comprises  also  the  commodity  circulation  lying  out¬ 
side  the  circuit  of  individual  capital,  i.e.,  the  circulation  of 
commodities  which  do  not  represent  capital. 

We  have  now  to  study  the  process  of  circulation  (which  in 
its  entirety  is  a  form  of  the  process  of  reproduction)  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  capitals  as  components  of  the  aggregate  social  capital,  that 
is  to  say,  the  process  of  circulation  of  this  aggregate  social  capital 

II.  THE  ROLE  OF  MONEY-CAPITAL 

[Although  the  following  belongs  in  a  later  section  of  this 
Part,  we  shall  analyse  it  immediately,  namely,  the  money-capital 
considered  as  a  constituent  part  of  the  aggregate  social  capital.  I 

In  the  study  of  the  turnover  of  the  individual  capital  money- 
capital  revealed  two  aspects. 

In  the  first  place  it  constitutes  the  form  in  which  every  in¬ 
dividual  capital  appears  upon  the  scene  and  opens  its  process  as 
capital.  It  therefore  appears  as  the  primus  motor,  lending  impe¬ 
tus  to  the  entire  process. 

In  the  second  place,  that  portion  of  the  advanced  capital- 
value  which  must  be  continually  advanced  and  renewed  in  the 
form  of  money  differs  in  its  ratio  to  the  productive  capital  which 
it  sets  in  motion,  i.e.,  in  its  ratio  to  the  continuous  scale  of 
production,  depending  on  the  particular  length  of  the  period 
of  turnover  and  the  particular  ratio  between  its  two  component 
parts — the  working  period  and  the  period  of  circulation.  But 
whatever  this  ratio  may  be,  the  portion  of  the  capital-value 
in  process  which  can  continually  function  as  productive  capital 
is  limited  in  any  event  by  that  portion  of  the  advanced  capital- 
value  which  must  always  exist  beside  the  productive  capital 
in  the  form  of  money.  It  is  here  merely  a  question  of  the  normal 
turnover,  an  abstract  average.  Additional  money-capital  required 
to  compensate  for  interruptions  of  the  circulation  is  excepted. 

As  to  the  first  point :  commodity  production  presupposes 
commodity  circulation,  and  commodity  circulation  presup¬ 
poses  the  expression  of  commodities  in  money,  the  circulation 
of  money;  the  splitting  of  a  commodity  into  commodity  and 


INTRODUCTION 


359 


money  is  a  law  of  the  expression  of  the  product  as  a  com¬ 
modity.  Similarly  the  capitalist  production  of  commodities— 
whether  considered  socially  or  individually — presupposes  capi¬ 
tal  in  the  form  of  money,  or  money-capital,  both  as  the  primus 
motor  of  every  incipient  business,  and  as  its  continual  motor. 
The  circulating  capital  especially  implies  that  the  money-capital 
acts  with  constant  repetition  at  short  intervals  as  a  motor.  The 
entire  advanced  capital-value,  that  is  to  say,  all  the  elements 
of  capital,  consisting  of  commodities,  labour-power,  instruments 
of  labour,  and  materials  of  production,  must  be  bought  over 
and  over  again  with  money.  What  is  true  here  of  the  individual 
capital  is  also  true  of  the  social  capital,  which  functions  only  in 
the  form  of  many  individual  capitals.  But  as  we  showed  in  Book  I, 
it  does  not  at  all  follow  from  this  that  capital's  field  of  opera¬ 
tion,  the  scale  of  production,  depends — even  on  a  capitalist 
basis — for  its  absolute  limits  on  the  amount  of  functioning 
money-capital. 

Incorporated  in  capital  are  elements  of  production  whose 
expansion  within  certain  limits  is  independent  of  the  magnitude 
of  the  advanced  money-capital.  Though  payment  of  labour-power 
be  the  same,  it  can  be  exploited  more  or  less  extensively  or 
intensively.  If  the  money-capital  is  increased  with  this  greater 
exploitation  (that  is,  if  wages  are  raised),  it  is  not  increased 
proportionately,  hence  not  at  all  pro  tanto. 

The  productively  exploited  nature-given  materials— the  soil, 
the  seas,  ores,  forests,  etc. — which  do  not  constitute  elements 
of  capital-value,  are  more  intensively  or  extensively  exploit¬ 
ed  with  a  greater  exertion  of  the  same  amount  of  labour-power, 
without  an  increased  advance  of  money-capital.  The  real  ele¬ 
ments  of  productive  capital  are  thus  multiplied  without  requir¬ 
ing  an  additional  money-capital.  But  so  far  as  such  an  addition 
becomes  necessary  for  additional  auxiliary  materials,  the  mon¬ 
ey-capital  in  which  the  capital-value  is  advanced  is  not  in¬ 
creased  proportionately  to  the  augmented  effectiveness  of  the 
productive  capital,  hence  is  pro  tanto  not  at  all  increased. 

The  same  instruments  of  labour,  and  thus  the  same  fixed 
capital,  can  be  used  more  effectively  by  an  extension  of  the  time 
they  are  daily  used  and  by  a  greater  intensity  of  employment, 
without  an  additional  outlay  of  money  for  fixed  capital.  There 
is,  in  that  case,  only  a  more  rapid  turnover  of  the  fixed  capital, 
but  then  the  elements  of  its  reproduction  are  supplied  more  rapidly. 

Apart  from  the  natural  substances,  it  is  possible  to  incorpo¬ 
rate  in  the  productive  process  natural  forces,  which  do  not  cost 


360 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


anything,  to  act  as  agents  with  more  or  less  heightened  effect. 
The  degree  of  their  effectiveness  depends  on  methods  and  scien¬ 
tific  developments  which  cost  the  capitalist  nothing. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  social  combination  of  labour-power 
in  the  process  of  production  and  of  the  accumulated  skill  of 
the  individual  labourers.  Carey  calculates  that  the  landowner 
never  receives  enough,  because  he  is  not  paid  for  all  the  capital 
or  labour  put  into  the  soil  since  time  immemorial  in  order  to 
give  it  its  present  productivity.  (Of  course,  no  mention  is  made 
of  the  productivity  of  which  the  soil  is  robbed.)  According 
to  that  each  individual  labourer  would  have  to  be  paid  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  work  which  it  cost  the  entire  human  race  to  evolve 
a  modern  mechanic  out  of  a  savage.  On  the  contrary  one  should 
think  that  if  all  the  unpaid  labour  put  into  the  soil  and 
converted  into  money  by  the  landowner  and  capitalist  is  to¬ 
talled  up,  all  the  capital  ever  invested  in  this  soil  has  been  paid 
back  over  and  over  again  with  usurious  interest,  so  that  socie¬ 
ty  has  long  ago  redeemed  landed  property  over  and  over  again. 

True  enough,  the  increase  in  the  productive  power  of  labour, 
so  far  as  it  does  not  imply  an  additional  investment  of  capital- 
value,  augments  in  the  first  instance  only  the  quantity  of  the  prod¬ 
uct,  not  its  value,  except  insofar  as  it  makes  it  possible  to  re¬ 
produce  more  constant  capital  with  the  same  labour  and  thus  to 
preserve  its  value.  But  it  forms  at  the  same  time  new  material 
for  capital,  hence  the  basis  of  increased  accumulation  of  capital. 

So  far  as  the  organisation  of  social  labour  itself,  and  thus 
the  increase  in  the  social  productive  power  of  labour,  requires 
large-scale  production  and  therefore  the  advance  of  large  quan¬ 
tities  of  money-capital  by  individual  capitalists,  we  have  shown 
in  Book  I*  that  this  is  accomplished  in  part  by  the  centralisation 
of  capitals  in  a  few  hands,  without  necessitating  an  absolute 
increase  in  the  magnitude  of  the  functioning  capital-values,  and 
consequently  also  in  the  magnitude  of  the  money-capital  in 
which  they  are  advanced.  The  magnitude  of  the  individual  capi¬ 
tals  can  increase  by  centralisation  in  the  hands  of  a  few  without 
a  growth  of  their  social  sum  total.  It  is  only  a  changed  distri¬ 
bution  of  the  individual  capitals. 

Finally,  we  have  shown  in  the  preceding  Part  that  a  shorten¬ 
ing  of  the  period  of  turnover  permits  of  setting  in  motion  either 
the  same  productive  capital  with  less  money-capital  or  more 
productive  capital  with  the  same  money-capital. 


*  English  edition:  Vol.  I,  pp.  624-28,  761-64.— Ed. 


INTRODUCTION 


861 


But  evidently  all  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question 
of  money-capital  itself.  It  shows  only  that  the  advanced  capital— 
a  given  sum  of  values  consisting  in  its  free  form,  in  its  value-form, 
of  a  certain  sum  of  money— includes,  after  its  conversion  into 
productive  capital,  productive  powers  whose  limits  are  not  set 
by  the  limits  of  its  value,  but  which  on  the  contrary  may  operate 
within  certain  bounds  with  differing  degrees  of  extensiveness  or 
intensiveness.  If  the  prices  of  the  elements  of  production — the 
means  of  production  and  labour-power— are  given,  the  magnitude 
of  the  money-capital  required  for  the  purchase  of  a  definite  quan¬ 
tity  of  these  elements  of  production  existing  as  commodities  is 
determined.  Or  the  magnitude  of  value  of  the  capital  to  be  ad¬ 
vanced  is  determined.  But  the  extent  to  which  this  capital  acts 
as  a  creator  of  values  and  products  is  elastic  and  variable. 

As  to  the  second  point:  it  is  self-evident  that  the  part  of  the 
social  labour  and  means  of  production  which  must  be  annually 
expended  for  the  production  or  purchase  of  money  in  order  to 
replace  worn-off  coin  is  pro  tanto  a  diminution  of  the  volume 
of  social  production.  But  as  for  the  money-value  which  functions 
partly  as  a  medium  of  circulation,  partly  as  a  hoard,  it  is  simply 
there,  acquired,  present  alongside  the  labour-power,  the  produced 
means  of  production,  and  the  natural  sources  of  wealth.  It  can¬ 
not  be  regarded  as  a  limit  set  to  these  things.  By  its  transforma¬ 
tion  into  elements  of  production,  by  its  exchange  with  other 
nations,  the  scale  of  production  might  be  extended.  This  pre¬ 
supposes,  however,  that  money  plays  its  role  of  world-money 
the  same  as  ever. 

To  set  the  productive  capital  in  motion  requires  more  or  less 
money-capital,  depending  on  the  length  of  the  period  of  turn¬ 
over.  We  have  also  seen  that  the  division  of  the  period  of  turnover 
into  working  time  and  circulation  time  requires  an  increase 
of  the  capital  latent  or  suspended  in  the  form  of  money. 

Inasmuch  as  the  period  of  turnover  is  determined  by  the  length 
of  the  working  period,  it  is  determined,  other  conditions  remain¬ 
ing  equal,  by  the  material  nature  of  the  process  of  production, 
hence  not  by  the  specific  social  character  of  this  process  of  pro¬ 
duction.  However,  on  the  basis  of  capitalist  production,  more 
extensive  operations  of  comparatively  long  duration  necessi¬ 
tate  large  advances  of  money-capital  for  a  rather  long  time. 
Production  in  such  spheres  depends  therefore  on  the  magnitude 
of  the  money-capital  which  the  individual  capitalist  has  at 
his  disposal.  This  barrier  is  broken  down  by  the  credit  system 
and  the  associations  connected  with  it,  e.g.,  the  stock  companies. 


362 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


Disturbances  in  the  money-market  therefore  put  such  establish¬ 
ments  out  of  business,  while  these  same  establishments,  in  their 
turn,  produce  disturbances  in  the  money-market. 

On  the  basis  of  socialised  production  the  scale  must  be  ascer¬ 
tained  on  which  those  operations — which  withdraw  labour-power 
and  means  of  production  for  a  long  time  without  supplying  any 
product  as  a  useful  effect  in  the  interim — can  be  carried  on  with¬ 
out  injuring  branches  of  production  which  not  only  withdraw 
labour-power  and  means  of  production  continually,  or  several 
times  a  year,  but  also  supply  means  of  subsistence  and  of  pro¬ 
duction.  Under  socialised  as  well  as  capitalist  production,  the 
labourers  in  branches  of  business  with  shorter  working  periods 
will  as  before  withdraw  products  only  for  a  short  time  without 
giving  any  products  in  return;  while  branches  of  business  with 
long  working  periods  continually  withdraw  products  for  a  long¬ 
er  time  before  they  return  anything.  This  circumstance,  then, 
arises  from  the  material  character  of  the  particular  labour-proc¬ 
ess,  not  from  its  social  form.  In  the  case  of  socialised  production 
the  money-capital  is  eliminated.  Society  distributes  labour- 
power  and  means  of  production  to  the  different  branches  of  pro¬ 
duction.  The  producers  may,  for  all  it  matters,  receive  paper 
vouchers  entitling  them  to  withdraw  from  the  social  supplies  of 
consumer  goods  a  quantity  corresponding  to  their  labour-time. 
These  vouchers  are  not  money.  They  do  not  circulate. 

We  see  that  inasmuch  as  the  need  for  money-capital  origi¬ 
nates  in  the  length  of  the  working  period,  it  is  conditioned  by 
two  things:  First,  that  money  in  general  is  the  form  in  which 
every  individual  capital  (apart  from  credit)  must  make  its  appear¬ 
ance  in  order  to  transform  itself  into  productive  capital;  this 
follows  from  the  nature  of  capitalist  production  and  of  commodity- 
production  in  general.  Second,  the  magnitude  of  the  required 
money  advance  is  due  to  the  circumstance  that  labour-power 
and  means  of  production  are  continually  withdrawn  from  society 
for  a  comparatively  long  time  without  any  return  to  it,  during 
that  period,  of  products  convertible  into  money.  The  first  con¬ 
dition,  that  the  capital  to  be  advanced  must  be  advanced  in 
the  form  of  money,  is  not  eliminated  by  the  form  of  this  money 
itself,  whether  it  is  metal-money,  credit-money,  token-money, 
etc.  The  second  condition  is  in  no  way  affected  by  what  money- 
medium  or  in  what  form  of  production  labour,  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence,  and  means  of  production  are  withdrawn  without  the  return 
of  some  equivalent  to  the  circulation. 


CHAPTER  XIX3‘ 

FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


I.  THE  PHYSIOCRATS 

Quesnay’s  Tableau  Economique  shows  in  a  few  broad  outlines 
how  the  annual  result  of  the  national  production,  representing 
a  definite  value,  is  distributed  by  means  of  the  circulation  in 
such  a  way  that,  other  things  being  equal,  simple  reproduction, 
i.e.,  reproduction  on  the  same  scale,  can  take  place.  The  starting- 
point  of  the  period  of  production  is  properly  the  preceding  year’s 
harvest.  The  innumerable  individual  acts  of  circulation  are  at 
once  brought  together  in  their  characteristic  social  mass  move¬ 
ment— the  circulation  between  great  functionally  determined 
economic  classes  of  society.  We  are  here  interested  in  the  follow¬ 
ing:  A  portion  of  the  total  product — being,  like  every  other 
portion  of  it,  a  use-object,  it  is  a  new  result  of  last  year’s  labour— 
is  at  the  same  time  only  the  depository  of  old  capital-value 
re-appearing  in  the  same  bodily  form.  It  does  not  circulate  but 
remains  in  the  hands  of  its  producers,  the  class  of  farmers,  in 
order  to  resume  there  its  service  as  capital.  In  this  portion  of 
the  year’s  product,  the  constant  capital,  Quesnay  includes  im¬ 
pertinent  elements,  but  he  strikes  upon  the  main  thing,  thanks 
to  the  limitations  of  his  horizon,  within  which  agriculture  is  the 
only  sphere  of  investment  of  human  labour  producing  surplus- 
value,  hence  the  only  really  productive  one  from  the  capitalist 
point  of  view.  The  economic  process  of  reproduction,  whatever 
may  be  its  specific  social  character,  always  becomes  inter¬ 
twined  in  this  sphere  (agriculture)  with  a  natural  process  of  repro¬ 
duction.  The  obvious  conditions  of  the  latter  throw  light  on  those 
of  the  former,  and  keep  off  a  confusion  of  thought  which  is  called 
forth  by  the  mirage  of  circulation. 


3s  Beginning  of  Manuscript  VIII. — F.  E. 


864 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


The  label  of  a  system  differs  from  that  of  other  articles,  among 
other  things,  by  the  fact  that  it  cheats  not  only  the  buyer  but 
often  also  the  seller.  Quesnay  himself  and  his  immediate  disci¬ 
ples  believed  in  their  feudal  shop-sign.  So  do  our  grammarians 
even  this  day  and  hour.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  system  of  the 
physiocrats  is  the  first  systematic  conception  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction.  The  representative  of  industrial  capital— the  class  of 
tenants — directs  the  entire  economic  movement.  Agriculture  is 
carried  on  capitalistically,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  the  enterprise  of 
a  capitalist  farmer  on  a  large  scale;  the  direct  cultivator  of  the 
soil  is  the  wage-labourer.  Production  creates  not  only  articles  of 
use  but  also  their  value;  its  compelling  motive  is  the  procurement 
of  surplus-value,  whose  birth-place  is  the  sphere  of  production, 
not  of  circulation.  Among  the  three  classes  which  figure  as  the 
vehicles  of  the  social  process  of  reproduction  brought  about  by 
the  circulation,  the  immediate  exploiter  of  “productive”  labour, 
the  producer  of  surplus-value,*  the  capitalist  farmer,  is  distin¬ 
guished  from  those  who  merely  appropriate  the  surplus-value. 

The  capitalist  character  of  the  physiocratic  system  excited 
opposition  even  during  its  florescence:  on  the  one  side  it  was 
challenged  by  Linguet  and  Mably,  on  the  other  by  the  champions 
of  the  small  freeholders. 


Adam  Smith’s  retrogression36  in  the  analysis  of  the  process 
of  reproduction  is  so  much  the  more  remarkable  because  he  not 
only  elaborates  upon  Quesnay ’s  correct  analyses,  generalising 
his  “ avarices  primitives ”  and  "avarices  annuelles ”  for  instance  and 
calling  them  respectively  “fixed”  and  “circulating”  capital,37 
but  even  relapses  in  spots  entirely  into  physiocratic  errors.  For 
instance  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  the  farmer  produces  more 


*  Marx  analyses  Quesnay’s  Tableau  Economique  in  greater  detail  in  his 
Theories  of  Surplus-Value  (see  English  edition:  Karl  Marx,  Theories  of  Sur¬ 
plus-Value  [Volume  IV  of  Capital],  Part  I,  Moscow,  1963,  pp.  299  333  and 
367-69). — Ed. 

30  Kapital,  Band  I,  2.  Ausgabe,  S.  612,  Note  32.  [Eng.  ed.,  Moscow, 
1954,  p.  591,  Note  1.  ] 

37  Some  physiocrats  had  paved  the  way  for  him  even  here,  especially 
Turgot.  The  latter  uses  the  term  capital  for  avarices  more  frequently  than 
Quesnay  and  the  other  physiocrats  and  identifies  still  more  the  arances, 
or  capitaux,  of  the  manufacturers  with  those  of  the  farmers.  For  instance: 
“Like  these  (the  entrepreneurs-manufacturers),  they  ( les  fermiers,  i.e.,  the 
capitalist  farmers)  must  receive  in  addition  to  returning  capitals,  etc.’1 
(Turgot,  Oeuvres,  Daire edition,  Paris,  1844,  Vol.  1,  p.  40.) 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


365 


value  than  any  other  sort  of  capitalist,  he  says:  “No  equal  capi¬ 
tal  puts  into  motion  a  greater  quantity  of  productive  labour 
than  that  of  the  farmer.  Not  only  his  labouring  servants,  but  his 
labouring  cattle  are  productive  labourers.”  (Fine  compliment 
for  the  labouring  servants!)  “In  agriculture  too  nature  labours 
along  with  man;  and  though  her  labour  costs  no  expense,  its  prod¬ 
uce  has  its  value,  as  well  as  that  of  the  most  expensive  workmen. 
The  most  important  operations  of  agriculture  seem  intended  not 
so  much  to  increase,  though  they  do  that  too,  as  to  direct  the 
fertility  of  nature  towards  the  production  of  the  plants  most 
profitable  to  man.  A  field  overgrown  with  briars  and  brambles 
may  frequently  produce  as  great  a  quantity  of  vegetables  as  the 
best  cultivated  vineyard  or  corn  field.  Planting  and  tillage  fre¬ 
quently  regulate  more  than  they  animate  the  active  fertility  of 
nature;  and  after  all  their  labour,  a  great  part  of  the  work  always 
remains  to  be  done  by  her.  The  labourers  and  labouring  cattle 
(sic!),  therefore,  employed  in  agriculture,  not  only  occasion, 
like  the  workmen  in  manufactures,  the  reproduction  of  a  value 
equal  to  their  own  consumption,  or  to  the  capital  which  employs 
them,  together  with  its  owners’  profits;  but  of  a  much  greater 
value.  Over  and  above  the  capital  of  the  farmer  and  all  its  profits, 
they  regularly  occasion  the  reproduction  of  the  rent  of  the  land¬ 
lord.  This  rent  may  be  considered  as  the  produce  of  those  powers 
of  nature  the  use  of  which  the  landlord  lends  to  the  farmer.  It  is 
greater  or  smaller  according  to  the  supposed  extent  of  those  pow¬ 
ers,  or,  in  other  words,  according  to  the  supposed  natural  or 
improved  fertility  of  the  land.  It  is  the  work  of  nature  which 
remains  after  deducting  or  compensating  everything  which  can  be 
regarded  as  the  work  of  man.  It  is  seldom  less  than  a  fourth,  and 
frequently  more  than  a  third  of  the  whole  produce.  No  equal 
quantity  of  productive  labour  employed  in  manufactures  can  ever 
occasion  so  great  a  reproduction.  In  them  nature  does  nothing; 
man  does  all;  and  the  reproduction  must  always  be  in  proportion 
to  the  strength  of  the  agents  that  occasion  it.  The  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  agriculture,  therefore,  not  only  puts  into  motion  a 
greater  quantity  of  productive  labour  than  any  equal  capital 
employed  in  manufactures,  but  in  proportion  too  to  the  quantity 
of  productive  labour  which  it  employs,  it  adds  a  much  greater 
value  to  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country, 
to  the  real  wealth  and  revenue  of  its  inhabitants.”  (Book  II, 
Ch.  5,  p.  242.) 

Adam  Smith  says  in  Book  II,  Ch.  1:  “The  whole  value  of 
the  seed,  too,  is  properly  a  fixed  capital.  ”  Here,  then,  capital 


366 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


equals  capital-value;  it  exists  in  a  “fixed”  form.  “Though  it  (the 
seed)  goes  backwards  and  forwards  between  the  ground  and  the 
granary,  it  never  changes  masters,  and  therefore  does  not  prop¬ 
erly  circulate.  The  farmer  makes  his  profit,  not  by  its  sale,  but 
by  its  increase.  ”  (P.  186.)  The  absurdity  of  the  thing  lies  here 
in  the  fact  that  Smith  does  not,  like  Quesnay  before  him,  see 
the  re-appearance  of  the  value  of  constant  capital  in  a  renewed 
form,  and  hence  fails  to  see  an  important  element  of  the  process 
of  reproduction,  but  merely  offers  one  more  illustration,  and 
a  wrong  one  at  that,  of  his  distinction  between  circulating  and 
fixed  capital.  In  Smith’s  translation  of  “ avarices  primitives ” 
and  “avarices  annuelles ”  as  “fixed  capital”  and  “circulating 
capital,”  the  progress  consists  in  the  term  “capital,”  the  concept 
of  which  is  generalised,  and  becomes  independent  of  the  special 
consideration  for  the  “agricultural”  sphere  of  application  of  the 
physiocrats;  the  retrogression  consists  in  the  fact  that  “fixed" 
and  “circulating”  are  regarded  as  the  over-riding  distinction, 
and  are  so  maintained. 


II.  ADAM  SMITH 

1.  Smith's  General  Points  of  View 

Adam  Smith  says  in  Book  I,  Ch.  6,  page  42:  “In  every  society 
the  price  of  every  commodity  finally  resolves  itself  into  some 
one  or  other,  or  all  of  those  three  parts  (wages,  profit,  rent); 
and  in  every  improved  society,  all  the  three  enter  more  or  less, 
as  component  parts,  into  the  price  of  the  far  greater  part  of  com¬ 
modities.  ”8S  Or,  as  he  continues,  page  63:  “Wages,  profit,  and 
rent,  are  the  three  original  sources  of  all  revenue  as  well  as  of 
all  exchangeable  value."  Below  we  shall  discuss  in  greater  detail 
this  doctrine  of  Adam  Smith  concerning  “the  component  parts 
of  the  price  of  commodities,”  or  of  “all  exchangeable  value.” 


**  In  order  that  the  reader  .may  not  misconstrue  the  meaning  of  the  phrase 
“the  price  of  the  far  greater  part  of  commodities,  ”  the  following  shows  how 
Adam  Smith  himself  explains  this  term.  For  instance,  no  rent  enters  into 
the  price  of  sea  fish,  only  wages  and  profit,  only  wages  enter  into  the  price 
of  Scotch  pebbles.  He  says:  “In  some  parts  of  Scotland  a  few  poor  people 
make  a  trade  of  gathering,  along  the  sea-shore,  those  little  variegated  stones 
commonly  known  by  the  name  of  Scotch  pebbles.  The  price  which  is  paid 
to  them  by  the  stone-cutter  is  altogether  the  wages  of  their  labour;  neither 
rent  nor  profit  makes  any  part  of  it.” 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


367 


He  says  furthermore:  “Since  this  is  the  case,  it  has  been  ob¬ 
served,  with  regard  to  every  particular  commodity,  taken  sepa¬ 
rately;  it  must  be  so  with  regard  to  all  the  commodities  which 
compose  the  whole  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  every 
country,  taken  complexly.  The  whole  price  or  exchangeable  value 
of  that  annual  produce,  must  resolve  itself  into  the  same  three 
parts,  and  be  parcelled  out  among  the  different  inhabitants  of 
the  country,  either  as  the  wages  of  their  labour,  the  profits  of 
their  stock,  or  the  rent  of  their  land.  (Book  II,  Ch.  2,  p.  190.) 

After  Adam  Smith  has  thus  resolved  the  price  of  all  commodi¬ 
ties  individually,  as  well  as  “the  whole  price  or  exchangeable 
value  ...  of  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  every 
country,”  into  wages,  profit  and  rent,  the  three  sources  of  revenue 
for  wage-labourers,  capitalists,  and  landowners,  he  must  needs 
smuggle  in  a  fourth  element  by  a  circuitous  route,  namely  the 
element  of  capital.  This  is  accomplished  by  drawing  a  distinction 
between  gross  and  net  revenue:  “The  gross  revenue  of  all  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  a  great  country  comprehends  the  whole  annual 
produce  of  their  land  and  labour;  the  neat  revenue,  what  remains 
free  to  them  after  deducting  the  expense  of  maintaining-,  first, 
their  fixed;  and  secondly,  their  circulating  capital;  or  what, 
without  encroaching  upon  their  capital,  they  can  place  in  their 
stock  reserved  for  immediate  consumption,  or  spend  upon  their 
subsistence,  conveniences,  and  amusements.  Their  real  wealth 
too  is  in  proportion,  not  .to  their  gross,  but  to  their  neat  revenue.  ” 
(Ibid.,  p.  190.) 

On  this  we  comment  as  follows: 

1)  Adam  Smith  expressly  deals  here  only  with  simple  reproduc¬ 
tion,  not  reproduction  on  an  extended  scale,  or  accumulation. 
He  speaks  only  of  expenses  for  “maintaining”  the  capital  in 
operation.  The  “neat”  income  is  equal  to  that  portion  of  the 
annual  product,  whether  of  society  or  of  the  individual  capital¬ 
ist,  which  can  pass  into  the  “fund  for  consumption,”  but  the  size 
of  this  fund  must  not  “encroach  upon  capital”  in  operation.  One 
portion  of  the  value  of  both  the  individual  and  the  social  product, 
then,  is  resolved  neither  into  wages  nor  into  profit  nor  into  rent, 
but  into  capital. 

2)  Adam  Smith  flees  from  his  own  theory  by  means  of  a  play 
upon  words,  the  distinction  between  “gross  and  neat  revenue.” 
The  individual  capitalist  as  well  as  the  entire  capitalist  class, 
or  the  so-called  nation,  receive  in  place  of  the  capital  consumed 
in  production  a  commodity-product  whose  value — it  can  be  repre¬ 
sented  by  the  proportional  parts  of  this  product— replaces  on 


368 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


the  one  hand  the  expended  capital-value  and  thus  forms  an 
income,  or  still  more  literally,  revenue  (revenue,  pp.  of  revenir — 
to  come  back),  but,  nota  bene,  a  revenue  upon  capital,  or  income 
upon  capital;  on  the  other  hand  components  of  value  which  are 
“parcelled  out  among  the  different  inhabitants  of  the  country, 
either  as  the  wages  of  their  labour,  the  profits  of  their  stock,  or 
the  rent  of  their  land”  a  thing  commonly  called  income.  Hence 
the  value  of  the  entire  product  constitutes  somebody’s  income 
— either  of  the  individual  capitalist  or  of  the  whole  country, 
but  it  is  on  the  one  hand  an  income  upon  capital,  and  on  the  other 
a  “revenue”  different  from  the  latter.  Consequently,  the  thing 
which  is  eliminated  in  the  analysis  of  the  value  of  the  commodity 
into  its  component  parts  is  brought  back  through  a  side  door— 
the  ambiguity  of  the  word  “revenue.”  But  only  such  value  con¬ 
stituents  of  the  product  can  be  “taken  in”  as  already  exist  in 
it.  If  the  capital  is  to  come  in  as  revenue,  capital  must  first  have 
been  expended. 

Adam  Smith  says  furthermore:  “The  lowest  ordinary  rate  of 
profit  must  always  be  something  more  than  what  is  sufficient 
to  compensate  the  occasional  losses  to  which  every  employment 
of  stock  is  exposed.  It  is  this  surplus  only  which  is  neat  or  clear 
profit.  ”  (What  capitalist  understands  by  profit,  necessary  expend¬ 
iture  of  capital?  1  “What  is  called  gross  profit  comprehends 
frequently,  not  only  this  surplus,  but  what  is  retained  for  com¬ 
pensating  such  extraordinary  losses.”  (Book  I,  Ch.  9,  p.  72.) 
This  means  nothing  else  than  that  a  part  of  the  surplus-value, 
considered  as  a  part  of  the  gross  profit,  must  form  an  insurance- 
fund  for  the  production.  This  insurance-fund  is  created  by  a 
portion  of  the  surplus-labour,  which  to  that  extent  produces 
capital  directly,  that  is  to  say,  the  fund  intended  for  reproduction. 
As  regards  the  expense  for  “maintaining”  the  fixed  capital,  etc. 
(see  the  above  quotations),  the  replacement  of  the  consumed 
fixed  capital  by  a  new  one  is  not  a  new  outlay  of  capital,  but 
only  a  renewal  of  the  old  capital-value  in  new  form.  And  as  far 
as  the  repair  of  the  fixed  capital  is  concerned,  which  Adam  Smith 
counts  likewise  among  the  costs  of  maintenance,  this  expense 
goes  in  with  the  price  of  the  capital  advanced.  The  fact  that  the 
capitalist,  instead  of  having  to  invest  this  all  at  one  time  invests 
it  gradually,  as  required,  during  the  functioning  of  the  capital, 
and  can  invest  it  out  of  profits  already  pocketed,  does  not  change 
the  source  of  this  profit.  The  value  constituent  of  which  it  consists 
proves  only  that  the  labourer  delivers  surplus-labour  for  the  in¬ 
surance-fund  as  well  as  for  the  repair  fund. 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


369 


Adam  Smith  then  tells  us  that  one  should  exclude  from  the 
net  revenue,  i.e.,  from  the  revenue  in  its  specific  meaning,  the 
entire  fixed  capital,  and  also  the  entire  portion  of  the  circulating 
capital  which  is  required  for  the  maintenance  and  repair  of  the 
fixed  capital,  and  for  its  renewal,  in  fact  all  capital  not  in  a  bodily 
form  intended  for  the  consumption-fund. 

“The  whole  expense  of  maintaining  the  fixed  capital,  must 
evidently  be  excluded  from  the  neat  revenue  of  the  society. 
Neither  the  materials  necessary  for  supporting  their  useful  ma¬ 
chines  and  instruments  of  trade  ...  nor  the  produce  of  the  labour 
necessary  for  fashioning  those  materials  into  the  proper  form, 
can  ever  make  any  part  of  it.  The  price  of  that  labour  may  indeed 
make  a  part  of  it;  as  the  workmen  so  employed  may  place  the 
whole  value  of  their  wages  in  their  stock  reserved  for  immedi¬ 
ate  consumption.  But  in  other  sorts  of  labour,  both  the  price 
l i . e. ,  the  wages  paid  for  this  labdur]  and  the  produce  [in 
which  this  labour  is  incorporated]  go  to  this  stock,  the  price 
to  that  of  the  workmen,  the  produce  to  that  of  other  people, 
whose  subsistence,  conveniences,  and  amusements,  are 
augmented  by  the  labour  of  those  workmen.”  (Book  II,  Ch.  2, 
pp.  190,  191.) 

Adam  Smith  comes  here  upon  a  very  important  distinction 
between  the  labourers  employed  in  the  production  of  means  of 
production  and  those  employed  in  the  immediate  production  of 
articles  of  consumption.  The  value  of  the  commodities  produced 
by  the  first-named  contains  a  constituent  part  which  is  equal 
to  the  sum  of  the  wages,  i.e.,  equal  to  the  value  of  the  part  of 
capital  invested  in  the  purchase  of  labour-power.  This  part  of 
value  exists  bodily  as  a  certain  quota  of  th»  means  of  production 
produced  by  the  labourers.  The  money  received  by  them  as  wages 
is  their  revenue,  but  their  labour  has  not  produced  any  goods 
which  are  consumable,  either  for  themselves  or  for  others.  Hence 
these  products  are  not  an  element  of  that  part  of  the  annual 
product  which  is  intended  to  form  a  social  consumption-fund, 
in  which  alone  a  “neat  revenue”  can  be  realised.  Adam  Smith 
forgets  to  add  here  that  the  same  thing  that  applies  to  wages  is 
also  true  of  that  constituent  of  the  value  of  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  which,  being  surplus-value,  forms  the  revenue  (first  and 
foremost)  of  the  industrial  capitalist  under  the  categories  of 
profit  and  rent.  These  value-components  likewise  exist  in  means 
of  production,  articles  which  cannot  be  consumed.  They  cannot 
raise  articles  of  consumption  produced  by  the  second  kind  of 
labourers  in  a  quantity  corresponding  to  their  price  until  they 


370 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


have  been  converted  into  money;  only  then  can  they  transfer 
those  articles  to  the  individual  consumption-fund  of  their  own¬ 
ers.  But  so  much  the  more  should  Adam  Smith  have  seen  that 
that  part  of  the  value  of  the  annually  begotten  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  which  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  means  of  production  func¬ 
tioning  within  this  sphere  of  production— the  means  of  production 
with  which  means  of  production  are  made— hence  a  portion  of 
value  equal  to  the  value  of  the  constant  capital  employed  here, 
cannot  possibly  be  a  value  constituent  forming  revenue,  not 
only  on  account  of  the  bodily  form  in  which  it  exists,  but  also 
on  account  of  its  functioning  as  capital. 

With  regard  to  the  second  kind  of  labourers — who  directly 
produce  articles  of  consumption— Adam  Smith’s  definitions 
are  not  quite  exact.  For  he  says  that  in  these  kinds  of  labour, 
both  the  price  of  labour  and  the  product  “go  to”  the  stock 
reserved  for  immediate  consumption,  “the  price”  (i.e.,  the  money 
received  in  wages)  “to  that  of  the  workmen,  the  produce  to  that 
of  other  people,  whose  subsistence,  conveniences  and  amuse¬ 
ments,  are  augmented  by  the  labour  of  those  workmen.”  But  the 
labourer  cannot  live  on  the  “price”  of  his  labour,  the  money  in 
which  his  wages  are  paid;  he  realises  this  money  by  buying  articles 
of  consumption  with  it.  These  may  in  part  consist  of  classes  of 
commodities  produced  by  himself.  On  the  other  hand  his  own 
product  may  be  such  as  goes  only  into  the  consumption  of  the 
exploiters  of  labour. 

After  Adam  Smith  has  thus  entirely  excluded  the  fixed  capital 
from  the  “net  revenue”  of  a  country,  he  continues: 

“But  though  the  whole  expense  of  maintaining  the  fixed  capi¬ 
tal  is  thus  necessarily  excluded  from  the  neat  revenue  of  the 
society,  it  is  not  the  same  case  with  that  of  maintaining  the 
circulating  capital.  Of  the  four  parts  of  which  this  latter  capital 
is  composed,  money,  provisions,  materials,  and  finished  work, 
the  three  last,  it  has  already  been  observed,  are  regularly  with¬ 
drawn  from  it,  and  placed  either  in  the  fixed  capital  of  the  society, 
or  in  their  stock  reserved  for  immediate  consumption.  Whatever 
portion  of  those  consumable  goods  is  not  employed  in  maintain¬ 
ing  the  former”  [the  fixed  capital]  “goes  all  to  the  latter”  [the 
fund  for  immediate  consumption],  “and  makes  a  part  of  the  neat 
revenue  of  the  society.  The  maintenance  of  those  three  parts  of 
the  circulating  capital,  therefore,  withdraws  no  portion  of  the 
annual  produce  from  the  neat  revenue  of  the  society,  besides 
what  is  necessary  for  maintaining  the  fixed  capital.  ”  (Book 
II,  Ch.  2,  p.  192.) 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


371 


It  is  sheer  tautology  to  say  that  that  portion  of  the  circulating 
capital  which  does  not  serve  for  the  production  of  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  goes  into  that  of  articles  of  consumption,  in  other  words, 
into  that  part  of  the  annual  product  which  is  intended  to  form 
society’s  consumption-fund.  However,  the  immediately  following 
passage  is  important: 

“The  circulating  capital  of  a  society  is  in  this  respect  different 
from  that  of  an  individual.  That  of  an  individual  is  totally  ex¬ 
cluded  from  making  any  part  of  his  neat  revenue,  which  must 
consist  altogether  in  his  profits.  But  though  the  circulating  capital 
of  every  individual  makes  a  part  of  that  of  the  society  to  which 
he  belongs,  it  is  not  upon  that  account  totally  excluded  from  mak¬ 
ing  a  part  likewise  of  their  neat  revenue.  Though  the  whole 
goods  in  a  merchant’s  shop  must  by  no  means  be  placed  in  his  own 
stock  reserved  for  immediate  consumption,  they  may  in  that  of 
other  people,  who,  from  a  revenue  derived  from  other  funds, 
may  regularly  replace  their  value  to  him,  together  with  its  profits, 
without  occasioning  any  diminution  either  of  his  capital  or  of 
theirs.  ”  (Ibid.) 

And  so  we  learn  here  that: 

1)  lust  as  the  fixed  capital,  and  the  circulating  capital  re¬ 
quired  for  its  reproduction  (he  forgets  the  function)  and  mainte¬ 
nance,  are  totally  excluded  from  the  net  revenue  of  every  individ¬ 
ual  capitalist,  which  can  consist  only  of  his  profit,  so  is  the  circu¬ 
lating  capital  employed  In  the  production  of  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion.  Hence  that  portion  of  his  commodity-product  which  replaces 
nis  capital  cannot  resolve  itself  into  constituents  of  value  which 
form  any  revenue  for  him. 

2)  The  circulating  capital  of  each  individual  capitalist  con¬ 
stitutes  a  part  of  society’s  circulating  capital  the  same  as  every 
individual  fixed  capital. 

3)  The  circulating  capital  of  society,  while  representing  only 
the  sum  of  the  individual  circulating  capitals,  has  a  character 
different  from  that  of  the  circulating  capital  of  every  individual 
capitalist.  The  latter  circulating  capital  can  never  form  a  part 
of  his  own  revenue',  however  a  portion  of  the  first-named  circulat¬ 
ing  capital  (namely  that  consisting  of  consumable  goods)  may 
at  the  same  time  form  a  portion  of  the  revenue  of  society  or,  as  he 
had  expressed  it  above,  it  must  not  necessarily  reduce  the  net 
revenue  of  society  by  a  portion  of  the  annual  product.  Indeed, 
that  which  Adam  Smith  here  calls  circulating  capital  consists 
of  the  annually  produced  commodity-capital,  which  is  thrown 
Into  circulation  annually  by  the  capitalists  producing  articles 


372 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


of  consumption.  This  entire  annual  commodity-product  of  theirs 
consists  of  consumable  goods  and  therefore  forms  the  fund  in 
which  the  net  revenues  of  society  (including  wages)  are  real¬ 
ised  or  expended.  Instead  of  choosing  for  his  illustration  the  goods 
in  a  merchant’s  shop,  Adam  Smith  should  have  selected  the 
masses  of  goods  stored  away  in  the  warehouses  of  the  industrial 
capitalists. 

Now  if  Adam  Smith  had  welded  together  the  snatches  of 
thought  which  forced  themselves  upon  him  at  first  in  the  study 
of  the  reproduction  of  that  which  he  calls  fixed,  and  now  of  that 
which  he  calls  circulating  capital,  he  would  have  arrived  at  the 
following  result: 

I.  The  annual  product  of  society  consists  of  two  departments; 
one  of  them  comprises  the  means  of  production,  the  other  the 
articles  of  consumption.  Each  must  be  treated  separately. 

II.  The  aggregate  value  of  that  part  of  the  annual  product 
which  consists  of  means  of  production  is  divided  as  follows:  One 
portion  of  the  value  represents  only  the  value  of  the  means  of 
production  consumed  in  the  fabrication  of  these  means  of  produc¬ 
tion;  it  is  but  capital-value  re-appearing  in  a  renewed  form; 
another  portion  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  capital  laid  out  in 
labour-power,  or  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  wages  paid  by  the  capi¬ 
talists  in  this  sphere  of  production.  Finally,  a  third  portion  of 
value  is  the  source  of  profits,  including  ground-rent,  of  the 
industrial  capitalists  in  this  category. 

The  first  constituent  part,  according  to  Adam  Smith  the  repro¬ 
duced  portion  of  the  fixed  capital  of  all  the  individual  capitals 
employed  ir  this  first  section,  is  “totally  excluded  from  making 
any  part  of  the  “neat  revenue,”  either  of  the  individual  capi¬ 
talist  or  of  society.  It  always  functions  as  capital,  never  as  reve¬ 
nue.  To  that  extent  the  “fixed  capital”  of  every  individual  capi¬ 
talist  is  in  no  way  different  from  the  fixed  capital  of  society.  But 
the  other  portions  of  value  of  the  annual  product  of  society  con¬ 
sisting  of  means  of  production— portions  of  value  which  therefore 
exist  in  aliquot  parts  of  this  aggregate  quantity  of  means  of  pro¬ 
duction —  form  indeed  simultaneously  revenues  for  all  agents 
engaged  in  this  production,  wages  for  the  labourers,  profits  and 
ground-rents  for  the  capitalists.  But  they  form  capital,  not  reve¬ 
nue,  for  society,  although  the  annual  product  of  society  consists 
only  of  the  sums  of  the  products  of  the  individual  capitalists 
who  belong  to  that  society.  By  nature  they  are  generally  fit  to 
function  only  as  means  of  production,  and  even  those  which,  if 
need  be,  might  be  able  to  function  as  articles  of  consumption  are 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


373 


intended  for  service  as  raw  or  auxiliary  materials  of  new  produc¬ 
tion.  But  they  serve  as  such  — hence  as  capital  — not  in  the  hands 
of  their  producers,  but  in  those  of  their  users,  namely: 

III.  The  capitalists  of  the  second  department,  the  direct  produc¬ 
ers  of  articles  of  consumption.  They  replace  for  these  capitalists 
the  capital  consumed  in  the  production  of  articles  of  consumption 
(so  far  as  this  capital  is  not  converted  into  labour-power,  and 
hence  is  not  the  sum  of  the  wages  of  the  labourers  of  this  second 
department),  while  this  consumed  capital,  which  now  exists  in  the 
form  of  articles  of  consumption  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist 
producing  them — socially  speaking  — in  its  turn  forms  the  consump¬ 
tion-fund  in  which  the  capitalists  and  labourers  of  the  first  depart¬ 
ment  realise  their  revenue. 

If  Adam  Smith  had  continued  his  analysis  to  this  point,  but 
little  would  have  been  lacking  for  the  solution  of  the  whole  prob¬ 
lem.  He  almost  hit  the  nail  on  the  head,  for  he  had  already 
observed  that  certain  value-parts  of  one  kind  (means  of  production) 
of  the  commodity-capitals  constituting  the  total  annual  product 
of  society  indeed  form  revenue  for  the  individual  labourers  and 
capitalists  engaged  in  their  production,  but  do  not  form  a  con¬ 
stituent  part  of  the  revenue  of  society;  while  a  value-part  of 
the  other  kind  (articles  of  consumption),  although  representing 
capital-value  for  its  individual  owners,  the  capitalists  engaged 
in  this  sphere  of  investment,  is  only  a  part  of  the  social 
revenue. 

But  this  much  is  evident  from  the  foregoing: 

First:  Although  the  social  capital  is  only  equal  to  the  sum  of  the 
individual  capitals  and  for  this  reason  the  annual  commodity- 
product  (or  commodity-capital)  of  society  is  equal  to  the  sum  of 
commodity-products  of  these  individual  capitals;  and  although 
therefore  the  analysis  of  the  value  of  the  commodities  into  its 
component  parts,  valid  for  every  individual  commodity-capital, 
must  also  be  valid  for  the  commodity-capital  of  all  society — and 
actually  proves  valid  in  the  end — the  form  of  appearance  which 
these  component  parts  assume  in  the  aggregate  social  process 
of  reproduction  is  different. 

Second:  Even  on  the  basis  of  simple  reproduction  there  takes 
place  not  merely  a  production  of  wages  (variable  capital)  and 
surplus-value,  but  direct  production  of  new  constant  capital-value, 
although  the  working-day  consists  of  only  two  parts,  one  in  which 
the  labourer  replaces  the  variable  capital,  in  fact  producing  an 
equivalent  for  the  purchase  of  his  labour-power,  and  another  in 
which  he  produces  surplus-value  (profit,  rent,  etc.). 


374 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


The  daily  labour  which  is  expended  in  the  reproduction  of 
means  of  production  — and  whose  value  is  composed  of  wages  and 
surplus-value— realises  itself  in  new  means  of  production  which 
replace  the  constant  part  of  capital  laid  out  in  the  production  of 
articles  of  consumption. 

The  main  difficulties,  the  greater  part  of  which  has  been  solved 
in  the  preceding  text,  are  not  encountered  in  studying  accumu¬ 
lation  but  simple  reproduction.  For  this  reason,  Adam  Smith 
(Book  II)  and  Quesnay  ( Tableau  Economique)  before  him  make 
simple  reproduction  their  starting-point,  whenever  it  is  a  question 
of  the  movement  of  the  annual  product  of  society  and  its  reproduc¬ 
tion  through  circulation 


2.  Adam  Smith  Resolves  Exchange-Value  into  u+s 

Adam  Smith's  dogma  that  the  price,  or  “exchangeable  value,” 
of  any  single  commodity— and  therefore  of  all  commodities  in 
the  aggregate  constituting  the  annual  product  of  society  (he 
rightly  assumes  capitalist  production  everywhere)  — is  made  up  of 
three  “component  parts,”  or  “resolves  itself  into”  wages,  profit, 
and  rent,  can  be  reduced  to  this:  that  the  commodity-value  is 
equal  to  v+s,  i.e.,  equal  to  the  value  of  the  advanced  variable 
capital  plus  the  surplus-value.  And  we  may  undertake  this  re¬ 
duction  of  profit  and  rent  to  a  common  unit  called  s  with  the 
express  permission  of  Adam  Smith,  as  shown  by  the  following 
quotations,  in  which  we  at  first  leave  aside  all  minor  points, 
i.e.,  any  apparent  or  real  deviation  from  the  dogma  that  commod¬ 
ity-value  consists  exclusively  of  those  elements  which  we  call 
v+s. 

In  manufacture:  “The  value  which  the  workmen  add  to  the  ma¬ 
terials  ...  resolves  itself  ...  into  two  parts,  of  which  the  one  pays 
their  wages,  the  other  the  profits  of  their  employer  upon  the  whole 
stock  of  materials  and  wages  which  he  advanced.  ”  (Book  I,  Ch.  6, 
p.  41.)  “Though  the  manufacturer  has  his  wages  advanced  to 
him  by  his  master,  he,  in  reality,  costs  him  no  expense,  the  value 
of  those  wages  being  generally  restored,  together  with  a  profit, 
in  the  improved  value  of  the  subject  upon  which  his  labour  is  be¬ 
stowed.”  (Book  II,  Ch.  3,  p.  221.)  That  portion  of  the  stock 
which  is  laid  out  “in  maintaining  productive  hands  ...  after 
having  served  in  the  function  of  a  capital  to  him  (the  employ¬ 
er)  ...  constitutes  a  revenue  to  them”  (the  labourers).  (Book  II, 
Ch.  3,  p.  223.) 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


375 


Adam  Smith  says  explicitly  in  the  chapter  just  quoted: 

“The  whole  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  every 
country  ...  naturally  divides  itself  into  two  parts.  One  of  them, 
and  frequently  the  largest,  is,  in  the  first  place,  destined  for 
replacing  a  capital,  or  for  renewing  the  provisions,  materials, 
and  finished  work,  which  had  been  withdrawn  from  a  capital; 
the  other  for  constituting  a  revenue  either  to  the  owner  of  this 
capital,  as  the  profit  of  his  stock ;  or  to  some  other  person,  as  the 
rent  of  his  land.  ”  (P.  222.)  Only  one  part  of  the  capital,  so  Adam 
Smith  just  informed  us,  forms  at  the  same  time  a  revenue  for 
somebody,  namely  that  which  is  invested  in  the  purchase  of 
productive  hands.  This  portion — the  variable  capital — first  “serves 
in  the  function  of  a  capital”  in  the  hands  of  its  employer  and 
for  him  and  then  it  “constitutes  a  revenue”  for  the  productive 
labourer  himself.  The  capitalist  transforms  a  portion  of  his  cap¬ 
ital-value  into  labour-power  and  precisely  thereby  into  vari¬ 
able  capital;  it  is  only  due  to  this  transformation  that  not  alone 
this  portion  of  capital  but  his  entire  capital  functions  as  indus¬ 
trial  capital.  The  labourer— the  seller  of  labour-power — receives 
its  value  in  the  form  of  wages.  In  his  hands  labour-power  is  but 
a  saleable  commodity,  a  commodity  by  the  sale  of  which  he 
lives,  which  therefore  is  the  sole  source  of  his  revenue;  labour- 
power  functions  as  a  variable  capital  only  in  the  hands  of  its 
buyer,  the  capitalist,  and  the  capitalist  advances  its  purchase 
price  only  apparently,  since  its  value  has  been  previously  sup¬ 
plied  to  him  by  the  labourer. 

After  Adam  Smith  has  thus  shown  that  the  value  of  a  product 
in  manufacture  is  equal  to  v+s  (s  standing  for  the  profit  of  the 
capitalist),  he  tells  us  that  in  agriculture  the  labourers  besides 
“the  reproduction  of  a  value  equal  to  their  own  consumption, 
or  to  the  [variable]  capital  which  employs  them,  together  with 
its  owners'  profits...” — furthermore,  “over  and  above  the  capital 
of  the  farmer  and  all  its  profits  regularly  occasion  the  repro¬ 
duction  of  the  rent  of  the  landlord."  (Book  II,  Ch.  5,  p.  243.) 
The  fact  that  the  rent  passes  into  the  hands  of  the  landlord  is 
wholly  immaterial  for  the  question  under  consideration.  Before 
it  can  pass  into  his  hands,  it  must  be  in  those  of  the  farmer,  i.e., 
of  the  industrial  capitalist.  It  must  form  a  component  part  of  the 
value  of  the  product  before  it  becomes  a  revenue  for  anyone. 
Rent  as  well  as  profit  are  therefore,  according  to  Adam  Smith 
himself,  but  component  parts  of  surplus-value  and  these  the  pro¬ 
ductive  labourer  reproduces  continually  together  with  his  own 
wages,  i.e.,  with  the  value  of  the  variable  capital.  Hence  rent 


376 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


and  profit  are  parts  of  the  surplus-value  s,  and  thus,  with  Adam 
Smith,  the  price  of  all  commodities  resolves  itself  into  v-fs. 

The  dogma  that  the  price  of  all  commodities  (hence  also  of  the 
annual  commodity-product)  resolves  itself  into  wages  plus  profit 
plus  ground-rent,  assumes  even  in  the  intermittent  esoteric  con¬ 
stituents  of  Smith’s  work  the  form  that  the  value  of  every  com¬ 
modity,  hence  also  that  of  society’s  annual  commodity-product, 
is  equal  to  v+s,  or  equal  to  the  capital-value  laid  out  in  labour 
power  and  continually  reproduced  by  the  labourers,  plus  the 
surplus-value  added  by  the  labourers  through  their  work. 

This  final  result  of  Adam  Smith  reveals  to  us  at  the  same  time 
— see  further  down— the  source  of  his  one-sided  analysis  of  the 
component  parts  into  which  the  value  of  a  commodity  resolves 
itself.  The  circumstance  that  they  are  at  the  same  time  different 
sources  of  revenue  for  different  classes  engaged  in  production  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  determination  of  the  magnitude  of  each 
of  these  component  parts  and  of  the  sum  of  their  values. 

All  kinds  of  quid  pro  quo's  are  jumbled  together  when  Adam 
Smith  says:  “Wages,  profit,  and  rent,  are  the  three  original  sources 
of  all  revenue  as  well  as  of  all  exchangeable  value.  All  other 
revenue  is  ultimately  derived  from  some  one  or  other  of  these.  ” 
(Book  I,  Ch.  6,  p.  48.) 

1)  All  members  of  society  not  directly  engaged  in  reproduc¬ 
tion,  with  or  without  labour,  can  obtain  their  share  of  the  annual 
commodity-product — in  other  words,  their  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion — primarily  only  out  of  the  hands  of  those  classes  to  which  the 
product  first  accrues— productive  labourers,  industrial  capitalists, 
and  landlords.  To  that  extent  their  revenues  are  materially  de¬ 
rived  from  wages  (of  the  productive  labourers),  profit,  and  rent, 
and  appear  therefore  as  derivative  vis-a-vis  those  primary  revenues. 
But  on  the  other  hand  the  recipients  of  these  revenues,  derived  in 
this  sense,  draw  them  by  virtue  of  their  social  functions  —as  a  king, 
priest,  professor,  prostitute,  soldier,  etc.,  and  they  may,  therefore, 
regard  these  functions  as  the  original  sources  of  their  revenue. 

2) — and  here  Adam  Smith’s  ridiculous  blunder  reaches  its 
climax.  After  starting  by  correctly  defining  the  component  parts 
of  the  value  of  the  commodities  and  the  sum  of  the  value-product 
incorporated  in  them,  and  then  demonstrating  how  these  compo¬ 
nent  parts  form  so  many  different  sources  of  revenue,3®  after  thus 


"  I  reproduce  this  sentence  verbatim  from  the  manuscript,  although 
it  seems  to  contradict,  in  its  present  context,  both  what  precedes  and  imme¬ 
diately  follows.  This  apparent  contradiction  is  resolved  further  down  in 
No.  4:  Capital  and  Revenue  in  Adam  Smith. — F  E. 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


377 


deriving  the  revenues  from  the  value,  he  proceeds  in  the  opposite 
direction  — and  this  remains  the  predominant  conception  with 
him  — and  turns  the  revenues  from  “component  parts”  into  “orig¬ 
inal  sources  of  all  exchangeable  value,”  thereby  throwing  the 
doors  wide  open  to  vulgar  economy.  (See  our  Roscher.  *) 

3.  The  Constant  Part  of  Capital 

Let  us  now  see  how  Adam  Smith  tries  to  spirit  the  constant 
part  of  the  capital-value  away  from  the  commodity-value. 

“In  the  price  of  corn,  for  example,  one  part  pays  the  rent  of  the 
landlord.”  The  origin  of  this  constituent  of  value  has  no  more 
to  do  with  the  circumstance  that  it  is  paid  to  the  landlord  and 
forms  a  revenue  for  him  in  the  shape  of  rent  than  the  origin  of  the 
other  constituents  of  value  has  to  do  with  the  fact  that  as  profit 
and  wages  they  form  sources  of  revenue. 

“Another  [portion  ]  pays  the  wages  or  maintenance  of  the  la¬ 
bourers”  (“and  labouring  cattle,”  he  adds]  “employed  in  produc¬ 
ing  it,  and  the  third  pays  the  profit  of  the  farmer.  These  three 
parts  seem”  [they  seem  indeed]  “either  immediately  or  ultimate¬ 
ly  to  make  up  the  whole  price  of  corn.”40  This  entire  price,  i.e., 
the  determination  of  its  magnitude,  is  absolutely  independent 
of  its  distribution  among  three  kinds  of  people.  “A  fourth  part, 
it  may  perhaps  be  thought,  is  necessary  for  replacing  the  stock 
of  the  farmer,  or  for  compensating  the  wear  and  tear  of  his  labour¬ 
ing  cattle,  and  other  instruments  of  husbandry.  But  it  must 
be  considered  that  the  price  of  any  instrument  of  husbandry,  such 
as  a  labouring  horse,  is  itself  made  up  of  the  same  three  parts: 
the  rent  of  the  land  upon  which  he  is  reared,’ the  labour  of  tending 
and  rearing  him,  and  the  profits  of  the  farmer  who  advances 
both  the  rent  of  this  land,  and  the  wages  of  this  labour.  Though 
the  price  of  the  corn,  therefore,  may  pay  the  price  as  well  as  the 
maintenance  of  the  horse,  the  whole  price  still  resolves  itself 
either  immediately  or  ultimately  into  the  same  three  parts  of 


•  Marx  has  in  mind  W.  Roscher's  System  der  Volkswirtschaft.  Band  I: 
Die  Grundlagen  der  Nationalokonomie.  Dritte,  vermehrte  und  verbesserte 
Auflage.  Stuttgart  und  Augsburg,  1858.— Ed. 

40  We  ignore  the  fact  that  Adam  Smith  was  here  particularly  unfortu¬ 
nate  in  the  choice  of  his  example.  The  value  of  the  com  resolves  itself  into 
wages,  profit,  and  rent  only  because  the  food  consumed  by  the  labouring 
cattle  is  depicted  as  wages  of  the  labouring  cattle,  and  the  labouring  cattle 
as  wage-labourers,  sa  that  the  wage-labourer  on  his  part  is  also  depicted 
as  labouring  cattle.  (Added  from  Manuscript  II. — F.  E.) 


378 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


rent,  labour”  (he  means  wages),  “and  profit.”  (Book  I,  Ch.  6, 
P-  42.) 

This  is  verbatim  all  that  Adam  Smith  has  to  say  in  support 
of  his  astonishing  doctrine.  His  proof  consists  simply  in  the  repe¬ 
tition  of  the  same  assertion.  He  admits,  for  instance,  that  the 
price  of  corn  does  not  only  consist  of  v+s,  but  also  of  the  price 
of  the  means  of  production  consumed  in  the  production  of  corn, 
hence  of  a  capital-value  not  invested  in  labour-power  by  the 
farmer.  But,  he  says,  the  prices  of  all  these  means  of  production 
resolve  themselves  into  v+s,  the  same  as  the  price  of  corn.  He 
forgets,  however,  to  add:  and,  moreover,  into  the  prices  of  the 
means  of  production  consumed  in  their  own  creation.  He  refers 
us  from  one  branch  of  production  to  another,  and  from  that  to 
a  third.  The  contention  that  the  entire  price  of  commodities 
resolves  itself  “immediately”  or  “ultimately”  into  v+s  would 
not  be  a  hollow  subterfuge  only  if  he  were  able  to  demonstrate 
that  the  commodities  whose  price  resolves  itself  immediately 
into  c  (price  of  consumed  means  of  production)+v+s,  are  ulti¬ 
mately  compensated  by  commodities  which  completely  replace 
those  “consumed  means  of  production,”  and  which  are  them¬ 
selves  produced  by  the  mere  outlay  of  variable  capital,  i.e., 
by  a  mere  investment  of  capital  in  labour-power.  The  price  of 
these  last  commodity-products  would  then  be  immediately  v+s. 
Consequently  the  price  of  the  former,  c+v+s,  where  c  stands 
for  the  constant  part  of  capital,  would  also  be  ultimately  resolv¬ 
able  into  v+s.  Adam  Smith  himself  did  not  believe  that  he 
had  furnished  such  a  proof  by  his  example  of  the  collectors  of 
Scotch  pebbles,  who,  according  to  him,  1)  do  not  generate  sur¬ 
plus-value  of  any  description,  but  produce  only  their  own  wages, 
and  2)  do  not  employ  any  means  of  production  (they  do,  however, 
employ  them,  such  as  baskets,  sacks,  and  other  containers  for 
carrying  the  pebbles). 

We  have  already  seen  above  that  Adam  Smith  himself  later 
on  overthrows  his  own  theory,  without  however  being  conscious 
of  his  contradictions.  But  their  source  is  to  be  found  precisely 
in  his  scientific  premises.  The  capital  converted  into  labour 
produces  a  greater  value  than  its  own.  How?  Says  Adam  Smith: 
by  the  labourers  imparting  during  the  process  of  production  to 
the  things  on  which  they  work  a  value  which  forms  not  only 
an  equivalent  for  their  own  purchase  price,  but  also  a  surplus- 
value  (profit  and  rent)  apportioned  not  to  them  but  to  their  em¬ 
ployers.  That  is  all  they  accomplish,  and  all  they  can  accomplish. 
And  what  is  true  of  the  industrial  labour  of  one  day  is  true  of 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


379 


the  labour  set  in  motion  by  the  entire  capitalist  class  during  one 
year.  Hence  the  aggregate  mass  of  the  annual  value  produced 
by  society  can  resolve  itself  only  into  v+s,  into  an  equivalent 
by  which  the  labourers  replace  the  capital-value  expended  for 
the  purchase  of  their  own  labour-power,  and  into  an  additional 
value  which  they  must  deliver  over  and  above  this  to  their  em¬ 
ployers.  But  these  two  elements  of  commodity-value  form  at 
the  same  time  sources  of  revenue  for  the  various  classes  engaged 
in  reproduction:  the  first  is  the  source  of  wages,  the  revenue  of 
the  labourers;  the  second  that  of  surplus-value,  a  portion  of  which 
is  retained  by  the  industrial  capitalist  in  the  form  of  profit,  while 
another  is  given  up  by  him  as  rent,  the  revenue  of  the  landlord. 
Where,  then,  should  another  portion  of  value  come  from,  when 
the  annual  value-product  contains  no  other  elements  than  v+s? 
We  are  proceeding  here  from  simple  reproduction.  Since  the  en¬ 
tire  quantity  of  annual  labour  resolves  itself  into  labour  needed 
for  the  reproduction  of  the  capital-value' laid  out  in  labour-power, 
and  into  labour  needed  for  the  creation  of  surplus-value,  where 
should  the  labour  for  the  production  of  a  capital-value  not  laid 
out  in  labour-power  come  from? 

The  case  is  as  follows: 

1)  Adam  Smith  determines  the  value  of  a  commodity  by  the 
amount  of  labour  which  the  wage-labourer  adds  to  the  subject 
of  labour.  He  calls  it  literally  “materials,”  since  he  is  dealing 
with  manufacture,  which  itself  is  working  up  products  of  labour. 
But  this  does  not  alter  the  matter.  The  value  which  the  labourer 
adds  to  a  thing  (and  this  “adds”  is  the  expression  of  Adam  Smith) 
is  entirely  independent  of  whether  or  not  this  object  to  which 
value  is  added  had  itself  any  value  before  this  addition.  The  la¬ 
bourer  therefore  produces  a  value  in  the  form  of  a  commodity. 
This,  according  to  Adam  Smith,  is  partly  an  equivalent  for  his 
wages,  and  this  part,  then,  is  determined  by  the  magnitude  of  value 
of  his  wages;  depending  on  that  magnitude  he  has  to  add  labour 
in  order  to  produce  or  reproduce  a  value  equal  to  that  of  his  wages. 
On  the  other  hand  the  labourer  adds  more  labour  over  and  above 
the  limit  so  drawn,  and  this  creates  surplus-value  for  the  capital¬ 
ist  employing  him.  Whether  this  surplus-value  remains  entirely 
in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist  or  parts  of  it  are  yielded  by  him  to 
third  persons,  does  not  in  the  least  alter  either  the  qualitative 
(that  it  is  at  all  surplus-value)  or  the  quantitative  (magnitude) 
determination  of  the  surplus-value  added  by  the  wage-labourer. 
It  is  value  the  same  as  any  other  portion  of  the  value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct,  but  it  differs  in  that  the  labourer  has  not  received  any 


380 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


equivalent  for  it,  nor  will  receive  any  later  on,  in  that,  on  the 
contrary,  this  value  is  appropriated  by  the  capitalist  without  any 
equivalent.  The  total  value  of  a  commodity  is  determined  by  the 
quantity  of  labour  expended  by  the  labourer  in  its  production; 
one  portion  of  this  total  value  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  it 
is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  wages,  i.e.,  an  equivalent  for  them. 
The  second  part,  the  surplus-value,  is,  therefore,  necessarily 
likewise  determined  as  equal  to  the  total  value  of  the  product 
minus  that  part  of  its  value  which  is  equivalent  to  the  wages; 
hence  equal  to  the  excess  of  the  value  produced  in  the  making 
of  the  commodity  over  that  part  of  the  value  contained  in  it  which 
is  an  equivalent  for  his  wages. 

2)  That  which  is  true  of  a  commodity  produced  in  some  individ¬ 
ual  industrial  establishment  by  any  individual  labourer  is  true 
of  the  annual  product  of  all  branches  of  business  as  a  whole.  That 
which  is  true  of  the  day’s  work  of  some  individual  productive 
labourer  is  true  of  the  year’s  work  set  in  motion  by  the  entire 
class  of  productive  labourers.  It  “fixes”  (Adam  Smith’s  expres¬ 
sion)  in  the  annual  product  a  total  value  determined  by  the 
quantity  of  the  annual  labour  expended,  and  this  total  value 
resolves  itself  into  one  portion  determined  by  that  part  of  the 
annual  labour  wherewith  the  working-class  creates  an  equivalent 
of  its  annual  wages,  in  fact,  these  wages  themselves;  and  into 
another  portion  determined  by  the  additional  annual  labour 
by  which  the  labourer  creates  surplus-value  for  the  capitalist 
class.  The  annual  value-product  contained  in  the  annual  product* 
consists  therefore  of  but  two  elements:  namely,  the  equivalent 
of  the  annual  wages  received  by  the  working-class,  and  the  sur¬ 
plus-value  annually  provided  for  the  capitalist  class.  Now,  the 
annual  wages  are  the  revenue  of  the  working-class,  and  the  annual 
quantity  of  surplus-value  the  revenue  of  the  capitalist  class; 
hence  both  of  them  represent  the  relative  shares  in  the  annual 
fund  for  consumption  (this  view  is  correct  when  describing  simple 
reproduction)  and  are  realised  in  it.  There  is,  then,  no  room  left 
anywhere  for  the  constant  capital-value,  for  the  reproduction 
of  the  capital  functioning  in  the  form  of  means  of  production. 
And  Adam  Smith  states  explicitly  in  the  introduction  to  his  work 
that  all  portions  of  the  value  of  commodities  which  serve  as 
revenue  coincide  with  the  annual  product  of  labour  intended 
for  the  social  fund  for  consumption:  “To  explain  in  what  has 
consisted  the  revenue  of  the  great  body  of  the  people,  or  what 
has  been  the  nature  of  those  funds,  which,  in  different  ages  and 
nations,  have  supplied  their  annual  consumption,  is  the  object 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


381 


of  these  first  Four  Books.”  (P.  12.)  And  in  the  very  first  sentence 
of  the  introduction  we  read:  “The  annual  labour  of  every  nation 
is  the  fund,  which  originally  supplies  it  with  all  the  necessaries 
and  conveniences  of  life  which  it  annually  consumes,  and  which 
consists  always  either  in  the  immediate  produce  of  that  labour, 
or  in  what  is  purchased  with  that  produce  from  other  nations.” 
(P.  11.) 

Now  Adam  Smith’s  first  mistake  consists  in  equating  the  value 
of  the  annual  product  to  the  newly  produced  annual  value.  The 
latter  is  only  the  product  of  labour  of  the  past  year,  the  former 
includes  besides  all  elements  of  value  consumed  in  the  making 
of  the  annual  product,  but  which  were  produced  in  the  preceding 
and  partly  even  earlier  years:  means  of  production  whose  value 
merely  re-appears — which,  as  far  as  their  value  is  concerned,  have 
been  neither  produced  nor  reproduced  by  the  labour  expended 
in  the  past  year.  By  this  confusion  Adam  Smith  spirits  away 
the  constant  portion  of  the  value  of  the  annual  product.  This 
confusion  rests  on  another  error  in  his  fundamental  conception: 
He  does  not  distinguish  the  two-fold  nature  of  labour  itself:  of 
labour  which  creates  value  by  expending  labour-power,  and 
of  labour  as  concrete,  useful  work,  which  creates  articles  of  use 
(use-values).  The  total  quantity  of  the  commodities  fabricated 
annually,  in  other  words,  the  total  annual  product  is  the  product 
of  the  useful  labour  active  during  the  past  year;  it  is  only  due  to 
the  fact  that  socially  employed  labour  was  spent  in  a  ramified 
system  of  useful  kinds  of  labour  that  all  these  commodities  exist; 
it  is  due  to  this  fact  alone  that  the  value  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  consumed  in  the  production  of  commodities  and  re¬ 
appearing  in  a  new  bodily  form  is  preserved  in  their  total  value. 
The  total  annual  product,  then,  is  the  result  of  the  useful  labour 
expended  during  the  year;  but  only  a  part  of  the  value  of  the 
annual  product  has  been  created  during  the  year;  this  portion 
is  the  annual  value-product,  in  which  the  quantity  of  labour  set 
In  motion  during  the  year  is  represented. 

Hence,  if  Adam  Smith  says  in  the  passage  just  cited:  “The 
annual  labour  of  every  nation  is  the  fund  which  originally  sup¬ 
plies  it  with  all  the  necessaries  and  conveniences  of  life  which 
it  annually  consumes,  etc.,”  he  takes  the  one-sided  standpoint 
of  solely  useful  labour,  which  has  indeed  given  all  these  means 
of  subsistence  their  consumable  form.  But  he  forgets  that  this 
was  impossible  without  the  assistance  of  instruments  and  sub¬ 
jects  of  labour  supplied  by  former  years,  and  that,  therefore, 
the  “annual  labour,”  while  it  created  value,  did  not  create  all 


382 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


the  value  of  the  products  fabricated  by  it;  that  the  value  newly 
produced  is  smaller  than  the  value  of  the  product. 

While  we  cannot  reproach  Adam  Smith  for  going  in  this  analy¬ 
sis  no  farther  than  all  his  successors  (although  a  step  in  the  right 
direction  could  already  be  discerned  among  the  physiocrats), 
he  subsequently  gets  lost  in  a  chaos  and  this  mainly  because  his 
“esoteric”  conception  of  the  value  of  commodities  in  general 
is  constantly  contravened  by  exoteric  conceptions,  which  on 
the  whole  prevail  with  him.  and  yet  his  scientific  instinct  per¬ 
mits  the  esoteric  standpoint  to  re-appear  from  time  to  time. 

4.  Capital  and  Revenue  in  Adam  Smith 

That  portion  of  the  value  of  every  commodity  (and  therefore 
also  of  the  annual  product)  which  is  but  an  equivalent  of  the  wages, 
is  equal  to  the  capital  advanced  by  the  capitalist  for  labour- 
power;  i.e.,  is  equal  to  the  variable  portion  of  the  total  capital 
advanced.  The  capitalist  recovers  this  portion  of  the  capital-value 
through  a  portion  of  the  newly  produced  value  of  the  commodi¬ 
ties  supplied  by  the  wage-labourers.  Whether  the  variable  cap¬ 
ital  is  advanced  in  the  sense  that  the  capitalist  pays  the  labour¬ 
er  in  money  for  his  share  in  a  product  which  is  not  yet  ready  for 
sale  or  which,  though  ready,  has  not  yet  been  sold  by  the  capi¬ 
talist,  or  whether  he  pays  him  with  money  already  obtained  by 
the  sale  of  commodities  previously  supplied  by  the  labourer,  or 
whether  he  has  drawn  this  money  in  advance  by  means  of  credit — 
in  all  these  cases  the  capitalist  expends  variable  capital,  which 
passes  into  the  hands  of  the  labourers  in  the  form  of  money,  and 
on  the  other  hand  he  possesses  the  equivalent  of  this  capital-value 
.in  that  portion  of  the  value  of  his  commodities  in  which  the  la¬ 
bourer  has  produced  anew  his  share  of  its  total  value,  in  other 
words,  in  which  he  has  produced  the  value  of  his  own  wages.  Instead 
of  giving  him  this  portion  of  the  value  in  the  bodily  form  of  his 
own  product,  the  capitalist  pays  it  to  him  in  money.  For  the  capi¬ 
talist  the  variable  portion  of  his  advanced  capital-value  now 
exists  in  the  form  of  commodities,  while  the  labourer  has  received 
the  equivalent  for  his  sold  labour-power  in  the  form  of  money. 

Now  while  that  portion  of  the  capital  advanced  by  the  capi¬ 
talist,  which  has  been  converted  by  the  purchase  of  labour-power 
into  variable  capital,  functions  in  the  process  of  production 
itself  as  operative  labour-power  and  by  the  expenditure  of  this 
power  is  produced  anew  as  a  new  value,  in  the  form  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  i.e.,  is  reproduced — hence  a  reproduction,  or  new  produc- 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


383 


tion,  of  advanced  capital-value — the  labourer  spends  the  value, 
or  price,  of  his  sold  labour-power  on  means  of  subsistence,  on 
means  for  the  reproduction  of  his  labour-power.  An  amount  of 
money  equal  to  the  variable  capital  forms  his  income,  hence  his 
revenue,  which  lasts  only  so  long  as  he  can  sell  his  labour-power 
to  the  capitalist. 

The  commodity  of  the  wage-labourer— his  labour-power— 
serves  as  a  commodity  only  to  the  extent  that  it  is  incorporated  in 
the  capital  of  the  capitalist,  acts  as  capital;  on  the  other  hand  the 
capital  expended  by  the  capitalist  as  money-capital  in  the  pur¬ 
chase  of  labour-power  functions  as  a  revenue  in  the  hands  of  the 
seller  of  labour-power,  the  wage-labourer. 

Various  processes  of  circulation  and  production  intermingle 
here,  which  Adam  Smith  does  not  distinguish. 

First :  Acts  pertaining  to  the  process  of  circulation.  The  labour¬ 
er  sells  his  commodity — labour-power- -to  the  capitalist;  the  mon¬ 
ey  with  which  the  capitalist  buys  it  is  from  his  point  of  view 
money  invested  for  the  production  of  surplus-value,  hence  money- 
capital;  it  is  not  spent  but  advanced.  (This  is  the  real  meaning  of 
“advance”— the  avance  of  the  physiocrats— no  matter  where  the 
capitalist  gets  the  money  Every  value  which  the  capitalist  pays 
out  for  the  purposes  of  the  productive  process  is  advanced  from 
his  point  of  view,  regardless  of  whether  this  takes  place  before 
or  post  festum ;  it  is  advanced  to  the  process  of  production  itself.) 
The  same  takes  place  here  as  in  every  other  sale  of  commodities: 
The  seller  gives  away  a  use-value  (in  this  case  his  labour-power) 
and  receives  its  value  (realises  its  price)  in  money;  the  buyer 
gives  away  his  money  and  receives  in  return  the  commodity 
itself — in  this  case  labour-power. 

Second:  In  the  process  of  production  the  purchased  labour- 
power  now  forms  a  part  of  the  functioning  capital,  and  the  labour¬ 
er  himself  serves  here  merely  as  a  special  bodily  form  of  this 
capital,  distinguished  from  its  elements  existing  in  the  bodily 
form  of  means  of  production.  During  the  process,  by  expending 
his  labour-power,  the  labourer  adds  value  to  the  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  which  he  converts  into  products  equal  to  the  value  of  his  la¬ 
bour-power  (exclusive  of  surplus-value);  he  therefore  reproduces 
for  the  capitalist  in  the  form  of  commodities  that  portion  of  his 
capital  which  has  been,  or  has  to  be,  advanced  by  him  for  wages, 
produces  for  him  an  equivalent  of  the  latter;  hence  he  reproduces 
for  the  capitalist  that  capital  which  the  latter  can  “advance” 
once  more  for  the  purchase  of  labour-power. 

Third:  In  the  sale  of  a  commodity  one  portion  of  its  selling 


384 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


price  replaces  the  variable  capital  advanced  by  the  capitalist, 
whereby  on  the  one  hand  he  is  enabled  anew  to  buy  labour-power, 
and  the  labourer  on  the  other  hand  to  sell  it  anew. 

In  all  purchases  and  sales  of  commodities — so  far  as  only  these 
transactions  are  under  discussion — it  is  quite  immaterial  what 
becomes  of  the  proceeds  the  seller  receives  for  his  commodities, 
and  what  becomes  of  the  bought  articles  of  use  in  the  hands  of 
the  buyer.  Hence,  so  far  as  the  njere  process  of  circulation  is  con¬ 
cerned,  it  is  quite  immaterial  that  the  labour-power  bought  by 
the  capitalist  reproduces  capital-value  for  him,  and  that  on  the 
other  hand  the  money  received  by  the  labourer  as  the  purchase- 
price  of  his  labour-power  constitutes  his  revenue.  The  magnitude 
of  value  of  the  labourer’s  article  of  commerce,  his  labour-pow¬ 
er,  is  not  affected  either  by  its  forming  “revenue”  for  him  or  by 
the  fact  that  the  use  of  this  article  of  commerce  by  the  buyer  re¬ 
produces  capital-value  for  this  buyer. 

Since  the  value  of  the  labour-power— i.e.,  the  adequate  selling 
price  of  this  commodity— is  determined  by  the  quantity  of  labour 
required  for  its  reproduction,  and  this  quantity  of  labour  itself 
is  here  determined  by  that  needed  for  the  production  of  the  neces¬ 
sary  means  of  subsistence  of  the  labourer,  hence  for  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  his  existence,  the  wages  become  the  revenue  on  which 
the  labourer  has  to  live. 

It  is  entirely  wrong,  when  Adam  Smith  says  (p.  223):  “ That 
portion  of  the  stock  which  is  laid  out  in  maintaining  productive 
hands  ...  after  having  served  in  the  function  of  a  capital  to  him 
(the  capitalist]  ...  constitutes  a  revenue  to  them”  [the  labourers]. 
The  money  with  which  the  capitalist  pays  for  the  labour-power 
purchased  by  him  “serves  in  the  function  of  a  capital  to  him,” 
since  he  thereby  incorporates  labour-power  in  the  material  con¬ 
stituents  of  his  capital  and  thus  enables  his  capital  to  function 
altogether  as  productive  capital.  We  must  make  this  distinc¬ 
tion:  The  labour-power  is  a  commodity,  not  capital,  in  the  hands 
of  the  labourer,  and  it  constitutes  for  him  a  revenue  so  long  as 
he  can  continuously  repeat  its  sale;  it  functions  as  capital  after 
its  sale,  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist,  during  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  itself.  That  which  here  serves  twice  is  labour-power:  as 
a  commodity  which  is  sold  at  its  value,  ih  the  hands  of  the  labour¬ 
er;  as  a  power-producing  value  and  use-value,  in  the  hands  of  the 
capitalist  who  has  bought  it.  But  the  labourer  does  not  receive 
the  money  from  the  capitalist  until  after  he  has  given  him  the 
use  of  his  labour-power,  after  it  has  already  been  realised  in  the 
value  of  the  product  of  labour.  The  capitalist  possesses  this  value 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


385 


before  he  pays  for  it.  Hence  it  is  not  the  money  which  functions 
twice:  first,  as  the  money-form  of  the  variable  capital,  and  then 
as  wages.  On  the  contrary  it  is  labour-power  which  has  functioned 
twice:  first,  as  a  commodity  in  the  sale  of  labour-power  (in  stip¬ 
ulating  the  amount  of  wages  to  be  paid,  money  acts  merely  as 
an  ideal  measure  of  value  and  need  not  even  be  in  the  hands  of 
the  capitalist);  secondly,  in  the  process  of  production,  in  which 
it  functions  as  capital,  i.e.,  as  an  element,  in  the  hands  of  the 
capitalist,  creating  use-value  and  value.  Labour-power  already 
supplied,  in  the  form  of  commodities,  the  equivalent  which  is 
to  be  paid  to  the  labourer,  before  it  is  paid  by  the  capitalist 
to  the  labourer  in  money-form.  Hence  the  labourer  himself  creates 
the  fund  out  of  which  the  capitalist  pays  him.  But  this  is  not 
all. 

The  money  which  the  labourer  receives  is  spent  by  him  in 
order  to  preserve  his  labour-power,  or — viewing  the  capitalist 
class  and  the  working-class  in  their  totality— in  order  to  pre¬ 
serve  for  the  capitalist  the  instrument  by  means  of  which  alone  he 
can  remain  a  capitalist. 

Thus  the  continuous  purchase  and  sale  of  labour-power  per¬ 
petuates  on  the  one  hand  labour-power  as  an  element  of  capital, 
by  virtue  of  which  the  latter  appears  as  the  creator  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  articles  of  use  having  value,  by  virtue  of  which,  furthermore, 
that  portion  of  capital  which  buys  labour-power  is  continually 
restored  by  labour-power’s  own  product,  and  consequently  the 
labourer  himself  constantly  creates  the  fund  of  capital  out  of  which 
he  is  paid.  On  the  other  hand  the  constant  sale  of  labour-power 
becomes  the  source,  ever  renewing  itself,  of  the  maintenance  of  the 
labourer  and  hence  his  labour-power  appears  as  that  faculty 
through  which  he  secures  the  revenue  by  which  he  lives.  Revenue 
in  this  case  signifies  nothing  else  than  an  appropriation  of  values 
effected  by  ever  repeated  sales  of  a  commodity  (labour-power), 
these  values  serving  only  for  the  continual  reproduction  of  the 
commodity  to  be  sold.  And  to  this  extent  Smith  is  right  when 
he  says  that  the  portion  of  the  value  of  the  product  created  by  the 
labourer  himself  for  which  the  capitalist  pays  him  an  equivalent 
in  the  form  of  wages,  becomes  the  source  of  revenue  for  the  la¬ 
bourer.  But  this  does  not  alter  the  nature  or  magnitude  of  this 
portion  of  the  value  of  the  commodity  any  more  than  the  value 
of  the  means  of  production  is  changed  by  the  fact  that  they  func¬ 
tion  as  capital-values,  or  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  a  straight 
line  are  changed  by  the  fact  that  it  serves  as  the  base  of  some 
triangle  or  as  the  diameter  of  some  ellipse.  The  value  of  labour- 


13—  175a 


386 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


power  remains  quite  as  independently  definite  as  that  of  those 
means  of  production.  This  portion  of  the  value  of  a  commodity 
neither  consists  of  revenue  as  an  independent  factor  constituting 
this  value-part  nor  does  it  resolve  itself  into  revenue.  While 
this  new  value  constantly  reproduced  by  the  labourer  constitutes 
a  source  of  revenue  for  him,  his  revenue  conversely  is  not  a  con¬ 
stituent  of  the  new^value  produced  by  him.  The  magnitude  of 
the  share  paid  to  him  of  the  new  value  created  by  him  determines 
the  value-magnitude  of  his  revenue,  not  vice  versa.  The  fact  that 
this  part  of  the  newly  created  value  forms  a  revenue  for  him, 
indicates  merely  what  becomes  of  it,  shows  the  character  of  its 
application,  and  has  no  more  to  do  with  its  formation  that  with 
that  of  any  other  value.  If  my  receipts  are  ten  shillings 
a  week  that  changes  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  value  of  the  ten 
shillings,  nor  in  the  magnitude  of  their  value.  As  in  the  case  of 
every  other  commodity  so  in  that  of  labour-power  its  value  is 
determined  by  the  amount  of  labour  necessary  for  its  reproduc¬ 
tion;  that  the  amount  of  this  labour  is  determined  by  the  value 
of  the  labourer’s  necessary  means  of  subsistence,  hence  is  equal 
to  the  labour  required  for  the  reproduction  of  the  very  conditions 
of  his  life — that  is  peculiar  for  this  commodity  (labour-power), 
but  no  more  peculiar  than  the  fact  that  the  value  of  labouring 
cattle  is  determined  by  the  value  of  the  means  of  subsistence 
necessary  for  its  maintenance,  i.e.,  by  the  amount  of  human 
labour  necessary  to  produce  these  means  of  subsistence. 

But  it  is  this  category  of  “revenue”  which  is  to  blame  for  all 
the  harmful  confusion  in  Adam  Smith.  The  various  kinds  of 
revenue  form  with  him  the  “component  parts  ”  of  the  annually  pro¬ 
duced,  newly  created  commodity-value,  while,  vice  versa,  the  two 
parts  into  which  this  commodity-value  resolves  itself  for  the 
capitalist — the  equivalent  of  his  variable  capital  advanced  in  the 
form  of  money  when  purchasing  labour,  and  the  other  portion  of 
the  value,  the  surplus-value,  which  likewise  belongs  to  him  but 
did  not  cost  him  anything — form  sources  of  revenue.  The  equiv¬ 
alent  of  the  variable  capital  is  advanced  again  for  labour-power  and 
to  that  extent  forms  a  revenue  for  the  labourer  in  the  shape  of 
wages;  since  the  other  portion,  the  surplus-value,  does  not  serve 
to  replace  any  advance  of  capital  for  the  capitalist,  it  may  be 
spent  by  him  in  articles  of  consumption  (both  necessities  and 
luxuries)  or  consumed  as  revenue  instead  of  forming  capital-value 
of  any  description.  Commodity-value  itself  is  the  preliminary 
condition  of  this  revenue  and  its  component  parts  differ,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  capitalist,  only  to  the  extent  that  they 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


387 


constitute  either  an  equivalent  for  or  an  excess  over  the  variable 
capital-value  advanced  by  him.  Both  of  them  consist  of  nothing 
but  labour-power  expended  during  the  production  of  commodities, 
rendered  fluent  in  labour.  They  consist  of  outlay,  not  income  or 
revenue — of  outlay  of  labour. 

In  accordance  with  the  quid  pro  quo,  by  which  the  revenue  be¬ 
comes  the  source  of  commodity-value  instead  of  the  commodity- 
value  being  the  source  of  revenue,  the  value  of  commodities  new 
has  the  appearance  of  being  “composed”  of  the  various  kinds  of 
revenue;  these  revenues  are  determined  independently  of  one  an¬ 
other,  and  the  total  value  of  commodities  is  determined  by  the 
addition  of  the  values  of  these  revenues.  But  now  the  question  is 
how  to  determine  the  value  of  each  of  these  revenues  which  are 
supposed  to  form  commodity-value.  In  the  case  of  wages  it  can 
be  done,  for  wages  represent  the  value  of  their  commodity,  la¬ 
bour-power,  and  this  value  is  determinable  (the  same  as  that  of 
all  other  commodities)  by  the  labour  required  for  the  reproduction 
of  this  commodity  But  surplus-value,  or,  as  Adam  Smith  has  it, 
its  two  forms,  profit  and  rent,  how  are  they  determined?  Here 
Adam  Smith  has  but  empty  phrases  to  offer.  At  one  time  he  rep¬ 
resents  wages  and  surplus-value  (or  wages  and  profit)  as  compo¬ 
nent  parts  of  the  value,  or  price,  of  commodities;  at  another,  and 
almost  in  the  same  breath,  as  parts  into  which  the  price  of  com¬ 
modities  “resolves  itself”;  but  this  means  on  the  contrary  that 
the  commodity-value  is  the  thing  given  first  and  that  different 
parts  of  this  given  value  fall  in  the  form  of  different  revenues  to 
the  share  of  different  persons  engaged  in  the  productive  process. 
This  is  by  no  means  identical  with  the  notion  that  value  is 
“composed”  of  these  three  “component  parts.”  If  I  determine  the 
lengths  of  three  different  straight  lines  independently,  and  then 
form  out  of  these  three  lines  as  “component  parts”  a  fourth  straight 
line  equal  to  their  sum,  it  is  by  no  means  the  same  procedure 
as  when  I  have  some  given  straight  line  before  me  and  for  some 
purpose  divide  it,  “resolve”  it,  so  to  say,  into  three  different  parts. 
In  the  first  case,  the  length  of  the  line  changes  throughout  with 
the  lengths  of  the  three  lines  whose  sum  it  is;  in  the  second  case, 
the  lengths  of  the  three  parts  of  the  line  are  from  the  outset  lim¬ 
ited  by  the  fact  that  they  are  parts  of  a  line  of  given  length. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  we  adhere  to  that  part  of  Smith’s  exposi¬ 
tion  which  is  correct,  namely,  that  the  value  neudy  created  by 
the  annual  labour  and  contained  in  the  annual  social  commodity- 
product  (the  same  as  in  every  individual  commodity,  or  every 
daily,  weekly,  etc.,  product)  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  variable 


13* 


388 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


capital  advanced  (i.e.,  to  the  value-part  intended  to  purchase 
new  labour-power)  plus  the  surplus-value  which  the  capitalist 
can  realise  in  means  of  his  individual  consumption — simple  re¬ 
production  being  assumed  and  other  circumstances  remaining  the 
same;  if  we  furthermore  keep  in  mind  that  Adam  Smith  lumps 
together  labour,  so  far  as  it  creates  value  and  is  an  expenditure 
of  labour-power,  and  labour,  so  far  as  it  creates  use-value,  i.e., 
is  expended  in  a  useful,  appropriate  manner — then  the  entire 
conception  amounts  to  this:  The  value  of  every  commodity  is  the 
product  of  labour;  hence  this  is  also  true  of  the  value  of  the 
product  of  the  annual  labour  or  of  the  value  of  society’s  annual 
commodity-product.  But  since  all  labour  resolves  itself  1)  into 
necessary  labour-time,  in  which  the  labourer  reproduces  merely  an 
equivalent  for  the  capital  advanced  in  the  purchase  of  his  labour- 
power,  and  2)  into  surplus-labour,  by  which  he  supplies  the  capi¬ 
talist  with  a  value  for  which  the  latter  does  not  give  any  equiva¬ 
lent,  hence  surplus-value,  it  follows  that  all  commodity-value  can 
resolve  itself  only  into  these  two  component  parts,  so  that  ulti¬ 
mately  it  forms  a  revenue  for  the  working-class  in  the  form  of 
wages,  and  for  the  capitalist  class  in  the  form  of  surplus-value.  As 
for  the  constant  capital-value,  i.e.,  the  value  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  consumed  in  the  creation  of  the  annual  product,  it  cannot 
be  explained  how  this  value  gets  into  that  of  the  new  product 
(except  for  the  phrase  that -the  capitalist  charges  the  buyer  with 
it  in  the  sale  of  his  goods),  but  ultimately,  since  the  means  of 
production  are  themselves  products  of  labour,  this  portion  of 
value  can,  in  turn,  consist  only  of  an  equivalent  of  the  variable 
capital  and  of  surplus-value,  of  a  product  of  necessary  labour  and 
of  surplus-labour.  The  fact  that  the  values  of  these  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  function  in  the  hands  of  their  employers  as  capital- 
values  does  not  prevent  them  from  having  “originally,”  in  the 
hands  of  others  if  we  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter— even  though 
at  some  previous  time — resolved  themselves  into  the  same  two 
portions  of  value,  hence  into  two  different  sources  of  revenue. 

One  point  herein  is  correct:  that  the  matter  presents  itself 
differently  in  the  movement  of  social  capital,  i.e.,  of  the  totality 
of  individual  capitals,  from  the  way  it  presents  itself  for  each  in¬ 
dividual  capital  considered  separately,  hence  from  the  standpoint 
of  each  individual  capitalist.  For  the  latter  the  value  of  commod¬ 
ities  resolves  itself  into  1)  a  constant  element  (a  fourth  one,  as  Adam 
Smith  says),  and  2)  the  sum  of  wages  and  surplus-value,  or  wages, 
profit,  and  rent.  But  from  the  point  of  view  of  society  the  fourth 
element  of  Adam  Smith,  the  constant  capital-value,  disappears. 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


389 


5.  Recapitulation 

The  absurd  formula  that  the  three  revenues,  wages,  profit,  and 
rent,  form  the  three  “component  parts”  of  the  value  of  commodi¬ 
ties  originates  with  Adam  Smith  from  the  more  plausible  idea  that 
the  value  of  commodities  “resolves  itself”  into  these  three  compo¬ 
nent  parts.  This  is  likewise  incorrect,  even  granted  that  the  value 
of  commodities  is  divisible  only  into  an  equivalent  of  the  con¬ 
sumed  labour-power  and  the  surplus-value  created  by  it.  But 
the  mistake  rests  here  too  on  a  deeper,  a  true  foundation.  Cap¬ 
italist  production  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  productive  labour¬ 
er  sells  his  own  labour-power,  as  his  commodity,  to  the  capital¬ 
ist,  in  whose  hands  it  then  functions  merely  as  an  element  of  his 
productive  capital.  This  transaction,  which  pertains  to  circula¬ 
tion —  the  sale  and  purchase  of  labour-power — not  only  inaugu¬ 
rates  the  process  of  production,  but  also  determines  implicitly 
its  specific  character.  The  production  of  a  use-value,  and  even  that 
of  a  commodity  (for  this  can  be  carried  on  also  by  independent 
productive  labourers),  is  here  only  a  means  of  producing  absolute 
and  relative  surplus-value  for  a  capitalist.  For  this  reason  we 
have  seen  in  the  analysis  of  the  process  of  production  that  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  absolute  and  relative  surplus-value  determines  1)  the 
duration  of  the  daily  labour-process  and  2)  the  entire  social  and 
technical  configuration  of  the  capitalist  process  of  production. 
Within  this  process  there  is  realised  the  distinction  between  the 
mere  conservation  of  value  (of  the  constant  capital-value),  the  ac¬ 
tual  reproduction  of  advanced  value  (equivalent  of  labour-power), 
and  the  production  of  surplus-value,  i.e.,  of  value  for  which  the 
capitalist  has  neither  advanced  an  equivalent  previously  nor  will 
advance  one  post  festum. 

The  appropriation  of  surplus-value  — a  value  in  excess  of  the 
equivalent  of  the  value  advanced  by  the  capitalist— although 
inaugurated  by  the  purchase  and  sale  of  labour-power,  is  an  act 
performed  within  the  process  of  production  itself,  and  forms  an 
essential  element  of  it. 

The  introductory  act,  which  constitutes  an  act  of  circulation  — 
the  purchase  and  sale  of  labour-power— itself  rests  on  a  distribu¬ 
tion  of  the  elements  of  production  which  preceded  and  presup¬ 
posed  the  distribution  of  the  social  products ,  namely  on  the 
separation  of  labour-power  as  a  commodity  of  the  labourer  from 
the  means  of  production  as  the  property  of  non-labourers. 

However  this  appropriation  of  surplus-value,  or  this  separation 
of  the  production  of  value  into  a  reproduction  of  advanced  value 


390 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


and  a  production  of  new  value  (surplus-value)  which  does  not  re¬ 
place  any  equivalent,  does  not  alter  in  any  way  the  substance  of 
value  itself  or  the  nature  of  the  production  of  value.  The  sub¬ 
stance  of  value  is  and  remains  nothing  but  expended  labour- 
power —  labour  independent  of  the  specific,  useful  character  of  this 
labour — and  the  production  of  value  is  nothing  but  the  process  of 
this  expenditure.  A  serf  for  instance  expends  his  labour-power  for 
six  days,  labours  for  six  days,  and  the  fact  of  this  expenditure  as 
such  is  not  altered  by  the  circumstance  that  he  may  be  working 
three  days  for  himself,  on  his  own  field,  and  three  days  for  his  lord, 
on  the  field  of  the  latter.  Both  his  voluntary  labour  for  himself  and 
his  forced  labour  for  his  lord  are  equally  labour;  so  far  as  this  la¬ 
bour  is  considered  with  reference  to  the  values,  or  to  the  useful 
articles  created  by  it,  there  is  no  difference  in  his  six  days  of  la¬ 
bour.  The  difference  refers  merely  to  the  different  conditions  by 
which  the  expenditure  of  his  labour-power  during  both  halves  of 
his  labour-time  of  six  days  is  called  forth.  The  same  applies  to 
the  necessary  and  surplus-labour  of  the  wage-labourer. 

The  process  of  production  expires  in  the  commodity.  The  fact 
that  labour-power  was  expended  in  its  fabrication  now  appears 
as  a  material  property  of  the  commodity,  as  the  property  of  pos¬ 
sessing  value.  The  magnitude  of  this  value  is  measured  by  the 
amount  of  labour  expended;  the  value  of  a  commodity  resolves 
itself  into  nothing  else  besides  and  is  not  composed  of  anything 
else.  If  I  have  drawn  a  straight  line  of  definite  length,  I  have, 
to  start  with,  “produced”  a  straight  line  (true,  only  symbolical¬ 
ly,  as  I  know  beforehand)  by  resort  to  the  art  of  drawing,  which 
is  practised  in  accordance  with  certain  rules  (laws)  independent 
of  myself.  If  I  divide  this  line  into  three  sections  (which  may  cor¬ 
respond  to  a  certain  problem),  every  one  of  these  sections  re¬ 
mains  a  straight  line,  and  the  entire  line,  whose  sections  they  are, 
does  not  resolve  itself  by  this  division  into  anything  different 
from  a  straight  line,  for  instance  into  some  kind  of  curve.  Nei¬ 
ther  can  I  divide  a  line  of  a  given  length  in  such  a  way  that  the 
sum  of  its  parts  is  greater  than  the  undivided  line  itself;  hence  the 
length  of  the  undivided  line  is  not  determined  by  any  arbitrar¬ 
ily  fixed  lengths  of  its  parts.  Vice  versa,  the  relative  lengths  of 
these  parts  are  limited  from  the  outset  by  the  size  of  the  line 
whose  parts  they  are. 

*  In  this  a  commodity  produced  by  a  capitalist  does  not  differ 
in  any  way  from  that  produced  by  an  independent  labourer  or  by 
communities  of  working-people  or  by  slaves.  But  in  the  present 
case  the  entire  product  of  labour,  as  well  as  its  entire  value,  be- 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


391 


longs  to  the  capitalist.  Like  every  other  producer  he  has  to  convert 
his  commodity  by  sale  into  money  before  he  can  manipulate  it 
further;  he  must  convert  it  into  the  form  of  the  universal 
equivalent. 

Let  us  examine  the  commodity-product  before  it  is  converted 
into  money.  It  belongs  wholly  to  the  capitalist.  On  the  other  hand 
as  a  useful  product  of  labour,  a  use-value,  it  is  entirely  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  a  past  labour-process.  Not  so  its  value.  One  portion  of 
this  value  is  but  the  value  of  the  means  of  production  expended 
in  the  production  of  the  commodity  and  re  appearing  in  a  new 
form.  This  value  has  not  been  produced  during  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  of  this  commodity,  for  the  means  of  production  possessed 
this  value  before  the  process  of  production,  independently  of  it; 
they  entered  into  this  process  as  the  vehicles  of  this  value;  it  is 
only  its  form  of  appearance  that  has  been  renewed  and  altered. 
This  portion  of  the  value  of  the  commodity  constitutes  for  the 
capitalist  an  equivalent  of  the  portion  of  the  constant  capital- 
value  advanced  and  consumed  in  the  production  of  the  commodity. 
It  existed  previously  in  the  form  of  means  of  production;  it  exists 
now  as  a  component  part  of  the  value  of  the  newly  produced  com¬ 
modity.  As  soon  as  this  commodity  has  been  turned  into  money, 
the  value  now  existing  in  the  form  of  money  must  be  reconverted 
into  means  of  production,  into  its  original  form  determined  by 
the  process  of  production  and  its  function  in  it.  Nothing  is  altered 
in  the  character  of  the  value  of  a  commodity  by  the  function  of 
this  value  as  capital. 

A  second  portion  of  the  value  of  a  commodity  is  the  value  of  the 
labour-power  which  the  wage-worker  sells  to  the  capitalist.  It  is 
determined,  the  same  as  that  of  the  means  of  production,  inde¬ 
pendently  of  the  process  of  production  into  which  labour-power  is 
to  enter,  and  it  is  fixed  in  an  act  of  circulation,  the  purchase  and 
sale  of  labour-power,  before  the  latter  enters  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction.  By  means  of  his  function— the  expenditure  of  labour-pow¬ 
er — the  wage-labourer  produces  a  commodity-value  equal  to  the 
value  which  the  capitalist  has  to  pay  him  for  the  use  of  his  labour- 
power.  He  gives  this  value  to  the  capitalist  in  the  form  of  a  com¬ 
modity  and  is  paid  for  it  by  him  in  money.  That  this  portion  of 
the  commodity-value  is  for  the  capitalist  but  an  equivalent  for 
the  variable  capital  which  he  has  to  advance  in  wages  does  not 
alter  in  any  way^fhe  fact  that  it  is  a  commodity-value  newly  cre¬ 
ated  during  the  process  of  production  and  consisting  of  nothing 
but  what  surplus-value  consists  of,  namely,  past  expenditure  of 
labour-power.  Nor  is  this  truth  affected  by  the  fact  that  the 


392 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


value  of  the  labour-power  paid  by  the  capitalist  to  the  labourer 
in  the  form  of  wages  assumes  the  form  of  a  revenue  for  the  la¬ 
bourer,  and  that  not  only  labour-power  is  continually  reproduced 
thereby  but  also  the  class  of  wage-labourers  as  such,  and  thus  the 
basis  of  the  entire  capitalist  production. 

However,  the  sum  of  these  two  portions  of  value  does  not  com¬ 
prise  the  whole  of  commodity-value.  There  remains  an  excess 
over  both  of  them — the  surplus-value.  This,  like  the  portion  of 
value  which  replaces  the  variable  capital  advanced  in  wages,  is  a 
value  newly  created  by  the  labourer  during  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion — congealed  labour.  But  it  does  not  cost  the  owner  of  the 
entire  product,  the  capitalist,  anything.  This  circumstance  ac¬ 
tually  permits  the  capitalist  to  consume  the  surplus-value  en¬ 
tirely  as  revenue,  unless  he  has  to  surrender  parts  of  it  to  other 
participants — such  as  ground-rent  to  the  landlord,  in  which  case 
such  portions  constitute  a  revenue  of  such  third  persons.  This 
same  circumstance  was  the  compelling  motive  that  induced  our 
capitalist  to  engage  at  all  in  the  manufacture  of  commodities. 
But  neither  his  original  benevolent  intention  of  snatching  sur¬ 
plus-value,  nor  its  subsequent  expenditure  as  revenue  by  him  or 
others  affects  the  surplus-value  as  such.  They  do  not  impair  the 
fact  that  it  is  congealed  unpaid  labour,  nor  the  magnitude  of  this 
surplus-value,  which  is  determined  by  entirely  different  condi¬ 
tions. 

However  if  Adam  Smith  wanted  to  occupy  himself,  as  he  did, 
with  the  role  of  the  various  parts  of  this  value  in  the  total  proc¬ 
ess  of  reproduction,  even  while  he  was  investigating  the  value 
of  commodities,  it  would  be  evident  that  while  some  particular 
parts  function  as  revenue,  others  function  just  as  continually 
as  capital  —  and  consequently,  according  to  his  logic,  should  have 
been  designated  as  constituent  parts  of  the  commodity-value,  or 
parts  into  which  this  value  resolves  itself. 

Adam  Smith  identifies  the  production  of  commodities  in  general 
with  capitalist  commodity  production;  the  means  of  production 
are  to  him  from  the  outset  "capital,  ”  labour  is  from  the  outset 
wage-labour,  and  therefore  “the  number  of  useful  and  productive 
labourers  ...  is  everywhere  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of 
capital  stock  which  is  employed  in  setting  them  to  work.”  (In¬ 
troduction,  p.  12.)  In  short,  the  various  factors  of  the  labour-proc¬ 
ess — both  objective  and  personal — appear  frorlf  the  first  with 
the  masks  characteristic  of  the  period  of  capitalist  production. 
The  analysis  of  the  value  of  commodities  therefore  coincides 
directly  with  the  consideration  of  the  extent  to  which  this  value 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


393 


is  on  the  one  hand  a  mere  equivalent  of  capital  laid  out,  and  on 
the  other,  to  what  extent  it  forms  “free”  value,  value  not  replac¬ 
ing  any  advanced  capital-value,  or  surplus-value.  Compared  from 
this  point  of  view,  parts  of  commodity-value  thus  transform  them¬ 
selves  imperceptibly  into  its  independent  “component  parts,” 
and  finally  into  the  “sources  of  all  value.”  A  further  conclusion 
is  that  commodity-value  is  composed  of,  or  “resolves  itself”  into, 
revenues  of  various  kinds,  so  that  the  revenues  do  not  consist  of 
commodity-values  but  the  commodity-value  consists  of  “reve¬ 
nues.”  As  little,  however,  as  the  nature  of  a  commodity-value  as 
such,  or  of  money  as  such,  is  changed  through  their  functioning 
as  capital-value,  just  so  little  is  the  nature  of  a  commodity-value 
changed  on  account  of  its  functioning  later  as  a  revenue  for  some 
particular  person.  The  commodity  with  which  Adam  Smith  has 
to  deal  is  from  the  outset  commodity-capital  (which  comprises 
surplus-value  in  addition  to  the  capital-value  consumed  in  the 
production  of  the  commodity);  it  is  therefore  a  commodity  pro¬ 
duced  capitalistically,  the  result  of  the  capitalist  process  of 
production.  It  would  have  been  necessary,  then,  to  analyse  first  this 
process,  and  also  the  process  of  self-expansion  and  of  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  value,  which  it  includes.  Since  this  process  is  in  its  turn 
premised  by  the  circulation  of  commodities,  its  description  re¬ 
quires  also  a  preliminary  and  independent  analysis  of  the  com¬ 
modity.  However,  even  where  Adam  Smith  at  times  hits  “esoter- 
ically”  upon  the  correct  thing  he  always  takes  into  consideration 
the  formation  of  value  only  as  incidental  to  the  analysis  of  com¬ 
modities,  i.e.,  to  the  analysis  of  commodity-capital. 


III.  LATER  ECONOMISTS41 

Ricardo  reproduces  the  theory  of  Adam  Smith  almost  verba¬ 
tim:  “It  must  be  understood  that  all  the  productions  of  a  country 
are  consumed;  but  it  makes  the  greatest  difference  imaginable 
whether  they  are  consumed  by  those  who  reproduce,  or  by  those 
who  do  not  reproduce  another  value.  When  we  say  that  revenue 
is  saved,  and  added  to  capital,  what  we  mean  is,  that  the  portion 
of  revenue,  so  said  to  be  added  to  the  capital,  is  consumed  by 
productive  instead  of  unproductive  labourers.  ”  ( Principles ,  p.  163.) 

In  fact  Ricardo  fully  accepted  the  theory  of  Adam  Smith  con- 


41  From  here  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  a  supplement  from  Manuscript  II. 
—F.  E 


394 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


cerning  the  resolution  of  the  price  of  commodities  into  wages  and 
surplus-value  (or  variable  capital  and  surplus-value).  The  points 
of  dispute  with  him  are  1)  the  component  parts  of  the  surplus- 
value:  he  eliminates  ground-rent  as  an  essential  element  of  it; 
2)  Ricardo  splits  the  price  of  the  commodity  into  these  compo¬ 
nent  parts.  The  magnitude  of  value  is,  then,  the  prius.  The  sum 
of  component  parts  is  assumed  as  a  given  magnitude,  it  is  the 
starting-point,  while  Adam  Smith  frequently  acts  to  the  contrary, 
against  his  own  better  judgement,  by  subsequently  deducing 
the  magnitude  of  value  of  the  commodity  through  the  sum  of 
the  component  parts. 

Ramsay  makes  the  following  remark  against  Ricardo:  He 

seems  always  to  consider  the  whole  produce  as  divided  between 
wages  and  profits,  forgetting  the  part  necessary  for  replacing  fixed 
capital.”  (An  Essay  on  the  Distribution  of  Wealth,  Edinburgh, 
1836,  p.  174.)  By  fixed  capital  Ramsay  means  the  same  thing 
that  I  mean  by  constant  capital:  “Fixed  capital  exists  in  a  form 
in  which,  though  assisting  to  raise  the  future  commodity,  it  does 
not  maintain  labourers.”  (Ibid.,  p.  59.) 

Adam  Smith  opposed  the  necessary  conclusion  of  his  resolu¬ 
tion  of  the  value  of  commodities,  and  therefore  also  of  the  value 
of  the  social  annual  product  into  wages  and  surplus-value  and 
therefore  into  mere  revenue — the  conclusion  that  in  this  event  the 
entire  annual  product  might  be  consumed.  It  is  never  the  original 
thinkers  that  draw  the  absurd  conclusions.  They  leave  that  to  the 
Says  and  MacCullochs. 

Say,  indeed,  settles  the  matter  easy  enough.  That  which  is  an 
advance  of  capital  for  one,  is  or  was  a  revenue  and  net  product 
for  another.  The  difference  between  the  gross  and  the  net  product 
is  purely  subjective,  and  “thus  the  total  value  of  all  products, 
has  been  distributed  in  society  as  revenue.  ”  (Say,  Traite  d' Econo¬ 
mic  Politique,  1817,  II,  p.  64.)  “The  total  value  of  every  product 
is  composed  of  the  profits  of  the  landowners,  the  capitalists,  and 
those  who  ply  industrial  trades”  [wages  figure  here  as  profits 
des  industrieux\  1  “who  have  contributed  towards  its  production. 
This  makes  the  revenue  of  society  equal  to  the  gross  value  pro¬ 
duced,  not  equal  to  the  net  products  of  the  soil,  as  was  believed 
by  the  sect  of  the  economists”  [the  physiocrats).  (P.  63.) 

Among  others,  Proudhon  has  appropriated  this  discovery  of 
Say. 

Storch,  who  likewise  accepts  Adam  Smith’s  doctrine  in  prin¬ 
ciple,  finds  however  that  Say’s  practical  application  of  it  does 
not  hold  water.  “If  it  is  admitted  that  the  revenue  of  a  nation 


FORMER  PRESENTATIONS  OF  THE  SUBJECT 


395 


is  equal  to  its  gross  product,  i.e.,  that  no  capital”  [it  should 
say:  no  constant  capital!  “is  to  be  deducted,  then  it  must  also  be 
admitted  that  this  nation  may  consume  unproductively  the  en¬ 
tire  value  of  its  annual  product  without  the  least  detriment  to  its 

future  revenue _  The  products  which  represent  the”  [constant] 

“capital  of  a  nation  are  not  consumable.”  (Storch,  Considera¬ 
tions  sur  la  nature  du  revenu  national ,  Paris,  1824,  pp.  147,  150.) 

However,  Storch  forgot  to  tell  us  how  the  existence  of  this 
constant  portion  of  capital  harmonises  with  the  Smithian  anal¬ 
ysis  of  prices  accepted  by  him,  according  to  which  the  value  of 
commodities  contains  only  wages  and  surplus-value,  but  no  part 
of  any  constant  capital.  He  realises  only  through  Say  that  this 
analysis  of  prices  leads  to  absurd  results,  and  his  own  last  word 
on  the  subject  is  “that  it  is  impossible  to  resolve  the  necessary 
price  into  its  simplest  elements.  ”  ( Cours  d' Economie  Politique, 
Petersburg,  1815,  II,  p.  141.) 

Sismondi,  who  occupies  himself  particularly  with  the  relation 
of  capital  to  revenue,  and  in  actual  fact  makes  the  peculiar  for¬ 
mulation  of  this  relation  the  differentia  specifica  of  his  Nouveaux 
Principes,  did  not  say  one  scientific  word,  did  not  contribute  one 
iota  to  the  clarification  of  the  problem. 

Barton,  Ramsay,  and  Cherbuliez  attempt  to  go  beyond  the 
formulation  of  Adam  Smith.  They  founder  because  they  pose  the 
problem  one-sidedly  from  the  outset  by  failing  to  make  clear  the 
distinction  between  constant  and  variable  capital-value  and  be¬ 
tween  fixed  and  circulating  capital. 

John  Stuart  Mill  likewise  reproduces,  with  his  usual  pompos¬ 
ity,  the  doctrine  handed  down  by  Adam  Smith  to  his  followers. 
As  a  result,  the  Smithian  confusion  of  thought  persists  to  this 
hour  and  his  dogma  is  one  of  the  orthodox  articles  of  faith  of 
Political  Economy. 


CHAPTER  XX 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


I.  THE  FORMULATION  OF  THE  QUESTION 


If  we  study4*  the  annual  function  of  social  capital — hence 
of  the  total  capital  of  which  the  individual  capitals  form  only 
fractional  parts,  whose  movement  is  their  individual  movement 
and  simultaneously  integrating  link  in  the  movement  of  the  total 
capital — and  its  results,  i.e.,  if  we  study  the  commodity-product 
furnished  by  society  during  the  year,  then  it  must  become  ap¬ 
parent  how  the  process  of  reproduction  of  the  social  capital  takes 
place,  what  characteristics  distinguish  this  process  of  reproduction 
from  the  process  of  reproduction  of  an  individual  capital,  and 
what  characteristics  are  common  to  both.  The  annual  product  in¬ 
cludes  those  portions  of  the  social  product  which  replace  capital, 
namely  social  reproduction,  as  well  as  those  which  go  to  the  con¬ 
sumption-fund,  those  which  are  consumed  by  labourers  and  capi¬ 
talists,  hence  both  productive  and  individual  consumption.  It 
comprises  also  the  reproduction  (i.e.,  maintenance)  of  the  capital¬ 
ist  class  and  the  working-class,  and  thus  the  reproduction  of  the 
capitalist  character  of  the  entire  process  of  production. 


It  is  evidently  the  circulation  formula  C' — j 


|M— C  ...  P  ..  C' 


m — c 


which  we  have  to  analyse,  and  consumption  necessarily  plays 
a  role  in  it;  for  the  point  of  departure,  C'  =C+c,  the  commodity- 
capital,  embraces  both  the  constant  and  variable  capital-value, 
and  the  surplus-value.  Its  movement  therefore  includes  both 
individual  and  productive  consumption.  In  the  circuits 
M — C  ...  P  ...C' — M'  and  P...C' — M'— C  ...  P,  the  movement  of  the 
capital  is  the  starting  and  finishing  point.  And  of  course  this 
includes  consumption,  for  the  commodity,  the  product,  must  be 


48  From  Manuscript  II. — F.E. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


397 


sold.  When  this  has  assumedly  been  done  it  is  immaterial  for 
the  movement  of  the  individual  capital  what  becomes  of  the 
commodities  subsequently.  On  the  other  hand  in  the  movement 
of  C'  ...  C'  the  conditions  of  social  reproduction  are  discernible 
precisely  from  the  fact  that  it  must  be  shown  what  becomes  of 
every  portion  of  value  of  this  total  product,  C'.  In  this  case 
the  total  process  of  reproduction  includes  the  process  of  consump¬ 
tion  brought  about  by  the  circulation  quite  as  much  as  the 
process  of  reproduction  of  the  capital  itself. 

For  our  present  purpose  this  process  of  reproduction  must  be 
studied  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  replacement  of  the  value 
as  well  as  the  substance  of  the  individual  component  parts  of  C'. 
We  cannot  rest  content  any  longer,  as  we  did  in  the  analysis  of 
the  value  of  the  product  of  the  individual  capital,  with  the  as¬ 
sumption  that  the  individual  capitalist  can  first  convert  the  com¬ 
ponent  parts  of  his  capital  into  money  by  the  sale  of  his  commodi¬ 
ties,  and  then  reconvert  them  into  productive  capital  by  renewed 
purchase  of  the  elements  of  production  in  the  commodity-market. 
Inasmuch  as  those  elements  of  production  are  by  nature  material, 
they  represent  as  much  a  constituent  of  the  social  capital  as  the 
individual  finished  product,  which  is  exchanged  for  them  and 
replaced  by  them.  Contrariwise  the  movement  of  that  portion  of 
the  social  commodity-product  which  is  consumed  by  the  labourer 
in  expending  his  wages,  and  by  the  capitalist  in  expending  his 
surplus-value,  not  only  forms  an  integral  part  of  the  move¬ 
ment  of  the  total  product  but  intermingles  with  the  movements 
of  the  individual  capitals,  and  therefore  this  process  cannot  be 
explained  by  merely  assuming  it. 

The  question  that  confronts  us  directly  is  this:  How  is  the 
capital  consumed  in  production  replaced  in  value  out  of  the  annual 
product  and  how  does  the  movement  of  this  replacement  inter¬ 
twine  with  the  consumption  of  the  surplus-value  by  the  capitalists 
and  of  the  wages  by  the  labourers?  It  is  then  first  a  matter  of 
reproduction  on  a  simple  scale.  It  is  furthermore  assumed  that 
products  are  exchanged  at  their  values  and  also  that  there  is  no 
revolution  in  the  values  of  the  component  parts  of  productive 
capital.  The  fact  that  prices  diverge  from  values  cannot,  however, 
exert  any  influence  on  the  movements  of  the  social  capital.  On  the 
whole,  there  is  the  same  exchange  of  the  same  quantities  of  prod¬ 
ucts,  although  the  individual  capitalists  are  involved  in  value- 
relations  no  longer  proportional  to  their  respective  advances  and 
to  the  quantities  of  surplus-value  produced  singly  by  every  one 
of  them.  As  for  revolutions  in  value,  they  do  not  alter  anything 


398 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


in  the  relations  between  the  value-components  of  the  total  annual 
product,  provided  they  are  universally  and  evenly  distributed. 
To  the  extent  however  that  they  are  partially  and  unevenly  dis¬ 
tributed,  they  represent  disturbances  which,  in  the  first  place,  can 
be  understood  as  such  only  as  far  as  they  are  regarded  as  diver¬ 
gences  from  unchanged  value-relations,  but  in  the  second  place,  once 
there  is  proof  of  the  law  according  to  which  one  portion  of  the  va¬ 
lue  of  the  annual  product  replaces  constant,  and  another  portion 
variable  capital,  a  revolution  either  in  the  value  of  the  constant 
or  that  of  the  variable  capital  would  not  alter  anything  in  this 
law.  It  would  change  merely  the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  por¬ 
tions  of  value  which  function  in  the  one  or  the  other  capacity,  be¬ 
cause  other  values  would  have  taken  the  places  of  the  original  ones. 

So  long  as  we  looked  upon  the  production  of  value  and  the  value 
of  the  product  of  capital  individually,  the  bodily  form  of  the  com¬ 
modities  produced  was  wholly  immaterial  for  the  analysis,  wheth¬ 
er  it  was  machines,  for  instance,  com,  or  looking  glasses.  It  was 
always  but  a  matter  of  illustration,  and  any  branch  of  production 
could  have  served  that  purpose  equally  well.  What  we  dealt 
with  was  the  immediate  process  of  production  itself,  which  pre¬ 
sents  itself  at  every  point  as  the  process  of  some  individual  capital. 
So  far  as  the  reproduction  of  capital  was  concerned,  it  was  suffi¬ 
cient  to  assume  that  that  portion  of  the  product  in  commodities 
which  represents  capital-value  finds  an  opportunity  in  the  sphere 
of  circulation  to  reconvert  itself  into  its  elements  of  production 
and  thus  into  Its  form  of  productive  capital;  just  as  it  sufficed  to 
assume  that  both  the  labourer  and  the  capitalist  find  in  the  mar¬ 
ket  those  commodities  on  which  they  spend  their  wages  and  the 
surplus-value.  This  merely  formal  manner  of  presentation  is  no 
longer  adequate  in  the  study  of  the  total  social  capital  and  of 
the  value  of  its  products.  The  reconversion  of  one  portion  of  the 
value  of  the  product  into  capital  and  the  passing  of  another  por¬ 
tion  into  the  individual  consumption  of  the  capitalist  as  well 
as  the  working-class  form  a  movement  within  the  value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  itself  in  which  the  result  of  the  aggregate  capital  finds  ex¬ 
pression;  and  this  movement  is  not  only  a  replacement  of  value, 
but  also  a  replt^cement  in  material  and  is  therefore  as  much 
bound  up  with  the  relative  proportions  of  the  value-components  of 
the  total  social  product  as  with  their  use-value,  their  material 
shape. 

Simple4'  reproduction,  reproduction  on  the  same  scale,  ap- 


u  From  Manuscript  VIII. — F.E. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


399 


pears  as  an  abstraction,  inasmuch  as  on  the  one  hand  the  absence 
of  all  accumulation  or  reproduction  on  an  extended  scale  is  a 
strange  assumption  in  capitalist  conditions,  and  on  the  other  hand 
conditions  of  production  do  not  remain  exactly  the  same  in  differ¬ 
ent  years  (and  this  is  assumed).  The  assumption  is  that  a  social 
capital  of  a  given  magnitude  produces  the  same  quantity  of  com¬ 
modity-value  this  year  as  last,  and  supplies  the  same  quantum  of 
wants,  although  the  forms  of  the  commodities  may  change  in  the 
process  of  reproduction.  However,  as  far  as  accumulation  does  take 
place,  simple  reproduction  is  always  a  part  of  it,  and  can  there¬ 
fore  be  studied  by  itself,  and  is  an  actual  factor  of  accumulation. 
The  value  of  the  annual  product  may  decrease,  although  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  use-values  may  remain  the  same;  or  the  value  may  remain 
the  same  although  the  quantity  of  the  use-values  may  decrease; 
or  the  quantity  of  value  and  of  the  reproduced  use-values  may  de¬ 
crease  simultaneously.  All  this  amounts  to  reproduction  taking 
place  either  under  more  favourable  conditions  than  before  or  under 
more  difficult  ones,  which  may  result  in  imperfect — defective — 
reproduction.  All  this  can  refer  only  to  the  quantitative  aspect 
of  the  various  elements  of  reproduction,  not  to  the  role  which  they 
play  as  reproducing  capital  or  as  a  reproduced  revenue  in  the  en¬ 
tire  process. 


II.  THE  TWO  DEPARTMENTS  OF  SOCIAL  PRODUCTION44 

The  total  product,  and  therefore  the  total  production,  of  so¬ 
ciety  may  be  divided  into  two  major  departments: 

I.  Means  of  Production,  commodities  having  a  form  in  which 
they  must,  or  at  least  may,  pass  into  productive  consumption. 

II.  Articles  of  Consumption,  commodities  having  a  form  in 
which  they  pass  into  the  individual  consumption  of  the  capitalist 
and  the  working-class. 

All  the  various  branches  of  production  pertaining  to  each  of 
these  two  departments  form  one  single  great  branch  of  production, 
that  of  the  means  of  production  in  the  one  case,  and  that  of  arti¬ 
cles  of  consumption  in  the  other.  The  aggregate  capital  employed 
in  each  of  these  two  branches  of  production  constitutes  a  separate 
large  department  of  the  social  capital. 

In  each  department  the  capital  consists  of  two  parts: 

1)  Variable  Capital.  This  capital,  so  far  as  its  value  is  concerned. 


44  Mainly  from  Manuscript  II,  the  schemes  from  Manuscript  VIII. — F.  E. 


400 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  social  labour-power  employed  in 
this  branch  of  production;  in  other  words,  it  is  equal  to  the  sum  of 
the  wages  paid  for  this  labour-power.  So  far  as  its  substance  is  con¬ 
cerned,  it  consists  of  the  labour-power  in  action,  i.e.,  of  the 
living  labour  set  in  motion  by  this  capital-value. 

2)  Constant  Capital.  This  is  the  value  of  all  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  employed  for  productive  purposes  in  this  branch.  These, 
again,  are  divided  into  fixed,  capital,  such  as  machines,  instruments 
of  labour,  buildings,  labouring  animals,  etc.,  and  circulating  con¬ 
stant  capital,  such  as  materials  of  production:  raw  and  auxiliary 
materials,  semi-finished  products,  etc. 

The  value  of  the  total  annual  product  created  with  the  aid 
of  this  capital  in  each  of  the  two  departments  consists  of  one  por¬ 
tion  which  represents  the  constant  capital  c  consumed  in  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  and  only  transferred  to  the  product  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  its  value,  and  of  another  portion  added  by  the  entire 
labour  of  the  year.  This  latter  portion  is  divided  in  turn  into  the 
replacement  of  the  advanced  variable  capital  v  and  the  excess 
over  and  above  it,  which  forms  the  surplus-value  s.  And  just  as 
the  value  of  every  individual  commodity,  that  of  the  entire  an¬ 
nual  product  of  each  department  consists  of  c-fv+s. 

Portion  c  of  the  value,  representing  the  constant  capital  con¬ 
sumed  in  production,  does  not  coincide  with  the  value  of  the 
constant  capital  employed  in  production.  True,  the  materials  of 
production  are  entirely  consumed  and  their  values  completely 
transferred  to  the  product.  But  only  a  portion  of  the  employed 
fixed  capital  is  wholly  consumed  and  its  value  thus  transferred 
to  the  product.  Another  part  of  the  fixed  capital,  such  as  machines, 
buildings,  etc.,  continues  to  exist  and  function  the  same  as  be¬ 
fore,  though  depreciated  to  the  extent  of  the  annual  wear  and  tear. 
This  persistent  portion  of  the  fixed  capital  does  not  exist  for  us, 
when  we  consider  the  value  of  the  product.  It  is  a  portion  of  the 
capital-value,  which  exists  independently  and  alongside  of  this 
newly  produced  commodity-value.  This  was  shown  previously 
in  the  analysis  of  the  value  of  the  product  of  individual  capital 
(Buch  I,  Kap.  VI,  p.  192).*  However,  for  the  present  we  must 
leave  aside  the  method  of  analysis  employed  there.  We  saw  in 
the  study  of  the  value  of  the  product  of  individual  capital  that  tho 
value  of  which  the  fixed  capital  was  shorn  through  wear  and  tear 
is  transferred  to  the  product  created  during  the  time  of  wear, 
irrespective  of  whether  or  not  any  portion  of  this  fixed  capital  is 


•  English  edition:  Ch.  VIII,  pp.  202-04.— Ed. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


401 


replaced  in  kind  during  this  time  out  of  the  value  thus  transferred. 
At  this  point  in  the  study  of  the  total  social  product  and  of  its 
value,  however,  we  are  compelled,  at  least  for  the  present,  to  leave 
out  of  account  that  portion  of  value  which  is  transferred  from  the 
fixed  capital  to  the  annual  product  by  wear  and  tear,  unless 
fixed  capital  is  replaced  in  kind  during  the  year.  In  one  of  the 
following  sections  of  this  chapter  we  shall  discuss  this  point  in 
particular. 


We  shall  base  our  study  of  simple  reproduction  on  the  follow¬ 
ing  scheme,  in  which  c  stands  for  constant  capital,  v  for  variable 
capital,  and  s  for  surplus-value,  assuming  the  rate  of  surplus- 

value  ^4°  be  100  per  cent.  The  figures  may  indicate  millions  of 

marks,  francs,  or  pounds  sterling. 

I.  Production  of  Means  of  Production: 

Capital .  4,000c -f  1 ,000v  =  5.000 

Commodity-Product  .  .  4,000c  -j-  1 ,000v  -f- 1 ,000s  =  6,000, 

existing  in  means  of  production. 

II.  Production  of  Articles  of  Consumption: 

Capital  .  2,000c  -f-  500v  =  2,500 

Commodity-Product  ....  2,000c  -j-  500v  500„  =  3,000, 

existing  in  articles  of  consumption. 

Recapitulation:  Total  annual  commodity-product: 

I  4,000c  -f- 1 ,000v  -|-  1 ,0008  =  6  000  means  of  production. 
II.  2,000c  -j-  500v  -f-  500,  =  3,000  articles  of  consumption. 

Total  value  9,000,  exclusive  of  the  fixed  capital  persisting  in 
its  natural  form,  according  to  our  assumption. 

If  we  were  now  to  examine  the  transformations  necessary  on 
the  basis  of  simple  reproduction,  where  the  entire  surplus-value 
is  unproductively  consumed,  and  leave  aside  for  the  present  the 
money-circulation  that  brings  them  about,  we  should  obtain  at  the 
outset  three  great  points  of  support. 

1)  The  500v,  representing  wages  of  the  labourers,  and  500a, 
representing  surplus-value  of  the  capitalists,  in  department  II, 
must  be  spent  for  articles  of  consumption.  But  their  value  exists 
in  articles  of  consumption  worth  i,000,  held  by  the  capitalists 
of  department  II,  which  replace  the  advanced  500v  and  represent 
the  5008.  Consequently  the  wages  and  surplus-value  of  depart¬ 
ment  II  are  exchanged  within  this  department  for  products  of 


402 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


this  same  department.  Thereby  articles  of  consumption  to  the 
amount  of  (500v+5009)  11=1,000,  drop  out  of  the  total  product. 

2)  The  l,000v  plus  1,0008  of  department  I  must  likewise  be 
spent  for  articles  of  consumption;  in  other  words,  for  products 
of  department  II.  Hence  they  must  be  exchanged  for  the  remainder 
of  this  product  equal  to  the  constant  capital  part,  2,000c.  Depart-, 
ment  II  receives  in  return  an  equal  quantity  of  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  the  product  of  I,  in  which  the  value  of  1,000V  +  1,0008  of  I  is 
incorporated.  Thereby  2,000  IIC  and  (l,000v-j-l,000g)  I,  drop  out 
of  the  calculation. 

3)  There  still  remain  4,000  Ic.  These  consist  of  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  which  can  be  used  only  in  department  I  to  replace  its  con¬ 
sumed  constant  capital,  and  are  therefore  disposed  of  by  mutual 
exchange  between  the  individual  capitalists  of  I,  just  as  the 
(500v+500s)  II  by  an  exchange  between  the  labourers  and  capi¬ 
talists,  or  between  the  individual  capitalists  of  II. 

Let  this  serve  for  the  moment  to  facilitate  the  understanding 
of  what  follows. 


III.  EXCHANGE  BETWEEN  THE  TWO  DEPARTMENTS 

I(V+s)versus  He45 

We  begin  with  the  great  exchange  between  the  two  classes. 
(l,000v  +  1.0008)  I— these  values  consisting,  in  the  "hands  of  their 
producers,  of  means  of  production  in  their  natural  form,  are  ex¬ 
changed  for  2,000  IIC,  for  values  consisting  of  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption  in  their  bodily  form.  The  capitalist  class  of  II  there¬ 
by  reconverts  its  constant  capital  of  2,000  from  the  form  of  ar¬ 
ticles  of  consumption  into  that  of  means  of  production  of  articles 
of  consumption,  into  a  form  in  which  it  can  once  more  func¬ 
tion  as  a  factor  of  the  labour-process  and  for  purposes  of  self-ex¬ 
pansion  of  value  as  constant  capital-value.  On  the  other  hand  the 
equivalent  of  the  labour-power  of  I  (1,000T)  and  the  surplus-value 
of  the  capitalists  of  I  (1,0008)  are  realised  thereby  in  articles 
of  consumption*;  both  of  them  are  converted  from  their  bodily 
form  of  means  of  production  into  a  bodily  form  in  which  they 
can  be  consumed  as  revenue. 

Now,  this  mutual  exchange  is  accomplished  by  means  of  a 
circulation  of  money,  which  promotes  it  just  as  much  as  it 
renders  its  understanding  difficult,  but  which  is  of  decisive  im- 


“  Here  Manuscript  VIII  is  resumed. — F.E. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


403 


portance  because  the  variable  portion  of  capital  must  ever  resume 
the  form  of  money,  as  money-capital  converting  itself  from  the 
form  of  money  into  labour-power.  The  variable  capital  must  be 
advanced  in  the  form  of  money  in  all  branches  of  production 
carried  on  at  the  entire  periphery  of  society  simultaneously  along¬ 
side  each  other,  regardless  of  whether  they  belong  to  category 
I  or  II.  The  capitalist  buys  the  labour-power  before  it  enters  into 
the  process  of  production,  but  pays  for  it  only  at  stipulated  times, 
after  it  has  been  expended  in  the  production  of  use-values.  He 
owns,  together  with  the  remainder  of  the  value  of  the  product,  also 
that  portion  of  it  which  is  only  an  equivalent  for  the  money  ex¬ 
pended  in  the  payment  of  labour-power,  that  portion  of  the  value 
of  the  product  which  represents  variable  capital.  In  this  portion 
of  value  the  labourer  has  already  supplied  the  capitalist  with 
the  equivalent  of  his  wages.  But  it  is  the  reconversion  of  commod¬ 
ities  into  money,  their  sale,  which  restores  to  the  capitalist  his 
variable  capital  in  the  form  of  money-capital,  which  he  may  ad¬ 
vance  once  more  for  the  purchase  of  labour-power. 

In  department  I,  then,  the  aggregate  capitalist  has  paid  £1,000 
(I  say  £  solely  to  indicate  that  it  is  value  in  the  form  of  money), 
equal  to  1,000T,  to  the  labourers  for  the  value  of  product  I  already 
existing  as  the  v-portion,  i.e. ,  of  the  means  of  production  created 
by  them.  With  these  £1,000  the  labourers  buy  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption  of  the  same  value  from  capitalists  II,  thereby  convert¬ 
ing  one  half  of  the  constant  capital  II  into  money;  capitalists 
II,  in  their  turn,  buy  with  these  £1,000  means  of  production, 
valued  at  1,000,  from  capitalists  I;  thereby,  as  far  as  the  latter 
are  concerned,  the  variable  capital-value  equal  to  l,000v,  which, 
being  part  of  their  product,  existed  in  the  bodily  form  of  means 
of  production,  is  thus  reconverted  into  money  and  can  now  func¬ 
tion  anew  in  the  hands  of  capitalists  I  as  money-capital,  which 
is  transformed  into  labour-power,  hence  into  the  most  essential 
element  of  productive  capital.  In  this  way  their  variable  capital 
flows  back  to  them  in  the  form  of  money,  as  a  result  of  the 
realisation  of  some  of  their  commodity-capital. 

As  for  the  money  required  to  exchange  the  s-portion  of  com¬ 
modity-capital  I  for  the  second  half  of  constant  capital  II,  it  may 
be  advanced  in  various  ways.  In  reality  this  circulation  embraces 
innumerable  separate  purchases  and  sales  by  the  individual 
capitalists  of  both  categories,  the  money  coming  in  any  event 
from  these  capitalists,  since  we  have  already  accounted  for  the 
money  put  into  circulation  by  the  labourers.  A  capitalist  of 
category  II  can  buy,  with  the  money-capital  he  has  besides  his 


404 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


productive  capital,  means  of  production  from  capitalists  of  cat¬ 
egory  I,  and,  vice  versa,  a  capitalist  of  category  I  can  buy,  wiih 
money-funds  assigned  for  personal  and  not  for  capital  expend¬ 
iture,  articles  of  consumption  from  capitalists  of  category  II. 
A  certain  supply  of  money,  to  be  used  either  for  the  advance¬ 
ment  of  capital  or  for  the  expenditure  of  revenue  must  under  all 
circumstances  be  assumed  to  exist  beside  the  productive  capital 
in  the  hands  of  the  capitalists,  as  we  have  shown  above  in  parts 

I  and  II.  Let  us  assume  — the  proportion  is  wholly  immaterial 
for  our  purpose  — that  one  half  of  the  money  is  advanced  by  capi¬ 
talists  II  in  the  purchase  of  means  of  production  for  the  replace¬ 
ment  of  their  constant  capital,  while  the  other  half  is  spent  by 
capitalists  I  for  articles  of  consumption.  In  that  case  department 

II  advances  £500  for  the  purchase  of  means  of  production  from 
department  I,  thereby  replacing  (inclusive  of  the  above  £1,000 
coming  from  the  labourers  of  department  I)  three-quarters  of  its 
constant  capital  in  kind,  with  the  £500  so  obtained  department 
I  buys  articles  of  consumption  from  II,  thereby  completing  forone 
half  of  the  s-portion  of  its  commodity-capital  the  circulation 
c  — m— c,  and  thus  realising  its  product  in  the  consumption-fund. 
By  means  of  this  second  process  the  £500  return  to  the  hands 
of  II  as  money-capital  existing  beside  its  productive  capital. 
On  the  other  hand  I  expends  money  to  the  amount  of  £500  for 
the  purchase  of  II’s  articles  of  consumption  in  anticipation  of 
the  sale  of  that  half  of  the  s-portion  of  its  commodity-capital 
which  is  still  lying  in  store  as  product.  With  the  same  £500  11 
buys  from  I  means  of  production,  thereby  replacing  in  kind  its 
entire  constant  capital  (1,000  —  500  +  500  =  2,000)  while  I  real¬ 
ises  its  entire  surplus-value  in  articles  of  consumption.  On  the 
whole,  the  entire  exchange  of  commodities  in  the  amount  of  £4,000 
would  be  effected  with  a  money-circulation  of  £2,000  which  amount 
is  attained  only  because  the  entire  annual  product  is  described 
as  exchanged  in  bulk,  in  a  few  large  lots.  The  important  point 
here  is  that  II  has  not  only  reconverted  its  constant  capital  re¬ 
produced  in  the  form  of  articles  of  consumption,  into  the  form  of 
means  of  production,  but  has  besides  recovered  the  £500  which  it 
had  adyanced  to  the  circulation  for  the  purchase  of  means  of 
production;  and  that,  similarly,  I  again  possesses  not  only  its 
variable  capital,  which  it  bad  reproduced  in  the  form  of  means 
of  production,  in  money-form,  as  money-capital  once  more  direct¬ 
ly  convertible  into  labour-power,  but  also  the  £500  expended  in 
the  purchase  of  articles  of  consumption  in  anticipation  of  the  sale 
of  the  s-portion  of  its  capital.  These  £500  flow  back  to  it  not  be- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


405 


cause  of  the  expenditure  incurred,  but  because  of  the  subsequent 
sale  of  a  part  of  its  commodity-product  incorporating  one  half  of 
its  surplus-value. 

In  both  cases  it  is  not  only  that  the  constant  capital  of  II 
is  reconverted  from  the  form  of  a  product  into  the  bodily  form 
of  means  of  production,  in  which  alone  it  can  function  as  capital; 
and  likewise  it  is  not  only  that  the  variable  portion  of  the  capital 
of  I  is  converted  into  its  money-form,  and  the  surplus-value  por¬ 
tion  of  the  means  of  production  of  I  into  its  consumable  form,  the 
form  in  which  it  can  be  used  as  revenue.  It  is  also  that  the  £500  of 
money-capital,  advanced  by  II  in  the  purchase  of  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  prior  to  selling  the  corresponding  compensating  portion 
of  the  value  of  its  constant  capital — existing  in  the  form  of  means 
of  consumption — flow  back  to  II;  and  furthermore  back  to  I 
flow  the  £500  which  were  expended  anticipando  by  it  for  the 
purchase  of  articles  of  consumption.  If  the  money  advanced 
by  II  at  the  expense  of  the  constant  portion  of  its  commodity- 
product,  and  by  I  at  the  expense  of  the  surplus-value  portion  of 
its  commodity-product,  flows  back  to  them,  this  is  solely  because 
the  one  class  of  capitalists  throws  £500  into  circulation  over 
and  above  the  constant  capital  existing  in  the  form  of  commodi¬ 
ties  in  II,  and  the  other  class  a  like  amount  over  and  above  the 
surplus-value  existing  in  the  form  of  commodities  in  I.  In  the  last 
analysis  the  two  departments  have  mutually  paid  one  another 
in  full  by  the  exchange  of  equivalents  in  the  shape  of  their  re¬ 
spective  commodities.  The  money  thrown  into  circulation  by 
them  in  excess  of  the  values  of  their  commodities,  as  a  means  of 
effecting  the  exchange  of  these  commodities,  returns  to  each  one 
of  them  out  of  the  circulation  in  proportion  to  the  quota  which 
each  of  the  two  had  thrown  into  circulation.  Neither  has  grown 
a  farthing  richer  thereby.  II  possessed  a  constant  capital  of  2,000 
in  the  form  of  articles  of  consumption  plus  500  in  money;  now  it 
possesses  2,000  in  means  of  production  plus  500  in  money,  the 
same  as  before;  in  the  same  way  I  possesses,  as  before,  a  sur¬ 
plus-value  of  1,000  (consisting  of  commodities,  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  now  converted  into  a  consumption-fund)  plus  500  in  money. 
The  general  conclusion  is  this:  Of  the  money  which  the  indus¬ 
trial  capitalists  throw  into  circulation  to  accomplish  their  own 
commodity  circulation,  whether  at  the  expense  of  the  constant 
part  of  the  commodity-value  or  at  the  expense  of  the  surplus-value 
existing  in  the  commodities  to  the  extent  that  it  is  laid  out  as 
revenue,  as  much  returns  into  the  hands  of  the  respective  capi¬ 
talists  as  was  advanced  by  them  for  the  money-circulation. 


406 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


As  for  the  reconversion  of  the  variable  capital  of  class  I  into 
the  form  of  money,  this  capital,  after  the  capitalists  of  I  invested 
it  in  wages,  exists  for  them  first  in  the  form  of  commodities  in 
which  the  labourers  delivered  it  to  them.  They  paid  this  capital 
in  the  form  of  money  to  these  labourers  as  the  price  of  their  labour- 
power.  To  this  extent  the  capitalists  have  paid  for  that  constit¬ 
uent  part  of  the  value  of  their  commodity-product  which  is  equal 
to  the  variable  capital  expended  in  the  form  of  money.  They 
are,  for  this  reason,  the  owners  of  this  portion  of  the  commodity- 
product  as  well.  But  that  part  of  the  working-class  which  is 
employed  by  them  does  not  buy  the  means  of  production  created 
by  it;  these  labourers  buy  articles  of  consumption  produced  by  II. 
Hence  the  variable  capital  advanced  by  the  capitalists  of  I  in 
the  payment  of  labour-power  does  not  return  to  them  directly. 
It  passes  by  means  of  purchases  made  by  the  labourers  into  the 
hands  of  the  capitalist  producers  of  the  commodities  necessary 
for  and  within  the  reach  of  working  folks;  in  other  words,  it  passes 
into  the  hands  of  capitalists  II.  And  not  until  these  expend  the 
money  in  the  purchase  of  means  of  production  does  it  return  by 
this  circuitous  route  into  the  hands  of  capitalists  I. 

It  follows  that,  on  the  basis  of  simple  reproduction,  the  sum 
of  the  values  of  v-f- s  of  the  commodity-capital  of  I  (and  therefore 
a  corresponding  proportional  part  of  the  total  commodity- 
product  of  I)  must  be  equal  to  the  constant  capital  IIe,  which  is 
likewise  taken  as  a  proportional  part  of  the  total  commodity- 
product  of  department  II;  or  I(T+«)  =  Hc. 


IV.  EXCHANGE  WITHIN  DEPARTMENT  II. 

NECESSITIES  OF  LIFE  AND  ARTICLES  OF  LUXURY 

Of  the  value  of  the  commodity-product  of  department  II  there 
still  remain  to  be  studied  the  constituents  v  plus  s.  This  anal¬ 
ysis  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  most  important  question  which 
occupies  our  attention  here,  namely  to  what  extent  the  division 
of  the  value  of  every  individual  capitalist  commodity-product  into 
c+v-fs — even  if  brought  about  by  different  forms  of  appearance 
— applies  also  to  the  value  of  the  total  annual  product.  This 
question  finds  its  answers  on  the  one  hand  in  the  exchange  of  I(T+*) 
for  IIC,  and  on  the  other  hand  in  the  investigation,  to  be  made 
later,  of  the  reproduction  of  Ic  in  the  annual  product  of  I.  Since 
II(v+8>  exists  in  the  bodily  form  of  articles  of  consumption; 
since  the  variable  capital  advanced  to  the  labourers  in  payment 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


407 


of  their  labour-power  must  generally  speaking  be  spent  by  them 
for  articles  of  consumption;  and  since  the  s-portion  of  the  value  of 
commodities,  on  the  assumption  of  simple  reproduction,  is  prac¬ 
tically  spent  as  revenue  for  articles  of  consumption,  it  is  prima 
facie  evident  that  the  labourers  II  buy  back,  with  the  wages  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  capitalists  II,  a  portion  of  their  own  product,  cor¬ 
responding  to  the  amount  of  the  money-value  received  as  wages. 
Thereby  the  capitalist  class  II  reconverts  the  money-capital  ad¬ 
vanced  by  it  in  the  payment  of  labour-power  into  the  form  of 
money.  It  is  quite  the  same  as  if  it  had  paid  the  labourers  in  mere 
value  tokens.  As  soon  as  the  labourers  would  realise  these  value 
tokens  by  the  purchase  of  a  part  of  the  commodities  produced 
by  them  but  belonging  to  the  capitalists,  these  tokens  would  re¬ 
turn  into  the  hands  of  the  capitalists.  Only,  these  tokens  do  not 
merely  represent  value  but  possess  it,  in  golden  or  silver  embodi¬ 
ment.  We  shall  analyse  in  greater  detail  later  on  this  sort  of 
reflux  of  variable  capital  advanced  in  the  form  of  money  by  means 
of  a  process  in  which  the  working-class  appears  as  the  purchaser 
and  the  capitalist  class  as  the  seller.  Here  however  a  different 
point  is  at  issue,  which  must  be  discussed  in  connection  with 
this  return  of  the  variable  capital  to  its  point  of  departure. 

Category  II  of  the  annual  production  of  commodities  consists 
of  a  great  variety  of  branches  of  production,  which  may,  however, 
be  divided  into  two  great  sub-divisions  by  their  products: 

a)  Articles  of  consumption,  which  enter  into  the  consumption 
of  the  working-class,  and,  to  the  extent  that  they  are  necessities 
of  life— even  if  frequently  different  in  quality  and  value  from 
those  of  the  labourers— also  form  a  portion  of  the  consumption 
of  the  capitalist  class.  For  our  purposes  we  may  call  this  entire 
sub-division  consumer  necessities,  regardless  of  whether  such 
a  product  as  tobacco  is  really  a  consumer  necessity  from  the 
physiological  point  of  view.  It  suffices  that  it  is  habitually 
such. 

b)  Articles  of  luxury,  which  enter  into  the  consumption  of 
only  the  capitalist  class  and  can  therefore  be  exchanged  only 
for  spent  .surplus-value,  which  never  falls  to  the  share  of  the 
labourer. 

As  far  as  the  first  category  is  concerned  it  is  obvious  that  the 
variable  capital  advanced  in  the  production  of  the  commodities 
belonging  in  it  must  flow  back  in  money-form  directly  to  that 
portion  of  the  capitalist  class  II  (i.e.,  the  capitalists  Ila)  who  have 
produced  these  necessities  of  life.  They  sell  them  to  their  own 
labourers  to  the  amount  of  the  variable  capital  paid  to  them  in 


408 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


wages.  This  reflux  is  direct  so  far  as  this  entire  sub-division  a  of 
capitalist  class  II  is  concerned,  no  matter  how  numerous  the 
transactions  may  be  between  the  capitalists  of  the  various 
pertinent  branches  of  industry,  by  means  of  which  the  returning 
variable  capital  Is  distributed  pro  rata.  These  are  processes  of 
circulation,  whose  means  of  circulation  are  supplied  directly  by  the 
money  expended  by  the  labourers.  It  is  different,  however,  with 
sub-division  lib.  The  entire  portion  of  the  value  produced  in  this 
sub-division,  IIb(,+a),  exists  in  the  bodily  form  of  articles  of 
luxury,  i.e.,  articles  which  the  labouring  class  can  buy  no  more 
than  it  can  buy  commodity-value  Iv  existing  in  the  form  of 
means  of  production,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  both  the 
articles  of  luxury  and  the  means  of  production  are  the  products 
of  these  labourers.  Hence  the  reflux  by  which  the  variable  capital 
advanced  in  this  sub-division  returns  to  the  capitalist  produc¬ 
ers  in  its  money-form  cannot  be  direct  but  must  be  mediated, 
as  in  the  case  of  Iv. 

Let  us  assume  for  instance  that  v  =500  and  s  =500,  as  they 
did  in  the  case  of  the  entire  class  II;  but  that  the  variable  capital 
and  the  corresponding  surplus-value  are  distributed  as  follows: 

Sub-division  a,  Necessities  of  Life:  v  =400;  s=400;  hence 
a  quantity  of  commodities  in  consumer  necessities  of  the  value 
of  400T+4008  =800,  or  Ila  (400T+4008). 

Sub-division  b,  Articles  of  Luxury:  of  the  value  of  100v-f  100a  = 
=200,  or  lib  (100T  + 1008). 

The  labourers  of  lib  have  received  100  in  money  as  payment 
for  their  labour-power,  or  say  £100.  With  this  money  they  buy 
articles  of  consumption  from  capitalists  Ila  to  the  same  amount. 
This  class  of  capitalists  buys  with  the  same  money  £100  worth 
of  the  1 1  b  commodities,  and  in  this  way  the  variable  capital  of 
capitalists  lib  flows  back  to  them  in  the  form  of  money. 

In  Ila  there  are  available  onc§  more  400,  in  money,  in  the  hands 
of  the  capitalists,  obtained  by  exchange  with  their  own  labourers. 
Besides,  a  fourth  of  the  part  of  the  product  representing  surplus- 
value  has  been  transferred  to  the  labourers  of  1 1  b ,  and  in  exchange 
lib  (100„)  have  been  received  in  the  form  of  articles  of  luxury. 

Now,  assuming  that  the  capitalists  of  Ila  and  lib  divide  the 
expenditure  of  their  revenue  in  the  same  proportion  between 
necessities  of  life  and  luxuries — three-fifths  for  necessities  for 
instance  and  two-fifths  for  luxuries — the  capitalists  of  sub-class 
Ila  will  spend  three-fifths  of  their  revenue  from  surplus-value, 
amounting  to  400a,  or  240,  for  their  own  products,  necessities  of 
life,  and  two-fifths,  or  160,  for  articles  of  luxury.  The  capitalists 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


409 


of  sub-class  1 1  b  will  divide  their  surplus-value  of  100B  in  the 
same  way:  three-fifths,  or  60,  for  necessities,  and  two-fifths, 
or  40,  for  articles  of  luxury,  the  latter  being  produced  and 
exchanged  in  their  own  sub-class. 

The  160  in  articles  of  luxury  received  by  (II a)8  pass  into  the 
hands  of  the  I  la  capitalists  in  the  following  manner:  As  we  have 
seen,  100  of  the  (I  I  a)  4009  were  exchanged  in  the  form  of  necessi¬ 
ties  of  life  for  an  equal  amount  of  (IIb)v,  which  exists  as  articles 
of  luxury,  and  another  60,  consisting  of  necessities  of  life,  for 
(I I b)  60a,  consisting  of  luxuries.  The  total  calculation  then  stands 
as  follows: 

Ila:  400, +  400,;  lib:  100,  +  100,. 

1)  400,  (a)  are  consumed  by  the  labourers  of  Ila,  a  part  of 
whose  product  (necessities  of  life)  they  form  The  labourers  buy 
them  from  the  capitalist  producers  of  their  own  sub-division. 
These  capitalists  thereby  recover  £400  in  money,  which  is  the 
value  of  their  variable  capital  of  400  paid  by  them  to  these  same 
labourers  as  wages.  They  can  now  once  more  buy  labour-power 
with  it. 

2)  A  part  of  the  400,  (a),  equal  to  the  100,  (b),  one-fourth  of 
the  surplus-value  (a),  is  realised  in  luxuries  in  the  following 
way:  The  labourers  (b)  received  from  the  capitalists  of  their 
sub-division  (b)  £100  in  wages.  With  this  amount  they  buy  one- 
fourth  of  the  surplus-value  (a),  i.e.,  commodities  consisting 
of  necessities  of  life.  With  this  money  the  capitalists  of  (a)  buy 
articles  of  luxury  to  the  same  amount,  which  equals  100,  (b), 
or  one  half  of  the  entire  output  of  luxuries.  In  this  way  the  b  cap¬ 
italists  get  back  their  variable  capital  in  the  form  of  money  and 
are  enabled  to  resume  reproduction  by  again  purchasing  labour- 
power,  since  the  entire  constant  capital  of  the  whole  category  II 
has  already  been  replaced  by  the  exchange  of  I(,+,)  for  IIC.  The 
labour-power  of  the  luxury  workers  is  therefore  saleable  anew 
only  because  the  part  of  their  own  product  created  as  an  equivalent 
for  their  wages  is  drawn  by  capitalists  Ila  into  their  consumption- 
fund,  is  turned  into  money.  (The  same  applies  to  the  sale  of  the 
labour-power  of  I,  since  the  IIC  for  which  I(,+,)  is  exchanged, 
consists  of  both  articles  of  luxury  and  necessities  of  life,  and 
that  which  is  renewed  by  means  of  I(,+,)  constitutes  the  means 
of  production  of  both  luxuries,  and  necessities.) 

3)  We  now  come  to  the  exchange  between  a  and  b,  which  is 
merely  exchange  between  the  capitalists  of  the  two  sub-divi¬ 
sions.  Si  far  we  have  disposed  of  the  variable  capital  (400,)  and 


410 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


part  of  the  surplus-value  (1008)  in  a,  and  the  variable  capital 
(100v)  in  b.  We  have  furthermore  assumed  that  the  average 
proportion  of  the  expenditure  of  the  capitalist  revenue  was  in 
both  classes  two- fifths  for  luxuries  and  three-fifths  for  necessities. 
Apart  from  the  100  already  expended  for  luxuries,  the  entire  sub¬ 
division  a  still  has  to  be  allotted  60  for  luxuries,  and  b  has  pro¬ 
portionately  to  be  allotted  40. 

(II a)s  is  then  divided  into  240  for  necessities  and  160  for 
luxuries,  or  240  +  160  =400*  (I la). 

(lib)*  is  divided  into  60  for  necessities  and  40  for  luxuries; 
60+40=100*  (lib).  The  last  40  are  consumed  by  this  class  out 
of  its  own  product  (two- fifths  of  its  surplus-value);  the  60  in 
necessities  are  obtained  by  this  class  through  the  exchange  of 
60  of  its  surplus-value  for  60*  (a). 

We  have,  then,  for  the  entire  capitalist  class  II  the  following 
(v  plus  s  in  sub-division  [a  1  consisting  of  necessities,  in  [b]  of 
luxuries): 

1 1  a  (400v+400*)  +  IIb  (100T  +  100g)  =1,000;  by  this  move¬ 
ment  there  is  thus  realised:  500v  (a  +  b)  [realised  in  400v  (a)  and 
100*  (a)  1+500,  (a  +  b)  [realised  in  300,  (a)  +  100v  (b)  +  100,  (b) ) 
=1,000. 

For  a  and  b,  each  considered  by  itself,  we  obtain  the  follow¬ 
ing  realisation: 


a)  400v(a)  +  240,  (a)  +  100v  (b)  +  60,  (b)  =  800 


,  x  v  s 

°)  TOO^j-  +  60,  (a)  +  40,  (b) 


200 

1,000. 


If,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  we  assume  the  same  proportion 
between  the  variable  and  constant  capital  (which,  by  the  way,  is 
not  at  all  necessary),  we  obtain  for  400v  (a)  a  constant  capital 
of  1,600,  and  for  100?  (b)  a  constant  capital  of  400.  We  then  have 
the  following  two  sub-divisions,  a  and  b,  in  II: 


Ha)  l,600c  -f  400v  +  400,  =  2.400 
lib)  400c-f  100v  +  100,=  600, 

adding  up  to 

2, 000c  +  500v  4  500,  =  3,000. 


Accordingly  1,600  of  the  2,000  IIC  in  articles  of  consumption, 
which  are  exchanged  for  2,000  !(»+*),  are  exchanged  for  means 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


411 


of  productiftn  of  necessities  of  life  and  400  for  means  of  production 
of  luxuries. 

The  2,000  I(v+s)  would  therefore  break  up  into  (800V+800B) 
I  for  a,  equal  to  1,600  means  of  production  of  necessities  of  life, 
and  (200v+200.)  I  for  b,  equal  to  400  means  of  production  of 
luxuries. 

A  considerable  part  of  the  instruments  of  labour  as  such,  as 
well  as  of  the  raw  and  auxiliary  materials,  etc.,  is  the  same  for 
both  departments.  But  so  far  as  the  exchange  of  the  various  por¬ 
tions  of  value  of  the  total  product  I(»+t)  is  concerned,  such  a 
division  would  be  wholly  immaterial.  Both  the  above  800v  of 
I  and  the  200v  of  I  are  realised  because  the  wages  are  spent  for 
articles  of  consumption  1,000  IIC;  hence  the  money-capital  ad¬ 
vanced  for  this  purpose  is  distributed  evenly  on  its  return  among 
the  capitalist  producers  of  I,  their  advanced  variable  capital 
is  replaced  pro  rata  in  money.  On  the  other  hand,  so  far  as  the 
realisation  of  the  1,000  I„  is  concerned,  the  capitalists  will  here  like¬ 
wise  draw  uniformly  (in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  their 
s)  60011a  and  400  lib  in  means  of  consumption  out  of  the  entire 
second  half  of  IIC,  equal  to  1,000;  consequently  those  who  replace 
the  constant  capital  of  I  la  will  draw. 

480  (three- fifths)  out  of  600c  (Ila)  and  320  (two-fifths)  out 
of  400c  (lib),  a  total  of  800;  those  who  replace  the  constant  ca¬ 
pital  of  1 1  b  will  draw. 

120  (three-fifths)  out  of  600c  (Ila)  and  80  (two-fifths)  out  of 
400c  (lib),  which  equals  200.  Grand  total,  1,000. 

What  is  arbitrary  here  is  the  ratio  of  the  variable  to  the  con¬ 
stant  capital  of  both  I  and  II  and  so  is  the  identity  of  this  ratio 
for  I  and  II  and  their  sub-divisions.  As  for  this  identity,  it  has 
been  assumed  here  merely  for  the  sake  of  simplification,  and  it 
would  not  alter  in  any  way  the  conditions  of  the  problem  and 
its  solution  if  we  were  to  assume  different  proportions.  However, 
the  necessary  result  of  all  this,  on  the  assumption  of  simple  repro¬ 
duction,  is  the  following: 

1)  That  the  new  value  created  by  the  labour  of  one  year  (di¬ 
visible  into  v-f-s)  in  the  bodily  form  of  means  of  production  is 
equal  to  the  value  of  the  constant  capital  c  contained  in  the  value  of 
the  product  created  by  the  other  part  of  the  annual  labour  and  re¬ 
produced  in  the  form  of  articles  of  consumption.  If  it  were  smaller 
than  IIC,  it  would  be  impossible  for  II  to  replace  its  constant 
capital  entirely;  if  it  were  greater,  a  surplus  would  remain  un¬ 
used.  In  either  case,  the  assumption  of  simple  reproduction 
would  be  violated. 


412 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


2)  That  in  the  case  of  annual  product  which  is  reproduced 
in  the  form  of  articles  of  consumption,  the  variable  capital  v 
advanced  in  the  form  of  money  can  be  realised  by  its  recipients, 
inasmuch  as  they  are  labourers  producing  luxuries,  only  in  that 
portion  of  the  necessities  of  life  which  embodies  for  their  capi¬ 
talist  producers  prlma  facie  their  surplus-value;  hence  that  v, 
laid  out  in  the  production  of  luxuries,  is  equal  in  value  to  a  cor¬ 
responding  portion  of  s  produced  in  the  form  of  necessities  of 
life,  and  hence  must  be  smaller  than  the  whole  of  this  s,  namely 

(lla) a,  and  that  the  variable  capital  advanced  by  the  capitalist 
producers  of  luxuries  returns  to  them  in  the  form  of  money  only 
by  means  of  the  realisation  of  that  v  in  this  portion  of  s.  This 
phenomenon  is  quite  analogous  to  the  realisation  of  I(v+»  in 
IIC,  except  that  in  the  second  case  (I Ib)v  realises  itself  in  a  part 
of  (Ha)*  of  the  same  value.  These  proportions  remain  qualita¬ 
tively  determinant  in  every  distribution  of  the  total  annual  prod¬ 
uct,  since  it  actually  enters  into  the  process  of  the  annual  re¬ 
production  brought  about  by  circulation.  I(T+g)  can  be  realised 
only  in  IIC,  just  as  IIC  can  only  be  renewed  in  function  as  a  compo¬ 
nent  part  of  productive  capital  by  means  of  this  realisation; 
in  the  same  way,  (IIb)T  can  be  realised  only  in  a  portion  of  (IIa)s 
and  (II b)v  can  only  thus  be  reconverted  into  the  form  of  money- 
capital.  It  goes  without  saying  that  this  applies  only  to  the  extent 
that  it  all  is  really  a  result  of  the  process  of  reproduction  itself,  i.e., 
to  the  extent  that  the  capitalists  of  lib,  for  instance,  do  not  ob¬ 
tain  money-capital  for  v  on  credit  from  others.  Quantitatively 
however  the  exchanges  of  the  various  portions  of  the  annual  prod¬ 
uct  can  take  place  in  the  proportions  indicated  above  only  so 
long  as  the  scale  and  value-relations  in  production  remain  sta¬ 
tionary  and  so  long  as  these  strict  relations  are  not  altered  by 
foreign  commerce. 

Now,  if  we  were  to  say  after  the  manner  of  Adam  Smith  that 
I(v+8)  resolve  themselves  into  1 1  c ,  and  IIC  resolves  itself  into  I(V+B), 
or,  as  he  used  to  say  more  frequently  and  still  more  absurdly, 
I(v-fg)  constitute  component  parts  of  the  price  (or  “value  in 
exchange,  ”  as  he  has  it)  of  IIC  and  IIC  constitutes  the  entire  compo¬ 
nent  part  of  the  value  of  I(T+s),  then  one  could  and  should 
likewise  say  that  (IIb)T  resolves  itself  into  (II a)s,  or  (IIa)e  into 

(llb) T,  or  (Ilb)y  forms  a  component  part  of  the  surplus-value 
of  Ha,  and,  vice  versa,  the  surplus-value  thus  resolves  itself 
into  wages,  or  into  variable  capital,  and  the  variable  capital 
forms  a  “component  part”  of  the  surplus-value.  This  absurdity 
is  indeed  found  in  Adam  Smith,  since  with  him  wages  are  de- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


413 


termined  by  the  value  of  the  necessities  of  life,  and  these  com¬ 
modity-values  in  their  turn  by  the  value  of  the  wages  (variable 
capital)  and  surplus-value  contained  in  them.  He  is  so  absorbed 
in  the  fractional  parts  into  which  the  value-product  of  one  work¬ 
ing-day  is  divided  on  the  basis  of  capitalism — namely  into  v 
plus  s — that  he  quite  forgets  that  it  is  immaterial  in  simple 
commodity  exchange  whether  the  equivalents  existing  in  var¬ 
ious  bodily  forms  consist  of  paid  or  unpaid  labour,  since  their 
production  costs  in  either  case  the  same  amount  of  labour;  and 
that  it  is  also  immaterial  whether  the  commodity  of  A  is  a  means 
of  production  and  that  of  B  an  article  of  consumption,  and 
whether  on&  commodity  has  to  serve  as  a  component  part  of 
capital  after  its  sale  while  another  passes  into  the  consumption- 
fund  and,  secundum  Adam,  is  consumed  as  revenue.  The  use 
to  which  the  individual  buyer  puts  his  commodity  does  not 
come  within  the  scope  of  commodity-exchange,  the  sphere  of  cir¬ 
culation,  and  does  not  affect  the  value  of  the  commodity.  This  is 
in  no  wise  altered  by  the  fact  that  in  the  analysis  of  the  circu¬ 
lation  of  the  total  annual  social  product,  the  definite  use  for 
which  it  is  intended,  the  factor  of  consumption  of  the  various 
component  parts  of  that  product,  must  be  taken  into  consider¬ 
ation. 

In  the  exchange  established  above  of  (I I b)v  for  a  portion  of 
(IIa)9  of  the  same  value,  and  in  the  further  exchanges  between 
(Ila)s  and  (IIb)s  it  is  by  no  means  assumed  that  either  the  in¬ 
dividual  capitalists  of  Ila  and  1 1  b  or  their  respective  totalities 
divide  their  surplus-value  in  the  same  proportion  between 
necessary  articles  of  consumption  and  articles  of  luxury.  The  one 
may  spend  more  on  this  consumption,  the  other  more  on  that. 
On  the  basis  of  simple  reproduction  it  is  merely  assumed  that  a 
sum  of  values  equal  to  the  entire  surplus-value  is  realised  in  the 
consumption-fund.  The  limits  are  thus  given.  Within  each  de¬ 
partment  the  one  may  spend  more  in  a,  the  other  in  b.  But  this 
may  compensate  itself  mutually,  so  that  the  capitalist  groups 
of  a  and  b,  taken  as  a  whole,  each  participate  in  the  same  propor¬ 
tion  in  both.  The  value-relations — the  proportional  shares  of  the 
two  kinds  of  producers,  a  and  b,  in  the  total  value  of  product 
II — consequently  also  a  definite  quantitative  relation  between  the 
branches  of  production  supplying  those  products — are  however 
necessarily  given  in  each  concrete  case;  only  the  proportion  chosen 
as  an  illustration  is  a  hypothetical  one.  It  would  not  alter  the 
qualitative  aspects  if  another  illustration  were  selected;  only 
the  quantitative  determinations  would  be  altered.  But  if  on  ac- 


414 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


count  of  any  circumstances  there  arises  an  actual  change  in  the 
relative  magnitude  of  a  and  b,  the  conditions  of  simple  reproduc¬ 
tion  would  also  change  accordingly. 

Since  (I Ib)v  is  realised  in  an  equivalent  part  of  (IIa)8,  it 
follows  that  in  proportion  as  the  luxury  part  of  the  annual  prod¬ 
uct  grows,  as  therefore  an  increasing  share  of  the  labour-power 
is  absorbed  in  the  production  of  luxuries,  the  reconversion  of 
the  variable  capital  advanced  in  (IIb)v  into  money-capital 
functioning  anew  as  the  money-form  of  the  variable  capital, 
and  thereby  the  existence  and  reproduction  of  the  part  of  the 
working-class  employed  in  1 1  b  —  the  supply  to  them  of  consumer 
necessities — depends  upon  the  prodigality  of  the  capitalist  class, 
upon  the  exchange  of  a  considerable  portion  of  their  surplus- 
value  for  articles  of  luxury. 

Every  crisis  at  once  lessens  the  consumption  of  luxuries.  It 
retards,  delays  the  reconversion  of  (IIb)v  into  money-capital, 
permitting  it  only  partially  and  thus  throwing  a  certain  number 
of  the  labourers  employed  in  the  production  of  luxuries  out  of 
work,  while  on  the  other  hand  it  thus  clogs  the  sale  of  consumer 
necessities  and  reduces  it.  And  this  without  mentioning  the  un¬ 
productive  labourers  who  are  dismissed  at  the  same  time,  labour¬ 
ers  who  receive  for  their  services  a  portion  of  the  capitalists’ 
luxury  expense  fund  (these  labourers  are  themselves  pro  tanto 
luxuries),  and  who  take  part  to  a  very  considerable  extent  in  the 
consumption  of  the  necessities  of  life,  etc.  The  reverse  takes 
place  in  periods  of  prosperity,  particularly  during  the  times  of  bo¬ 
gus  prosperity,  in  which  the  relative  value  of  money,  expressed  in 
commodities,  decreases  also  for  other  reasons  (without  any  ac¬ 
tual  revolution  in  values),  so  that  the  prices  of  commodities  rise 
independently  of  their  own  values.  It  is  not  alone  the  consumption 
of  necessities  of  life  which  increases.  The  working-class  (now 
actively  reinforced  by  its  entire  reserve  army)  also  enjoys  mo¬ 
mentarily  articles  of  luxury  ordinarily  beyond  its  reach,  and 
those  articles  which  at  other  times  constitute  for  the  greater  part 
consumer  “necessities”  only  for  the  capitalist  class.  This  on  its 
part  calls  forth  a  rise  in  prices. 

It  is  sheer  tautology  to  say  that  crises  are  caused  by  the  scarcity 
of  effective  consumption,  or  of  effective  consumers.  The  capital¬ 
ist  system  does  not  know  any  other  modes  of  consumption  than 
effective  ones,  except  that  of  sub  forma  pauperis  or  of  the  swin¬ 
dler.  That  commodities  are  unsaleable  means  only  that  no  effec¬ 
tive  purchasers  have  been  found  for  them,  i.e.,  consumers  (since 
commodities  are  bought  in  the  final  analysis  for  productive  or  in- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


415 


dividual  consumption).  But  if  one  were  to  attempt  to  give  this 
tautology  the  semblance  of  a  profounder  justification  by  saying 
that  the  working-class  receives  too  small  a  portion  of  its  own 
product  and  the  evil  would  be  remedied  as  soon  as  it  receives  a 
larger  share  of  it  and  its  wages  increase  in  consequence,  one  could 
only  remark  that  crises  are  always  prepared  by  precisely  a  pe¬ 
riod  in  which  wages  rise  generally  and  the  working-class  actually 
gets  a  larger  share  of  that  part  of  the  annual  product  which  is 
intended  for  consumption.  From  the  point  of  view  of  these  ad¬ 
vocates  of  sound  and  “simple”  (!)  common  sense,  such  a  period 
should  rather  remove  the  crisis.  It  appears,  then,  that  capitalist 
production  comprises  conditions  independent  of  good  or  bad 
will,  conditions  which  permit  the  working-class  to  enjoy  that 
relative  prosperity  only  momentarily,  and  at  that  always  only 
as  the  harbinger  of  a  coming  crisis.47 

We  saw  a  while  ago  that  the  proportion  between  the  production 
of  consumer  necessities  and  that  of  luxuries  requires  the  division 
of  II(v4s)  between  I  la  and  lib,  and  thus  of  IIC  between  (II  a)c 
and  (II b)c .  Hence  this  division  affects  the  character  and  the 
quantitative  relations  of  production  to  their  very  roots,  and  is 
an  essential  determining  factor  of  its  general  structure. 

Simple  reproduction  is  essentially  directed  toward  consump¬ 
tion  as  an  end,  although  the  grabbing  of  surplus-value  appears 
as  the  compelling  motive  of  the  individual  capitalists;  but  sur¬ 
plus-value,  whatever  its  relative  magnitude  may  be,  is  after  all 
supposed  to  serve  here  only  for  the  individual  consumption  of 
the  capitalist. 

As  simple  reproduction  is  a  part,  and  the  most  important  one 
at  that,  of  all  annual  reproduction  on  an  extended  scale,  this 
motive  remains  as  an  accompaniment  of  and  contrast  to  the 
self-enrichment  motive  as  such.  In  reality  the  matter  is  more  com¬ 
plicated,  because  partners  in  the  loot  — the  surplus-value  of  the 
capitalist  —  figure  as  consumers  independent  of  him. 


V.  THE  MEDIATION  OF  EXCHANGE 
BY  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  MONEY 

So  far  as  we  have  analysed  circulation  up  to  the  present,  it 
proceeded  between  the  various  classes  of  producers  as  indicated 
in  the  following  scheme: 

47  Ad  notam  for  possible  followers  of  the  Rodbertian  theory  of  crises. 
—  F.E. 


416 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


1)  Between  class  I  and  class  II: 

I.  4,OOOc  +  i,ooov  +  i,ooo9 
II .  2,000c  . -f  500v  +  500g. 

This  disposes  of  the  circulation  of  IIC,  equal  to  2,000,  which 
is  exchanged  for  I  (l,000v-f  1,0008). 

Leaving  aside  for  the  present  the  4,000  Ic  there  still  remains 
the  circulation  of  v-fs  within  class  II.  Now  II(v48)  is  divided 
between  the  sub-classes  Ila  and  lib  in  the  following  manner: 

2)  II.  500v  +  500„  =  a  (400v  +  400„)  -f  b  (100v  +  1008). 

The  400v  (a)  circulates  within  its  own  sub-class;  the  labour¬ 
ers  paid  with  it  buy  from  their  employers,  the  capitalists  Ila, 
necessary  means  of  subsistence  produced  by  themselves. 

Since  the  capitalists  of  both  sub-classes  spend  three-fifths  of 
their  surplus-value  in  products  of  Ila  (necessities)  and  two- 
fifths  in  products  of  1 1  b  (luxuries),  the  three-fifths  of  the  surplus- 
value  of  a,  or  240,  are  consumed  within  the  sub-class  Ila  itself; 
likewise,  two-fifths  of  the  surplus-value  of  b  (produced  and 
existing  in  the  form  of  articles  of  luxury),  within  the  sub-class 
lib. 

There  remains  to  be  exchanged  between  Ila  and  lib:  On  the 
side  of  Ila:  160g; 

On  the  side  of  lib:  100v+608.  These  cancel  each  other.  With 
their  100,  received  in  the  form  of  money  wages,  the  labourers 
of  lib  buy  necessities  of  life  in  that  amount  from  Ila.  The  lib 
capitalists  likewise  buy  necessities  from  Ila  to  the  amount  of 
three-fifths  of  their  surplus-value,  or  60.  The  Ila  capitalists  thus 
obtain  the  money  required  for  investing,  as  above  assumed,  two- 
fifths  of  their  surplus-value,  or  160s,  in  luxuries  produced  by 
lib  (100v  held  by  the  lib  capitalists  as  a  product  replacing  the 
wages  paid  by  them,  and  60„).  The  scheme  for  this  is  therefore: 

3)  Ila.  [400v] +  [240s]  +  160S 

b .  100v  +  60s  +  [40„], 

the  bracketed  items  circulating  and  being  consumed  only  within 
their  own  sub-class. 

The  direct  reflux  of  the  money-capital  advanced  in  variable 
capital,  which  takes  place  only  in  the  case  of  the  capitalist 
department  Ila  which  produces  necessities  of  life,  is  but  an 
expression,  modified  by  special  conditions,  of  the  previously 
mentioned  general  law  that  money  advanced  to  the  circulation  by 
producers  of  commodities  returns  to  them  in  the  normal  course 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


417 


of  commodity  circulation.  From  this  it  incidentally  follows  that 
if  any  money-capitalist  at  all  stands  behind  the  producer  of  com¬ 
modities  and  advances  to  the  industrial  capitalist  money-capital 
(in  the  strictest  meaning  of  the  word,  i.e.,  capital-value  in  the 
form  of  money),  the  real  point  of  reflux  for  this  money  is  the 
pocket  of  this  money-capitalist.  Thus  the  mass  of  the  circulating 
money  belongs  to  that  department  of  money-capital  which  is 
organised  and  concentrated  in  the  form  of  banks,  etc.,  although 
the  money  circulates  more  or  less  through  all  hands.  The  way  in 
which  this  department  advances  its  capital  necessitates  the  con¬ 
tinual  final  reflux  to  it  in  the  form  of  money,  although  this  is  once 
again  brought  about  by  the  reconversion  of  the  industrial  capital 
into  money-capital. 

The  circulation  of  commodities  always  requires  two  things: 
Commodities  which  are  thrown  into  circulation  and  money  which 
is  likewise  thrown  into  it.  “The  process  of  circulation  ...  does 
not,  like  direct  barter  of  products,  become  extinguished  upon 
the  use-values  changing  places  and  hands.  The  money  does  not 
vanish  on  dropping  out  of  the  circuit  of  the  metamorphosis  of  a 
given  commodity.  It  is  constantly  being  precipitated  into  new 
places  in  the  arena  of  circulation  vacated  by  other  commodities,” 
etc.  (Buch  I,  Kap.  Ill,  p.  92).* 

For  instance  in  the  circulation  between  II0  and  I(V+s)  we 
assumed  that  II  had  advanced  £500  in  money  for  it.  In  the 
innumerable  processes  of  circulation,  into  which  the  circulation 
between  large  social  groups  of  producers  resolves  itself,  represent¬ 
atives  of  the  various  groups  will  at  various  times  be  the  first  to 
appear  as  buyers,  and  hence  throw  money  into  circulation.  Quite 
apart  from  particular  circumstances,  this  is  necessitated  by  the 
difference,  if  nothing  else,  in  the  periods  of  production,  and  thus 
of  the  turnovers,  of  the  various  commodity-capitals.  So  with  these 
£500  II  buys  from  I  means  of  production  of  the  same  value  and 
I  buys  from  II  articles  of  consumption  valued  at  £500.  Hence  the 
money  flows  back  to  II,  but  this  department  does  not  in  any  way 
grow  richer  by  this  reflux.  It  had  first  thrown  £500  in  money  into 
circulation  and  drew  commodities  of  the  same  value  out  of  it; 
then  it  sells  £500  worth  of  commodities  and  draws  the  same 
amount  of  money  out  of  circulation;  thus  the  £500  flow  back  to 
it.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  II  has  thrown  into  circulation  £500  in 
money  and  £500  in  commodities,  which  is  equal  to  £1,000.  It 
draws  out  of  the  circulation  £500  in  commodities  and  £500  in 


*  English  edition:  Ch.  Ill,  pp.  112-13. — Ed. 


14—1752 


418 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


money.  The  circulation  requires  for  the  handling  of  £500  in  I 
commodities  and  £500  in  II  commodities  only  £500  in  money; 
hence  whoever  advanced  the  money  in  the  purchase  of  commodi¬ 
ties  from  other  producers  recovers  it  when  selling  his  own.  Con¬ 
sequently  if  I  had  at  first  bought  commodities  from  II  for  £500, 
and  later  sold  to  II  commodities  of  the  value  of  £500,  these 
£500  would  have  returned  to  I  instead  of  to  II. 

In  class  I  the  money  invested  in  wages,  i.e.,  the  variable 
capital  advanced  in  the  form  of  money,  does  not  return  directly 
in  this  form  but  indirectly,  by  a  detour.  But  in  II  the  £500  of 
wages  return  directly  from  the  labourers  to  the  capitalists,  and 
this  return  is  always  direct  in  the  case  where  purchase  and  sale 
take  place  repeatedly  between  the  same  persons  in  such  a  way  that 
they  are  acting  alternately  as  buyers  and  sellers  of  commodi¬ 
ties.  The  capitalist  of  II  pays  for  the  labour-power  in  money; 
he  thereby  incorporates  labour-power  in  his  capital  and  assumes 
the  role  of  an  industrial  capitalist  in  relation  to  his  labourers  as 
wage-earners,  but  does  so  only  by  means  of  this  act  of  circula¬ 
tion,  which  is  for  him  merely  a  conversion  of  money-capital  into 
productive  capital.  Thereupon  the  labourer,  who  in  the  first  in¬ 
stance  was  a  seller,  a  dealer  in  his  own  labour-power,  appears  in 
the  second  instance  as  a  buyer,  a  possessor  of  money,  in  relation 
to  the  capitalist,  who  now  acts  as  a  seller  of  commodities.  In  this 
way  the  capitalist  recovers  the  money  invested  by  him  in  wages. 
As  the  sale  of  these  commodities  does  not  imply  cheating,  etc., 
but  is  an  exchange  of  equivalents  in  commodities  and  money,  it 
is  not  a  process  by  which  the  capitalist  enriches  himself.  He 
does  not  pay  the  labourer  twice,  first  in  money  and  then  in  com¬ 
modities.  His  money  returns  to  him  as  soon  as  the  labourer  ex¬ 
changes  it  for  his  commodities. 

However,  the  money-capital  converted  into  variable  capital, 
i.e.,  the  money  advanced  for  wages,  plays  a  prominent  role  in  the 
circulation  of  money  itself,  since  the  labourers  must  live  from 
hand  to  mouth  and  cannot  give  the  industrial  capitalists  credit 
for  any  length  of  time.  For  this  reason  variable  capital  must  be 
advanced  in  the  form  of  money  simultaneously  at  innumerable 
territorially  different  points  in  society  at  certain  short  intervals, 
such  as  a  week,  etc. — in  periods  of  time  that  repeat  themselves 
rather  quickly  (and  the  shorter  these  periods,  the  smaller  rela¬ 
tively  is  the  total  amount  of  money  thrown  at  one  time  into 
circulation  through  this  channel) — whatever  the  various  periods  of 
turnover  of  the  capitals  in  the  different  branches  of  industry.  In 
every  country  with  a  capitalist  production  the  money-capital  so 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


419 


advanced  constitutes  a  relatively  decisive  share  of  the  total  circu¬ 
lation,  the  more  so  as  the  same  money,  before  its  reflux  to  its  point 
of  departure,  passes  through  the  most  diverse  channels  and  func¬ 
tions  as  a  medium  of  circulation  for  countless  other  businesses. 


Now  let  us  consider  the  circulation  between  I(v+S)  and  IIC 
from  a  different  angle. 

Capitalists  I  advance  £1,000  in  the  payment  of  wages.  With 
this  money  the  labourers  buy  £1,000  worth  of  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  from  capitalists  II.  These  in  turn  buy  for  the  same  money 
means  of  production  from  capitalists  I.  Capitalists  I  thus  get 
back  their  variable  capital  in  the  form  of  money,  while  capital¬ 
ists  II  have  reconverted  one  half  of  their  constant  capital  from 
the  form  of  commodity-capital  into  that  of  productive  capital. 
Capitalists  II  advance  another  £500  in  money  to  get  means  of 
production  from  I.  The  capitalists  I  spend  this  money  on  articles 
of  consumption  from  II.  These  £500  thus  return  to  capitalists 
II.  They  advance  this  amount  again  in  order  to  reconvert  the  last 
quarter  of  their  constant  capital,  converted  into  commodities, 
into  its  productive  bodily  form.  This  money  flows  back  to  I  and 
once  more  withdraws  articles  of  consumption  of  the  same  amount 
from  II.  Thus  the  £500  return  to  II.  The  capitalists  II  are  now 
as  before  in  possession  of  £500  in  money  and  £2,000  in  constant 
capital,  the  latter  having  been  newly  converted  from  the  form 
of  commodity-capital  into  that  of  productive  capital.  By  means 
of  £1,500  a  quantity  of  commodities  worth  £5,000  has  been  cir¬ 
culated.  Namely:  1)  I  pays  £1,000  to  his  labourers  for  their  la¬ 
bour-power  of  the  same  value;  2)  With  these  same  £1,000  the 
labourers  buy  means  of  subsistence  from  II;  3)  With  the  same 
money  II  buys  means  of  production  from  I,  thereby  restoring  to 
I  variable  capital  to  the  amount  of  £1,000  in  the  form  of  money; 
4)  II  buys  £500  worth  of  means  of  production  from  I;  5)  With 
the  same  £500  I  buys  articles  of  consumption  from  II;  6)  With 
the  same  £500  II  buys  means  of  production  from  I;  7)  With  the 
same  £500  I  buys  means  of  subsistence  from  II.  Thus  £500  have 
returned  to  II,  which  had  thrown  them  into  circulation  besides 
its  £2,000  in  commodities  and  for  which  it  did  not  withdraw 
from  circulation  any  equivalent  in  commodities. 48 

The  exchange  therefore  takes  the  following  course: 

48  This  presentation  differs  somewhat  from  that  given  on  p.  394  [present 
volume,  pp.  404-05J.  There  1  likewise  throws  an  independent  amount  of 
£500  into  circulation.  Here  II  alone  supplies  the  additional  money  for  the 
circulation  But  this  does  not  alter  the  final  result. — F.E. 


420 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


1)  I  pays  £1,000  in  money  for  labour-power,  hence  for  com¬ 
modities  equal  to  £1,000. 

2)  The  labourers  buy  with  their  wages  amounting  in  money 
to  £1,000  articles  of  consumption,  from  II;  hence  commodities 
equal  to  £1,000. 

3)  With  the  £l,000  received  from  the  labourers  II  buys  means 
cf  production  of  the  same  value  from  I;  hence  commodities  equal 
to  £1,000. 

In  this  way  the  £1,000  have  returned  to  I  as  the  money-form 
of  its  variable  capital. 

4)  II  buys  £500  worth  of  means  of  production  fr8m  I,  hence 
commodities  equal  to  £500. 

5)  With  the  same  £500  I  buys  articles  of  consumption  from 
II;  hence  commodities  equal  to  £500. 

6)  With  the  same  £500  II  buys  means  of  production  from  I; 
hence  commodities  equal  to  £500. 

7)  With  the  same  £500  I  buys  articles  of  consumption  from 
II;  hence  commodities  equal  to  £500. 

Total  amount  of  commodity-values  exchanged:  £5,000. 

The  £500  advanced  by  II  for  the  purchase  have  returned  to  it. 

The  result  is  as  follows: 

1)  I  possesses  variable  capital  in  the  form  of  money  to  the 
amount  of  £1,000,  which  it  originally  advanced  to  the  circula¬ 
tion.  It  furthermore  expended  £1,000  for  its  individual  consump¬ 
tion,  in  the  shape  of  its  own  products;  i.e.,  it  has  spent  the 
money  which  it  had  received  for  the  sale  of  means  of  production 
to  the  amount  of  £1,000. 

On  the  other  hand  the  bodily  form  into  which  the  variable 
capital  existing  in  the  form  of  money  must  be  transformed,  i.e., 
labour-power,  has  been  maintained,  reproduced  and  again  made 
available  by  consumption  as  the  sole  article  of  trade  of  its  owners, 
which  they  must  sell  in  order  to  live.  The  relation  of  wage- 
labourers  and  capitalists  has  likewise  been  reproduced. 

2)  The  constant  capital  of  II  is  replaced  in  kind,  and  the 
£500  advanced  by  the  same  II  to  the  circulation  have  returned  to  it. 

As  for  the  labourers  I,  the  circulation  is  the  simple  one  of 

i  2 

C— M— C  :  C  (labour-poWer)— M  (£1,000,  money-form  of  variable 

3 

capital  I)— £  (necessities  of  life  to  the  amount  of  £1,000); 
these  £1,000  convert  into  money  to  the  same  amount  of  value 
the  constant  capital  II  existing  in  the  form  of  commodities, 
of  means  of  subsistence. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


421 


As  for  the  capitalists  II,  the  process  is  C— M,  the  transformation 
of  a  portion  of  their  commodity-product  into  the  money-form, 
from  which  it  is  reconverted  into  the  constituents  of  productive 
capital,  namely  into  a  portion  of  the  means  of  production  re¬ 
quired  by  them. 

In  the  money  advance  (£500)  made  by  capitalists  II  for  the 
purchase  of  the  other  parts  of  the  means  of  production,  the  mon¬ 
ey-form  of  that  portion  of  IIC  which  exists  as  yet  in  the  form 
of  commodities  (articles  of  consumption)  is  anticipated;  in  the 
act  M — C,  in  which  II  buys  with  M,  and  C  is  sold  by  I,  the  money 
(II)  is  converted  into  a  portion  of  the  productive  capital,  while 
C  (I)  passes  through  the  act  C — M,  changes  into  money,  which 
however  does  not  represent  any  component  part  of  capital-value 
for  I,  but  surplus-value  converted  into  money  and  expended 
solely  for  articles  of  consumption. 

In  the  circuit  M— G  ...  P  ...  C'—  M',  the  first  act,  M— C,  is 
that  of  one  capitalist,  the  last,  C' — M'  (or  part  of  it),  is  that  of 
another;  whether  the  C,  by  which  M  is  converted  into  productive 
capital,  represents  a  component  of  constant  capital,  of  variable 
capital,  or  surplus-value  for  the  seller  of  C  (who  exchanges  this  C 
for  money),  is  wholly  immaterial  for  the  commodity  circulation 
itself. 

Class  I,  so  far  as  concerns  the  component  v+s  of  its  commodity- 
product,  draws  more  money  out  of  the  circulation  than  it  has 
thrown  in.  In  the  first  place,  the  £1,000  of  variable  capital  re¬ 
turn  to  it;  in  the  second  place,  it  sells  means  of  production  worth 
£500  (see  above,  exchange  No.  4);  one  half  of  its  surplus-value 
is  thus  turned  into  money;  then  (exchange  No.  6)  it  sells  once 
more  £500  worth  of  means  of  production,  the  second  half  of  its 
surplus-value,  and  thus  the  entire  surplus-value  is  withdrawn 
from  circulation  in  the  shape  of  money.  Hence  in  succession: 

1)  variable  capital  reconverted  into  money,  equal  to  £1,000; 

2)  one  half  of  the  surplus-value  turned  into  money,  equal  to 
£500;  3)  the  other  half  of  the  surplus-value,  equal  to  £500; 
altogether  l,000v-f-l,000a  turned  into  money,  equal  to  £2,000. 
Although  I  threw  only  £1,000  into  circulation  (aside  from  those 
exchanges  which  promote  the  reproduction  of  Ic  and  which  we 
shall  have  to  analyse  later),  it  has  withdrawn  double  that  amount 
from  it.  Of  course  s  passes  into  other  hands,  (II),  as  soon  as  it 
has  been  converted  into  money,  by  being  spent  for  articles  of 
consumption.  The  capitalists  of  I  withdrew  only  as  much  in 
money  as  they  threw  into  it  in  value  in  the  form  of  commodities', 
the  fact  that  this  value  is  surplus-value,  i.e.,  that  it  does  not  cost 


422 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


the  capitalists  anything,  does  not  alter  the  value  of  these  com¬ 
modities  in  any  way;  so  far  as  the  exchange  of  values  in  commodity 
circulation  is  concerned,  that  fact  is  of  no  consequence  at  all. 
The  existence  of  surplus-value  in  money  is  of  course  transient, 
the  same  as  all  other  forms  which  the  advanced  capital  assumes 
in  its  metamorphoses.  It  lasts  no  longer  than  the  interval  between 
the  conversion  of  commodities  I  into  money  and  the  subsequent 
conversion  of  the  money  I  into  commodities  II. 

If  the  turnovers  had  been  assumed  to  bo  shorter — or,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  simple  circulation  of  commodities,  the  circu¬ 
lation  of  money  more  rapid — even  less  money  would  be  ample 
to  circulate  the  exchanged  commodity-values;  the  amount  is 
always  determined — if  the  number  of  successive  exchanges  is 
given— by  the  sum  of  the  prices,  or  the  sum  of  values,  of  the  cir¬ 
culating  commodities.  It  is  immaterial  in  what  proportion  this 
sum  of  values  consists  of  surplus-value  on  the  one  hand,  and  of 
capital-value  on  the  other. 

If  the  wages  of  I,  in  our  illustration,  were  paid  four  times 
per  year,  we  should  have  4  times  250,  or  1,000.  Hence  £250  in 
money  would  suffice  for  the  circulation  Iv— V,  IIC,  and  for  that 
between  the  variable  capital  IT  and  the  labour-power  I.  Likewise, 
if  the  circulation  between  Is  and  IIC  were  to  take  place  in  four 
turnovers,  it  would  require  only  £250,  or  in  the  aggregate  a 
sum  of  money,  or  a  money-capital,  of  £500  for  the  circulation 
of  commodities  amounting  to  £5,000.  In  that  case  the  surplus- 
value  would  be  converted  into  money  four  times  successively, 
one-quarter  each  time,  instead  of  twice  successively,  one  half 
each  time. 

If  I  instead  of  II  should  act  as  buyer  in  exchange  No.  4  and 
expend  £500  for  articles  of  consumption  of  the  same  value, 
II  would  buy  means  of  production  with  the  same  £500  in  ex¬ 
change  No.  5;  6)  I  buys  articles  of  consumption  with  the  same 
£500;  7)  II  buys  means  of  production  with  the  same  £500  so 
that  the  £500  finally  return  to  I,  the  same  as  before  to  II.  The 
surplus-value  is  here  converted  into  money  by  means  of  the  money 
spent  by  the  capitalist  producers  themselves  for  their  individual 
consumption.  This  money  represents  the  anticipated  revenue, 
the  anticipated  receipts  from  the  surplus-value  contained  in  the 
commodities  still  to  be  sold.  The  surplus-value  is  not  converted 
into  money  by  the  reflux  of  the  £500;  for  aside  from  £1,000  in 
the  form  of  commodities  Iv,  I  threw  £500  in  money  into  circula¬ 
tion  at  the  close  of  exchange  No.  4,  and  this  was  additional 
money,  so  far  as  we  know,  and  not  the  proceeds  from  the  sale  of 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


423 


commodities.  If  this  money  flows  back  to  I,  I  merely  gets  back 
its  additional  money,  and  does  not  thereby  convert  its  surplus- 
value  into  money.  The  conversion  of  the  surplus-value  I  into 
money  takes  place  only  by  the  sale  of  the  commodities  I,,  in 
which  it  is  incorporated,  and  lasts  each  time  only  until  the  money 
obtamed  by  the  sale  of  the  commodities  is  expended  anew  in 
the  purchase  of  articles  of  consumption. 

With  additional  money  (£500)  I  buys  articles  of  consumption 
from  II;  this  money  was  spent  by  I,  which  holds  its  equivalent 
in  II  commodities;  the  money  returns  for  the  first  time  by  the 
purchase  from  I  by  II  of  commodities  to  the  amount  of  £500; 
in  other  words,  it  returns  as  the  equivalent  of  the  commodities 
sold  by  I,  but  these  commodities  do  not  cost  I  anything,  they  con¬ 
stitute  surplus-value  for  I,  and  thus  the  money  thrown  into  cir¬ 
culation  by  this  very  department  turns  its  own  surplus-value  into 
money  On  buying  for  the  second  time  (No.  6)  I  has  likewise  ob¬ 
tained  its  equivalent  in  II  commodities.  Take  it,  now,  that  II 
does  not  buy  (No.  7)  means  of  production  from  I.  In  that  case  I 
would  have  actually  paid  £1,000  for  articles  of  consumption, 
thereby  consuming  its  entire  surplus-value  as  revenue;  namely, 
500  in  its  own  I  commodities  (means  of  production)  and  500  in 
money;  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  still  have  £500  in  its  own  com¬ 
modities  (means  of  production)  in  stock,  and  would  have  got  rid 
of  £500  in  money. 

On  the  contrary  II  would  have  reconverted  three-fourths  of 
its  constant  capital  from  the  form  of  commodity-capital  into  that 
of  productive  capital;  but  one-fourth  (£500)  would  be  held  by 
it  in  the  form  of  money-capital,  actually  in  the  form  of  idle 
money,  or  of  money  which  has  suspended  its  function  and  is 
held  in  abeyance.  Should  this  state  of  affairs  last  for  any  length 
of  time,  II  would  have  to  cut  down  its  scale  of  reproduction  by 
one-fourth. 

However  the  500  in  means  of  production,  which  I  has  on  its 
hands,  are  not  surplus-value  existing  in  the  form  of  commodi¬ 
ties;  they  occupy  the  place  of  the  £500  advanced  in  money, 
which  1  possessed  aside  from  its  £1,000  of  surplus-value  in  com¬ 
modity-form.  In  the  form  of  money,  they  are  always  converti¬ 
ble;  as  commodities  they  are  momentarily  unsaleable.  So  much 
is  evident:  that  simple  reproduction  —  in  which  every  element  of 
productive  capital  must  be  replaced  in  both  II  and  I — remains 
possible  in  this  case  only  if  the  500  golden  birds,  which  I  first 
sent  flying,  return  to  it. 

If  a  capitalist  (we  have  only  industrial  capitalists  still  to 


424 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


deal  with  here,  who  are  the  representatives  of  all  others)  spends 
money  for  articles  of  consumption,  he  is  through  with  it,  it  goes 
the  way  of  all  flesh.  It  can  flow  back  to  him  only  if  he  fishes  it 
out  of  circulation  in  exchange  for  commodities,  i.e.,  for  his 
commodity-capital.  As  the  value  of  his  entire  annual  commodity- 
product  (his  commodity-capital),  so  that  of  every  one  of  its  ele¬ 
ments,  i.e.,  the  value  of  every  individual  commodity,  is  divis¬ 
ible,  as  far  as  he  is  concerned,  into  constant  capital-value,  variable 
capital-value,  and  surplus-value.  The  conversion  into  money  of 
every  individual  commodity  (as  elements  constituting  the  com¬ 
modity-product)  is  consequently  at  the  same  time  such  a  con¬ 
version  of  a  certain  portion  of  the  surplus-value  contained  in 
the  entire  commodity-product.  In  this  case,  then,  it  is  literally 
true  that  the  capitalist  himself  threw  the  money  into  circulation 
— when  he  spent  it  on  articles  of  consumption  — by  which  his  sur¬ 
plus-value  is  converted  into  money,  or  realised.  Of  course  it  is 
not  a  question  of  the  identical  coins  but  of  a  certain  amount  of 
hard  cash  equal  to  the  one  (or  to  a  portion  of  the  one)  which 
he  had  previously  thrown  into  circulation  to  satisfy  his  personal 
wants. 

In  practice  this  occurs  in  two  ways:  If  the  business  has  just 
been  opened,  in  the  current  year,  it  will  take  quite  a  while,  at 
least  a  few  months,  before  the  capitalist  is  able  to  use  any  portion 
of  the  receipts  of  his  business  for  his  personal  consumption.  But 
for  all  that  he  does  not  suspend  his  consumption  for  a  single  mo¬ 
ment.  He  advances  to  himself  (immaterial  whether  out  of  his  own 
pocket  or  by  means  of  credit  from  the  pocket  of  somebody  else) 
money  in  anticipation  of  surplus-value  still  to  be  snatched  by 
him;  but  in  doing  so  he  also  advances  a  circulating  medium  for 
the  realisation  of  surplus-value  to  be  realised  later.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  the  business  has  been  running  regularly  for  a  longer 
period  payments  and  receipts  are  distributed  over  different  terms 
throughout  the  year.  But  one  thing  continues  uninterruptedly, 
namely,  the  consumption  of  the  capitalist,  which  anticipates, 
and  whose  volume  is  computed  on  a  definite  proportion  of,  the 
customary  or  estimated  revenue.  With  every  portion  of  commodi¬ 
ties  sold,  a  portion  of  the  surplus-value  to  be  produced  annually 
is  also  realised.  But  if  during  the  entire  year  only  as  much  of  the 
produced  commodities  is  sold  as  is  required  to  replace  the  con¬ 
stant  and  variable  capital-values  contained  in  them,  or  if  prices 
were  to  fall  to  such  an  extent  that  only  the  advanced  capital-value 
contained  in  the  entire  annual  commodity-product  should  be 
realised  on  its  sale,  then  the  anticipatory  character  of  the  expend- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


425 


iture  of  money  in  expectation  of  future  surplus-value  would 
be  clearly  revealed.  If  our  capitalist  fails,  his  creditors  and  the 
court  investigate  whether  his  anticipated  private  expenditures 
were  in  proper  proportion  to  the  volume  of  his  business  and  to 
the  receipt  of  surplus-value  usually  or  normally  corresponding 
to  it. 

So  far  as  the  entire  capitalist  class  is  concerned,  the  proposition 
that  it  must  itself  throw  into  circulation  the  money  required  for 
the  realisation  of  its  surplus-value  (correspondingly  also  for  the 
circulation  of  its  capital,  constant  and  variable)  not  only  fails 
to  appear  paradoxical,  but  stands  forth  as  a  necessary  condition 
of  the  entire  mechanism.  For  there  are  here  only  two  classes: 
the  working-class  disposing  only  of  its  labour-power,  and  the 
capitalist  class,  which  has  a  monopoly  of  the  social  means  of 
production  and  money.  It  would  rather  be  a  paradox  if  the  working- 
class  were  to  advance  in  the  first  instance  from  its  own  resources 
the  money  required  for  the  realisation  of  the  surplus-value 
contained  in  the  commodities.  But  the  individual  capitalist 
makes  this  advance  only  by  acting  as  a  buyer,  expending  money  in 
the  purchase  of  articles  of  consumption  or  advancing  money  in  the 
purchase  of  elements  of  his  productive  capital,  whether  of  labour- 
power  or  means  of  production.  He  never  parts  with  his  money 
unless  he  gets  an  equivalent  for  it.  He  advances  money  to  the 
circulation  only  in  the  same  way  as  he  advances  commodities 
to  it.  He  acts  in  both  instances  as  the  initial  point  of  their  circu¬ 
lation. 

The  actual  process  is  obscured  by  two  circumstances: 

1)  The  appearance  in  the  process  of  circulation  of  industrial 
capital  of  merchant's  capital  (the  first  form  of  which  is  always 
money,  since  the  merchant  as  such  does  not  create  any  “product” 
or  “commodity”)  and  of  money-capital  as  an  object  of  manipu¬ 
lation  by  a  special  kind  of  capitalists. 

2)  The  cUvision  of  surplus-value— which  must  always  be  first 
in  the  hands  of  the  industrial  capitalist — into  various  catego¬ 
ries,  as  vehicles  of  which  there  appear,  aside  from  the  industrial 
capitalist,  the  landlord  (for  ground-rent),  the  usurer  (for  interest), 
etc.,  furthermore  the  government  and  its  employees,  rentiers, 
etc.  These  gentry  appear  as  buyers  vis-a-vis  the  industrial  capi¬ 
talist  and  to  that  extent  as  converters  of  his  commodities  into 
money;  they  too  throw  “money"  pro  parte  into  the  circulation 
and  he  gets  it  from  them.  But  it  is  always  forgotten  from  what 
source  they  derived  it  originally,  and  continue  deriving  it  ever 
anew. 


426 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


VI.  THE  CONSTANT  CAPITAL 
OF  DEPARTMENT  I«a 

It  remains  for  us  to  analyse  the  constant  capital  of  depart¬ 
ment  I,  amounting  to  4,000c.  This  value  is  equal  to  the  value — 
appearing  anew  in  the  commodity-product  I  — of  the  means  of 
production  consumed  in  the  creation  of  this  quantity  of  commodi¬ 
ties.  This  re-appearing  value,  which  was  not  produced  in  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  of  I,  but  entered  into  it  during  the  preceding 
year  as  constant  value,  as  the  given  value  of  its  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  exists  now  in  the  entire  part  of  commodity  mass  I  not  ab¬ 
sorbed  by  category  II.  And  the  value  of  this  quantity  of  commod¬ 
ities  thus  left  in  the  hands  of  the  I  capitalists  equals  two-thirds 
of  the  value  of  their  entire  annual  commodity-product.  In  the 
case  of  the  individual  capitalist  producing  some  particular  means 
of  production  we  could  say:  He  sells  his  commodity-product;  he 
converts  it  into  money.  By  converting  it  into  money  he  has  also 
reconverted  into  money  the  constant  portion  of  the  value  of  his 
product.  With  this  portion  of  value  converted  into  money  he 
then  buys  his  means  of  production  once  more  from  other  sellers 
of  commodities  or  transforms  the  constant  portion  of  the  value 
of  his  product  into  a  bodily  form  in  which  it  can  resume  its 
function  of  productive  constant  capital.  But  now  this  assumption 
becomes  impossible.  The  capitalist  class  of  I  comprises  the  to¬ 
tality  of  the  capitalists  producing  means  of  production.  Besides, 
the  commodity-product  of  4,000,  which  is  left  on  their  hands, 
is  a  portion  of  the  social  product  which  cannot  be  exchanged 
for  any  other,  because  no  such  other  portion  of  the  annual  product 
remains.  With  the  exception  of  these  4,000,  all  the  remainder 
has  been  disposed  of.  One  portion  has  been  absorbed  by  the  social 
consumption-fund,  and  another  portion  has  to  replace  the  con¬ 
stant  capital  of  department  II,  which  has  already  exchanged 
everything  it  could  dispose  of  in  an  exchange  with  department  I. 

The  difficulty  is  solved  very  easily  if  we  remember  that  the 
entire  commodity-product  I  in  its  bodily  form  consists  of  means 
of  production,  i.e.,  of  the  material  elements  of  the  constant  cap¬ 
ital  itself.  We  meet  here  the  same  phenomenon  which  we  wit¬ 
nessed  before  under  II,  only  in  a  different  aspect.  In  the  case  of 
II  the  entire  commodity-product  consisted  of  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion.  Hence  one  portion  of  it,  measured  by  the  wages  plus  sur¬ 
plus-value  contained  in  this  product,  could  be  consumed  by  its 


48a  From  here,  Manuscript  II. — F,E. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


427 


own  producers.  Here,  in  the  case  of  I,  the  entire  product  consists 
of  means  of  production,  of  buildings,  machinery,  vessels,  raw  and 
auxiliary  materials,  etc.  One  portion  of  them,  namely  that 
replacing  the  constant  capital  employed  in  this  sphere,  can  there¬ 
fore  immediately  function  anew  in  its  bodily  form  as  a  compo¬ 
nent  of  the  productive  capital.  So  far  as  it  goes  into  circulation, 
it  circulates  within  class  I.  In  II  a  part  of  the  commodity-product 
is  individually  consumed  in  kind  by  its  own  producers  while  in 
I  a  portion  of  the  product  is  productively  consumed  in  kind 
by  its  capitalist  producers. 

In  the  part  of  the  commodity-product  I  equal  to  4,000c  the 
constant  capital-value  consumed  in  this  category  re-appears,  and 
does  so  in  a  bodily  form  in  which  it  can  immediately  resume  its 
function  of  productive  constant  capital.  In  II  that  portion  of 
the  commodity-product  of  3,000  whose  value  is  equal  to  the  wages 
plus  the  surplus-value  (equal  to  1,000)  passes  directly  into  the 
individual  consumption  of  the  capitalists  and  labourers  of  II, 
while  on  the  other  hand  the  constant  capital-value  of  this  com¬ 
modity-product  (equal  to  2,000)  cannot  re-enter  the  productive 
consumption  of  the  II  capitalists  but  must  be  replaced  by  ex¬ 
change  with  I. 

In  I,  on  the  contrary,  that  portion  of  its  commodity-product 
of  6,000  whose  value  is  equal  to  the  wages  plus  the  surplus-value 
(equal  to  2,000)  does  not  pass  into  the  individual  consumption 
of  its  producers,  and  cannot  do  so  on  account  of  its  bodily  form. 
It  must  first  be  exchanged  with  II.  Contrariwise  the  constant 
portion  of  the  value  of  this  product,  equal  to  4,000,  exists  in  a 
bodily  form  in  which — taking  the  capitalist  class  I  as  a  whole — 
it  can  immediately  resume  its  function  of  constant  capital  of  that 
class.  In  other  words,  the  entire  product  of  department  I  consists 
of  use-values  which,  on  account  of  their  bodily  form,  can  under 
a  capitalist  mode  of  production  serve  only  as  elements  of  con¬ 
stant  capital.  Hence  one-third  (2,000)  of  this  product  of  6,000 
replaces  the  constant  capital  of  department  II,  and  the  other 
two-thirds  the  constant  capital  of  department  I. 

The  constant  capital  I  consists  of  a  great  number  of  different 
groups  of  capital  invested  in  the  various  branches  of  production 
of  means  of  production,  so  much  in  iron  works,  so  much  in  coal¬ 
mines,  etc.  Every  one  of  these  groups  of  capital,  or  every  one  of 
these  social  group  capitals,  is  in  its  turn  composed  of  a  larger  or 
smaller  number  of  independently  functioning  individual  capitals. 
In  the  first  place,  the  capital  of  society,  for  instance  7,500  (which 
may  mean  millions,  etc.)  is  composed  of  various  groups  of  capital; 


428 


REPRODUCTION'  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


the  social  capital  of  7,500  is  divided  into  separate  parts,  every 
one  of  which  is  invested  in  a  special  branch  of  production;  each 
portion  of  the  social  capital-value  invested  in  some  particular 
branch  of  production  consists,  so  far  as  its  bodily  form  is  con¬ 
cerned,  partly  of  means  of  production  required  in  that  particular 
sphere  of  production,  partly  of  the  labour-power  needed  in  that 
business  and  trained  accordingly,  variously  modified  by  division 
of  labour,  according  to  the  specific  kind  of  labour  to  be  per¬ 
formed  in  each  individual  sphere  of  production.  Each  portion  of 
social  capital  invested  in  any  particular  branch  of  production 
in  its  turn  consists  of  the  sum  of  the  individual  capitals  invested 
in  it  and  functioning  independently.  This  patently  applies  to 
both  departments,  I  as  well  as  II. 

As  for  the  constant  capital-value  re-appearing  in  I  in  the  form 
of  its  commodity-product,  it  re-enters  in  part  as  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  into  the  particular  sphere  of  production  (or  even  into  the 
individual  business)  from  which  it  emerges  as  product;  for  in¬ 
stance  corn  into  the  production  of  corn,  coal  into  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  coal,  iron  in  the  form  of  machines  into  the  production 
of  iron,  etc. 

However  since  the  partial  products  constituting  the  constant 
capital-value  I  do  not  return  directly  to  their  particular  or  in¬ 
dividual  sphere  of  production,  they  merely  change  their  place. 
They  pass  in  their  bodily  form  to  some  other  sphere  of  production 
of  department  I,  while  the  product  of  other  spheres  of  production 
of  department  I  replaces  them  in  kind.  It  is  merely  a  change  of 
place  of  these  products.  All  of  them  re-enter  as  factors  replacing 
constant  capital  in  I,  only  instead  of  the  same  group  of  I  they 
enter  another.  Since  an  exchange  takes  place  here  between  the 
individual  capitalists  of  I,  it  is  an  exchange  of  one  bodily  form 
of  constant  capital  for  another  bodily  form  of  constant  capital, 
of  one  kind  of  means  of  production  for  other  kinds  of  means  of 
production.  It  is  an  exchange  of  the  different  individual  parts 
of  constant  capital  I  among  themselves.  Products  which  do  not 
serve  directly  as  means  of  production  in  their  own  sphere  are 
transferred  from  their  place  of  production  to  another  and  thus 
mutually  replace  one  another.  In  other  words  (similarly  to  what 
we  saw  in  the  case  of  the  surplus-value  II),  every  capitalist  I  draws 
from  this  quantity  of  commodities,  proportionally  to  his  share  in 
the  constant  capital  of  4,000,  the  means  of  production  required 
by  him.  If  production  were  socialised  instead  of  capitalistic, 
these  products  of  department  I  would  evidently  just  as  regular¬ 
ly  be  redistributed  as  means  of  production  to  the  various  branches 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


429 


of  this  department,  for  purposes  of  reproduction,  one  portion 
remaining  directly  in  that  sphere  of  production  from  which  it 
emerged  as  a  product,  another  passing  over  to  other  places  of 
production,  thereby  giving  rise  to  a  constant  to-and-fro  movement 
between  the  various  places  of  production  in  this  department. 


VII.  VARIABLE  CAPITAL  AND  SURPLUS- VALUE 
IN  BOTH  DEPARTMENTS 

The  total  value  of  the  annually  produced  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion  is  thus  equal  to  the  variable  capital-value  II  reproduced 
during  the  year  plus  the  newly  produced  surplus-value  II  (i.e., 
equal  to  the  value  produced  by  II  during  the  year)  plus  the  varia¬ 
ble  capital-value  I  reproduced  during  the  year  and  the  newly 
produced  surplus-value  I  (i.e.,  plus  the  value  created  by  I  during 
the  year). 

On  the  assumption  of  simple  reproduction  the  total  value  of 
the  annually  produced  articles  of  consumption  is  therefore  equal 
to  the  annual  value-product,  i.e.,  equal  to  the  total  value 
produced  during  the  year  by  social  labour,  and  this  must 
be  so,  because  in  simple  reproduction  this  entire  value  is 
consumed. 

The  total  social  working-day  is  divided  into  two  parts:  1)  Nec¬ 
essary  labour  which  creates  in  the  course  of  the  year  a  value  of 
1,500t;  2)  surplus-labour,  which  creates  an  additional  value, 
or  surplus-value,  of  1,500„.  The  sum  of  these  values,  3,000,  is 
equal  to  the  value  of  the  annually  produced  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion — 3,000.  The  total  value  of  the  articles  of  consumption 
produced  during  the  year  is  therefore  equal  to  the  total  value 
produced  by  the  total  social  working-day  during  the  year,  equal  to 
the  value  of  the  social  variable  capital  plus  the  social  surplus- 
value,  equal  to  the  total  new  product  of  the  year. 

But  we  know  that  although  these  two  magnitudes  of  value 
are  equal  the  total  value  of  commodities  II,  the  articles  of 
consumption,  is  not  produced  in  this  department  of  social  produc¬ 
tion.  They  are  equal  because  the  constant  capital-value  re-ap¬ 
pearing  in  II  is  equal  to  the  value  newly  produced  by  I  (value 
of  variable  capital  plus  surplus-value);  therefore  I(v+s)Can  buy 
the  part  of  the  product  of  II  which  represents  the  constant  cap¬ 
ital-value  for  its  producers  (in  department  II).  This  shows, 
then,  why  the  value  of  the  product  of  capitalists  II,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  society,  may  be  resolved  into  v+s  although  for 


430 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


these  capitalists  it  is  divided  into  c+v+s.  This  is  so  only  because 
IIC  is  here  equal  to  I(T+8),  and  because  these  two  components 
of  the  social  product  interchange  their  bodily  forms  by  exchange, 
so  that  after  this  transformation  IIC  exists  once  more  in  means 
of  production  and  I(T+i)  in  articles  of  consumption. 

And  it  is  this  circumstance  which  induced  Adam  Smith  to 
maintain  that  the  value  of  the  annual  product  resolves  itself 
into  v-fs.  This  is  true  1)  only  for  that  part  of  the  annual  product 
which  consists  of  articles  of  consumption;  and  2)  it  is  not  true  in 
the  sense  that  this  total  value  is  produced  in  II  and  that  the 
value  of  its  product  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  variable  capital 
advanced  in  II  plus  the  surplus-value  produced  in  II.  It  is  true 
only  in  the  sense  that  II(c+v+8)  is  equal  to  II(T+8)-i-I(v+8),  or 
because  IIC  is  equal  to  I(T+8). 

It  follows  furthermore: 

The  social  working-day  (i.e.,  the  labour  expended  by  the  en¬ 
tire  working-class  during  the  whole  year),  like  every  individual 
working-day,  breaks  up  into  only  two  parts,  namely  into  neces¬ 
sary  labour  and  surplus-labour,  and  the  value  produced  by  this 
working-day  consequently  likewise  resolves  itself  into  only  two 
parts,  namely  into  the  value  of  the  variable  capital,  or  that 
portion  of  the  value  with  which  the  labourer  buys  the  means  of 
his  own  reproduction,  and  the  surplus-value  which  the  capitalist 
may  spend  for  his  own  individual  consumption.  Nevertheless, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  society,  one  part  of  the  social  working- 
day  is  spent  exclusively  on  the  production  of  new  constant  capital, 
namely  of  products  exclusively  intended  to  function  as  means 
of  production  in  the  labour-process  and  hence  as  constant  capital 
in  the  accompanying  process  of  self-expansion  of  value.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  our  assumption  the  total  social  working-day  presents  itself  • 
as  a  money-value  of  3,000,  only  one-third  of  which,  or  1,000, 
is  produced  in  department  II,  which  manufactures  articles  of 
consumption,  that  is,  the  commodities  in  which  the  entire  value 
of  the  variable  capital  and  the  entire  surplus-value  of  society 
are  ultimately  realised.  Thus,  according  to  this  assumption,  two- 
thirds  of  the  social  working-day  are  employed  in  the  production 
of  new  constant  capital.  Although  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
individual  capitalists  and  labourers  of  department  I  these  two- 
thirds  of  the  social  working-day  serve  merely  for  the  production 
of  variable  capital-value  plus  surplus-value,  the  same  as  the  last 
third  of  the  social  working-day  in  department  II,  still  from 
the  point  of  view  of  society  and  likewise  of  the  use-value  of  the 
product,  these  two-thirds  of  the  social  working-day  produce 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


431 


only  replacement  of  constant  capital  in  the  process  of  productive 
consumption  or  already  so  consumed.  Also  when  viewed  individ¬ 
ually  these  two-thirds  of  the  working-day,  while  producing  a 
total  value  equal  only  to  the  value  of  the  variable  capital  plus 
surplus-value  for  the  producer,  nevertheless  do  not  produce  any 
use-values  of  a  kind  on  which  wages  or  surplus-value  could  be 
expended;  for  their  products  are  means  of  production. 

It  must  be  noted  in  the  first  place  that  no  portion  of  the  so¬ 
cial  working-day,  whether  in  I  or  in  II,  serves  for  the  production 
of  the  value  of  the  constant  capital  employed  and  functioning  in 
these  two  great  spheres  of  production.  They  produce  only  addi¬ 
tional  value,  2,000  I(V+e) +1,000  II(y+s),  in  addition  to  the 
value  of  the  constant  capital  equal  to  4,000  Ic  +  2,000  IIC.  The 
new  value  produced  in  the  form  of  means  of  production  is  not 
yet  constant  capital.  It  merely  is  intended  to  function  as  such 
in  the  future. 

The  entire  product  of  II — the  articles  of  consumption — viewed 
concretely  as  a  use-value,  in  its  bodily  form,  is  a  product  of 
the  one-third  of  the  social  working-day  spent  by  II.  It  is  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  labour  in  its  concrete  form— such  as  the  labour  of  weav¬ 
ing,  baking,  etc.,  performed  in  this  department— the  product 
of  this  labour,  inasmuch  as  it  functions  as  the  subjective  element 
of  the  labour-process.  As  to  the  constant  portion  of  the  value 
of  this  product  II,  it  re-appears  only  in  a  new  use-value,  in  a 
new  bodily  form,  the  form  of  articles  of  consumption,  while 
it  existed  previously  in  the  form  of  means  of  production.  Its 
value  has  been  transferred  by  the  labour-process  from  its  old 
bodily  form  to  its  new  bodily  form.  But  the  value  of  these  two- 
thirds  of  the  product-value,  equal  to  2,000,  has  not  been  produced 
in  this  year’s  self-expansion  process  of  II. 

Just  as  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  labour-process,  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  II  is  the  result  of  newly  functioning  living  labour  and  of 
the  assumed  means  of  production  assigned  to  it,  in  which  that 
labour  materialises  itself  as  in  its  objective  conditions,  so,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  process  of  self-expansion,  the  value  of 
the  product  of  II,  equal  to  3,000,  is  composed  of  a  new  value 
(500v+500a  =1,000)  produced  by  the  newly  added  one-third  of 
the  social  working-day  and  of  a  constant  value  in  which  are 
embodied  two-thirds  of  a  past  social  working-day  that  had  elapsed 
before  the  present  process  of  production  of  .II  here  under 
consideration.  This  portion  of  the  value  of  the  II  product  finds 
expression  in  a  portion  of  the  product  itself.  It  exists  in  a  quan¬ 
tity  of  articles  of  consumption  worth  2,000,  or  two-thirds  of 


432 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


a  social  working-day.  This  is  the  new  use-form  in  which  this 
value-portion  re-appears.  The  exchange  of  part  of  the  articles 
of  consumption  equal  to  2,000  IIC  for  means  of  production  of 
I  equal  to  I  (l,000v  + 1,000,,)  thus  really  represents  an  exchange 
of  two-thirds  of  an  aggregate  working-day— which  do  not  con¬ 
stitute  any  portion  of  this  year's  labour,  and  elapsed  before  this 
year — for  two-thirds  of  the  working-day  newly  added  this  year. 
Two-thirds  of  this  year’s  social  working-day  could  not  be  em¬ 
ployed  in  the  production  of  constant  capital  and  at  the  same 
time  constitute  variable  capital-value  plus  surplus-value  for 
their  own  producers  unless  they  were  to  be  exchanged  for  a  portion 
of  the  value  of  the  annually  consumed  articles  of  consumption, 
in  which  are  incorporated  two-thirds  of  a  working-day  spent 
and  realised  before  this  year.  It  is  an  exchange  of  two-thirds 
of  this  year’s  working-day  for  two-thirds  of  a  working-day  spent 
before  this  year,  an  exchange  of  this  year’s  labour-time  for  last 
year’s.  This  explains  the  riddle  of  how  the  value-product  of  an 
entire  social  working-day  can  resolve  itself  into  variable  capital- 
value  plus  surplus-value,  although  two-thirds  of  this  working- 
day  were  not  expended  in  the  production  of  articles  in  which 
variable  capital  or  surplus-value  can  be  realised,  but  rather  in 
the  production  of  means  of  production  for  the  replacement  of 
the  capital  consumed  during  the  year.  The  explanation  is  simply 
that  two-thirds  of  the  value  of  the  product  of  II,  in  which  the 
capitalists  and  labourers  of  I  realise  the  variable  capital-value 
plus  surplus-value  produced  by  them  (and  which  constitute 
two-ninths  of  the  value  of  the  entire  annual  product),  are,  so 
far  as  their  value  is  concerned,  the  product  of  two-thirds  of  a 
social  working-day  of  a  year  prior  to  the  current  one. 

The  sum  of  the  social  product  I  and  II — means  of  production 
and  articles  of  consumption  — is  indeed,  viewed  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  their  use-value,  in  their  concrete,  bodily  form,  the  prod¬ 
uct  of  this  year’s  labour,  but  only  to  the  extent  that  this  labour 
itself  is  regarded  as  useful  and  concrete  and  not  as  an  expendi¬ 
ture  of  labour-power,  as  value-creating  labour.  And  even  the 
first  is  true  only  in  the  sense  that  the  means  of  production  have 
transformed  themselves  into  new  products,  into  this  year’s  prod¬ 
ucts  solely  by  dint  of  the  living  labour  added  on  to  them,  operat¬ 
ing  on  them.  On  the  contrary,  this  year’s  labour  could  not  have 
transformed  itself  into  products  without  means  of  production 
independent  of  it,  without  instruments  of  labour  and  materials 
of  production. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


433 


VIII.  THE  CONSTANT  CAPITAL  IN  BOTH  DEPARTMENTS 

The  analysis  of  the  total  value  of  the  product  of  9,000,  and 
of  the  categories  into  which  it  is  divided,  does  not  present  any 
greater  difficulty  than  that  of  the  value  produced  by  an  indi¬ 
vidual  capital.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  identical. 

The  entire  annual  social  product  here  contains  three  social 
working-days,  each  of  one  year.  The  value  expressed  by  each 
one  of  these  working-days  is  3,000,  so  that  the  value  expressed 
by  the  total  product  is  equal  to  3  x  3,000,  or  9,000. 

Furthermore  the  following  portions  of  this  working  time  have 
elapsed  prior  to  the  one-year  process  of  production,  the  product 
of  which  we  are  now  analysing:  In  department  I  four-thirds  of 
a  working-day  (with  a  product  worth  4,000),  and  in  department 
II  two-thirds  of  a  working-day  (with  a  product  worth  2,000), 
making  a  total  of  two  social  working-days  with  a  product  worth 
6,000.  For  this  reason  4,000  Ic+ 2,000  IIC=6,000C  figure  as  the 
value  of  the  means  of  production,  or  the  constant  capital-value 
re-appearing  in  the  total  value  of  the  social  product. 

Furthermore  one-third  of  the  social  working-day  of  one  year 
newly  added  in  department  I  is  necessary  labour,  or  labour  re¬ 
placing  the  value  of  the  variable  capital  of  1,000  Iv  and  paying 
the  price  of  the  labour  employed  by  I.  In  the  same  way  one-sixth 
of  a  social  working-day  in  II  is  necessary  labour  with  a  value  of 
500.  Hence  1,000  Iv  +  500  1 1 v  =1 ,500v,  expressing  the  value  of 
one  half  of  the  social  working-day,  is  the  value-expression  of 
the  first  half  of  the  aggregate  working-day  added  this  year  and 
consisting  of  necessary  labour. 

Finally,  in  department  I  one-third  of  the  aggregate  working- 
day,  with  a  product  worth  1,000,  is  surplus-labour,  and  in  depart¬ 
ment  II  one-sixth  of  the  working-day,  with  a  product  worth 
500,  is  surplus-labour.  Together  they  constitute  the  other  half 
of  the  added  aggregate  working-day.  Hence  the  total  surplus- 
value  produced  is  equal  to  1,000  Is+500  IIa,  or  l,500g. 

Thus: 

The  constant  capital  portion  of  the  value  of  the  social  prod¬ 
uct  (c): 

Two  working-days  expended  prior  to  the  process  of 
production;  expression  of  value  =6,000. 

Necessary  labour  (v)  expended  during  the  year: 

One  half  of  a  working-day  expended  on  the  annual 
production;  expression  of  value  =1,500. 

Surplus-labour  (s)  expended  during  the  year: 


434 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


One  half  of  a  working-day  expended  on  the  annual 
production;  expression  of  value  =1,500. 

Value  produced  by  annual  labour  (vJ-s)  =3,000. 

Total  value  of  product  (c  +  v-j-s)  =9,000. 

The  difficulty,  then,  does  not  consist  in  the  analysis  of  the 
value  of  the  social  product  itself.  It  arises  in  the  comparison  of 
the  component  parts  of  the  value  of  the  social  product  with  its 
material  constituents. 

The  constant,  merely  re-appearing  portion  of  value  is  equal 
to  the  value  of  that  part  of  this  product  which  consists  of  means 
of  production  and  is  incorporated  in  that  part. 

The  new  value-product  of  the  year,  equal  to  v-Ts,  is  equal 
to  the  value  of  that  part  of  this  product  which  consists  of  articles 
of  consumption  and  is  incorporated  in  it. 

But  with  exceptions  of  no  consequence  here,  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  articles  of  consumption  are  wholly  different  kinds  of 
commodities,  products  of  entirely  different  bodily  or  use-forms, 
and,  therefore,  products  of  wholly  different  classes  of  concrete 
labour.  The  labour  which  employs  machinery  in  the  production 
of  means  of  subsistence  is  vastly  different  from  the  labour  which 
makes  machinery.  The  entire  aggregate  annual  working-day, 
whose  value-expression  is  3,000,  seems  spent  in  the  production  of 
articles  of  consumption  equal  to  3,000,  in  which  no  constant  por¬ 
tion  of  value  re-appears,  since  these  3,000,  equal  to  l,500v-f 1,500*, 
resolve  themselves  only  into  variable  capital-value  and  surplus- 
value.  On  the  other  hand  the  constant  capital-value  of  6,000 
re-appears  in  a  class  of  products  quite  different  from  articles  of 
consumption,  namely  in  means  of  production,  while  as  a  matter 
of  fact  no  part  of  the  social  working-day  seems  spent  in  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  these  new  products.  It  seems  rather  that  the  entire 
working-day  consists  only  of  classes  of  labour  which  do  not 
result  in  means  of  production  but  in  articles  of  consumption.  This 
mystery  has  already  been  cleared  up.  The  value-product  of  the 
year’s  labour  is  equal  to  the  value  of  the  products  of  department 
II,  to  the  total  value  of  the  newly  produced  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion.  But  the  value  of  these  products  is  greater  by  two-thirds 
than  that  portion  of  the  annual  labour  which  has  been  expended 
in  the  sphere  of  production  of  articles  of  consumption  (depart¬ 
ment  II).  Only  one-third  of  the  annual  labour  has  been  expended 
in  their  production.  Two-thirds  of  this  annual  labour  have  been 
expended  in  the  production  of  means  of  production,  that  is  to 
say,  in  department  I.  The  value-product  created  during  this  time 
in  I,  equal  to  the  variable  capital-value  plus  surplus-value  pro- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


435 


duced  in  I,  is  equal  to  the  constant-capital-value  of  II  re-appear¬ 
ing  in  articles  of  consumption  of  II.  Hence  they  may  be  mutu¬ 
ally  exchanged  and  replaced  in  kind.  The  total  value  of  the  arti¬ 
cles  of  consumption  of  II  is  therefore  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  new 
value-product  of  I  and  II,  or  1 1  «•  4  v  -t-«>  is  equal  to  I(V+9)+II(v+a)i 
hence  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  new  values  produced  by  the  year’s 
labour  in  the  form  of  v  plus  s. 

On  the  other  hand  the  total  value  of  the  means  of  production 
(I)  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  constant  capital-value  re-appearing 
in  the  form  of  means  of  production  (I)  and  in  that  of  articles  of 
consumption  (II);  in  other  words,  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  constant 
capital-value  re-appearing  in  the  total  product  of  society.  This 
total  value  is  equal  in  terms  of  value  to  four-thirds  of  a  working- 
day  preceding  the  process  of  production  of  I  and  two-thirds  of 
a  working-day  preceding  the  process  of  production  of  II,  in  all 
equal  to  two  aggregate  working-days. 

The  difficulty  with  the  annual  social  product  arises  there¬ 
fore  from  the  fact  that  the  constant  portion  of  value  is  represent¬ 
ed  by  a  wholly  different  class  of  products — means  of  production 
—than  the  new  value  v+s  added  to  this  constant  portion  of 
value  and  represented  by  articles  of  consumption.  Thus  the  ap¬ 
pearance  is  created,  so  far  as  value  is  concerned,  that  two-thirds 
of  the  consumed  mass  of  products  are  found  again  in  a  new  form 
as  new  product,  without  any  labour  having  been  expended  by 
society  in  their  production.  This  is  not  so  in  the  case  of  an  in¬ 
dividual  capital.  Every  individual  capitalist  employs  some 
particular  concrete  kind  of  labour,  which  transforms  the  means 
of  production  peculiar  to  it  into  a  product.  Let  for  instance  the 
capitalist  be  a  machine-builder,  the  constant  capital  expend¬ 
ed  during  the  year  6  000c,  the  variable  l,500v,  the  surplus-value 
l,500s,  the  product  9,000,  the  product,  say,  18  machines  of 
500  each.  The  entire  product  here  exists  in  the  same  form,  that 
of  machines.  (If  he  produces  various  kinds,  each  kind  is  calcu¬ 
lated  separately.)  The  entire  commodity-product  is  the  result 
of  the  labour  expended  during  the  year  in  machine-building; 
it  is  a  combination  of  the  same  concrete  kind  of  labour  with 
the  same  means  of  production.  The  various  portions  of  the  value 
of  the  product  therefore  present  themselves  in  the  same  bodily 
form:  12  machines  embody  6,000c,  3  machines  l,500v,  3  machines 
1,5009.  In  the  present  case  it  is  evident  that  the  value  of  the 
12  machines  is  equal  to  6,000c,  not  because  there  is  incorporated 
in  these  12  machines  only  labour  performed  previously  to  the 
manufacture  of  these  machines  and  not  labour  expended  on  build- 


430 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


ing  them.  The  value  of  the  means  of  production  for  18  machines 
did  not  of  itself  become  transformed  into  12  machines  but  the 
value  of  these  12  machines  (consisting  itself  of  4,000c+l,000v-f- 
-fl,000„)  is  equal  to  the  total  value  of  the  constant  capital  con¬ 
tained  in  the  18  machines.  The  machine-manufacturer  must 
therefore  sell  12  of  the  18  machines  in  order  to  replace  his  expend¬ 
ed  constant  capital,  which  he  requires  for  the  reproduction  of 
18  new  machines.  On  the  contrary,  the  thing  would  be  inex¬ 
plicable  if  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  labour  expended  was 
employed  solely  in  the  manufacture  of  machines,  the  result 
were  to  be:  On  the  one  hand  6  machines  equal  to  l,500„-f-l,500B, 
on  the  other  iron,  copper,  screws,  belts,  etc.,  of  a  value  amount¬ 
ing  to  6,000c,  i.e.,  the  means  of  production  of  the  machines  in 
their  bodily  form,  which,  as  we  know,  the  individual  machine- 
building  capitalist  does  not  produce  himself  but  must  replace 
by  way  of  the  process  of  circulation.  And  yet  it  seems  at  first 
glance  that  the  reproduction  of  the  annual  product  of  society 
takes  place  in  this  absurd  way. 

The  product  of  an  individual  capital,  i.e.,  of  every  fraction 
of  the  social  capital  endowed  with  a  life  of  its  own  and  function¬ 
ing  independently,  has  a  bodily  form  of  one  kind  or  another. 
The  only  condition  is  that  this  product  must  really  have  a  use- 
form,  a  use-value,  which  gives  it  the  imprint  of  a  member  of  the 
world  of  commodities  capable  of  circulation.  It  is  immaterial 
and  accidental  whether  or  not  it  can  re-enter  as  a  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  into  the  same  process  of  production  from  which  it  emerged 
as  a  product;  in  other  words,  whether  the  portion  of  its  value 
representing  the  constant  part  of  the  capital  has  a  bodily  form 
in  which  it  can  actually  function  again  as  constant  capital. 
If  not,  this  portion  of  the  value  of  the  product  is  reconverted 
into  the  form  of  its  material  elements  of  production  by  means 
of  sale  and  purchase  and  thus  the  constant  capital  is  reproduced 
in  the  bodily  form  capable  of  functioning. 

It  is  different  with  the  product  of  the  aggregate  social  capital. 
All  the  material  elements  of  reproduction  must  in  their  bodily 
form  constitute  parts  of  this  product.  The  consumed  constant 
part  of  capital  can  be  replaced  by  the  aggregate  production  only 
to  the  extent  that  the  entire  constant  part  of  the  capital  re¬ 
appearing  in  the  product  re-appears  in  the  bodily  form  of  new 
means  of  production  which  can  really  function  as  constant  capital. 
Hence,  simple  reproduction  being  assumed,  the  value  of  that 
portion  of  the  product  which  consists  of  means  of  production 
must  be  equal  to  the  constant  portion  of  the  value  of  social  capital. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


431 


Furthermore:  Considered  individually,  the  capitalist  pro¬ 
duces  in  the  value  of  his  product  by  means  of  the  newly  added 
labour  only  his  variable  capital  plus  surplus-value,  while  the 
constant  part  of  the  value  is  transferred  to  the  product  owing 
to  the  concrete  character  of  the  newly  added  labour. 

Considered  socially  that  portion  of  the  social  working-day 
which  produces  means  of  production,  hence  adding  new  value 
to  them  as  well  as  transferring  to  them  the  value  of  the  means 
of  production  consumed  in  their  manufacture,  creates  nothing 
but  new  constant  capital  intended  to  replace  that  consumed 
in  the  shape  of  old  means  of  production  in  both  departments 
I  and  II.  It  creates  only  product  intended  for  productive  con¬ 
sumption.  The  entire  value  of  this  product,  then,  is  only  value 
which  can  function  anew  as  constant  capital,  which  can  only 
buy  back  constant  capital  in  its  bodily  form,  and  which,  for 
this  reason,  resolves  itself,  considered  socially,  neither  into 
variable  capital  nor  surplus-value. 

On  the  other  hand  that  part  of  the  social  working-day  which 
produces  articles  of  consumption  does  not  create  any  portion  of 
the  social  replacement  capital.  It  creates  only  products  intended, 
in  their  bodily  form,  to  realise  the  value  of  the  variable  capital 
and  surplus-value  of  I  and  II. 

Speaking  of  the  point  of  view  of  society,  and  therefore  con¬ 
sidering  the  aggregate  product  of  society,  which  comprises  both 
the  reproduction  of  social  capital  and  individual  consumption, 
we  must  not  lapse  into  the  manner  copied  by  Proudhon  from 
bourgeois  economy  and  look  upon  this  matter  as  though  a  so¬ 
ciety  with  a  capitalist  mode  of  production,  if  viewed  en  bloc , 
as  a  totality,  would  lose  this  its  specific  historical  and  economic 
character.  No,  on  the  contrary.  We  have,  in  that  case,  to  deal 
with  the  aggregate  capitalist.  The  aggregate  capital  appears 
as  the  capital  stock  of  all  individual  capitalists  combined.  This 
joint-stock  company  has  in  common  with  many  other  stock 
companies  that  everyone  knows  what  he  puts  in,  but  not  what 
he  will  get  out  of  it. 


IX.  A  RETROSPECT  TO  ADAM  SMITH, 

STORCH,  AND  RAMSAY 

The  aggregate  value  of  the  social  product  amounts  to  9,000, 
equal  to  6, 000o+l, 500^,4-1,300,,  i.e.,  0,000  reproduce  the  value 
of  the  means  of  production  and  3,000  that  of  the  articles  of  con- 


438 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


sumption.  The  value  of  the  social  revenue  (v-f-s)  amounts  therefore 
to  only  one-third  of  the  value  of  the  aggregate  product,  and 
the  totality  of  consumers,  labourers  as  well  as  capitalists,  can 
draw  commodities,  products  out  of  the  total  social  product  and 
incorporate  them  in  their  consumption-fund  only  to  the  amount 
of  this  one-third.  On  the  other  hand  6,000,  or  two-thirds,  of  the 
value  of  the  product,  are  the  value  of  the  constant  capital  which 
must  be  replaced  in  kind.  Means  of  production  to  this  amount 
must  therefore  again  be  incorporated  in  the  production-fund. 
Storch  recognised  this  as  essential  without  being  able  to  prove 
it:  “It  is  clear  that  the  value  of  the  annual  product  is  divid¬ 
ed  partly  into  capital  and  partly  into  profits,  and  that  each 
one  of  these  portions  of  the  value  of  the  annual  product  is  regu¬ 
larly  employed  in  huying  the  products  which  the  nation  needs 
both  for  the  maintenance  of  its  capital  and  for  replenishing  its 
consumption-fund....  The  products  which  constitute  the  capital 
of  a  nation  are  not  to  be  consumed."  (Storch,  Considerations  sur 
la  nature  du  revenu  national,  Paris,  1824,  pp.  134-35,  150.) 

Adam  Smith,  however,  has  promulgated  this  astounding 
dogma,  which  is  believed  to  this  day,  not  only  in  the  previously 
mentioned  form,  according  to  which  the  entire  value  of  the 
social  product  resolves  itself  into  revenue,  into  wages  plus  sur¬ 
plus-value,  or,  as  he  expresses  it,  into  wages  plus  profit  (interest) 
plus  ground-rent,  but  also  in  the  still  more  popular  form,  ac¬ 
cording  to  which  the  consumers  must  “ultimately”  pay  to  the 
producers  the  entire  value  of  the  product.  This  is  to  this  day  one 
of  the  best-established  commonplaces,  or  rather  eternal  truths, 
of  the  so-called  science  of  political  economy.  This  is  illustrated 
in  the  following  plausible  manner:  Take  any  article,  for  instance, 
a  linen  shirt.  First,  the  spinner  of  linen  yarn  has  to  pay  the  flax- 
grower  the  entire  value  of  the  flax,  i.e.,  the  value  of  flax-seed, 
fertilisers,  labouring  cattle  feed,  etc.,  plus  that  part  of  the  value 
which  the  fixed  capital,  such  as  buildings,  agricultural  imple¬ 
ments,  etc.,  of  the  flax-grower  gives  up  to  the  product;  the  wages 
paid  in  the  production  of  the  flax;  the  surplus-value  (profit, 
ground-rent)  embodied  in  the  flax;  finally  the  carriage  costs 
of  the  flax  from  its  place  of  production  to  the  spinnery.  Next, 
the  weaver  has  to  reimburse  the  spinner  of  the  linen  yarn  not 
only  for  the  price  of  the  flax,  but  also  for  that  portion  of  the 
value  of  machinery,  buildings,  etc.,  in  short  of  the  fixed  capital, 
which  is  transferred  to  the  flax;  furthermore,  all  the  auxiliary 
materials  consumed  in  the  spinning  process,  the  wages  of  the 
spinners,  the  surplus-value,  etc.,  and  so  the  thing  goes  on  with 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


439 


the  hleacher,  the  transportation  costs  of  the  finished  linen, 
and  finally  the  shirtmaker,  who  has  to  pay  the  entire  price  of 
all  preceding  producers,  who  supplied  him  only  with  his  raw 
material.  In  his  hands  a  further  addition  of  value  takes  place, 
partly  through  the  value  of  constant  capital  consumed  in  the 
manufacture  of  shirts  in  the  shape  of  instruments  of  labour, 
auxiliary  materials,  etc.,  and  partly  through  the  labour  expend¬ 
ed,  which  adds  the  value  of  the  shirtmakers’  wages  plus  the 
surplus-value  of  the  shirt  manufacturer.  Now  let  this  entire 
product  in  shirts  cost  ultimately  £100  and  let  this  be  the  ali¬ 
quot  part  of  the  value  of  the  total  annual  product  expended  by 
society  on  shirts.  The  consumers  of  the  shirts  pay  these  £100, 
i.e.,  the  value  of  all  the  means  of  production  contained  in  the 
shirts,  and  of  the  wages  plus  surplus-value  of  the  flax-grower, 
spinner,  weaver,  bleacher,  shirt  manufacturer,  and  all  carriers. 
This  is  absolutely  correct.  Indeed,  every  child  can  see  that. 
But  then  it  says:  that’s  how  matters  stand  with  regard  to  the 
value  of  all  other  commodities.  It  should  say:  That’s  how  mat¬ 
ters  stand  with  regard  to  the  value  of  all  articles  of  consumption, 
with  regard  to  the  value  of  that  portion  of  the  social  product 
which  passes  into  the  consumption-fund,  i.e.,  with  regard  to 
that  portion  of  the  value  of  the  social  product  which  can  be 
expended  as  revenue.  True  enough,  the  sum  of  the  values  of  all 
these  commodities  is  equal  to  the  value  of  all  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  (constant  portions  of  capital)  used  up  in  them  plus  the 
value  created  by  the  labour  last  added  (wages  plus  surplus-value). 
Hence  the  totality  of  the  consumers  can  pay  for  this  entire  sum 
of  values  because,  although  the  value  of  each  individual  commod¬ 
ity  is  made  up  of  c-f-v+s,  nevertheless  the  sum  of  the  values 
of  all  commodities  passing  into  the  consumption-fund,  taken  at 
its  maximum,  can  be  equal  only  to  that  portion  of  the  value 
of  the  social  product  which  resolves  itself  into  v+s,  in  other 
words,  equal  to  that  value  which  the  labour  expended  during 
the  year  has  added  to  the  existing  means  of  production — i.e., 
to  the  value  of  the  constant  capital.  As  for  the  value  of  the  con¬ 
stant  capital,  we  have  seen  that  it  is  replaced  out  of  the  mass 
of  social  products  in  a  two-fold  way.  First,  through  an  exchange 
by  capitalists  II,  who  produce  articles  of  consumption,  with 
capitalists  I,  who  produce  the  means  of  production  for  them. 
And  here  is  the  source  of  the  saying  that  what  is  capital  for  the 
one  is  revenue  for  the  other.  But  this  is  not  the  actual  state  of 
affairs.  The  2,000  IIC  existing  in  the  shape  of  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption  worth  2,000  constitute  a  constant  capital-value  for 


440 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


the  capitalist  class  of  II.  They  therefore  cannot  consume  this 
value  themselves,  although  the  product  in  accordance  with  its 
bodily  form  is  intended  for  consumption.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  2,000  I(v+s)  are  wages  plus  surplus-value  produced  by  cap¬ 
italist  and  working-class  I.  They  exist  in  the  bodily  form  of 
means  of  production,  of  things  in  which  their  own  value  cannot 
be  consumed.  We  have  here,  then,  a  sum  of  values  to  the  amount 
of  4,000,  one  half  of  which,  before  and  after  the  exchange,  re¬ 
places  only  constant  capital,  while  the  other  half  forms  only 
revenue. 

In  the  second  place  the  constant  capital  of  department  I  is 
replaced  in  kind,  partly  by  exchange  among  capitalists  I,  partly 
by  replacement  in  kind  in  each  individual  business. 

The  phrase  that  the  value  of  the  entire  annual  product  must 
ultimately  be  paid  by  the  consumer  would  be  correct  only  if  con¬ 
sumer  were  taken  to  comprise  two  vastly  different  kinds:  indi¬ 
vidual  consumers  and  productive  consumers.  However  that 
one  portion  of  the  product  must  be  consumed  productively  means 
nothing  but  that  it  must  function  as  capital  and  not  be  consumed 
as  revenue. 

If  we  divide  the  value  of  the  aggregate  product,  equal  to 
9,000,  into  6,000c-fl,500¥-|-l,5008  and  look  upon  the  3,000(T+8) 
only  in  its  quality  of  revenue,  then,  on  the  contrary,  the  variable 
capital  seems  to  disappear  and  capital,  socially  speaking,  to 
consist  only  of  constant  capital.  For  that  which  appeared  origi¬ 
nally  as  l,500v  has  resolved  itself  into  a  portion  of  the  social 
revenue,  into  wages,  the  revenue  of  the  working-class,  and  its 
character  of  capital  has  thus  vanished.  This  conclusion  is  ac¬ 
tually  drawn  by  Ramsay.  According  to  him,  capital,  socially 
considered,  consists  only  of  fixed  capital,  but  by  fixed  capital 
he  means  the  constant  capital,  that  quantity  of  values  which 
consists  of  means  of  production,  whether  these  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  are  instruments  or  materials  of  labour,  such  as  raw  materials, 
semi-finished  products,  auxiliary  materials,  etc.  He  calls  the 
variable  capital  circulating  capital:  “Circulating  capital  con¬ 
sists  exclusively  of  subsistence  and  other  necessaries  advanced 
to  the  workmen,  previous  to  the  completion  of  the  produce  of 
their  labour....  Fixed  capital  alone,  not  circulating,  is  properly 
speaking  a  source  of  national  wealth....  Circulating  capital  is 
not  an  immediate  agent  in  production,  nor  even  essential  to  it  at 
all,  but  merely  a  convenience  rendered  necessary  by  the  deplor¬ 
able  poverty  of  the  mass  of  the  people....  Fixed  capital  alone 
constitutes  an  element  of  cost  of  production  in  a  national  point 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


441 


of  view.”  (Ramsay,  l.c.,  pp.  23  to  26,  passim.)  Ramsay  defines 
fixed  capital,  by  which  he  means  constant  capital,  more  closely 
in  the  following  words:  “On  the  length  of  time  during  which 
any  portion  of  the  product  of  that  labour”  (namely  labour  be¬ 
stowed  on  any  commodity)  “has  existed  as  fixed  capital;  that  is, 
in  a  form  in  which,  though  assisting  to  raise  the  future  commod¬ 
ity,  it  does  not  maintain  labourers.’’  (Ibid.,  p.  59.) 

Here  we  see  once  more  the  calamity  Adam  Smith  brings  on 
by  submerging  the  distinction  between  constant  and  variable 
capital  in  that  between  fixed  capital  and  circulating  capital. 
Ramsay’s  constant  capital  consists  of  instruments  of  labour, 
his  circulating  capital  of  means  of  subsistence.  Both  of  them  are 
commodities  of  a  given  value.  The  one  can  no  more  create  sur¬ 
plus-value  than  the  other. 


X.  CAPITAL  AND  REVENUE:  VARIABLE  CAPITAL 
AND  WAGES48 

The  entire  annual  reproduction,  the  entire  product  of  a  year 
is  the  product  of  the  useful  labour  of  that  year.  But  the  val¬ 
ue  of  this  total  product  is  greater  than  that  portion  of  the  value 
in  which  the  annual  labour,  the  labour-power  expended  dur¬ 
ing  the  current  year,  is  incorporated.  The  value-product  of  this 
year,  the  value  newly  created  during  this  period  in  the  form 
of  commodities,  is  smaller  than  the  value  of  the  product,  the  ag¬ 
gregate  value  of  the  mass  of  commodities  fabricated  during  the 
entire  year.  The  difference  obtained  by  deducting  from  the  total 
value  of  the  annual  product  that  value  which  was  added  to  it 
by  the  labour  of  the  current  year,  is  not  really  reproduced  value 
but  only  value  re-appearing  in  a  new  form  of  existence.  It  is 
value  transferred  to  the  annual  product  from  value  existing 
prior  to  it,  which  may  be  of  an  earlier  or  later  date,  according 
to  the  durability  of  the  components  of  the  constant  capital  which 
have  participated  in  that  year’s  social  labour-process,  a  value 
which  may  originate  from  the  value  of  means  of  production  which 
came  into  the  world  the  previous  year  or  in  a  number  of  years 
even  previous  to  that.  It  is  by  all  means  a  value  transferred  from 
means  of  production  of  former  years  to  the  product  of  the  cur¬ 
rent  year. 


48  The  following  Is  from  Manuscript  VIII. — F.  E. 


442 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


Take  pur  scheme.  We  have,  after  the  exchange  of  the  ele¬ 
ments  hitherto  considered  between  I  and  II,  and  within  II: 

I)  4,000C+1,000V  +  1,000B  (the  latter  2,000  realised  in  articles 
of  consumption  of  IIC)  =6,000. 

II)  2,000c  (reproduced  by  exchange  with  I(T+g)  +  500v-t-5003  = 
=3,000. 

Sum  of  values  =9,000. 

Value  newly  produced  during  the  year  is  contained  only  in 
v  and  s.  The  sum  of  the  value-product  of  this  year  is  therefore 
equal  to  the  sum  of  v  +  s,  or  2,000  I(V+8)-t-l,000  II(v+8)  =3,000. 
All  remaining  value-parts  of  the  product  of  this  year  are  merely 
value  transferred  from  the  value  of  earlier  means  of  production 
consumed  in  the  annual  production.  The  current  annual  labour 
has  not  produced  any  value  other  than  that  of  3,000.  That  rep¬ 
resents  its  entire  annual  value-product. 

Now,  as  we  have  seen,  the  2,000  I(v+8)  replace  for  class  II 
its  2,000  IIC  in  the  bodily  form  of  means  of  production.  Two- 
thirds  of  the  annual  labour,  then,  expended  in  category  I,  have 
newly  produced  constant  capital  II,  both  its  entire  value  and  its 
bodily  form.  From  the  standpoint  of  society,  two-thirds  of  the 
labour  expended  during  the  year  have  created  new  constant 
capital-value  realised  in  the  bodily  form  appropriate  for 
department  II.  Thus  the  greater  portion  of  the  annual  labour  of 
society  has  been  spent  in  the  production  of  new  constant  capital 
(capital-value  existing  in  the  form  of  means  of  production)  in 
order  to  replace  the  value  of  the  constant  capital  expended  in 
the  production  of  articles  of  consumption.  What  distinguishes 
capitalist  society  in  this  case  from  the  savage  is  not,  as  Senior60 
thinks,  the  privilege  and  peculiarity  of  the  savage  to  expend 
his  labour  at  times  in  a  way  that  does  not  procure  him  any  prod¬ 
ucts  resolvable  (exchangeable)  into  revenue,  i.e.,  into  articles 
of  consumption.  No,  the  distinction  consists  in  the  following: 

a)  Capitalist  society  employs  more  of  its  available  annual 
labour  in  the  production  of  means  of  production  (ergo,  of  con¬ 
stant  capital)  which  are  not  resolvable  into  revenue  in  the  form 
of  wages  or  surplus-value,  but  can  function  only  as  capital. 

b)  When  a  savage  makes  bows,  arrows,  stone  hammers,  axes, 
baskets,  etc.,  he  knows  very  well  that  he  did  not  spend  the  time 


60  “When  the  savage  makes  bows,  he  exercises  an  industry,  but  he  does 
not  practise  abstinence.”  (Senior,  Principes  jondamentaux  de  VEconomie 
Politique,  trad.  Arrivabene,  Paris,  1836,  pp.  342-43.)  “The  more  society 
progresses,  the  more  abstinence  is  demanded  ’’  (Ibid.,  p.  312).  (Cf  Das 
Kapital,  Buch  I,  Kap.  XXII,  S.  19  )  [English  edition:  Ch.  XXIV,  3,  p.597.J 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


443 


so  employed  in  the  production  of  articles  of  consumption,  but 
that  he  has  thus  stocked  up  the  means  of  production  he  needs, 
and  nothing  else.  Furthermore,  a  savage  commits  a  grave  eco¬ 
nomic  sin  by  his  utter  indifference  to  waste  of  time,  and,  as 
Tylor51  tells  us,  takes  sometimes  a  whole  month  to  make  one 
arrow. 

The  current  conception  whereby  some  political  economists 
seek  to  extricate  themselves  from  the  theoretical  difficulty,  i.e., 
the  understanding  of  the  real  interconnections — that  what  is 
capital  to  one  is  revenue  to  another,  and  vice  versa  — is  only 
partially  correct  and  becomes  utterly  wrong  (harbours  therefore 
a  complete  misunderstanding  of  the  entire  process  of  exchange 
taking  place  in  annual  reproduction,  hence  also  a  misunderstand¬ 
ing  of  the  actual  basis  of  the  partially  correct)  as  soon  as  the 
character  of  universality  is  attributed  to  it. 

We  now  summarise  the  actual  relations  on  which  the  partial 
correctness  of  this  conception  rests,  and  in  doing  so  the  wrong 
conception  of  these  relations  will  come  to  the  surface. 

1)  The  variable  capital  functions  as  capital  in  the  hands  of 
the  capitalist  and  as  revenue  in  the  hands  of  the  wage-worker. 

The  variable  capital  exists  at  first  in  the  hands  of  the  capi¬ 
talist  as  money-capital',  and  it  performs  the  function  of  money- 
capital,  by  his  buying  labour-power  with  it.  So  long  as  it  per¬ 
sists  in  his  hands  in  the  form  of  money,  it  is  nothing  but  a  given 
value  existing  in  the  form  of  money;  hence  a  constant  and  not 
a  variable  magnitude.  It  is  a  variable  capital  only  potentially, 
owing  to  its  convertibility  into  labour-power.  It  becomes  real 
variable  capital  only  after  divesting  itself  of  its  money-form, 
after  being  converted  into  labour-power  functioning  as  a  com¬ 
ponent  part  of  productive  capital  in  the  capitalist  process. 

Money ,  which  first  functioned  as  the  money-form  of  the 
variable  capital  for  the  capitalist,  now  functions  in  the  hands  of 
the  labourer  as  the  money-form  of  his  wages,  which  he  exchanges 
for  means  of  subsistence;  i.e.,  as  the  money-form  of  revenue  de¬ 
rived  from  the  constantly  repeated  sale  of  his  labour-power. 

We  have  here  but  the  simple  fact  that  the  money  of  the  buyer, 
in  this  case  the  capitalist,  passes  from  his  hands  into  those  of 
the  seller,  in  this  case  the  seller  of  labour-power,  the  labourer. 
It  is  not  a  case  of  the  variable  capital  functioning  in  a  dual  ca¬ 
pacity,  as  capital  for  the  capitalist  and  as  revenue  for  the  labour- 


41  E.  B.  Tylor,  Researches  into  the  Early  History  of  Mankind,  etc., 
London,  1865,  pp.  198-99. 


444 


reproduction  and  circulation  op  social  capital 


er.  It  is  the  same  money  which  exists  first  in  the  hands  of  the 
capitalist  as  the  money-form  of  his  variable  capital,  hence  as 
potential  variable  capital,  and  which  serves  in  the  hands  of 
the  labourer  as  an  equivalent  for  sold  labour-power  as  soon  as  the 
capitalist  converts  it  into  labour-power.  But  the  fact  that  the 
same  money  serves  another  useful  purpose  in  the  hands  of  the 
seller  than  in  those  of  the  buyer  is  a  phenomenon  peculiar  to 
the  purchase  and  sale  of  all  commodities. 

Apologetic  economists  present  the  matter  in  a  wrong  light, 
as  is  best  seen  if  we  keep  our  eyes  fixed  exclusively,  without 
taking  for  the  time  being  any  notice  of  what  follows,  on  the 
act  of  circulation  M  — L  (equal  to  M  — C),  the  conversion  of  mon¬ 
ey  into  labour-power  on  the  part  of  the  capitalist  buyer,  which 
is  L — M  (equal  to  C— M),  the  conversion  of  the  commodity  la¬ 
bour-power  into  money  on  the  part  of  the  seller,  the  labourer. 
They  say:  Here  the  same  money  realises  two  capitals;  the  buyer — 
the  capitalist — converts  his  money-capital  into  living  labour- 
power,  which  he  incorporates  in  his  productive  capital;  on  the 
other  hand  the  seller,  the  labourer,  converts  his  commodity,  la¬ 
bour-power,  into  money,  which  he  spends  as  revenue,  and  this 
enables  him  to  keep  on  reselling  his  labour-power  and  thereby 
to  maintain  it.  His  labour-power,  then,  represents  his  capital 
in  commodity-form,  which  yields  him  a  continuous  revenue. 
Labour-power  is  indeed  his  property  (ever  self-renewing,  repro¬ 
ductive),  not  his  capital.  It  is  the  only  commodity  which  he 
can  and  must  sell  continually  in  order  to  live,  and  which  acts 
as  capital  (variable)  only  in  the  hands  of  the  buyer,  the  capi¬ 
talist.  The  fact  that  a  man  is  continually  compelled  to  sell  his 
labour-power,  i.e.,  himself,  to  another  man  proves,  according 
to  those  economists,  that  he  is  a  capitalist,  because  he  constantly 
has  “commodities”  (himself)  for  sale.  In  that  sense  a  slave  is 
also  a  capitalist,  although  he  is  sold  by  another  once  and  for 
all  as  a  commodity;  for  it  is  in  the  nature  of  this  commodity, 
a  labouring  slave,  that  its  buyer  does  not  only  make  it  work 
anew  every  day,  but  also  provides  it  with  the  means  of  subsist¬ 
ence  that  enable  it  to  work  ever  anew.  (Compare  on  this  point 
Sismondi  and  Say  in  the  letters  to  Malthus.*) 

2)  And  so,  in  the  exchange  of  1,000  IT  +  1,000  I„  for  2,000  IIC, 
what  is  constant  capital  for  some  (2,000  IIC)  becomes  variable 


*  Marx  has  in  mind  J  .  B.  Say’s  Lelires  h  M .  Malthus  sur  differents  sujets 
d'economie  politique,  notamment  sur  les  causes  de  la  stagnation  generale  du 
commerce,  Paris,  1820. — Ed. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


445 


capital  and  surplus-value,  hence  generally  revenue,  for  the 
others;  and  what  is  variable  capital  and  surplus-value  (2,000 
I(T+B)),  hence  generally  revenue  for  some  becomes  constant  cap¬ 
ital  for  the  others. 

Let  us  first  look  at  the  exchange  of  Iv  for  IIC,  beginning,  with 
the  point  of  view  of  the  labourer. 

The  collective  labourer  of  I  has  sold  his  labour-power  to  the 
collective  capitalist  of  I  for  1,000;  he  receives  this  value  in  mon¬ 
ey,  paid  in  the  form  of  wages.  With  this  money  he  buys  from 
II  articles  of  consumption  for  the  same  amount  of  value.  Capi¬ 
talist  II  confronts  him  only  as  a  seller  of  commodities,  and  noth¬ 
ing  else,  even  if  the  labourer  buys  from  his  own  capitalist,  as  he 
does  for  instance  in  the  exchange  of  500  IIV,  as  we  have  seen 
above  (p.  400).*  The  form  of  circulation  through  which  his  com¬ 
modity,  labour-power,  passes,  is  that  of  the  simple  circulation 
of  commodities  for  the  mere  satisfaction  of  needs,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  consumption:  C  (labour-power) — M — C  (articles  of  con¬ 
sumption,  commodities  II).  The  result  of  this  act  of  circulation 
is  that  the  labourer  maintains  himself  as  labour-power  for  capi¬ 
talist  I,  and  in  order  to  continue  maintaining  himself  as  such 
he  must  continually  renew  the  process  L(C) — M — C.  His  wages 
are  realised  in  articles  of  consumption,  they  are  spent  as  reve¬ 
nue,  and,  taking  the  working-class  as  a  whole,  are  spent  again 
and  again  as  revenue. 

Now  let  us  look  at  the  same  exchange  of  Iv  for  IIC,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  capitalist.  The  entire  commodity-product 
of  II  consists  of  articles  of  consumption,  hence  of  things  intended 
to  enter  into  annual  consumption,  hence  to  serve  in  the  real¬ 
isation  of  revenue  for  someone,  in  the  present  case  for  the  col¬ 
lective  labourer  I.  But  for  the  collective  capitalist  II  one  portion 
of  his  commodity-product,  equal  to  2,000,  is  now  the  form  of  the 
constant  capital-value  of  his  productive  capital  converted  into 
commodities.  This  productive  capital  must  be  reconverted  from 
this  commodity-form  into  its  bodily  form,  in  which  it  may  act 
again  as  the  constant  portion  of  a  productive  capital.  What  cap¬ 
italist  II  has  accomplished  so  far  is  that  he  has  reconverted  by 
means  of  sales  to  labourers  I  one  half  (equal  to  1,000)  of  his 
constant  capital-value,  which  had  been  reproduced  in  the  shape 
of  commodities  (articles  of  consumption),  into  the  form  of  mon¬ 
ey.  Hence  it  is  not  the  variable  capital  IT,  which  has  been  con¬ 
verted  into  this  first  half  of  the  constant  capital-value  IIC,  but 


Present  book,  pp.  408-09. — Ed. 


446 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


simply  the  money  which  functioned  for  1  as  money-capital  in 
the  exchange  for  labour-power  and  thus  came  into  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  seller  of  labour-power,  to  whom  it  does  not  repre¬ 
sent  capital  but  revenue  in  the  form  of  money,  i.e.,  it  is  spent 
as  a  means  of  purchase  of  articles  of  consumption.  Meanwhile, 
the  money  amounting  to  1,000,  which  has  come  into  the  hands 
of  the  II  capitalists  from  labourers  of  I,  cannot  function  as  the 
constant  element  of  productive  capital  II.  It  is  only  as  yet  the 
money-form  of  his  commodity-capital  to  be  commuted  into  fixed 
or  circulating  constituents  of  constant  capital.  So  II  buys  with 
the  money  received  from  the  labourers  of  I,  the  buyers  of  its 
commodities,  means  of  production  from  I  to  the  amount  of  1,000. 
In  this  way  the  constant  capital-value  II  is  renewed  to  the  ex¬ 
tent  of  one  half  of  its  total  amount  in  its  bodily  form,  in  which 
it  can  function  once  more  as  an  element  of  productive  capital  II. 
The  circulation  in  this  instance  took  the  course  C— M— C:  articles 
of  consumption  worth  1,000— money  to  the  amount  of  1, 000- 
means  of  production  worth  1,000. 

But  C— M— C  represents  here  the  movement  of  capital.  C, 
when  sold  to  the  labourers,  is  converted  into  M,  and  this  M  is 
converted  into  means  of  production.  It  is  the  reconversion  of 
commodities  into  the  material  elements  of  which  this  commodity 
is  made.  On  the  other  hand  just  as  capitalist  II  acts  vis-a-vis 

I  only  as  a  buyer  of  commodities,  so  capitalist  I  acts  only  as  a 
seller  of  commodities  vis-a-vis  II.  I  originally  bought  labour- 
power  worth  1,000  with  1,000  in  money  intended  to  function 
as  variable  capital.  It  has  therefore  received  an  equivalent  for 
the  1,000T  which  it  expended  in  money-form.  This  money  now 
belongs  to  the  labourer  who  spends  it  in  purchases  from  II.  I 
cannot  get  back  this  money,  which  thus  found  its  way  into  the 

II  treasury  unless  it  fishes  it  out  of  it  again  by  the  sale  of  com¬ 
modities  of  the  same  value. 

I  first  had  a  definite  sum  of  money  amounting  to  1,000  des¬ 
tined  to  function  as  variable  capital.  The  money  functions  as 
such  by  its  conversion  into  labour-power  of  the  same  value. 
But  the  labourer  supplied  it  as  a  result  of  the  process  of  pro¬ 
duction  with  a  quantity  of  commodities  (means  of  production) 
worth  6,000,  of  which  one-sixth,  or  1,000,  are  equivalent  to  the 
variable  portion  of  capital  advanced  in  money.  The  variable 
capital-value  functions  no  more  as  variable  capital  now  in  its 
commodity-form  than  it  did  before  in  its  form  of  money.  It  can 
do  so  only  after  its  conversion  into  living  labour-power,  and 
only  so  long  as  this  labour-power  functions  in  the  process  of 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


447 


production.  As  money  the  variable  capital-value  was  only  po¬ 
tential  variable  capital.  But  it  had  a  form  in  which  it  was  di¬ 
rectly  convertible  into  labour-power.  As  a  commodity  the  same 
variable  capital-value  is  still  potential  money-value,  it  is  re¬ 
stored  to  its  original  money-form  only  by  the  sale  of  the  commodi¬ 
ties,  and  therefore  by  II  buying  for  1,000  commodities  from  I. 
The  movement  of  the  circulation  is  here  as  follows:  l,000v  (mon¬ 
ey)— labour-power  worth  1,000—1,000  in  commodities  (equiv¬ 
alent  of  the  variable  capital)— 1,000T  (money);  hence  M— C... 
C— M  (equal  to  M— L  ...  C— M).  The  process  of  production  in¬ 
tervening  between  C  ...  C  does  not  itself  belong  in  the  sphere  of 
circulation.  It  does  not  figure  in  the  mutual  exchange  of  the 
various  elements  of  the  annual  reproduction,  although  this 
exchange  includes  the  reproduction  of  all  the  elements  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital,  the  constant  elements  as  well  as  the  variable 
element  (labour-power).  All  the  participants  in  this  exchange 
appear  either  as  buyers  or  sellers  or  both.  The  labourers  appear 
only  as  buyers  of  commodities,  the  capitalists  alternately  as 
buyers  and  sellers,  and  within  certain  limits  either  only  as  buyers 
of  commodities  or  only  as  sellers  of  commodities. 

Result:  I  possesses  once  more  the  variable  value-constituent 
of  its  capital  in  the  form  of  money,  from  which  alohe  it  is  di¬ 
rectly  convertible  into  labour-power,  i.e.,  it  once  more  posses¬ 
ses  the  variable  capital-value  in  the  sole  form  in  which  it  can 
really  be  advanced  as  a  variable  element  of  its  productive  capi¬ 
tal.  On  the  other  hand  the  labourer  must  again  act  as  a  seller 
of  commodities,  of  his  labour-power,  before  he  can  act  again  as 
a  buyer  of  commodities. 

So  far  as  the  variable  capital  of  category  II  (500  IIT)  is  con¬ 
cerned,  the  process  of  circulation  between  the  capitalists  and 
labourers  of  the  same  class  of  production  takes  place  directly, 
since  we  look  upon  it  as  taking  place  between  the  collective  capi¬ 
talist  II  and  the  collective  labourer  II. 

The  collective  capitalist  II  advances  500T  for  the  purchase 
of  labour-power  of  the  same  value.  In  this  case  the  collective 
capitalist  is  a  buyer,  the  collective  labourer  a  seller.  Thereupon 
the  labourer  appears  with  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  his  labour- 
power  to  act  as  a  buyer  of  a  part  of  the  commodities  produced 
by  himself.  Here  the  capitalist  is  therefore  a  seller.  The  labourer 
has  replaced  to  the  capitalist  the  money  paid  in  the  purchase 
of  his  labour-power  by  means  of  a  portion  of  commodity-capital 
II  produced,  namely  500v  in  commodities.  The  capitalist  now 
holds  in  the  form  of  commodities  the  same  v  which  he  had  in  the 


448 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


form  of  money  before  its  conversion  into  labour-power,  while 
the  labourer  on  the  other  hand  has  realised  the  value  of  his  la¬ 
bour-power  in  money  and  now,  in  his  turn,  realises  this  money 
by  spending  it  as  his  revenue  to  defray  his  consumption  in  the 
purchase  of  part  of  the  articles  of  consumption  produced  by 
himself.  It  is  an  exchange  of  the  revenue  of  the  labourer  in 
money  for  a  portion  of  commodities  he  has  himself  reproduced, 
namely  500v  of  the  capitalist.  In  this  way  this  money  returns  to 
capitalist  II  as  the  money-form  of  his  variable  capital.  An  equiv¬ 
alent  value  of  revenue  in  the  form  of  money  here  replaces  variable 
capital-value  in  the  form  of  commodities. 

The  capitalist  does  not  increase  his  wealth  by  taking  away 
again  the  money  paid  by  him  to  the  labourer  in  the  purchase  of 
labour-power  when  he  sells  him  an  equivalent  quantity  of  com¬ 
modities.  He  would  indeed  be  paying  the  labourer  twice  if  he 
were  to  pay  him  first  500  in  the  purchase  of  his  labour-power, 
and  then  in  addition  give  him  gratis  a  quantity  of  commodities 
worth  500,  which  the  labourers  produced  for  him.  Vice  versa, 
if  the  labourer  were  to  produce  for  him  nothing  but  an  equiva¬ 
lent  in  commodities  worth  500  for  the  price  of  his  labour-power 
of  500,  the  capitalist  would  be  no  better  off  after  the  transaction 
than  before.  But  the  labourer  has  reproduced  a  product  of  3,000. 
He  has  preserved  the  constant  portion  of  the  value  of  the  prod¬ 
uct,  i.e.,  the  value  of  the  means  of  production  used  up  in  it  to 
the  amount  of  2,000  by  converting  them  into  a  new  product. 
He  has  furthermore  added  to  this  given  value  a  value  of  l,000(T+g). 
(The  idea  that  the  capitalist  grows  richer  in  the  sense  that  he 
wins  a  surplus-value  by  the  reflux  of  the  500  in  money  is  de¬ 
veloped  by  Destutt  de  Tracy,  as  shown  in  detail  in  section  XIII 
of  this  chapter.) 

Through  the  purchase  of  500  worth  of  articles  of  consumption 
by  labourer  II,  capitalist  II  recovers  the  value  of  500  IIV — which 
he  just  possessed  in  commodities  — in  money,  the  form  in  which 
he  advanced  it  originally.  The  immediate  result  of  this  transac¬ 
tion,  as  of  any  other  sale  of  commodities,  is  the  conversion  of 
a  given  value  from  the  form  of  commodities  into  that  of  money. 
Nor  is  there  anything  special  in  the  reflux  thus  effected  of  the 
money  to  its  point  of  departure.  If  capitalist  II  had  bought, 
with  500  in  money,,  commodities  from  capitalist  I,  and  then  in 
turn  sold  to  capitalist  I  commodities  to  the  amount  of  500,  500 
would  have  likewise  returned  to  him  in  money.  This  sum  of 
500  in  money  would  merely  have  served  for  the  circulation  of  a 
quantity  of  commodities  (1,000),  and  according  to  the  general 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


449 


law  previously  expounded,  the  money  would  have  returned  to 
the  one  who  put  it  into  circulation  for  the  purpose  of  exchanging 
this  quantity  of  commodities. 

But  the  500  in  money  which  flowed  back  to  capitalist  II  are 
at  one  and  the  same  time  renewed  potential  variable  capital  in 
money-form.  Why  is  this  so?  Money,  and  therefore  money-capi¬ 
tal,  is  potential  variable  capital  only  because  and  to  the  extent 
that  it  is  convertible  into  labour-power.  The  return  of  £500  in 
money  to  capitalist  II  is  accompanied  by  the  return  of  labour- 
power  II  to  the  market.  The  return  of  both  of  these  at  opposite 
poles— hence  also  the  re-appearance  of  500  in  money  not  only  as 
money  but  also  as  variable  capital  in  the  form  of  money — is  con¬ 
ditional  on  one  and  the  same  process.  The  money  equal  to  500 
returns  to  capitalist  II  because  he  sold  to  labourers  II  articles 
of  consumption  amounting  to  500,  i.e.,  because  the  labourer 
spends  his  wages  to  maintain  himself  and  his  family  and  thus 
his  labour-power.  In  order  to  be  able  to  live  on  and  act  again 
as  a  buyer  of  commodities  he  must  again  sell  his  labour-power. 
The  return  of  500  in  money  to  capitalist  II  is  therefore  at  the 
same  time  a  return,  or  an  abiding,  of  the  labour-power  in  the 
capacity  of  a  commodity  purchasable  with  500  in  money,  and 
thereby  a  return  of  500  in  money  as  potential  variable  capital. 

As  for  category  lib,  which  produces  articles,  of  luxury,  the 
case  with  v  —  (I I b) v — is  the  same  as  with  I*.  The  money,  which 
renews  for  capitalists  lib  their  variable  capital  in  the  form  of 
money,  flows  back  to  them  in  a  round-about  way  through  capi¬ 
talists  Ha.  But  it  nevertheless  makes  a  difference  whether  the 
labourers  buy  their  means  of  subsistence  directly  from  the  cap¬ 
italist  producers  to  whom  they  sell  their  labour-power  or  whether 
they  buy  them  from  capitalists  of  another  category,  through 
whose  agency  the  money  returns  to  the  former  only  by  a  cir¬ 
cuitous  route  Since  the  working-class  lives  from  hand  to  mouth, 
it  buys  as  long  as  it  has  the  means  to  buy.  It  is  different  with 
the  capitalists,  as  for  instance  in  the  exchange  of  1,000  IIC  for 
1,000  Iv.  The  capitalist  does  not  live  from  hand  to  mouth.  His 
compelling  motive  is  the  utmost  self-expansion  of  his  capital. 
Now,  if  circumstances  of  any  description  seem  to  promise  greater 
advantages  to  capitalist  II  in  case  he  holds  on  to  his  money, 
or  to  part  of  it  at  least,  for  a  while,  instead  of  immediately  renew¬ 
ing  his  constant  capital,  then  the  return  of  1,000  IIC  (in  money) 
to  I  is  delayed;  and  so  is  the  restoration  of  1,000T  to  the  form 
of  money,  and  capitalist  I  can  continue  his  business  on  the  same 
scale  only  if  he  disposes  of  reserve  money;  and,  generally  speak- 


15 — 1732 


450  REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 

ing,  reserve  capital  in  the  form  of  money  is  necessary  to  be  able 
to  work  without  interruption,  regardless  of  the  rapid  or  slow 
reflux  of  the  variable  capital-value  in  money. 

If  the  exchange  of  the  various  elements  of  the  current  annual 
reproduction  is  to  be  investigated,  so  are  the  results  of  the  la¬ 
bour  of  the  preceding  year,  of  the  labour  of  the  year  that  has 
already  come  to  a  close.  The  process  of  production  which  result¬ 
ed  in  this  yearly  product  lies  behind  us;  it  is  a  thing  of  the  past, 
incorporated  in  its  product,  and  so  much  the  more  is  this  the 
case  with  the  process  of  circulation,  which  precedes  the  proc¬ 
ess  of  production  or  runs  parallel  with  it,  the  conversion  of 
potential  into  real  variable  capital,  i.e. ,  the  sale  and  purchase 
of  labour-power.  The  labour-market  is  no  longer  a  part  of  the 
commodity-market,  such  as  we  have  here  before  us.  The  labourer 
has  here  not  only  already  sold  his  labour-power,  but  besides  the 
surplus-value  also  supplied  an  equivalent  of  the  price  of  his  la¬ 
bour-power  in  the  shape  of  commodities.  He  has  furthermore 
pocketed  his  wages  and  figures  during  the  exchange  only  as  a 
buyer  of  commodities  (articles  of  consumption).  On  the  other 
hand  the  annual  product  must  contain  all  the  elements  of  re¬ 
production,  restore  all  the  elements  of  productive  capital,  above 
all  its  most  important  element,  the  variable  capital.  And  we 
have  seen  indeed  that  the  result  of  the  exchange  in  regard  to 
the  variable  capital  is  this:  By  spending  his  wages  and  consuming 
the  purchased  commodities,  the  labourer  as  a  buyer  of  com¬ 
modities  maintains  and  reproduces  his  labour-power,  this  be¬ 
ing  the  only  commodity  which  he  has  to  sell.  Just  as  the  money 
advanced  by  the  capitalist  in  the  purchase  of  his  labour-power 
returns  to  him,  so  labour-power  returns  to  the  labour-market 
in  its  capacity  of  a  commodity  exchangeable  for  money.  The 
result  in  the  special  case  of  1,000  I,  is  that  the  capitalists  of 
I  hold  1,000T  in  money  and  the  labourers  of  I  offer  them  1,000 
in  labour-power,  so  that  the  entire  process  of  reproduction  of 
I  can  be  renewed.  This  is  one  result  of  the  process  of  ex¬ 
change. 

On  the  other  hand  the  expenditure  of  the  wages  of  the  labour¬ 
ers  of  I  relieved  II  of  articles  of  consumption  to  the  amount  of 
l,000c,  thus  transforming  them  from  the  commodity-form  into 
the  money-form.  Department  II  reconverted  them  into  the 
bodily  form  of  its  constant  capital  by  purchasing  from  I  com¬ 
modities  equal  to  1,000T  and  thus  restoring  to  I  in  money-form 
the  value  of  its  variable  capital. 

The  variable  capital  of  I  passes  through  three  metamorphoses, 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


451 


which  do  not  appear  at  all  in  the  exchange  of  the  annual  product 
or  do  so  only  suggestively. 

1)  The  first  form  is  1,000  I,  in  money,  which  is  converted 
into  labour-power  of  the  same  value.  This  conversion  does  not 
itself  appear  in  the  exchange  of  commodities  between  I  and  II, 
but  its  result  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  working-class  I  confronts 
commodity  seller  II  with  1,000  in  money,  just  as  working-class 
II  with  500  in  money  confronts  commodity  seller  of  500  IIT  in 
commodity-form. 

2)  The  second  form,  the  only  one  in  which  variable  capital 
actually  varies,  functions  as  variable  capital,  where  value-creat¬ 
ing  force  appears  in  the  place  of  given  value  exchanged  for  it; 
it  belongs  exclusively  to  the  process  of  production  which  is  be¬ 
hind  us. 

3)  The  third  form,  in  which  the  variable  capital  has  justi¬ 
fied  itself  as  such  in  the  result  of  the  process  of  production,  is 
the  annual  value-product,  which  in  the  case  of  I  is  equal  to  1,000T 
plus  1,000,,  or  2,000  I(v+,).  In  the  place  of  its  original  value 
of  1,000  in  money  we  have  a  value  of  double  this  amount,  or 
2,000,  in  commodities.  The  variable  capital-value  of  1,000  in 
commodities  is  therefore  only  one  half  of  the  value  produced 
by  the  variable  capital  as  an  element  of  the  productive  capital. 
The  1,000  IT  in  commodities  are  an  exact  equivalent  of  the 
1,000T  in  money  originally  advanced  by  I  and  intended  to  be 
the  variable  part  of  the  aggregate  capital.  But  in  the  form  of 
commodities  they  are  money  only  potentially  (they  do  not  be¬ 
come  so  actually  until  they  are  sold),  and  still  less  directly  are 
they  variable  money-capital.  They  eventually  become  variable 
money-capital  by  the  sale  of  the  commodity  1,000  Iy  to  IIC, 
and  by  the  early  re-appearance  of  labour-power  as  a  purchasable 
commodity,  as  a  material  for  which  1,000T  in  money  may  be 
exchanged. 

During  all  these  transformations  capitalist  1  continually  holds 
the  variable  capital  in  his  hands;  1)  to  start  with  as  money-cap¬ 
ital;  2)  then  as  an  element  of  his  productive  capital;  3)  still  later 
as  a  portion  of  the  value  of  his  commodity-capital,  hence  in 
the  form  of  commodity-value;  4)  finally  once  more  in  money 
which  is  again  confronted  by  the  labour-power  for  which  it  can 
be  exchanged.  During  the  labour-process  the  capitalist  is  in 
possession  of  the  variable  capital  as  active  value-creating  la¬ 
bour-power,  but  not  as  a  value  of  a  given  magnitude.  But  since 
he  never  pays  the  labourer  until  his  power  has  acted  for  a  certain 
length  of  time,  he  already  has  in  hand  the  value  created  by  that 


452 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


power  to  replace  itself  plus  the  surplus-value  before  he  pays 
him. 

.4s  the  variable  capital  always  stays  in  the  hands  of  the  capi¬ 
talist  in  some  form  or  other,  it  cannot  be  claimed  in  any  way  that 
it  converts  itself  into  revenue  for  anyone.  On  the  contrary,  1,000 
Iv  in  commodities  converts  itself  into  money  by  its  sale  to  II 
half  of  whose  constant  capital  it  replaces  in  kind. 

What  resolves  itself  into  revenue  is  not  variable  capital  I,  or 
l,000v  in  money.  This  money  has  ceased  to  function  as  the  money- 
form  of  variable  capital  I  as  soon  as  it  is  converted  into  labour- 
power,  just  as  the  money  of  any  other  buyer  of  commodities  has 
ceased  to  represent  anything  belonging  to  him  as  soon  as  he  has 
exchanged  it  for  commodities  of  still  other  sellers.  The  conver¬ 
sions  which  the  money  received  in  wages  goes  through  in  the  hands 
of  the  working-class  are  not  conversions  of  variable  capital,  but 
of  the  value  of  their  labour-power  converted  into  money;  just 
as  the  conversion  of  the  value  (2,000  I(,+B))  created  by  the  labour¬ 
er  is  only  the  conversion  of  a  commodity  belonging  to  the 
capitalist,  which  does  not  concern  the  labourer.  However,  the  cap¬ 
italist,  and  still  more  his  theoretical  interpreter,  the  political 
economist,  can  rid  himself  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty  of 
the  idea  that  the  money  paid  to  the  labourer  is  still  his,  the  cap¬ 
italist’s.  If  the  capitalist  is  a  producer  of  gold,  then  the  variable 
portion  of  value— i.e.,  the  equivalent  in  commodities  which 
replaces  for  him  the  purchasing  price  of  the  labour— appears 
itself  directly  in  the  form  of  money  and  can  therefore  function 
anew  as  variable  money-capital  without  the  circuitous  route  of 
a  reflux.  But  so  far  as  labourer  II  is  concerned — aside  from  the 
labourer  who  produces  articles  of  luxury — 500,  exists  in  com¬ 
modities  intended  for  the  consumption  of  the  labourer  which 
he,  considered  as  the  collective  labourer,  buys  directly  again 
from  the  same  collective  capitalist  to  whom  he  sold  his  labour- 
power.  The  variable  portion  of  capital-value  II,  so  far  as  its 
bodily  form  is  concerned,  consists  of  articles  of  consumption 
intended  mostly  for  consumption  by  the  working-class.  But  it 
is  not  the  variable  capital  which  is  spent  in  this  form  by  the 
labourer,  it  is  the  wages,  the  money  of  the  labourer,  which  pre¬ 
cisely  by  its  realisation  in  these  articles  of  consumption  restores 
to  the  capitalist  the  variable  capital  500  II,  in  its  money-form. 
The  variable  capital  II,  is  reproduced  in  articles  of  consumption, 
the  same  as  the  constant  capital  2,000  IIC.  The  one  resolves  itself 
no  more  into  revenue  than  the  other  does.  In  either  case  it  is 
the  wages  which  resolve  themselves  into  revenue. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


453 


However  tt  is  a  momentous  fact  in  the  exchange  of  the  annual 
product  that  by  the  expenditure  of  the  wages  as  revenue  there 
is  restored  to  the  form  of  money-capital  in  the  one  case  1,000  IIC, 
likewise,  by  this  circuitous  route,  1,000  I,  and  ditto  500  1 1  v, 
hence  constant  and  variable  capital.  (In  the  case  of  the  variable 
capital  partly  by  means  of  a  direct  and  partly  by  means  of  an 
indirect  reflux.) 

XI.  REPLACEMENT  OF  THE  FIXED  CAPITAL 

In  the  analysis  of  the  exchanges  of  the  annual  reproduction 
the  following  presents  great  difficulty.  If  we  take  the  simplest 
form  in  which  the  matter  may  be  presented,  we  get: 

I)  4,000c  +  1,000,  +  1 ,0009  + 

II)  2,000o  +  500 v  +  500s==  9,000. 

This  resolves  itself  finally  into: 

4,000  Ic  +  2,000  IIC  +  1.000  Iv  +  500  II, +  1,000  Ia  + 

+  500  IIS  =  6, 000c  +  1,500,  +  1,500,  =  9,000 

One  portion  of  the  value  of  the  constant  capital,  which  con¬ 
sists  of  instruments  of  labour  in  the  strict  meaning  of  the  term 
(as  a  distinct  section  of  the  means  of  production)  is  transferred 
from  the  instruments  of  labour  to  the  product  of  labour  (the 
commodity);  these  instruments  of  labour  continue  to  function 
as  elements  of  the  productive  capital,  doing  so  in  their  old  bodily 
form.  It  is  their  wear  and  tear,  the  depreciation  gradually 
experienced  by  them  during  their  continual  functioning  for  a 
definite  period  which  re-appears  as  an  element  of  value  of  the  com¬ 
modities  produced  by  means  of  them,  which  is  transferred  from 
the  instrument  of  labour  to  the  product  of  labour.  With  regard 
to  the  annual  reproduction  therefore  only  such  component  parts 
of  fixed  capital  will  from  the  first  be  given  consideration  as  last 
longer  than  a  year.  If  they  are  completely  worn  out  within  the 
year  they  must  be  completely  replaced  and  renewed  by  the  annual 
reproduction,  and  the  point  at  issue  does  not  concern  them  at 
all.  It  may  happen  in  the  case  of  machines  and  other  more 
durable  forms  of  fixed  capital— and  it  frequently  does  happen  — 
that  certain  parts  of  them  must  be  replaced  lock,  stock  and  bar¬ 
rel  within  one  year,  although  the  building  or  machine  in  its 
entirety  lasts  much  longer.  These  parts  belong  in  one  category 
with  the  elements  of  fixed  capital  which  are  to  be  replaced  within 
one  year. 


454 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


This  element  of  the  value  of  commodities  must  not  be  con¬ 
fused  with  the  costs  of  repair.  If  a  commodity  is  sold,  this  value- 
element  is  turned  into  money,  the  same  as  all  others.  But  after 
it  has  been  turned  into  money,  its  difference  from  the  other 
elements  of  value  becomes  apparent.  The  raw  and  auxiliary 
materials  consumed  in  the  production  of  commodities  must  be 
replaced  in  kind  in  order  that  the  reproduction  of  commodities 
may  begin  (or  that  the  process  of  production  of  commodities  in 
general  may  be  continuous).  The  labour-power  spent  on  them 
must  also  be  renewed  by  fresh  labour-power.  Consequently  the 
money  realised  on  the  commodities  must  be  continually  recon¬ 
verted  into  these  elements  of  the  productive  capital,  from  the 
money-form  into  the  commodity-form.  It  does  not  alter  the 
matter  if  raw  and  auxiliary  materials  for  instance  are  bought 
at  certain  intervals  in  larger  quantities— so  that  they  consti¬ 
tute  productive  supplies  — and  need  not  be  bought  anew  during 
certain  periods;  and  therefore — as  long  as  they  last— the  money 
coming  in  through  the  sale  of  commodities,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
meant  for  this  purpose,  may  accumulate  and  this  portion  of  con¬ 
stant  capital  thus  appears  temporarily  as  money-capital  whose 
active  function  has  been  suspended.  It  is  not  a  revenue-capital; 
it  is  productive  capital  suspended  in  the  form  of  money.  The 
renewal  of  the  means  of  production  must  go  on  all  the  time, 
although  the  form  of  this  renewal— with  reference  to  the  circu¬ 
lation — may  vary.  The  new  purchases,  the  circulation  opera¬ 
tion  by  which  they  are  renewed  or  replaced,  may  take  place  at 
more  or  at  less  prolonged  intervals,  then  a  large  amount  may  be 
invested  at  one  stroke,  compensated  by  a  corresponding  produc¬ 
tive  supply.  Or  the  intervals  between  purchases  may  be  small; 
then  follows  a  rapid  succession  of  money  expenditures  in  small 
doses,  of  small  productive  supplies.  This  does  not  alter  the  mat¬ 
ter  itself.  The  same  applies  to  labour-power.  Where  production 
is  carried  on  continuously  throughout  the  year  on  the  same  scale 
—continuous  replacement  of  consumed  labour-power  by  new. 
Where  work  is  seasonable,  or  different  portions  of  labour  are 
applied  at  different  periods,  as  in  agriculture — corresponding 
purchases  of  labour-power,  now  in  small,  now  in  large  amounts. 
But  the  money  proceeds  realised  from  the  sale  of  commodities, 
so  far  as  they  turn  into  money  that  part  of  the  commodity-value 
which  is  equal  to  the  wear  and  tear  of  fixed  capital,  are  not  re¬ 
converted  into  that  component  part  of  the  productive  capital 
whose  diminution  in  value  they  cover.  They  settle  down  beside 
the  productive  capital  and  persist  in  the  form  of  money.  This 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


455 


precipitation  of  money  is  repeated,  until  the  period  of  reproduc¬ 
tion  consisting  of  great  or  small  numbers  of  years  has  elapsed, 
during  which  the  fixed  element  of  constant  capital  continues  to 
function  in  the  process  of  production  in  its  old  bodily  form.  As 
soon  as  the  fixed  element,  such  as  buildings,  machinery,  etc., 
has  been  worn  out,  and  can  no  longer  function  in  the  process 
of  production,  its  value  exists  alongside  it  fully  replaced  by 
money,  by  the  sum  of  money  precipitations,  the  values  which 
had  been  gradually  transferred  from  the  fixed  capital  to  the 
commodities  in  whose  production  it  participated  and  which 
had  assumed  the  form  of  money  as  a  result  of  the  sale  of  these 
commodities.  This  money  then  serves  to  replace  the  fixed  capi¬ 
tal  (or  its  elements,  since  its  various  elements  have  different 
durabilities)  in  kind  and  thus  really  to  renew  this  component 
part  of  the  productive  capital.  This  money  is  therefore  the  money- 
form  of  a  part  of  the  constant  capital-value,  namely  of  its 
fixed  part.  The  formation  of  this  hoard  is  thus  itself  an  element 
of  the  capitalist  process  of  reproduction;  it  is  the  reproduction 
and  storing  up  — in  the  form  of  money — of  the  value  of  fixed 
capital,  or  its  several  elements,  until  the  fixed  capital  has  ceased 
to  live  and  in  consequence  has  given  off  its  full  value  to  the  com¬ 
modities  produced  and  must  now  be  replaced  in  kind.  But  this 
money  loses  only  its  form  of  a  hoard  and  hence  resumes  its  ac¬ 
tivity  in  the  process  of  reproduction  of  capital  brought  about 
by  the  circulation  as  soon  as  it  is  reconverted  into  new  elements 
of  fixed  capital  to  replace  those  that  died  off. 

Just  as  simple  commodity  circulation  is  in  no  way  identical 
with  a  bare  exchange  of  products,  the  conversion  of  the  annual 
commodity-product  can  in  no  way  resolve  itself  into  a  mere 
unmediated  mutual  exchange  of  its  various  components.  Money 
plays  a  specific  role  in  it,  which  finds  expression  particularly  in 
the  manner  in  which  the  value  of  the  fixed  capital  is  reproduced. 
(How  different  the  matter  would  present  itself  if  production 
were  collective  and  no  longer  possessed  the  form  of  commodity 
production  is  left  to  a  later  analysis.) 

Should  we  now  return  to  our  fundamental  scheme,  we  shall 
get  the  following  for  class  II:  2,000c-f  50(^+500*.  All  the  ar¬ 
ticles  of  consumption  produced  in  the  course  of  the  year  are  in 
that  case  equal  in  value  to  3,000;  and  every  one  of  the  different 
commodity  elements  in  the  total  sum  of  the  commodities  is 
composed,  so  far  as  its  value  is  concerned,  of  ‘/.c+V  «V  +  1/*.,  or, 
in  percentages,  66VSC  +  162  SV-|-16J/S,.  The  various  kinds  of  com¬ 
modities  of  class  II  may  contain  different  proportions  of  constant 


456 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


capital.  Likewise  the  fixed  portion  of  the  constant  capital  may 
be  different.  The  duration  of  the  parts  of  the  fixed  capital  and 
hence  the  annual  wear  and  tear,  or  that  portion  of  value  which 
they  transfer  pro  rata  to  the  commodities  in  the  production  of 
which  they  participate,  may  also  differ.  But  that  is  immaterial 
here.  As  to  the  process  of  social  reproduction,  it  is  only  a  question 
of  exchange  between  classes  II  and  I.  These  two  classes  here  con¬ 
front  each  other  only  in  their  social,  mass  relations.  Therefore 
the  proportional  magnitude  of  part  c  of  the  value  of  commodity- 
product  II  (the  only  one  of  consequence  in  the  question  now  being 
discussed)  gives  the  average  proportion  if  all  the  branches  of 
production  classed  under  II  are  embraced. 

Every  kind  of  commodity  (and  they  are  largely  the  same  kinds) 
whose  aggregate  value  is  classed  under  2,000c-f500v-(-500s  is 
therefore  equal  in  value  to  662/s  % c -(-  16a/3  %  v -h  16a/s  % a.  This 
applies  to  every  100  of  the  commodities,  whether  classed  under 
c,  v  or  s. 

The  commodities  in  which  the  2,000c  are  incorporated  may 
be  further  divided,  in  value,  into: 

1)  1,333V*,  +  333V,t  +  333VM  =  2,000c ; 

similarly  500v  may  be  divided  into: 

2)  333VSc  +  83l/Sv  +  83VSS  =  500v; 

and  finally  500s  may  be  divided  into: 

3)  333V3c  +  83V3T  +  83V3S  =  500a 

Now,  if  we  add  the  c’s  in  1),  2),  and  3)  we  get  1 ,333l/sc-+- 
+  333l/,e-+333l/3C  =2,000.  Furthermore  SSS^v+SS'/^+SS1 '3V  = 
=500.  And  the  same  in  the  case  of  s.  The  addition  gives  the  same 
total  value  of  3,000,  as  above. 

The  entire  constant  capital-value  contained  in  the  commod¬ 
ity  mass  II  representing  a  value  of  3,000  is  therefore  comprised 
in  2, 000c,  and  neither  500v  nor  5003  hold  an  atom  of  it.  The 
same  is  true  of  v  and  s  respectively. 

In  other  words,  the  entire  share  of  commodity  mass  II  that 
represents  constant  capital-value  and  therefore  is  reconvertible 
either  into  its  bodily  or  its  money-form,  exists  in  2,000c.  Every¬ 
thing  referring  to  the  exchange  of  the  constant  value  of  com¬ 
modities  II  is  therefore  confined  to  the  movement  of  2,000  IIC. 
And  this  exchange  can  be  made  only  with  I  (1,000V  +  1,000S). 

Similarly,  as  regards  class  I,  everything  that  bears  on  the 
exchange  of  the  constant  capital-value  of  that  class  is  to  be  con¬ 
fined  to  a  consideration  of  4,000  Ic- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


457 


1.  Replacement  of  the  Wear  and  Tear  Portion  of  the  Value 
in  the  Form  of  Money 

Now,  if  to  start  with  we  take 

I.  4,000c  +  l,Q00v  +  1,000, 

II .  2, 000c  -f  500v  +  500,. 

the  exchange  of  the  commodities  2,000  IIC  for  commodities  of 
the  same  value  I  (l,000v-f-l,0008)  would  presuppose  that  the 
entire  2,000  1IC  are  reconverted  in  kind  into  the  natural  elements 
of  the  constant  capital  of  II,  produced  by  I.  But  the  commodity- 
value  of  2,000,  in  which  the  latter  exists,  contains  an  element 
making  good  the  depreciation  in  value  of  the  fixed  capital,  which 
is  not  to  be  replaced  immediately  in  kind  but  converted  into 
money,  which  gradually  accumulates  into  a  sum  total  until 
the  time  for  the  renewal  of  the  fixed  capital  in  its  bodily  form 
arrives.  Every  year  registers  the  demise  of  fixed  capital  which 
must  be  replaced  in  this  or  that  individual  business,  or  in  this  or 
that  branch  of  industry.  In  the  case  of  one  and  the  same  indi¬ 
vidual  capital,  this  or  that  portion  of  its  fixed  capital  must  be 
replaced,  since  its  different  parts  have  different  durabilities. 
On  examining  annual  reproduction,  even  on  a  simple  scale,  i.e. , 
disregarding  all  accumulation,  we  do  not  begin  ab  ovo.  The  year 
which  we  study  is  one  in  the  course  of  many;  it  is  not  the  first 
year  after  the  birth  of  capitalist  production.  The  various  cap¬ 
itals  invested  in  the  manifold  lines  of  production  of  class  II 
therefore  differ  in  age.  Just  as  people  functioning  in  these  lines  of 
production  die  annually,  so  a  host  of  fixed  capitals  expire  an¬ 
nually  and  must  be  renewed  in  kind  out  of  the  accumulated  mon¬ 
ey-fund.  Therefore  the  exchange  of  2,000  IIC  for  2,000  I(v+g) 
includes  a  conversion  of  2,000  IIC  from  its  commodity-form 
(articles  of  consumption)  into  natural  elements  which  consist 
not  only  of  raw  and  auxiliary  materials  but  also  of  natural  ele¬ 
ments  of  fixed  capital,  such  as  machinery,  tools,  buildings,  etc. 
The  wear  and  tear,  which  must  be  replaced  in  money  in  the  value 
of  2,000  IIC,  therefore  *by  no  means  corresponds  to  the  amount 
of  the  functioning  fixed  capital,  since  a  portion  of  this  must 
be  replaced  in  kind  every  year.  But  this  assumes  that  the  money 
necessary  for  this  replacement  was  accumulated  in  former  years 
by  the  capitalists  of  class  II.  However  that  very  condition  holds 
good  in  the  same  measure  for  the  current  yeaT  as  for  the  preced¬ 
ing  ones. 


458 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


In  the  exchange  between  I  (l,000v  +  l,000a)  and  2,000  II* 
it  must  be  first  noted  that  the  sum  of  values  I<v+«)  does  not  con¬ 
tain  any  constant  element  of  value,  hence  also  no  element  of 
value  to  replace  wear  and  tear,  i.e.,  value  that  has  been  trans¬ 
mitted  from  the  fixed  component  of  the  constant  capital  to  the 
commodities  in  whose  bodily  form  v+s  exist.  On  the  other  hand 
this  element  exists  in  IIC,  and  it  is  precisely  a  part  of  this  value- 
element  that  owes  its  existence  to  fixed  capital  which  is  not  to 
be  converted  immediately  from  the  money-form  into  its  bodily 
form,  but  has  first  to  persist  in  the  form  of  money.  The  exchange 
between  I  (l,000v-|-l,000g)  and  2,000  IIC,  therefore,  at  once  pre¬ 
sents  the  difficulty  that  the  means  of  production  of  I,  in  whose 
bodily  form  the  2,000(v+s)  exist,  are  to  be  exchanged  to  the 
full  value  of  2,000  for  an  equivalent  in  articles  of  consumption 
II,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  2,000  IIC  of  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion  cannot  be  exchanged  at  their  full  value  for  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  I  (l,000T-j-l,000s)  because  an  aliquot  part  of  their 
value— equal  to  the  wear  and  tear,  or  the  value  depreciation  of 
the  fixed  capital  that  is  to  be  replaced — must  first  be  precipitat¬ 
ed  in  the  form  of  money  that  will  not  function  any  more  as  a 
medium  of  circulation  during  the  current  period  of  annual 
reproduction,  which  alone  we  are  examining.  But  the  money 
paying  for  this  element  of  wear  and  tear  incorporated  in  the  com¬ 
modity-value  2,000  IIC  can  come  only  from  department  I,  since 
II  cannot  pay  for  itself  but  effects  payment  precisely  by  selling  its 
goods,  and  since  presumably  I (v+a)  buys  the  whole  of  the  com¬ 
modities  2,000  IIC.  Hence  class  I  must  by  means  of  this  purchase 
convert  that  wear  and  tear  into  money  for  II.  But  according 
to  the  law  previously  evolved,  money  advanced  to  the  circula¬ 
tion  returns  to  the  capitalist  producer  who  later  on  throws  an 
equal  amount  of  commodities  into  circulation.  It  is  evident  that 
in  buying  IIC,  I  cannot  give  II  commodities  worth  2,000  and  a 
surplus  amount  of  money  on  top  of  that  once  and  for  all  (without 
any  return  of  the  same  by  way  of  the  operation  of  exchange). 
Otherwise  I  would  buy  the  commodity  mass  IIC  above  its  value. 
If  II  actually  exchanges  its  2,000c  for  I  (1,000T-|-1,0008),  it  has 
no  further  claims  on  I,  and  the  money  circulating  in  this  ex¬ 
change  returns  to  either  I  or  II,  depending  on  which  of  them 
threw  it  into  circulation,  i.e.,  which  of  them  acted  first  as  buyer 
At  the  same  time  II  would  have  reconverted  the  entire  value  of 
its  commodity-capital  into  the  bodily  form  of  means  of  produc¬ 
tion,  while  our  assumption  is  that  after  its  sale  it  would  not  re¬ 
convert  an  aliquot  portion  of  it  during  the  current  period  of 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


459 


annual  reproduction  from  money  into  the  bodily  form  of  fixed 
components  of  its  constant  capital.  A  money  balance  in  favour 
of  1 1  could  arise  only  if  it  sold  2,000  worth  to  I  and  bought  less 
than  2,000  from  I,  say  only  1,800.  In  that  case  I  would  have 
to  make  good  the  debit  balance  by  200  in  money,  which  would 
not  flow  back  to  it,  because  it  would  not  have  withdrawn  from 
circulation  the  money  it  had  advanced  to  it  by  throwing  into 
it  commodities  equal  to  200.  In  such  an  event  we  would  have  a 
money- fund  for  II,  placed  to  the  credit  of  the  wear  and  tear  of 
its  fixed  capital.  But  then  we  would  have  an  over-production  of 
means  of  production  in  the  amount  of  200  on  the  other  side, 
the  side  of  I,  and  the  basis  of  our  scheme  would  be  destroyed, 
namely  reproduction  on  the  same  scale,  where  complete  propor¬ 
tionality  between  the  various  systems  of  production  is  assumed. 
We  would  only  have  done  away  with  one  difficulty  in  order  to 
create  another  one  much  worse. 

As  this  problem  offers  peculiar  difficulties  and  has  hitherto 
not  been  treated  at  all  by  the  political  economists,  we  shall 
examine  seriatim  all  possible  (at  least  seemingly  possible)  solutions, 
or  rather  formulations  of  the  problem. 

In  the  first  place,  we  have  just  assumed  that  II  sells  commod¬ 
ities  of  the  value  of  2,000  to  I,  but  buys  from  it  only  1,800  worth. 
The  commodity-value  2,000  IIC  contains  200  for  replacement 
of  wear  and  tear,  which  must  be  stored  up  in  the  form  of  money. 
The  value  of  2,000  IIC  would  thus  be  divided  into  1,800,  to  be 
exchanged  for  means  of  production  I,  and  200,  to  replace  wear 
and  tear,  which  are  to  be  kept  in  the  form  of  money  (after  the 
sale  of  the  2,000c  to  I).  Expressed  in  terms  of  value,  2,000  IIC 
equals  l,800c-(-200c(d),  this  d  standing  for  dechet .  * 

We  would  then  have  to  study 

Exchange  I.  1,000T  -j-  1,0009 


II.  l,800c  -}-  200c  (d). 

I  buys  with  £1,000,  which  has  gone  to  the  labourers  in  wages 
for  their  labour-power,  1,000  IIC  of  articles  of  consumption. 
II  buys  with  the  same  £1,000  means  of  production  1,000  Iv. 
Capitalists  I  thus  recover  their  variable  capital  in  the  form  of 
money  and  can  employ  it  next  year  in  the  purchase  of  labour- 


Dechet:  Wear  and  tear. — Ed. 


460 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


power  to  the  same  amount,  i.e.,  they  can  replace  the  variable  por¬ 
tion  of  their  productive  capital  in  kind. 

Furthermore,  II  buys  with  advanced  £400  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  Is,  and  Is  buys  with  the  same  £400  articles  of  consumption 
IIC.  The  £400  advanced  to  the  circulation  by  the  capitalists 
of  II  have  thus  returned  to  them,  but  only  as  an  equivalent  for 
sold  commodities.  I  now  buys  articles  of  consumption  for  ad¬ 
vanced  £400;  II  buys  from  I  £400  worth  of  means  of  production, 
whereupon  these  £400  flow  back  to  I.  So  far,  than,  the  account 
is  as  follows: 

I  throws  into  circulation  l,000v4-800s  in  commodities;  it 
furthermore  throws  into  circulation,  in  money,  £1,000  in  wages 
and  £400  for  exchange  with  II.  After  the  exchange  has  been  made, 
I  has  1,000T  in  money,  800„  exchanged  for  800  IIC  (articles  of 
consumption)  and  £400  in  money. 

II  throws  into  circulation  l,800c  in  commodities  (articles  of 
consumption)  and  £400  in  money.  On  the  completion  of  the  ex¬ 
change  it  has  1,800  in  commodities  I  (means  of  production)  and 
£400  in  money. 

There  still  remain,  on  the  side  of  I,  200  (in  means  of  pro¬ 
duction)  and,  on  the  side  of  II,  200c(d)  (in  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion). 

According  to  our  assumption  I  buys  with  £200  the  articles 
of  consumption  c(d)  of  the  value  of  200.  But  II  holds  on  to  these 
£200  since  200c(d)  represent  wear  and  tear,  and  are  not  to  be 
immediately  reconverted  into  means  of  production.  Therefore 
200  I8  cannot  be  sold.  One- fifth  of  the  surplus-value  I  to  be  re¬ 
placed  cannot  be  realised,  or  converted,  from  its  bodily  form 
of  means  of  production  into  that  of  articles  of  consumption. 

This  not  only  contradicts  our  assumption  of  reproduction 
on  a  simple  scale;  it  is  by  itself  not  a  hypothesis  which  would 
explain  the  transformation  of  200c(d)  into  money.  It  means 
rather  that  it  cannot  be  explained.  Since  it  cannot  be  demon¬ 
strated  in  what  manner  200c(d)  can  be  converted  into  money, 
it  is  assumed  that  I  is  obliging  enough  to  do  the  conversion  just 
because  it  is  not  able  to  convert  its  own  remainder  of  200s  into 
money.  To  conceive  this  as  a  normal  operation  of  the  exchange 
mechanism  is  tantamount  to  the  notion  that  £200  fall  every 
year  from  the  clouds  in  order  regularly  to  convert  200c(d)  into 
money. 

But  the  absurdity  of  such  a  hypothesis  does  not  strike  one 
at  once  if  I3,  instead  of  appearing,  as  it  does  in  this  case,  in  its 
primitive  mode  of  existence— namely  as  a  component  part  of 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


461 


the  value  of  means  of  production,  hence  as  a  component  part 
of  the  value  of  commodities  which  their  capitalist  producers 
must  convert  into  money  by  sale — appears  in  the  hands  of  the 
partners  of  the  capitalists,  for  instance  as  ground-rent  in  the 
hands  of  landowners  or  as  interest  in  the  hands  of  money¬ 
lenders.  But  if  that  portion  of  the  surplus-value  of  commodities 
which  the  industrial  capitalist  has  to  yield  as  ground-rent  or 
interest  to  other  co-owners  of  the  surplus-value  cannot  be  realised 
for  a  long  time  by  the  sale  of  the  commodities,  then  there  is  also 
an  end  to  the  payment  of  rent  and  interest,  and  the  landowners 
or  recipients  of  interest  cannot  therefore  serve  as  dei  ex  machina 
to  convert  at  pleasure  definite  portions  of  the  annual  repro¬ 
duction  into  money  by  spending  rent  and  interest.  The  same  is 
true  of  the  expenditures  of  all  so-called  unproductive  labourers — 
government  officials,  physicians,  lawyers,  etc.,  and  others  who 
as  members  of  the  “general  public”  “serve”  the  political  econo¬ 
mists  by  explaining  what  they  left  unexplained. 

Nor  does  it  improve  matters  if  instead  of  direct  exchange 
between  I  and  II— between  the  two  major  departments  of  capi¬ 
talist  producers — the  merchant  is  drawn  in  as  mediator  and  helps 
to  overcome  all  difficulties  with  his  “money.”  In  the  present  case 
for  instance  200  I„  must  be  definitively  disposed  of  to  the  indus¬ 
trial  capitalists  of  II.  It  may  pass  through  the  hands  of  a  number 
of  merchants,  but  the  last  of  them  will  find  himself,  according 
to  the  hypothesis,  in  the  same  predicament,  vis-a-vis  II,  in 
which  the  capitalist  producers  of  I  were  at  the  outset,  i.e.,  they 
cannot  sell  the  200  I„  to  II.  And  this  stalled  purchase  sum  cannot 
renew  the  same  process  with  I. 

We  see  here  that,  aside  from  our  real  purpose,  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  view  the  process  of  reproduction  in  its  basic  form 
—  in  which  obscuring  minor  circumstances  have  been  elimi¬ 
nated —  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  false  subterfuges  which  furnish 
the  semblance  of  “scientific”  analysis  when  the  process  of  so¬ 
cial  reproduction  is  immediately  made  the  subject  of  the  anal¬ 
ysis  in  its  complicated  concrete  form. 

The  law  that  when  reproduction  proceeds  normally  (whether 
it  be  on  a  simple  or  on  an  extended  scale)  the  money  advanced 
by  the  capitalist  producer  to  the  circulation  must  return  to  its 
point  of  departure  (whether  the  money  is  his  own  or  borrowed) 
excludes  once  and  for  all  the  hypothesis  that  200  IIc(d)  is  con¬ 
verted  into  money  by  means  of  money  advanced  by  I. 


462 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


2.  Replacement  of  Fixed  Capital  in  Kind 

Having  disposed  of  the  hypothesis  considered  above,  only 
such  possibilities  remain  as,  besides  replacing  the  wear-and-tear 
portion  in  money,  include  also  the  replacement  in  kind  of  the 
wholly  defunct  fixed  capital. 

We  assumed  hitherto 

a)  that  £1,000  paid  in  wages  by  I  are  spent  by  the  labourers 
for  IIC  to  the  same  amount,  i.e.,  that  they  buy  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption  with  them. 

It  is  merely  a  statement  of  fact  that  these  £1,000  are  advanced 
by  I  in  money.  Wages  must  be  paid  in  money  by  the  respective 
capitalist  producers.  This  money  is  then  spent  by  the 
labourers  for  articles  of  consumption  and  serves  the  sellers  of 
the  articles  of  consumption  as  a  medium  of  circulation  in  the 
conversion  of  their  constant  capital  from  commodity-capital 
into  productive  capital.  True,  it  passes  through  many  channels 
(shopkeepers,  house  owners,  tax  collectors,  unproductive  la¬ 
bourers,  such  as  physicians,  etc.,  who  are  needed  by  the  labour¬ 
er  himself)  and  hence  it  flows  only  in  part  directly  from  the  hands 
of  labourers  I  into  those  of  capitalist  class  II.  Its  flow  may  be 
retarded  more  or  less  and  the  capitalist  may  therefore  require 
a  new  money-reserve.  All  this  does  not  come  under  consideration 
in  this  basic  form. 

b)  We  assumed  that  at  one  time  I  advances  another  £400 
in  money  for  purchases  from  II  and  that  this  money  returns  to 
it,  while  at  some  other  time  II  advances  £400  for  purchases  from 
I  and  likewise  recovers  this  money.  This  assumption  must  be 
made,  for  it  would  be  arbitrary  to  presuppose  the  contrary,  that 
capitalist  class  I  or  II  should  one-sidedly  advance  to  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  the  money  necessary  for  the  exchange  of  their  com¬ 
modities.  Since  we  have  shown  under  subtitle  1  that  one  should 
reject  as  absurd  the  hypothesis  that  I  would  throw  additional 
money  into  the  circulation  in  order  to  turn  200  IIC  (d)  into  mon¬ 
ey,  it  would  appear  that  there  was  left  only  the  seemingly  still 
more  absurd  hypothesis  that  II  itself  was  throwing  the  money 
into  circulation,  by  which  that  constituent  portion  of  the  value 
of  its  commodities  is  converted  into  money  which  has  to  com¬ 
pensate  the  wear  and  tear  of  its  fixed  capital.  For  instance  that 
portion  of  value  which  is  lost  by  the  spinning-machine  of  Mr.  X 
in  the  process  of  production  re  appears  as  a  portion  of  the 
value  of  the  yarn.  The  loss  which  his  spinning-machine  suffers 
in  value,  i.e.,  in  wear  and  tear,  on  the  one  hand,  should  accu- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


463 


mulate  in  his  hands  as  money  on  the  other.  Now  supposing  that 
X  buys  £200  worth  of  cotton  from  Y  and  thus  advances  to  the 
circulation  £200  in  money.  Y  then  buys  from  him  £200  worth 
of  yarn,  and  these  £200  now  serve  X  as  a  fund  to  compensate 
the  wear  and  tear  of  his  machine.  The  thing  would  simply  come 
down  to  this — that  X,  aside  from  his  production,  its  product, 
and  the  sale  of  this  product,  keeps  £200  in  petto  to  make  good 
to  himself  the  depreciation  of  his  spinning-machine,  i.e.,  that 
in  addition  to  losing  £200  through  the  depreciation  of  his  ma¬ 
chine,  he  must  also  put  up  another  £200  in  money  every  year 
out  of  his  own  pocket  in  order  to  be  able  eventually  to  buy  a 
new  spinning-machine. 

But  the  absurdity  is  only  apparent.  Class  II  consists  of  capi¬ 
talists  whose  fixed  capital  is  in  the  most  diverse  stages  of  its 
reproduction.  In  the  case  of  some  of  them  it  has  arrived  at  the 
stage  where  it  must  be  entirely  replaced  in  kind.  In  the  case  of 
the  others  it  is  more  or  less  remote  from  that  stage.  All  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  latter  group  have  this  in  common,  that  their  fixed 
capital  is  not  actually  reproduced,  i.e.,  is  not  renewed  in  na- 
tura  by  a  new  specimen  of  the  same  kind,  but  that  its  value  is 
successively  accumulated  in  money.  The  first  group  is  in  quite 
the  same  (or  almost  the  same,  it  does  not  matter  here)  position 
as  when  it  started  in  business,  when  it  came  on  the  market  with 
its  money-capital  in  order  to  convert  it  into  constant  (fixed  and 
circulating)  capital  on  the  one  hand  and  into  labour-power, 
into  variable  capital,  on  the  other.  They  have  once  more  to 
advance  this  money-capital  to  the  circulation,  i.e.,  the  value 
of  constant  fixed  capital  as  well  as  that  of  the  circulating  and 
variable  capital. 

Hence,  if  we  assume  that  half  of  the  £400  thrown  into  cir¬ 
culation  by  capitalist  class  II  for  exchange  with  I  comes  from 
those  capitalists  of  II  who  have  to  renew  not  only  by  means  of 
their  commodities  their  means  of  production  pertaining  to  the 
circulating  capital,  but  also,  by  means  of  their  money,  their  fixed 
capital  in  kind,  while  the  other  half  of  capitalists  II  replaces  in 
kind  with  its  money  only  the  circulating  portion  of  its  constant 
capital,  but  does  not  renew  in  kind  its  fixed  capital,  then  there 
is  no  contradiction  in  the  statement  that  these  returning  £400 
(returning  as  soon  as  I  buys  articles  of  consumption  for  it)  are 
variously  distributed  among  these  two  sections  of  II.  They  re¬ 
turn  to  class  II,  but  they  do  not  come  back  into  the  same  hands 
and  are  distributed  variously  within  this  class,  passing  from 
one  of  its  sections  to  another. 


464 


reproduction  and  circulation  of  social  capital 


One  section  of  II  has,  besides  .the  part  of  the  means  of  pro¬ 
duction  covered  in  the  long  run  by  its  commodities,  converted 
£200  in  money  into  new  elements  of  fixed  capital  in  kind.  As 
was  the  case  at  the  start  of  the  business  the  money  thus  spent 
returns  to  this  section  from  the  circulation  only  gradually 
over  a  number  of  years  as  the  wear-and-tear  portion  of  the 
value  of  the  commodities  to  be  produced  by  this  fixed 
capital. 

The  other  section  of  II  however  did  not  get  any  commodities 
from  I  for  £200.  But  I  pays  it  with  the  money  which  the  first 
section  of  II  spent  for  elements  of  its  fixed  capital.  The  first 
section  of  II  has  its  fixed  capital-value  once  more  in  renewed 
bodily  form,  while  the  second  section  is  still  engaged  in  accumu¬ 
lating  it  in  money-form  for  the  subsequent  replacement  of  its 
fixed  capital  in  kind. 

The  basis  on  which  we  now  have  to  proceed  after  the  previous 
exchanges  is  the  remainder  of  the  commodities  still  to  be  ex¬ 
changed  by  both  sides:  400a  on  the  part  of  I,  and  400c  on  the  part 
of  II.62  We  assume  that  II  advances  400  in  money  for  the  ex¬ 
change  of  these  commodities  amounting  to  800.  One  half  of  the 
400  (equal  to  200)  must  be  laid  out  under  all  circumstances  by 
that  section  of  IIC  which  has  accumulated  200  in  money  as  the 
wear-and-tear  value  and  which  has  to  reconvert  this  money  into 
the  bodily  form  of  its.  fixed  capital. 

Just  as  constant  capital-value,  variable  capital-value,  and 
surplus-value— into  which  the  value  of  commodity-capital  II 
as  well  as  I  is  divisible  — may  be  represented  by  special  propor¬ 
tional  shares  of  commodities  II  and  I  respectively,  so  may, 
within  the  value  of  the  constant  capital  itself,  that  portion  of  the 
value  which  is  not  yet  to  be  converted  into  the  bodily  form  of 
the  fixed  capital,  but  is  rather  to  be  accumulated  for  the  time 
being  in  the  form  of  money.  A  certain  quantity  of  commodities 
II  (in  the  present  case  therefore  one  half  of  the  remainder,  or 
200)  is  here  only  a  vehicle  of  this  wear-and-tear  value,  which 
has  to  be  precipitated  in  money  by  means  of  exchange.  (The  first 
section  of  capitalists  II,  which  renews  fixed  capital  in  kind,  may 
already  have  realised  in  this  way — with  the  wear-and-tear  part 
of  the  mass  of  commodities  of  which  here  only  the  rest  still 
figures— a  part  of  its  wear-and-tear  value,  but  it  still  has  to  real¬ 
ise  200  in  money.) 


tJ  These  figures  again  do  not  coincide  with  those  previously  assumed. 
But  this  is  immaterial  since  it  is  merely  a  question  ol  proportions. — F.  E. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


465 


As  for  the  second  half  (equal  to  200)  of  the  £400  thrown  into 
circulation  by  II  in  this  final  operation,  it  buys  circulating  com¬ 
ponents  of  constant  capital  from  I.  A  portion  of  these  £200  may 
be  thrown  into  circulation  by  both  sections  of  II,  or  only  by 
the  one  which  does  not  renew  its  fixed  component  of  value  in 
kind. 

With  these  £400  there  is  thus  extracted  from  I:  1)  commodi¬ 
ties  amounting  to  £200,  consisting  only  of  elements  of  fixed  cap¬ 
ital;  2)  commodities  amounting  to  £200,  replacing  only  natural 
elements  of  the  circulating  portion  of  the  constant  capital  of  II. 
So  I  has  sold  its  entire  annual  product,  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  sold 
to  II;  but  the  value  of  one-fifth  of  it,  £400,  is  now  held  by  I  in 
the  form  of  money.  This  money  however  is  surplus-value  convert¬ 
ed  into  money  which  must  be  spent  as  revenue  for  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption.  Thus  I  buys  with  its  £400  II ’s  entire  commodity-value 
equal  to  400;  hence  this  money  flows  back  to  II  by  setting  its 
commodities  in  motion. 

We  shall  now  suppose  three  cases,  in  which  we  shall  call  the 
section  of  capitalists  II  which  replaces  its  fixed  capital  in  kind 
“section  1,”  and  that  section  which  stores  up  depreciation-value 
from  fixed  capital  in  money-form,  “section  2.  ”  The  three  cases 
are  the  following:  a)  that  a  share  of  the  400  still  existing  with 
II  as  a  remnant  in  the  shape  of  commodities  must  replace  cer¬ 
tain  shares  of  the  circulating  parts  of  the  constant  capital  for 
sections  1  and  2  (say,  one  half  for  each);  b)  that  section  1  has 
already  sold  all  its  commodities,  while  section  2  still  has  to  sell 
400;  c)  that  section  2  has  sold  all  but  the  200  which  are  the  bearers 
of  the  depreciation  value. 

Then  we  have  the  following  distributions: 

a)  Of  the  commodity-value  400c,  still  in  the  hands  of  II,  sec¬ 
tion  1  holds  100  and  section  2 — 300;  200  out  of  the  300  repre¬ 
sent  depreciation.  In  that  case  section  1  originally  laid  out  300 
of  the  £400  in  money  now  returned  by  I  to  get  commodities 
from  II,  namely  200  in  money,  for  which  it  secured  elements  of 
fixed  capital  in  kind  from  I,  and  100  in  money  for  the  promotion 
of  its  exchange  of  commodities  with  I.  Section  2  on  the  other 
hand  advanced  only  V«  of  the  400,  i.e.,  100,  likewise  for  the  pro¬ 
motion  of  its  commodity-exchange  with  I. 

Section  1,  then,  advanced  300,  and  section  2 — 100  of  the  400 
in  money. 

Of  these  400  there  return  however: 

To  section  1  — 100  i.e..  only  one-third  of  the  money  advanced 
by  it.  But  it  has  in  place  of  the  other  2/s  a  renewed  fixed  capital 


466 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


to  the  value  of  200.  Section  1  has  given  money  to  I  for  this  ele¬ 
ment  of  fixed  capital  to  the  value  of  200,  but  no  subsequent  com¬ 
modities.  So  far  as  the  200  in  money  are  concerned,  section  1 
confronts  department  I  only  as  buyer,  but  not  later  on  as  seller. 
This  money  cannot  therefore  return  to  section  1;  otherwise 
it  would  have  received  the  elements  of  fixed  capital  from  I  as 
a  gift. 

With  reference  to  the  last  third  of  the  money  advanced  by 
it,  section  1  first  acted  as  a  buyer  of  circulating  constituent  parts 
of  its  cbnstant  capital.  With  the  same  money  I  buys  from  it  the 
remainder  of  its  commodities  worth  100.  This  money,  then,  flows 
back  to  it  (section  1  of  department  II)  because  it  acts  as  a  vendor 
of  commodities  directly  after  having  acted  as  a  buyer.  If  this 
money  did  not  return,  then  II  (section  1)  would  have  given  to  I,  ior 
commodities  amounting  to  100,  first  100  in  money,  and  then  into 
the  bargain,  100  in  commodities,  i.e.,  II  would  have  given  away 
its  commodities  to  I  as  a  present. 

On  the  other  hand  section  2,  which  laid  out  100  in  money 
receives  back  300  in  money:  100  because  first  as  a  buyer  it  threw 
100  in  money  into  circulation,  and  receives  them  back  as  a  sell¬ 
er;  200,  because  it  functions  only  as  a  seller  of  commodities  to 
that  amount,  but  not  as  a  buyer.  Hence  the  money  cannot  flow 
back  to  I.  The  fixed  capital  depreciation  is  thus  balanced  by 
the  money  thrown  into  circulation  by  II  (section  1)  in  the  pur¬ 
chase  of  elements  of  fixed  capital.  But  it  reaches  the  hands  of 
section  2  not  as  money  of  section  1,  but  as  money  belonging  to 
class  I. 

b)  On  this  assumption  the  remainder  of  I  Ic  is  so  distributed  that 
section  1  has  200  in  money  and  section  2  has  400  in  commodities. 

Section  1  has  sold  all  of  its  commodities,  but  200  in  money 
are  a  transformed  shape  of  the  fixed  component  part  of  its  con¬ 
stant  capital  which  it  has  to  renew  in  kind.  Hence  it  acts  here 
only  as  a  buyer  and  receives  instead  of  its  money  commodity 
I  to  the  same  value  in  natural  elements  of  its  fixed  capital.  Sec¬ 
tion  2  -has  to  throw  only  £200  into  circulation,  as  a  maximum 
(if  I  does  not  advance  any  money  for  commodity-exchange  be¬ 
tween  I  and  II),  since  for  half  of  its  commodity-value  it  is  only 
a  seller  to  I,  not  a  buyer  from  I. 

There  return  to  section  2  from  the  circulation  £400:  200  be¬ 
cause  it  has  advanced  them  as  a  buyer  and  receives  them  back 
as  a  seller  of  200  in  commodities;  200  because  it  sells  commodi¬ 
ties  to  the  value  of  200  to  I  without  obtaining  an  equivalent  in 
commodities  from  I. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


467 


c)  Section  1  has  200  in  money  and  200c  in  commodities.  Sec¬ 
tion  2  has  200o  (d)  in  commodities. 

On  this  supposition  section  2  does  not  have  any  advance  to 
make  in  money,  because  vis-a-vis  I  it  no  longer  acts  at  all  as 
buyer  but  only  as  seller,  hence  has  to  wait  until  someone  buys 
from  it. 

Section  1  advances  £400  in  money:  200  for  mutual  commodity- 
exchange  with  I,  200  as  mere  buyer  from  I.  With  the  last  £200 
in  money  it  purchases  the  elements  of  fixed  capital. 

With  £200  in  money  I  buys  from  section  1  commodities  for 
200,  so  that  the  latter  thus  recovers  the  £200  in  money  it  had 
advanced  for  this  commodity-exchange.  And  I  buys  with  the 
other  £200,  which  it  has  likewise  received  from  section  1,  com¬ 
modities  to  the  value  of  200  from  section  2,  whereby  the  latter’s 
wear  and  tear  of  fixed  capital  is  precipitated  in  the  form  of  money. 

The  matter  is  not  altered  in  the  least  if  it  is  assumed  that, 
in  case  c),  class  I  instead  of  II  (section  1)  advances  the  200  in 
money  to  promote  the  exchange  of  the  existing  commodities. 
If  I  buys  in  that  event  first  200  in  commodities  from  II,  section 
2,  on  the  assumption  that  this  section  has  only  this  commodity 
remnant  left  to  sell— then  the  £200  do  not  return  to  I,  since  II, 
section  2,  does  not  act  again  as  buyer.  But  II,  section  1,  has  in 
that  case  £200  in  money  to  spend  in  buying  and  200  in  commodi¬ 
ties  for  exchange  purposes,  thus  making  a  total  of  400  for  trading 
with  I.  £200  in  money  then  return  to  I  from  II,  section  1.  If  I 
again  lays  them  out  in  the  purchase  of  200  in  commodities  from 
II,  section  1,  they  return  to  I  as  soon  as  II,  section  1,  takes  the 
second  half  of  the  400  in  commodities  off  I’s  hands.  Section  1 
(II)  has  spent  £200  in  money  as  a  mere  buyer  of  elements  of 
fixed  capital;  they  therefore  do  not  return  to  it,  but  serve  to 
turn  the  200c,  the  commodity  remnant  of  II,  section  2,  into  money, 
while  the  £200,  the  money  laid  out  by  I  for  the  exchange  of 
commodities,  return  to  I  via  II,  section  1,  not  via  II,  section  2. 
In  the  place  of  its  commodities  of  400  there  has  returned  to  it 
a  commodity  equivalent  amounting  to  400;  the  £200  in  money 
advanced  by  it  for  the  exchange  of  800  in  commodities  have 
likewise  returned  to  it.  Everything  is  therefore  all  right. 


The  difficulty  encountered  in  the  exchange 


I.  1,000„+ 1.000. 

II.  “Tooo; 

remainders: 


was  reduced  to  the  difficulty  on  exchanging 


468 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


1 .  400s. 

II.  (1)  200  in  money-f-200c  in  commodities  +  (2)  200c  in 
commodities.  Or,  to  make  the  matter  still  clearer: 

I.  200s+200s. 

II.  (1)  200  in  money  +  200c  in  commodities  +  (2)  200c  in  com¬ 
modities. 

Since  in  II,  section  1,  200c  in  commodities  are  exchanged  for 
200  I9  (in  commodities)  and  since  all  the  money  circulating  in 
this  exchange  of  400  in  commodities  between  I  and  II  returns  to 
him  who  advanced  it,  I  or  II,  this  money,  being  an  element  of 
the  exchange  between  I  and  II,  is  actually  not  an  element  of  the 
problem  which  is  troubling  us  here.  Or,  to  present  it  differently: 
Supposing  in  the  exchange  between  200  I,  (commodities)  and 
200  IIC  (commodities  of  II,  section  1)  the  money  functions  as 
a  means  of  payment,  not  as  a  means  of  purchase  and  therefore 
also  not  as  a  “medium  of  circulation,”  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the 
words.  It  is  then  clear,  since  the  commodities  200  Is  and  200 
IIC  (section  1)  are  equal  in  magnitude  of  value,  that  means  of 
production  worth  200  are  exchanged  for  articles  of  consumption 
worth  200,  that  money  functions  here  only  ideally,  and  that 
neither  side  really  has  to  throw  any  money  into  the  circulation 
for  the  payment  of  any  balance.  Hence  the  problem  presents  it¬ 
self  in  its  pure  form  only  when  we  strike  off  on  both  sides,  I  and 
II,  the  commodities  200  Is  and  their  equivalent,  the  commodities 
200  IIC  (section  1). 

After  the  elimination  of  these  two  amounts  of  commodities 
of  equal  value  (I  and  II),  which  balance  each  other,  there  is  left 
for  exchange  a  remainder  in  which  the  problem  evinces  its  pure 
form,  namely, 

I.  200„  in  commodities. 

II.  (1)  200c  in  money  plus  (2)  200c  in  commodities. 

It  is  evident  here  that  II,  section  1,  buys  with  200  in  money 
the  component  parts  of  its  fixed  capital,  200  I3.  The  fixed  capital 
of  II,  section  1,  is  thereby  renewed  in  kind  and  the  surplus-value 
of  I,  worth  200;  is  converted  from  the  commodity-form  (means 
of  production,  or,  more  precisely,  elements  of  fixed  capital) 
Into  the  money-form.  With  this  money  I  buys  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption  from  II,  section  2,  and  the  result  for  II  is  that  for 
section  1  a  fixed  component  part  of  its  constant  capital  has  been 
renewed  in  kind,  and  that  for  section  2  another  component  part 
(which  compensates  for  the  depreciation  of  its  fixed  capital)  has 
been  precipitated  in  money-form.  And  this  continues  every 
year  until  this  last  component  part,  too,  has  to  be  renewed  in  kind. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


4G9 


The  condition  precedent  is  here  evidently  that  this  fixed  com¬ 
ponent  part  of  constant  capital  II,  which  is  reconverted  into 
money  to  the  full  extent  of  its  value  and  therefore  must  be  re¬ 
newed  in  kind  each  year  (section  1),  should  be  equal  to  the  an¬ 
nual  depreciation  of  the  other  fixed  component  part  of  constant 
capital  II,  which  continues  to  function  in  its  old  bodily  form 
and  whose  wear  and  tear,  depreciation  in  value,  which  it  trans¬ 
fers  to  the  commodities  in  whose  production  it  is  engaged,  is 
Erst  to  be  compensated  in  money.  Such  a  balance  would  seem 
to  be  a  law  of  reproduction  on  the  same  scale.  This  is  equivalent 
to  saying  that  in  class  I,  which  puts  out  the  means  of  production, 
the  proportional  division  of  labour  must  remain  unchanged, 
since  it  produces  on  the  one  hand  circulating  and  on  the  other 
fixed  component  parts  of  the  constant  capital  of  depart¬ 
ment  II. 

Before  we  analyse  this  more  closely  we  must  see  what  turn 
the  matter  takes  if  the  remainder  of  II0  (1)  is  not  equal  to  the 
remainder  of  IIC  (2),  and  may  be  larger  or  smaller.  Let  us  study 
the  two  cases  one  after  the  other. 

First  Case 

I.  200„. 

II.  (1)  220c  (in  money)  plus  (2)  200c  (in  commodities). 

In  this  case  II0  (1)  buys  with  £200  in  money  the  commodities 
200  I8,  and  I  buys  with  the  same  money  the  commodities  200 
IIC  (2),  i.e.,  that  portion  of  the  fixed  capital  which  is  to  be  precip¬ 
itated  in  money.  This  portion  is  thus  converted  into  money.  But 
20  IIC  (1)  in  money  cannot  be  reconverted  into  fixed  capital  in 
kind. 

It  seems  this  misfortune  can  be  remedied  by  setting  the  remain¬ 
der  of  I8  at  220  instead  of  at  200,  so  that  only  1,780  instead  of 
1,800  of  the  2,000  I  would  be  disposed  of  by  former  exchange. 
We  should  then  have: 

I.  2203. 

II.  (1)  220c  (in  money)  plus  (2)  200c  (in  commodities). 

II0,  section  1,  buys  with  £220  in  money  the  220  I„  and  I  buys 
then  with  £200  the  200  IIC  (2)  in  commodities.  But  now  £20 
in  money  remain  on  the  side  of  I,  a  portion  of  surplus-value  which 
it  can  hold  on  to  only  in  the  form  of  money,  without  being  able 
to  spend  it  for  articles  of  consumption.  The  difficulty  is  thus 
merely  transferred  from  IIC,  section  1,  to  I8. 

Let  us  now  assume  on  the  other  hand  that  IIC,  section  1,  is 
smaller  than  II0,  section  2;  then  we  have  the 


470 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


Second  Case 

I.  200s  (in  commodities). 

II.  (1)  180c  (in  money)  plus  (2)  200c  (in  commodities). 

With  £180  in  money  II  (section  1)  buys  commodities,  180 

I,.  With  this  money  I  buys  commodities  of  the  same  value  from  II 
(section  2),  hence  180  IIC  (2).  There  remain  20  I8  unsaleable  on  one 
side,  and  also  20  II0  (2)  on  the  other— commodities  worth  40, 
not  convertible  into  money. 

It  would  not  help  us  to  make  the  remainder  of  I  equal  to  180. 
True,  no  surplus  would  then  be  left  in  I,  but  now  as  before  a  sur¬ 
plus  of  20  would  remain  in  IIC  (section  2),  unsaleable,  inconverti¬ 
ble  into  money. 

In  the  first  case,  where  II  (1)  is  greater  than  II  (2),  there  re¬ 
mains  on  the  side  of  IIC  (1)  a  surplus  in  money-form  not  recon¬ 
vertible  into  fixed  capital;  or,  if  the  remainder  I3  is  assumed  to  be 
equal  to  IIC  (1),  there  remains  on  the  side  of  I8  the  same  surplus 
in  money-form,  not  convertible  into  articles  of  consumption. 

In  the  second  case,  where  IIC  (1)  is  smaller  than  IIC  (2),  there 
remains  a  money  deficit  on  the  side  of  200  Is  and  IIC  (2),  and  an 
equal  surplus  of  commodities  on  both  sides,  or,  if  the  remainder 
of  I,  is  assumed  to  be  equal  to  IIC  (1),  there  remains  a  money 
deficit  and  a  surplus  of  commodities  on  the  side  of  IIC  (2). 

If  we  assume  the  remainders  of  I3  always  to  be  equal  to  IIC  (1) 
—since  production  is  determined  by  orders  and  reproduction  is 
not  altered  in  any  way  if  one  year  there  is  a  greater  output  of 
fixed  component  parts  and  the  next  a  greater  output  of  circulat¬ 
ing  component  part  of  constant  capitals  II  and  I  — then  in  the 
first  case  I,  can  be  reconverted  into  articles  of  consumption  only 
if  I  buys  with  it  a  portion  of  the  surplus-value  of  II  and  II  accu¬ 
mulates  it  in  money  instead  of  consuming  it;  and  in  the  second 
case  matters  can  be  remedied  only  if  I  spends  the  money  itself, 
an  assumption  we  have  already  rejected. 

If  IIC  (1)  is  greater  than  IIC  (2),  foreign  commodities  must  be 
imported  to  realise  the  money-surplus  in  I8.  If,  conversely, 
IIe  (1)  is  smaller  than  II0  (2),  commodities  II  (articles  of  consump¬ 
tion)  will  have  to  be  exported  to  realise  the  depreciation  part  of 
IIC  in  means  of  production.  Consequently  in  either  case  foreign 
trade  is  necessary. 

Even  granted  that  for  a  study  of  reproduction  on  an  unchanging 
scale  it  is  to  be  supposed  that  the  productivity  of  all  lines  of 
Industry,  hence  also  the  proportional  value-relations  of  their 
commodities,  remain  constant,  the  two  last-named  cases,  in  which 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


471 


IIC  (1)  is  either  greater  or  smaller  than  IIC  (2),  will  nevertheless 
always  be  of  interest  for  production  on  an  enlarged  scale  where 
these  cases  may  Infallibly  be  encountered. 

3.  Results 

The  following  is  to  be  noted  with  reference  to  replacement 
of  fixed  capital: 

If — all  other  things,  and  not  only  the  scale  of  production,  but 
above  all  the  productivity  of  labour,  remaining  the  same— a 
greater  part  of  the  fixed  element  of  IIC  expires  than  did  the  year 
before,  and  hence  a  greater  part  must  be  renewed  in  kind,  then  that 
part  of  the  fixed  capital  which  is  as  yet  only  on  the  way  to  its 
demise  and  is  to  be  replaced  meanwhile  in  money  until  its  day  of 
expiry,  must  shrink  in  the  same  proportion,  inasmuch  as  it  was 
assumed  that  the  sum  (and  the  sum  of  the  value)  of  the  fixed 
part  of  capital  functioning  in  II  remains  the  same.  This  however 
brings  with  it  the  following  circumstances:  First:  If  the  greater 
part  of  commodity-capital  I  consists  of  elements  of  the  fixed 
capital  of  IIC,  then  a  correspondingly  smaller  portion  consists 
of  circulating  component  parts  of  IIC,  because  the  total  production 
of  I  for  IIC  remains  unchanged.  If  one  of  these  parts  increases  the 
other  decreases,  and  vice  versa.  On  the  other  hand  the  total  pro¬ 
duction  of  class  II  also  retains  the  same  volume.  But  how  is 
this  possible  if  its  raw  materials,  semi-finished  products,  and 
auxiliary  materials  (i.e.,  the  circulating  elements  of  constant 
capital  II)  decrease?  Second:  the  greater  part  of  fixed  capital  IIC, 
restored  in  its  money-form,  flows  to  I  to  be  reconverted  from  its 
money-form  into  its  bodily  form.  So  there  is  a  greater  flow  of 
money  to  I,  aside  from  the  money  circulating  between  I  and  II 
merely  for  the  exchange  of  their  commodities;  more  money  which 
is  not  instrumental  in  effecting  mutual  commodity  exchange,  but 
acts  only  one-sidedly  in  the  function  of  a  means  of  purchase. 
But  then  the  mass  of  commodities  of  IIC,  which  is  the  bearer  of 
the  wear-and-tear  equivalent — and  thus  the  mass  of  commoditias 
1 1  that  must  only  be  exchanged  for  money  I  and  not  for  commodities 
I — would  also  shrink  proportionately.  More  money  would  have 
flown  from  II  to  I  as  mere  means  of  purchase,  and  there  would 
be  fewer  commodities  II  in  relation  to  which  I  would  have  to 
function  as  a  mere  buyer.  A  greater  portion  of  Is— for  IT  is  already 
converted  into  commodities  II— would  not  therefore  be  converti¬ 
ble  into  commodities  II,  but  would  persist  in  the  form  of 
money. 


472 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


The  opposite  case,  in  which  the  reproduction  of  demises  of  fixed 
capital  II  in  a  certain  year  is  less  and  on  the  contrary  the  de¬ 
preciation  part  greater,  needs  no  further  discussion. 

Thero  would  be  a  crisis— a  crisis  of  over-production  — in  spite  of 
reproduction  on  an  unchanging  scale. 

In  short,  if  under  simple  reproduction  and  other  unchanged 
conditions— particularly  under  unchanged  productive  power,  to¬ 
tal  volume  and  intensity  of  labour— no  constant  proportion  is 
assumed  between  expiring  fixed  capital  (to  be  renewed)  and  fixed 
capital  still  continuing  to  function  in  its  old  bodily  form  (merely 
adding  to  the  products  value  in  compensation  of  its  depreciation), 
then,  in  the  one  case  the  mass  of  circulating  component  parts  to  he 
reproduced  would  remain  the  same  while  the  mass  of  fixed  compo¬ 
nent  parts  to  be  reproduced  would  be  increased.  Therefore  the 
total  production  I  would  have  to  grow  or,  even  aside  from  money- 
relations,  there  would  be  a  deficit  in  reproduction. 

In  the  other  case,  if  the  size  of  fixed  capital  II  to  be  repro¬ 
duced  in  kind  should  proportionately  decrease  and  hence  the  com¬ 
ponent  part  of  fixed  capital  II,  which  must  now  he  replaced  only 
in  money,  should  increase  in  the  same  ratio,  then  the  quantity 
of  the  circulating  component  parts  of  constant  capital  II  repro¬ 
duced  by  I  would  remain  unchanged,  while  that  of  the  fixed 
component  parts  to  be  reproduced  would  decrease.  Hence  either 
decrease  in  aggregate  production  of  I,  or  surplus  (as  previously 
deficit)  and  surplus  that  is  not  to  bo  converted  into  money. 

True,  the  same  labour  can,  in  the  first  case,  turn  out  a  greater 
product  through  increasing  productivity,  extension  or  intensity, 
and  the  deficit  could  thus  be  covered  in  that  case.  But  such  a 
change  would  not  take  place  without  a  shifting  of  capital  and 
labour  from  one  line  of  production  of  I  to  another,  and  every  such 
shift  would  call  forth  momentary  disturbances.  Furthermore 
(in  so  far  as  extension  and  intensification  of  labour  would  mount), 
I  would  have  for  exchange  more  of  its  own  value  for  less  of  II’s 
value.  Hence  there  would  be  a  depreciation  of  the  product  of  I. 

The  reverse  would  take  place  in  the  second  case,  where  I  must 
curtail  its  production,  which  implies  a  crisis  for  its  labourers 
and  capitalists,  or  produce  a  surplus,  which  again  spells  crisis. 
Such  surplus  is  not  an  evil  in  itself,  but  an  advantage;  however 
it  is  an  evil  under  capitalist  production. 

Foreign  trade  could  help  out  in  either  case:  in  the  first  case  in 
order  to  convert  commodities  I  held  in  the  form  of  money  into 
articles  of  consumption,  and  in  the  second  case  to  dispose  of  the 
commodity  surplus.  But  since  foreign  trade  does  not  merely 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


473 


replace  certain  elements  (also  with  regard  to  value),  it  only 
transfers  the  contradictions  to  a  wider  sphere  and  gives  them 
greater  latitude. 

Once  the  capitalist  form  of  reproduction  is  abolished,  it  is 
only  a  matter  of  the  volume  of  the  expiring  portion — expiring 
and  therefore  to  be  reproduced  in  kind— of  fixed  capital  (the 
capital  which  in  our  illustration  functions  in  the  production 
of  articles  of  consumption)  varying  in  various  successive  years. 
If  it  is  very  large  in  a  certain  year  (in  excess  of  the  average  mor¬ 
tality,  as  is  the  case  with  human  beings),  then  it  is  certainly  so 
much  smaller  in  the  next  year.  The  quantity  of  raw  materials, 
semi-finished  products,  and  auxiliary  materials  required  for  the 
annual  production  of  the  articles  of  consumption — provided  oth¬ 
er  things  remain  equal — does  not  decrease  in  consequence.  Hence 
the  aggregate  production  of  means  of  production  would  have  to 
increase  in  the  one  case  and  decrease  in  the  other.  This  can  be  rem¬ 
edied  only  by  a  continuous  relative  over-production.  There  must 
be  on  the  one  hand  a  certain  quantity  of  fixed  capital  produced  in 
excess  of  that  which  is  directly  required;  on  the  other  hand,  and 
particularly,  there  must  be  a  supply  of  raw  materials,  etc.,  in  ex¬ 
cess  of  the  direct  annual  requirements  (this  applies  especially  to 
means  of  subsistence).  This  sort  of  over-production  is  tantamount 
to  control  by  society  over  the  material  means  of  its  own  reproduc¬ 
tion.  But  within  capitalist  society  it  is  an  element  of  anarchy. 

This  illustration  of  fixed  capital,  on  tbe  basis  of  an  unchanged 
scale  of  reproduction,  is  striking.  A  disproportion  of  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital  is  one  of  the  favourite  argu¬ 
ments  of  the  economists  in  explaining  crises.  That  such  a  dispro¬ 
portion  can  and  must  arise  even  when  the  fixed  capital  is  merely 
preserved ,  that  it  can  and  must  do  so  on  the  assumption  of  ideal 
normal  production  on  the  basis  of  simple  reproduction  of  the 
already  functioning  social  capital  is  something  new  to  them. 

XII.  THE  REPRODUCTION 
OF  THE  MONEY  MATERIAL 

One  factor  has  so  far  been  entirely  disregarded,  namely  the 
annual  reproduction  of  gold  and  silver.  As  mere  material  for 
articles  of  luxury,  gilding,  etc.,  there  is  as  little  occasion  for 
special  mention  of  them  as  there  is  of  mentioning  any  other  prod¬ 
ucts.  But  they  play  an  important  role  as  money  material  and 
hence  as  potential  money.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  we  here  re¬ 
gard  only  gold  as  material  for  money. 


474 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


According  to  older  data  the  entire  annual  production  of  gold 
amounted  to  800,000-900,000  lbs.,  equal  roundly  to  1,100  or 
1,250  million  marks.  But  according  to  Soetbeerss  it  amounted 
to  only  170,675  kilograms,  valued  at  roundly  476  million  marks, 
based  on  the  average  for  1871  to  1875.  Of  this  amount  Australia 
supplied  roundly  167,  the  United  States  166,  and  Russia  93  mil¬ 
lion  marks.  The  remainder  is  distributed  over  various  countries  in 
amounts  of  less  than  10  million  marks  each.  During  the  same  pe¬ 
riod,  the  annual  production  of  silver  amounted  to  somewhat  less 
than  2  million  kilograms,  valued  at  354Vj  million  marks.  Of  this 
amount,  Mexico  supplied  roundly  108,  the  United  States  102, 
South  America  67,  Germany  26  million,  etc. 

Among  the  countries  with  predominantly  capitalist  production 
only  the  United  States  is  a  producer  of  gold  and  silver.  The  capi¬ 
talist  countries  of  Europe  obtain  almost  all  their  gold,  and  by 
far  the  greater  part  of  their  silver,  from  Australia,  the  United 
States,  Mexico,  South  America,  and  Russia. 

But  we  take  it  that  the  gold  mines  are  in  a  country  with  capi¬ 
talist  production  whose  annual  reproduction  we  are  here  analys¬ 
ing,  and  for  the  following  reasons: 

Capitalist  production  does  not  exist  at  all  without  foreign 
commerce.  But  when  one  assumes  normal  annual  reproduction 
on  a  given  scale  one  also  assumes  that  foreign  commerce  only  re¬ 
places  home  products  by  articles  of  other  use-  or  bodily  form, 
without  affecting  value-relations,  hence  without  affecting  either 
the  value-relations  in  which  the  two  categories  “means  of  produc¬ 
tion”  and  “articles  of  consumption"  mutually  exchange,  or  the 
relations  between  constant  capital,  variable  capital,  and  surplus- 
value,  into  which  the  value  of  the  product  of  each  of  these  catego¬ 
ries  may  be  divided.  The  involvement  of  foreign  commerce  in 
analysing  the  annually  reproduced  value  of  products  can  therefore 
only  confuse  without  contributing  any  new  element  of  the  prob¬ 
lem,  or  of  its  solution.  For  this  reason  it  must  be  entirely  dis¬ 
carded.  And  consequently  gold  too  is  to  be  treated  here  as  a  direct 
element  of  annual  reproduction  and  not  as  a  commodity  element 
imported  from  abroad  by  means  of  exchange. 

The  production  of  gold,  like  that  of  metals  generally,  belongs 
in  class  I,  the  category  which  embraces  the  production  of  means 
of  production.  Supposing  the  annual  production  of  gold  is  equal 
to  30  (for  convenience’s  sake;  actually  the  figure  is  much  too 
high  compared  to  the  other  figures  of  our  scheme).  Let  this  value 


*3  Ad  Soetbeer,  Edelmetall-Produktion,  Gotha,  1879. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


475 


be  divisible  into  20c+5T+5,;  20c  is  to  be  exchanged  for  other  ele¬ 
ments  of  Ic  and  this  is  to  be  studied  later*;  but  the  5T  +  5,  (I)  are 
to  be  exchanged  for  elements  of  IIC,  i.e.,  articles  of  consumption. 

As  for  the  5V,  every  gold-producing  establishment  begins 
by  buying  labour-power.  This  is  done  not  with  gold  produced 
by  this  particular  enterprise,  but  with  a  portion  of  the  money- 
supply  in  the  land.  The  labourers  buy  with  this  5V  articles  of 
consumption  from  II,  and  that  buys  with  this  money  means  of 
production  from  I.  Let  II  buy  gold  from  I  to  the  amount  of  2  as 
commodity  material,  etc.  (component  part  of  its  constant  capital), 
then  2y  flow  back  to  gold  producers  I  in  money  which  has  already 
belonged  to  the  circulation.  If  II  does  not  buy  any  more  material 
from  I,  then  I  buys  from  II  by  throwing  its  gold  into  circulation  as 
money,  since  gold  can  buy  any  commodity.  The  difference  is  only 
that  I  does  not  act  here  as  a  seller,  but  only  as  a  buyer.  Gold 
miners  I  can  always  get  rid  of  their  commodity;  it  is  always  in  a 
directly  exchangeable  form. 

Let  us  assume  that  some  producer  of  yarn  has  paid  5V  to  his 
labourers,  who  create  for  him  in  return  — aside  from  the  surplus- 
value— a  yarn  product  equal  to  5.  For  5  the  labourers  buy  from 
IIC,  and  the  latter  buys  yarn  from  I  for  5  in  money,  and  thus  5T 
flows  back  in  money  to  the  spinner  of  yarn.  Now  in  the  case  as¬ 
sumed  I  g  (as  we  shall  designate  the  producers  of  gold)  advances 
to  its  labourers  5T  in  money  which  previously  belonged  to  the 
circulation.  The  labourers  spend  it  for  articles  of  consumption, 
but  only  2  of  the  5  return  from  II  to  I  g.  However  I  g  can  begin 
the  process  of  reproduction  anew,  just  as  well  as  the  producer  of 
yarn.  For  his  labourers  have  supplied  him  with  5  in  gold,  2  of 
which  he  sold  and  3  of  which  he  still  has,  so  that  he  has  but  to 
coin61  them,  or  turn  them  into  bank-notes  to  have  his  entire 
variable  capital  again  directly  in  his  hands  in  money-form,  with¬ 
out  the  further  intervention  of  II. 

Even  this  first  process  of  annual  reproduction  has  wrought 
a  change  in  tha  quantity  of  money  actually  or  virtually  belonging 
to  the  circulation.  We  assumed  that  II0  bought  2y  (I  g)  as  material, 
and  that  I  g  has  again  laid  out  3— as  the  money-form  of  its  vari¬ 
able  capital— within  II.  Hence  3  of  the  mass  of  money  supplied 
by  the  new  gold  production  remained  within  II  and  did  not  return 
to  I.  According  to  our  assumption  II  has  satisfied  its  require- 

•  See  Engels's  footnote  on  p.  477. — Ed. 

11  “A  considerable  quantity  of  gold  bullion  ...  is  taken  direct  to  the 
mint  at  San  Francisco  by  the  owners."  Reports  of  H.  M.  Secretaries  of  Em¬ 
bassy  and  Legation,  1879,  Part  III,  p.  337. 


476 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


merits  in  gold  material.  The  3  remain  in  its  hands  as  a  gold  hoard. 
Since  they  cannot  constitute  any  element  of  its  constant  capital, 
and  since  II  had  previously  enough  money-capital  for  the  pur¬ 
chase  of  labour-power;  since  furthermore  these  additional  3  g, 
with  the  exception  of  the  depreciation  element,  have  no  function 
to  perform  within  IIC,  for  a  portion  of  which  they  were  exchanged 
(they  could  only  serve  to  cover  the  depreciation  element  pro 
tanto ,  if  IIC  (1)  should  be  smaller  than  IIC  (2),  which  would  be 
accidental);  on  the  other  hand,  however,  namely  with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  the  depreciation  element,  the  entire  commodity-product 
IIC,  must  be  exchanged  for  means  of  production  I(v+S)— this 
money  must  be  transferred  in  its  entirety  from  IIC  to  IIa,  no 
matter  whether  it  exists  in  necessities  of  life  or  articles  of  luxury, 
and  vice  versa  corresponding  commodity-value  must  be  transferred 
from  II8  to  IIC.  Result:  A  portion  of  the  surplus-value  is  stored 
up  as  a  money-hoard. 

In  the  second  year  of  reproduction,  provided  the  same  pro¬ 
portion  of  annually  produced  gold  continues  to  be  used  as  mate¬ 
rial,  2  will  again  flow  back  to  I  g,  and  3  will  be  replaced  in  kind, 
i.e.,  will  be  released  again  in  II  as  a  hoard,  etc. 

With  reference  to  the  variable  capital  in  general:  The  capi¬ 
talist  I  g,  like  every  other  capitalist,  must  continually  advance 
this  capital  in  money  for  the  purchase  of  labour-power.  But  so  far 
as  this  v  is  concerned,  it  is  not  he  but  his  labourers  who  have  to 
buy  from  II.  It  can  therefore  never  happen  that  he  should  act 
as  a  buyer,  throwing  gold  into  II  without  the  initiative  of  II. 
But  to  the  extent  that  II  buys  material  from  him,  and  must  con¬ 
vert  constant  capital  IIC  into  gold  material,  a  portion  of  (I  g)¥ 
flows  back  to  him  from  II  in  the  same  way  that  it  does  to  other 
capitalists  of  I.  And  so  far  as  this  is  not  the  case,  he  replaces  his 
v  in  gold  directly  from  his  product.  But  to  the  extent  that  the  v 
advanced  in  money  does  not  flow  back  to  him  from  II,  a  portion 
of  the  already  available  means  of  circulation  (received  from  I  and 
not  returned  to  I)  is  converted  in  II  into  a  hoard  and  for  that  reason 
a  portion  of  its  surplus-value  is  not  expended  for  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption.  Since  new  gold-mines  are  continually  opened  or  old 
ones  re-opened,  a  certain  portion  of  the  money  to  be  laid  out  by 
I  g  in  v  is  always  part  of  the  money  existing  prior  to  the  new  gold 
production;  it  is  thrown  by  I  g  through  its  labourers  into  II,  and 
unless  it  returns  from  II  to  I  g  it  forms  there  an  element  of  hoard 
formation. 

But  as  for  (I  g)8,  I  g  can  always  act  here  as  buyer.  He  throws 
his  s  in  the  shape  of  gold  into  circulation  and  withdraws  from 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


477 


it  in  return  articles  of  consumption  IIC.  In  II  the  gold  is  used 
in  part  as  material,  and  thus  functions  as  a  real  element  of  the 
constant  constituent  portion  c  of  the  productive  capital.  When 
this  is  not  the  case  it  becomes  once  more  an  element  of  hoard 
formation  as  a  part  of  IIa  persisting  in  the  form  of  money.  We 
see,  then,  aside  from  Ic  which  we  reserve  for  a  later  analysis,66 
that  even  simple  reproduction,  excluding  accumulation  proper, 
namely  reproduction  on  an  extended  scale,  necessarily  includes 
the  storing  up,  or  hoarding,  of  money.  And  as  this  is  annually 
repeated,  it  explains  the  assumption  from  which  we  started  in 
the  analysis  of  capitalist  production,  namely,  that  at  the  beginning 
of  the  reproduction  a  supply  of  money  corresponding  to  the  ex¬ 
change  of  commodities  is  in  the  hands  of  capitalist  classes  I  and  II. 
Such  an  accumulation  takes  place  even  after  deducting  the  amount 
of  gold  being  lost  through  the  depreciation  of  money  in  circulation. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  more  advanced  capitalist 
production,  the  more  money  is  accumulated  in  all  hands,  and 
therefore  the  smaller  the  quantity  annually  added  to  this  hoard 
by  the  production  of  new  gold,  although  the  absolute  quantity 
thus  added  may  be  considerable.  We  revert  once  more  in 
general  terms  to  the  objection*  raised  against  Tooke;  how  is  it 
possible  that  every  capitalist  draws  a  surplus-value  in  money 
out  of  the  annual  product,  i.e.,  draws  more  money  out  of  the 
circulation  than  he  throws  into  it,  since  in  the  long  run  the  ca¬ 
pitalist  class  itself  must  be  regarded  as  the  source  of  all  the  mo¬ 
ney  thrown  into  circulation? 

We  reply  by  summarising  the  ideas  developed  previously  (in 
Chapter  XVII): 

1)  The  only  assumption  essential  here,  namely,  that  in  general 
there  is  money  enough  for  the  exchange  of  the  various  elements 
of  the  mass  of  the  annual  reproduction,  is  not  affected  in  any 
way  by  the  fact  that  a  portion  of  the  commodity-value  consists 
of  surplus-value.  Supposing  that  the  entire  production  belonged 
to  the  labourers  themselves  and  that  their  surplus-labour  were 
therefore  only  surplus-labour  for  themselves,  not  for  the  capi¬ 
talists,  then  the  quantity  of  circulating  commodity-values  would 
be  the  same  and,  other  things  being  equal,  would  require  the  same 
amount  of  money  for  their  circulation.  The  question  in  either 
case  is  therefore  only:  Where  does  the  money  come  from  to  make 


s*  The  study  of  the  exchange  of  newly  produced  gold  within  the  constant 
capital  of  department  I  is  not  contained  in  the  manuscript. — F.  E. 

*  See  p.  334.—  Ed. 


478 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


possible  the  exchange  of  this  total  of  commodity-values?  It  is 
not  at  all:  where  does  the  money  come  from  to  turn  the  surplus- 
value  into  money? 

It  is  true,  to  revert  to  it  once  more,  that  every  individual 
commodity  consists  of  c+v+s,  and  the  circulation  of  the  entire 
quantity  of  commodities  therefore  requires  on  the  one  hand  a  def¬ 
inite  sum  of  money  for  the  circulation  of  the  capital  c-j-v  and 
on  the  other  hand  another  sum  for  the  circulation  of  the  revenue 
of  the  capitalists,  the  surplus-value  s.  For  the  individual  capital¬ 
ist,  as  well  as  for  the  entire  capitalist  class,  the  money  in  which 
they  advance  capital  is  different  from  the  money  in  which  they 
spend  their  revenue.  Where  does  the  latter  money  come  from?  Sim¬ 
ply  from  the  mass  of  money  in  the  hands  of  the  capitalist  class, 
hence  by  and  large  from  the  total  mass  of  money  in  society,  a  por¬ 
tion  of  which  circulates  the  revenue  of  the  capitalists.  We  have  seen 
above  that  every  capitalist  establishing  a  new  business  recoups 
the  money  which  he  spent  for  his  maintenance  in  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption  as  money  serving  to  convert  his  surplus-value  into 
money,  once  his  business  is  fairly  under  way.  But  generally  speak¬ 
ing  the  whole  difficulty  has  two  sources: 

In  the  first  place,  if  we  analyse  only  the  circulation  and  the 
turnover  of  capital,  thus  regarding  the  capitalist  merely  as  a  per¬ 
sonification  of  capital,  not  as  a  capitalist  consumer  and  man  about 
town,  we  see  indeed  that  he  is  continually  throwing  surplus- 
value  into  circulation  as  a  component  part  of  his  commodity-capi¬ 
tal,  but  we  never  see  money  as  a  form  of  revenue  in  his  hands. 
We  never  see  him  throwing  money  into  circulation  for  the  consump¬ 
tion  of  his  surplus-value. 

In  the  second  place,  if  the  capitalist  class  throws  a  certain 
amount  of  money  into  circulation  in  the  shape  of  revenue,  it  looks 
as  if  it  were  paying  an  equivalent  for  this  portion  of  the  total  an¬ 
nual  product,  and  this  portion  thereby  ceases  to  represent  surplus- 
value,  But  the  surplus-product  in  which  the  surplus-value  is 
represented  does  not  cost  the  capitalist  class  anything.  As  a 
class,  the  capitalists  possess  and  enjoy  it  gratuitously,  and  the 
circulation  of  money  cannot  alter  this  fact.  The  alteration  brought 
about  by  this  circulation  consists  merely  in  the  fact  that  every 
capitalist,  instead  of  consuming  his  surplus-product  in  kind,  a 
thing  which  is  generally  impossible,  draws  commodities  of  all 
sorts  up  to  the  amount  of  the  surplus-value  he  has  appropriated 
out  of  the  general  stock  of  the  annual  surplus-product  of  society 
and  appropriates  them.  But  the  mechanism  of  the  circulation  has 
shown  that  while  the  capitalist  class  throws  money  into  circu- 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


479 


lation  for  the  purpose  of  spending  its  revenue,  it  also  withdraws 
this  money  from  the  circulation,  and  can  continue  the  same 
process  over  and  over  again;  so  that,  considered  as  a  class,  capi¬ 
talists  remain  as  before  in  possession  of  the  amount  of  money 
necessary  for  the  conversion  of  surplus-value  into  money.  Hence, 
if  the  capitalist  not  only  withdraws  his  surplus-value  from  the 
commodity-market  in  the  form  of  commodities  for  his  consump¬ 
tion-fund,  but  at  the  same  time  gets  back  the  money  with  which 
he  has  paid  for  these  commodities,  he  has  evidently  withdrawn 
the  commodities  from  circulation  without  paying  an  equivalent 
for  them.  They  do  not  cost  him  anything,  although  he  pays  money 
for  them.  If  I  buy  commodities  for  one  pound  sterling  and  the 
seller  of  the  commodities  gives  me  the  pound  back  for  surplus- 
product  which  I  got  for  nothing,  it  is  obvious  that  I  received  the 
commodities  gratis.  The  constant  repetition  of  this  operation 
does  not  alter  the  fact  that  I  constantly  withdraw  commodities 
and  constantly  remain  in  possession  of  the  pound,  although  I 
part  with  it  temporarily  to  purchase  commodities.  The  capitalist 
constantly  gets  this  money  back  as  a  money  equivalent  of  sur¬ 
plus-value  that  has  not  cost  him  anything. 

We  have  seen  that  with  Adam  Smith  the  entire  value  of  the 
social  product  resolves  itself  into  revenue,  into  v+s,  so  that  the 
constant  capital-value  is  set  down  as  zero.  It  follows  necessarily 
that  the  money  required  for  the  circulation  of  the  yearly  revenue 
must  also  suffice  for  the  circulation  of  the  entire  annual  product, 
that  therefore  in  our  illustration  the  money  required  for  the  circu¬ 
lation  of  the  articles  of  consumption  worth  3,000  also  suffices 
for  the  circulation  of  the  entire  annual  product  worth  9,000. 
This  is  indeed  the  opinion  of  Adam  Smith,  and  it  is  repeated 
by  Th.  Tooke.  This  erroneous  conception  of  the  ratio  of  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  money  required  for  the  realisation  of  revenue  to  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  money  required  to  circulate  the  entire  social  product  is 
the  necessary  result  of  the  uncomprehended,  thoughtlessly  con¬ 
ceived  manner  in  which  the  various  elements  of  material  and 
value  of  the  total  annual  product  are  reproduced  and  annually 
replaced.  It  has  therefore  already  been  refuted. 

Let  us  listen  to  Smith  and  Tooke  themselves. 

Smith  says  in  Book  II,  Ch.  2:  “The  circulation  of  every  country 
may  be  considered  as  divided  into  two  different  branches:  the 
circulation  of  the  dealers  with  one  another,  and  the  circulation 
between  the  dealers  and  the  consumers.  Though  the  same  pieces 
of  money,  whether  paper  or  metal,  may  be  employed  sometimes 
in  the  one  circulation  and  sometimes  in  the  other;  yet  as  both 


480 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


are  constantly  going  on  at  the  same  time,  each  requires  a  certain 
stock  of  money  of  one  kind  or  another,  to  carry  it  on.  The  value 
of  the  goods  circulated  between  the  different  dealers,  never  can 
exceed  the  value  of  those  circulated  between  the  dealers  and  the 
consumers;  whatever  is  bought  by  the  dealers,  being  ultimately 
destined  to  be  sold  to  the  consumers.  The  circulation  between 
the  dealers,  as  it  is  carried  on  by  wholesale,  requires  generally 
a  pretty  large  sum  for  every  particular  transaction.  That  between 
the  dealers  and  the  consumers,  on  the  contrary,  as  it  is  generally 
carried  on  by  retail,  frequently  requires  but  very  small  ones, 
a  shilling,  or  even  a  halfpenny,  being  often  sufficient.  But  small 
sums  circulate  much  faster  than  large  ones....  Though  the  annual 
purchases  of  all  the  consumers,  therefore,  are  at  least”  [this  “at 
least”  is  rich  ]  “equal  in  value  to  those  of  all  the  dealers,  they  can 
generally  be  transacted  with  a  much  smaller  quantity  of  mon¬ 
ey;  ”  etc. 

Th.  Tooke  remarks  to  this  passage  from  Adam  Smith  (in  An 
Inquiry  into  the  Currency  Principle ,  London,  1844,  pp.  34  to 
36  passim ):  “There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  distinction  here  made 
is  substantially  correct  ...  the  interchange  between  dealers  and 
consumers  including  the  payment  of  wages,  which  constitute 
the  principal  means  of  the  consumers....  All  the  transactions  be¬ 
tween  dealers  and  dealers,  by  which  are  to  be  understood  all  sales 
from  the  producer  or  importer,  through  all  the  stages  of  interme¬ 
diate  processes  of  manufacture  or  otherwise  to  the  retail  dealer 
or  the  exporting  merchant,  are  resolvable  into  movements  or  trans¬ 
fers  of  capital.  Now  transfers  of  capital  do  not  necessarily  suppose, 
nor  do  actually  as  a  matter  of  fact  entail,  in  the  great  majority 
of  transactions,  a  passing  of  money,  that  is,  bank-notes  or  coin  — 
I  mean  bodily,  and  not  by  fiction— at  the  time  of  transfer.... 
The  total  amount  of  the  transactions  between  dealers  and  deal¬ 
ers  must,  in  the  last  resort,  be  determined  and  limited  by  the 
amount  of  those  between  dealers  and  consumers.  ” 

If  this  last  sentence  stood  by  itself,  one  might  think  Tooke 
simply  stated  the  fact  that  there  was  a  ratio  between  the  exchanges 
among  dealers  and  those  among  dealers  and  consumers,  in  other 
words,  between  the  value  of  the  total  annual  revenue  and  the  value 
of  the  capital  with  which  it  is  produced.  But  this  is  not  the  case. 
He  explicitly  endorses  the  view  of  Adam  Smith.  A  special  criti¬ 
cism  of  his  theory  of  circulation  is  therefore  superfluous. 

2)  Every  industrial  capital,  on  beginning  its  career,  throws 
at  one  fling  money  into  circulation  for  its  entire  fixed  constit¬ 
uent  part,  which  it  recovers  but  gradually,  in  the  course  of  years, 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


481 


by  the  sale  of  its  annual  products.  Thus  it  throws  at  first  more 
money  into  circulation  than  it  draws  from  it.  This  is  repeated 
at  every  renewal  of  the  entire  capital  in  kind.  It  is  repeated  every 
year  for  a  certain  number  of  enterprises  whose  fixed  capital  is 
to  be  renewed  in  kind.  It  is  repeated  piecemeal  at  every  repair, 
every  only  partial  renewal  of  the  fixed  capital.  While,  then, 
on  the  one  hand  more  money  is  withdrawn  from  circulation  than  is 
thrown  into  it,  the  opposite  takes  place  6n  the  other  hand. 

In  all  lines  of  industry  whose  production  period — as  distin¬ 
guished  from  its  working  period— extends  over  a  long  term,  money 
is  continually  thrown  into  circulation  during  this  period  by  the 
capitalist  producers,  partly  in  payment  for  labour-power  employed, 
partly  in  the  purchase  of  means  of  production  to  be  consumed. 
Means  of  production  are  thus  directly  withdrawn  from  the  com¬ 
modity-market,  and  articles  of  consumption,  partly  indirectly, 
by  the  labourers  spending  their  wages,  and  partly  directly, 
by  the  capitalists,  who  do  not  by  any  means  suspend  their  con¬ 
sumption,  although  they  do  not  simultaneously  throw  any  equiv¬ 
alent  in  commodities  on  the  market.  During  this  period  the  money 
thrown  by  them  into  circulation  serves  to  convert  commodity- 
value,  including  the  surplus-value  embodied  in  it,  into  money. 
This  factor  becomes  very  important  in  an  advanced  stage  of  capi¬ 
talist  production  in  the  case  of  long-drawn  out  enterprises,  such 
as  are  undertaken  by  stock  companies,  etc.,  for  instance  the  con¬ 
struction  of  railways,  canals,  docks,  large  municipal  buildings, 
iron  shipbuilding,  large-scale  drainage  of  land,  etc. 

3)  While  the  other  capitalists,  aside  from  the  investment  in 
fixed  capital,  draw  more  money  out  of  the  circulation  than  they 
threw  into  it  on  purchasing  the  labour-power  and  the  circulating 
elements,  the  gold-  and  silver-producing  capitalists  throw  only 
money  into  the  circulation,  aside  from  the  precious  metal  which 
serves  as  raw  material,  while  they  withdraw  only  commod¬ 
ities  from  it.  The  constant  capital,  with  the  exception  of  the 
depreciated  portion,  the  greater  portion  of  the  variable  capital 
and  the  entire  surplus-value,  save  the  hoard  which  may  be  accu¬ 
mulating  in  their  own  hands,  are  all  thrown  into  circulation  as 
money. 

4)  On  the  one  hand  all  kinds  of  things  circulate  as  commodities 
which  were  not  produced  during  the  given  year,  such  as  land  lots, 
houses,  etc.;  furthermore  goods  whose  period  of  production  exceeds 
one  year,  such  as  cattle,  timber,  wine,  etc.  For  this  and  other 
phenomena  it  is  important  to  establish  that  aside  from  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  money  required  for  the  immediate  circulation  there  is 


16—1752 


482 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


always  a  certain  quantity  in  a  latent  non-functioning  state 
which  may  start  functioning  if  the  impulse  is  given.  Furthermore, 
the  value  of  such  products  circulates  often  piecemeal  and  gradual-- 
ly,  like  the  value  of  houses  In  the  rents  over  a  number  of  years. 

On  the  other  hand  not  all  movements  of  the  process  of  repro¬ 
duction  are  effected  through  the  circulation  of  money.  The  entire 
process  of  production,  once  its  elements  have  been  procured, 
is  excluded  from  circulation.  All  products  which  the  producer 
himself  consumes  directly,  whether  individually  or  productively, 
are  also  excluded.  Under  this  head  comes  also  the  feeding  of  agri¬ 
cultural  labourers  in  kind. 

Therefore  the  quantity  of  money  which  circulates  the  annual 
product,  exists  in  society,  having  been  gradually  accumulated. 
It  does  not  belong  to  the  value  produced  during  the  given  year, 
except  perhaps  the  gold  used  to  make  good  the  loss  of  depreciat¬ 
ed  coins. 

This  exposition  presupposes  the  exclusive  circulation  of  pre¬ 
cious  metals  as  money,  and  in  this  circulation  the  simplest  form  of 
cash  purchases  and  sales;  although  money  can  function  also  as  a 
means  of  payment,  and  has  actually  done  so  in  the  course  of  histo¬ 
ry,  even  on  the  basis  of  circulating  plain  metal  coin,  and  though 
a  credit  system  and  certain  aspects  of  its  mechanism  have  devel¬ 
oped  upon  that  basis. 

This  assumption  is  not  made  from  mere  considerations  of 
method,  although  these  are  important  enough,  as  demonstrated 
by  the  fact  that  Tooke  and  his  school,  as  well  as  their  opponents, 
were  continually  compelled  in  their  controversies  concerning  the 
circulation  of  bank-notes  to  revert  to  the  hypothesis  of  a  purely 
metallic  circulation.  They  were  forced  to  do  so  post  festum  and  did 
so  very  superficially,  which  was  unavoidable,  because  the  point  of 
departure  in  their  analysis  thus  played  merely  the  role  of  an  inci¬ 
dental  point. 

But  the  simplest  study  of  money-circulation  presented  in  its 
primitive  form — and  this  is  here  an  immanent  element  of  the 
process  of  annual  reproduction— demonstrates: 

a)  Advanced  capitalist  production,  and  hence  the  domination 
of  the  wage  system,  being  assumed,  money-capital  obviously 
plays  a  prominent  role,  since  it  is  the  form  in  which  the  variable 
capital  is  advanced.  In  step  with  the  development  of  the  wage  sys¬ 
tem,  all  products  are  transformed  into  commodities  and  must 
therefore — with  a  few  important  exceptions — pass  in  their  entirety 
through  the  transformation  into  money  as  one  phase  of  their  move¬ 
ment.  The  quantity  of  circulating  money  must  suffice  for  this 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


483 


conversion  of  commodities  into  money,  and  the  greater  part  of 
this  mass  is  furnished  in  the  form  of  wages,  of  the  money  advanced 
by  tho  industrial  capitalists  as  the  money-form  of  the  variable  cap¬ 
ital  in  payment  for  labour-power,  and  which  functions  in  the  hands 
of  the  labourers,  generally  speaking,  only  as  a  medium  of  circu¬ 
lation  (means  of  purchase).  It  is  quite  the  opposite  of  natural 
economy  such  as  is  predominant  under  every  form  of  bondage 
(including  serfdom),  and  still  more  so  in  more  or  less  primitive 
communities,  whether  or  not  they  are  attended  by  conditions 
of  bondage  or  slavery. 

In  the  slave  system,  the  money-capital  invested  in  the  purchase 
of  labour-power  plays  the  role  of  the  money-form  of  the  fixed 
capital,  which  is  but  gradually  replaced  as  the  active  period  of  the 
slave’s  life  expires.  Among  the  Athenians  therefore,  the  gain  real¬ 
ised  by  a  slave  owner  directly  through  the  industrial  employment 
of  his  slave,  or  indirectly  by  hiring  him  out  to  other  industrial 
employers  (e.g.,  for  mining),  was  regarded  merely  as  interest 
(plus  depreciation  allowance)  on  the  advanced  money-capital, 
just  as  the  industrial  capitalist  under  capitalist  production  places 
a  portion  of  the  surplus-value  plus  the  depreciation  of  his  fixed 
capital  to  the  account  of  interest  and  replacement  of  his  fixed 
capital.  This  is  also  the  rule  with  capitalists  offering  fixed  capital 
(houses,  machinery,  etc.)  for  rent.  Mere  household  slaves,  wheth¬ 
er  they  perform  necessary  services  or  are  kept  as  luxuries  for 
show,  are  not  considered  here.  They  correspond  to  the  modern  serv¬ 
ant  class.  But  the  slave  system  too— so  long  as  it  is  the  dominant 
form  of  productive  labour  in  agriculture,  manufacture,  navi¬ 
gation,  etc.,  as  it  was  in  the  advanced  states  of  Greece  and  Rome— 
preserves  an  element  of  natural  economy.  The  slave  market  main¬ 
tains  its  supply  of  the  commodity  labour-power  by  war,  piracy, 
etc.,  and  this  rapine  is  not  promoted  by  a  process  of  circulation, 
but  by  the  actual  appropriation  of  the  labour-power  of  others 
by  direct  physical  compulsion.  Even  in  the  United  States,  after 
the  conversion  of  the  buffer  territory  between  the  wage-labour 
states  of  the  North  and  the  slavery  states  of  the  South  into  a 
slave-breeding  region  for  the  South,  where  the  slave  thrown  on  the 
market  thus  became  himself  an  element  of  the  annual  reproduction, 
this  did  not  suffice  for  a  long  time,  so  that  the  African  slave 
trade  was  continued  as  long  as  possible  to  satisfy  the  market. 

b)  The  fluxes  and  refluxes  of  money  taking  place  spontaneously 
on  the  basis  of  capitalist  production  in  the  exchange  of  the  annual 
products;  the  one-time  advances  of  fixed  capitals  to  the  full 
extent  of  their  value  and  the  successive  extraction  of  this  value 


16* 


484 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


from  the  circulation  in  the  course  of  years,  in  other  words,  their 
gradual  reconstitution  in  money-form  by  the  annual  formation 
of  hoards,  a  hoarding  which  is  essentially  different  from  the  paral¬ 
lel  accumulation  of  hoards  based  on  the  annual  production  of 
new  gold;  the  different  lengths  of  time  for  which,  depending  on  the 
duration  of  the  production  period  of  the  commodities,  money 
must  be  advanced,  and  consequently  always  hoarded  anew  before 
it  can  be  recovered  from  the  circulation  by  the  sale  of  the  commod¬ 
ities;  the  different  lengths  of  time  for  which  money  must  be  ad¬ 
vanced,  if  only  resulting  from  the  different  distances  of  the  places 
of  production  from  their  markets;  furthermore  the  differences  in 
the  magnitude  and  period  of  the  reflux  according  to  the  condition 
or  relative  size  of  the  productive  supplies  in  the  various  lines 
of  business  and  in  the  individual  businesses  of  the  same  line,  and 
hence  the  lengths  of  periods  for  which  the  elements  of  constant 
capital  are  bought,  and  all  this  during  the  year  of  reproduction- 
all  these  different  aspects  of  spontaneous  movement  had  only  to  be 
noted,  and  made  conspicuous,  through  experience,  in  order  to 
give  rise  to  a  methodical  use  of  the  mechanical  appliances  of  the 
credit  system  and  to  a  real  fishing  out  of  available  loanable  capitals. 

To  this  must  be  added  the  difference  between  those  lines  of 
business  whose  production  proceeds  under  otherwise  normal  con¬ 
ditions  continuously  on  the  same  scale,  and  those  which  apply 
varying  quantities  of  labour-power  in  different  periods  of  the  year, 
such  as  agriculture. 

XIII.  DESTUTT  DE  TRACY’S  THEORY 
OF  REPRODUCTION118 

Let  us  illustrate  the  confused  and  at  the  same  time  boastful 
thoughtlessness  of  political  economists  analysing  social  reproduc¬ 
tion,  with  the  example  of  the  great  logician  Destutt  de  Tracy 
(cf.  Buch  I,  p.  146,  Note  30),*  whom  even  Ricardo  took  seri¬ 
ously  and  called  a  very  distinguished  writer.  ( Principles ,  p.  333.) 

This  “distinguished  writer”  gives  the  following  explanations 
concerning  the  entire  process  of  social  reproduction  and  circulation: 

“I  shall  be  asked  how  these  industrial  entrepreneurs  can  make 
such  large  profits  and  out  of  whom  they  can  draw  them.  I  reply 
that  they  do  so  by  selling  everything  which  they  produce  for  more 
than  it  has  cost  to  produce;  and  that  they  sell: 


66  From  Manuscript  II. — F.E. 

*  English  edition:  p.  163,  Note  1. — Ed. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


485 


“1)  to  one  another  for  the  entire  portion  of  their  consumption 
intended  for  the  satisfaction  of  their  needs,  which  they  pay  with 
a  portion  of  their  profits; 

“2)  to  the  wage-labourers,  both  those  whom  they  pay  and  those 
whom  the  idle  capitalists  pay;  from  these  wage-labourers  they 
thus  extract  their  entire  wages  except  perhaps  their  small  savings; 

*‘3)  to  the  idle  capitalists  who  pay  them  with  the  portion 
of  their  revenue  which  they  have  not  yet  given  to  the  wage-la¬ 
bourers  employed  by  them  directly;  so  that  the  entire  rent  which 
they  pay  them  annually  flows  back  to  them  in  this  way  or  the  oth¬ 
er.  ”  (Destutt  de  Tracy,  Traite  de  la  volonte  et  de  ses  effets,  Paris, 
1826,  p.  239.) 

In  other  words,  the  capitalists  enrich  themselves  by  mutually 
getting  the  best  of  one  another  in  the  exchange  of  that  portion 
of  their  surplus-value  which  they  set  apart  for  their  individual 
consumption  or  consume  as  revenue.  For  instance,  if  this  portion 
of  their  surplus-value  or  of  their  profits  is  equal  to  £400,  this 
sum  of  £400  is  supposed  to  grow  to,  say,  £500  by  each  stockholder 
of  the  £400  selling  his  share  to  another  25  per  cent  in  excess.  But 
since  all  do  the  same,  the  result  will  be  the  same  as  if  they  had 
sold  to  one  another  at  the  real  values.  They  merely  need  £500 
in  money  for  the  circulation  of  commodities  worth  £400,  and 
this  would  seem  to  be  rather  a  method  of  impoverishing  than 
of  enriching  themselves  since  it  compels  them  to  keep  a  large 
portion  of  their  total  wealth  unproductively  in  the  useless  form 
of  circulation  media.  The  whole  thing  boils  down  to  this,  that 
despite  the  all-round  nominal  rise  in  the  price  of  their  com¬ 
modities  the  capitalist  class  has  only  £400  worth  of  commodities 
to  divide  among  themselves  for  their  individual  consumption, 
but  that  they  do  one  another  the  favour  of  circulating  £400 
worth  of  commodities  by  means  of  a  quantity  of  money  which 
is  required  to  circulate  £500  worth  of  commodities. 

And  this  quite  aside  from  the  fact  that  a  “portion  of  their 
profits,  ”  and  therefore  in  general  a  supply  of  commodities  in  which 
there  exist  profits,  is  here  assumed.  But  Destutt  undertook  pre¬ 
cisely  to  tell  us  where  those  profits  come  from.  The  quantity  of 
money  required  to  circulate  the  profit  is  a  very  subordinate  ques¬ 
tion.  The  quantity  of  commodities  in  which  the  profit  is  repre¬ 
sented  seems  to  have  its  origin  in  the  circumstance  that  the  cap¬ 
italists  not  only  sell  these  commodities  to  one  another,  although 
even  this  much  is  quite  fine  and  profound,  but  sell  them  to  one 
another  at  prices  which  are  too  high.  So  we  now  know  one  source 
of  the  enrichment  of  the  capitalists.  It  is  on  a  par  with  the  se- 


IV— 1752 


486 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


cret  of  the  “Entspektor  Brasig”*  that  the  great  poverty  is  due  to 
the  great  “pauvrete." 

2)  The  same  capitalists  furthermore  sell  “to  the  wage-labourers, 
both  those  whom  they  pay  and  those  whom  the  idle  capitalists 
pay;  from  these  wage-labourers  they  thus  recover  their  entire 
wages,  except  perhaps  their  small  savings.” 

According  to  Monsieur  Destutt,  then,  the  reflux  of  the  money- 
capital,  the  form  in  which  the  capitalists  have  advanced  wages 
to  the  labourers,  is  the  second  source  of  the  enrichment  of  these 
capitalists. 

If  therefore  the  capitalists  paid  for  instance  £100  to  their  la¬ 
bourers  as  wages  and  if  these  same  labourers  then  buy  from  the 
same  capitalists  commodities  of  this  same  value,  of  £100,  so 
that  the  sum  of  £100  which  the  capitalists  had  advanced  as 
buyers  of  labour-power  returns  to  the  capitalists  when  they  sell 
to  the  labourers  £100  worth  of  commodities,  the  capitalists  get 
richer  thereby.  It  would  appear  to  anyone  endowed  with  ordinary 
common  sense  that  they  only  find  themselves  once  more  in  pos¬ 
session  of  their  £100,  which  they  owned  before  this  procedure. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  procedure  they  have  £100  in  money. 
For  these  £100  they  buy  labour-power.  The  labour  bought  pro¬ 
duces  for  these  £100  in  money  commodities  of  a  value  which, 
so  far  as  we  now  know7,  amounts  to  £100.  By  selling  the  £100 
worth  of  commodities  to  their  labourers  the  capitalists  recover 
£100  in  money.  The  capitalists  then  have  once  more  £100  in 
money,  and  the  labourers  have  £100  worth  of  commodities  which 
they  have  themselves  produced.  It  is  hard  to  understand  how 
that  can  make  the  capitalists  any  richer.  If  the  £100  in  money' 
did  not  flow  back  to  them  they  would  first  have  to  pay  to  the 
labourers  £100  in  money  for  their  labour  and  secondly  to  give 
them  the  product  of  this  labour,  £100  worth  of  articles  of  con¬ 
sumption,  for  nothing.  The  reflux  of  this  money  might  therefore 
at  best  explain  why  the  capitalists  do  not  get  poorer  by  this 
transaction,  but  by  no  means  why  they  get  richer  by  it. 

To  be  sure  it  is  another  question  how  the  capitalists  came  into 
possession  of  the  £100  and  why  the  labourers,  instead  of  produc¬ 
ing  commodities  for  their  own  account,  are  compelled  to  exchange 
their  labour-power  for  these  £100.  But  this,  for  a  thinker  of 
Destutt ’s  calibre,  is  self-explanatory. 

Destutt  himself  is  not  quite  satisfied  with  the  solution.  After 
all,  he  did  not  tell  us  that  one  gets  richer  by  spending  a  sum 

•  A  character  in  a  number  of  works  by  the  German  humorist  Fritz  Reuter 
(1810-74). — Ed. 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


487 


of  money,  a  hundred  pounds,  and  then  taking  in  again  a  sum 
of  money  amounting  to  100;  hence,  by  the  reflux  of  £100  in 
money,  which  merely  shows  why  the  £100  in  money  do  not  get 
lost.  He  tells  us  that  the  capitalists  get  richer  “by  selling  every¬ 
thing  which  they  produce  for  more  than  it  has  cost  to  produce.  ” 

Consequently  the  capitalists  must  get  richer  also  in  their 
transactions  with  the  labourers  by  selling  to  them  too  dear.  Very 
well!  “They  pay  wages  ...  and  all  this  flows  back  to  them  through 
the  expenditures  of  all  these  people  who  pay  them  more”  [for 
the  products]  “than  they  cost  them  [the  capitalists]  in  wages.” 
(Ibid.,  p.  240.)  In  other  words,  the  capitalists  pay  £100  in  wages 
to  the  labourers,  and  then  they  sell  to  these  labourers  their  own 
product  at  £120,  so  that  they  not  only  recover  their  £100  but 
also  gain  £20?  That  is  impossible.  The  labourers  can  pay  only 
with  the  money  which  they  have  received  in  the  form  of  wages. 
If  they  get  £100  in  wages  from  the  capitalists  they  can  buy  only 
£100  worth,  not  £120  worth.  So  this  will  not  work.  But  there 
is  still  another  way.  The  labourers  buy  from  the  capitalists  com¬ 
modities  for  £100,  but  actually  receive  commodities  worth  only 
£80.  Then  they  are  absolutely  cheated  out  of  £20.  And  the 
capitalist  has  absolutely  gained  £20,  because  he  actually  paid 
for  the  labour-power  20  per  cent  less  than  its  value,  or  cut  nomi¬ 
nal  wages  20  per  cent  by  a  circuitous  route. 

The  capitalist  class  would  accomplish  the  same  end  if  it  paid 
the  labourers  at  the  start  only  £80  in  wages  and  afterwards 
gave  them  for  these  £80  in  money  actually  £80  worth  of  com¬ 
modities.  This  seems  to  be  the  normal  way,  considering  the  class 
of  capitalists  as  a  whole,  for  according  to  Monsieur  Destutt 
himself  the  labouring  class  must  receive  a  “sufficient  wage” 
(p.  219),  since  their  wages  must  at  least  be  adequate  to  maintain 
their  existence  and  capacity  to  work,  “to  procure  the  barest 
subsistence.”  (P.  180.)  If  the  labourers  do  not  receive  such  suffi¬ 
cient  wages,  that  means,  according  to  the  same  Destutt,  “the 
death  of  industry”  (p.  208),  which  does  not  seem  therefore  to  be 
a  way  in  which  the  capitalists  can  get  richer.  But  whatever 
may  be  the  scale  of  wages  paid  by  the  capitalists  to  the  working- 
class,  they  have  a  definite  value,  e.g.,  £80.  If  the  capitalist 
class  pays  the  labourers  £80,  then  it  has  to  supply  them  with 
commodities  worth  £80  for  these  £80  and  the  reflux  of  the  £80 
does  not  enrich  it.  If  it  pays  them  £100  in  money,  and  sells 
them  £80  worth  of  commodities  for  £100  it  pays  them  in  money 
25  per  cent  more  than  their  normal  wage  and  supplies  them  in 
return  with  25  per  cent  less  in  commodities. 


488  “REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 

In  other  words,  the  fund  from  which  the  capitalist  class  in 
general  derives  its  profits  is  supposedly  made  up  of  deductions 
from  the  normal  wages  by  paying  less  than  its  value  for  labour- 
power,  i.e.,  less  than  the  value  of  the  means  of  subsistence  re¬ 
quired  for  their  normal  reproduction  as  wage-labourers.  If  therefore 
normal  wages  were  paid,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  case  accord¬ 
ing  to  Destutt,  there  could  be  no  profit  fund  for  either  the  indus¬ 
trial  or  the  idle  capitalists. 

Hence  Destutt  should  have  reduced  the  entire  secret  of  how 
the  capitalist  class  gets  richer  to  the  following:  by  a  deduction 
from  wages.  In  that  case  the  other  surplus-value  funds,  which  he 
mentions  under  1)  and  3),  would  not  exist. 

Hence  in  all  countries,  in  which  the  money  wages  of  the  la¬ 
bourers  should  be  reduced  to  the  value  of  the  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion  necessary  for  their  subsistence  as  a  class,  there  would  be  no 
consumption-fund  and  no  accumulation-fund  for  the  capitalists, 
and  hence  also  no  existence-fund  for  the  capitalist  class,  and 
hence  also  no  capitalist  class.  And,  according  to  Destutt,  this 
should  be  the  case  in  all  wealthy  and  developed  countries  with 
an  old  civilisation,  for  in  them,  “in  our  ancient  societies,  the 
fund  for  the  maintenance  of  wage-labourers  is  ...  an  almost  con¬ 
stant  magnitude.”  (Ibid.,  p.  202.) 

Even  with  a  deduction  from  the  wages,  the  capitalist  does 
not  enrich  himself  by  first  paying  the  labourer  £100  in  money 
and  then  supplying  him  with  £80  worth  of  commodities  for 
these  £100,  thus  actually  circulating  £80  worth  of  commodities 
by  means  of  £100,  an  excess  of  25  per  cent.  The  capitalist  gets 
richer  by  appropriating,  besides  the  surplus-value — that  portion 
of  the  product  in  which  surplus-value  is  represented — 25  per  cent 
of  that  portion  of  the  product  which  the  labourer  should  receive 
in  the  form  of  wages.  The  capitalist  class  would  not  gain  anything 
by  the  silly  method  Destutt  conceived.  It  pays  £100  in  wages 
and  gives  back  to  the  labourer  for  these  £100  £80  worth  of  his 
own  product.  But  in  the  next  transaction  it  must  again  advance 
£100  for  the  same  procedure.  It  would  thus  be  indulging  in  the 
useless  sport  of  advancing  £100  in  money  and  giving  in  exchange 
£80  in  commodities,  instead  of  advancing  £80  in  money  and  sup¬ 
plying  in  exchange  for  it  £80  in  commodities.  That  is  to  say,  it 
would  be  continually  advancing  to  no  purpose  a  money-capital 
which  is  25  per  cent  in  excess  of  that  required  for  the  circulation  of 
its  variable  capital,  which  is  a  very  peculiar  method  of  getting  rich. 

3)  Finally  the  capitalist  class  sells  “to  the  idle  capitalists, 
who  pay  them  with  the  portion  of  their  revenue  which  they  have 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


489 


not  yet  given  to  the  wage-labourers  employed  by  them  directly; 
so  that  the  entire  rent,  which  they  pay  them  (the  idle  ones)  an¬ 
nually,  flows  back  to  them  in  this  way  or  the  other.  ” 

We  have  seen  above  that  the  industrial  capitalists  “pay  with 
a  portion  of  their  profits  the  entire  portion  of  their  consumption 
intended  for  the  satisfaction  of  their  needs.”  Take  it,  then,  that 
their  profits  are  equal  to  £200.  And  let  them  use  up,  say,  £100 
of  this  in  their  individual  consumption.  But  the  other  half,  or 
£100,  does  not  belong  to  them;  it  belongs  to  the  idle  capitalists, 
i.e.,  to  those  who  receive  the  ground-rent,  and  to  capitalists  who 
lend  money  on  interest.  So  they  have  to  pay  £100  to  these  gentry. 
Let  us  assume  that  these  gentry  need  £80  of  this  money  for  their 
individual  consumption,  and  £20  for  the  hire  of  servants,  etc. 
With  those  £80  they  buy  articles  of  consumption  from  the  in¬ 
dustrial  capitalists.  Thus  while  these  capitalists  part  with  com¬ 
modities  to  the  value  of  £80,  they  receive  back  £80  in  money, 
or  four-fifths  of  the  £100  paid  by  them  to  the  idle  capitalists 
under  the  name  of  rent,  interest,  etc.  Furthermore  the  serv¬ 
ant  class,  the  direct  wage-labourers  of  the  idle  capitalists,  have 
received  £20  from  their  masters.  These  servants  likewise  buy 
articles  of  consumption  from  the  industrial  capitalists  to  the 
amount  of  £20.  In  this  way,  while  parting  with  commodities 
worth  £20,  these  capitalists  have  £20  in  money  flow  back  to 
them,  the  last  fifth  of  the  £100  which  they  paid  to  the  idle  capi¬ 
talists  for  rent,  interest,  etc. 

At  the  close  of  the  transaction  the  industrial  capitalists  have 
recovered  in  money  the  £100  which  they  remitted  to  the  idle 
capitalists  in  payment  of  rent,  interest,  etc.  But  one  half  of  their 
surplus-product,  equal  to  £100,  passed  meanwhile  from  their 
hands  into  the  consumption-fund  of  the  idle  capitalists. 

It  is  evidently  quite  superfluous  for  the  question  now  under 
discussion  to  bring  in  somehow  or  other  the  division  of  the  £100 
between  the  idle  capitalists  and  their  direct  wage-labourers. 
The  matter  is  simple:  their  rent,  interest,  in  short,  their  share 
in  the  surplus-value  equal  to  £200,  is  paid  to  them  by  the  indus¬ 
trial  capitalists  in  money  to  the  amount  of  £100.  With  these 
£100  they  buy  directly  or  indirectly  articles  of  consumption 
from  the  industrial  capitalists.  Thus  they  pay  back  to  them  the 
£100  in  money  and  take  from  them  articles  of  consumption 
worth  £100. 

This  completes  the  reflux  of  the  £100  paid  by  the  industrial 
capitalists  in  money  to  the  idle  capitalists.  Is  this  reflux  of  money 
a  means  of  enriching  the  industrial  capitalists,  as  Destutt  imag- 


490 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


ines?  Before  the  transaction  they  had  a  sum  of  values  amounting 
to  £200,  100  being  money  and  100  articles  of  consumption.  After 
the  transaction  they  have  only  one  half  of  the  original  sum  of 
values.  They  have  once  more  the  £100  in  money,  but  they  have 
lost  the  £100  in  articles  of  consumption  which  have  passed  into 
the  hands  of  the  idle  capitalists.  Hence  they  are  poorer  by  £100 
instead  of  richer  by  £100.  If  instead  of  taking  the  circuitous 
route  of  first  paying  out  £100  in  money  and  then  receiving  this 
£100  in  money  back  in  payment  of  articles  of  consumption 
worth  £100,  they  had  paid  rent,  interest,  etc.,  directly  in  the 
bodily  form  of  their  products,  there  would  be  no  £100  in  money 
flowing  back  to  them  from  the  circulation,  because  they  would 
not  have  thrown  that  amount  of  money  into  the  circulation. 
Via  payment  in  kind  the  matter  would  simply  have  taken  this 
course:  they  would  keep  one  half  of  the  surplus-product  worth 
£200  for  themselves  and  give  the  other  half  to  the  idle  capi¬ 
talists  without  any  equivalent  in  return.  Even  Destutt  would 
not  have  been  tempted  to  declare  this  a  means  of  getting  richer. 

Of  course  the  land  and  capital  borrowed  by  the  industrial  cap¬ 
italists  from  the  idle  capitalists  and  for  which  they  have  to  pay  a 
portion  of  their  surplus-value  in  the  form  of  ground-rent,  interest, 
etc.,  are  profitable  for  them,  for  this  constitutes  one  of  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  production  of  commodities  in  general  and  of  that  por¬ 
tion  of  the  product  which  constitutes  surplus-product  or  in  which 
surplus-value  is  represented.  This  profit  accrues  from  the  use  of 
the  borrowed  land  and  capital,  not  from  the  price  paid  for  them. 
This  price  rather  constitutes  a  deduction  from  it.  Otherwise 
one  would  have  to  contend  that  the  industrial  capitalists  would 
not  get  richer  but  poorer,  if  they  were  able  to  keep  the  other  half 
of  their  surplus-value  for  themselves  instead  of  having  to  give 
it  away.  This  is  the  confusion  which  results  from  mixing  up  such 
phenomena  of  circulation  as  a  reflux  of  money  with  the  distri¬ 
bution  of  the  product,  which  is  merely  promoted  by  these  phe¬ 
nomena  of  circulation. 

And  yet  the  same  Destutt  is  shrewd  enough  to  remark:  “Whence 
come  the  revenues  of  these  idle  gentry?  Do  the  revenues  not 
come  out  of  the  rent  paid  to  them  out  of  their  profits  by  those 
who  put  the  capitals  of  the  former  to  work,  i.e.,  by  those  who 
pay  with  the  funds  of  the  former  a  labour  which  produces  more 
than  it  costs,  in  a  word,  the  industrial  capitalists?  It  is  always 
necessary  to  hark  back  to  them  to  find  the  source  of  all  wealth. 
It  is  they  who  in  reality  feed  the  wage-labourers  employed  by 
the  former.  ”  (P.  246.) 


SIMPLE  REPRODUCTION 


401 


So  now  the  payment  of  this  rent,  etc.,  is  a  deduction  from  the 
profit  of  the  industrial  capitalists.  Before  it  was  a  means  where¬ 
with  they  could  enrich  themselves. 

But  at  least  one  consolation  is  left  to  our  Destutt.  These  good 
industrialists  handle  the  idle  capitalists  the  same  way  they  have 
been  handling  one  another  and  the  labourers.  They  sell  them  all 
commodities  too  dear,  for  instance,  by  20  per  cent.  Now  there  are 
two  possibilities.  The  idle  capitalists  either  have  other'  money 
resources  aside  from  the  £100  which  they  receive  annually  from 
the  industrial  capitalists,  or  they  have  not.  In  the  first  case 
the  industrial  capitalists  sell  them  commodities  worth  £100  at  a 
price  of,  say,  £120.  Consequently  on  selling  their  commodities 
they  recover  not  only  the  £100  paid  to  the  idlers  but  £20  besides, 
which  constitute  really  new  value  for  them.  How  does  the  account 
look  now?  They  have  given  away  £100  in  commodities  for  noth¬ 
ing,  because  the  £100  in  money  that  they  were  paid  in  part  for 
their  commodities  were  their  own  money.  Thus  their  own  com¬ 
modities  have  been  paid  with  their  own  money.  Hence  they  have 
lost  £100.  But  they  have  also  received  an  excess  of  £20  in  the 
price  of  their  commodities  over  and  above  their  value,  which 
makes  £20  to  the  good.  Balance  this  against  the  loss  of  £100, 
and  you  still  have  a  loss  of  £80.  Never  a  plus,  always  a  minus. 
The  cheating  practised  against  the  idle  capitalists  has  reduced 
the  loss  of  the  industrial  capitalists,  but  for  all  that  it  has  not 
transformed  a  diminution  of  their  wealth  into  a  means  of  enrich¬ 
ment.  But  this  method  cannot  go  on  indefinitely,  for  the  idle 
capitalists  cannot  possibly  pay  year  after  year  £120  in  money 
if  they  take  in  only  £100  in  money  year  after  year. 

There  remains  the  other  approach:  The  industrial  capitalists 
sell  commodities  worth  £80  in  exchange  for  the  £100  in  money 
they  paid  to  the  idle  capitalists.  In  this  case,  the  same  as  before, 
they  still  give  away  £80  for  nothing,  in  the  form  of  rent,  inter¬ 
est,  etc.  By  this  fraudulent  means  the  industrial  capitalists  have 
reduced  their  tribute  to  the  idlers,  but  it  still  exists  nevertheless 
and  the  idlers  are  in  a  position — according  to  the  same  theory 
proclaiming  that  prices  depend  on  the  good  will  of  the  sellers — 
to  demand  in  the  future  £120  instead  of  £100,  as  formerly,  for 
rent,  interest,  etc.,  on  their  land  and  capital. 

This  brilliant  analysis  is  quite  worthy  of  that  deep  thinker 
who  copies  on  the  one  hand  from  Adam  Smith  that  “labour  is 
the  source  of  all  wealth”  (p.  242),  that  the  industrial  capitalists 
“employ  their  capital  to  pay  for  labour  that  reproduces  it  with 
a  profit”  (p.  246),  and  who  concludes  on  the  other  hand  that  thesa 


492 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


industrial  capitalists  “feed  all  the  other  people,  are  the  only  ones 
who  increase  the  public  wealth,  and  create  all  our  means  of  enjoy¬ 
ment”  (p.  242),  that  it  is  not  the  capitalists  who  are  fed  by  the 
labourers,  but  the  labourers  who  are  fed  by  the  capitalists,  for 
the  brilliant  reason  that  the  money  with  which  the  labourers  are 
paid  does  not  remain  in  their  hands,  but  continually  returns  to 
the  capitalists  in  payment  of  the  commodities  produced  by  the 
labourers.  “All  they  do  is  receive  with  one  hand  and  return  with 
the  other.  Their  consumption  must  therefore  be  regarded  as 
engendered  by  those  who  hire  them.”  (P.  235.) 

After  this  exhaustive  analysis  of  social  reproduction  and  con¬ 
sumption,  as  being  brought  about  by  the  circulation  of  money, 
Destutt  continues:  “This  is  what  perfects  this  perpetuum  mobile 
of  wealth,  a  movement  which,  though  badly  understood”  ( mal 
connu ,  I  should  say  so!),  “has  justly  been  named  circulation.  For  it 
is  indeed  a  circuit  and  always  returns  to  its  point  of  departure.  This 
is  the  point  where  production  is  consummated.  ”  (Pp.  239  and  240.) 

Destutt,  that  very  distinguished  writer,  membre  de  Vlnsti- 
tut  de  France  et  de  la  Societe  Philosophique  de  Philadelphie ,  and  in 
fact  to  a  certain  extent  a  luminary  among  the  vulgar  economists, 
finally  requests  his  readers  to  admire  the  wonderful  lucidity 
with  which  he  has  presented  the  course  of  social  process,  the  flood 
of  light  which  he  has  poured  over  the  matter,  and  is  even  conde¬ 
scending  enough  to  communicate  to  his  readers,  where  all  this 
light  comes  from.  This  must  be  read  in  the  original: 

"On  remarquera,  j'espere,  combien  cette  maniere  de  considerer 
la  consommation  de  nos  richesses  est  concordante  avec  tout  ce  que 
nous  avons  dit  a  propos  de  leur  production  et  de  leur  distribution, 
et  en  meme  temps  quelle  clarte  elle  repand  sur  toute  la  marche  de 
la  societe.  D'oii  viennent  cet  accord  et  cette  lucidity?  De  ce  que 
nous  avons  rencontre  la  verite.  Cela  rappelle  I'effet  de  ces  miroirs 
ou  les  objets  se  peignent  nettement  et  dans  leurs  justes  proportions, 
quand  on  est  place  dans  leur  vrai  point-de-vue,  et  oil  tout  parait  confus 
etdesuni,  quand  on  en  est  trop  pres  ou  trop  loin. "  (Pp.  242  and  243.) 

Voil'a  le  cretinisme  bourgeois  dans  toute  sa  beatitude!* 

*  “It  will  be  noted,  I  hope,  how  much  this  manner  of  viewing  the  con¬ 
summation  of  our  wealth  is  in  accord  with  all  we  have  been  saying  concern¬ 
ing  its  production  and  distribution,  and  at  the  same  time  how  much  light 
it  throws  on  the  entire  course  of  society.  Whence  this  accord  and  this 
lucidity?  From  the  fact  that  we  have  met  truth  face  to  face.  This  recalls  the 
effect  of  those  mirrors  in  which  things  are  reflected  accurately  and  in  their 
true  proportions  when  correctly  focussed,  but  in  which  everything  appears 
confused  and  disjointed  when  one  is  too  close  or  too  far  away  from  them.” 

There  you  have  the  bourgeois  idiocy  in  all  its  beatitude! 


CHAPTER  XXI” 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION 
ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE 

It  has  been  shown  in  Book  I  how  accumulation  works  in  the 
case  of  the  individual  capitalist.  By  the  conversion  of  the  com¬ 
modity-capital  into  money  the  surplus-product,  in  which  the 
surplus-value  is  represented,  is  also  turned  into  money.  The 
capitalist  reconverts  the  so  metamorphosed  surplus-value  into 
additional  natural  elements  of  his  productive  capital.  In  the  next 
cycle  of  production  the  increased  capital  furnishes  an  increased 
product.  But  what  happens  in  the  case  of  the  individual  capital 
must  also  show  in  the  annual  reproduction  as  a  whole,  just  as 
we  have  seen  it  happen  on  analysing  simple  reproduction,  namely, 
that  the  successive  precipitation— in  the  case  of  individual 
capital— of  its  used-up  fixed  component  parts  in  money  which  is 
being  hoarded,  also  finds  expression  in  the  annual  reproduction 
of  society. 

If  a  certain  individual  capital  is  equal  to  400C  +  100T,  and  the 
annual  surplus-value  is  equal  to  100,  then  the  commodity-product 
amounts  to  400c-fl00v-H100s.  These  600  are  converted  into 
money.  Of  this  money,  again,  400c  are  converted  into  the  natural 
form  of  constant  capital,  100T  into  labour-power,  and— provided 
the  entire  surplus-value  is  being  accumulated  —  100s  are  converted 
besides  into  additional  constant  capital  by  transformation  into 
natural  elements  of  the  productive  capital.  It  is  assumed  in  this 
case:  1)  that  this  amount  is  sufficient  under  the  given  technical 
conditions  either  to  expand  the  functioning  constant  capital  or 
to  establish  a  new  industrial  business.  But  it  may  also  happen 
that  surplus-value  must  be  converted  Into  money  and  this  money 
hoarded  for  a  much  longer  time  before  this  process,  i.e. ,  before 
real  accumulation,  expansion  of  production,  can  take  place; 


From  here  to  the  end  Manuscript  VIII. — F.B. 


494 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


2)  that  production  on  an  extended  scale  has  actually  been  in  proc¬ 
ess  previously.  For  in  order  that  the  money  (the  surplus-value 
hoarded  in  money-form)  may  be  converted  into  elements  of  pro¬ 
ductive  capital,  one  must  be  able  to  buy  these  elements  on  the 
market  as  commodities.  It  makes  no  difference  if  they  are  not 
bought  as  finished  products  but  made  to  order.  They  are  not  paid 
for  until  they  are  in  existence  and  at  any  rate  not  until  actual 
reproduction  on  an  extended  scale,  an  expansion  of  hitherto 
normal  production,  has  taken  place  so  far  as  they  are  concerned 
They  had  to  exist  potentially,  i.e.,  in  their  elements,  as  it  re¬ 
quires  only  the  impulse  of  an  order,  that  is,  the  purchase  of  com¬ 
modities  before  they  actually  exist  and  their  anticipated  sale,  for 
their  production  really  to  take  place.  The  money  on  the  one  side 
then  calls  forth  extended  reproduction  on  the  other,  because  the 
possibility  of  it  exists  without  money.  For  money  in  itself  is  not 
an  element  of  real  reproduction. 

For  instance  capitalist  A,  who  sells  during  one  year  or  during 
a  number  of  years  certain  quantities  of  commodities  successively 
produced  by  him,  thereby  converts  into  money  also  that  portion 
of  the  commodities  which  is  the  vehicle  of  surplus-value— the 
surplus-product— or  in  other  words  the  very  surplus-value  pro¬ 
duced  by  him  in  commodity-form,  accumulates  it  gradually,  and 
thus  forms  for  himself  new  potential  money-capital— potential 
because  of  its  capacity  and  mission  to  be  converted  into  elements 
of  productive  capital.  But  in  actual  fact  he  only  engages  in 
simple  hoarding,  which  is  not  an  element  of  actual  reproduction. 
His  activity  at  first  consists  only  in  successively  withdrawing 
circulating  money  out  of  the  circulation.  Of  course  it  is  not  im¬ 
possible  that  the  circulating  money  thus  kept  under  lock  and  key 
by  him  was  itself,  before  it  entered  into  circulation,  a  portion  of 
some  other  hoard.  This  hoard  of  A,  which  is  potentially  new 
money-capital,  is  not  additional  social  wealth,  any  more  than  it 
would  be  if  it  were  spent  in  articles  of  consumption.  But  money 
withdrawn  from  circulation,  which  therefore  previously  existed 
in  circulation,  may  have  been  stored  up  at  some  prior  time  as  a 
component  part  of  a  hoard,  may  have  been  the  money-form  of 
wages,  may  have  converted  means  of  production  or  other  commod¬ 
ities  into  money  or  may  have  circulated  portions  of  constant 
capital  or  the  revenue  of  some  capitalist.  It  is  no  more  new  wealth 
than  money,  considered  from  the  standpoint  of  the  simple  circu¬ 
lation  of  commodities,  is  the  vehicle  not  only  of  its  actual  value 
but  also  of  its  ten-fold  value,  because  it  was  turned  over  ten  times 
a  day,  realised  ten  different  commodity-values.  The  commodities 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  495 


exist  without  it,  and  it  itself  remains  what  it  is  (or  becomes  even 
less  by  depreciation)  whether  in  one  turnover  or  in  ten.  Only  in 
the  production  of  gold — inasmuch  as  the  gold  product  contains  a 
surplus-product,  a  depository  of  surplus-value— is  new  wealth 
(potential  money)  created,  and  it  increases  the  money  material 
of  new  potential  money-capitals  only  so  far  as  the  entire  money- 
product  enters  into  circulation. 

Although  this  surplus-value  hoarded  in  the  form  of  money  is 
not  additional  new  social  wealth,  it  represents  new  potential 
money-capital,  on  account  of  the  function  for  which  it  is  hoarded. 
(We  shall  see  later  that  new  money-capital  may  arise  also  in  a 
way  other  than  the  gradual  conversion  of  surplus-value  into 
money.) 

Money  is  withdrawn  from  circulation  and  stored  up  as  a  hoard 
by  selling  commodities  without  subsequent  buying.  If  this  op¬ 
eration  is  therefore  conceived  as  a  general  process,  il  seems  inex¬ 
plicable  where  the  buyers  are  to  come  from,  since  in  that  process 
everybody  would  want  to  sell  in  order  to  hoard,  and  none  would 
want  to  buy.  And  it  must  be  conceived  generally,  since  every 
individual  capital  may  be  in  the  process  of  accumulation. 

If  we  were  to  conceive  the  process  of  circulation  between  the 
various  parts  of  the  annual  reproduction  as  taking  place  in  a 
straight  line— which  would  be  wrong  as  it  always  consists  with  a 
few  exceptions  of  mutually  opposite  movements— then  we  should 
have  to  start  from  the  producer  of  gold  (or  silver)  who  buys 
without  selling,  and  to  assume  that  all  others  sell  to  him.  In 
that  case  the  entire  yearly  social  surplus-product  (the  bearer  of 
the  entire  surplus-value)  would  pass  into  his  hands,  and  all  the 
other  capitalists  would  distribute  among  themselves  pro  rata  his 
surplus-product,  which  naturally  exists  in  the  form  of  money, 
the  natural  embodiment  in  gold  of  his  surplus-value.  For  that 
portion  of  the  product  of  the  gold  producer  which  has  to  make 
good  his  active  capital  is  already  tied  up  and  disposed  of.  The 
surplus-value  of  the  gold  producer,  created  in  the  form  of  gold, 
would  then  be  the  sole  fund  from  which  all  other  capitalists 
would  draw  the  material  for  the  conversion  of  their  annual  sur¬ 
plus-product  into  money.  The  magnitude  of  its  value  would 
then  have  to  be  equal  to  the  entire  annual  surplus-value  of  society, 
which  must  first  assume  the  guise  of  a  hoard.  Absurd  as  these 
assumptions  would  be,  they  would  do  nothing  more  than  explain 
the  possibility  of  a  universal  simultaneous  formation  of  a  hoard, 
and  would  not  get  reproduction  itself  one  step  further,  except 
on  the  part  of  the  gold  producer. 


496 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


Before  we  resolve  this  seeming  difficulty  we  must  distinguish 
between  the  accumulation  in  department  I  (production  of  means 
of  production)  and  in  department  II  (production  of  articles  of 
consumption).  We  shall  start  with  I. 


I.  ACCUMULATION  IN  DEPARTMENT  I 
1.  The  Formation  of  a  Hoard 

It  is  evident  that  both  the  investments  of  capital  in  the  nu¬ 
merous  lines  of  industry  constituting  class  I  and  the  different 
individual  investments  of  capital  within  each  of  these  lines  of 
industry,  according  to  their  age,  i.e.,  the  space  of  time  during 
which  they  already  have  functioned,  quite  aside  from  their 
volumes,  technical  conditions,  market  conditions,  etc.,  are  in 
different  stages  of  the  process  of  successive  transformation  from 
surplus-value  into  potential  money-capital,  whether  this  money- 
capital  is  to  serve  for  the  expansion  of  the  active  capital  or  for 
the  establishment  of  new  industrial  enterprises— the  two  forms 
of  expansion  of  production.  One  part  of  the  capitalists  is  con¬ 
tinually  converting  its  potential  money-capital,  grown  to  an 
appropriate  size,  into  productive  capital,  i.e.,  with  the  money 
hoarded  by  the  conversion  of  surplus-value  into  money  they  buy 
means  of  production,  additional  elements  of  constant  capital. 
Another  part  of  the  capitalists  is  meanwhile  still  engaged  in 
hoarding  its  potential  money-capital.  Capitalists  belonging  to 
these  two  categories  confront  each  other:  some  as  buyers,  the 
others  as  sellers,  and  each  one  of  the  two  exclusively  in  one  of 
these  roles. 

For  instance,  let  A  sell  600  (equal  to  400C+100V  +  100B)  to  B 
(who  may  represent  more  than  one  buyer).  A  sells  600  in  com¬ 
modities  for  600  in  money,  of  which  100  are  surplus-value  which 
he  withdraws  from  circulation  and  hoards  in  the  form  of  money. 
But  these  100  in  money  are  but  the  money-form  of  the  surplus- 
product,  which  was  the  bearer  of  a  value  of  100.  The  forma¬ 
tion  of  a  hoard  is  no  production  at  all,  hence  not  an  increment  of 
production,  either.  The  action  of  the  capitalist  consists  here 
merely  in  withdrawing  from  circulation  the  100  in  money  he 
grabbed  by  the  sale  of  his  surplus-product,  holding  on  to  it  and 
impounding  it.  This  operation  is  carried  on  not  alone  by  A,  but 
at  numerous  points  along  the  periphery  of  circulation  by  other 
capitalists,  A',  A",  A"',  all  of  them  working  with  equal  zeal  at 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  497 


this  sort  of  hoard  formation.  These  numerous  points  at  which 
money  is  withdrawn  from  circulation  and  accumulated  in  nu¬ 
merous  individual  hoards  or  potential  money-capitals  appear  as 
so  many  obstacles  to  circulation,  because  they  immobilise  the 
money  and  deprive  it  of  its  capacity  to  circulate  for  a  certain 
length  of  time.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  hoarding 
takes  place  in  the  simple  circulation  of  commodities  long  before 
this  is  based  on  capitalist  commodity  production.  The  quantity 
of  money  existing  in  society  is  always  greater  than  the  part  of 
it  in  actual  circulation,  although  this  swells  or  subsides  accord¬ 
ing  to  circumstances.  We  find  here  again  the  same  hoards,  and 
the  same  formation  of  hoards,  but  now  as  an  element  immanent 
in  the  capitalist  process  of  production. 

One  can  understand  the  pleasure  experienced  when  all  these 
potential  capitals  within  the  credit  system,  by  their  concentra¬ 
tion  in  the  hands  of  banks,  etc.,  become  disposable,  “loanable 
capital,”  money-capital,  which  indeed  is  no  longer  passive  and 
music  of  the  future,  but  active  capital  growing  rank. 

However,  A  accomplishes  the  formation  of  a  hoard  only  to  the 
extent  that  he  acts  only  as  a  seller,  so  far  as  his  surplus-product 
is  concerned,  and  not  afterward  as  a  buyer.  His  successive  pro¬ 
duction  of  surplus-products,  the  vehicles  of  his  surplus-value  to 
be  converted  into  money,  is  therefore  the  premise  of  his  forming 
a  hoard.  In  the  present  case,  where  we  are  examining  only  the 
circulation  within  category  I,  the  bodily  form  of  the  surplus- 
product,  as  that  of  the  total  product  of  which  it  is  a  part,  is  the 
bodily  form  of  an  element  of  constant  capital  I,  that  is  to  say,  it 
belongs  in  the  category  of  means  of  production  creating  means 
of  production.  We  shall  see  presently  what  becomes  of  it,  what 
function  it  performs,  in  the  hands  of  buyers  B,  B',  B",  etc. 

It  must  be  noted  at  this  point  first  and  foremost  that  although 
withdrawing  money  to  the  amount  of  his  surplus-value  from  cir¬ 
culation  and  hoarding  it,  A  on  the  other  hand  throws  commodities 
into  it  without  withdrawing  other  commodities  in  return.  The 
capitalists  B,  B',  B",  etc.,  are  thereby  enabled  to  throw  money 
into  circulation  and  withdraw  only  commodities  from  it.  In  the 
present  case  these  commodities,  according  to  their  bodily  form 
and  their  destination,  enter  into  the  constant  capital  of  B,  B', 
etc.,  as  fixed  or  circulating  element.  We  shall  hear  more  about 
this  anon  when  we  deal  with  the  buyer  of  the  surplus-product, 
with  B,  B',  etc. 


498 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


Let  us  note  by  the  way:  Once  more  we  find  here,  as  wo  did  in 
the  case  of  simple  reproduction,  that  the  exchange  of  the  various 
component  parts  of  the  annual  product,  i.e.,  their  circulation 
(which  must  comprise  at  the  same  time  the  reproduction  of  the 
capital,  and  indeed  its  restoration  in  its  various  determinations, 
such  as  constant,  variable,  fixed,  circulating,  money-  and  com¬ 
modity-capital)  does  not  by  any  means  presuppose  mere  purchase 
of  commodities  supplemented  by  a  subsequent  sale,  or  a  sale 
supplemented  by  a  subsequent  purchase,  so  that  there  would 
actually  be  a  bare  exchange  of  commodity  for  commodity,  as 
Political  Economy  assumes,  especially  the  free-trade  school 
since  the  physiocrats  and  Adam  Smith.  We  know  that  the  fixed 
capital,  once  the  expenditure  for  it  is  made,  is  not  replaced  during 
the  entire  period  of  its  function,  but  continues  to  act  in  its  old 
form,  while  its  value  is  gradually  precipitated  in  the  form  of 
money.  Now  we  have  seen  that  the  periodical  renewal  of  fixed 
capital  IIC  (the  entire  capital-value  IIC  being  converted  into 
elements  worth  I(V+S))  presupposes  on  the  one  hand  the  mere 
purchase  of  the  fixed  part  of  IIC,  reconverted  from  the  form  of 
money  into  its  bodily  form,  to  which  corresponds  the  mere  sale 
of  I„;  and  presupposes  on  the  other  hand  the  mere  sale  on  the  part 
of  IIC,  the  sale  of  its  fixed  (depreciation)  part  of  the  value  pre¬ 
cipitated  in  money,  to  which  corresponds  the  mere  purchase  of 
Is.  In  order  that  the  exchange  may  take  place  normally  in  this 
case,  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  mere  purchase  on  the  part  of 
IIC  is  equal  in  magnitude  of  value  to  the  mere  sale  on  the  part 
of  IIC,  and  that  in  the  same  way  the  mere  sale  of  IB  to  IIC,  section 
1,  is  equal  to  its  mere  purchase  from  IIC,  section  2.  (Pp.  464-65.) 
Otherwise  simple  reproduction  is  disturbed.  Mere  purchase  here 
must  be  offset  by  a  mere  sale  there.  It  must  likewise  be  assumed 
in  this  case  that  the  mere  sale  of  that  portion  of  Ig  which  forms 
the  hoards  of  A,  A’,  A”  is  balanced  by  the  mere  purchase  of  that 
portion  of  Is  which  converts  the  hoards  of  B,  B',  and  B"  into 
elements  of  additional  productive  capital. 

So  far  as  the  balance  is  restored  by  the  fact  that  the  buyer  acts 
later  on  as  a  seller  to  the  same  amount  of  value,  and  vice  versa, 
the  money  returns  to  the  side  that  advanced  it  on  purchasing, 
and  which  sold  before  it  bought  again.  But  the  actual  balance, 
so  far  as  the  exchange  of  commodities  itself,  the  exchange  of 
the  various  portions  of  the  annual  product  is  concerned,  demands 
that  the  values  of  the  commodities  exchanged  for  one  another 
be  equal. 

But  inasmuch  as  only  one-sided  exchanges  are  made,  a  number 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  499 


of  mere  purchases  on  the  one  hand,  a  number  of  mere  sales  on 
the  other — and  we  have  seen  that  the  normal  exchange  of  the 
annual  product  on  the  basis  of  capitalism  necessitates  such  one¬ 
sided  metamorphoses — the  balance  can  be  maintained  only  on 
the  assumption  that  in  amount  the  value  of  the  one-sided  pur¬ 
chases  and  that*  of  the  one-sided  sales  tally.  The  fact  that  the 
production  of  commodities  is  the  general  form  of  capitalist 
production  implies  the  role  which  money  is  playing  in  it  not  only 
as  a  medium  of  circulation,  but  also  as  money-capital,  and  en¬ 
genders  certain  conditions  of  normal  exchange  peculiar  to  this 
mode  of  production  and  therefore  of  the  normal  course  of 
reproduction,  whether  it  be  on  a  simple  or  on  an  extended  scale — 
conditions  which  change  into  so  many  conditions  of  abnormal 
movement,  into  so  many  possibilities  of  crises,  since  a  balance 
is  itself  an  accident  owing  to  the  spontaneous  nature  of  this 
production. 

We  have  also  seen  that  in  the  exchange  of  Iv  for  a  correspond¬ 
ing  amount  of  value  of  IIC,  there  takes  place  in  the  end,  precisely 
for  IIC,  a  replacement  of  commodities  II  by  an  equivalent  commod¬ 
ity-value  I,  that  therefore  on  the  part  of  aggregate  capitalist  II 
the  sale  of  his  own  commodities  is  subsequently  supplemented  by 
the  purchase  of  commodities  from  I  of  the  same  amount  of  value. 
This  replacement  takes  place.  But  what  does  not  take  place  is 
an  exchange  between  capitalists  I  and  II  of  their  respective  goods. 
IIC  sells  its  commodities .  to  working-class  I.  The  latter  con¬ 
fronts  it  one-sidedly,  as  a  buyer  of  commodities,  and  it  confronts 
that  class  one-sidedly  as  a  seller  of  commodities.  With  the  money 
proceeds  so  obtained  IIC  confronts  aggregate  capitalist  I  one- 
sidedly  as  a  buyer  of  commodities,  and  aggregate  capitalist  I 
confronts  it  one-sidedly  as  a  seller  of  commodities  up  to  the 
amount  of  Iv.  It  is  only  by  means  of  this  sale  of  commodities  that 
I  finally  reproduces  its  variable  capital  in  the  form  of  money- 
capital.  If  capital  I  faces  that  of  II  one-sidedly  as  a  seller  of  com¬ 
modities  to  the  amount  of  Iv,  it  faces  working-class  I  as  a  buyer 
of  commodities  purchasing  their  labour-power.  And  if  working- 
class  I  faces  capitalist  II  one-sidedly  as  a  buyer  of  commodities 
(namely,  as  a  buyer  of  means  of  subsistence),  it  faces  capitalist 
I  one-sidedly  as  a  seller  of  commodities,  namely,  as  a  seller  of 
its  labour-power. 

The  constant  supply  of  labour-power  on  the  part  of  working- 
class  I,  the  reconversion  of  a  portion  of  commodity-capital  I  into 
the  money-form  of  variable  capital,  the  replacement  of  a  portion 
of  commodity-capital  II  by  natural  elements  of  constant  capital 


4' 


500  REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 

I Ic  —  all  these  necessary  premises  demand"  one  another,  but  they 
are  brought  about  by  a  very  complicated  process,  including  three 
processes  of  circulation  which  occur  independently  of  one  another 
but  intermingle.  This  process  is  so  complicated  that  it  offers  ever 
so  many  occasions  for  running  abnormally. 

2.  The  Additional  Constant  Capital 

The  surplus-product,  the  bearer  of  surplus-value,  does  not 
cost  its  appropriators,  capitalists  I,  anything.  They  are  by  no 
manner  of  means  obliged  to  advance  any  money  or  commodi¬ 
ties  in  order  to  obtain  it.  Even  among  the  physiocrats  an  advance 
was  the  general  form  of  value  embodied  in  elements  of  productive 
capital.  Hence  what  capitalists  I  advance  is  nothing  but  their 
constant  and  variable  capital.  The  labourer  not  only  preserves 
by  his  labour  their  constant  capital;  he  not  only  replaces  the 
value  of  their  variable  capital  by  a  corresponding  newly  created 
portion  of  value  in  the  form  of  commodities;  by  his  surplus- 
labour  he  supplies  them  with  a  surplus-value  existing  in  the  form 
of  surplus-product.  By  the  successive  sale  of  this  surplus-product 
they  form  a  hoard,  additional  potential  money-capital.  In  the 
rase  under  consideration,  this  surplus-product  consists  from  the 
outset  of  means  of  production  of  means  of  production.  It  is  only 
when  it  reaches  the  hands  of  B,  B',  B",  etc.  (I)  that  this  surplus- 
product  functions  as  additional  constant  capital.  But  it  is  this 
virtua liter  even  before  it  is  sold,  even  in  the  hands  of  the  accu¬ 
mulators  of  hoards,  A,  A',  A"  (1).  If  we  consider  merely  the 
amount  of  value  of  the  reproduction  on  the  part  of  I,  we  are 
still  moving  within  the  bounds  of  simple  reproduction,  for  no 
additional  capital  has  been  set  in  motion  to  create  this  virtualiter 
additional  constant  capital  (the  surplus-product),  nor  has  any 
greater  amount  of  surplus-labour  been  expended  than  that  on 
the  basis  of  simple  reproduction.  The  difference  is  here  only  in 
the  form  of  the  surplus-labour  performed,  in  the  concrete  nature 
of  its  particular  useful  character.  It  has  been  expended  in  means 
of  production  for  Ic  instead  of  IIC,  in  means  of  production  of 
means  of  production  instead  of  means  of  production  of  articles 
of  consumption.  In  the  case  of  simple  reproduction  it  was  assumed 
that  the  entire  surplus-value  I  is  spent  as  revenue,  hence 
in  commodities  II.  Hence  the  surplus-value  consisted  only  of 
such  means  of  production  as  have  to  replace  constant  capital 
lie  in  its  bodily  form.  In  order  that  the  transition  from  simple 
to  extended  reproduction  may  take  place,  production  in  depart- 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  501 


ment  I  must  be  in  a  position  to  fabricate  fewer  elements  of  con¬ 
stant  capital  for  II  and  so  many  the  more  for  I.  This  transition, 
which  does  not  always  take  place  without  difficulties,  is  facili¬ 
tated  by  the  fact  that  some  of  the  products  of  I  may  serve  as 
means  of  production  in  either  department. 

It  follows,  then,  that,  considering  the  matter  merely  from  the 
angle  of  volume  of  values,  the  material  substratum  of  extended 
reproduction  is  produced  within  simple  reproduction.  It  is  simply 
surplus-labour  of  working-class  I  expended  directly  in  the 
production  of  means  of  production,  in  the  creation  of  virtual 
additional  capital  I.  The  formation  of  virtual  additional  money- 
capital  on  the  part  of  A,  A'  and  A”  (I) — by  the  successive  sale 
of  their  surplus-product  which  was  formed  without  any  capital¬ 
ist  expenditure  of  money — is  therefore  simply  the  money-form 
of  additionally  produced  means  of  production  I. 

Consequently  production  of  virtual  additional  capital  ex¬ 
presses  in  our  case  (we  shall  see  that  it  may  also  be  formed  in  a 
quite  different  way)  nothing  but  a  phenomenon  of  the  process  of 
production  itself,  production,  in  a  particular  form,  of  elements  of 
productive  capital. 

The  production  of  additional  virtual  money-capital  on  a  large 
scale,  at  numerous  points  of  the  periphery  of  circulation,  is  there¬ 
fore  but  a  result  and  expression  of  multifarious  production  of 
virtually  additional  productive  capital,  whose  rise  does  not 
itself  require  additional  expenditure  of  money  on  the  part  of 
the  industrial  capitalist. 

The  successive  transformation  of  this  virtually  additional  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  into  virtual  money-capital  (hoard)  on  the  part  of 
A,  A',  A",  etc.  (I),  occasioned  by  the  successive  sale  of  their 
surplus-product — hence  by  repeated  one-sided  sale  of  commodities 
without  a  supplementing  purchase — is  accomplished  by  a  repeat¬ 
ed  withdrawal  of  money  from  circulation  and  a  corresponding 
formation  of  a  hoard.  Except  in  the  case  where  the  buyer  is  a  gold 
producer,  this  hoarding  does  not  in  any  way  imply  additional 
wealth  in  precious  metals,  but  only  a  change  in  the  function  of 
money  previously  circulating.  A  while  ago  it  functioned  as  a 
medium  of  circulation,  now  it  functions  as  a  hoard,  as  virtually 
new  money-capital  in  the  process  of  formation.  Thus  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  additional  money-capital  and  the  quantity  of  the  precious 
metals  existing  in. a  country  are  not  in  any  causal  relation  to 
each  other. 

Hence  it  follows  furthermore:  The  greater  the  productive 
capital  already  functioning  in  a  country  (including  the  labour- 


502 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


power,  the  producer  of  the  surplus-product,  incorporated  in  it), 
the  more  developed  the  productive  power  of  labour  and  thereby 
also  the  technical  means  for  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  means  of  production — the  greater  therefore  the  quantity 
of  the  surplus-product  both  as  to  its  value  and  as  to  the  quantity 
of  use-values  in  which  it  is  represented — so  much  the  greater  is 

1)  the  virtually  additional  productive  capital  in  the  form  of 
a  surplus-product  in  the  hands  of  A,  A',  A",  etc.,  and 

2)  the  quantity  of  this  surplus-product  transformed  into  money, 
and  hence  that  of  the  virtually  additional  money-capital  in  the 
hands  of  A,  A',  A”.  The  fact  that  Fullarton  for  instance  does  not 
want  to  hear  of  over-production  in  the  ordinary  sense  but  only 
of  the  over-production  of  capital,  meaning  money-capital,  again 
shows  how  extremely  little  of  the  mechanism  of  their  own  system 
even  the  best  bourgeois  economists  understand. 

Whereas  the  surplus-product,  directly  produced  and  appro¬ 
priated  by  the  capitalists  A,  A',  A"  (I),  is  the  real  basis  of  the 
accumulation  of  capital,  i.e.,  of  extended  reproduction,  although 
it  does  not  actually  function  in  this  capacity  until  it  reaches  the 
hands  of  B,  B',  B",  etc.  (I),  it  is  on  the  contrary  absolutely 
unproductive  in  its  chrysalis  stage  of  money — as  a  hoard  and 
virtual  money-capital  in  process  of  gradual  formation— runs 
parallel  with  the  process  of  production  in  this  form,  but  lies 
outside  of  it.  It  is  a  dead  weight  of  capitalist  production.  The 
eagerness  to  utilise  this  surplus-value  accumulating  as  virtual 
money-capital  for  the  purpose  of  deriving  profits  or  revenue  from 
it  finds  its  object  accomplished  in  the  credit  system  and  “papers.” 
Money-capital  thereby  gains  in  another  form  an  enormous  in¬ 
fluence  on  the  course  and  the  stupendous  development  of  the 
capitalist  system  of  production. 

The  surplus-product  converted  into  virtual  money-capital 
will  grow  so  much  more  in  volume,  the  greater  was  the  total 
amount  of  already  functioning  capital  whose  functioning  brought 
it  into  being.  With  the  absolute  increase  of  the  volume  of  the 
annually  reproduced  virtual  money-capital  its  segmentation  also 
becomes  easier,  so  that  it  is  more  rapidly  invested  in  any  par¬ 
ticular  business,  either  in  the  hands  of  the  same  capitalist  or  in 
those  of  others  (for  instance  members  of  the  family,  in  the  case 
of  a  partition  of  inherited  property,  etc.).  By  segmentation  of 
money-capital  is  meant  here  that  it  is  wholly  detached  from  the 
parent  stock  in  order  to  be  invested  as  a  new  money-capital  in 
a  new  and  independent  business. 

While  the  sellers  of  the  surplus-product,  A,  A',  A”,  etc.  (I), 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  5Q3 


have  obtained  it  as  a  direct  outcome  of  the  process  of  produc¬ 
tion,  which  does  not  envisage  any  additional  acts  of  circulation 
except  the  advance  of  constant  and  variable  capital  required  also 
in  simple  reproduction;  and  while  they  thereby  construct  the 
real  basis  for  reproduction  on  an  extended  scale,  and  in  actual 
fact  manufacture  virtually  additional  capital,  the  attitude  of 
B,  B',  B",  etc.  (I),  is  different.  1)  Not  until  it  reaches  the  hands 
of  B,  B',  B",  etc.  (I),  will  the  surplus-product  of  A,  A',  A", 
etc.,  actually  function  as  additional  constant  capital  (we  leave 
out  of  consideration  for  the  presenl  the  other  element  of  produc¬ 
tive  capital,  the  additional  labour-power,  in  other  words,  the 
additional  variable  capital).  2)  In  order  that  that  surplus- 
product  may  reach  their  hands  an  act  of  circulation  is  wanted  — 
they  must  buy  it. 

In  regard  to  point  1  it  should  be  noted  here  that  a  large  portion 
of  the  surplus-product  (virtually  additional  constant  capital), 
although  produced  by  A,  A',  A"(I)  in  a  given  year,  may  not  func¬ 
tion  as  industrial  capital  in  the  hands  of  B,  B',  B"(I)  until  the 
following  year  or  still  later.  With  reference  to  point  2,  the  question 
arises:  Whence  comes  the  money  needed  for  the  process  of  cir¬ 
culation? 

Since  the  products  created  by  B,  B',  B",  etc.  (I),  re-enter  in 
kind  into  their  own  process,  it  goes  without  saying  that  pro 
tanto  a  portion  of  their  own  surplus-product  is  transferred  directly 
(without  any  intervention  of  circulation)  to  their  productive 
capital  and  becomes  an  additional  element  of  constant  capital. 
And  pro  tanto  they  do  not  effect  the  conversion  of  the  surplus- 
product  of  A,  A',  etc.  (I),  into  money.  Aside  from  this,  where 
does  the  money  come  from?  We  know  that  B,  B',  B'\  etc.  (I) 
have  formed  their  hoard  in  the  same  way  as  A,  A',  etc.,  by  the 
sale  of  their  respective  surplus-products.  Now  they  have  arrived 
at  the  point  where  their  hoarded,  only  virtual,  money-capital 
is  to  function  effectively  as  additional  money-capital.  But  this 
is  merely  going  round  in  circles.  The  question  still  remains: 
Where  does  the  money  come  from  which  the  B’s  (I)  before  with¬ 
drew  from  circulation  and  accumulated? 

We  know  from  the  analysis  of  simple  reproduction  that  capital¬ 
ists  I  and  II  must  have  a  certain  amount  of  money  at  hand  in 
order  to  be  able  to  exchange  their  surplus-product.  In  that  case 
the  money  which  served  only  as  revenue  to  be  spent  for 
articles  of  consumption  returned  to  the  capitalists  in  the  same 
measure  in  which  they  had  advanced  it  for  the  exchange  of  their 
respective  commodities.  Here  the  same  money  re-appears,  but 


504 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


performing  a  different  function.  The  A’s  and  B’s  (I)  supply 
one  another  alternately  with  the  money  for  converting  surplus- 
product  into  additional  virtual  money-capital,  and  throw  the 
newly  formed  money-capital  alternately  back  into  circulation  as 
a  means  of  purchase. 

The  only  assumption  made  in  this  case  is  that  the  amount  of 
money  in  the  country  in  question  (the  velocity  of  circulation, 
etc.,  being  constant)  should  suffice  for  both  the  active  circulation 
and  the  reserve  hoard.  As  we  have  seen  this  is  the  same  assump¬ 
tion  as  had  to  be  made  in  the  case  of  the  simple  circulation  of 
commodities.  Only  the  function  of  the  hoards  is  different  in  the 
present  case.  Furthermore,  the  available  amount  of  money  must 
be  larger,  first,  because  under  capitalist  production  all  the  prod¬ 
ucts  (with  the  exception  of  newly  produced  precious  metals 
and  the  few  products  consumed  by  the  producer  himself)  are 
created  as  commodities  and  must  therefore  pass  through  the 
pupation  stage  of  money;  secondly,  because  on  a  capitalist  basis 
the  quantity  of  the  commodity-capital  and  the  magnitude  of 
its  value  is  not  only  absolutely  greater  but  also  grows  with  in¬ 
comparably  greater  rapidity;  thirdly,  because  an  ever  expanding 
variable  capital  must  always  be  converted  into  money-capital; 
fourthly,  because  the  formation  of  new  money-capitals  keeps  pace 
with  the  extension  of  production,  so  that  the  material  for  corre¬ 
sponding  hoard  formation  must  be  available. 

This  is  generally  true  of  the  first  phase  of  capitalist  production, 
in  which  even  the  credit  system  is  mostly  accompanied  by  metallic 
circulation,  and  it  applies  to  the  most  developed  phase  of  the 
credit  system  as  well,  to  the  extent  that  metallic  circulation 
remains  its  basis.  On  the  one  hand  an  additional  production  of 
precious  metals,  being  alternately  abundant  or  scarce,  may 
here  exert  a  disturbing  influence  on  the  prices  of  commodities 
not  only  at  long,  but  also  at  very  short  intervals.  On  the  other 
hand  the  entire  credit  mechanism  is  continually  occupied  in 
reducing  the  actual  metallic  circulation  to  a  relatively  more 
and  more  decreasing  minimum  by  means  of  sundry  operations, 
methods,  and  technical  devices.  The  artificiality  of  the  entire 
machinery  and  the  possibility  of  disturbing  its  normal  course 
increase  to  the  same  extent. 

The  different  B’s,  B  ’s,  B"’s,  etc.  (I),  whose  virtual  new  money- 
capital  enters  upon  its  function  as  active  capital,  may  have 
to  buy  their  products  (portions  of  their  surplus-product)  from 
one  another,  or  to  sell  them  to  one  another.  Pro  tanto  the  money 
advanced  by  them  for  the  circulation  of  their  surplus-product 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  505 


flows  back  under  normal  conditions  to  the  different  B’s  in  the 
same  proportion  in  which  they  had  advanced  it  for  the  circulation 
of  their  respective  commodities.  If  the  money  circulates  as  a 
means  of  payment,  then  only  balances  are  to  be  squared  so  far 
as  the  mutual  purchases  and  sales  do  not  cover  one  another. 
But  it  is  important  first  and  foremost  to  assume  here,  as  every¬ 
where,  metallic  circulation  in  its  simplest,  most  primitive  form, 
because  then  the  flux  and  reflux,  the  squaring  of  balances,  in 
short  all  elements  appearing  under  the  credit  system  as  consciously 
regulated  processes  present  themselves  as  existing  independently 
of  the  credit  system,  and  the  matter  appears  in  primitive  form 
instead  of  the  later,  reflected  form. 


3.  The  Additional  Variable  Capital 

Hitherto  we  have  been  dealing  only  with  additional  constant 
capital.  Now  we  must  direct  our  attention  to  a  consideration  of 
the  additional  variable  capital. 

We  have  explained  at  great  length  in  Book  I  that  labour-pow¬ 
er  is  always  available  under  the  capitalist  system  of  production, 
and  that  more  labour  can  be  rendered  fluent,  if  necessary,  without 
increasing  the  number  of  labourers  or  the  quantity  of  labour- 
power  employed.  We  therefore  need  not  go  into  this  any  further, 
but  shall  rather  assume  that  the  portion  of  the  newly  created 
money-capital  capable  of  being  converted  into  variable  capital 
will  always  find  at  hand  the  labour-power  inio  which  it  is  to 
transform  itself.  It  has  also  been  explained  in  Book  I  that  a 
given  capital  may  expand  its  volume  of  production  within  certain 
limits  without  any  accumulation.  But  here  we  are  dealing  with 
the  accumulation  of  capital  in  its  specific  meaning,  so  that  the 
expansion  of  production  implies  the  conversion  of  surplus-value 
into  additional  capital,  and  thus  also  an  expansion  of  the  capital 
forming  the  basis  of  production. 

The  gold  producer  can  accumulate  a  portion  of  his  golden  sur¬ 
plus-value  as  virtual  money-capital.  As  soon  as  it  becomes  suf¬ 
ficient  in  amount,  he  can  transform  it  directly  into  new  variable 
capital,  without  first  having  to  sell  his  surplus-product.  He  can 
likewise  convert  it  into  elements  of  the  constant  capital.  But  in 
the  latter  case  he  must  find  at  hand  the  material  elements  of  his 
constant  capital.  It  is  immaterial  whether,  as  was  assumed  in 
our  presentation  hitherto,  each  producer  works  to  stock  up  and 
then  brings  his  finished  product  to  the  market  or  fills  orders. 


606  REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


The  actual  expansion  of  production,  i.e.,  the  surplus-product,  is 
assumed  in  either  case,  in  the  one  case  as  actually  available,  in 
the  other  as  virtually  available,  capable  of  delivery. 


II.  ACCUMULATION  IN  DEPARTMENT  II 

We  have  hitherto  assumed  that  A,  A',  A"  (I)  sell  their  surplus- 
product  to  B,  B',  B",  etc.,  who  belong  to  the  same  department 
I.  But  supposing  A  (I)  converts  his  surplus-product  into  money 
by  selling  it  to  one  B  in  department  II.  This  can  be  done  only 
by  A  (I)  selling  means  of  production  to  B  (II)  without  subse¬ 
quently  buying  articles  of  consumption,  i.e.,  only  by  a  one-sided 
sale  on  A’s  part.  Now  whereas  IIC  cannot  be  converted  from  the 
commodity-capital  form  into  the  bodily  form  of  productive 
constant  capital  unless  not  only  IT  but  also  at  least  a  portion  of 
I,  is  exchanged  for  a  portion  of  IIC,  which  IIC  exists  in  the  form  of 
articles  of  consumption;  but  now  A  converts  his  I,  into  money 
by  not  making  this  exchange  but  rather  withdrawing  from  cir¬ 
culation  the  money  obtained  from  II  on  the  sale  of  his  I8  instead 
of  exchanging  it  in  the  purchase  of  articles  of  consumption  IIC— 
then  what  we  have  on  the  part  of  A  (I)  is  indeed  a  formation  of 
additional  virtual  money-capital,  but  on  the  other  hand  a  portion 
of  the  constant  capital  of  B  (II)  of  equal  magnitude  of  value  is 
tied  up  in  the  form  of  commodity-capital,  unable  to  transform 
itself  into  the  bodily  form  of  productive,  constant  capital.  In 
other  words,  a  portion  of  the  commodities  of  B  (II),  and  indeed 
prima  facie  a  portion  without  the  sale  of  which  he  cannot  recon¬ 
vert  his  constant  capital  entirely  into  its  productive  form,  has 
become  unsaleable.  As  far  as  this  portion  is  concerned  there  is 
therefore  an  over-production,  which,  likewise  as  far  as  the  same 
portion  is  concerned,  clogs  reproduction,  even  on  the  same  scale. 

In  this  case  the  additional  virtual  money-capital  on  the  side 
of  A  (I)  is  indeed  a  moneyed  form  of  surplus-product  (surplus- 
value),  but  the  surplus-product  (surplus-value)  considered  as  such 
is  here  a  phenomenon  of  simple  reproduction,  not  yet  of  reproduc¬ 
tion  on  an  extended  scale.  I(T+P),  for  which  this  is  true  at  all 
events  of  one  portion  of  s,  must  ultimately  be  exchanged  for  II0, 
in  order  that  the  reproduction  of  IIC  may  take  place  on  the  same 
scale.  By  the  sale  of  his  surplus-product  to  B  (II),  A  (I)  has  sup¬ 
plied  to  the  latter  a  corresponding  portion  of  the  value  of  constant 
capital  in  its  bodily  form.  But  at  the  same  time  he  has  rendered 
an  equivalent  portion  of  the  commodities  of  B  (II)  unsaleable  by 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  5Q7 


withdrawing  the  money  from  circulation — by  failing  to  com¬ 
plement  his  sale  through  subsequent  purchase.  Hence,  if  we 
survey  the  entire  social  reproduction,  which  comprises  the  capi¬ 
talists  of  both  I  and  II,  the  conversion  of  the  surplus-product  of 
A  (I)  into  virtual  money-capital  expresses  the  impossibility  of 
reconverting  commodity-capital  of  B  (II)  representing  an  equal 
amount  of  value  into  productive  (constant)  capital;  hence  not 
virtual  production  on  an  extended  scale  but  an  obstruction  of 
simple  reproduction,  and  so  a  deficit  in  simple  reproduction. 
As  the  formation  and  sale  of  the  surplus-product  of  A  (I)  are 
normal  phenomena  of  simple  reproduction,  we  have  here  even  on 
the  basis  of  simple  reproduction  the  following  interdependent 
phenomena:  Formation  of  virtual  additional  money-capital  in 
class  I  (hence  under-consumption  from  the  view-point  of  II); 
piling  up  of  commodity-supplies  in  class  II  which  cannot  be 
reconverted  into  productive  capital  (hence  relative  over-produc¬ 
tion  in  II);  surplus  of  money-capital  in  I  and  reproduction  deficit 
in  II. 

Without  pausing  any  longer  at  this  point,  we  simply  remark 
that  we  had  assumed  in  the  analysis  of  simple  reproduction  that 
the  entire  surplus-value  of  I  and  II  is  spent  as  revenue.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  however  one  portion  of  the  surplus-value  is  spent 
as  revenue,  and  the  other  is  converted  into  capital.  Actual  accu¬ 
mulation  can  take  place  only  on  this  assumption.  That  accu¬ 
mulation  should  take  place  at  the  expense  of  consumption  is, 
couched  in  such  general  terms,  an  illusion  contradicting  the  nature 
of  capitalist  production.  For  it  takes  for  granted  that  the  aim  and 
compelling  motive  of  capitalist  production  is  consumption,  and 
not  the  snatching  of  surplus-value  and  its  capitalisation,  i.e., 
accumulation. 


Let  us  now  take  a  closer  look  at  the  accumulation  in  depart¬ 
ment  II. 

The  first  difficulty  with  reference  to  IIC,  i.e.,  its  reconversion 
from  a  component  part  of  commodity-capital  II  into  the  bodily 
form  of  constant  capital  II,  concerns  simple  reproduction.  Let 
us  take  the  former  scheme: 

( 1 ,000y  + 1 ,000,)  I  are  exchanged  for 
2,000  IIC. 

Now,  if  for  instance  one  half  of  the  surplus-product  of  I,  hence 
1  OX) 

s  or  500  It  is  reincorporated  in  department  I  as  constant 
capital,  then  this  portion  of  the  surplus-product,  being  detained 


508 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


in  I,  cannot  replace  any  part  of  IIC.  Instead  of  being  converted 
into  articles  of  consumption  (and  here  in  this  section  of  the 
circulation  between  I  and  II  the  exchange  is  actually  mutual, 
that  is,  there  is  a  double  change  of  position  of  the  commodi¬ 
ties,  unlike  the  replacement  of  1,000  II(.  by  1,000  Iv  effected  by 
the  labourers  of  I),  it  is  made  to  serve  as  an  additional  means  of 
production  in  I  itself.  It  cannot  perform  this  function  simulta¬ 
neously  in  I  and  II.  The  capitalist  cannot  spend  the  value  of  his 
surplus-product  for  articles  of  consumption  and  at  the  same  time 
consume  the  surplus-product  itself  productively,  i.e.,  incorpo¬ 
rate  it  in  his  productive  capital.  Instead  of  2,000  I(v  +  8,,  only 
1,500,  namely  (l,000v-|-500g)  I,  are  therefore  exchangeable  for 
2,000  IIC;  500  IIC  cannot  be  reconverted  from  the  commodity- 
form  into  productive  (constant)  capital  II.  Hence  there  would 
be  an  over-production  in  II,  exactly  equal  in  volume  to  the  expan¬ 
sion  of  production  in  I.  This  over-production  in  II  might  react 
to  such  an  extent  on  I  that  even  the  reflux  of  the  1,000  spent  by  the 
labourers  of  I  for  articles  of  consumption  of  II  might  take  place 
but  partially,  so  that  these  1,000  would  not  return  to  the  hands 
of  capitalists  I  in  the  form  of  variable  money-capital.  These  capi¬ 
talists  would  thus  find  themselves  hampered  even  in  reproduc¬ 
tion  on  an  unchanging  scale,  and  this  by  the  bare  attempt  to 
expand  it.  And  in  this  connection  it  must  be  taken  into  consi¬ 
deration  that  in  I  only  simple  reproduction  had  actually  taken 
place  and  that  its  elements,  as  represented  in  our  scheme,  are 
only  differently  grouped  with  a  view  to  expansion  in  the  future, 
say,  next  year. 

One  might  attempt  to  circumvent  this  difficulty  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  way:  Far  from  being  over-production,  the  500  IIC  which  are 
kept  in  stock  by  the  capitalists  and  cannot  be  immediately  con¬ 
verted  into  productive  capital  represent,  on  the  contrary,  a  neces¬ 
sary  element  of  reproduction,  which  we  have  so  far  neglected. 
We  have  seen  that  a  money-supply  must  be  accumulated  at  many 
points,  hence  money  must  be  withdrawn  from  circulation,  partly 
for  the  purpose  of  making  it  possible  to  form  new  money-capital 
in  I,  and  partly  to  hold  fast  temporarily  the  value  of  the  gradually 
depreciating  fixed  capital  in  the  form  of  money.  But  since  we 
placed  all  money  and  commodities  from  the  very  start  exclusive¬ 
ly  Into  the  hands  of  capitalists  I  and  II  when  we  drew  up  our 
scheme  and  since  neither  merchants,  nor  money-changers,  nor 
bankers,  nor  merely  consuming  and  not  directly  producing  classes 
exist  here,  it  follows  that  the  constant  formation  of  commodity 
stores  in  the  hands  of  their  respective  producers  is  here  indispen- 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  509 


sable  to  keep  the  machinery  of  reproduction  going.  The  500 IIC  held 
in  stock  by  capitalists  II  therefore  represent  the  commodity- 
supply  of  articles  of  consumption  which  ensures  the  continuity 
of  the  process  of  consumption  implied  in  reproduction,  here 
meaning  the  passage  of  one  year  to  the  next.  The  consumption- 
fund,  which  is  as  yet  in  the  hands  of  its  sellers  who  are  at  the 
same  time  its  producers,  cannot  fall  one  year  to  the  point  of  zero 
in  order  to  begin  the  next  with  zero,  any  more  than  such  a  thing 
can  take  place  in  the  transition  from  today  to  tomorrow.  Since 
such  supplies  of  commodities  must  constantly  be  built  up  anew, 
though  varying  in  volume,  our  capitalist  producers  II  must 
have  a  reserve  money-capital,  which  enables  them  to  continue 
their  process  of  production  although  one  portion  of  their  pro¬ 
ductive  capital  is  temporarily  tied  up  in  the  shape  of  commod¬ 
ities.  Our  assumption  is  that  they  combine  the  whole  business 
of  trading  with  that  of  producing.  Hence  they  must  also  have  at 
their  disposal  the  additional  money-capital,  which  is  in  the 
hands  of  the  merchants  when  the  individual  functions  in  the 
process  of  reproduction  are  separated  and  distributed  among 
the  various  kinds  of  capitalists. 

To  this  one  may  object:  1)  That  the  forming  of  such  supplies 
and  the  necessity  of  doing  so  applies  to  all  capitalists,  those  of 
I  as  well  as  of  II.  Considered  as  mere  sellers  of  commodities, 
they  differ  only  in  that  they  sell  different  kinds  of  commodities. 
A  supply  of  commodities  II  implies  a  previous  supply  of  commodi¬ 
ties  I.  If  we  neglect  this  supply  on  one  side,  we  must  also  do  so 
on  the  other.  But  if  we  take  them  into  account  on  both  sides, 
the  problem  is  not  altered  in  any  way. 

2)  Just  as  a  certain  year  closes  on  the  part  of  II  with  a  supply 
of  commodities  for  the  following  year,  so  it  was  opened  with 
a  supply  of  commodities  on  the  same  part,  taken  over  from  the 
preceding  year.  In  an  analysis  of  annual  reproduction,  reduced 
to  its  most  abstract  form,  we  must  therefore  strike  it  out  in  both 
cases.  If  we  leave  to  the  given  year  its  entire  production, 
including  the  commodity-supply  to  be  yielded  up  for  next  year, 
and  simultaneously  take  from  it  the  supply  of  commodities 
transferred  to  it  from  the  preceding  year,  we  have  before  us  the 
actual  aggregate  product  of  an  average  year  as  the  subject  of  our 
analysis. 

3)  The  simple  circumstance  that  in  the  analysis  of  simple 
reproduction  we  did  not  stumble  across  the  difficulty  which  is 
now  to  be  surmounted  proves  that  we  are  confronted  by  a  spe¬ 
cific  phenomenon  due  solely  to  the  different  grouping  (with 


510 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


reference  to  reproduction)  of  elements  I,  a  changed  grouping 
without  which  reproduction  on  an  extended  scale  cannot  take 
place  at  all. 


III.  SCHEMATIC  PRESENTATION  OF  ACCUMULATION 

We  shall  now  study  reproduction  according  to  the  following 
scheme. 


I.  4,000,  +  1.000, +  1,000,  =  6,000  1 
Scheme  a)  n  1  500c  +  376v  376,  =  2,252  J 


Total,  8,252. 


We  note  in  the  first  place  that  the  sum  total  of  the  annual 
social  product,  or  8,252,  is  smaller  than  that  of  the  first  scheme, 
where  it  was  9,000.  We  might  just  as  well  assume  a  much  larger 
sum,  for  instance  one  ten  times  larger.  We  have  chosen  a  smaller 
sum  than  in  our  scheme  I  in  order  to  make  it  conspicuously  clear 
tha.t  reproduction  on  an  enlarged  scale  (which  is  here  regarded 
merely  as  production  carried  on  with  a  larger  investment  of  capi¬ 
tal)  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  absolute  volume  of  the  product, 
that  for  a  given  quantity  of  commodities  it  implies  merely  a 
different  arrangement  or  a  different  definition  of  the  functions 
of  the  various  elements  of  a  given  product,  so  that  it  is  but  a 
simple  reproduction  so  far  as  the  value  of  the  product  is  concerned. 
It  is  not  the  quantity  but  the  qualitative  determination  of  the 
given  elements  of  simple  reproduction  which  is  changed,  and 
this  change  is  the  material  premise  of  a  subsequent  reproduction 
on  an  extended  scale.58 

We  might  vary  the  scheme  by  changing  the  ratio  between 
the  variable  and  constant  capital.  For  instance  as  follows: 


c.  I.  4,000c +  875, +  875.  =  5.750  \ 

Scheme  b)  n  i,750c  +  376v  +  376s  =  2,502  \ 


Total,  8,252. 


This  scheme  seems  arranged  for  reproduction  on  a  simple  scale, 
the  surplus-value  being  entirely  consumed  as  revenue  and  not 
accumulated.  In  either  case,  both  a)  and  b),  we  have  an  annual 
product  of  the  same  magnitude  of  value,  only  under  b)  func- 


*•  This  puts  an  end,  once  and  for  all,  to  the  feud  over  the  accumulation 
of  capital  between  James  Mill  and  S  Bailey,  which  we  have  discussed  from 
another  point  of  view  in  Book  I  (Kap.  XXII,  5,  Note  64)  [English  edition: 
Ch.  XXIV,  5,  p.  610,  Note  1],  namely,  the  feud  concerning  the  possibility 
of  extending  the  operation  of  industrial  capital  without  changing  its  mag¬ 
nitude.  We  shall  revert  to  this  later. 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  5U 


tionally  its  elements  are  grouped  in  such  a  way  that  reproduc¬ 
tion  is  resumed  on  the  same  scale,  while  under  a)  the  functional 
grouping  forms  the  material  basis  of  reproduction  on  an  extended 
scale.  Under  b)  (875T+875S)  I,  or  1,750  I(v+»,  are  exchanged 
without  any  surplus  for  1,750  IIC,  while  under  a)  the  exchange  of 
(1,000T+ 1,000,)  I,  equal  to  2,000  I<v+d,  for  1,500  IIC  leaves  a 
surplus  of  500  I,  for  accumulation  in  class  I. 

Now  let  us  analyse  scheme  a)  more  closely.  Let  us  suppose 
that  both  I  and  II  accumulate  one  half  of  their  surplus-value, 
that  is  to  say,  convert  it  into  an  element  of  additional  capital, 
instead  of  spending  it  as  revenue.  As  one  half  of  1,000  I„,  or  500, 
are  to  be  accumulated  in  one  form  or  another,  invested  as  addi¬ 
tional  money-capital,  i.e. ,  converted  into  additional  productive 
capital,  only  (l,000T+500,)  I  are  spent  as  revenue.  Hence  only 
1,500  figures  here  as  the  normal  size  of  IIC.  We  need  not  further 
examine  the  exchange  between  1,500  I(T+*>  and  1,500  II0,  becauso 
this  has  already  been  done  under  the  head  of  process  of  simplo 
reproduction.  Nor  does  4,000  Ic  require  any  attention,  since  its 
re-arrangement  for  the  newly  commencing  reproduction  (which 
this  time  will  occur  on  an  extended  scale)  was  likewise  discussed 
as  a  process  of  simple  reproduction. 

The  only  thing  that  remains  to  be  examined  by  us  is  500  Is 
and  (376t+376,)  II,  in^much  as  it  is  a  matter  on  the  one  hand 
of  the  internal  relations  of  both  I  and  II  and  on  the  other  of  the 
movement  between  them.  Since  we  have  assumed  that  in  II  like¬ 
wise  one  half  of  the  surplus-value  is  to  be  accumulated,  188  are 
to  be  converted  here  into  capital,  of  which  one-fourth,*  or  47, 
or,  to  round  it  off,  48,  are  to  be  variable  capital,  so  that  140  re¬ 
main  to  be  converted  into  constant  capital. 

Here  we  come  across  a  new  problem,  whose  very  existence 
must  appear  strange  to  the  current  view  that  commodities  of 
one  kind  are  exchanged  for  commodities  of  another  kind,  or  com¬ 
modities  for  money  and  the  same  money  again  for  commodities 
of  another  kind.  The  140  IIa  can  be  converted  into  productive 
capital  only  by  replacing  them  with  commodities  of  I,  of  the 
same  value.  It  is  a  matter  of  course  that  that  portion  of  I,  which 
must  be  exchanged  for  IIS  must  consist  of  means  of  production, 
which  may  enter  either  into  the  production  of  both  I  and  II,  or 
exclusively  into  that  of  II.  This  replacement  can  be  made  feasible 
only  by  means  of  a  one-sided  purchase  on  the  part  of  II,  as  the 


•  This  is  an  obvious  slip  of  the  pen;  it  should  be  one-fifth;  this,  however, 
does  not  affect  the  final  conclusions. — Ed. 


512 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


entire  surplus-product  of  500  I,,  which  we  still  have  to  examine, 
is  to  serve  the  purposes  of  accumulation  within  I,  hence  cannot 
be  exchanged  for  commodities  II;  in  other  words,  it  cannot  be 
simultaneously  accumulated  and  consumed  by  I.  Therefore  II 
must  buy  140  I,  for  cash  without  recovering  this  money  by  a 
subsequent  sale  of  its  commodities  to  I.  And  this  is  a  process  which 
is  continually  repeating  itself  in  every  new  annual  production, 
so  far  as  it  is  reproduction  on  an  extended  scale.  Where  in  II  is 
the  source  of  the  money  for  this? 

It  would  rather  seem  that  II  is  a  very  unprofitable  field  for 
the  formation  of  new  money-capital  which  accompanies  actual 
accumulation  and  necessitates  it  under  capitalist  production, 
and  which  at  first  actually  presents  itself  as  simple  hoarding. 

We  have  first  376  IIV.  The  money-capital  of  376,  advanced 
in  labour-power,  continually  returns  through  the  purchase  of 
commodities  II  as  variable  capital  in  money-form  to  capitalist  II. 
This  constant  repetition  of  departure  from  and  return  to  the  start¬ 
ing-point,  the  pocket  of  the  capitalist,  does  not  add  in  any  way 
to  the  money  roving  over  this  circuit.  This,  then,  is  not  a  source  of 
the  accumulation  of  money.  Norcan  this  money  be  withdrawn  from 
circulation  in  order  to  form  hoarded,  virtually  new,  money-capital. 

But  stop!  Isn’t  there  a  chance  here  to  make  a  little  profit? 

We  must  not  forget  that  class  II  has  this  advantage  over  class 
I,  that  its  labourers  have  to  buy  back  from  it  the  commodities 
produced  by  themselves.  Class  II  is  a  buyer  of  labour-power  and 
at  the  same  time  a  seller  of  the  commodities  to  the  owners  of 
the  labour-power  employed  by  it.  Class  II  can  therefore: 

1) — and  this  it  shares  with  the  capitalists  of  class  I — simply 
depress  wages  below  their  normal  average  level.  By  this  means  a 
portion  of  the  money  functioning  as  the  money-form  of  variable 
capital  is  released,  and  if  this  process  is  continually  repeated, 
it  might  become  a  normal  source  of  hoarding,  and  thus  of  vir¬ 
tually  additional  money-capital  in  class  II.  Of  course  we  are 
not  referring  to  a  casual  swindle  profit  here,  since  we  are  treat¬ 
ing  of  a  normal  formation  of  capital.  But  it  must  not  be  for¬ 
gotten  that  the  normal  wages  actually  paid  (which  ceteris  paribus 
determine  the  magnitude  of  the  variable  capital)  are  not  paid 
by  the  capitalists  out  of  the  goodness  of  their  hearts,  but  must  be 
paid  under  given  relations.  This  eliminates  the  above  method 
of  explanation.  If  we  assume  that  376v  is  the  variable  capital  to 
be  laid  out  by  class  II,  we  have  no  right  suddenly  to  sneak  in  the 
hypothesis  that  it  may  pay  only  350v  instead  of  376v,  merely  to 
elucidate  a  problem  that  has  newly  arisen. 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  513 


2)  On  the  other  hand  class  II,  taken  as  a  whole,  has  the  above- 
mentioned  advantage  over  I  that  it  is  at  the  same  time  a  buyer 
of  labour-power  and  a  seller  of  its  commodities  to  its  own  labour¬ 
ers.  Every  industrial  country  (for  instance  Britain  and  the 
U.S.A.)  furnishes  the  most  tangible  proofs  of  the  way  in  which 
this  advantage  may  be  exploited — by  paying  nominally  the  nor¬ 
mal  wages  but  grabbing,  alias  stealing,  back  part  of  them  without 
an  equivalent  in  commodities;  by  accomplishing  the  same  thing 
either  through  the  truck  system  or  through  a  falsification  of 
the  medium  of  circulation  (perhaps  in  a  way  too  elusive  for  the 
law).  (Take  this  opportunity  to  expatiate  on  this  idea  with  some 
appropriate  examples.)  This  is  the  same  operation  as  under  1), 
only  disguised  and  carried  out  by  a  detour.  Therefore  it  must 
likewise  be  rejected,  the  same  as  the  other.  We  are  dealing  here 
with  actually  paid,  not  nominally  paid  wages. 

We  see  that  in  an  objective  analysis  of  the  mechanism  of 
capitalism  certain  stains  still  sticking  to  it  with  extraordinary 
tenacity  cannot  be  used  as  a  subterfuge  to  get  over  some  theoret¬ 
ical  difficulties.  But  strange  to  say,  the  great  majority  of  my 
bourgeois  critics  upbraid  me  as  though  I  have  wronged  the  capi¬ 
talists  by  assuming,  for  instance  in  Book  I  of  Capital,  that  the 
capitalist  pays  labour-power  at  its  real  value,  a  thing  which  he 
mostly  does  not  do!  (Here,  exercising  some  of  the  magnanimity 
attributed  to  me,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  quote  Schaffle.) 

So  with  the  376  IIV  we  cannot  get  any  nearer  the  goal  we  have 
mentioned. 

But  the  376  II3  seem  to  be  in  a  still  more  precarious  position. 
Here  only  capitalists  of  the  same  class,  mutually  buying  and 
selling  the  articles  of  consumption  they  produced,  confront 
one  another.  The  money  required  for  these  transactions  functions 
only  as  a  medium  of  circulation  and  in  the  normal  course  of 
things  must  flow  back  to  the  interested  parties  in  the  same  pro¬ 
portion  in  which  they  advanced  it  to  the  circulation,  in  order  to 
cover  the  same  route  over  and  over  again. 

There  seem  to  be  only  two  ways  by  which  this  money  can 
be  withdrawn  from  circulation  to  form  virtually  additional  mon¬ 
ey-capital.  Either  one  part  of  capitalists  II  cheats  the  other  and 
thus  robs  them  of  their  money.  We  know  that  no  preliminary 
expansion  of  the  circulating  medium  is  necessary  for  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  new  money-capital.  All  that  is  necessary  is  that  the  mon¬ 
ey  should  be  withdrawn  from  circulation  by  certain  parties  and 
hoarded.  It  would  not  alter  the  case  if  this  money  were  stolen, 
so  that  the  formation  of  additional  money-oapital  by  one  part 


of  capitalists  II  would  entail  a  positive  loss  of  money  by  another 
part.  The  cheated  capitalists  II  would  have  to  live  a  little  less 
gaily,  that  would  be  all. 

Or  a  part  of  II,  represented  by  necessities  of  life  is  directly 
converted  into  new  variable  capital  within  department  II.  How 
that  is  done  we  shall  examine  at  the  close  of  this  chapter  (under 
No.  IV). 

1.  First  Illustration 


A.  Scheme  of  Simple  Reproduction 

I.  4, 000c  +  1,000,  4- 1.000,  =  6,000  1  .  Qnm 

II.  2, 000c  4-  500,+  500,  =  3.000  /  1  otal-  9>uu0- 

B.  Initial  Scheme  for  Reproduction  on  an  Extended  Scale 

I.  4, 000c  +  1,000,  +1,000,  =  6,000  \ 

II.  1,500c  +  750,  +  750,  =  3,000  /  lota1’  9-uoa 


Assuming  that  in  scheme  B  one  half  of  surplus-value  I,  i.e., 
500,  is  accumulated,  we  first  receive  (l,000,+500,)  I,  or  1,500 
I(T+B)  to  be  replaced  by  1,500  IIC.  There  then  remains  in  I:4,000c 
and  500,,  the  latter  having  to  be  accumulated.  The  replacement 
of  (l,000,+500.)  I  by  1,500  IIC  is  a  process  of  simple  reproduc¬ 
tion,  which  has  been  examined  previously. 

Let  us  now  assume  that  400  of  the  500  I,  are  to  be  converted 
into  constant  capital,  and  100  into  variable  capital.  The  exchange 
within  I  of  the  400,,  which  are  thus  to  be  capitalised,  has  already 
been  discussed.  They  can  therefore  be  annexed  to  Ic,  without  more 
ado  and  in  that  case  we  get  for  I: 


4,400c  -f  1 ,000, 1 00,  (the  latter  to  be  converted  into  100,). 


II  in  turn  buys  from  I  for  the  purpose  of  accumulation  the  100 
I,  (existing  in  means  of  production)  which  now  form  additional 
constant  capital  II,  while  the  100  in  money  which  it  pays  for  them 
are  converted  into  the  money-form  of  the  additional  variable 
capital  of  I.  We  then  have  for  I  a  capital  of  4,400C+1,10Q,  (the 
latter  in  money),  equalling  5,500. 

II  has  now  l,600c  for  its  constant  capital.  In  order  to  put  them 
to  work,  it  must  advance  a  further  50,  in  money  for  the  purchase 
of  new  labour-power,  so  that  its  variable  capital  grows  from  750 
to  800.  This  expansion  of  the  constant  and  variable  capital  of  II 
by  a  total  of  150  is  supplied  out  of  its  surplus-value.  Hence  only 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  515 


600,  of  the  750  II,  remain  as  a  consumption-fund  for  capitalists 
II,  whose  annual  product  is  now  distributed  as  follows: 

II.  l,600c  -j-  800t  -f-  600,  (consumption-fund),  equal  to  3,000. 

The  150,  produced  in  articles  of  consumption,  which  have 
been  converted  here  into  (100c-(-50T)  II,  go  entirely  in  their 
bodily  form  for  the  consumption  of  the  labourers,  100  being 
consumed  by  the  labourers  of  I  (100  IT),  and  50  by  the  labourers 
of  II  (50  IIV),  as  explained  above.  As  a  matter  of  fact  in  II,  where 
its  total  product  is  prepared  in  a  form  suitable  for  accumula¬ 
tion,  a  part  greater  by  100  of  the  surplus-value  in  the  form  of 
necessary  articles  of  consumption  must  be  reproduced.  If  repro¬ 
duction  really  starts  on  an  extended  scale,  then  the  100  of  varia¬ 
ble  money-capital  I  flow  back  through  the  hands  of  its  working- 
class  to  II,  while  II  transfers  100,  in  commodity-supply  to  I 
and  at  the  same  time  50  in  commodity-supply  to  its  own  working- 
class. 

The  arrangement  changed  for  the  purpose  of  accumulation  is 
now  as  follows: 

I.  4,400c  l,100v  -f  500  consumption-fund  =  6,000 

II.  l,600c  +  800,  -j-600  consumption-fund  =  3,000 

Total,  as  before,  9,000. 


Of  these  amounts,  the  following  are  capital: 

I.  4,400c  +  1,100T  (money)  =  5,500  \  . 

II.  l,600c  +  800v  (money)  =  2,400  /  =  7>9U0- 

while  production  started  out  with 

I.  4.000c  +  l,000y  =  5,000  1 
II.  l,500c  +  750v  =  2,250  /  =  7-25U- 


Now,  if  actual  accumulation  takes  place  on  this  basis,  that 
is  to  say,  if  production  really  goes  on  with  this  augmented  capi¬ 
tal,  we  obtain  at  the  end  of  the  following  year: 


I.  4,400c  +  1,1 00y  +  1,100.  =  6,600  \ 

II.  l,600c-f  800y  +  800,  =  3,200  / 


9,800. 


Then  let  accumulation  in  I  continue  in  the  same  proportion, 
so  that  550,  are  spent  as  revenue  and  550,  accumulated.  In  that 
case  1,100  Iy  are  first  replaced  by  1,100  IIC,  and  550  I,  must  be 
realised  in  an  equal  amount  of  commodities  of  II,  making  a 
total  of  1,650  I(y+,).  But  the  constant  capital  II,  which  is  to  be 


516 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


replaced,  is  equal  to  only  1,600;  hence  the  remaining  50  must 
be  supplemented  out  of  800  II,.  Leaving  aside  the  money  aspect 
for  the  present,  we  have  as  a  result  of  this  transaction: 

I.  4,400o+550,  (to  be  capitalised);  furthermore,  realised  in 
commodities  IIC,  the  consumption-fund  of  the  capitalists  and  la¬ 
bourers  l,650(V+g). 

II.  1 ,650c  (50  added  from  II,  as  indicated  above)+800,+750s 
(consumption-fund  of  the  capitalists). 

But  if  the  old  ratio  of  v:s  is  maintained  in  II,  then  addition¬ 
al  25,  must  be  laid  out  for  50c,  and  these  are  to  be  taken  from  the 
750s.  Then  we  have 

II.  1,650c  +  825v  +  725,. 


In  I,  550,  must  be  capitalised.  If  the  former  ratio  is  main¬ 
tained,  440  of  this  amount  form  constant  capital  and  110 
variable  capital.  These  110  might  be  taken  out  of  the  725  II,,  i.e., 
articles  of  consumption  to  the  value  of  110  are  consumed  by 
labourers  I  instead  of  capitalists  II,  so  that  the  latter  are  com¬ 
pelled  to  capitalise  these  110,  which  they  cannot  consume.  This 
leaves  615  IIS  of  the  725  II,.  But  if  II  thus  converts  these  110  into 
additional  constant  capital,  it  requires  an  additional  variable 
capital  of  55.  This  again  must  be  supplied  by  its  surplus-value. 
Subtracting  this  amount  from  615  II,  leaves  560  for  the  consump¬ 
tion  of  capitalists  II,  and  we  now  obtain  the  following  capital- 
value  after  accomplishing  all  actual  and  potential  transfers: 


I.  (4,400c  +  440c )  +  (1,100,  +  110,)  =  4,840c  -f  1,210,  =  6,050 
II.  (l,600c  +  50o-fll0o)  +  (800,  +  25,  +  55,)== 

2,640 


l,760c-f  880, 


8,690  • 


If  things  are  to  proceed  normally,  accumulation  in  II  must 
take  place  more  rapidly  than  in  I,  because  otherwise  the  por¬ 
tion  I<v-t-a)  which  must  be  converted  into  commodities  IIC  will 
grow  more  rapidly  than  II0,  for  which  alone  it  can  be  exchanged. 

If  reproduction  is  continued  on  this  basis  and  conditions 
otherwise  remain  unchanged  we  obtain  at  the  end  of  the  succeeding 
year: 


I.  4,840o  +  1,210,  +  1,210,  =  7,260  1 
II.  l,760c+  880,+  880,  =  3,520  J 


10,780. 


If  the  rate  of  division  of  the  surplus-value  remains  unchanged, 
there  is  first  to  be  expended  as  revenue  by  I  :  1,210,  and  one 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  517 


hall  of  s,  or  605,  a  total  of  1,815.  This  consumption-fund  is  again 
larger  than  IIC  by  55.  These  55  must  be  deducted  from  880„ 
leaving  825.  Furthermore,  the  conversion  of  55  Il9  into  Ilc  im¬ 
plies  another  deduction  from  IIS  for  a  corresponding  variable 
capital  of  271/a,  leaving  for  consumption  7971/,  II,. 

I  has  now  to  capitalise  605,.  Of  these  484  are  constant  and 
121  variable.  The  last  named  are  to  be  deducted  from  IIg,  which 
is  still  equal  to  797V2,  leaving  6761/,  II,.  II,  then,  converts  an¬ 
other  121  into  constant  capital  and  requires  another  variable 
capital  of.  60Va  for  it,  which  likewise  comes  out  of  6761/,,  leaving 
616  for  consumption. 

Then  we  have  the  following  capitals: 

I.  Constant:  4,840+484=5,324. 

Variable:  1,210+121=1,331 
II.  Constant:  1,760+55+121  =1,936. 

Variable:  880  +  271/a+60l/2  =968. 

Totals:  I.  5,324c  +  1,331,  -  6,655  1  „  __n 

II.  1,936c  +  968,  =  2,904  (  "  y-55y' 


And  at  the  end  of  the  year  the  product  is 

I.  5,324c  +  1.331,  +  1,331,  =  7,9861 
II.  1,936c  +  968,+  968,  =  3,872/ 


11,858. 


Repeating  the  same  calculation  and  rounding  off  the  frac¬ 
tions,  we  get  at  the  end  of  the  succeeding  year  the  following 
product: 

I.  5, 856c  +  1,464,  +  1,464,  =  8,784  1 
II.  2,129c  +  1,065,  +  1,065,  =4,259  /  =  ld-U4'3- 


And  at  the  end  of  the  next  succeeding  year: 

I.  6,442c  +  1,610,  +  1,610,  =  9,662  \ 
II.  2,342c  +  1,172,  +  1,172,  =  4,686  ) 


14,348. 


In  the  course  of  five  years  of  reproduction  on  an  extended 
scale  the  aggregate  capital  of  I  and  II  has  risen  from  5,500c+ 
+1,750,  =7,250  to  8, 784c+2, 782,  =11,566;  in  other  words  in 
the  ratio  of  100  :  160.  The  total  surplus-value  was  originally 
1,750;  it  is  now  2,782.  The  consumed  surplus-value  was  orig¬ 
inally  500  for  I  and  600  for  II,  a  total  of  1,100.  The  previous 
year  it  was  732  for  I  and  745  for  II,  a  total  of  1,477.  It  has  there¬ 
fore  grown  in  the  ratio  of  100  :  134. 


518 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OP  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


2.  Second  Illustration 

Now  take  the  annual  product  of  9,000,  which  is  altogether 
a  commodity-capital  in  the  hands  of  the  class  of  industrial 
capitalists  in  a  form  in  which  the  general  average  ratio  of  the 
variable  to  the  constant  capital  is  that  of  1:5.  This  presupposes 
a  considerable  development  of  capitalist  production  and  according¬ 
ly  of  the  productivity  of  social  labour,  a  considerable  previous 
increase  in  the  scale  of  production,  and  finally  a  development 
of  all  the  circumstances  which  produce  a  relative  surplus- 
population  among  the  working-class.  The  annual  product  will 
then  be  divided  as  follows,  after  rounding  off  the  various  frac¬ 
tions: 

I.  5,000c  +  1,000T+  1,0008  =  7,000  \  Q  ^ 

II.  1,430c  +  285y-j-  285,  =  2,000  /  “ - 

Now  take  it  that  capitalist  class  I  consumes  one  half  of  its 
surplus-value,  or  500,  and  accumulates  the  other  half.  In  that 
case  (1,000V+500B)  I,  or  1,500,  would  have  to  be  converted  into 
1,500  IIC.  Since  II0  here  amounts  to  only  1,430,  it  is  necessary  to 
add  70  from  the  surplus-value.  Subtracting  this  sum  from  285  II, 
leaves  215  II,.  Then  we  have: 

I.  5,000c  500s  (to  be  capitalised)  -j-  l,500(V+8) 

in  the  consumption-fund  of  the  capitalists  and  labourers. 

II.  l,430c  -J-  70s  (to  be  capitalised)  -f  285y  -|-  215,. 

As  70  II,  are  directly  annexed  here  to  IIC,  a  variable  capital 
of  ro/j,  or  14,  is  required  to  set  this  additional  constant  capital 
in  motion.  These  14  must  also  come  out  of  the  215  II„  so  that 
201  IIS  remain,  and  we  have: 

II.  (l,430c  +  70c )  +  (28 5T  +  14y)  +  201,. 

The  exchange  of  1,500  Ify+i/,,)  for  1,500  IIC  is  a  process  of 
simple  reproduction,  and  nothing  further  need  be  said  about 
it.  However  a  few  peculiarities  remain  to  be  noted  here,  which 
arise  from  the  fact  that  in  accumulating  reproduction  I(v+i/|8) 
is  not  replaced  solely  by  IIC,  but  by  IIC  plus  a  portion  of  II,. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  as  soon  as  we  assume  accumula¬ 
tion,  I(v+,)  is  greater  than  IIC,  not  equal  to  IIC,  as  in  simple 
reproduction.  For  in  the  first  place,  I  incorporates  a  portion 
of  its  surplus-product  in  its  own  productive  capital  and  converts 
five-sixths  of  it  into  constant  capital,  therefore  cannot  replace 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  519 


these  five-sixths  simultaneously  by  articles  of  consumption  II. 
In  the  second  place  I  ha3  to  supply  out  of  its  surplus-product  the 
material  for  the  constant  capital  required  for  accumulation  with¬ 
in  II,  just  as  II  has  to  supply  I  with  the  material  for  the  variable 
capital,  which  is  to  set  in  motion  the  portion  of  I's  surplus- 
product  employed  by  I  itself  as  additional  constant  capital. 
We  know  that  the  actual,  and  therefore  also  the  additional, 
variable  capital  consists  of  labour-power.  It  is  not  capitalist 
I  who  buys  from  II  a  supply  of  necessities  of  life  or  accumulates 
them  for  the  additional  labour-power  to  be  employed  by  him, 
as  the  slaveholder  had  to  do.  It  is  the  labourers  themselves  who 
trade  with  II.  But  this  does  not  prevent  the  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion  of  his  additional  labour-power  from  being  viewed  by  the 
capitalist  as  only  so  many  means  of  production  and  maintenance 
of  his  eventual  additional  labour-power,  hence  as  the  bodily 
form  of  his  variable  capital.  His  own  immediate  operation,  in 
the  present  case  that  of  I,  consists  in  merely  storing  up  the  new 
money-capital  required  for  the  purchase  of  additional  labour- 
power.  As  soon  as  he  has  incorporated  this  in  his  capital,  the 
money  becomes  a  means  of  purchase  of  commodities  II  for  this 
labour-power,  which  must  find  these  articles  of  consumption 
at  hand. 

By  the  by.  The  capitalist,  as  welt  as  his  press,  is  often  dis¬ 
satisfied  with  the  way  in  which  the  labour-power  spends  its 
money  and  with  the  commodities  II  in  which  it  realises  this 
money.  On  such  occasions  he  philosophises,  babbles  of  culture,  and 
dabbles  in  philanthropical  talk,  fof  instance  after  the  manner 
of  Mr.  Drummond,  the  Secretary  of  the  British  Embassy  in  Wash¬ 
ington.  According  to  him,  The  Nation  (a  journal)  carried  last 
October  1879,  an  interesting  article,  which  contained  among 
other  things  the  following  passages:  “The  working-people  have 
not  kept  up  in  culture  with  the  growth  of  invention,  and  they 
have  had  things  showered  on  them  which  they  do  not  know  how 
to  use,  and  thus  make  no  market  for.”  [Every  capitalist  natu¬ 
rally  wants  the  labourer  to  buy  his  commodities.  ]  “There  is 
no  reason  why  the  working  man  should  not  desire  as  many  com¬ 
forts  as  the  minister,  lawyer,  and  doctor,  who  is  earning  the 
same  amount  as  himself.”  [This  class  of  lawyers,  ministers  and 
doctors  have  indeed  to  be  satisfied  with  the  mere  desire  of  many 
comforts!  ]  “He  does  not  do  so,  however.  The  problem  remains, 
how  to  raise  him  as  a  consumer  by  rational  and  healthful  proc¬ 
esses,  not  an  easy  one,  as  his  ambition  does  not  go  beyond  a 
diminution  of  his  hours  of  labour,  the  demagogues  rather  inciting 


520 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


him  to  this  than  to  raising  his  condition  by  the  improvement 
of  his  mental  and  moral  powers.”  (Reports  of  H.  M.’s  Secretaries 
of  Embassy  and  Legation  on  the  Manufactures,  Commerce, 
etc.,  of  the  Countries  in  which  they  reside.  London,  1879,  p.  404.) 

Long  hours  of  labour  seem  to  be  the  secret  of  the  rational  and 
healthful  processes,  which  are  to  raise  the  condition  of  the  labour¬ 
er  by  an  improvement  of  his  mental  and  moral  powers  and  to 
make  a  rational  consumer  of  him.  In  order  to  become  a  ration¬ 
al  consumer  of  the  commodities  of  the  capitalist,  he  should  above 
all  begin  to  let  his  own  capitalist  consume  his  labour-power 
irrationally  and  unhealthfully— but  the  demagogue  prevents 
him!  What  the  capitalist  means  by  a  rational  consumption  is 
evident  wherever  he  is  condescending  enough  to  engage  directly 
in  the  trade  with  his  own  labourers,  in  the  truck  system,  which 
includes  also  the  supplying  of  homes  to  the  labourers,  so  that 
the  capitalist  is  at  the  same  time  a  landlord  for  them — a  branch 
of  business  among  many  others. 

The  same  Drummond,  whose  beautiful  soul  is  enamoured  of 
the  capitalist  attempts  to  uplift  the  working-class,  tells  in  the 
same  report  among  other  things  of  the  cotton  goods  manufac¬ 
ture  of  the  Lowell  and  Lawrence  Mills.  The  boarding  and  lodging 
houses  for  the  factory  girls  belong  to  the  corporation  or  company 
owning  the  mills.  The  stewardesses  of  these  houses  are  in  the 
employ  of  the  same  company  which  prescribes  them  rules  of 
conduct.  No  girl  is  permitted  to  stay  out  after  10  p.  m.  Then  comes 
a  gem:  a  special  police  patrol  the  grounds  for  the  purpose  of 
guarding  against  an  infringement  of  those  rules.  After  10  p.m. 
no  girl  can  leave  or  enter.  No  girl  may  live  anywhere  but  on  the 
premises  of  the  company,  and  every  house  on  it  brings  the  com¬ 
pany  about  10  dollars  per  week  in  rent.  And  now  we  see  the 
rational  consumer  in  his  full  glory:  “As  the  ever  present  piano 
is  however  to  be  found  in  many  of  the  best  appointed  working 
girls’  boarding  houses,  music,  song,  and  dance  come  in  for  a  con¬ 
siderable  share  of  the  operatives’  attention  at  least  among  those 
who,  after  10  hours’  steady  work  at  the  looms,  need  more  relief 
from  monotony  than  actual  rest."  (P.  412.)  But  the  main  secret 
of  making  a  rational  consumer  out  of  the  labourer  is  yet  to  be 
told.  Mr.  Drummond  visits  the  cutlery  works  of  Turner’s  Falls 
(Connecticut  River),  and  Mr.  Oakman,  the  treasurer  of  the 
concern,  after  telling  him  that  especially  American  table  cutlery 
beat  the  English  in  quality,  continues:  “The  time  is  coming 
that  we  will  beat  England  as  to  prices  also,  we  are  ahead  in  qual¬ 
ity  now,  that  is  acknowledged,  but  we  must  have  lower  prices, 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  521 


and  shall  have  It  the  moment  we  get  our  steel  at  lower  prices 
and  have  our  labour  down.”  (P.  427.)  A  reduction  of  wages  and 
long  hours  of  labour — that  is  the  essence  of  the  rational  and 
healthful  processes  which  are  to  uplift  the  labourer  to  the  dignity 
of  a  rational  consumer,  so  that  “they  make  a  market  for  things 
showered  upon  them”  by  culture  and  growth  of  invention. 


Consequently,  just  as  I  has  to  supply  the  additional  constant 
capital  of  II  out  of  its  surplus-product,  so  II  likewise  supplies 
the  additional  variable  capital  for  I.  II  accumulates  for  I  and 
for  itself,  so  far  as  the  variable  capital  is  concerned,  by  reproduc¬ 
ing  a  greater  portion  of  its  total  product,  and  hence  especially 
of  its  surplus-product,  in  the  shape  of  necessary  articles  of 
consumption. 

In  production  on  the  basis  of  increasing  capital,  I(v+1)  must 
be  equal  to  II0  plus  that  portion  of  the  surplus-product  which 
is  re-incorporated  as  capital,  plus  the  additional  portion  of 
constant  capital  required  for  the  expansion  of  the  production 
in  II;  and  the  minimum  of  this  expansion  is  that  without  which 
real  accumulation,  i.e.,  a  real  expansion  of  production  in  I  it¬ 
self,  is  unfeasible. 

Reverting  now  to  the  case  which  we  examined  last,  we  find  in 
it  the  peculiarity  that  IIC  is  smaller  than  I(T+i/lg),  than  that  por¬ 
tion  of  product  I  which  is  spent  as  revenue  for  articles  of  consump¬ 
tion,  so  that  on  exchanging  the  1,500  I(T+»)  a  portion  of  surplus- 
product  II,  equal  to  70,  is  at  once  realised.  As  for  IIC,  equal  to 
1,430,  it  must,  all  other  conditions  remaining  the  same,  be  re¬ 
placed  by  an  equal  magnitude  of  value  out  of  I(V+8),  in  order 
that  simple  reproduction  may  take  place  in  II,  and  to  that 
extent  we  need  not  pay  any  more  attention  to  it  here.  It  is  differ¬ 
ent  with  the  additional  70  II,.  What  for  I  is  merely  a  replace¬ 
ment  of  revenue  by  articles  of  consumption,  merely  commodity- 
exchange  meant  for  consumption,  is  for  II  hot  a  mere  reconversion 
of  its  constant  capital  from  the  form  of  commodity-capital  into 
its  bodily  form,  as  it  is  in  simple  reproduction,  but  a  direct 
process  of  accumulation,  a  transformation  of  a  part  of  its  surplus- 
product  from  the  form  of  articles  of  consumption  into  that  of 
constant  capital.  If  with  £70  in  money  (money-reserve  for  the 
conversion  of  surplus- value)  I  buys  the  70  II8,  and  if  II  does 
not  buy  in  exchange  70  I8,  but  accumulates  the  £70  as  money- 
capital,  then  the  latter  is  indeed  always  an  expression  of  addi¬ 
tional  product  (precisely  of  the  surplus-product  of  II,  of  which 


17—1752 


522 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


it  is  an  aliquot  part),  although  this  is  not  a  product  which  re¬ 
enters  production;  but  in  that  case  this  accumulation  of  money  on 
the  part  of  II  would  at  the  same  time  express  that  70  I8  in  means 
of  production  are  unsaleable.  There  would  be  a  relative  over¬ 
production  in  I,  corresponding  to  the  simultaneous  non-expan¬ 
sion  of  reproduction  on  the  part  of  II. 

But  apart  from  this:  Until  the  70  in  money,  which  came  from 
I,  return  to  it,  wholly  or  in  part,  through  the  purchase  of  70 
I,  by  II,  this  70  in  money  figures  wholly  or  in  part  as  additional 
virtual  money-capital  in  the  hands  of  II.  This  is  true  of  every 
exchange  between  I  and  II,  until  the  mutual  replacement  of 
their  respective  commodities  has  effected  the  return  of  the  money 
to  its  starting-point.  But  in  the  normal  course  of  things  the 
money  figures  here  only  transiently  in  this  role.  In  the  credit 
system,  however,  where  all  temporarily  released  additional 
money  is  supposed  to  function  at  once  actively  as  an  additional 
money-capital,  such  only  temporarily  released  money-capital 
may  be  enthralled,  for  instance,  serve  in  new  enterprises  of  I, 
while  it  should  have  to  realise  surplus-products  held  there  in 
other  enterprises.  It  must  also  be  noted  that  the  annexation  of 
70  I3  to  constant  capital  II  requires  at  the  same  time  an  expan¬ 
sion  of  variable  capital  II  by  14.  This  implies — about  the  way 
it  did  in  I,  in  the  direct  incorporation  of  surplus-product  I8  in 
capital  Ic — that  the  reproduction  in  II  is  already  in  process  with 
a  tendency  toward  further  capitalisation;  in  other  words,  it 
implies  expansion  of  that  portion  of  the  surplus-product  which 
consists  of  necessary  means  of  subsistence. 


The  product  of  9,000  in  the  second  illustration  must,  as  we 
have  seen,  be  distributed  in  the  following  manner  for  the 
purpose  of  reproduction,  if  500  I8  is  to  be  capitalised.  In  doing  so 
we  merely  consider  the  commodities  and  neglect  the  money- 
circulation. 

I.  5,000c+5009  (to  be  capitalised) 4-l,500fT+«)  consumption- 
fund  equals  7,000  in  commodities. 

II.  l,500c+299v+201,  equals  2,000  in  commodities.  Grand 
total,  9,000  in  commodities. 

Capitalisation  takes  place  in  the  following  manner: 

In  I  the  500,  which  are  being  capitalised  divide  into  five- 
sixths,  or  417c  plus  one-sixth,  or  83v.  The  83v  draw  an  equal 
amount  out  of  II,,  which  buys  elements  of  constant  capital  and 
adds  them  to  II0.  An  increase  of  II0  by  83  implies  an  increase 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  523 


of  IIT  by  one-fifth  of  83,  or  17.  We  have,  then,  after  this  exchange 

I.  (5, 000c  +  417,)c  +  (1,000,  +  83,),  =  5,417c  +  1,083,  =  6,500 

II.  (l,500e+  83,)c  +  (299,  +  17,),  =  l,583c  +  316,  =  1,899 

Total.  .  8,399. 

The  capital  in  I  has  grown  from  6,000  to  6,500,  or  by  l/lt.  That 
of  II  has  grown  from  1,715  to  1,899,  or  by  not  quite  V,. 

The  reproduction  on  this  basis  in  the  second  year  brings  the 
capital  at  the  end  of  that  year  to 

I.  (5,417c+452,)c  +  (1,083,+  90s),  =  5,869c  +  1,173,  =  7,042 

II.  (1,583c  +  42,  +  90,)c  +  (316,  +  8.  +  18,),  =  l,715c  +  342,  = 

=  2,057. 

And  at  the  end  of  the  third  year,  we  have  a  product  of 
I.  5,869c  +  1,173,  +  1,173, 

II.  1 , 7 1 5C  +  342,+  342,. 

If  I  accumulates  one  half  of  its  surplus-value,  as  before,  we 
find  that  I(v+'/,«)  yields  l,173v4-587(./tg),  equal  to  1,760,  more 
than  the  entire  1,715  IIC,  an  excess  of  45.  This  must  again  be 
balanced  by  transferring-  an  equal  amount  of  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  to  IIC,  which  thus  grows  by  45,  necessitating  an  addition 
of  one-fifth,  or  9,  to  II,.  Furthermore,  the  capitalised  587  I, 
divide  into  five-sixths  and  one-sixth,  i.e.,  489c  and  98,.  The 
98  imply  in  II  a  new  addition  of  98  to  the  constant  capital,  and 
this  again  an  increase  of  variable  capital  II  by  one-fifth,  or  20. 
Then  we  have: 

I.  (5,869c  +  489,)c  +  (1,173*  +  98,),  =  6, 358c  +  1,271,  =  7,629 

II.  (1,7 15c  +  45,  +  98,)c  +  (342,  +  9,  +  20,),  =  l,858c  +  371,  = 

=  2,229. 

Total  capital  =9,858. 

In  three  years  of  growing  reproduction  the  total  capital  of 
I  has  increased  from  6,000  to  7,629  and  that  of  II  from  1,715  to 
2,229,  the  aggregate  social  capital  from  7,715  to  9,858. 

3.  Replacement  of  IIC  in  Accumulation 

In  the  exchange  of  I(,4,)  for  Ilc  we  thus  meet  with  various 
cases. 

In  simple  reproduction  both  of  them  must  be  equal  and 


17* 


524 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


replace  one  another,  since  otherwise  simple  reproduction  cannot 
proceed  without  disturbance,  as  we  have  seen  above. 

In  accumulation  it  is  above  all  the  rate  of  accumulation  that 
must  be  considered.  In  the  preceding  cases  we  assumed  that 
the  rate  of  accumulation  in  I  was  equal  to  V2s  I,  and  also  that 
it  remained  constant  from  year  to  year.  We  changed  only  the 
proportion  in  which  this  accumulated  capital  was  divided  into 
variable  and  constant  capital.  We  then  had  three  cases: 

1)  I(t+v,d  equals  IIC,  which  is  therefore  smaller  than  I(T+i). 
This  must  always  be  so,  otherwise  I  does  not  accumulate. 

2)  I(V+i/tS)  is  greater  than  IIC.  In  this  case  the  replacement 
is  effected  Dy  adding  a  corresponding  portion  of  IIg  to  IIC,  so 
that  this  sum  becomes  equal  to  I(T+i/lg).  Here  the  replacement 
for  II  is  not  a  simple  reproduction  of  its  constant  capital,  but 
accumulation,  an  augmentation  of  its  constant  capital  hy  that 
portion  of  its  surplus-product  which  it  exchanges  for  means  of 
production  of  I.  This  augmentation  implies  at  the  same  time 
a  corresponding  addition  to  variable  capital  II  out  .of  its  own 
surplus-product. 

3)  I(V-f'/,s)  is  smaller  than  IIC.  In  this  case  II  does  not  fully 
reproduce  its  constant  capital  by  means  of  exchange  and  must 
make  good  the  deficit  by  purchase  from  I.  But  this  does  not 
entail  any  further  accumulation  of  variable  capital  II,  since  its 
constant  capital  is  fully  reproduced  only  by  this  operation. 
On  the  other  hand  that  part  of  capitalists  I  who  accumulate 
only  additional  money-capital,  have  already  accomplished  a  por¬ 
tion  of  this  accumulation  by  thi3  transaction. 

The  premise  of  simple  reproduction,  that  I<T+»)  is  equal  to 
IIC,  is  not  only  incompatible  with  capitalist  production,  although 
this  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  in  an  industrial 
cycle  of  10-11  years  some  yeaT  may  show  a  smaller  total  pro¬ 
duction  than  the  preceding  year,  so  that  not  even  simple  repro¬ 
duction  takes  place  compared  to  the  preceding  year.  Besides 
that,  considering  the  natural  annual  increase  in  population 
simple  reproduction  could  take  place  only  to  the  extent  that 
a  correspondingly  larger  number  of  unproductive  servants  would 
partake  of  the  1,500  representing  the  aggregate  surplus-value.  But 
accumulation  of  capital,  real  capitalist  production,  would  be 
impossible  under  such  circumstances.  The  fact  of  capitalist  ac¬ 
cumulation  therefore  excludes  the  possibility  of  IIC  being  equal 
to  I(v+g).  Nevertheless  it  might  occur  even  with  capitalist  accu¬ 
mulation  that  in  consequence  of  the  course  taken  by  the  proc¬ 
esses  of  accumulation  during  a  preceding  series  of  periods  of 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  525 


production  IIC  might  become  not  only  equal  but  even  bigger  than 
I(v+8).  This  would  mean  an  over-production  in  II  and  could  not 
be  adjusted  in  any  other  way  than  by  a  great  crash,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  which  some  capital  of  II  would  got  transferred  to  I. 

Nor  does  it  alter  the  relation  of  I(T+S)  to  IIC  if  a  portion  of 
constant  capital  II  reproduces  itself,  as  happens  for  instance  in 
the  use  of  home-grown  seeds  in  agriculture.  This  portion  of  II0 
is  no  more  to  be  taken  into  consideration  in  the  exchange  bet¬ 
ween  I  and  II  than  is  Ie.  Nor  does  it  change  matters  if  a  part 
of  the  products  of  II  is  capable  of  entering  into  I  as  means  of 
production.  It  is  covered  by  a  part  of  the  means  of  production 
supplied  by  I,  and  this  portion  must  be  deducted  on  both  sides 
at  the  outset,  if  we  wish  to  examine  in  pure  and  unobscured 
form  the  exchange  between  the  two  large  classes  of  social  pro¬ 
duction,  the  producers  of  means  of  production  and  the  produc¬ 
ers  of  articles  of  consumption. 

Hence  under  capitalist  production  I(T+S)  cannot  be  equal 
to  IIC,  in  other  words,  the  two  cannot  balance  in  mutual  ex¬ 
change.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I^_  is  taken  as  that  portion  of  Is 


which  is  spent  by  capitalists  I  as  revenue, 


(t+-j  )  may 


be  equal  to,  larger,  or  smaller  than,  II0.  But  I  ^  must  al- 

(V+I  ) 


ways  be  smaller  than  II(e+B)  by  as  much  as  that  portion  of  IIS 
which  must  be  consumed  under  all  circumstances  by  capitalist 
class  II. 

It  must  be  noted  that  in  this  exposition  of  accumulation  the 
value  of  the  constant  capital  is  not  presented  accurately  so  far 
as  that  capital  is  a  part  of  the  value  of  the  commodity-capital 
it  helped  to  produce.  The  fixed  portion  of  the  newly  accumu¬ 
lated  constant  capital  enters  into  the  commodity-capital  only 
gradually  and  periodically,  according  to  the  different  natures 
of  these  fixed  elements.  Therefore  whenever  raw  materials,  semi¬ 
finished  goods,  etc.,  enter  in  huge  quantities  into  the  produc¬ 
tion  of  commodities,  the  commodity-capital  consists  for  the 
most  part  of  replacements  of  the  circulating  constant  components 
and  of  the  variable  capital.  (On  account  of  the  specific  turnover  of 
the  circulating  component  parts  this  way  of  presenting  the  matter 
may  nevertheless  be  adopted.  It  is  then  assumed  that  the  circulat¬ 
ing  portion  together  with  the  portion  of  value  of  the  fixed  capital 
transferred  to  it  is  turned  over  so  often  during  the  year  that  the 
aggregate  sum  of  the  commodities  supplied  is  equal  in  value  to  all 
the  capital  entering  into  the  annual  production.)  But  wherever 


526 


REPRODUCTION  AND  CIRCULATION  OF  SOCIAL  CAPITAL 


only  auxiliary  materials  are  used  for  mechanical  industry,  and 
no  raw  material,  there  the  labour  element,  equal  to  v,  must  re¬ 
appear  in  the  commodity-capital  as  its  larger  constituent.  While 
in  the  calculation  of  the  rate  of  profit  the  surplus-value  is  figured 
on  the  total  capital,  regardless  of  whether  the  fixed  components 
periodically  transfer  much  or  little  value  to  the  product,  the  fixed 
portion  of  constant  capital  is  to  be  included  in  the  calculation 
of  the  value  of  any  periodically  created  commodity-capital  only 
to  the  extent  that  on  an  average  it  yields  value  to  the  product 
on  account  of  wear  and  tear. 


IV.  SUPPLEMENTARY  REMARKS 

The  original  source  of  the  money  for  II  is  v  +  s  of  the  gold 
industry  I  exchanged  for  a  part  of  IIC.  The  v-i-s  of  the  producer 
of  gold  does  not  enter  into  II  only  to  the  extent  that  he  accumu¬ 
lates  surplus-value  or  converts  it  into  means  of  production  I, 
i.e.,  to  the  extent  that  he  expands  his  production.  On  the  other 
hand,  since  the  accumulation  of  money  on  the  part  of  the  gold 
producer  himself  leads  ultimately  to  reproduction  on  an  extended 
scale,  a  portion  of  the  surplus-value  of  gold  production  not  spent 
as  revenue  passes  as  additional  variable  capital  of  the  gold  pro¬ 
ducer  into  II,  promotes  here  the  formation  of  new  hoards  or  sup¬ 
plies  new  means  with  which  to  buy  from  I  without  selling  to  it  di¬ 
rect.  From  the  money  derived  from  this  I(T+B)  of  the  production 
of  gold  that  portion  of  the  gold  must  be  deducted  which  certain 
branches  of  production  II  need  as  raw  material,  etc.,  in  short 
as  an  element  for  the  replacement  of  their  constant  capital. 
An  element  for  the  preliminary  formation  of  hoards  — for  the 
purpose  of  future  extended  reproduction — exists  in  the  ex¬ 
change  between  I  and  II:  for  I  only  if  part  of  I,  is  sold  one- 
sidedly,  without  a  balancing  purchase,  to  II  and  serves  there  as 
additional  constant  capital  II;  for  II,  when  the  same  is  the  case 
on  the  part  of  I  for  additional  variable  capital;  furthermore, 
if  a  part  of  the  surplus-value  spent  by  I  as  revenue  is  not  covered 
by  IIC,  hence  a  part  of  IIS  is  bought  with  it  and  thus  converted 
into  money.  If  1^  ,  ^  is  greater  than  IIC,  then  IIC  need  not  for 

its  simple  reproduction  replace  in  commodities  from  I  what  I 
consumed  out  of  II8.  The  question  arises  to  what  extent  hoarding 
can  take  place  within  the  sphere  of  exchange  of  capitalists  II 
among  themselves,  an  exchange  which  can  consist  only  of  a 


ACCUMULATION  AND  REPRODUCTION  ON  AN  EXTENDED  SCALE  527 


mutual  exchange  of  II,.  We  know  that  direct  accumulation 
takes  place  within  II  by  the  direct  conversion  of  a  portion  of 
II,  into  variable  capital  (just  as  in  I  a  portion  of  I,  is  directly 
converted  into  constant  capital).  In  the  various  age  categories 
of  accumulation  within  the  various  lines  of  business  of  II,  and 
for  the  individual  capitalists  in  each  line  of  business,  the  matter 
is  explained  mutatis  mutandis  in  the  same  way  as  in  I.  Some 
are  still  in  the  stage  of  hoarding,  and  sell  without  buying;  the 
others  are  on  the  point  of  actual  expansion  of  reproduction, 
and  buy  without  selling.  The  additional  variable  money-capital 
is,  true  enough,  first  invested  in  additional  labour-power,  but 
this  buys  means  of  subsistence  from  the  hoarding  owners  of  the 
additional  articles  of  consumption  entering  into  the  consumption 
of  the  labourers.  From  these  owners,  pro  rata  to  their  hoard 
formation,  the  money  does  not  return  to  its  point  of  departure. 
They  hoard  it. 


NAME  INDEX 


A 

Adams,  William  (1797-1872)— 174, 
175. 

Alembert  d' ,  Jean  U  Rond  (1717- 
1783)— 80. 

Arrivabene,  Giovanni  (1787-1881)  — 
442. 


B 

Bailey,  Samuel  (1791-1870)  — 109, 
510. 

Bakewell,  Robert  (1725-1795)— 241 . 

Barton,  John  (the  end  of  the  18th, 
and  the  beginning  of  the  19th  cen- 
tury) — 230,  231. 

Bessemer,  Henry,  Sir  (1813-1898) — 
243. 


C 

Carey,  Henry  Charles  (1793-1879) — 
360. 

Chalmers,  Thomas  (1780-1847) — 158. 

Cherbuliez,  Antoine  Elisee  (1797- 
1869)— 395. 

Chuprov,  A.  /.  (1842-1908)— 54. 

Corbet,  Thomas — 141. 

Courcelle-Seneuil,  Jean  Gustave 
(1813-1892)— 243. 

D 

Destutt  de  Tracy,  Antoine  Louis 
Claude,  Comte  (1754-1836) — 448, 
484,  485,  486,  487,  488,  489,  490, 
491,  492. 

Drummond,  V.A.W  (1833-1907) — 
519,  520. 

Dupont  de  Nemours,  Pierre  Samuel 
(1739-1817)— 194. 

E 

Edmonds,  Thomas  (1803-1889) — 14. 


F 

Fitzmaurice — 182. 

Fullarton,  John  (1780-1849)— 502. 

G 

Gooch,  T.— 182. 

Good,  W.  Walter— 239. 

H 

Hodgskin,  Thomas  (1787-1869)— 14, 
246. 

Holdsworlh,  W.  A.  — 176,  180 

K 

Kirchhof,  Friedrich — 182,  244,  248, 
249  ,  251,  259. 

Kozak,  Theophil — 6. 

L 

Lalor,  John  (1814-1856)— 143,  145, 
146. 

Lardner,  Dionysius  (1793-1859) — 173, 
174,  182,  183,  184. 

Lassalle,  Ferdinand  (1825-1864) — 8, 

Laveleye,  Emile  Louis  Victor  de 
(1822-1892)— 247. 

Lavergne,  Leonce  de  (1809-1880) — 
241. 

Lavoisier,  Antoine  Laurent  (1743- 
1794)  — 15,  16,  17. 

Le  Trosne,  Guillaume  Francois  (1728- 
1780)  — 194. 

Linguel,  Simon  Nicolas  Henry  (1736- 
1794)— 364. 

List,  Friedrich  (1789-1846)-7. 

M 

Mably,  Gabriel  Bonnot  de  (1709- 
1785)— 364. 

MacCulloch,  John  Ramsay  (1789- 
1864) -12,  251,  394. 


530 


NAME  INDEX 


Macleod,  Henry  Dunning  (1821-1902) 
—231. 

Malthus,  Thomas  Robert  (1766-1834) 
—444. 

Marx-Aveltng,  Eleanor  (Tussy)  (1855 
-1898)— 5,  7. 

Marx,  Jenny  (1814-1881) — 20. 

Marx,  Karl  (1818-1883)  —  1,  2  3, 

4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13, 
14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  80,  157, 
206,  288,  312,  350,  364,  417. 

Meyer,  Rudolf  Hermann  (1839-1899) 
-6,  7. 

Mill,  James  (1773-1836) — 251,  510. 

Mill,  John  Stuart  (1806-1873)  —  231. 

Muller,  Adam  Heinrich  (1779-1829) 
—  189. 

N 

Newman,  Samuel  Phillips  (1797- 
1842)— 158. 


O 

Owen,  Robert  (1771-1858)  — 13. 


P 

Patterson,  Robert  (1821-1886) — 231. 
Potter,  A.  — 190. 

Priestley,  Joseph  (1733-1804) — 15, 
16,  17. 

Proudhon ,  Pierre  Joseph  (1809-1865) 
—6,  14,  394. 


Q 

Quesnay,  Francois  (1694-1774)  — 102, 
134,  193,  194,  202,  346,  363, 
364,  366,  374. 


B 

Ramsay,  George  (1800-1871) — 162. 

231,  394,  395,  437,  440,  441. 
Rau,  Karl  Heinrich  (1792-1870) — 7 
Ravenstone,  Piercy  (d.  1830) — 14. 
Ricardo,  David  (1772-1823)  — 10,  11, 
12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  153, 
219,  221,  223,  227,  230,  231,  301, 
394,  484. 


Rodbertus,  Johann  Karl  (1805-1875) 
—6,  7,  8,  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15, 
17,  18,  415 

Roscher,  Wilhelm  (1817-1894)— 377. 

Roscoe,  Henry  Enfield,  Sir  (1833- 
1915)— 15. 

Russell,  John,  Lord  ( 1792-1878)— 12. 

S 

Say,  Jean  Baptiste  (1767-1832) — 
153,  394,  444. 

Schafflc,  Albert  Eberhard  Friedrich 
(1831-1903)— 6,  513. 

Scheele,  Karl  Wilhelm  (1742-1786) — 
15,  16. 

Schorlemmer,  Karl  (1834-1892) — 15. 

Scrope,  George  Julius  Poulelt  (1797- 
1876)— 187,  190 

Senior,  Nassau  William  (1790-1864) 
-442. 

Sismondi,  Jean  Charles  Leonard  Si- 
monde  de  (1773-1842)  — 18,  114, 
143,  395,  444. 

Smith,  Adam  (1723-1790) — 3,  6,  9, 
10,  13,  15,  143,  170,  193-219, 
221,  223  ,  231,  349,  364-389,  392, 
393,  394,  412,  430,  437,  438,  441, 
479  480  491  498 

Soetbeer,  Georg  Adolph  ( 1814-1892)  — 
474. 

Stein,  Lorem  von  (1815-1890) — 165. 

Steuart,  James  (1712-1780) — 9. 

S  torch,  Heinrich  Friedrich  (1766- 
1835)— 152,  395,  437,  438. 

Sturrock,  Archibald — 183. 

T 

Thompson,  William  (1785-1833) — 
14,  326,  328 

Tooke,  Thomas  (1774-1858)— 115,  334 
477,  479,  480 

Turgot,  Anne  Robert  (1727-1781) — 
194  346  364. 

Tylor,  Edward  Burnett  (1832-1917) 
—443 

W 

Wayland,  Francis  (1796-1865) — 229. 

Williams,  R  P  — 173,  183. 

Z. 

Zeller,  J. — 6. 


INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES 

QUOTED  IN  CAPITAL.  VOLUME  II 


I.  AUTHORS 


A 

ADAMS,  W.  B.  Roads  and  Rails 
and  Their  Sequences ,  Physical  and 
Moral .  Loudon,  1862.  — 174,  175, 

B 

(BAILEY,  Samuel.)  A  Critical  Dis¬ 
sertation  on  the  Nature,  Measures, 
and  Causes  of  Value;  Chiefly  in 
Reference  to  the  Writings  of  Mr. 
Ricardo  and  His  Followers  By 
the  Author  of  Essays  on  the  For¬ 
mation  and  Publication  of  Opini¬ 
ons,  etc.  London,  1825. — 109. 

BARTON,  John.  Observations  on  the 
Circumstances  Which  Influence  the 
Condition  of  the  Labouring  Classes 
of  Society.  London,  1817. — 230. 

C 

CHALMERS,  Thomas.  On  Poli¬ 
tical  Economy  in  Connection  with 
the  Moral  State  and  Moral  Pros¬ 
pects  of  Society.  2nd  ed.,  Glas- 
t?ow,  1832.— 158. 

CHUPROV,  A.  Railroading,  Part  1. 
Moscow,  1875.  (A.  HynpoB.  XCe- 
jieaHodopootcHoe  xoanucmso.) — 54 

CORBET,  Thomas.  An  Inquiry  into 
the  Causes  and  Modes  of  the  Wealth 
of  Individuals',  or  the  Principles  of 
Trade  and  Speculation  Explained. 
London,  1841. — 141. 

COURCELLE-SENEUIL,  J.  G.  Tra- 
ite  theorique  et  pratique  des  en¬ 
terprises  industrielles,  commercia- 


lles  et  agricoles  ou  Manuel  des 
affaires,  2  6d.,  Paris,  1857.— 243. 

D 

DESTUTT  DE  TRACY,  Antoine. 
Elements  d' ideologic.  IVe  et  V« 
Parties.  Traite  de  la  volonte  et  de 
ses  effets  Paris,  1826.-484-492. 

DUPONT  DE  NEMOURS,  Pierre 
Samuel.  Maximes  du  docteur  Quet- 
nay,  ou  Resume  de  ses  principes 
d'economie  sociale.  In:  Collection 
des  principaux  Economistes.  V.  II. 
Physiocrates.  Partie  I.  Ed.  Daire. 
Paris,  1846—194. 

G 

GOOD,  W.  Walter.  Political,  Agri¬ 
cultural  and  Commercial  Falla¬ 
cies  London,  1866.— 239,  240. 

H 

HODGSKIN,  Thomas.  Popular  Po¬ 
litical  Economy.  London,  1827. — 
246 

HOLDSWORTH,  W.  A.  The  Law  of 
Landlord  and  Tenant.  London, 
1857.  — 176,  180. 

K 

KIRCHHOF,  Friedrich.  Handbuch 
der  landwirtschaft  lichen  Betrieb- 
slehre.  Etn  Leitfaden  fur  prakli- 
sche  Landwlrlhe  zur  zweckmassi- 
gen  Einrichtung  und  Verwaltung 
der  Landguler  Dresden,  1852. — 
182,  244,  248-51,  259. 


532 


INDEX  OP  AUTHORITIES 


L 

LARDNER,  Dionysius.  Railway 
Economy:  A  Treatise  on  the  New 
Art  of  Transport,  Its  Manage¬ 
ment,  Prospects  and  Relations, 
Commercial,  Financial,  and  Social. 
London,  1850.— 173,  182-184. 

LAVELEYE,  Emile  de,  Essai  sur 
I' Economic  Rurale  de  la  Belgique. 
2  id.,  Paris,  Bruxelles,  Leipzig, 
1863.— 247 

LAVERGNE,  L4once  de.  The  Rural 
Economy  of  England,  Scotland, 
and  Ireland,  London,  1855  — 241. 

LE  TROSNE,  Guillaume  Francois. 
De  I'Interit  social.  In:  Collection 
des  principaux  Economistes.  VII, 
Physiocrates.  Partie  II.  Ed.  Dai- 
re.  Paris,  1846. — 194. 


M 

MARX,  Karl.  Das  Kapital.  Krilik 
der  politischen  Oekonomie,  Bd.  I. — 
2,  11,  13,  29,  69,  81,  116,  120,  129, 
144,  157,  160.  167,  177,  185,  191, 
234-05,  207,  219,  229,  310,  312, 
324,  328,  335-36,  346,  350,  357, 
364,  400,  417,  442,  505,  510. 

— Das  Kapital.  Kritik  der  polltl- 
schen  Oekonomie.  Bd.  III. — 2  10, 
16,  19. 

— Lohnarbeit  und  Kapital.  In:  Neue 
Rheinische  Zeitung.  Nr.  264,  269. 
Koln,  1849.— 7. 

— Mis'ere  de  la  Philosophic.  Reponse 
a  la  Philosophic  de  la  Mis'ere 
par  M.  Proudhon.  Paris-Bruxel- 
les,  1847—7,  14,  18. 

—  Theorien  uber  den  Mehrwerl. — 

2,  18. 

— Zur  Kritik  der  politischen  Oeko¬ 
nomie.  Berlin,  1859  — 2,  5,  8, 
9,  12,  19,  350. 

MEYER,  Rudolf.  Der  Emancipatt- 
onskampf  des  vierten  Standee.  I. 
Bd.  Berlin,  1874.-6-7. 

MOLLER,  Adam  Heinrich.  Die  Ele¬ 
ments  der  S taatskunst  2.  Theil, 
Berlin,  1809. — 189. 


N 

NEWMAN,  Samuel  Phillips.  Ele¬ 
ments  of  Political  Economy.  An¬ 
dover  and  New  York,  1835. — 
158. 

P 

POTTER,  A.  Political  Economy :  its 
Objects,  Uses ,  and  Principles :  con¬ 
sidered  with  Reference  to  the  Con¬ 
dition  of  the  American  People. 
With  a  Summary,  for  the  Use  of 
Students.  New  York,  1840. — 190. 

Q 

QUESNAY,  Frangois.  Analyse  du 
Tableau  Economique.  In:  Collec¬ 
tion  des  principaux  Economistes. 
V.  II.  Physiocrates.  Partie  I.  Ed. 
Daire.  Paris,  1846.— 102,  134, 

194  ,  227  ,  346  ,  364,  374. 

— Dialogues  sur  le  Commerce  et  les 
Travaux  des  Artisans.  In:  Collec¬ 
tion  des  principaux  Economistes. 
V.  II.  Physiocrates.  Partie  I.  Ed. 
Daire.  Paris,  1846.— 134,  346. 

R 

RAMSAY,  George.  An  Essay  on  the 
Distribution  of  Wraith.  Edin¬ 
burgh,  1836.-394-395,  440,  441. 

RICARDO,  David.  On  the  Principles 
of  Political  Economy,  and  Taxa¬ 
tion.  3rd  ed.  London,  1821. — 
153,  219,  227,  230,  231,  394. 

RODBERTUS-JAGETZOW,  Karl. 
Briefe  und  sozialpolitische  Auf- 
sdtze.  Hrsg.  von  Dr.  R.  Meyer. 
Berlin,  1881. — 6. 

—  Das  Kapital-  Hrsg.  v.  Theophil 
Kozak,  Berlin,  1884. — 6. 

—  Einige  Briefe  von  Dr.  Rodbertus 
an  J  Z.  In:  Zeitschrift  fur  die  ge- 
samte  Staatswissenschaft.  Hrsg. 
von  Fricker-Leipzig,  Schaffle-Stut- 
tgart,  A.  Wagner-Berlin.  Bd.  35. 
Tiibingen,  1879. — 6. 

— Soziale  Briefe  an  von  Kirchmann. 
Dritter  Brief:  Widerlegung  der 


INDEX  OP  AUTHORITIES 


533 


Ricardoschen  Lehre  von  der  Grunt- 
rente  und  Bergrundung  einer  neuen 
Rententheorie.  Berlin,  1851. — 7,8. 

— Zur  Erkenntniss  unsrer  staatswirt- 
tchaft  lichen  Zustande.  Heft  I. 
Neubrandenburg  und  Fried  land, 
1842.— 6,  11,  19 

ROSCOE,  H.  F.  undC.  SCHORLEM- 
MER.  Ausfuhrliches  Lehrbuch  der 
Chemie,  Bd.  I.  Braunschweig, 
1887.— 15. 

S 

SAY,  Jean  Baptiste  Traite  d' Econo¬ 
mic  Politique.,  ou  simple  Exposi¬ 
tion  de  la  Mamlre  dont  se  forment, 
se  dislribuent  et  se  consomment  les 
Richesses.  3  4d.,  2  v.  Paris,  1817. 
—153,  394. 

SENIOR,  Nassau  William  Principes 
Fondamentaux  de  l'  Economic 
Politique,  Trad.  J.  Arrivabeue. 
Paris,  1836  — 442 

SISMONDI,  J.  C.  L.  Simonde  de. 
Nouveaux  Principes  d'  Economie 
Politique  ou  de  la  Richesse  dans 
ses  Rapports  avec  la  Population. 
T,  I.  Paris,  1819.  — 18,  114. 

SMITH,  Adam.  An  Inquiry  into  the 
Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth 
of  Nations.  Ed.  Aberdeen,  1848. 
-9,  143,  194-217,  364-71  374-77, 
380,  381,  384,  392,  479-80. 

SOETBEER,  Adolf.  Edelmetall- 
Produktion  und  Werth  verhaltniss 
zwischen  Gold  und  Silber  seit  der 
Entdeckung  Amerika's  bis  zur  Ge- 
genwart.  Ergangzungschaft  Nr  75 
zu  “Petermann's  Mitteilungen.  ” 
Gotha,  1879. — 474. 

STORCH,  Henri.  Cours  d' Economie 
Politique',  ou  Exposition  des  prin¬ 
cipes  qui  delerminent  la  pros  per  ite 
des  nations.  Tome  2.  St.  Peters- 
bourg,  1815. — 395. 

— Considerations  sur  la  nature  du 
revenue  national.  Paris,  1824. — 
395,  438. 

T 

THOMPSON,  William.  An  Inquiry 
into  the  Principles  of  the  Distribu¬ 


tion  of  Wealth,  Most  Conducive 
lo  Human  Happiness,  London, 

1850.  — 14  ,  326-28. 

TOOKE,  Th.  An  Inquiry  into  the 
Currency  Principle ;  the  Connec¬ 
tion  of  the  Currency  with  Prices, 
and  the  Expediency  of  a  Separation 
of  Issue  from  Banking.  London, 
1844  —480. 

TURGOT,  A.  R.  J.  Reflexions  sur 
la  formation  et  la  distribution  des 
richesses.  (1766).  In:  Oeuvres,  6d. 
Daire,  v.  I.  Paris,  1844.— 194, 
346,  364. 

TYLOR,  E.  B.  Researches  into  the 
Early  History  of  Mankind  and 
the  Development  of  Civilisation. 
London,  John  Murray,  1865.— 443. 

W 

WAYLAND,  Francis.  The  Elements 
of  Political  Economy.  Boston, 
1843.  — 229. 

WILLIAMS,  R  P.  On  the  Mainten¬ 
ance  and  Renewal  of  Permanent 
Way.  Minutes  of  proceedings  of 
the  Institution  of  civil  engineers; 
with  abstracts  of  the  Discussions 
V.  XXV,  London,  1866.— 173, 
183. 


II.  ANONYMOUS 

Manara  Dharma  Sastra,  or  the  In¬ 
stitutes  of  Manu  according  to 
the  gloss  of  Kulluka,  comprising 
the  Indian  system  of  duties,  re¬ 
ligious  and  civil.  Verbally  trans¬ 
lated  from  the  original,  with  a 
preface  by  Sir  William  Jones, 
and  collated  with  the  Sanskrit 
text,  by  Graves  Chamney  Haugh- 
ton,  esq.  M.A.F.R.S.,  etc.,  etc.; 
Prof,  of  Hindu  literature  in  the 
East  India  College.  3.  ed.  Madras, 
1863.— 241. 

The  Source  and  Remedy  of  the  Nation¬ 
al  Difficulties,  Deduced  from  Prin 
ciples  of  Political  Economy,  in 
A  letter  to  Lord  John  Russell. 
London,  1821. — 12. 


534 


INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES 


III.  NEWSPAPERS  AND 
PERIODICALS 

Economist.  London,  May  8,  1847. — 
139. 

— June  16,  1866. — 256. 

—June  30,  1866.— 256. 

—July  7,  1866.— 256. 

Money  Market  fie  view.  1867.  — 182. 
Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung,  Organ  der 
Demokratie.  Koln,  1848/49. — 7. 
Zeitschrift  f.  d.  gesamte  Slaatswis- 
senschaft.  Tubingen,  1879.— 6. 


IV.  PARLIAMENTARY  REPORTS 
AND  OTHER  OFFICIAL 
PUBLICATIONS 

East  India  (Madras  and  Orissa  Fa¬ 
mine).  Return  to  an  Address  of 
the  Honourable  The  House  of 
Commons.  July  4,  1867. — 240-41. 

East  India  (Bengal  and  Orissa  Fam¬ 
ine).  Papers  and  Correspondence 
relative  to  the  Famine  in  Bengal 


and  Orissa,  including  the  Report 
of  the  Famine  Commission  and 
the  Minutes  of  the  Lieutenant  Gov. 
ernor  of  Bengal  and  the  Governor 
General  of  India.  May  31,  1867. — 
143-44. 

East  India  (Bengal  and  Orissa  Fam¬ 
ine).  Papers,  relating  to  the 
Famine  in  Behar,  including  Mr. 
F.  R.  Cockerell's  Report.  Part  III. 
May  31,  1867.— 143-44. 

Reports  by  H.  M.  Secretaries  of  Em¬ 
bassy  and  Legation  on  the  Manu¬ 
factures,  Commerce,  etc.,  of  the 
countries  in  which  they  reside. 
London.  No.  8  (1865)  — 245. 

—No.  14  (1879).— 475,  519,  520. 

Report  from  the  Select  Committee 
on  Bank  Acts',  together  with  the 
Proceedings  of  the  Committee,  Mi¬ 
nutes  of  Evidence,  Appendix  and 
Index.  Part  I.  Report  and  Evid¬ 
ence.  July  30,  1857. — 238. 

Royal  Commission  on  Railways  Mi¬ 
nutes  of  Evidence  taken  before 
the  Commissioners,  London,  1867. 
—141,  173,  177,  183.  255. 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


A 

Accumulation  of  capital'. 

— as  aim  and  compelling  motive  of 
industrial  capital— 59,  507; 

— hoarding  as  factor  of  accumula¬ 
tion— 79,  85-86,  123,  477,  493; 
— as  a  means  to  expand  production 
of  surplus-value — 80,  123; 

— as  capitalisation  of  surplus-value 
—82; 

— accumulation  of  money-capital  in 
bank  deposits  and  securities — 86, 

123; 

— money  reserve  fund — 86,  167,  175, 
324,  351,  453; 

— and  growth  of  productive  power 
of  labour — 360; 

— necessity  of  accumulation  under 
capitalism— 498-99; 

— simple  reproduction  as  an  actual 
factor  of — 396-99; 

— expenditure  of  surplus-labour  in 
accumulation— 500; 

— extension  of  business  without  ac¬ 
cumulation — 504; 

—  rate  of  accumulation — 524. 

Advanced  capital : 

— minimum  magnitude  of— 81,  85, 
86,  110,  123,  262; 

— time  for  which  fixed  capital  is 
advanced — 165,  171; 

— and  capital-value  turned  over  an¬ 
nually — 187; 

— and  terms  of  payment — 191; 

— and  distribution  of  social  surplus- 
value — 220; 

— and  duration  of  productive  acts — 
232,  233,  236; 

— and  length  of  working  period — 235, 
320; 

— and  credit  system— 237,  238; 

— and  interruptions  in  working  peri¬ 
od— 244-45; 


— money-form  of — 257,  259-60,  268, 

346,  361; 

— advancement  of  variable  capital 
-302,  382,  383; 

Agriculture'. 

—commodity  character  of  farmer’s 

economy — 118; 

—  natural  economy — 118,  119; 

—  production  of  raw  materials — 146; 
— expansion  of  production — 176; 

— Quesnay  on  capital  employed  in 

—193; 

— taxes  and  rent  are  detrimental  to 

—238-39; 

—  working  period  in— 239,  244; 
—difference  between  production  time 

and  working  time  in— 244,  245, 

246,  250; 

—  condition  of  agricultural  labour¬ 
er— 245; 

—shortening  of  turnover  time  in — 

246- 48; 

—  production  time  and  forestry — 

247- 48,  250; 

— turnover  cycle  in — 251; 

— economic  and  natural  process  of 
reproduction  in— 363; 

— employment  of  labour-power  in 
—454,  485; 

—  reproduction  of  constant  capital 
in — 525. 

See  also  Cattle-breeding. 


Anarchy  of  capitalist  production: 

—and  waste  of  productive  forces — 
175; 

— and  disturbances  in  production — 
319; 

— and  over-production — 473; 

— and  crises— 499. 

See  also  Crises. 

Arabs.  Effect  of  world  trade  on — 35. 


536 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


B 

Banks: 

— deposits — 86,  123,  349,  353,  497; 
— concentration  of  banking  opera¬ 
tions — 137; 

— withdrawal  of  deposits  and  mo¬ 
ney-market—  295; 

— and  circulation  of  money-capital 
—350,  416-17; 

—assets  of — 349,  353. 

Bill  of  exchange: 

— accumulation  of  money-capital  in 
form  of — 86. 

Bourgeoisie — See  Capitalist. 

See  also  Capital,  Capitalist  mode 
of  production,  Classes. 

G 

Capital: 

— augmentation  of  capital  as  con¬ 
dition  of  its  preservation — 81; 

— as  a  value  generating  value — 83; 
—characteristic  features  of  social 
capital — 100,  108-109. 
—revolutions  in  value  of  social  cap¬ 
ital-109-10,  111; 

—can  be  understood  only  as  mo¬ 
tion — 109; 

— movement  of  social  capital — 355, 
356; 

— social  capital  as  joint-stock  cap¬ 
ital  of  all  individual  capitalists— 
437. 

See  also  Advanced  capital,  Money, 
Money-capital,  Productive  capi¬ 
tal. 

Capital  of  circulation: 

— as  opposed  to  productive  capit¬ 
al— 196,  200,  203,  208,  210. 

See  also  Circulation,  Commodity- 
capital,  Money-capital. 

Capitalist: 

— growth  of  Individual  consump¬ 
tion  of — 70; 

— as  personification  of  Industrial 
capital— 121; 

—  and  labourer — 414,  447,  518-19; 
—consumption  and  revenue  of — 
423-24; 


— and  circulation  of  money — 337; 
— and  variable  capital — 443,  451; 
— industrial  capitalist  and  idle  ca¬ 
pitalist  in  Destutt  de  Tracy — 484- 

92; 

See  also  Capital,  Capitalist  mode 
of  production,  Classes. 

Capitalist  mode  of  production: 

— value  of  newly  produced  com¬ 
modity  is  higher  than  that  of 
its  elements  of  production — 17, 
26,  120; 

— purchase  aud  sale  of  labour-power 
as  a  basic  condition  of — 17,  30, 
36-37,  77,  84,  119-20,  349,  357, 
389; 

— and  separation  of  labour-power 
from  means  of  production — 32; 
— capitalist  production  and  commod¬ 
ity  production— 36,  113,  119, 

499,  504; 

— labourers  and  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  as  factors  of  production — 34- 

35; 

—and  revolutionisatlon  of  econom¬ 
ic  structure  of  Bociety — 36,  57; 
compelling  motive  of— 58-59,  70, 
80,  99,  123,  157,  355.  389,  449, 
507; 

—vulgar  political  economy  on  cap¬ 
italist  process  of  production — 

68; 

—  quantity  of  commodities  created 
by  capitalist  production  depends 
on  the  scale  of  production  — 
77; 

— and  technique — 36,  57,  79,  110, 
173; 

—continuity  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion — 105,  108,  285; 

— and  evolution  of  agricultural  la¬ 
bourer  into  wage-labourer — 119- 


exchange— 120; 

. — and  market — 154-55; 

— anarchy  of  production  and  waste 
of  productive  forces — 175,  320, 
473; 

—  contradictions  of — 320; 

— crisis  and  abnormal  conditions 
of  process  of  production — 322; 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


537 


— unproductive  expenses  ( faux  fra- 
is)  of— 134,  139,  142,  152,  350; 
— and  credit — 350; 

— and  condition  of  working-class— 
414-15; 

— and  foreign  trade — 474; 

— accidental  character  of  balance 
in — 499; 

— method  of  analysing— 512,  513; 
Cattle-breeding — 239,  241,  249,  250; 
— use  of  replacement-fund  to  ex¬ 
pand  production  in — 176; 
means  of  reducing  working  period 
in— 241,  246,  247,  248. 

See  also  Agriculture. 

Centralisation  of  capitals: 

— one-sided  accumulation  and  cen¬ 
tralisation  of  money-capital,  and 
productive  capital — 354; 

— scale  of  production  and — 360; 

— as  a  changed  distribution  of  in¬ 
dividual  capitals — 360; 

China: 

— effect  of  capitalist  world  trade 
on— 36; 

— Chinese  artisans — 105; 
—commodity  production  of  Chinese 
peasants — 113. 

Circuit  of  capital: 

— purpose  and  outcome  of— 47,  58, 
103; 

— interruptions  in  circuit  of  capi¬ 
tal — 50,  106; 

—  fixation  of  capital  for  certain 
lengths  of  time  in  various  phases 
of— 50; 

— as  a  unity  of  circulation  and  pro¬ 
duction— 60,  103,  106; 

— disturbances  in  it  and  reserve 
fund — 87; 

— three  formulas  of — 103; 

— as  unity  of  its  three  forms— 103 
106-07; 

— and  its  turnover— 158,  311; 

— in  production  of  precious  metals — 
331; 

— circuit  of  social  capital — 356,  358; 
Circulation: 

— production  of  commodities  and 
circulation  of  commodities—  33; 


—of  commodities  under  capitalism 
—33,  35,  61,  129,  393; 

—of  surplus-value  and  capital- 
value— 42,  44,  68-69; 

— of  capital  as  part  of  general 
circulation  of  commodities — 60- 
61,  71; 

— within  the  circuit  of  productive 
capital — 65-66; 

— of  surplus-value  in  simple  repro¬ 
duction— 67,  68,  71-72; 

— and  formation  of  a  fund  for  pur¬ 
chase  and  payment — 78; 

— money-capital  and  speed  of — 112; 
— of  industrial  capital  and  world- 
market — 113; 

— process  of  circulation  and  devel¬ 
opment  of  commodity  produc¬ 
tion—  113-14; 

— amount  of  money  required  for — 
116,  288,  329,  333,  335-36,  345, 
349; 

— as  a  phase  of  reproduction  pro¬ 
cess— 129,  131,  355; 

—and  formation  of  supply— 147, 
148,  151; 

— of  portion  of  capital-value  fixed 
in  instruments  of  labour— 161, 
166; 

— commodity-capital  and  money- 
capital  as  capital  of  circulation 
—196,  198,  209; 

—improvement  in  means  of  trans¬ 
portation  and  time  of — 255, 
256; 

— of  money  and  wages — 418,  482; 
— credit  and  metallic  circulation — 
504. 

See  also  Exchange. 

Circulating  capital: 

— money-form  of— 87,  286; 

— circulation  of  capital-value — 161, 
171; 

— difference  between  it  and  fixed 
capital— 161,  164,  171,  192,  199- 
200,  204,  283; 

— time  for  which  it  is  advanced — 
169; 

— additional  investment  of — 235, 

240,  263; 

— and  methods  to  reduce  time  of 
turnover  in  agriculture — 246-48; 


538 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


— changes  in  amount  of — 262; 

— turnover  of  constant  and  variable 
part  of — 298. 

C lasses: 

— capitalist  reproduction  as  repro¬ 
duction  of  class  of  wage-labour¬ 
ers  and  class  of  capitalists— 33, 
384,  396,  420; 

—exploitation  of  working-class  un¬ 
der  capitalism — 37,  359,  513,  519- 
20;  . 

— industrial  capital  and  class  an¬ 
tagonism  between  capitalists  and 
wage-labourers — 57; 

—  working-class  and  crises  of  over¬ 
production — 321,  414-15. 

See  also  Capitalist,  Peasantry. 

Commodi  ty: 

—and  money— 17,  29,  47,  358; 

— universal  character  of  commodity 
production  under  capitalism — 32, 
36,  119,  138-39,  146,  499,  505; 
— and  division  of  social  labour — 36; 
— transformation  of  commodity  pro¬ 
duction  into  capitalist  proauc¬ 
tion — 36,  113; 

— produced  capitalistically  and  sur¬ 
plus-value— 37; 

— as  element  of  commodity-capi¬ 
tal— 37,  40,  96,  146; 

— hoarding  in  production  of — 85; 

— commodity  production  in  pre¬ 
capitalist  modes  of  production — 
113,  389; 

— purchase  and  sale  with  small 
independent  producers  of  com¬ 
modities — 133,  135; 

—commodity  production  and  capi¬ 
talist  production  with  Adam 
Smith— 392. 

See  also  Commodity-capital. 

Commodity-capital: 

—as  form  of  existence  of  capital- 
value  which  has  produced  sur¬ 
plus-value— 37,  42,  47,  96; 

— realisation  of,  and  separation  of 
surplus-value  and  capital-value— 
43,  90,  95; 

— and  money-capital— 47,  82; 


— as  a  functional  form  of  industrial 
capital  — 49,  57,  82; 

— general  formula  of  its  circuit — 88, 
97; 

— its  circuit  and  that  of  surplus- 
value— 90,  95,  99; 

— and  discrepancy  between  price 
and  value — 94; 

—circuit  of  commodity-capital  and 
its  reproduction— 94; 

— consumption  as  condition  of  its 
circuit— 95,  99,  396  97: 
—depreciation  of — 112; 

—and  commodity-supply— 139,  142, 
145; 

—speedy  growth  of— 505. 

See  also  Commodity. 

Commodity  production — See  Commod¬ 
ity 

Communist  society: 

— book-keeping  in  collective  pro¬ 
duction-137; 

— supply  in  socialised  production — 

472-73; 

— preservation  of  difference  in  be¬ 
haviour  of  means  of  production 
in  labour-process— 200-01; 

— distribution  of  labour-power  and 
means  of  production  in  socialised 
production— 362; 

—reproduction  in — 362,  455,  472, 

473; 

— planning  of  production  in— 362; 
— distribution  of  products  of  depart¬ 
ment  1  in  socialised  production — 
427-28; 

— control  of  society  over  process  of 
reproduction — 472-73. 

Community: 

— and  wage-labour  in  Russia— 34; 
— commodity  production  of — 113, 
117,  390; 

—book-keeping  in  primitive  Indian 
communities — 137; 

— natural  economy  of  primitive  com¬ 
munities — 483. 

Competition : 

—between  commodity-capitals — 78; 
— and  replacement  of  old  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  by  new  ones — 172; 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


539 


— and  minimum  size  of  capital  in¬ 
vestment — 262. 

Concentration: 

—and  costs  of  book-keeping— 137; 
— social  concentration  of  supplies — 
146; 

• — of  transport  industry— 153; 

— concentration  in  era  of  developed 
capitalism— 237,  254; 

— and  credit — 239,  497; 

— of  centres  of  production  and  mar¬ 
kets — 254; 

— of  money-capital  in  form  of  banks 
—417. 

Constant  capital: 

—  Division  of  capital  into  fixed  and 
circulating  and  difference  between 
variable  and  constant  capital — 
217,  222; 

— difference  in  turnover  of  constant 
and  variable  part  of  circulating 
capital — 297; 

— employed  and  consumed  in  pro¬ 
duction— 400; 

— production  of  new  constant  capi¬ 
tal-369,  430,  442; 

— as  part  of  value  of  commodity-cap¬ 
ital  it  helped  to  produce — 525. 

Consumption: 

— productive  consumption — 25,  34, 
43,  49,  57-58,  59,  76,  77-78,  160- 
61; 

— of  the  labourer  and  reproduction 
of  labour-power— 35,  59-60,  95, 
211,  356; 

— pre-capitalist  modes  of  produc¬ 
tion  and — 36; 

— individual  consumption  of  labour¬ 
er  as  condition  of  productive 
consumption — 59-60,  77-78,  95, 

167,  211,  356; 

—individual  consumption  of  capi¬ 
talist  and  simple  reproduction— 
66-67,  413,  415; 

— vulgar  political  economy  sees  in 
consumption  the  purpose  of  capi¬ 
talist  production — 70; 

— and  crises  of  over-production — 77, 
78,  414-15; 


— as  condition  of  the  circuit 
of  commodity-capital— 99,  397; 

— individual  consumption-fund — 95, 
211,  372-73. 

See  also  Use-value. 

Co-operation: 

— and  increase  in  productive  power 
of  labour — 144; 

—and  working  period— 237-38. 

Costs  of  circulation: 

— and  value  of  commodities — 131- 
32,  138,  148,  151, 

— and  exploitation  of  workers  em¬ 
ployed  in  trade — 133-34; 

— cost  of  book-keeping — 136; 
—money  and— 137,  350; 

— unproductive  expenses  and  enrich¬ 
ment  of  individual  capitalists — 
139; 

— and  commodity-supply — 140,  141, 
146-47,  150; 

—  replacement  of  unproductive  ex¬ 
penses — 151. 

—  productive  character  of  costs  of 
transportation — 151-52. 

Credit: 

— Money-economy  and  credit-econo 
my— 119; 

— and  supply — 145; 

— and  wrapping  of  real  movement 
of  reproduction  in  mystery — 151; 
— development  of — 185,  237,  325, 
350,  361; 

— development  of,  and  functioning 
of  money  as  capital— 185,  502; 
— development  of,  and  advancing  of 
other  people's  capital — 238; 

— and  concentration  of  capital — 
239,  497; 

— and  different  usances — 256-57; 

— use  of  fluxes  and  refluxes  of  mon¬ 
ey  as  auxiliary  means  of— 483; 
— and  metallic  circulation — 504. 
Credit  system — See  Credit. 

Crises: 

—  Explanation  of  crises  by  under¬ 
consumption  of  working  class — 18, 
414; 


540 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


— attempts  of  bourgeois  economists 
to  prove  the  impossibility  of 
overproduction  under  capitalism 
-75; 

— and  contradiction  between  pro¬ 
duction  and  consumption — 76,  77; 
— manifestations  of — 78; 

— and  renewal  of  equipment — 172; 

— material  basis  of  periodic  crises — 
189; 

— and  material  basis  of  next  turn¬ 
over  cycle— 188; 

— and  unemployment — 319,  414; 

— on  money-market  and  abnormal 
conditions  in  process  of  produc¬ 
tion — 321; 

—  and  wages — 414-15; 

— in  simple  reproduction — 471; 

— possibility  of,  and  conditions  for 
return  to  normal  course  of  re¬ 
production  —499. 

See  also  Anarchy  of  capitalist  pro¬ 
duction,  Cycle. 

Cycle: 

— of  turnovers  of  advanced  capital- 
value — 188-251; 

—of  turnovers  of  fixed  capital,  and 
crises— 188-89; 

—successive  phases  of— 189; 

— of  turnover  in  agriculture— 251; 

—  fluctuations  of  annual  production 
in  industrial  cycle — 525. 

See  also  Criset 

D 

Demand  and  supply: 

— of  industrial  capitalist  and  class 
of  capitalists — 119-22; 

— labourer’s  savings  from  wages  and 
his  demand  for  necessities  of 
life— 120; 

—  of  capitalist  and  turnover  of 
capital— 121; 

—  scale  of  production  and  demand — 
146; 

— volume  of  supply  and  demand — 
148; 

— demand  for  necessities  of  life 
and  their  price— 344 
Depreciation — See  Replacement  of 
capital,  Wear  and  tear. 


Division  of  social  labour: 

— and  commodity  production — 34, 

35; 

— and  increase  in  productive  power 
of  labour — 143; 

— and  working  period — 238. 

E 

England: 

— trade  and  credit  relations  with 
India— 321-22; 

— accumulated  wealth  in  England 
and  Ireland  (according  to  Thomp¬ 
son)— 326-27. 

Exchange: 

— mode  of  production  and  mode 
of— 119; 

— exchange  between  two  depart¬ 
ments  of  social  production — 402- 
06,  417-18,  419-25,  431-32. 

— exchanges  among  dealers  and 
among  dealers  and  consumers — 
479-80. 

— balance  in  exchange— 498-99. 

See  also  Circulation. 

F 

Fixed  capital: 

— peculiar  features  of  circulation 
of— 160,  162,  170,  282-83; 

— and  instruments  of  labour — 162; 
— confusion  in  the  minds  of  bour¬ 
geois  economists  of  properties  in¬ 
herent  in  bodily  form  of  instru¬ 
ments  of  labour  with  properties 
of  fixed  capital — 163; 

— difference  between  it  and  circu¬ 
lating  capital — 160,  163,  170,  191, 
199,  204,  207,  282; 

— and  locally  fixed  instruments  of 
labour — 165,  214-15; 

— scale  of  production  and  magnitude 
of— 168; 

— repairs  of — 177; 

— turnover  time  of,  and  cycle  of 
turnovers  of  advanced  capital — 
188,  251; 

— division  of  capital  into  fixed  and 
circulating  and  difference  between 
constant  and  variable  capital — 
217,  222; 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


541 


— and  prolongation  of  turnover 
time — 240; 

— and  reduction  of  production  time 
_ 243- 

— replacement  of — 173,  186,  453-56. 
See  also  Circulating  capital. 
Productive  capital. 

Foreign  trade — See  Trade. 

G 

Gold: 

— production  of— 48,  330,  474-75; 

— circuit  of  capita}  in  production 
of  precious  metals— 57,  331-32; 

— expenditure  of  labour-power  and 
-social  means  of  production  for 
production  of  gold  and  silver 
as  circulating  media — 350,  361; 

—annual  reproduction  of  gold  and 
silver — 474. 

See  also  Money. 

Ground  rent — See  Rent. 


H 

Hoard — See  Money. 


I 

India: 

— effect  of  capitalist  world  commerce 
on — 35-36; 

— commodity  production  of  Indian 
ryots — 113; 

— book-keeping  in  Indian  commu¬ 
nity — 137. 

—influence  of  American  Civil  War 
on  Indian  economy — 144; 

— famine  of  1866 — 144; 

—famine  and  cattle-breeding  in — 
240-41; 

—trade  and  credit  relations  with 
England — 256; 

—export  of  English  cotton  goods 
and  yarn  to— 321-22. 

Industrial  Capital: 

— definition  of,  and  forms  of  its 
circuit — 50,  82; 

— and  capitalist  character  of  pro¬ 
duction— 57,  61. 


— and  other  kinds  of  capital — 57; 
— and  money-capital — 110; 

— circuit  of,  and  commodity  cir¬ 
culation — 1 12-13; 

— world-market  and  circulation  of — 
113,  118; 

—  its  extended  operation  without 
changing  its  magnitude — 510. 

Insurance: 

— insurance  companies — 140; 

— insurance  of  destructions — 180; 

— insurance-fund  intended  for  re¬ 
production— 368. 

Instruments  of  labour — See  Means  of 
production. 

J 

Joint-stock  capital: 

—as  part  of  social  capital — 99, 
437; 

— nature  of  stocks — 165-66,  353; 

— joint-stock  companies  as  associat¬ 
ed  capitalists— 237,  481; 

— house-building  stock  companies 
— 237-38; 

— stock  companies  and  money-mar¬ 
ket— 361; 

—circulation  of  titles  of  owner¬ 
ship  in  shape  of  stocks — 165-66. 
214. 


L 

Labour: 

—and  creation  of  value — 16,  18, 
20,  29,  390; 

— and  labour-power — 17-20,119; 
—forced— 32,  237,  390,  483; 

— surplus-labour  is  gratuitous  la¬ 
bour  performed  for  capital — 37; 
— capitalist  society  and  wage-labour 
—  108,  120,  348; 

— character  of  labour  performed  in 
sphere  of  circulation — 132-35; 

— labour-process  is  measured  by 
time — 302. 

— two-fold  character  of  labour — 381, 

387. 

See  also  Productive  power  of  labour 


542 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


Labour-power : 

— purchase  and  sale  of,  as  basic 
condition  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion-17,  28,  36,  76,  83,  109,  117- 
19,  348,  357,  388-89; 

—value  of— 19,  118,  384,  386,  387; 
— ratio  of  investment  in  labour-pow¬ 
er  and  means  of  production — 26; 
— transformation  into  commodity — 
30; 

— purchase  and  sale  of,  and  class 
relation  between  capitalist  and  la¬ 
bourer — 31; 

— reproduction  of,  and  consumption 
of  labourer — 35,  59-60,  95,  167, 
209,  356; 

— manner  of  uniting  labour-power 
with  means  of  production  deter¬ 
mines  economic  structure  of  so¬ 
ciety — 36-37; 

— transformation  into  capital — 37, 
90-91,  116-17,  209,  375,  382,  384. 
443; 

— and  self-expansion  of  value— 36- 
38,  76,  215,  219; 

—and  evolution  of  agricultural  pro¬ 
ducer  into  wage  labourer— 119-20; 
— its  exclusion  from  productive  cap¬ 
ital  by  Adam  Smith— 208-09, 
214-16; 

— wage-labourer  advances  his  la¬ 
bour  to  capitalist — 219; 

— unproductive  labourers — 414; 

— employment  of  labour-power  in 
agriculture — 454,  484; 

See  also  Reserve  army  of  wage- 
labourers. 

Landownership: 

— in  Russia  after  abolition  of  serf" 
dom — 32-34; 

—landed  property  has  long  ago 
been  redeemed  by  society — 360. 


M 

Machinery : 

— employment  of,  and  productive 
power  of  labour — 144; 

— as  commodity-capital  and  as  fixed 
capital— 163,  196-97,  229; 


—  peculiarity  of  turnover  of  its 
value — 167,  199; 

— moral  depreciation — 173; 

— wear  and  tear  of  its  different  parts 
and  their  replacement — 174,  453; 
— use  of  replacement  fund  for  im- 

firovement  of — 175; 
abour  of  cleaning  of — 177; 

— repair  work — 177-78; 

— employment  of,  and  working  pe 
riod— 236. 

See  also  Means  of  production,  Tech¬ 
nique 

Market'. 

— World  market  and  circulation  of 
industrial  capital — 112; 

— development  of  world-market  and 
magnitude  of  supplies — 146; 

— and  period  of  selling — 251; 

— transport  and  concentration  of — 
253; 

— transport  and  world-market— 254; 
— crises  on  money-market  and  ab¬ 
normal  conditions  in  process  of 
roduction — 322. 
ee  also  Trade. 

Means  of  production: 

—  production  of,  is  divorced  from 
production  of  other  commodities 
as  a  result  of  division  of  social 
labour — 34-36; 

—manner  of  uniting  labour-power 
with  means  of  production  deter¬ 
mines  economic  structure  of  so¬ 
ciety—  35-37; 

— transfer  of  value  of  instruments 
of  labour  to  product — 53,  160, 
161; 

_ and  labour-power  as  elemonts  in 

labour-process — 82,  167; 

_ instruments  of  labour  and  fixed 

capital — 163; 

— degree  of  fixity  and  durability 
of  instruments  of  labour — 163; 
— confusion  by  bourgeois  economists 
of  properties  of  instruments  of 
labour  in  their  bodily  form  with 
properties  of  capital — 164,  202- 
OS; 

—locally  fixed  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour — 164,  213; 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


543 


— revolutions  in  instruments  of  la¬ 
bour— 173,  188; 

— more  effective  use  of  instruments 
of  labour  without  additional  out¬ 
lay  of  money — 359; 

— products  of  department  I  and 
revenue— 369-70,  372. 

Means  of  subsistence: 

— ClassiGcation  of  means  of  subsis¬ 
tence  of  labourers  by  Adam 
Smith  as  circulating  capital — 215; 
— consumed  by  labourer  and  capi¬ 
talist — 229; 

— consumer  necessities  and  articles 
of  luxury — 407,  415; 

— crisis  and  consumption  of  luxu¬ 
ries — 414; 

— consumption  of  necessities  of  life 
by  unproductive  labourers — 414. 

Mercantilism: 

— Explanation  of  sirrplus-value — 8; 
— preaching  of  productive  consump¬ 
tion— 59-60; 

— circuit  of  money-capital  as  basis 
of— 61-62,  100-01; 

—production  of  commodities  as  nec¬ 
essary  element  in— 61-62. 

Merchant’s  capital: 

— wholesale  trade  and  mass  produc¬ 
tion— 76,  113; 

— and  commodity  production — 113; 
— its  functions  and  economy  of 
working  time  of  society — 134; 

— exploitation  of  trade  workers — 

133-35. 

See  also  Purchase  and  sale,  Trade. 
Money: 

— commodity  and — 17,  29,  48,  358- 
59; 

— transformation  into  capital — 16- 
17,  30-31,  36,  46; 

— functions  of  money  and  functions 
of  capital— 28,  31,  46,  78; 

— as  universal  equivalent — 29,  43, 
44; 

— precious  metals  as — 38; 

— and  use-form  of  commodities — 48, 
58-59; 


— money-making  as  compelling  mo¬ 
tive  of  capitalist  production — 58; 
— as  form  of  existence  of  value — 58, 
59; 

—as  form  of  hoard— 67,  79,  80,  85, 
151,  325,  329; 

— hoard  formation  and  real  accumu¬ 
lation— 80,  85,  122,  325,  455,  476, 
493; 

— credit-money  during  first  epoch 
of  capitalist  production— 114; 

— as  means  of  payment — 115,  190; 
— money-reserve  as  premise  of  money 
circulation — 151; 

— credit  system  and  hoarding — 185; 
— amount  required  for  circulation 
—115,  288,  329,  333.  335-36,  345, 
348; 

— laws  governing  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities  and  money — 115,  333, 
335-36; 

— circuit  of  money  and  its  currency 
—346; 

— expenses  of  producing  or  buying 
money — 361; 

—advanced  by  capitalists  to  serve 
circulation  of  their  commodities — 
—405,  461; 

— mass  of  circulating  money  and 
banks — 417; 

—and  wages— 418; 

— quantity  of  money  accumulated — 
477; 

— fluxes  and  refluxes  of  money  and 
credit  system — 483; 

— and  reproduction — 494. 

See  also  Circulation,  Gold,  Re¬ 
serve  fund. 

Money-capital: 

— formula  of  its  circuit— 25; 

— stages  of  its  circuit — 25-48,  50, 
53; 

— circuit  of,  and  productive  capi¬ 
tal— 34-35,  63-64. 

— and  commodity-capital — 48,  50, 
82; 

— and  industrial  capital — 50,  57,  82; 
— circuit  of,  and  compelling  motive 
of  capitalist  production — 58-59, 
61,  99; 

— circulation  and  circuit  of — 61; 


544 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


— form  of  hoard  as  function  of — 
78-79,  85; 

— within  the  circuit  of  industrial 
capital — 79; 

—latent— 80,  85,  325-26,  353,  454; 
— tying-up  and  setting  free  of — 110- 
12; 

—amount  of,  to  be  advanced — 84, 
110,  263; 

— and  credit  system — 286,  349; 

— plethora  of  money-capital  after 
crisis— 287; 

— and  annual  Bocial  production — 
326; 

— scale  of  capitalist  production  and 
functioning  of — 359; 

— and  banks — 416-17; 

— potential  (virtual)— 494,  495,  496- 
497,  500-04,  506-07; 

— formation  of  new  money-capital — 
513. 

See  also  Advanced,  capital. 

Money-market'. 

— and  rise  in  prices — 300; 

— and  speculative  railway  schemes 
—319; 

— crises  on,  and  abnormal  conditions 
in  process  of  production — 322; 
—and  joint-stock  companies— 361. 
See  also  Credit. 

Monopo  ly: 

— large-scale  production  as  its  basis 
—110. 

N 

Natural  economy: 

— of  small  peasant— 118; 

— natural  economy,  money-economy 
and  credit  economy — 119; 

— natural  economy  of  primitive  com¬ 
munities — 482. 


O 

Organic  composition  of  capital: 

— and  distribution  of  social  surplus- 
walue — 220; 

— as  ratio  of  constant  to  variable 
capital — 220; 


— and  process  of  circulation — 220; 
— conditions  for  the  growth  of — 
518-19; 

See  also  Value-composition  of  cap¬ 
ital. 

Over-production — See  Crises. 

P 

Peasantry : 

— commodity  production  based  on 
serfdom — 110,  117; 

— capitalist  production  and  evo¬ 
lution  of  agricultural  producer 
into  wage-labourer — 119-20; 

— supplies  in  peasant  economy — 
143; 

— disarrangements  caused  among 
small  farmers  and  peasants  by 
prolongation  of  turnover— 240; 

— domestic  peasant  industries — 245; 
— combination  of  agriculture  with 
subsidiary  industries— 245. 

Physiocra  ts — 363-66 ; 

—circuit  of  commodity-capital  as 
basis  of  Quesnay’s  Tableau  Econo- 
mique — 102; 

— Quesnay  on  the  difference 
between  fixed  and  circulating 
capital— 193-94,  202; 

— to  physiocrats,  only  capital  em¬ 
ployed  in  agriculture  is  really 
productive  capital — 193,  216,  229, 
363; 

— origin  of  surplus-value  accord¬ 
ing  to — 216,  223; 

— simple  reproduction  according  to 
Quesnay’s  Tableau  Economique— 
363; 

— system  of,  as  first  systematic  con¬ 
ception  of  capitalist  production- 
364; 

— analysis  of  reproduction  by — 363- 
64; 

— a  vance  (advance)  in — 383,  500. 

Political  economy,  bourgeois: 

— Criticism  of  Rodbertus's  views  on 
surplus-value — 7-18; 

— mercantilists  on  source  of  surplus- 
value — 8; 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


545 


— Adam  Smith  on  surplus-value  and 
its  origin — 8-9; 

— Ricardo  on  value  and  surplus- 
value— 11-12,  17,  221,  393; 

— communism  of  Owen  is  based  on 
Ricardo’s  economic  theory — 

13; 

— on  purpose  of  capitalist  produc¬ 
tion— 70,  94; 

— vulgar  political  economy  gives 
out  circulation  of  capital  as  its 
circuit — 70-71; 

— fetishism  peculiar  to — 127,  227, 

300; 

— sees  in  circulation  the  source  of 
self  expansion  of  value — 127; 

— confusion  of  categories  of  con¬ 
stant  and  variable  capital  with 
categories  of  Exed  and  circulat¬ 
ing  capital — 163,  215,  220,  221, 
228,  229,  441; 

— confusion  of  properties  of  things 
as  such  with  properties  of  capital 
—163,  205; 

— confusion  of  money-capital  and 
commodity-capital  with  circulat¬ 
ing  part  of  productive  capital — 
169,  207; 

— Adam  Smith  on  Exed  and  circu¬ 
lating  capital— 193-217,  230,  364, 
366; 

— Ricardo  on  Exed  and  circulating 
capital — 219-30; 

— physiocrats  and  Adam  Smith  place 
labour  of  workers  on  a  level  with 
that  of  labouring  cattle— 215,  217, 
364,  376; 

— Ricardo’s  theory  of  profit — 
227; 

— analysis  of  reproduction  with  phy¬ 
siocrats — 364; 

— analysis  of  reproduction  with 
Adam  Smith— 364-92,  438-41; 

—Smith's  mistake  as  regards  com¬ 
ponent  parts  of  price  of  commodi¬ 
ties— 365,  373-74,  376-77,  392-94, 
475; 

— revenue  as  original  source  of  ex¬ 
changeable  value  in  Adam  Smith 
—375,  386,  391; 

— identification  of  commodity  pro¬ 
duction  with  capitalist  production 
in  Adam  Smith — 391; 


— apologetic  economists  present  la¬ 
bour-power  as  capital  and  la¬ 
bourer  as  capitalist — 444; 

— free-trade  school  confuses  circu¬ 
lation  of  capital  with  exchange  of 
commodities — 498. 

See  also  Mercantilism,  Physiocrats 

Precious  metals — See  Gold,  Money. 
Price: 

— of  commodities  and  amount  of 
money  in  circulation— 115,  288, 
328,  344; 

— market,  prices  and  acts  of  purchase 
and  sale— 295,  320; 

— wages  and  price  of  production — 
342; 

— wage  increases  and  rises  in  prices 
—344; 

— divergence  of  prices  from  values, 
and  movement  of  social  capital — 

396; 

— rise  of  prices  in  periods  of  prosper¬ 
ity — 414. 

Production — See  Capitalist  mode  of 
production. 

Productive  capital: 

—  and  creation  of  value  and  sur- 
lus-value — 28,  49-50,  76; 
istribution  of  elements  of  pro¬ 
duction — 32; 

eneral  formula  of  circuit  of — 65, 
7-88; 

— productive  consumption  and  cir¬ 
cuit  of — 76; 

— formula  of  reproduction  on  an 
enlarged  scale — 81; 

— its  division  into  fixed  and  cir¬ 
culating  capital — 161,  170,  192, 
199,  201,  205; 

— capital  of  circulation  as  opposed 
to  — 194,  196,  198,  206; 

— difference  in  behaviour  of  its  ele¬ 
ments  in  labour-process — 199-200; 
—constantly  functioning  quantity 
of— 272; 

— multiplication  Qf  its  elements 
without  additional  money-capital 
—358; 

— production  of  additional  produc¬ 
tive  capital — 501; 


546 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


Productive  power- of  labour: 

— and  continuous  change  invalue- 
relations — 74; 

— growth  of,  and  cheapening  of 
elements  of  production— 95-96; 

— capitalist  mode  of  production  and 
—143; 

— methods  of  increasing — 143; 

—and  mass  of  means  ot  production 
-143; 

—is  inversely  proportional  to  value 
it  creates — 152; 

—and  transportation  of  goods— 152; 
—and  continuity  of  production- 
284; 

— and  expansion  of  production — 324; 
— and  scale  of  production — 360; 

— and  accumulation  of  capital- 
360; 

— and  growth  of  organic  composition 
of  capital — 517-18; 

— augments  quantity  of  product, 
not  its  value — 360. 

Profit: 

— law  of  value  and  average  rate 
of— 19; 

— equalisation  of  general  rate  of  — 
218; 

— Ricardo's  theory  of — 227. 

Purchase  and  sale: 

— scale  of  reproduction  and  time  of 
realisation— 40,  140; 

— transfer  of  functions  of  purchase 
and  sale  to  merchant — 133; 

— volume  of  supply  and  volume  of 
sales — 148; 

— period  of  selling  and  fluctuations 
of  market — 253; 

— distance  from  market  and  time 
of  selling— 253,  321. 

See  also  Merchant's  capital,  Trade- 
Railways — See  Transport. 

Rent: 

— Rodbertus’s  conception  of— 7-8, 
11,  13; 

— Adam  Smith’s  definition  of — 10; 
— Ricardo's  conception  of — 11-12; 
—speculative  building  and  growth 
of -237; 


Repairs: 

—cost  of— 121,  176,  177,  178,  449; 
— calculation  of  cost  of— 178; 
—ordinary  and  substantial— 179; 

— repairs  proper  and  replacement — 
180-81; 

—  intermingled  with  partial  repro¬ 
duction — 183. 

Replacement  of  capital: 

—  and  extension  of  production— 
173-74; 

—  and  repairs— 180-81; 

— size  of— 182-83; 

— and  previous  accumulation  of 
money — 183-84; 

—  replacement  of  fixed  capital — 173, 
185.  453-56; 

— replacement  of  means  of  produc¬ 
tion  and  moral  depreciation — 188; 
— replacement  of  wear  and  tear  of 
a  hoard — 329-30; 

— and  process  of  reproduction — 397. 
See  also  Reproduction,  Wear  and 
tear. 

Reproduction: 

— capitalist  reproduction  as  repro¬ 
duction  of  class  of  wage-labourers 
and  class  of  capitalists — 34,  385, 

396,  420; 

— and  circulation— 40-41,  150,  204, 

355-57; 

— and  separation  of  realised  capital 
into  capital-value  and  surplus- 
value — 44; 

— as  a  periodical  renewal  of  function¬ 
ing  of  productive  capital— 65,  94; 
— and  consumption— 77-78; 

— and  crises — 78,  471-72,  498-99; 

— formation  of  reproduction  fund — 
95; 

— effect  of  changes  in  values  of  means 
of  production  on  scale  of  repro¬ 
duction— 109-11; 

— and  unproductive-functions— 133; 
— credit  and  real  movement  of— 150; 
— time  of  reproduction  of  living 
instruments  of  labour — 173; 

— in  agriculture— 247,  363; 

— reduction  of  reproduction  period 
and  annual  rate  of  surplus-value 
—318; 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


547 


—and  two  departments  of  social 
product — 372,  399-400; 

— and  replacement  of  value  and  sub¬ 
stance  of  component  parts  of  so¬ 
cial  product — 396,  397; 

—and  hoarding — 455; 

— annual  reproduction  of  gold  and 
silver — 473-74. 

See  also  Replacement  of  capital. 
Reproduction,  simple4. 

— and  individual  consumption  of 
capitalist — 67  ,  71,  328,  400  ,  413, 
415; 

— and  circulation  of  surplus-value — 
67,  68-71; 

— and  production  of  new  constant 
capital-value — 372,  430,  442; 

— as  an  actual  factor  of  accumula¬ 
tion — 399; 

— and  two  departments  of  social 
production — 399; 

— scheme  of — 400-01; 

—proportions  in— 406,  412,  430, 
435,  469,  523; 

—and  crises— 471; 

—and  storing  up  of  money— 476; 
—and  reproduction  od  an  extended 
scale — 500,  509-10. 

Reproduction  on  an  extended  scale4. 

—and  increased  individual  consump¬ 
tion-77-78; 

— and  its  proportions — 79,  500,  518; 
—and  latent  money-capital— 79-80, 
325; 

—and  productivity  of  labour — 95, 
96,  101; 

— and  fall  in  value  of  means  of  pro¬ 
duction — 110; 

— and  accumulation — 110,  324,  505; 
— and  money  reserve  fund  for  re¬ 
placement  of  capital — 175; 

— extensive  and  intensive  expansion 
of  production — 324; 

—and  simple  reproduction— 500, 
509-10,  521; 

— schemes  of — 509-526. 

Reserve  army  of  wage-labourers— 
320,  414,  505,  517-18. 

See  also  Labour-power. 

Reserve-capital — See  Supply. 


Reserve  fund4. 

— money-accumulation  fund  as — 86; 
— and  surplus-value — 87,  350; 

— and  bank  deposits — 348. 

Revenue: 

— net  revenue  and  consumption 
fund — 368; 

— value  of  annual  product  of  revenue 
of  society— 369,  372; 

— derivative  revenues — 376; 

— Adam  Smith's  erroneous  views  on 

-376,  392; 

— and  capital  In  Adam  Smith — 382- 

88; 

— of  labourer — 382,  383-84,  385,  386, 
391. 

R ussia: 

— study  by  Marx  of  agrarian  rela¬ 
tions  in  Russia — 3; 

— transition  from  serf  system  to 
capitalism— 33-34; 

—  landownership  of  village  com¬ 
munity— 34; 

—commodity  production  under  serf¬ 
dom — 113; 

—domestic  industries  in  agriculture 
—244-45. 


S 

Serfdom: 

— slate  production  based  on — 113; 

— labour  of  peasant  serf — 389-90; 

S  la  very: 

— purchase  and  sale  of  slaves — 32; 

— commodity  production  based  on — 
113,  117,  390; 

—  capital  invested  in  purchase  of 
labour-power  under — 482; 

—and  natural  economy— 483; 

—  direct  physical  compulsion  under 
—483. 

Social  product: 

— two  departments  of — 372,  399-400; 

— replacement  of  value  and  substance 
of  component  parts  of — 397; 
398; 


548 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


— composition  of — 434-35; 

— as  capital  and  as  revenue — 440; 

Socialised  production — See  Commun¬ 
ist  society. 

State  capital'. 

— functions  of  industrial  capitalists 
performed  by  governments— 99; 

— state  production  under  pre-capital¬ 
ist  systems— 113,  236; 

— government  securities  as  outstand¬ 
ing  claims  on  annual  product  of 
nation — 353. 

Stock  exchange : 

— Marginal  transactions — 347; 
Storage : 

—costs  of— 125,  138-39,  252. 

See  also  Supply. 

Sues  Canal  and  world  trade — 256. 
Supply: 

— formation  of — 139-45; 

— commodity-supply  proper — 145- 

50; 

— productive  supply  and  continuity 
of  process  of  production — 123, 
139,  146,  191; 

— commodity-capital  and  com¬ 
modity-supply— 139,  140,  146-48, 
191; 

— Adam  Smith  on  formation  of — 
142-43; 

— forms  of — 143; 

—and  consumption  fund — 142; 

— volume  of — 143-44,  148,  149,  150; 
— costs  of  formation  and  preserva¬ 
tion  of — 146-51; 

— social  concentration  of — 147; 

— formation  of,  and  commodity  cir¬ 
culation — 147-49; 

— and  stagnation  of  circulation — 
149,  151; 

—renewal  of — 149-50; 

— in  socialised  production — 472-73; 
—bulging  size  of  commodity-supply 
—151; 

— volume  of,  and  repetition  of  pur¬ 
chases — 191; 

— in  agriculture — 248-49; 

—  size  of  productive  supply  and  turn¬ 
over  of  capital — 249-50; 


— working  period  and  productive 
supply— 294; 

— analysis  of  annual  reproduction 
and  commodity-supply — 509. 

S ur plus- labour — See  Surplus- value. 
S urplus- product — See  Surplus- value. 
Surplus- value: 

—theory  of,  pith  and  marrow  of 
political  economy — 2,  7; 
—mercantilists  on  source  of— 8; 
—criticism  of  Rodbertus’s  views  on 
it— 7-8,  17-18; 

— A.  Smith  on  it  and  its  source — 8; 
—Ricardo  on— 11-14,  17-19,  227- 
28; 

— as  general  form  of  value  appro¬ 
priated  without  equivalent — 

10; 

— anti-capitalist  English  literature 
of  twenties  and  thirties  on — 
12; 

— Marx’s  theory  of,  a  revolution  in 
political  economy — 14-16; 

— circulation  of,  in  simple  repro¬ 
duction— 67,  68-71; 

— capitalisation  of — 80-85,  110,  123, 
324,  507; 

—circuit  of — 89,  94-96,  99; 

— division  of,  into  revenue  and  part 
to  be  accumulated — 100,  507; 

— difference  between  constant  and 
variable  capital  and  formation  of 
—224-25,  229; 

— annual  rate  of — 299,  306-07,  318, 
324; 

— magnitude  of  variable  capital  and 
quantity  of — 301,  302; 

— accumulation  of,  and  expansion 
of  business — 325; 

— distribution  of — 338,  415,  425; 

— money  required  for  realisation  of 
—338-39,  423; 

—insurance-fund  of  production- 

368; 

— appropriation  of,  as  essential  ele¬ 
ment  of  process  of  production- 
389; 

— consumption  of,  in  simple  repro¬ 
duction — 401; 

— and  potential  money-capital — 494, 
495. 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


549 


T 

Technique'. 

— capitalist  mode  of  production  and 
revolutions  in — 37,  57,  109,  172, 
187; 

— and  expansion  of  production — 79; 
— introduction  of  tecnnical  improve¬ 
ments  and  accumulation — 122. 
See  also  Machinery,  Means  of 
production. 

Time  of  circulation : 

— and  productive  capital — 126; 

— and  sale — 128,  252; 

— and  change  of  prices — 256. 

See  also  Purchase  and  sale. 

Time  of  production'. 

— and  period  of  labour-process — 123, 
124,  126,  242; 

— and  time  of  functioning  of  means 
of  production— 123-24; 

— and  velocity  of  turnover  of  capital 
—236,  243; 

—difference  between  production  time 
and  working  time  in  agriculture 
—244,  245,  246; 

— and  timber-growing — 247-48. 

Trade : 

— development  of,  as  premise  of 
capitalist  production — 33,  36,  113; 
— effect  of  world  trade  on  peoples 
of  East — 36; 

— as  function  of  merchant’s  capital 
—113,  134,  135; 

— world  trade  and  development  of 
transportation  facilities — 255-56; 
— capitalist  production  and  foreign 
trade — 472,  474; 

— foreign  trade  and  analysis  of  re¬ 
production — 474. 

See  also  Market,  Merchant' s  cap¬ 
ital. 

Trade  unions — 344. 

Transport: 

— useful  effect  of  transport  industry 
—54,  162; 

— production  and  consumption  in 
transport  industry — 54,  162; 


— exchange-value  of  useful  effect  of 
transportation — 54; 

— formula  of  circuit  for  transport 
industry— 57; 

— development  of  transport  facili¬ 
ties  and  supplies — 145; 

— costs  of  transportation— 151-55; 

— transport  industry  as  continuation 
of  process  of  production  within 
process  of  circulation — 155; 

— transport  industry,  an  independ¬ 
ent  branch  of  production — 155; 

— moral  depreciation  in  transport- 
173; 

— development  of,  and  new  centres 
of  production— 253; 

— development  of,  and  turnover  of 
capital — 254,  255. 

Transport  industry — See  Transport. 
Truck-system — 512,  520. 

Turnover  of  capital: 

— circuit  and  turnover  of  capital — 
158; 

— turnover  time — 158-59; 

— formula  for  number  of  turnovers— 
159; 

—peculiarity  of  turnover  of  fixed 
capital — 166; 

—and  difference  between  fixed  and 
circulating  capital — 170,  192,  204, 
282; 

— different  turnover  times  of  differ¬ 
ent  elements  ofifixed  capital — 172; 
— aggregate  turnover  of  advanced 
capital — 186; 

— turnover  time  of  value  of  advanced 
capital  and  actual  turnover  time 
of  its  component  parts — 188; 

— cycle  of  turnovers — 188,  257; 

— turnover  of  variable  capital  and 
circulating  component  of  constant 
capital — 202; 

— velocity  of  turnover— 236,  243,  255; 
— reduction  of  turnover  time  in 
agriculture — 246-48; 

— time  of  selling  and  period  of — 252; 
— and  development  of  transporta¬ 
tion — 254; 

— difference  in  turnover  of  constant 
and  variable  components  of  cir¬ 
culating  capital — 297; 


550 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


— and  relation  between  capital  ad¬ 
vanced  and  capital  employed — 
305; 

— accelerated  turnover  and  acceler¬ 
ated  currency — 346; 

— shortening  of  turnover  period — 
360-61; 

— turnover  period  and  material  na¬ 
ture  of  process  of  production — 361. 

U 

Unemployment’. 

— and  crisis  of  over-production — 
320,  414. 

U.S.A.: 

— Civil  War — 144; 

— export  of  cotton  to  England — 146; 
— production  of  gold  and  silver — 
473-74; 

— slavery — 483. 

Use- value'. 

— commodity  as— 60,  77; 
—production  of,  is  not  the  purpose 
of  capitalist  production— 70; 

— and  time  of  circulation  of  com¬ 
modities— 75,  129-30. 

V 

Value: 

— reduced  to  labour  and  surplus- 
value  to  surplus-labour  in  Adam 
Smith  and  Ricardo — 13; 

— average  rate  of  profit  and  law  of 
—19; 

— purchase  of  labour-power  and 
transformation  of  value  into  cap¬ 
ital — 28; 

— labour  cannot  have  any  value — 
29; 

— changes  in  value-relations — 74, 
107-08,  397-98; 

— discrepancies  between  price  and — 
93,  397; 

— revolutions  in  value  of  social 
capital  — 107-108,  109; 

— its  identification  with  exchange- 
value  by  Bailey — 109; 

— of  social  product  and  its  material 
const  itu  ents  — 434 . 

See  also  Surplus-value. 


Value  composition  of  capital: 

— its  effect  on  magnitude  of  cap¬ 
ital-value — 69; 

— its  change  with  the  growth  of  cap¬ 
ital— 84; 

— and  minimum  size  of  capital  to 
be  advanced — 84,  85. 

See  also  Organic  composition  of 
capital. 

Variable  capital: 

— labour-power  as — 167,  210,  374-75; 
— Adam  Smith’s  erroneous  views  on 
variable  capital — 209-10,  216-17, 

222; 

— turnover  of  constant  and  variable 
part  of  circulating  capital — 297; 
— advanced  and  employed — 303; 

— return  to  capitalists  1  and  II 
of  variable  capital  laid  out  for 
wages — 406,  418,  451; 

— time  for  which  it  is  advanced — 
418. 

W 

Wages: 

— creation  by  Marx  of  Grst  rational 
theory  of— 16; 

— and  value  of  product-17,  72; 

— as  disguised  form  of  price  of  la¬ 
bour-power — 29,  116; 

— as  converted  form  of  labourer's 
future  labour — 73; 

— savings  from — 120; 

— and  prices— 343,  345; 

— and  inteusification  of  exploita¬ 
tion — 359; 

—as  form  of  labourer’s  revenue — 
391; 

— role  of  money  advanced  for  wages 
in  circulation — 418,  482; 

— their  depression  below  normal 
average — 512. 

Wear  and  tear: 

—  and  costs  of  repairs — 121; 

— moral  depreciation  of  means  of 
production — 173,  188; 

— sinking  fund — 183-85: 

— of  fixed  capital  and  price  of  pro¬ 
ducts— 201; 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


551 


— replacement  of  wear  and  tear — 
457-61. 

See  also  Replacement 

Worker,  working-class — See  Classes, 
Labour-power. 

Working-day. 

—  and  working  period— 232; 

— length  of,  ana  employment  of 
fixed  capital — 240; 

—and  proauction  of  surplus  value — 
389 

Working  period: 

— duration  of,  and  investment  of 
circulating  capital— 233-34  321; 


—  undertakings  requiring  a  long 
working  period— 235-36; 

— means  of  reducing  it— 236  ,  237; 

—  advanced  capital  and  reduction 
of— 237; 

— means  of  reducing  it  in  agricul- 
tu re — 237-38; 

— time  of  production  and  working 
time — 240-48 ; 

—  and  fixed  capital— 280-81; 

—  reduction  of,  and  productive  sup¬ 
ply-292; 

—  and  material  conditions  of  pro¬ 
duction— 320,  361. 

World-market—  See  Circulation, 
Market,  Trade. 


