US 


a 


Ja 
CHINA KNOWLEDGE _ SERIES’ 


) 


A SHORT 4USTORY ». 
OF 


CHINESE: PHILOSOPHY 


HOU WAI-LU : 2 


FOREIGN LANGUAGES PRESS 
PEKING 


| ith arrpe: awn mee wwe os Pade Las fra ad = ae P: 
as a : 


QLIVILILGIQGLGLGP 


Written for popular reading 
A Short History of Chinese 
Philosophy outlines the develop- 
ment of Chinese philosophy 
from the ancient to the modern 
times. It describes the con- 
troversies between materialism 
and idealism, and between 
dialectics and metaphysics, 
which run through the history 
of Chinese philosophical thought. 
It discusses the important 
philosophers of each period and 
their materialist or idealist, 
their progressive, conservative 
or reactionary standpoints. The 
book also gives a brief analysis 
of the historical and economic 
background from which the 
various schools of thought 
sprang. 

A great deal of space is 
devoted to contemporary Chi- 
nese philosophy with emphasis 
on the works of Mao T'se-tung 
during the past period of 
democratic revolution and 
the present period of socialist 
revolution. 


CHINA KNOWLEDGE SERIES 


A SHORT HISTORY 
OF 
CHINESE PHILOSOPHY 


HOU WAI-LU 
IN COLLABORATION WITH 


CHANG CHI-CHIH, LI HSUEH-CHIN, 
YANG CHAO AND LIN YING 


FOREIGN LANGUAGES PRESS 
PEKING 1959 


Translated by 
WANG CHENG-CHUNG 


Printed in the People’s Republic of China 


Foreword 


Chinese philosophy has long been omitted from the 
histories of philosophy written by Western bourgeois 
scholars. At the same time there are “national charac- 
teristics’ groups! of both traditional and modern type in 
China who vaunt the superiority of Chinese philosophy, 
making no distinction between its merits and defects and 
enshrouding it in an air of mystery. Those who omit it 
entirely and those who claim the superiority of Chinese 
philosophy appear to belong to two opposing camps, but 
they actually complement each other — they are in short 
all idealists. This is at once apparent when we see that 
in dealing with the problem of accepting our cultural 
heritage the imperialists and the feudal reactionaries form 
a close alliance and support each other in their views. 
The real polarity is between these idealist distorters of the 
history of Chinese philosophy and those who have tried 
to make a really scientific analysis of its development. 

In the course of its continuous development over a 
period of some four thousand years, there have been, in 
Chinese philosophy as in the philosophies of other na- 
tions, two different national cultures and two opposing 

1The name given to several groups who advocated a revival 
of feudal culture. In their blind worship of ancient things, 
they in fact extolled the past at the expense of the present. 
Being against the course of historical development their views 
were not progressive. Such dregs of the historical heritage 
could only lead people to look backwards and divorce them- 
selves from practical realities, 


schools of thought constantly warring with each other: 
the feudal, bourgeois, reactionary culture and the dem- 
ocratic, socialist, revolutionary culture; the idealist, 
metaphysical theory and the dialectical, materialist 
theory. Revolutionary culture with its materialism grew 
and matured in its struggle against the reactionary one 
with its idealism. 

In the realm of philosophy the Chinese people have 
a heritage, varied and rich in content and no less praise- 
worthy than that of any other people. Engels told us 
that to improve our theoretical and speculative ability 
we must study the history of philosophy. He also pointed 
out that to enable ourselves to wage a more effective 
struggle today we must draw on the experience gained and 
lessons learned in the struggle between materialism and 
idealism in the past. 

The great materialist thinkers of China have shown 
marvellous courage in their stormy struggles against the 
hostile idealists as may be seen from the historical rec- 
ords. They dared to destroy superstition, raise new 
problems, seek the truth, and through their creative 
thought they achieved remarkable progress. They skil- 
fully used the methods of their forerunners and gave new 
content to old forms making them accord with the spirit 
of their times. In this respect they may be said to have 
both inherited from the past and bequeathed to the future. 
Using philosophy as an instrument they expressed the 
ideals of the progressive class and held high the torch of 
a glorious tradition. With an open mind, they absorbed 
the good elements of foreign cultures and combined them 
with the realities of Chinese history. Such effort becomes 
especially noteworthy as we come to more recént times. 


With the spread of Marxism in China Mao Tse-tung, 
inheriting the excellent tradition of Chinese philosophy, 
developed Marxism in the practice of the Chinese revolu- 
tion. The philosophy of Mao Tse-tung is the culmina- 
tion of the wisdom of the Chinese people. It is the one 
and only correct theory by which the Chinese proletariat 
and the entire body of the Chinese working people ef- 
fected their liberation. 

This book is an attempt to write a brief history of 
Chinese philosophy in line with the above. 


Hou Wai-lu 
Peking, 
June 11, 1958 


CONTENTS 


Foreword 


1. 


The Origin and Development of Philosophy in the Yin 
and Chou Dynasties; and the “Hundred Schools” of 
the Warring States Period 


2. Philosophy in the Middle Ages: Heresy Versus Ortho- 


3. 


doxy; Materialism Versus Idealism 


Philosophy in the Transitional Period Between the 
Ming and Ching Dynasties: the Beginnings of Enlighten- 
"ment and Development of Materialism 


4. Modern Philosophy: the New and Old Learning and 
Bourgeois Philosophy 

5. Contemporary Philosophy: the Two Main Trends in 
Philosophy Since the May 4 Movement; the Develop- 
ment of Marxism in China 

Index 


21 


52 


80 


108 
171 


]. The Origin and Development of Philosophy in 
the Yin and Chou Dynasties; and the “Hundred 
Schools” of the Warring States Period 


We are as yet unable to say for certain when class 
society began in China. Archaeological researches have 
shown, however, that as early as the 16th century B.C, 
i.e. at the end of the Hsia and in the early years of the 
Shang dynasty, the people of the Shang tribe in the 
ntiddle and lower reaches of the Yellow River left traces 
of their advance towards a civilized society. Practically 
no written records of the Hsia and the earlier period of 
the Shang dynasty are yet available. The earliest writ- 
ten materials we possess now belong to the latter part 
of the Shang dynasty, commonly known in history books 
as the Yin dynasty (13th-12th century B.C.). This is the 
reason why this review of the development of Chinese 
thought has to start with the Yin period. 

In the Yin dynasty, the early period of slave society, 
religion and witchcraft occupied a dominant place in 
man’s world outlook. The Yin people believed in the 
existence of two worlds: An “upper” world of the gods 
and a “lower” world of man. Using the ruling body of 
their own society as a model, they conceived of an image 
of a “ruler,’”’* who was the supreme power in the “upper” 


*In this book an asterisk indicates that Chinese names with 
transliteration are given in the index. 


2 


world, with a host of deities, who were his subordinates. 
The King of Yin called himself a descendant of the 
“ruler” and his agent on earth. By means of religion he 
initiated the idea of a super-social power, i.e. the power 
of a ruler. The people of Yin were also worshippers of 
nature. The sun, the wind, the Yellow River, and the 
big mountains were all objects of their devotion. 

The Yin people did have a certain amount of scientific 
knowledge but it was inextricably mixed up with reli- 
gion. During the Yin dynasty astronomy, mathematics 
and the art of calendar-making were fairly well developed 
and the classification of natural phenomena was also fairly 
detailed and accurate. The arts of metallurgy and bronze- 
casting reached a high level of excellence. But so far 
as materials are available we have as yet found no 
definite indication of a moral code, nothing relating to 
rights and duties. 

Towards the end of the 12th century B.C. there emerged 
in the valley of the Wei River a group of tribes known 
as Chou the members of which had hitherto been cultural- 
ly backward. These tribes were originally subordinate 
to the tribe of Yin. Both under King Wu and King 
Cheng, the Chou tribes launchéd expeditions to the east 
against the Yin conquering and making the latter and 
their allies their tribal slaves. The Kingdom of Chou was 
founded and an early form of slavery was adopted. The 
Chou rulers inherited but reformed the various institu- 
tions of Yin. This resulted in major political changes 
which in turn resulted in some changes of ideology. 

The reason why the Chou inherited the culture of the 
Yin was because their own cultural level was lower in 
many respects. But in some ways they retained their own 
characteristics and made changes in the Yin culture 


adapting it to their own needs. This was shown by the 
historical tradition that the Duke of Chou, younger 
brother of King Wu, and Regent during minority of King 
Cheng after King Wu’s death, formulated rites* and 
music.* The Chou rulers continued to make use of the 
concept of the “ruler” in the hope of maintaining their 
own power. They created new concepts of “virtue’* 
and “mandate of heaven,’* stating that the Yin rulers 
were overthrown by order of heaven because they had 
forsaken virtue, and that the Chou rulers were given 
mandate of heaven because they were virtuous. So the 
fall of Yin and the rise of Chou was a decision made by 
the “ruler’s” will. Virtue means “to worship heaven” 
and “care of the people.” The rulers were required to 
discipline themselves by strict class ‘‘rites,” so as to con- 
solidate their rule. These “rites” were the earliest moral 
concepts of the ruling clan and were exclusively 
aristocratic codes reflecting the political system of a 
slave-owning autocracy. 

By the 9th and 8th centuries B.C. when the Western 
Chou! was nearing its end the clan-slavery system had 
become an impediment to the productive forces causing 
a crisis in labour power. Owing to a process of social 
differentiation a stratum of people known as freemen* 
appeared. Gradually through struggle these people ac- 
quired the right to own property and participate in polit- 
ical affairs. A form of slave system was then in the 
process of developing. From the viewpoint of the de- 


1Historians usually divide the Chou dynasty into two major 
periods: the Western Chou (c. 11th century to 771 B.C.) when 
the national capital was at Haoching (now Sian) and the 
Eastern Chou (770-221 B.C.) when it was at Loyi (now Loyang). 


4 


clining clan aristocrats society was going to the dogs. 
Through their poems and songs they expressed sharp 
complaints and doubts about heaven, gods, and their an- 
cestors, who were unable to protect them any longer 
from losing their rights and privileges. Hence, scepticism 
and humanism prevailed in their thinking. 

With the old religious world outlook tottering, 
rudimentary materialism based on the already ac- 
cumulated knowledge of natural science found expres- 
sion. Thus during the reign of King Hsuan towards the 
end of the Western Chou dynasty Po, the official his- 
torian, taught that metal, wood, water, fire and earth were 
the fundamental elements of which the world was made. 
It was from this that the later Theory of the Five Ele- 
ments® originated. Kuo Wen Kung,* a minister of King 
Hsuan, and Pai Yang Fu,* official historian to King Yu, 
believed that there were two natural forces, the positive* 
and negative,* opposite and at the same time comple- 
mentary to each other. All natural calamities, accord- 
ing to them, were due not to supernatural powers, but 
to the loss of balance between these two forces. This 
idea later gave rise to the Theory of the Positive and 
Negative Forces.* Both this theory and the Theory of 
the Five Elements were much elaborated during the 
period of Spring and Autumn (770-475 B.C.). The initia- 
tors of these two forms of rudimentary materialism were 
mainly the official historians, who were in charge of 
divination and witchcraft and the official physicians. 
They had a certain amount of knowledge of the natural 
science but they could not separate their scientific 
knowledge from religion and mythology. 

With the gradual development of such rudimentary 
materialism, the simplest form of atheism came into 


8 Se 


being. It denied the existence of a heavenly mandate, 
of gods and spirits. In the early stages of its develop- 
ment the terms “heaven” and “gods” were still used 
though no longer in their former sense. “The way of 
heaven is far and the way of man is near,” said Kung- 
sun Chiao,* a statesman of the Cheng State. ‘‘The peo- 
ple are the masters of the gods,” said Chi Liang* of the 
Sui State. These atheistic views, expressed in a round- 
about way, attached importance to the role of man and 
treated lightly that of the gods. There was something 
revolutionary about them as compared with the all- 
pervading religious world outlook of the Western Chou 
dynasty. 

From the last years of the Western Chou dynasty to 
the Spring and Autumn Period the landownership and 
political power monopolized by the Chou rulers gradually 
slipped into the hands of their subordinates. In their 
efforts to break the barrier of the clannish patriarchal 
social system the freemen stepped on to the stage of his- 
tory. In 770 B.C. nomadic tribes from the west invaded 
the Kingdom of Chou. King Ping was forced to move 
his capital to the east and to seek help from the vassals 
of his own clan. Most of the cultural objects of 
the Western Chou dynasty were lost in the turmoil. This 
signified the decline of the Chou rule. Education and 
knowledge, which had hitherto been a monopoly of the 
clan aristocracy, gradually spread and was shared by the 
lower classes. Towards the end of the Spring and Autumn 
Period private education was given to the hereditary offi- 
cial scholars of the Lu State which retained a part of 
Western Chou culture. The pioneers of private educa- 
tion were the Confucians* and a little later the Mohists* 


6 


whose teachings were known as the Confucian and 
Mohist “illustrious learning.” 

The founder of the former school of thought was Con- 
fucius* (c. 551-479 B.C.), who tried to preserve the in- 
terests of the declining clan aristocracy. Owing to the 
rising power of the freemen, however, he was forced to 
make certain concessions to them. There were, there- 
fore, also some progressive ideas in his teachings. This 
resulted in a series of contradictions in his thought 
which manifestly expressed themselves in his Doctrine 
of the Mean, which was full of compromises. Confucius’ 
world outlook was rehashed mainly from the world out- 
look prevalent in the Western Chou dynasty. He too 
was a believer in heaven, a ruler with will-power, 
though endowed with certain natural attributes and 
he was a defender of the traditional patriarchal system 
of the Western Chou dynasty. He added, however, a 
moral and spiritual content to the prevailing “rites” and 
“music,” which by then had become quite formalistic. 
The highest moral concept Confucius dwelled upon was 
“love” or ‘“‘benevolence,”* a moral standard attainable 
by all men, which he even extended to the freemen. But 
he also associated “love” with “rites” which were 
formerly a monopoly of the aristocracy. In his theory 
of knowledge Confucius believed in innate knowledge 
though he also stressed experience and practice. Con- 
fucius was, however, an innovator in the theory of educa- 
tion. It was here that he showed a certain degree of 
progressive thinking. He believed that, except for the 
most and the least wise who could not change, men 
closely resembled each -other in their original natures 
but in their acquired practices they grew widely apart. 


7 


After Confucius, came a rival school, the Mohists. 
The Mohist school of thought was founded by Mo Ti 
(c. 480-397 B.C.), who represented the interests of the 
rising class of freemen. He was against the despotic rule 
of the clan aristocracy and stood for the democratic system 
of ancient times. He opposed the idea of a heavenly 
mandate by which the ruling class deceived the people. 
Although he also used the terms heaven and spirits he 
stripped them of their religious connotation. In his 
theory of knowledge, Ite put forward a materialist prin- 
ciple that the world of reality should be taken as the 
point of departure. He seemed to respect the sage-kings! 
but these were actually his own creations which he used 
as a means of argument. Mo Ti was a stern critic of 
Canfucianism because it represented the interests of the 
clan aristocracy, especially with regard to the theory of 
knowledge. He pitted his materialist theory against the 
idealism of the Confucians. He laid stress on perceptions 
and impressions which he considered to be the founda- 
tion of knowledge. In declaring his philosophical theory 
he frequently drew illustrations from actual human ex- 
periences such as hunger, cold, warmth, satiety, poverty, 
wealth, nobility, lowliness, communication, etc. Mo Ti 
and his followers formed a political body with rigid 
organization and discipline. 

The efforts of the early Confucians and Mohists rep- 
resented the primary stage of private schools. They 
reasoned about moral institutions governing human rela- 


1During the Western Chou dynasty, the clan aristocrats 
worshipped their ancestors, principally King Wen and King 
Wu. This tradition was followed by Confucius. It was a re- 
flection of the rule of the clan aristocrats. 


tions by their knowledge of nature. But they lacked the 
ability to carry on full philosophical deliberations. 
During the Warring States Period (475-221 B.C.), es- 
pecially during the third century B.C., the use of iron 
implements became more general. With the rapid pro- 
gress made by the productive forces, agricultural and 
handicraft production methods were reformed. This 
led to private ownership of land and drastic changes 
in class relations. These political and economic changes, 
however, were reflected ideologically in the emergence 
of the “Hundred Schools” contending with one another. 
Let us take up the more important of these schools 
one by one. First, the Taoists. The book called Lao-tzu 
or The Way and Its Power," probably written in the 
Warring States Period, is the earliest piece of Taoist 
literature. Lao Tzu,* believed to be the author, 
is usually considered as belonging to the Spring and 
Autumn Period though the book bearing his name was a 
much later product. Taken as a whole, the philosophy 
of Lao Tzu was an idealist one. He considered “the 
Way” or “truth’* as a transcendental absolute. How- 
ever, he discussed natural laws governing the growth 
and development of all things in combination with 
“power’’* and thus showed that he accepted some ele- 
ments of materialism. Lao Tzu rejected the worship of 
the sage-kings and opposed the crude form of belief 
in the existence of gods. As such, his was a 
development of the criticism of the Confucian and 
Mohist theories. But in many other ways he was still a 
mystic. “The Way,” he said, “‘produces oneness, oneness 
produces duality, duality produces triplicity, and triplicity 
produces everything.” In his theory of knowledge Lao 
Tzu was an intuitionist. In his book The Way and Its 


Power he disclosed and analysed the antagonistic con- 
tradictions between various things. This shows that his 
philosophy contained rudiments of dialectics but he at- 
tempted to resolve contradictions by subjective methods. 
He also taught men to take humiliation with a good grace 
and be pliant in their outlook on life. This is clearly 
seen in his political theory. He stood for the restoration 
of a primitive form of social life to relieve the existing 
social strife and conflicts. This reflected the feelings of 
the peasants of the recently collapsed tribal communes 
and their naive attitude of non-resistance. 

Chuang Chou (c. 360-280 B.C.), better known as Chuang 
Tzu," was the second greatest Taoist after Lao Tzu. His 
philosophy was @ form of subjective idealism. He be- 
lieyed that matter was merely an illusion or unreal and 
that the final cause of matter was the indescribable 
“Way.” He was an agnostic and denied the knowability 
of the material world, saying that the reflections of the 
material world in man’s mind are nothing but hypotheses 
freely affirmed. Therefore, a knowledge of the real na- 
ture of things may be acquired only if the mind is in a 
state of absolute tranquillity, as still as water and as 
clear as a mirror. Starting from the principle of rela- 
tivity, Chuang Tzu inferred that there was equality of 
all things and he opposed the transformation of nature. 
His philosophy of life —satisfaction with the things as 
they were—inevitably leads to pessimism and philistinism. 

Another group of Taoists was represented by Sung 
Chien* and Yin Wen.* They held that “the Way” is 
really innate in man. The human mind is identical with 
“the Way” and so long as the mind is pure it is able to 
know “the Way” in its entirety. The difference between 
Sung Chien and Yin Wen on the one hand and Lao Tzu 


10 


and Chuang Tzu on the other was that the former sup- 
ported benevolence, justice,* rites and law* and believed 
that the metaphysical, natural qualities are superseded 
by moral qualities. Thus, they endowed themselves with 
the colours of objective idealism. 

The doctrines of Yang Chu* have a close connection 
with the Taoist School, especially with that of Chuang 
Tzu. We know little about the life of Yang Chu but 
from the scanty material now available we know that 
he was an egoist. He and his followers stressed the im- 
portance of life and self-interest. This, however, with 
regard to the relation between thought and existence, is 
a materialist principle, by which they actually meant 
that man is an organ of senses and simply remains such. 
Accordingly, they said that all man cared for were ma- 
terial benefits for his senses upon which they based their 
moral code. Yang Chu’s ethical theory was directly 
opposite to the “heaven-inspired” ethical theory of the 
idealists. It was in a certain sense progressive in that 
it reflected the desire of the freemen of that time to seek 
personal interest. 

During the Warring States Period both the Confucian 
and Mohist Schools of thought were split into a number 
of minor ones. Among the Confucians the Schools of 
Mencius* (c. 390-305 B.C.) and Hsun Ching* were most 
famous. Mencius inherited the teachings of Tseng Sen,* 
one of the best-known disciples of Confucius and Kung 
Chi,* the grandson of Confucius. He was much influenced 
by the teachings of Sung Chien and Yin Wen and believed 
in the mystical theory that human nature was essentially 
good, without offering any convincing proof. He thought 
that every man has the innate power to distinguish right 
from wrong. It followed, therefore, that in acquiring 


il 


knowledge man need not make an effort to know the 
objective reality, but he should rather separate himself 
from it, in order to restore his sense of right or wrong. 
With a “perfectly pure mind,” he said, it was possible to 
acquire the true “understanding of human nature” and 
then, a man was capable of “knowing heaven” and becom- 
ing one with it. In his idealist reasoning Mencius used 
a logic which savours of strained sophistry. 

During the middle and latter part of the Warring States 
Period a sophist school came to the fore, known as the 
School of Names,* represented by Hui Shih* (c. 365-310 
B.C.) and Kungsun Lung* (c. 320-250 B.C.). The theory 
of Hui Shih was close to that of the Taoists, especially the 
School of Chuang Tzu. He combined relativism with his 
saphistic reasoning. He exaggerated the identity of things 
and ignored their difference. Kungsun Lung held an 
entirely different view: he exaggerated the difference of 
things and ignored their identity. He was therefore an 
absolutist. Although Hui Shih and Kungsun Lung held 
opposite views, nevertheless they were idealists. They 
both ignored objective reality and laid undue emphasis 
on one aspect of subjective knowledge. It is true that 
they had a little knowledge of natural science but they 
made that knowledge serve the cause of their own mis- 
taken views. 

Using the sophist’s methods of reasoning Hui Shih 
and Kungsun Lung put forward many absurd prop- 
ositions. Hui Shih, for instance, said that ‘white dogs 
are black” (because both white and black dogs are dogs) 
and “dogs can be sheep” (because both dogs and sheep 
are quadrupeds). This kind of reasoning violated the 
law of identity and the fundamental rules of logical 
reasoning. Hui Shih was really trying to derive a uni- 


12 


versal and definite conclusion from two particular prop- 
ositions. That is to say, it is utterly impossible to reach 
the conclusion that ‘dogs can be sheep” from the two 
premises: ‘dogs are animals” and “sheep are animals.” 

Kungsun Lung also wrote certain sophist theses. Two 
of his better known discourses are: ‘‘white horses are 
not horses” and ‘chickens are three-legged.” He ex- 
plained that the concept of “horse” embraces brown 
and hlack horses while that of “white horse” does not, 
and that chickens are three-legged because they have 
two actual legs and an additional quality of leggedness. 
In this way abstract concepts are made to contrast with 
concrete things. 

The later Mohists, who also flourished in the Warring 
States Period, had some elementary knowledge of several 
sciences including mechanics and geometry. They did 
away with the earlier Mohists’ concepts of “heaven,” 
“spirits,” and “‘sage-kings,” and further developed the 
materialist doctrine of the Mohist School, In their theory 
of knowledge they believed that the material world is 
knowable and that objective reality is the direct source 
of knowledge. They pointed out, however, that the pro- 
cess of acquiring knowledge is not entirely a passive one 
but has its more important active aspect, which is man’s 
initiative. Perceptual knowledge is only possible through 
the contact of sensory organs with objective reality, and 
perceptual knowledge must undergo the process of being 
thought about and analysed before it becomes rational 
or real knowledge. The later Mohists divided knowledge 
into five kinds: hearing, inference, personal experience, 
correspondence of names with actualities, and action. 
They regarded action,or practice as 2 most reliable source 
of knowledge and indeed the basis of all knowledge. 


13 


In accordance with their materialist principles the later 
Mohists sharply criticized the sophistry of the School of 
Names. The sophists’ propositions, they said, were 
merely a play on concepts and violated the fundamental 
principle of logic, ie. propositions must tally with facts. 
They also used the law of contradiction in formal logic 
to show that the sophists were playing with words and 
trying to obliterate the distinction between right and 
wrong. The later Mohists made great contributions to 
the development of logic in ancient China. 

After the middle of the Spring and Autumn Period 
the conflict between the concepts of “rites” and “law,” 
both being forms of ancient rights, began to come to 
the fore. “Rites” differentiated between the class status 
of the aristocracy and the rabble according to the clan 
division, while “law” denied the inherited privileges of 
the aristocrats and protected the equality of freemen. 
Some of the states had already inscribed their laws on 
bronze as early as the middle of the Spring and Autumn 
Period. These laws recognized the equal social status 
of the freemen though the aristocracy was strongly op- 
posed to them. The Legalists,* who stood for the rule 
of law, represented the interests of the freemen. Most 
of them came from the three states of Han, Chao, and 
Wei. Their most famous representatives were Li Kuei,* 
Shen Pu-hai,* Wu Chi,* and Shang Yang* (c. 390-338 
B.C.), the last mentioned serving the state of Chin as a 
minister. There were also a number of Legalists in the 
state of Chi, Peng Meng* and Shen Tao* being two of 
the better known, who combined the Taoists’ concept of 
“the Way” with their own concept of “law” and “‘state- 
craft.”* These new concepts were named “the Way and 
the law’’* and “the Way and statecraft.”* 


14 


In the later years of the Warring States Period Chi- 
nese society began to change from slavery to feudalism. 
In the intellectual circles a tendency emerged to synthe- 
size the multifarious doctrines of the ‘(Hundred Schools.” 
The scholars at this time who tried to summarize the 
various ideas of ancient Chinese philosophy were Hsun 
Ching and Han Fei.* 

Hsun Ching (c. 340-245 B.C.) belonged to the School 
of Confucianism. He raised sharp criticisms and passed 
general judgements on all the schools of thought of the 
Warring States Period including some of the minor schools 
of Confucianism. He was against idealism. His attacks 
on the idealism of the Mencius School constituted the 
climax of the conflict between materialism and idealism 
in the Warring States Period. His theory of “the way 
of heaven” was materialist and atheist. He absorbed the 
naturalism of the Taoists and considered ‘‘heaven” as a 
material product of natural law. He stood for the con- 
quest and exploitation of nature by man. His theory of 
knowledge was also a gem in the treasury of materialism. 
He said that man possessed the reflective ability which 
gave him power over the objective world. Real knowl- 
edge meant the correct use of this power in finding out 
the laws of the objective world. 

Regarding human nature, Hsun Ching believed that 
men were born equal. He criticized the Mencius theory 
that “man is good by nature,” and advocated that man 
naturally “loves profit and dislikes the unpleasant” and 
therefore “the real nature of man is evil.” His theory 
was progressive from the historical viewpoint, and was 
easier to combine with practice. In his political theory 
Hsun Ching opposed the traditional worship of the “sage- 
kings” and held that ‘later kings” should be held up as 


——— 


15 


models. He partially accepted the teachings of the Le- 
galists on “law and statecraft’” and enlarged the Con- 
fucian concept of “rites” to include the concept of “law.” 
In criticizing the Sophists he pointed out that names 
should tally with facts, and thus made some contribu- 
tions to the development of Chinese logic. 

Han Fei (c. 280-233 B.C.), a disciple of Hsun Ching, 
further developed the doctrine of “law and statecraft” of 
his master’s teachings and summarized the concepts of 
the Legalist School. While inheriting the teachings of 
the Legalists of the three states of Han, Chao, and Wei, 
Han Fei also borrowed freely from the Taoists, Mohists, 
and Sophists. However, he critically improved Lao 
Tzu’s naturalist concept of “the way of heaven” and 
expanded the materialist elements in philosophical think- 
ing. He stressed the importance of practice in testing 
the correctness of theories and considered knowledge from 
a simple evolutionary viewpoint to be a developing 
process. 

Representing the interest of the freemen, Han Fei 
said that human nature is selfish and human society 
a battleground of calculating minds. In political affairs 
he stressed the importance of the absolute predominance 
of “law’’ and “statecraft” and advocated the establish- 
ment of a social system based on centralization and social 
contract which was a combination of the two. This was 
the doctrine of social contract in its earliest embryonic 
stage. 

Late in the Warring States Period there appeared an- 
other school of thought known as the Diplomatists.* They 
represented the merchants and usurious money-lenders 
and most of them succeeded in entering the political 
arena. They prided themselves on being the cleverest 


16 


men. They were practically all idealists and were skilful 
in the sophist art of being equivocal and double-tongued. 
Taking advantage of the confusion in society they put 
forward all kinds of catchy policies, such as “active co- 
existence” and “attack the nearby countries and make 
friends with those far away.” 

With the advance of the feudal social system in the later 
Warring States Period thought tended to deteriorate into 
philistinism. Tsou Yen* (c. 305-240 B.C.) was the 
representative of the School of Positive and Negative 
Forces,* which was the last to appear during that period. 
He picked up the Theories of Positive and Negative Forces 
and the Five Elements of unadorned materialism, com- 
bining them in a fantastic way into a cosmic structure 
with heaven, a God possessing human personality at the 
top ruling over all the people below. This school per- 
petuated the Mencius doctrines, advocated the unity of 
heaven and man and believed in their mutual influence. 
It declared that the course of history was cyclical and 
predestined. During the period of the Warring States 
and between the Chin and Han dynasties its idealist 
system had a great influence on the thought of a certain 
school of Confucians whose philosophy was based on the 
Appendices of the Book of Changes.* Later in the Han 
dynasty it became a source of inspiration to believers in 
divinations and distorted commentaries.! 

There is another important aspect of the history of 
philosophy in this period. 

During the Spring and Autumn and the Warring States 
Periods Chinese society was developing rapidly and the 
people lived in continual turmoil. Attempting to rid 


1 See Chapter 2. 


17 


themselves of the serious contradictions which arose in 
their class society, they dreamed of and hoped for a 
“cosmopolitan society” free from class conflict and their 
thinking was reflected in the writings of certain schools 
of thought. 

The Mohists, for instance, had put forward the idea of 
“similarity” in an ideal society. In it men were not dif- 
ferentiated by close or distant relationship. People loved 
what was beneficial to them and everyone worked and 
divided all their gains. There was no exploitation and 
no war of plunder. 

Lao Tzu’s philosophy also contained imaginary Utopias 
similar in nature to the primitive communes. He spoke 
of a selfless society in which people “worked but did not 
own.” 

Hsu Hsing,* a representative of the School of Agricul- 
turists* and a contemporary of Mencius, advocated that 
products derived from toil should belong to the toilers 
and that those who did not work should not eat. This 
represented the thought of the poorest peasants in the 
rural communes. The Agriculturists were against ex- 
ploitation and class distinction. They were an acute 
headache to the ruling class of their time. 

The latest and most complete system of “cosmopoli- 
tanism’* in ancient China appeared in the chapter 
on the “Evolution of Rites”’* in The Book of Rites.* 
This chapter was probably the work of Confucian scholars 
about the end of the Warring States Period or sometime 
between the Chin and Han dynasties. The following 
passage deals with a “cosmopolitan” society: 


When the Great Tao (“the Way” or “truth” — Tr.) 
prevailed, the whole world was one community. Men 


’ 


of talents and virtue were chosen (to lead the people); 
their words were sincere and they cultivated harmony. 
Men treated the parents of others as their own, and 
cherished the children of others as their own. Com- 
petent provision was made for the aged until their 
death, work for the able-bodied, and the young. Kind- 
ness and compassion was shown ta widows, orphans, 
childless men and those disabled by disease, so that all 
were looked after. Each man had his allotted work, 
and every woman a home to go to. They disliked to 
throw valuable things away, but did not mean that 
they treasured them up in private storehouses. They 
liked to exert their strength in labour, but that did not 
mean that they worked for private advantage. In this 
way selfish schemings were repressed and found no 
way to arise. Thieves, robbers and traitors did not 
show themselves, so the outer doors of the houses re- 
mained open and were never shut. This was the 
period of the Great Togetherness! 


This passage is notable as being a typical description of 
the “cosmopolitan society” or “world of Great Together- 
ness.” It has always been a popular one and greatly 
appreciated. It may be pointed out here that the principles 
of this imaginary “cosmopolitan world” are as follows: 
(1) In this “cosmopolitan society” the main principle was 
to make the whole world one community. This society 
was entirely different from one in which the world is 
described as belonging to a private family when the Great 


1English translation is~taken from Joseph Needham, Science 
and Civilization in. China, Cambridge University Press, 1956, 
Vol. 2, p. 167. 


19 


Way had been consigned to oblivion. (2) In the “cos- 
mopolitan society” no wealth or goods were privately 
owned; they were public property, owned and enjoyed 
by all. (3) Everyone had to work for the good of all 
but to work for personal gain was not allowed. (4) Every 
member was charged with the responsibility of bringing 
up the young and supporting the old. All able-bodied 
people worked while those who were disabled were sup- 
ported at public expense. (5) Human relations tran- 
scended formal equality in rights and responsibilities. 
People loved and helped each other. Throughout such 
society there was no scheming or cheating nor plundering 
by robbers and thieves. Life was peaceful and there was 
no war. (6) All kinds of public welfare work were done 
by. collective effort. Wherever division of labour was 
advisable, men who had the confidence of the people 
were chosen for positions of responsibility. 

From the theoretical and imaginary “cosmopolitan 
world” as outlined in this chapter we have a summary of 
the ideas of ‘‘cosmopolitanism” in ancient China. In the 
description of the excellence of this ideal society in which 
the whole world was one community, it is obvious that 
the author. of the chapter had absorbed Mohist and Taoist 
ideas, but he had not gone beyond the confines of Con- 
fucianism. He was mainly concerned with how to attain 
“fairly prosperous conditions’* through the cultivation 
of the rites; but he was unable to show how to turn such 
“fairly prosperous conditions” into a life of “Great To- 
getherness.” At the beginning of the chapter the writer 
pretended that he was quoting Confucius who said: “TI, 
Chiu (i.e. Confucius), am unable to see the time when 
the Great Way prevailed, nor am I able to see the great 
period of the Three Dynasties, but I aspire to work for 


20 


the attainment of such an age.” The writer evidently 
thought that the society of Great Togetherness in which 
the whole world was but one community was merely an 
aspiration, an ideal, a dream, which was so transcendent ” 
that it could not be realized. 


2. Philosophy in the Middle Ages: Heresy 
Versus Orthodoxy; Materialism 
Versus Idealism 


After the middle of the Warring States Period the vil- 
lage communes declined, accelerating the development of 
slavery. But in time the release of the peasants from 
the village communes, as Marx had pointed out, paved 
the way for the beginning of the feudal serfdom. During 
the. period between the Chin and Han dynasties the 


administration of China was divided into prefectures and 
counties, the countryside becoming the dominant factor 
in the nation’s economic life, of more importance than 
the cities. Throughout the country the combination of 
agriculture and handicrafts laid the economic foundation 
of the feudal system. Feudal ownership developed 
partly as a result of the emperor rewarding meritorious 
military services. The big landowners had large num- 
bers of completely dependent serfs toiling for them, who 
because of their dependence gradually became and 
remained as the lowest stratum of society. During the 
reign of Emperor Wu Ti in the Han dynasty the system 
of feudalism was. legalized. 

The period fromthe Chin (221-206 B.C.), through the 
Han (206 B.C.-A.D. 220), to the middle of the Tang 
dynasty (618-907) may be called the first period of feudal 
society in China. During these decades the feudal system 
of ownership was largely bound together with the mili- 


22 


tary system and land rent was to a great extent paid by 
corvée. The main conflict in society was between the 
peasants and the feudal ruling class. Intolerable con- 
ditions of serfdom and exploitation drove many of the 
peasants to a life of vagabondage. Many large-scale 
uprisings were organized but the aim of these did not go 
beyond a struggle for the right to live and have some 
personal rights. Meanwhile conflicts also arose in the 
ranks of the ruling class. The feudal system of land- 
ownership allotted manorial estates of various sizes to 
the aristocratic families among the ruling class, by law, 
according to their political status and rank. Some of 
these families, however, gradually appropriated more 
land and serfs than they were entitled to until the em- 
peror, the biggest landowner in the country, intervened 
and a sharp political conflict arose between him and the 
aristocratic families. But since these two had similar 
interests and were really dependent upon each other for 
their power, they often settled their differences by com- 
promising. 

During the Chin and Han dynasties the philosophy of 
the Confucians and that of the School of the Positive and 
Negative Forces merged producing certain philosophical 
ideas tinged by mysticism and eclecticism. Their basic 
doctrines were those of historical determinism and the 
interacting influences of heaven and man. Persons who 
professed this philosophy frequently used it as a means 
of flattering the ruling class. In the Han dynasty this 
philosophy was further elaborated and a type of teleo- 
logical theology (a doctrine according to which all 
developments are due to the purpose or design of a 
supernatural power) veiled behind Confucian Classics 


23 


came into existence. This became the orthodox philos- 
ophy of the Han dynasty. 

The founder of theology in the Han period was Tung 
Chung-shu* (2nd century B.C.). He was a clever man and 
knew how to pander to Emperor Wu Ti. He advocated © 
the doctrine that heaven and man (meaning the ruler) 
influenced each other. “Heaven does not change nor 
will the Way” — this was his favourite dictum. By this 
he implied that the feudal order would last for ever. 
Through theological doctrines concerning the power 
of heaven he advocated and bolstered the supreme cen- 
tralized power of the emperor and his absolute patriar- 
chal authority. About the same time Liu An, Prince of 
Huainan* (?-122 B.C.) called together a group of alche- 
mists and with their help he compiled a book called 
The Writings of Huainan* explaining a philosophy which 
Was a mixture of Taoism and the doctrines of the School 
of the Positive and Negative Forces. Its mystic content 
was closely related to theology. In politics Liu An at- 
tacked the government for its extravagance in spending 
and for the severity of its penal law. 

Ssuma Chien* (c. 145-90 B.C.) was a great historian 
and materialist thinker of the Han dynasty. He severely 
criticized the various kinds of mysticism of his day. 
Conversant with astronomy and the art of calendar- 
making he was most proficient in the science of history. 
He hated the predatory rulers and sympathized with the 
people. Consequently he aroused the enmity of the 
ruling class which persecuted him cruelly. 

Ssuma Chien left to posterity an immortal work called 
the Historical Records.* This book reveals the author’s 
keen insight and sympathy with the people. Its 
analysis of contemporary events was realistic and pro- 


24 . 


found, sparkling with the wisdom of a great materialist 
thinker. He thought man should study the “reason of 
things,” ie. natural laws. He was against their mysti- 
fication and did not believe in the theory of the 
theologians regarding the mutual influences of heaven 
and man. He had grave doubts concerning the doctrine 
of the eternal ways of heaven and did not hesitate to 
denounce it. 

Ssuma Chien’s views of history were strongly ma- 
terialist. He believed, for instance, that the production 
of the material means of sustenance did not de- 
pend upon the government’s political power but was 
merely a natural process of development, as natural as 
water always flowing to a lower level. The stratifica- 
tion of society into wealthy and poor classes naturally 
engendered the phenomenon of enslavement. There was 
no such thing as “heavenly will” or “heavenly mandate,” 
He went so far as to say that the ruling class had a moral 
code which they taught the people but the ruled also 
had a moral code with which they asserted their rights 
and that this was in perfect harmony with natural laws. 

The large-scale peasant uprisings in the period be- 
tween the Eastern and Western Han dynasty shook the 
very foundations of feudal rule. Facing an ever deepen- 
ing crisis the ruling class resorted to religion to main- 
tain its power. Divinations and distorted commentaries! 
were widely practised. The confusion of the period was 
shrouded in the obscurity of religious superstition. The 
study of the Classics was divided into two schools: the 


1The former contained oracles while the latter was an in- 
terpretation of Confucian Classics, making Confucius a god and 
containing other absurdities.* 


a 


25 


Modern Text Classics* and the Ancient Text Classics.* 
The former used texts written in contemporary charac- 
ters while the latter used an archaic style, hence their 
names. The Modern Text School, combined with 
divinations and distorted commentaries, became orthodox 
theology while the Ancient Text School tended more or 
less in their work of editing the Classics . towards 
humanism though they did not reject the main prin- 
ciples of theology. Siding with the.Ancient Text School 
were scholars who came out openly in opposition to the 
so-called orthodoxy. Their opinions were, of course, 
branded as heresy. Among these scholars were Yang 
Hsiung* (53 B.C.-A.D. 18) and Huan Tan* (33 B.C.-A.D. 
39). Although Yang Hsiung wrote a book based on the 
principles of The Book of Changes* and built up a rather 
fictitious cosmological system, he was nevertheless 
strongly against theology and stood for the “natural 
order.” Huan Tan was at first an opponent of the 
“orthodox” school of thought and later became a ma- 
terialist. As such he may be said to be the precursor of 
Wang Chung* (27-107), a great materialist thinker of 
the Han dynasty. 

Huan Tan was the most vigorous in opposing the 
divinations and distorted commentaries. He was con- 
sidered as an apostate having no respect for the sages 
and their teachings. He wrote a book called New Dis- 
courses* which unfortunately was lost. But we know 
from other sources that it was imbued with a fighting 
spirit. Starting from the natural principles he opposed 
the teleology of the theologians. He exposed the myth 
of the mutual influences of heaven and man, illustrating 
his argument with facts. He discussed the problem of 
the growth and development of plants and animals, up- 


SESE 


26 


holding the ancient materialist world outlook which 
made matter* the basis of all things in the universe. He 
pointed out the dependence of mind on body, comparing 
the latter to a candle and the former to the flame. He 
said that death is like the extinguishing of a candle. 
Huan Tan’s materialist theory later became the corner- 
stone of anti-religious and atheistic thought in the 
Middle Ages. In the teachings of Wang Chung, to whom 
we shall come presently, it was further developed and 
greatly elaborated. 

Wang Chung came from a poor family without social 
prestige or influence, and the traditional spirit of his 
family, somewhat like that of the Mohists, had always 
been antagonistic to the powerful clans, generous, just, 
and sympathetic with the underdog. Many notable 
characters in history came from humble origins and 
Wang Chung is one of the glorious examples of such 
men in the sphere of philosophy. In his youth he led 
a wanderer’s life in Loyang, then the capital of China. 
He had no money and could not afford to buy books, so 
he roamed the bookstores and received his education 
through the generosity of the book-sellers. Later he 
held several posts as a petty official. ‘I own not a single 
plot of land,” he once said, “and hold no office with even 
such a small salary as a single picul of grain.” He re- 
mained poor to the end of his life when, as a refugee, 
he suffered greatly from hunger and cold. But his spirit 
never flagged. He was a fighter for truth. He would 
admit no greater authority than truth and even the name 
of Confucius, then the most respected authority, did not 
overawe him. ‘Is it wrong,” he asked, “‘to doubt some- 
thing said by Confucius if it is a point which you do not 
understand? Is it unreasonable to refute a doctrine held 


—~” 


En 


27 


by Confucius if you possess the wisdom of the sages 
yourself?” This shows Wang Chung’s rebellious spirit 
and determination to struggle against idealist authori- 
tarianism. 

Some bourgeois scholars have said that Wang Chung’s 
work Critical Essays* is more destructive than construc- 
tive. Thisis not so. It is true that he attacked theology 
in a most thorough manner. But materialism has always 
developed through struggles, and in his controversy 
against theology he did succeed in establishing a ma- 
terialist world outlook. Just at the time when his 
Critical Essays was being written, Emperor Chang Ti 
convened a council of scholars and ordered the 
compilation of the book Comprehensive Discussions in 
the White Tiger Hall,* a general treatise on theology. 
This book was a rehash of Tung Chung-shu’s theory and 
was closely associated with divinations and distorted 
commentaries. Wang Chung’s criticisms were flung 
directly at this book in fact at the entire concept of 
theology since Tung Chung-shu’s time. 

From the time of Tung Chung-shu down to the com- 
pilation of the Comprehensive Discussions in the White 
Tiger Hall, “heaven” had always been regarded by the 
theologians as having a will, intelligence and personality. 
Basing themselves upon the feudal moral order, they 
put forward the theories that “heaven is superior to 
earth” and that the relation between heaven and man 
consists of the interaction of influence between them. 
This strengthened the doctrines of Three Bonds (the 
relationships between ruler and subjects, father and son, 
and husband and wife) and Five Virtues (benevolence, 
righteousness, propriety in demeanour, wisdom, and good 
faith) of the feudal order and gave them an air of eternal 


28 


sanctity. In criticizing the world outlook of the theolo- 
gians Wang Chung picked out their theory of heaven as 
the principal target and put forth his own brilliant theory. 
He said that heaven and earth both consist of material 
bodies and that they are not, as the theologians would 
have it, a mysterious spiritual “force.” Developing his 
own line of reasoning, he arrived at the following con- 
clusions: (1) Heaven and earth were material bodies. (2) 
Both being material, there was no difference between 
them in status, neither was superior. The first point 
restores the spiritual heaven to a natural one, ruling out 
its will, intelligence and personality and consequently 
its spiritual qualities. The second point denies the 
theoretical basis for the theology of the feudal order. 

Wang Chung’s remarkable criticism of theology re- 
flected the opposition of the toiling people and those of 
the lower strata to the prevailing social ofder. He also 
conceived of ‘‘force” as subordinate to and included in 
material body, as not being mysterious but having never- 
theless its own material existence. He discussed in de- 
tail how various things are the natural products of a 
combination of the positive and negative forces. He 
may be said to have defended and developed the ma- 
terialism of the ancient philosophers.. 

He also pointed out that heaven and earth are con- 
crete, corporeal things, the same as anything else. They 
are in constant motion and are subject to development 
and change. The universe as a whole, however, has no 
beginning or end. Wang Chung believed that the ma- 
terial world could be compared with a ball of fire burn- 
ing at a distance the appearance or disappearance of 
which was quite beyond man’s will. Here we can see 


29 


that he meant to attack the idealist theory that heaven 
and earth had a beginning and had a creator. 

However, according to Wang Chung, individual things 
within the universe did have a beginning and an end. 
They were born and they died. Death was the natural 
result of life. Spirit or mind depends upon the body 
for its existence. Man’s intelligence has a physiological 
basis, ie. the internal organs. As long as the internal 
organs remain uninjured, man is intelligent and wise. 
But when the internal organs become diseased, he be- 
comes dim and confused, stupid and dull. When a man 
dies his internal organs rot and his consciousness ceases. 
Death is like the extinction of fire. The body of a man 
who is dead is like a candle the flame of which has been 
blown out. No flame can burn without a candle or some 
other kind of inflammable material. Likewise no mind 
can exist without a body. With arguments like these, 
Wang Chung thoroughly refuted the theory that the soul 
can survive the body and become a ghost. 

In his theory of knowledge Wang Chung said that 
perception by the sense organs is the basis of all knowl- 
edge. He recognized the importance of rational think- 
ing but denied the existence of innate knowledge. It 
is true, he said, that some things are known and some 
are unknown. But just because some things are still 
unknown we cannot say that the world is unknowable. 
“In studying truth or falsehood in a statement, in judg- 
ing the honesty or dishonesty of a man’s conduct,” he 
said, ‘“‘we must go to the facts for verification.” It should 
be pointed out that to verify knowledge by facts is the 

* materialist test of truth. He also criticized the Taoists 
because they were too much engrossed in their study of 


30 


heaven and were ignorant of human affairs, thus deny- 
ing man’s active intellectual powers. 

Wang Chung was one of the most outstanding ma- 
terialists in the history of Chinese philosophy. His 
thought had a great influence on that of later materialist 
thinkers. 

In the latter period of the Eastern Han dynasty (25- 
220) two thinkers, Wang Fu* and Chung Chang-tung,* 
\ while criticizing contemporary politics, law, and moral 
order, also criticized theology. Their philosophy may 

be said to be a continuation and to a certain extent an 

expansion of Wang Chung’s teachings. Chung Chang- 
tung, for instance, distinguished between “the will of 

. heaven” and the laws of nature and said that belief in 
one is incompatible with belief in the other. 

From the last’ years of the Eastern Han, through the 
Wei (220-265), to the Tsin (265-420) dynasty the struggle 
between those who ruled and those who were ruled as 
well as between members of the ruling class became 
very sharp. At the end of the Han dynasty there were 
large-scale peasant uprisings. Drawing upon certain 
theories of Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu which expressed 
dissatisfaction with the present and a longing for the 
primitive past, the peasant leaders set up a primitive 
form of Taoism. They used it as a weapon in their 
ideological struggle against the prevalent belief in the 
divinations and distorted commentaries of the ruling 
class. They protested against its great wealth and its 
idleness. In his Book of Peace* Yu Chi,* founder of the: 
‘Peace Religion,’’* listed six kinds of crimes. Among 
them the third one was ‘‘to accumulate wealth by the 
millions and give no help to the poor and needy” ° 
and the fifth one was “not to use the muscles 


=<. ee 


31 


which heaven has given a man with’ which to 
produce his own food and clothing.’ This new moral 
standard had an unmistakable class character and re- 
flected the peasants’ demand for their right to life and 
subsistence. From the last years of the Warring States 
Period to the Chin and Han dynasties the slogans of the 
peasants in their struggle against the ruling class were 
always derived from the Mohist ‘‘public law” that those 
‘who kill others must die themselves. The slogans of 
the peasants at the end of the Han dynasty were raised 
to an even higher level. They said that ‘‘to be wealthy 
oneself but not let other people live was a crime.” 

After the social upheavals towards the end of the Han 
dynasty and during the period of the Three Kingdoms 
(220-280) materialism gained ground. Classicism and 
theology of the Han dynasty were shaken to their very 
foundations and lost their dominant position in the world 
of thought. To counteract the peasants’ primitive form 
of Taoism, the scholar-officials of the feudal ruling class 
had to change their tactics. They revised their old 
theology of the divinations and distorted commentaries 
and put forward a new theory known as “Mysterious 
Learning” or Metaphysical School* to deceive the 
credulous. This was one of the scholastic philosophies 
combining idealism and sophistry and in form it followed 
the traditions of Taoism and the School of Names, inter- 
preting Confucian classics in terms of the. philosophy of 
Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu. It took three books, Lao-tzu, 
Chuang-tzu and The Book of Changes, as its “Three 
Classics.” 

This Metaphysical School went through three stages 
of development. The representatives of its first stage 
were Ho Yen* (c. 193-249) and Wang Pi* (226-288) of the 


32 


Three Kingdoms Period. They developed the doctrines of 
idealism in Lao Tzu’s philosophy of “the way of heaven.” 
They said that Being* is a product of the mysterious 
Non-being* which they considered to be the more im- 
portant. The representative of the second stage was Pei 
Wei* (267-300) of the Tsin dynasty. He was against Ho 
Yen and Wang Pi’s doctrine of Non-being. He was of 
the opinion that Non-being cannot produce Being. In 
the third stage Hsiang Hsiu* (227-?) and Kuo Hsiang* 
(c. 252-312) were the chief representatives. They 
synthesized the doctrines of Being and Non-being. The 
doctrine of Non-being attempted to show that the world 
of Being takes Non-being as its substance. This suggested 
that the state might be governed by non-activity and 
that morals and institutions, such as the relations be- 
tween ruler and subjects in the feudal order, might be 
relegated to positions of secondary importance. The 
doctrine of Being, however, supported the morals and 
institutions and denied that Non-being can produce 
Being. Hsiang Hsiu and Kuo Hsiang while accepting 
the latter view endowed the theory of Non-being of Ho 
Yen and Wang Pi with the “real nature” of Being. Thus, 
they linked up morals and institutions with Nature and 
made the feudal order a natural phenomenon. But 
although they supported the doctrine of Being, they were 
no materialists and it would be a mistake to regard them 
as such. It is true they denied that Non-being can 
produce spirit. But they held that ghosts and gods are 
Spirits in their own right. Another one of their theories 
was that a wise man may either serve the ruler or retire 
to the mountains. In the former case he will be a great 
minister and in the latter a good hermit. This is idealism 
pure and simple and is aimed at a compromise between 


vx EE 


33 


the classes. The development of metaphysics reflected 
to a certain extent the intricate relations between the 
landed aristocracy and the imperial house which by now 
had buried the hatchet between them. 

With the progress of metaphysical thought the ruling 
class revised the early and popular Taoist religion and 
promoted the quest for immortality through alchemy in 
which only this class could afford to indulge. Ko Hung* 
of the Tsin dynasty was the most famous representative 
of this cult. 

Meanwhile Buddhism, a foreign religion, was also 
gaining considerable influence. It was first introduced 
into China during the Eastern Han dynasty. During 
the transitional period between the Han and Wei dynas- 
ties there were two schools of Buddhism: one laid stress 
on theoretical problems and the other on meditational 
exercises. During the Wei and Tsin dynasties the 
Buddhist scholars joined ranks with the metaphysicians 
and interpreted Buddhist teachings in a metaphysical 
way. Later; more Buddhist doctrines were imported 
from abroad. By the Sui (581-618) and Tang (618-907) 
dynasties there were many Buddhist sects, each one hav- 
ing its own special doctrine, method of teaching, and 
sphere of influence. Although these sects held differ- 
ent doctrines their common tenet was a type of re- 
ligious idealism which made the world of objective 
reality a fantasy. The Buddhists of these schools all 
fancied that they could, by conscious efforts at self- 
cultivation, free themselves from the world of reality and 
by so doing attain a mysterious, spiritual world of eternal 
bliss. Buddhist teachings included a most elaborate 
idealist world outlook as well as many ridiculous 
superstitions and myths. Beliefs in incarnation, trans- 


34 


migration of the soul, retributive justice, and many kinds 
of supernatural phenomena emasculated the will of the 
people and helped to protect the existing feudal order. 
Generally speaking, the ruling class of ancient China 
mostly patronized Buddhism and never stinted in sup- 
port to maintain its popularity. 

The development of Chinese philosophy was influenced 
by Buddhism to a large degree. Its idealist method of 
thinking influenced both Neo-Confucianism* and Taoism 
in the Sung (960-1279) and Ming (1368-1644) dynasties. 
Its methods of reasoning containing some logical ideas 
have also been adopted by certain progressive thinkers 
of later times though critically and with modifications. 

The mutual influence and finally the blending of the 
Metaphysical School with Buddhism and Taoism was the 
main characteristic of the orthodox school of thought 
among the ruling class from the Tsin dynasty to the 
Southern and Northern Dynasties (420-589). 

Side by side with the rapid dissemination of religion 
and idealist philosophies, atheism, following the tradi- 
tion of Huan Tan and Wang Chung, also enjoyed further 
growth. During the transitional period between the 
Wei and Tsin dynasties, Fu Hsuan* drew upon the teach- 
ings of Huan Tan, Yang Hsiung, and Chang Heng.* The 
latter was an astronomer who believed in the ‘Celestial 
Globe” theory that heaven surrounds the earth, and who 
built up a materialist world outlook of his own. He 
taught that the universe is made up entirely of matter 
which is derived from water. He was against religion 
and superstition, believing that no soul or mind can sur- 
vive the body after death. He severely criticized the 
idle metaphysical discussion among the landed aristocracy. 
Another philosopher, Pao Ching-yen* of the Eastern Tsin 


35 


dynasty, took the stand of the peasants, startling the 
world with his theory of a Utopian society without kings 
or rulers. He was also an atheist. Ho Cheng-tien* 
(370-447), a mathematician of the early Southern Dy- 
nasties, expounded views on atheism and a theory 
of “‘the extinction of the soul,”’ and engaged in theoretical 
controversies against Buddhism no less than five times. 
In the period of transition between the Chi (479-502) and 
Liang (502-557) of the Southern Dynasties, Liu Chun* 
(462-521) taught the natural philosophy of Wang Chung. 
He said that the universe was not created or developed 
by gods and spirits but by natural laws which are en- 
tirely mechanical. 
During the Chi and Liang dynasties the idealist’ philos- 
ophy of Buddhism dominated all others and belief in 
transmigration, retributive justice and other supersti- 
tions was almost universal. Under such circumstances 
the appearance of Fan Chen* (c. 450-515), a materialist 
philosopher who came from a poor family, is noteworthy. 
Summarizing and developing the atheist and materialist 
philosophies from the Han to the Tsin dynasty, Fan Chen 
attracted wide attention by his theory of the “extinction 
of the soul.” He launched two strong attacks on 
Buddhism which was on the way to becoming a national 
religion. In 489, during the reign of Emperor Wu of 
the Chi of the Southern Dynasties, Hsiao Tzu-liang,* 
Prince of Chingling, gave a party in his West Mansion. 
Fan Chen was among those present. During the discus- 
sions he mercilessly attacked Buddhism and the theory 
of retributive justice, debating with Hsiao Tzu-liang who 
was a devout Buddhist. Later, many famous Buddhist 
monks joined Hsiao’s side in the debate but none of them 
could defeat Fan Chen in argument. Then Hsiao Tzu- 


36 


liang resorted to a trick. He sent a man to persuade Fan 
Chen to relinquish his materialist views and to tell him 
' that if he did so he would be rewarded with a high posi- 
tion in the government. Fan Chen was, however, ada- 
mant. He replied that he would not sell his convictions 
for an official position. In 504, Emperor Wu of the 
Liang of the Southern Dynasties issued an _ edict 
making Buddhism the national religion. In 507 Fan 
Chen published his Essay on the Extinction of the 
Soul* which was a penetrating critique of Buddhism. 
Emperor Wu _ issued a_ special edict ordering Fa 
Yun,* a high Buddhist prieSt, to muster the noblemen 
and government dignitaries, sixty-four in all, to refute 
the arguments contained in Fan Chen’s book, and no less 
than 75 essays condemning his views were subsequently 
published. But in spite of the pressure of the emperor, 
the Buddhists and public opinion, Fan Chen did not 
budge. He held to his materialist doctrine firmly and 
refuted the views of his adversaries with powerful argu- 
ments. 

The Buddhist theory of transmigration and retributive 
justice is founded on the hypothesis that body and soul 
are different entities and that the soul can survive the 
body after death. Life means only temporary union of 
soul and body. When the body dies the soul does not 
die with it but continues to exist by itself. This falla- 
cious theory of the Buddhists, i.e. the continued existence 
of the soul, was forcefully refuted by Fan Chen in his 
Essay on the Extinction of the Soul. He said that body 
and soul are dependent on each other: body being the 
substance of soul and soul being the function of body. 
Fan Chen illustrated his point by the example of the 
sword. He compared the relation between soul and 


37 


body to that between sharpness and the sword. As 
sharpness cannot exist independently of the sword nor 
can soul exist independently of the body. ‘Soul exists 
if the body exists and soul dies if the body dies” — this 
in short was the conclusion at which Fan Chen arrived. 

Stated briefly Fan Chen’s main argument was that: 
the universe is a unity of substance and its attributes. 
Attributes are derived from substance; without substance 
there can be none. The two always unite; neither can 
exist as a separate entity. This principle is the basis of 
all Fan Chen’s arguments and sums up his materialist 
philosophy. 

In his theory of knowledge Fan Chen made a penetrat- 
ing analysis of the term ‘‘substance.” He pointed out in 
his Essay on the Extinction of the Soul that different 
concepts have different contents. The error in the logic 
of his opponents, he said, was in confusing the contents 
of the concepts. The substance of man and that of the 
tree, for instance, are different. It is only man’s 
substance that has consciousness while that of the tree 
has not. He also showed the difference between a dead 
body and a Tiving body; only the latter having the 
substance of man, but not the former. 

After Fan Chen, an atheist in the south who also 
severely criticized Buddhism was Chu Shih-ching* of 
the Chen dynasty (557-589). In the north Fan Hsun* 
and Hsing Shao* of the Northern Chi dynasty (550-577) 
held atheist views and believed in the extinction of the 
soul. We possess little material regarding their life and 
work. We only know that they generally carried on the 
philosophic tradition of Fan Chen. 

In the early Tang dynasty there was a great: atheist 
scholar Lu Tsai* (c. 600-665). Encyclopaedic in learning 


38 


he was conversant with astronomy, geography, military 
science, logic, and music, and especially well read in 
history. He used his historical knowledge to refute the 
philosophy of determinism and various religious theories 
prevailing in his time. 

From the Sui (581-618) to the middle of the Tang 
dynasty feudalism gradually entered its last period 
of development. In 780 the Tang court issued an 
edict proclaiming the “two-tax” system by which prop- 
erties were taxed in proportion to their value, twice 
a year, in the summer and autumn. The edict made no 
attempt to conceal its aim, which.was to curtail the power 
of the aristocratic families and lessen the burden of 
taxation on the peasants and thus prevent their emigra- 
tion. Owing to the collapse of the “land equalization” 
system, which permitted the peasants to reclaim and 
own waste land and the expansion of “landlord” hold- 
ings, the system of landownership by the feudal state 
and the system of distributing land according to official] 
rank was also somewhat modified. Land rent was 
largely paid in kind. Through uprisings the peasants 
gradually demanded equal opportunity ‘in landowner- 
ship. During the intervening period between the Sui 
and Tang dynasties the Han and minority peoples began 
to mingle together. The economy of South China ex- 
panded and the productive forces increased because of 
improved labour skill, which in turn stimulated com- 
‘merce. This was a serious threat to the patriarchal 
system of society. Meanwhile, among the members of 
the ruling class there arose a new class of landowners, 
i.e. the plebeian landlords. The plebeians were defined 
by law as a lower stratum than the great aristocratic 
landowners and were similar in status to the free peas- 


39 


ants. They had, however, a dual character. While 
they differed from the bristocratic landowning families 
in having no social prestige, they gradually acquired 
political influence through their legalized economic 
status. A conflict gradually arose between these 
plebeians and the old aristocratic families. The em- 
peror took advantage of this conflict and gained control 
over both groups himself. The transition from the 
“nine-grade” system of official preferment! fo the sys- 
tem of competitive examination was a reflection of this 
policy. Such a situation continued from the Tang to 
the Ming dynasty with slight differences in different 
regions. 

During the Sui and Tang dynasties Buddhism con- 
tinued to flourish. At the beginning of the Tang dynasty, 
the imperial court, feudal, tyrannical and despotic 
in character, wanted to increase the prestige of the 
“new dignitaries.” It had created a number of plebeian 
landlords so as to curtail the power of the famous old 
families and big clans which had existed since the time 
of the Southern and Northern Dynasties. Once it ac- 
tually raised Taoism to a higher position than that of 
Buddhism. But in spite of this. Buddhism was still 
greatly respected. In those days three Buddhist sects, 
the Trisastra, Tientai and Dharmalaksana, were most 
popular. During the reign of the Tang Empress Wu 
Tse-tien, Buddhism was further linked up with political 
interests and enjoyed much greater prestige than Taoism. 


1A system of official preferment devised by the big land- 
Jords during the third century A.D. Under this system officials 
were divided into nine grades and were selected among candidates 
recommended by the big clans. It was abolished during the reign 
of Emperor Wen Ti (589-604) of the Sui dynasty. 


40 


Two more sects, the Avatamsaka and the Dhyana, arose 
at this time. 

The appearance of these sects varied, but in reality 
the same basic idea ran through them all though with 
minute differences. According to Buddhist idealism 
the objective world was initially derived from a supreme 
spiritual cause. The Buddhists thought that it was 
necessary to try and understand this spiritual cause by 
mystical intuitive reflection, through the process of sub- 
jective thinking. The Buddhists considered knowledge 
of the world of phenomena to be “common” and that 
gained through intuition and contemplation “absolute 
truth.” 

About the time of the proclamation of the “two-tax” 
system there arose a new scholastic philosophy of the 
Neo-Confucians.* This was the orthodox school of 
thought during the last period of feudalism. The Neo- 
Confucians were strong protagonists of Confucianism 
and openly opposed all the religious ceremonies of the 
Buddhists and Taoists though they had practically 
plagiarized much of their philosophy. 

By far the greatest influence on Neo-Confucianism 
came from the Dhyana Sect of Buddhism. This sect was 
supposed to have been transmitted during the Southern 
and Northern Dynasties (420-589) by an Indian patriarch 
called Bodhidharma (?-536). Around the time of the 
reign of Empress Wu Tse-tien (684-701), Shen Hsiu* (c. 
600-706), a Buddhist worthy, was the head of the northern 
school of this sect. He was known as “the most famous 
Buddhist preacher in the two capitals (Changan and 
Loyang) and the teacher of three emperors.” After the 


revolt of An Lu-shan and Shih Szu-ming (755-763), the 


southern school of the sect, founded by Hui Neng* (638- 


———~ 


41 


713) and Shen Hui* (683-760) in Kwangtung, came to the 
fore replacing the influence of Shen Hsiu. The philos- 
ophy of this school which became the main trend of 
Buddhism was that of subjective idealism. Members of 
this school taught that all things originate in the mind 
and that mind is the sole reliable source of true knowl- 
edge. True knowledge, they said, is “instantaneous 
enlightenment.” It cannot be taught through written 
texts. It can only be gained from a mysterious revela- 
tion, a “mind-to-mind” transmission. The line of suc- 
cession transmitting the teachings of the sect consisted 
of twenty-eight patriarchs in India and it was continued 
in China through some others who were Chinese. This 
line- of succession had no historical basis and was purely 
an imaginary invention. 

Han Yu* (768-824) and Li Ao* (?-846?) were pioneers 
of Neo-Confucianism. They thought that Buddhism, 
owing to its doctrine of other-worldliness, was inimical 
to feudal morality which laid emphasis on the relation- 
ships between ruler and subjects, father and son; and, 
for this reason, it was not the best weapon for the de- 
fence of the feudal system. Although on the surface 
they stood against Buddhism, they actually adapted 
Buddhist idealism to their own philosophy and allowed 
themselves to be influenced by the Dhyana and Tientai 
sects. 

Han Yu stood firmly for an idealist world outlook. He 
even said that the destruction of human lives is the will 
of heaven. In his theory of human nature, he divides 
inborn human nature into three grades: superior, me- 
dium and inferior. Therefore by nature men are not 
equal. In this way he found a theoretical basis for the 


42 


» 
system of ranks and grades which prevailed in feudal 
society. 

Imitating the spiritual lineage of the Dhyana School 
Han Yu invented a line of sages in succession: Emperors 
Yao, Shun, Yu, and Tang; Kings Wen and Wu; Duke 
Chou; Confucius and Mencius. This fictitious line of 
succession for the Confucian School, of course, has no 
historical basis whatsoever. Li Ao even sought inspira- 
tion from the meditational exercises of the Buddhists and 
put forward a Confucian form of meditation, a kind of 
mysterious intuition. ‘If the mind is absolutely at rest 
all improper thoughts will disappear,” he said. 

Among the contemporaries of Han Yu and Li Ao, Liu 
Tsung-yuan* (773-819) and Liu Yu-hsi* (772-842) repre- 
sented the materialist school of thought. These two 
opposing groups of thinkers not only differed in philos- 
ophy but also in politics. At that time the rule of the 
Tang dynasty was very unstable. Owing to the imposi- 
tion of heavy taxes and exploitation many peasants fled 
from their homes. Meanwhile the struggle between the 
landed aristocracy and the new plebeian landlords be- 
came increasingly acute. In 805 during the reign of 
Emperor Shun Tsung, Wang Shu-wen* and Wang Pi,* 
who represented the interests of the plebeian landlords, 
were in power. They carried out a number of political 
reforms and abolished various kinds of taxes and im- 
posts frowned upon by the plebeians. They also tried 
to take from the eunuchs their control over the army. 
This reform movement was, however, short-lived. 
Strongly opposed by both the big landed aristocracy and 
the eunuchs it ended in failure in less than one year. Liu 
Tsung-yuan and Liu Yu-hsi, both protagonists of the 
movement, were deprived of their offices and exiled, to 


43 


the great satisfaction of their conservative opponents 
Han Yu and Li Ao. 

In his writings Liu Tsung-yuan criticized Han Yu for 
his belief in the power of heaven to reward the good and 
punish the bad. He believed that the world is material 
and that the development of things is all in accordance 
with laws. In his essay entitled “Heaven Answers’ he 
replied to questions concerning the universe and history 
posed by the famous ancient poet Chu Yuan in his prose 
poem “Heaven Asks.” From a materialist standpoint 
he pointed out that the universe is made of original mat- 
ter, it is presided over by no monstrous creature of any 
kind and there is nothing mysterious about its beginning. 
Liu Tsung-yuan quoted the achievements in natural 
science in his time. He said that natural laws are know- 
able and denounced all the false theories of theology and 
idealism. With great insight he also saw that the in- 
teraction between positive and negative forces is the sole 
cause of motion in nature, which was an elementary form 
of dialectics. Liu Yu-hsi analysed the cause of idealist 
thought and said that it was due to ignorance. When 
man knows the laws of the material world, he pointed 
out, he will be able to control nature and predict future 
development, and then idealism will lose its foundation. 
Like Hsun Ching, the great philosopher of the Warring 
States Period, Liu Yu-hsi believed in man’s ability to 
conquer and exploit nature. 

The philosophy of Liu Tsung-yuan and Liu Yu-hsi was 
of a popular character. The conflict between the ma- 
terialism of these two philosophers and idealism of the 
conservatives was an outstanding one in the history of 
Philosophy of the Tang dynasty. 


44 


China was a divided country during the period of the 
Five Dynasties (907-960) but with the founding of the 
Sung dynasty it was united again. Owing to the further 
development of peasant skills and to a greater exploita- 
tion of natural resources both in the south and north, 
feudal economy prospered under Sung rule. The dynasty 
also revised the laws concerning the class system to 
bring them into conformity with the changing economic 
conditions. The economic status of the plebeian land- 
owners of the south was elevated. The demands of the 
peasants in their struggles increased with time as can 
be seen from the changes in their slogans. When Wang 
Hsien-chih* led a peasant uprising, his title was “‘Great 
General of Equality Conferred by Heaven.” Later when 
Wang Hsiao-po* and Chung Hsiang* were leaders, their 
slogan became: “Let the high and low, rich and poor 
be equal!’ It was also a period of scientific progress. 
China’s three great inventions — gunpowder, the com- 
pass and printing — were perfected during the Northern 
Sung dynasty (960-1127). 

Materialism in the Northern Sung dynasty was ably 
represented by Wang An-shih* (1021-1086), chief minister 
of state during the reign of Emperor Shen Tsung. He 
stood for the interests of the plebeian landlords. The 
reform, which he carried out with great severity, aimed 
at two things. First, relying on the despotic power of 
the imperial government which maintained the system 
of “official land,” a form of feudal state ownership of land, 
as a basis of its power, he tried to unite the members of 
the royal family with the plebeian landlords to strike 
at the landed aristocracy. Secondly, he tried to carry 
out a policy intended to ease the contradiction between 
classes so as to increase production and strengthen na- 


45 


tional defence. In fighting against the conservative 
forces of the landed aristocracy, he showed a dauntless 
spirit. “Heavenly portents,” he said, “need not be 
feared, the examples of our ancestors need not be 
followed, and pay no heed to what most people say.” 

Wang An-shih’s theory was that matter was the primary 
substance of the universe and that all things were com- 
posed of the five elements of metal, wood, water, fire, 
and earth. These five elements existed eternally in the 
universe and were in constant motion. There is change 
and motion in the universe because there are contending 
forces within it; in other words, there are contradictions. 
Wang An-shih said that motion in the material world 
follows definite laws (he used the term “the Way’) and 
this does not change by man’s will. If man knows the 
natural laws he can control the greatest and largest num- 
ber of things. In Wang An-shih’s opinion all things in 
the universe were determined by natural laws and 
nothing happened by accident. Although his theory 
tends towards mechanism, it deals a strong blow to 
idealism. : 

With regard to human nature Wang An-shih thought 
it to be the same as man’s powers of perception, such 
as seeing, hearing, etc.; all these powers were nothing 
but functions of the physical body. Thus Wang 
An-shih’s theory of human nature and, of course, his 
theory of knowledge, too, had a materialist basis. 

Wang An-shih’s political enemy was the conservative 
party of the landed aristocracy, which was the social 
base of the Neo-Confucianism of the Northern Sung 
dynasty, hostile to reform. The leader of the conserva- 
tive party was Ssuma Kuang* (1019-1086). In direct 
opposition to Wang An-shih’s new ideas, he put forward 


46 


a reactionary philosophy which centred around the theory 
of the “mandate of heaven.’ Adherents of the conser- 
vative party included Chou Tun-yi* (1017-1073), and 
Shao Yung* (1011-1077), who drew heavily upon the 
idealist theories of the Taoists and the divinations and 
distorted commentaries to establish the School of 
Emblems and Numbers* which was actually a con- 
glomeration of superstitions and idealism, including 
such theories as those of astrology, the oracles, theories 
of the positive and negative forces and of the five ele- 
ments. Meanwhile the Cheng brothers, Cheng Hao* 
(1032-1085) and Cheng Yi* (1033-1107), famous members 
of the conservative party, formed a school of idealist 
philosophy known as the Loyang School of Philosophy,* 
the Cheng brothers being residents of that city. They 
stated that heaven is really “reason” or “principle’* gov- 
erning the relationships between ruler and subjects and 
father and son in feudal ethics. As “reason” is inherent 
in the human mind, the human mind is, therefore, iden- 
tical with heaven. Cheng Yi, whose philosophy was es- 
sentially the same as that of Cheng Hao, identified human 
nature with “reason.” He considered heaven, human na- 
ture and mind different manifestations of the same thing. 
The philosophy of the Cheng brothers contained many 
ideas similar to those of the Dhyana and Avatamsaka 
Sects of Buddhism. 

In the district of Kuanchung in Shensi there appeared 
a school of thought known by its location as the Kuan 
School.* This school stressed the study of practical 
subjects and natural science. It was represented by 
Chang Tsai* (1020-1077), a natural scientist. Politically, 
although he was not satisfied with Wang An-shih’s re- 
form, he did not actively oppose it. Like Liu Tsung-yuan 


47 


he accepted matter as the primary substance of the 
universe. He considered birth and death as a process of 
condensation and dispersion of matter. He emphatical- 
ly pointed out that development and changes in the 
universe are a result of contradiction within matter itself, 
the result of the “interaction” between the “two extremes” 
of positive and negative forces, and not of any external 
cause. Chang Tsai was, however, deeply influenced by 
Buddhism and the philosophy of the Cheng brothers. He 
considered the innate character of a man to have an jn- 
dependent existence. Thus he thought that the universe 
had a dual origin in matter and innate character. For 
this reason, followers of the Loyang School called the 
philosophy of Chang Tsai “dualism,” which was its fatal 
mistake. 

During the Southern Sung dynasty (1127-1279) Chu 
Hsi* (1130-1200) developed the philosophy of the Cheng 
brothers and originated a system of objective idealism. 
In his world outlook he affirmed that “reason” in its 
absolute and spiritual sense is the origin of the material 
world. In its primeval and tranquil state it was called 
the “supreme absolute’* and it was from this that matter 
was derived. Man’s conscious mind, according to Chu 
Hsi, manifests itself in two ways, as innate character* 
and as emotion.* This innate character of man is the 
“reason” in human form and is therefore perfectly good. 
However, since the emotions are fettered by the physical 
body of man, they may be either good or bad. Therefore 
badness or evil is a product of matter. 

Men differed in rank in feudal society because they 
were differently endowed, so Chu Hsi thought, and the 
differences in endowment are a result of divine will, or 
the mandate of heaven, Standing above all other ranks 


48 


of men is the sage who is perfectly endowed with “reason.” 


.The difference between a sage and a common man is in 


reality a difference between reason and matter. As 
reason rules matter so a sage should rule men. In the 
preface of his book The Commentary on the Great Learn- 
ing,* Chu Hsi made it clear that what he called sage was 
nothing but the emperor of the feudal state. 

In his theory of knowledge he stressed investigation 
as the method to be used to ascertain the laws of the 
universe. But he also said that these laws are really 
inherent in our mind and investigation is only necessary 
to make them explicit. As to the mysterious substance 
“reason” it is an outward manifestation of the function- 
ing of the mind itself. 

Chu Hsi’s contemporary Lu Chiu-yuan* (1139-1192) 
founded a rival school of Neo-Confucianism by adopting 
the subjective idealism of the southern Dhyana Sect of 
Buddhism. In his debates with Chu Hsi, he alleged, “‘The 
universe is my mind,” and “All things are complete within 
me.” The controversy between Lu Chiu-yuan and Chu 
Hsi was a family squabble for both were Neo-Confucian 
idealists and they both believed in the scholastic philo- 
sophical doctrines of the feudal age. 

In Yeh Shih* (1150-1223) and Chen Liang* (1143-1194), 
each leading a school of thought, we again find materialist 
philosophers. Together they waged a theoretical strug- 
gle against the Neo-Confucianism of Chu Hsi and Lu 
Chiu-yuan. Chen Liang pointed out that both Chu Hsi 
and Lu Chiu-yuan were scholastic philosophers. Their 
philosophy could only lead men to build castles in the 
air, indulge in empty talk and pedantry. It could never 
be of any real use in coping with the critical situation 
facing the Southern Sung dynasty which was threatened 


49 


by invasions from the north. Chen Liang called his own 
practical philosophy the “philosophy of action.” He 
said, “Act according to the principles of both righteous- 
ness and profit, benevolence and power; listen to the 
dictates of both reason and expediency,” and ‘A man 
must serve his country and fellow countrymen with deeds 
and not words.” He showed the absurdity of the Neo- 
Confucian theory which was that “the Heavenly prin- 
ciples ruled conduct in the Three Dynasties (i.e. Hsia, 
Shang and Chou) but that afterwards human desires 
began to rule,” a theory which lauded the past at the 
expense of the present. Yeh Shih and his followers, in- 
heriting the tradition of the advocates of practical 
application and verification by experience, criticized 
the theoretical foundation of Neo-Confucianism, Yeh 
Shih was against the Neo-Confucians in their attempt to 
elevate ‘‘reason” above the world of reality. He said, 
“To understand the general laws of the universe we must 
study and examine carefully the things of the objective 
world.” From the historical and evolutionary approach 
Yeh Shih thoroughly refuted the theory of the line of 
succession invented by the Neo-Confucians. He boldly 
criticized the idols of the Confucian School like Tseng 
Tzu,* Tzu Ssu* and Mencius. 

The materialist thought of the two schools as repre- 
sented by Yeh Shih and Chen Liang was largely derived 
from their profound knowledge of history, science and 
technology, which enriched their philosophy and provided 
them with strong weapons in their fight against Neo- 
Confucianism. The progressive members of the two 
schools were persecuted by the landed aristocracy. Chen 
Liang, for instance, once petitioned the court to avenge 
national humiliation and revive national strength. He 


50 


was considered a lunatic and several times sentenced to 
imprisonment. He died in poverty and distress. During 
the reign of Emperor Ning Tsung, Yeh Shih once com- 
manded troops against an army of the Chin Kingdom in 
the Huai River valley and scored a big victory. He was 
not rewarded for his meritorious service but actually con- 
demned! 

Teng Mu* (1247-1306) was considered a “heretical” 
thinker in the period between the Sung and Yuan (1279-. 
1368) dynasties. After the downfall of the Sung dynasty, 
with sorrow in his heart, he travelled widely visiting 
many places, of interest. He wrote a book entitled 
The Lute of Po Ya* in which he criticized the politics 
of his time. A spirit of realistic humanitarianism runs 
through the whole work. Using the form of the short 
essay he criticized, satirized and accused the rulers of © 
the Yuan dynasty, boldly exposing the tyrants’ and ruth- 
less officials’ exploitation and oppression of the people. 
He also mapped out a plan for a Utopian society in which 
there would be neither oppression nor enslavement and 
none could eat from the labour of others. Unable to find 
a way to realize his imaginary plan he succumbed to the 
illusions and escapism. 

The tradition of the subjective idealism of Lu Chiu- 
yuan was carried on in the Ming dynasty by Wang Shou- 
jen also known as Wang Yang-ming* (1472-1528) who 
declared that the universe and the things in it and their 
laws were all the products of mind. He said that without 
mind there could be nothing and that it was the basis 
of the universe. The human mind is “reason” itself be- 
cause in man’s mind there is innate “intuitive knowl- 
edge.’* This “intuitive knowledge” was really express- 
ed in the moral law of feudalism. In other words, he 


51 


considered the feudal moral law ‘innate and, there- 
fore, inviolable. He taught that to gain true knowl- 
edge, the mind must be cleaned and renewed to restore 
its original “intuitive knowledge.” ‘This he likened to 
a bright mirror with its original lustre, free from dust. 
When you have physical desires your “intuitive know]- 
edge” is clouded but as soon as you overcome your de- 
sires you will regain your former clear intuition and you 
will become a sage. Here Wang Shou-jen is really 
preaching a kind of monasticism and urging the people 
to abandon their struggle for the right of existence. 
During the Ming dynasty the orthodox successors of 
Wang Shou-jen included Tsou Shou-yi* and Wang Chi* 
(1498-1583), each being the leader of a school of thought. 
They further reduced philosophy to a religion and openly 
espoused the doctrines of the Dhyana Sect of Buddhism. 


3. Philosophy in the Transitional Period Between 
the Ming and Ching Dynasties: the Beginnings 
of Enlightenment and Development of 
Materialism 


During the reigns of Chia Ching (1522-1566) and Wan 
Li (1573-1620) of the Ming dynasty, agriculture, handi- 
crafts and domestic trade, especially in the region around 
the Yangtse delta, enjoyed great progress and paved the 
way for a future capitalist society, the beginning of which 
was already evident. A series of struggles against the 
feudal order were first waged by the city people culminat- 
ing in a big peasant uprising which eventually caused the 
overthrow of the Ming dynasty. During the transitional 
period of the 16th and 17th centuries, Western sciences 
— astronomy, geography, mathematics and technology — 
were introduced into China by the missionaries. Books 
on philosophy and logic were also translated and they 
probably exercised some influence over the philosophers 
of the time. Nevertheless, the Western sciences and 
philosophy introduced into China at this time were 
largely those of the Middle Ages; they did not include 
the progressive thought of the West. In China the pro- 
gressive scholars paid great attention to the Western 
sciences, but their opinions differed regarding Western 
philosophy and they debated its usefulness. 

In 1644 the Manchus established their rule in China 
and carried out an extremely reactionary policy of na- 


53 


tional oppression. The conflict between nationalities 
overshadowed that of classes. 

Wang Ken* (1483-1540), the founder of the Taichow 
School,* advocated the pseudo-philosophy of Wang Shou- 
jen. For generations his family had been salt-makers. 
At twenty-nine this young worker wrote the story of a 
dream to express his ambition. He said he dreamed that 
heaven was collapsing and the people were greatly fright- 
ened. He propped up heaven with one arm; then he 
put it together with the earth, sun, moon, stars and other 
heavenly bodies into their proper places so that a new 
universe was made. Through his tale he indicated that 
feudal society was disintegrating and a new world was 
emerging. He travelled in many places, giving lectures. 
Gradually he rallied round him a number of people — 
mostly those living in the salt-making areas. 

In his philosophy Wang Ken considered that “the 
universe and all things are one entity,” people and all 
things are of the same substance. This theory adopted 
the expression of the Neo-Confucians of the Sung and 
Ming dynasties but in content it reaffirmed that all things 
have one origin — the universe, all things including man 
are part of nature. Wang Ken called nature “heaven.” 
The substance of heaven and man was, according to his 
theory, material and not spiritual. This, however, 
directly contradicted Wang Shou-jen’s world outlook of 
subjective idealism. Wang Ken also said that eating, 
drinking and sexual satisfaction were man’s natural rights 
of which he should not be deprived by the ruling class. 
He encouraged the people to strive for the satisfaction 
of these natural desires. He implied that the people 
Should ‘‘turn the world upside down” to throw the feudal 
rulers off their thrones. 


54 


Expanding his theory of the “substance of inherent na- 
ture,’”’ Wang Ken discussed “the daily use of the people.” 
By this he meant the daily needs of the working people 
such as eating, clothing and so on. He insisted that 
education and knowledge should be found in the “daily 
use of the people,” thus reaffirming that the truth is 
learned through practice in the daily life of the working 
people. 

According to his world outlook of ‘‘all things are one 
entity,’ Wang Ken called for the appearance of a new 
world. The politics of making all things one entity which 
he warmly anticipated was, according to his plan, a state 
in which the ruler was as wise and good as Emperors Yao 
and Shun and the subjects like the subjects of these em- 
perors; everything was fully utilized; everybody became 
a gentleman; and every home was happy and prosperous. 

Another leader of the Taichow School was Ho Hsin- 
yin* (1517-1579). In his youth he devoted his time to 
travelling and lecturing instead of obtaining an official 
position through the imperial examination. His philos- 
ophy was coloured by mysticism. He said that man is 
“the mind of the universe,” “love” or “benevolence” is 
“man’s mind,” that ‘‘mind” is “the supreme absolute,” and 
“the supreme absolute” is the origin of all things. But he 
also said, “When the universe was, then man was also.” 
In other words, the universe was the origin of man. Such 
dualism is produced by the union of the Taoist innate 
mysticism with simple materialism. It is closely related 
to and combined with the peasants’ religion as well as 
with their anti-feudal struggle. 

If we disregard certain of the mystical and dualist 
views of Ho Hsin-yin, we can see that his philosophy has 
rational materialist aspects. On the question of the rela- 


55 


tion between objects and “reason,” he believed that 
“reason” existed in concrete things, and that it manifested 
itself through definite forms and shapes, such as weights 
and measures. : 

Ho Hsin-yin said that daily conduct and expression of 
views are the source of learning. Conduct means taking 
some action .through which man learns. When there is 
action, something is done and something is learned. 
Speech is action and it causes discussion. When there is 
speech, there is action, and a discussion follows. He, 
therefore, boldly proposed freedom of academic discus- 
sion. He also completely united thinking with conduct, 
speech, seeing and hearing, and said that thinking cannot 
be separated from these. Daily conduct promotes think- 
ing and so does speech, seeing or hearing. Under the 
historical conditions of the sixteenth century, this was a 
brilliant exposition of the theory of knowledge and 
psychology. Recognition should be given to his scholarly 
achievement. 

Furthermore, Ho Hsin-yin declared that man’s ma- 
terial desires are inherent, since desire itself is inherent. 
He expanded his point by saying that the highest desire 
is to share that of the people. This is to say that he 
wanted all men to obtain the satisfaction of their human 
desires. It was a reflection of the wiil of the working 
people to defend their right to existence and their right 
to strive for equality. 

How could all men satisfy their human desires? Ho 
Hsin-yin imagined that a clan could form a community 
in which the children and the young people could be 
collectively taught. They would assemble, live and eat 
together in the ancestral hall. When they grew up, their 
schooling, marriage, clothing and food would be sub- 


sidized by the whole community. Those over seventy 
could retire and be supported. The different families in 
the clan should help and be friendly to one another. This 
was, of course, a Utopia. 

Another outstanding leader of the Taichow School was 
Li Chih* (1527-1602). His progressive thinking was 
obvious in his works on social questions but not his 
seemingly metaphysical writings in which he discussed 
Buddhism. His writings on social questions embodied 
materialism together with his humanitarianism. 

On questions of morality, Li Chih showed a spirit of 
equality, freedom, and respect for individuality. He said 
that everyone is born with knowledge in which respect 
all men are same. The term “born with knowledge” can 
be traced to The Doctrine of the Mean, one of the Four 
Books of the Confucian School. It says: 


Some are born with knowledge; some know it by 
study; and some acquire knowledge after a painful 
feeling of their ignorance. But when once knowledge 
is possessed, it is the same thing. Some practise it 
with a natural ease; some because of a desire for self- 
advantages; and some by strenuous effort. But the 
achievement being made, it comes to the same thing. 


The Neo-Confucians had taken advantage of this argu- 
ment in The Doctrine of the Mean to become apologists 
for the feudal system of ranks and grades. But Li Chih 
declared that every man has inborn knowledge, every 
man could be Buddha — man is Buddha, Buddha is man. 
He meant that from a moral viewpoint all men are equal. 

In Li Chih’s philosophy there is another important theme 
that “truth” is embodied in men without exception. This 
implies first that “truth” does not detach itself from man, 


eee ee oa 


—— 


57 


nor man from itself; the two are inseparable and, secondly, 
man is ‘‘truth” and “truth” is man; there is no “truth” 
without man, no man without “truth.” This argument 
brings “truth” back from heaven to earth and “truth” is 
no longer a mysterious thing to be monopolized by the 
Neo-Confucians. 

But what is this “truth” that Li Chih has in mind? To 
him “truth” begins from man’s natural, minimum desire 
for food and clothes. Then he expands his view to say 
“man must have his personal desire’ and ‘“‘personal de- 
sire is in man’s mind.” Obviously, such a view stands 
opposed to the feudal moral concept. The Neo-Confu- 
cians had hypocritically propagated the doctrine of sup- 
pressing desire. Chu Hsi, for example, advised “earnest- 
ness” while Wang Shou-jen advised “investigation of 
things” — both intended to foil human desire. In con- 
trast, Li Chih believed that even the sages have ‘‘a desire 
for power” since “man must have personal desire”; “truth” 
can be obtained not by suppressing desire but by satisfy- 
ing man’s wants and giving him happiness in material 
benefits. This is equivalent to saying that all good con- 
duct is motivated by material interests. It can be seen 
that Li Chih considered material well-being as the aim 
of moral practice. As such it is a materialist view of 
morality in his time. 

Li Chih wrote profusely attacking the special privileges 
of the Confucians and Neo-Confucians and the sanctity 
of feudal society. His criticism of the Six Classics (The 
Book of Poems, The Book of History, The Book of Rites, 
The Book of Music, The Book of Changes and The Spring 
and Autumn Annals) as well as The Analects of Con- 
fucius* and Mencius* was that they were merely the rec- 
ords and notes freely written by the disciples and that 


58 


they were incomplete and inconsistent. He insisted that 
they were not all the true messages of the sages, nor 
“authoritative teachings of permanent value.” He con- 
tinued to say with boldness that truth changes and devel- 
ops and Confucius’ standard of right and wrong should 
not always be taken as the standard. 

Li Chih exposed the hypocrisy, shamelessness and other 
such contemptible conduct of the Neo-Confucians. He 
said that they claimed to be pure and lofty but the fact 
was that they worked for high positions and large remu- 
neration. He also exposed the fact that some of them 
who could write only a few lines of poetry but they called 
themselves hermits while others who could not write 
poems discussed “intuitive knowledge” and called them- 
selves sages. Actually, Li Chih concluded, they were as 
base and impure in thought as the money-mad merchants 
and timid thieves. 

While declaring war on the mundane world, fighting the 
theology of the feudal ruling class with his materialist 
views and humanitarianism, Li Chih was never able to 
completely escape the influence of dominant contem- 
porary thought. In his solitude he dreamed of the 
mysterious Buddhist “other world” or Nirvana, in order 
to find relief and freedom of mind. And so he sank into 
mysticism. 

The philosophers of the Taichow School earned the 
hatred of the ruling class which persecuted them cruelly. 
Among them Ho Hsin-yin met death in prison and Li 
Chih was compelled to commit suicide after his arrest. 

In the Ming dynasty, the one who first challenged the 
idealist theories of Chu Hsi and Wang Shou-jen was Wang 
Ting-hsiang* (1471-1544), an outstanding materialist 
thinker of the time. In two of his well-known works; 


59 


Careful Speech* and Elegant Narrative,* he declared that 
original matter which was the basis of the universe mani- 
fested the laws of the objective world in the course of 
its movement and development. He said it was necessary 
to go through practical experience in order to know the 
natural laws. Subjective knowledge, a product of im- 
agination when a man isolates himself and retires to his 
private study, is false knowledge. There has never been 
such a thing as innate “intuitive knowledge.” For 
example, he said if an infant were put in a chamber, 
separated from the outside world and taught nothing, 
when he grew up he would surely be an idiot. Such, in 
brief, was Wang Ting-hsiang’s theory. He was a fore- 
runner of the anti-Neo-Confucian enlightened thinkers 
in the period between the Ming and Ching -dynasties. 

Huang Wan* (1477-1551), a friend of Wang Ting-hsiang, 
was at first a believer of Wang Shou-jen’s theory. In 
the later years of his life he criticized Wang Shou-jen 
for having derived inspiration from the Dhyana Sect of 
Buddhism, saying that his theory, therefore, had nothing 
to do with the practical needs of the people. In his theory 
of knowledge Huang Wan based his thinking on ma- 
terialism in explaining the importance of practice and 
he advocated the functions of knowledge of the external 
things. In his world outlook, however, he could not 
sever himself from Wang Shou-jen’s influence. He 
finally retreated to idealism saying that the gods and 
spirits ruled the universe. 

During the transitional period between the Ming and 
Ching dynasties there appeared a number of enlightened 
thinkers and patriots, namely, Fang Yi-chih,* Wang Fu- 
chih,* Ku Yen-wu,* Huang Tsung-hsi,* and Yen Yuan.* 
They dreamed of a new world and comforted themselves 


60 


with hope during this time of national subjugation. In 
philosophy their views were largely materialist. They 
were all against the idealists who did nothing but indulge 
in empty talks and they struggled against the so-called 
orthodox school of Neo-Confucianism. 

The outstanding scientists of the early period of enlight- 
enment were Hsu Kuang-chi* (1562-1633), Fang Yi-chih 
(1611-1671) and the latter’s two sons, Fang Chung-tung* 
and Fang Chung-li.* Hsu Kuang-chi was learned in 
almost every one of the sciences of his time — astronomy, 
calendar-making, mechanics, arms manufacture, irriga- 
tion, water conservancy and other sciences. It was he who 
first translated Euclid’s geometry into Chinese. Fang Yi- 
chih and his two sons were versed in astronomy, calendar- 
making, mathematics, physics and music. These scien- 
tists not only conducted practical experiments but were 
able to crystallize their scientific knowledge into philo- 
sophical theories. Hsu Kuang-chi maintained the view 
that science requires the careful examination of a large 
number of phenomena and possession of a considerable 
amount of data. Only then could a search for the quan- 
titative relation between the different phenomena and 
their causes be made. The aim of science, according to 
him, was to sum up the laws of the natural world. Fang 
Yi-chih believed that science must have a very fine nu- 
merical basis and also principles to summarize and ex- 
plain this basis. His son, Fang Chung-li, went further 
in pointing out the dialectical relations between the 
specific and the abstract in science. He said that scientific 
laws already summarized should be constantly examined 
and corrected through observation of the natural 
phenomena. 


61 


Fang Yi-chih has never been mentioned by bour- 
geois historians of philosophy. It is strange that the 
name of such a great thinker, natural scientist and anti- 
Manchu patriot of whom we could be proud should have 
been allowed to lie in oblivion for three hundred years. 
He was an adversary of the idealists. His courage in 
opposing feudal tyranny is particularly noteworthy. 

A brilliant scholar, Fang Yi-chih was well read in 
literature, history, geography and natural sciences and 
was also an artist, Though living in a time when science 
was still in its infancy, he already knew that the earth 
was a moving and not a stationary body and that it was 
spherical in shape. He had an elementary knowledge of 
the solar system, optics and physiology. With his knowl- 
edge of the natural sciences as a basis, he founded a 
system of materialist philosophy. The universe, accord- 
ing to him, was not created by a god or spirit, nor was 
it made of mind or “reason,” but of fire. As fire ‘contains 
the elements of conflict, conflict is the cause of motion. 
Considered as a single entity, the universe consists of one 
element, fire, yet this one element only exists as the 
result of two conflicting forces within it, of which one is 
substance and the other non-substance, one being original 
and the other derivative. The “one” exists in the ‘‘two” 
and the “two” are united in the “one.” The union of 
the two conflicting forces in fire is the cause of all 
changes in the material world. That motion is caused 
by the union of opposites—this is the most notable 
philosophical principle first made explicit by Fang Yi- 
chih. ; 

Unlike the idealists Fang Yi-chih believed that laws 
are inherent in motion in the material world. There 
is no such thing as an unknowable “god” or “Way” in- 


62 


dependent of the material world. Man is a product of 
nature. The physical structure of his body produces 


, intellect and intellect is capable of learning the laws of 


nature. Man’s intellectual power increases with his 
knowledge of the laws of the objective world, as the im- 
plements of the peasants and workers improve with use. 
Just as the peasants and workers change the world with 
their labour and tools, so the scholar changes the world 
with his knowledge, and knowledge can only be acquired 
and improved through labour. Fang Yi-chih was the 
first Chinese philosopher to put forward this theory. 

Fang Yi-chih’s monistic materialism is hot unlike 
Descartes’ philosophy with regard to the material uni- 
verse for he thought that the universe was in perpetual 
same motion. Fang Yi-chih also had a vague idea of 
the law of the conservation of energy. He believed that 
both nature and society were constantly moving and 
changing and that human knowledge was a continuous 
and developing process. History meant progress. Men 
of a later age were always wiser than those of previous 
ones. With great courage he criticized the Confucians 
for their conservatism and blind credulity. He con- 
sidered himself the wise man of his time and was proud 
of his broad scientific knowledge. 

Fang Yi-chih’s philosophy has its shortcomings; it is 
marred by mechanism or determinism. 

Fang Yi-chih expressed his indignation over social in- 
justice and the evils of society in poetic form. He put 
forward the bold prophecy that the ‘fold world” would 
collapse. He was confident of the advent of a new world 
and showed great enthusiasm for it. He resolutely re- 
fused to take part in the official examinations which 
made the writing of the stereotyped essay the sole road 


63 


to official advancement. He was content to be a private 
citizen all his life. He was one of the leaders of the 
Restoration Society,* a progressive organization establish- 
ed in 1629, having chapters in many provinces, and wield- 
ing great influence in the struggle against the feudal 
ruling class. By rallying all the progressive forces in 
the country he hoped to make changes of great historic 
importance, but he never succeeded. The only way he 
could fight against the “old world” was with his pen. 

Wang Fu-chih (1619-1692) was another great ma- 
tefialist thinker and a patriot. In 1648 he led an uprising 
in Hengshan, Hunan Province, to resist the Manchu 
army. Having failed in this attempt he retired to the 
Shihchuan Mountains in Hengshan and devoted his life 
to writing. In philosophy he was deeply influenced by 
Wang Chung and Chang Tsai. 

Wang Fu-chih made a profound study of traditional 
Chinese philosophy. He also studied and criticized the 
idealist philosophy of the Buddhists. The existence of 
material things, he believed, did not depend upon our 
mind ‘and will. He pointed out that there were things 
which men already knew and there were things which 
men did not yet know then, but none of these things 
depended on man for their existence. That some 
things were unknown did not mean that they would re- 
main unknown for ever. Man would learn more and 
more until he reached nearer and nearer to the absolute 
truth. He called this the learning of the sages and its 
counterpart heresy. He was using a traditional term to 
develop his own materialism. 

Wang Fu-chih was skilful in giving old terms a new 
meaning. Thus, he used the term “generative forces’* 
in The Book of Changes to describe matter, the original 


aoe 


64 


substance of the universe, giving the term a new mean- 
ing and bringing it closer to the word “matter” as used 
in philosophy. Matter, according to him, was the funda- 
mental substance of the universe.. From the motion of | 
matter — its condensation and dispersion — all the laws 
of the universe are derived. Wang Fu-chih not only 
stressed motion but also considered it to be the cause 
of universal development, saying that it was due to mo- ) 
tion that things in the universe become more and more 
varied and developed in new ways every day. He criti- 
cized and revised Chang Tsai’s views that ‘‘the form of 
the sun and moon never changes.” By form, he said, 
we mean the external appearance of a thing. That the 
external form of a thing does not change does not mean 
that the thing undergoes no internal changes. The water 
of the river today, for instance, may appear to be the 
same as it presumably was in ancient times. But is the 
water really the same water? No, the water of today is 
not that of ancient times and it is the same with 
physiological changes. Our body is constantly under- 
going changes and old tissues are continuously being re- 
placed by new ones though we cannot see them. Wang 
Fu-chih laid special stress on the process of “continuous 
changes” by which he meant evolution and progress. 

Wang Fu-chih considered social life to be an evolu- 

tionary process. The social institutions of ancient times 
were different from those of his day. Moreover, the 
former were savage while the latter were civilized. The 
more modern the times, the more civilized the man. He 
was against the tendency of making the past more im- 
portant than the present and said that people who did 

this were one-sided in their views; they saw what was 

good in the old but they did not see what was good in 


—$—<— ——————— 


65 


the new. It was Wang Fu-chih’s opinion that new 
things do not come out of nothing; they are derived from 
old things; they inherit some rational elements from the 
old and are developed from them. 

Wang Fu-chih explained the cause of motion as the 
interaction between the positive and negative forces. 
Interaction, he believed, resulted in various phenomena 
such as inhalation and exhalation, expansion and con- 
traction, rising and falling, union and separation, etc. 
Everything in the world contained conflicting forces such 
as strength and weakness, heat and cold, growth and 
decay, etc., which are antagonistic to each other. In 
Wang Fu-chih’s own words, ‘they are opposed and 
hostile to each other.” But the result of the struggle 
between these opposite and antagonistic forces was al- 
ways reconciliation and peace or union of the opposites. 
What he failed to see was that the struggle between 
opposites is continuous while the union of opposites is 
only a temporary phenomenon. He only felt that 
“opposition and hostility” is bad and “reconciliation and 
peace” is good. Hampered by this mistaken view he 
arrived at some incorrect conclusions on the course of 
history. It is true that he stood for the theory of social 
evolution. But when he tackled concrete historical 
problems he was always influenced by the idea of balance. 
He thought that history was a continuous process of 
disturbance and restoration of balance. Wang Fu-chih’s 
view can be easily understood if we take into account 
the stage of intellectual development prevailing in 17th 
century China. The enlightened thinkers of that time 
could see that there was a big change coming but they 
could not see what kind of change it would be. They 
saw very clearly that the old social system was tottering, 


66 


but they did not know how nor with what it would 
be changed. 

Wang Fu-chih also expounded a theory that “truth” is 
embodied in “instrument,’* and may be learned through 
it. By this name of “instrument” he meant concrete 
things such as social institutions, politics, law, etc. He 
declared that since there were different kinds of institu- ) 
tions at different times “truth”’:-must be different also. 
There was no abstract truth applicable at all times. To 
find “truth” it was necessary, therefore, to go to the 
“instrument,” and not, as the Neo-Confucians were 
prone to do, to try and discover an abstract eternal truth 
first which would only be another name for “god.” 

Wang Fu-chih proceeded from these theories of his | 
which we have just described to show that “mind must 
conform to reason.” By “mind,” he meant the process | 
of learning, and he believed that true knowledge must 
include an understanding of the laws which govern 
things as they are. To understand these laws was to 
know the truth. The proper method of acquiring 
knowledge was to study nature and the laws of motion. 
This was different from the method used by the subjec- 
tive idealists, which was to acquire knowledge independ- 
ently of objective reality. In other words, the method 
of the realists was to make the mind conform to reason 
while that of the idealists was to make the mind create 
reason. They were the two opposing schools of thought. 
Using the former method the mind sees things as they 
are; using the latter method the mind sees things as it 
thinks they should be. Herein lies the difference be- 

I, tween the methods of the materialists and idealists in 
| their search for knowledge and truth. 


EEE —— 


67 


Wang Fu-chih considered man’s knowledge to be an 
accumulation of his past experiences and believed that 
as man’s knowledge increases his nature is enriched. The 
“perfection” of human nature through “practical knowl- 
edge” is one.of Wang Fu-chih’s most important doc- 
trines. By “practical knowledge” he meant knowledge 
of the order among things in the objective world. By 
“perfection” he meant continuous intellectual progress 
through practice. Man, he said, does not possess a ready- 
made and perfect character at birth. Man’s character 
is perfected through practice in the course of his his- 
torical development. So is the life of man. | This theory 
of Wang Fu-chih is just the opposite of that of the Neo- 
Confucians of the Sung and Ming dynasties who taught 
that human nature is “rational” and never changes. 

From the essential uniformity of human nature Wang 
Fu-chih derived the notion of a society in which freedom 
and equality would prevail. This aspiration of his re- 
flected that of the city people for equality in human and 
economic rights. 

Huang Tsung-hsi (1610-1695) was one of the outstand- 
ing democratic political thinkers and historians in Chi- 
nese history. In his youth he took part in the Tung 
Lin Party’s! fight against feudal authority. Later in his 
life he took part in the people’s struggle against the 
Manchus. After the struggle had ended in failure he 
abandoned political activities and devoted the rest of his 
life to study. 

In his writings he listed many vices of the kings and 
rulers. The king took the property of the whole nation 


1A group of intellectuals who, during the Ming dynasty, criticized 
the government’s policy through their discussions and writings. 


68 


for his own; he mercilessly exploited the people and 
broke up their families. From this, Huang Tsung-hsi 
drew the bold conclusion that the king was the cause of 
great calamities. He developed the idea that if the king 
were not virtuous, he should only be allowed to remain 
as a figurehead and the prime minister should be given 
the task of government administration. He also had a 
conception of modern representative government and 
advocated that the traditional educational system should 
be reorganized according to a new principle, making the 
schools centres of public opinion capable of influencing 
public affairs. He denounced the legal system of the 
feudal rulers, calling it the “law of one family,” and 
thought that it should be replaced by a “law of the na- 
tion,” under which all men, the ruler and the ruled, 
would be equal. He dreamed of a society where there 
was no ruler, where every man lived by himself and for 
himself. But it should be pointed out that the equality 
‘Huang Tsung-hsi spoke about was merely the equality 
demanded by the urban population. As Engels said 
when speaking about the French thinkers of the 18th 
century, “. . . that equality reduced itself to bourgeois 
equality before the law; that bourgeois property was 
proclaimed as one of the most essential rights of man.’’! 

Huang Tsung-hsi had enough knowledge of the natural 
sciences to appreciate Fan Chen’s atheism. He was also 
well read in history and philosophy. He wrote two his- 
tories of philosophy: Philosophical Theories of the Sung 
and Yuan Dynasties* and Philosophical Theories of the 
Ming Dynasty.* Although wavering between idealism 


1F, Engels, Anti-Duhring, Foreign Languages Publishing House, 
Moscow, 1947, p. 31. 


69 


and materialism he nevertheless found it difficult to ac- 
cept the idealist theory of existence without conceptual 
knowledge. 

Tang Chen* (1630-1704) agreed with Huang Tsung-hsi 
in many of his political views. In his book Thoughts in 
Retirement,* remarkable for its creative thinking, he 
attacked the feudal system with great vehemence, calling 
all kings of the past two thousand years bandits and 
thieves. The style of his writing was different from 
that of other contemporary philosophers who usually 
wrote in the form of commentaries to the classics. His 
series of essays was an exposition of his own philosophy 
and political thought. 

Chen Chueh,* a schoolmate of Huang Tsung-hsi, op- 
posed the theory of the Sung and Ming Neo-Confucians 
who advocated “rational human nature” as against human 
desire. He construed human nature in terms of actual 
life. It was practice, he thought, that determined the 
good or bad in human nature, and he believed human 
nature should undergo privations and hardships just as 
plants have to live in all kinds of weather. In writing 
the Mortuary Book* he showed his materialist ideas in 
attacking the superstitious belief in the spirits giving 
blessings. In another book An Analysis of the Great 
Learning* he strongly criticized the philosophy of the 
Neo-Confucians. He said that he had tried to correct 
the Cheng brothers and Chu Hsi in order to prevent 
students of philosophy from being hoodwinked and also 
to emancipate his own conscience from bondage. 

Ku Yen-wu (1613-1682) was a member of the Restora- 
tion Society! in his youth. e In 1644 he took part in the 


1See p. 63. ° 


70 


struggle waged by the people of the region against the 
Manchus, which extended from Soochow to Chiahsing. 
After the failure of the struggle he went to the north to 
look for a new base from which to carry on the struggle 
anew. He criticized the Neo-Confucian theory of the 
line of succession from the historical, evolutionary point 
of view. He pointed out that the rationalism of the 
Neo-Confucians was different from that of the ancient 
or original Confucianism. Instead of studying history, 
documents, culture, institutions and living realities, the 
Neo-Confucians engaged only in empty talks on abstract 
principles, being Buddhist rather than Confucian in their 
thinking. The ancient Confucian scholars were engaged 
in the study of classics, Ku Yen-wu said; they studied 
practical problems of life. The ancient world was, there- 
fore, Ku’s model. He considered that the ancient scholars 
acquired knowledge through practice and actual expe- 
rience in human affairs. The knowledge they spoke of 
was the practical knowledge of how to improve them- 
selves and others and was not abstract theories of human 
nature and reason. In Ku Yen-wu’s opinion, no spiritual 
being existed beyond man’s actual experience. No spirit- 
ual world existed beyond the world of human activities. 
He rejected the theory of the Neo-Confucians about the 
“mind-to-mind” transmission of true knowledge through 
the Three Sages, saying that the mind was merely a 
fine type of matter capable of thinking. Jt was only 
through experience that man can learn the laws of na- 


1The Three Sages were given in three versions by ancient 
Chinese scholars: (1) Fu Hsi, King Wen, and Confucius; (2) 
Emperor Yu, Duke Chou, and Confucius; and (3) Emperors 
Yao, Shun and Yu, 


j 
| 


71 


ture and distinguish truth from error, Since everybody 
was capable of acquiring knowledge through experience, 
there was no such thing as “mind-to-mind” trans- 
mission. 

“A man must be well read in literature and be of high 
principle’ was the ancient adage Ku Yen-wu used to 
guide his conduct. There were, so he thought, two sides 
to being a man of high principle, negative and positive. 
On the negative side a man of high principle should not 
do irrational things such as to write stereotyped essays 
or engage in empty talks about the mysterious doctrine 
of the way of heaven and original human nature. On 
the positive side he should consider government and the 
interests of the whole nation as his responsibility. In 
other words, every man should consider himself respon- 
sible for the fate of the whole nation. By literature Ku 
Yen-wu did not mean the ordinary kind of literary writ- 
ings; he meant practical knowledge of historical changes 
and political, social and economic problems. He con- 
sidered knowledge to be a reflection of objective reality 
and that its correctness should be tested by experience. 
He used the method of inductive logic to refute the dog- 
matic method of the Neo-Confucians. His inductive 
method is characterized by emphasis on investigation, 
reliance on first-hand materials, exhaustive research, use 
of the historical method, critical analysis, creative think- 
ing, modesty and an open mind. 

One of the most notable features of Ku Yen-wu’s 
method of study was to combine the study of the Six Clas- 
sics with that of current affairs. He thought the study of 

‘the past-should enlighten the study of, and be of practical 
use to, the present. Study of the past for its own sake 


ene 


72 


without reference to the present leads to erroneous views 
and bigotry. 

Among the philosophers of the period of enlighten- 
ment Yen Yuan (1635-1704) was the most radical. His 
criticism of Neo-Confucianism was even more disparag- 
ing than that of the other philosophers, Wang Fu-chih, 
Huang Tsung-hsi and Ku Yen-wu. He denounced blind 
faith and superstition, extolled reason and decried the 
prevailing Neo-Confucianism since the Sung and Ming 
dynasties. He said that whether a doctrine was right 
or wrong depended on whether it conformed to truth 
or not, but did not depend on the number of its sup- 
porters. If a doctrine was true, it would still be 
true even if it were supported by only one or two 
persons. If a doctrine were false it would still be false 
even if it were believed by millions of people. A 
doctrine should not be accepted just because many 
others accept it. Yen Yuan was aware that his radical 
views might land him in trouble. But he persisted in 
his own belief to oppose the Neo-Confucians — the Cheng 
brothers, Chu Hsi, Lu Chiu-yuan, and Wang Shou-jen. 

Basing his judgement on the facts of history, Yen Yuan 
criticized the main trend of thought since the Sung and 
Ming dynasties. He made a distinction between two 
worlds: the “world of words” and the “world of action.” 
The “world of words” was a world of superstitious be- 
lief, Buddhist meditation, literary verbosity and empty 
talk. It was full of conventions and restrictions which 
stifled creative genius. It was a world of gloom and 
darkness, and the breeding ground of subjective Neo- 
Confucian philosophies. In contrast with this, was the 
“world of reality” or ‘world of action.” In this practical 
world both hand and brain are used. Here doctors give 


i tr i it 


73 


treatment to patients, soldiers fight on the battlefield, road- 
builders build roads, sailors steer their boats, peasants 
work in the fields, tailors make clothes, composers write 
music, legislators enact laws, and soon. These people may 
be doing things of a widely different nature, since there 
is a division of labour, but they are nevertheless all work- 
ing people. They are full of spirit and energy and each 
one has something to give to this manifold world of ours. 
The “world of words,” according to Yen Yuan, was de- 
clining while the ‘‘world of action” was rising. It is 
significant that Yen Yuan’s philosophy, his division of 
society into two worlds, was a reflection of the class 
struggle. In his time the struggle between the progres- 
sive and conservative forces was also reflected in the 
realm of thought, as was the implacable opposition of 
the town and city dwellers to decaying feudalism. 

Yen Yuan held that matter was the original substance 
or cause of all things, while “reason” or “principle” was 
the law inherent in the things themselves. Without 
material things there could be no “‘reason.” In his theory 
of knowledge, Yen Yuan stressed the importance of per- 
ception and practice in the process of knowing. There 
was a passage in the Great Learning,* one of the Four 
Books, about “the investigation of things and extension 
of knowledge.” Yen Yuan interpreted ‘‘to investigate” 
as “to struggle.” Thus the process of learning was, ac- 
cording to him, a process of struggle to possess knowledge.., 
He said that to know the rites a person must perform 
them and to know music they must actually sing and 
dance. In other words, a man must do a thing before 
‘he ean understand it. The method of contemplation and 
meditation of the Neo-Confucians, he pointed out, can 
only make an effeminate scholar out of a man with book 


74 


knowledge and no practical experience. He, therefore, 
called on the men of letters of his time to free themselves 
from the bondage of the stereotyped writing and to study 
science and technology. 

Li Kung,* one of Yen Yuan’s disciples, carried on and 
developed this philosophy. But in his theory of knowl- 
edge he gave a wrong interpretation to the significance 
of practice. 

Having established their rule in China, the Manchus 
increased their national oppression. Many innocent 
scholars were persecuted on account of their writings 
opposing the interests of the ruling class. The Manchus 
promoted textual research and the philosophy of Neo- 
Confucianism so as to facilitate and strengthen their con- 
trol over the people’s thinking. The famous 18th cen- 
tury philosopher Tai Chen* (1723-1777) voiced a strong 
protest against this policy of thought control. He hinted 
that “reason” or “‘principle” has a class character. The 
ruling class had its own “reason” or “principle” which it 
uses as an instrument to enslave the people. The people 
also had theirs which the ruling class considered to be 
an instrument of revolt. In world outlook Tai Chen 
believed that the objective world consisted of matter in 
motion. The Book of Changes speaks about what is 
without shape, meaning the metaphysical and what has 
shape, meaning the physical. Both, according to Tai 
Chen, are substance and phenomena in movement. The 
former is the internal aspect of matter while the latter 
is the external shape of it as it appears to be. There is, 
therefore, no such thing as abstract “reason” or “‘prin- 
ciple” having no connection with matter and objective 
reality. Tai Chen particularly stressed the value of 
knowledge derived from the analysis and generalization 


75 


of actual things and events in the objective world. One 
shortcoming in his theory of knowledge was that he did 
not pay enough attention to practice and so his theory 
of knowledge cannot be compared favourably with that 
of Yen Yuan. However, he strongly opposed the teach- 
ings of the Sung Neo-Confucians that men should forsake 
their desires and restore their innate reason. He be- 
lieved that desire was also innate in man and taught 
that if a man’s desire was satisfied he would not harm 
himself nor would he interfere with others in satisfying 
their desire; and this conforms to reason. It was really 
an indirect refutation of the philosophy of the ruling 
class because, as he said, they often ‘‘killed people in the 
name of reason.” 

During the eighteenth century academic pursuits were 
under strict control and as a consequence learning in 
the style of the Han dynasty scholars* was promoted. 
This type of learning did not deal with the philo- 
sophical aspect of Confucianism, but was only devoted 
to laborious research into historical material di- 
vorced from politics, which the Manchu ruling class 
saw as a useful instrument for keeping the thought of 
the scholars ineffective and impractical. But the pro- 
gressive scholars of the time, such as Wang Chung* 
(1744-1794), Chang Hsueh-cheng* (1738-1801) and Chiao 
Hsun* (1763-1820) were aware of this underlying motive 
and raised their criticisms. 

Wang Chung was a rebel against feudal society. Critical 
and sceptical in spirit, he frowned on the conventional 
studies of his time and castigated the contemporary 
scholars. He carried on the tradition of the enlightened 


1pifferent from Wang Chung (27-107) discussed in Chapter 2. 


16 


scholars of the early Ching dynasty. His aim was to 
revive the philosophy of the thinkers of the Warring 
States Period, especially the theory of universal love ex- 
pounded by Mo Ti and the materialist theory of Hsun 
Ching. Although Wang Chung did some work in textual 
research, it was, as he said himself, different from that 
done by the other scholars because his aim was to bring 
out the real meaning of the Six Classics and make them 
serve the needs of his time. 

Chang Hsueh-cheng was relentless in his criticism of 
the Han style learning. According to him the writings of 
these scholars were not original but merely selections 
copied from other works. They were the results of pains- 
taking labour, to be sure, but they had no originality 
and could not be called schools or systems of thought. 
Containing vast quantities of information they were at 
best reference material for the use of students, and like 
a carriage or a boat used by a traveller, which should 
be discarded when the traveller arrived at his destina- 
tion. But.the ordinary scholar of this type, Chang 
Hsueh-cheng thought, was like a traveller who rides a 
carriage or a boat perpetually and never knows where 
to go. 

The most brilliant part of Chang Hsueh-cheng’s 
philosophy is, however, his materialism. He drew heavily 
on Mo Ti, Lao Tzu, Hsun Ching, and Han Fei, each one 
of whom, he said, had mastered one aspect of the 
great “truth” or “Way.” He said “truth” resides in 
“instrument.” He made certain revisions of Lao Tzu’s 
philosophy, omitting the point that “truth” is unknow- 
able but reaffirming the natural law that ‘‘truth” has 
substance. He criticized the Neo-Confucians of the 
Sung and Ming dynasties and in contrast declared that 


\ 
: 
‘ 
: 
: 


77 


“heaven is manifested in man and reason exists in mat- 
ter.” In his theory of knowledge he believed that sub- 
jective knowledge is a reflection of objective reality. He 
also pointed out that without practical experience knowl- 
edge would be merely an empty thing, lacking validity. 
The study of books alone makes men narrow-minded 
pedants. 

One of Chang Hsueh-cheng’s most important achieve- 
ments was his theory with regard to the Classics. He 
discussed the question “the Six Classics are all history!” 
With great boldness he pointed out that the Six Classics! 
which were accepted by people of feudal society as sacred 
are but the records of laws and institutions of ancient 
times, ancient treatises on politics and records of ancient 
social life; they were, therefore, ‘instruments.’ There 
was nothing sacred or permanent about them. This view 
of his was considered by the ruling class as blasphemy, 
and that of a rebel. He was, therefore, branded a heretic. 

Chiao Hsun was a great mathematician. He followed 
the lead given by Tai Chen and carried on further re- 
search but in a critical spirit. From his knowledge of 
mathematics he advanced the philosophical theory of 
formalistic equilibrium. He thought that all changes are 
those of quantity and that things do not differ from one 
another in their essential quality or inner composition. 
He described numbers as an absolute form, having an 
independent existence apart from the material world. 
His world outlook was, therefore, a form of idealism, in 
which quantitative relations became the cause of the 
universe. Chiao Hsun’s theory of equilibrium may be 
said to reflect the rise of new ideas from the intellectual 


1See p. 57. 


78 


contact between the East and West following the develop- 
ment of commerce and communication. He was also the 
precursor of Tan Ssu-tung,* an advocate of the “science 
of benevolence” which savoured of bourgeois “free 
trade.” 

Having made quantitative relations the initial cause of 
the universe, Chiao Hsun proceeded to show the many 
shortcomings of the textual research of the Han style 
learning. He thought that this hampered creative think- 
ing. He, therefore, proposed that a scholar should 
broaden the scope of his study by having the Six Classics 
as his guide and also studying the works of the various 
schools of philosophy extensively to gain a comprehensive 
understanding of linguistic problems and the power of 
reasoning. He should not only test the truth of his knowl- 
edge by practice but also see that it conformed to philo- 
sophical principles. He criticized the usual methods of 
study in his time, believing that a scholar should be 
versed in literature, textual criticism and philosophy, the 
last being the most important. He was one of the earliest 
Ching scholars to revive the doctrines of the Modern Text 
School of the Han dynasty. From the sayings he quoted 
from the Kungyang School,*! it would appear that he 
believed also in certain reforms. 

By the end of the eighteenth century the disintegra- 
tion of feudal society was obvious. Peasant uprisings 
continued without cessation. Meanwhile, the colonial 
policy of the Western imperialists was intensified. So- 
cial conflicts of the time were reflected in the views of 
Kung Tzu-chen* (1792-1841) and Wei Yuan™ (1794-1856). 

Kung Tzu-chen criticized the corrupt practices of the 


1See footnote on p. 86. 


79 


Ching court and predicted that all time-worn ideas and 
systems would be destroyed by the peasants in their up- 
risings. He saw through the colonial schemes of the 
British and prophesied that a new historical epoch would 
dawn. He paid great attention to the question of land- 
ownership. He said that in the ancient patriarchal clan 
communes equitable instead of unfair distribution pre- 
vailed. He, therefore, looked upon the ancient patriarchal 
society as his ideal. 

Wei Yuan believed that the world was constantly 
changing. The more old ideas and practices were dis- 
carded, the better it would be for the people. In his 
discussions on political questions he criticized the Ching 
government for its corruption and proposed plans for 
making China-a strong and wealthy country. He advised 
the use of tactics in dealing with foreign countries say- 
ing: “Take advantage of the hostility between foreign 
countries to make them fight each other; learn their 
strong points so as to pay them in their own coin.” What 
he meant by ‘‘strong points” were warships, fire-arms 
and the methods of building up and training an army. 
“If we want to know the real conditions of foreign coun- 
tries,” said he, “we must begin with establishing an 
institute to translate foreign books into Chinese.’ His 
book Illustrated Records of Oceanic Countries* contained 
information on world geography. He paid much atten- 
tion to the appearance of merchant capital at that time. 

Kung Tzu-chen and Wei Yuan were forerunners of the 
modern liberal-bourgeois reformists. 


4. Modern Philosophy: the New and Old 
Learning and Bourgeois Philosophy 


After the Opium War (1840-1842) Chinese society 
gradually became semi-feudal and semi-colonial. The 
Western imperialists dumped their cheap manufactured 
goods into the Chinese market and, as Marx had pointed 
out, destroyed China’s natural economy which was based 
on a combination of individual farming and home handi- 
crafts. The feudal, patriarchal society of China, which 
had previously closed its doors to foreigners, quickly 
underwent a complete change. The inroads of capitalism 
and the collapse of the feudal order soon awoke the pro- 
gressive intellectuals from their slumber and made them 
realize the necessity of studying Western culture in order 
to save their country from doom. But among the more 
enlightened feudal scholars only a feeble attempt was 
made at social reform. The real heralds of a new era 
who rose in revolutionary struggle were the masses, the 
millions of oppressed and despised peasants. 

Modern revolutions in China have been characterized 
by their mass character, usually involving millions of 
people. They arose like waves one after the other and 
living epics of glory and heroism were written by them. 
The Taiping Revolution, which began in 1850, was the 
curtain-raiser of modern democratic revolution in China. 
As soon as the Chinese peasants stepped onto the stage 
of modern history, they at once took up of their own 


81 


free will the task of struggling against both feudal op- 
pression and foreign aggression. ~The land system and 
political platform of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom 
(1851-1864) represented Utopian ideals and the struggle 
of the broad masses of Chinese peasants against feudal 
oppression. 

Adopting a theological form of the Reformation, the 
Taipings borrowed the concept of a rebel “God” from 
the West and founded a religion which they believed to 
be reformed Christianity. Their sharp contrasting of 
God and the Devil represented the irreconcilable ideolog- 
ical conflict between the broad masses of revolutionary 
peasants and the traditional feudal forces. Their aim 
was to destroy the hell on earth created by the feudal 
landlords. Borrowing from the doctrines of primitive 
Christianity they dreamed of a paradise on earth where 
liberty, equality and fraternity would prevail. In the 
modern history of China it was precisely the despised 
peasants who first dared to stand up and fight against 
the feudal moral code and superstitions, who dared to 
overthrow the idol of Confucius, who dared to declare 
war against all feudal tradition and conventions. The 
Taiping movement shook the patriarchal system and the 
ideology of feudal society to its roots. The feudal moral- 
ists called it “the greatest moral degradation of all times.” 
It was in reality a great political, cultural and ideological 
revolution. The revolutionary thought of the Taiping 
Heavenly Kingdom was a prelude to the modern enlight- 
enment movement in China. 

One of the characteristics of the modern enlighten- 
ment movement was that, neither its leaders nor its 
followers were able to entirely free themselves from 
scholastic tradition. They expressed their views in the 


language of the Classics and the works of the ancient 
philosophers. In other words, modern thought was 
clothed in the language of the Sages. In this respect 
not even the revolutionaries of the Taiping Heavenly 
Kingdom, who attempted linguistic reform were dif- 
ferent, for their programme for a cultural revolution, 
which opposed Confucianism or traditional moral institu- 
tions, was still expressed within the context of the clas- 
sical learning. When speaking of equality Hung Hsiu- 
chuan,* the leader of the Taiping Revolution, explained 
it by quoting the passage dealing with “cosmopolitanism” 
from the ancient’ treatise ‘Evolutions of Rites.” When 
speaking of the capitalist system Hung Jen-kan,* another 
Taiping leader, cloaked it with the enlightened despotism 
of the Duke of Chou.! 

Another characteristic of thinkers connected with the 
modern enlightenment movement in China was that their 
outlook was no longer limited within the bounds of 
feudal national culture isolated from the outside world. 
They had an elementary knowledge of the current world 
situation and the culture of the capitalist countries. As 
China gradually lost her former position of being a great 
nation and sank to the humiliating position of being a 
dumping ground for European capitalists they realized 
that it was necessary to reform the old feudal culture 
by studying the Western way of life and learning “new 
theories” and “new principles” from the West. The 
term “Western Learning” became the main subject of 
dispute between intellectuals of the new and old schools 
of thought. 


1See p. 3. 


83 
The struggle in the realm of thought and culture in 
modern China was a struggle waged by progressives of 
recent origin against conservatives of long standing. It 
was a conflict between the young immature culture of 
the rising bourgeoisie and the old deep-rooted culture 
of feudal China. It was a conflict between Western or 
New Learning and Chinese or Old Learning. The former 
consisted of natural and social sciences serving the 
cause of the bourgeois-democratic revolutién, while 
the latter consisted of traditional doctrines serving the 
interests of the feudal ruling class. Owing to the weak- 
ness of the bourgeoisie and the advent of the imperialist 
era in the world, works of. intellectuals advocating 
Western or New Learning, whether their terminology 
was borrowed from the West or from the ancients, could 
not but contain many backward and feudal ideas. They 
were like a child just learning to imitate the grown-ups. 

In the thirty years following the defeat of the Taiping 
Heavenly Kingdom the men in power were representa- 
tives of the landlords and bureaucrats whose rise to power 
was due to their ability to suppress the peasant revolu- 
tions. With the support of Western capital they launched 
the “Westernization” Movement* which aimed mainly 
at establishing an armament industry. The ‘“Westerniza- 
tion” Movement was in reality one of feudal bureaucrats 
who later became compradors. They were the pre- 
cursors of the bureaucrat-comprador bourgeoisie. ‘“Chi- 
nese Learning is the substance and Western Learning is 
the functioning” —this was the slogan of the ‘“West- 
ernizing” group. They wanted to breathe life into the 
corpse:-of feudalism and to decorate it with modern 
culture and science. They wanted to curry favour with 
the Western capitalists and thus maintain their own posi- 


84 


tion and interests. The movement must not, therefore, 
be looked upon as a real measure whereby they hoped 
to learn the truth from the West. 

Meanwhile, the first reformists of modern China ap- 
peared among the -scholar-officials of feudal society. 
They included such men as Ma Chien-chung* (1845- 
1900), Chen Chih,* Hsueh Fu-cheng* (1838-?), and Cheng 
Kuan-ying* (1841-?). They were the opponents of the 
“Westernizing” group. They criticized the latter with 
varying degrees of severity and vaguely expressed their 
desire to develop private industrial enterprises and see 
the realization of constitutional monarchy. These 
scholar-officials had been influenced by Western capi- 
talist thought and they became, consciously or uncon- 
sciously, the spokesmen of the rising class of industrialists 
and business men of the 1860s. 

The defeat of China in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894 
proved that the “Westernizing” group was utterly in- 
capable of finding a remedy for China’s ills. At this 
time the Western capitalist powers were entering the 
new era of imperialism and beginning to seek capital 
investment in China. Taking advantage of cheap labour 
they used their capital to build factories in China and 
made the Chinese economy entirely dependent upon 
them. A wave of anti-imperialist feeling was rising 
through the Chinese masses and the seeds of a demo- 
cratic revolution were sown. In the middle and upper 
sections of the ruling class there was also an increasing 
desire for reform. As a result a new movement was 
launched by a group of liberal-bourgeois yreformists 
headed by Kang Yu-wei.* 

Kang Yu-wei (1858-1927) raised his voice at this time 
of national crisis to call for political reform.* His re- 


formist ideas did have an influence on the progressive 
trend of his time and were in the interest of the nation. 
But he emphasized that change was the way of heaven. 
His idea was that change was not to be gained through 
observing the laws of development and change in the 
conflict between the old and new but rather it was based 
on wishful thinking. He wanted to change some ex- 
ternal features of the old regime and adapt them to the 
new Situation to perpetuate their existence. This was 
a distortion of the evolutionary theory and was based on 
imagination and not on fact. “Heaven is everlasting be- 
cause it can adapt to change and so is earth,” he said. , 
In other words, he was using the idea of gradual change 
as a means of preventing change. His logic was exactly 
the’ timid logic of the reformists, and when applied to 
politics it became the idea that if a ruling house followed 
the way of heaven and made changes in due time, it would 
last for ever. By political reform, he meant that the 
emperor should make certain voluntary changes and 
minor concessions on the question of constitutional 
monarchy. Kang Yu-wei also talked about moderniza- 
tion.* But what he hoped for was merely that the feudal 
government would use its power to carry out a policy 
of mercantilism, develop capitalism to a limited extent 
and keep the feudal system fundamentally intact. 
Kang Yu-wei had a smattering of Western knowledge, 
of the natural sciences, history, geography, etc. He was 
greatly influenced and impressed by the Reformation in 
Europe and attempted to carry out reforms in China on 
a similar pattern. He put forward a new theory con- 
cerning the original ideas of Confucius as a reformer in 
order to give authenticity to, and provide himself with 
a propaganda weapon for, his programme of reform. In 


86 


his book The Study of Classics Forged During the Hsin 
Period* he stated that the Classics of the Modern Text 
School of the Western Han dynasty were the original 
Classics handed down by Confucius while the “Classics” 
of the Ancient Text School of the Eastern Han dynasty 
were forged by Liu Hsin.* Just as the Protestant thinkers 
of the Reformation period distorted scholastic philosophy 
to prove that the God worshipped in the Middle Ages 
was not the true God. Kang Yu-wei’s theory dealt a 
severe blow to the traditional Classics which had been 
believed to be authentic and had been studied by scholars 
for two thousand years. He tried to prove that the Con- 
fucius worshipped by the Confucians for so many cen- 
turies was a false idol. In his book An Inquiry into 
Confucius’ Reform in the Name of the Ancients* he 
adopted the method of the Kungyang School! and 
claimed to give a true picture of Confucius. He said 
that the Six Classics were all works of Confucius in an 
attempt to bring order out of chaos at his time by using 
the names of Emperors Yao, Shun, etc. who were merely 
his ideal and therefore imaginary sages. Thus, Kang 
Yu-wei made Confucius a pioneer reformer, who claimed 
authority of the ancients as a basis for his plan of re- 
form. It is obvious that such historical views were 
absurd. But what Kang Yu-wei did was not without 
progressive significance. He aroused people’s critical 
spirit and made them re-examine and reappraise history. 

According to Kang Yu-wei, the real teaching of Con- 
fucius is-embodied in The Spring and Autumn Annals and 


* 


1Members of this school were followers of Kungyang Kao 
(late Warring States Period) in the interpretation of Confucius’ 
work, The Spring and Autumn Annals. 


Cee 


87 


its real meaning is to be found in the tradition of the 
Kungyang School and in the book Luxuriant Dew of the 
Spring and Autumn Annals* written by Tung Chung- 
shu. Adopting the methods and principles of the Kung- 
yang School Kang Yu-wei expounded his philosophy that 
“love” or “benevolence” is the essence of the Annals. 
He explained “love” by such terms as “inability to endure 
seeing the sufferings of others,” “soul,” “spirit,” etc. 
“Love” which originates in heaven is equivalent to Master, 
the idea of God common to many religions of the world. 
He was against the atheistic views of Darwin and others 
but failed to give any convincing proof of his arguments. 
The only argument he could offer was: ‘‘The world is 
so big and man so small that he will never be able to 
know everything.” The scientists’ denial of the existence 
of God he thought very presumptuous. His conclusion 
was, therefore, that the existence of God was certain. 
But Kang Yu-wei also accepted the scientific view of 
the natural scientists and believed that “Heaven” is a 
boundless celestial sphere with infinite numbers of 
stars and constellations. He was awed by the infinite 
extent'of the universe and deplored the limitations of 
human knowledge. 

Occasionally Kang Yu-wei wandered away from the 
realm of philosophy and entered that of the natural 
sciences, making certain correct statements about the 
structure of the universe. In his book Discourses on the 
Heavens,* for instance, he followed the nebular theory 
of Kant and explained the sun as having originated from 
tiny substances — ‘‘a big mass of gaseous substance,” to 
use his own words. But he could not understand or ex- 
plain natural sciences in terms of materialist philosophy. 
Whenever a fundamental problem of philosophy arose 


83 


he at once invoked his spiritualist world outlook, giving 
a twisted meaning. For instance, he explained “elec- 
tricity” as “benevolence” tinging it with a mysterious ele- 
ment.! 

As the liberal reformists, of whom Kang Yu-wei was 
a leader, stood aloof from the masses, they could receive 
no material support from them. They had to seek help 
from the spiritual realm with its principle of “love” or 
“benevolence” for the “salvation of the world.” “Love” 
became, for them, a mysterious, eternal and omnipotent 
power. Kang Yu-wei connected the idea of “love” with 
that of trade which he thought was the result of a rela- 
tionship between self and other men. This shows that 
the philosophical principle of the reformists, i.e. “love,” 
was closely connected with their politico-economical 
doctrine. This was mercantilism and the former was a 
reflection of the latter in the realm of abstract thought. 
He further believed that there were three stages of “love” 
with ever increasing scope. The first stage was filial 
piety, as taught by the Confucians together with the love 
for other people, varying according to the degree of in- 
timacy. The principle of filial piety demanded that the 
distinctions of high and low, noble and base, old and 
young, internal and external, far and near, etc. in social 
relations should never be altered. The second stage of 
“love,” which had special reference to the conduct of the 
rulers, was to love the people (i.e. to serve the cause of 


1In his book Commentaries on Mencius* Kang Yu-wei said, 
“The feeling of inability te endure seeing the sufferings of 
others is benevolence, electricity or Ether, which everybody 
has. All benevolent policies originate from this feeling; it is 
the sea of all changes, the roots, the source... .” 


ES a Srl 


the bourgeoisie). The third or final stage was an exten- 
sion of the idea to the world of nature— the world of 
rivers, mountains, plants, insects, etc. The work of 
“love” in this stage included the promotion of industry 
and transformation of nature. Kang Yu-wei’s philos- 
ophy of “love” is, therefore, a philosophy of compro- 
mise. By calling its primary requisite filial piety, he 
meant to compromise with feudalism and through this 
compromise he wished to realize reform.in the style of 
capitalism, i.e. through the second and third stages of 
“love.” It clearly reflects his compromising attitude and 
reformist views on constitutional monarchy. 

In his book On Cosmopolitanism* he gave a detailed 
account of the sufferings mankind had undergone since 
the earliest times and a description of the prosperity and 
happiness in the new “cosmopolitan world” of his imagina- 
tion. He derived his idea of this world from European 
theories of Utopian socialism and the Western bourgeois 
idea of democracy. It was meant to be a development 
of, as well as an improvement on, the traditional political 
thought of the Confucians. The parts of his book which 
attacked private ownership of property and expressed 
hope for a happy future were progressive in nature. But 
when he described his plan of how to attain the “‘cos- 
mopolitan world” his liberal-bourgeois characteristics 
were revealed. He made equality between man and 
woman a key question towards the realization of this 
“cosmopolitan world.” He never referred to the problem 
of land which was the central problem of the democratic 
revolution in modern China. Finally, he pictured his 
“cosmopolitan world” as nothing more than the demo- 
cratic system of the U.S.A. and Switzerland. He thought 
that China could only advance towards a “peaceful era” 


90 


or a society of constitutional reform but could not hope 
for a democratic revolution. As such, Kang Yu-wei’s 
Utopia is not even comparable with the peasants’ Utopian 
socialism of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom nor with Sun 
Yat-sen’s subjective socialism characteristic of the thought 
of the petty bourgeoisie. In his book On Cosmopolitanism 
Kang Yu-wei distorted the meaning of the democratic 
revolution. His “cosmopolitan world” is, therefore, not 
to be looked upon as one of Lenin’s “good Utopias.” 

In the reformist group, the most radical thinker was 
Tan Ssu-tung* (1865-1898) who, however, remained a 
reformist in political practice. He borrowed the concept 
of Ether from the natural sciences and made it his im- 
aginary new authority as a weapon to fight against feudal 
ethics. In his parlance Ether had the same meaning as 
benevolence or universal love, compassion, mercy and 
the power of attraction. He even connected the sacred- 
ness of “free trade’? with the authority of Ether, con- 
sidering the former as being derived from the nature of 
the latter. A closed-door policy in commerce would, ac- 
cording to his theory, be a violation of the principle of 
Ether or universal love. Equality was also an attribute 
of Ether. Progress and change were determined by 
Ether. According to him, Ether, largely a mysterious 
primary force, was not a spiritual phenomenon separated 
from the world of reality. It existed in the things of 
this world. Tan Ssu-tung, therefore, carried on the ideal- 
ist tradition of Kang Yu-wei’s theory of “love.” How- 
ever, while he stressed the importance of natural 
sciences, his contribution is at its best a kind of dis- 
guised materialism under the name of pantheism. 

Tan Ssu-tung talked a great deal about the importance 
of the natural sciences. Although his aim was to use 


beni 


91 


them to connect with the Confucian, Mohist, Buddhist, 
and_Christian systems of thought, what he wanted was 
to make natural sciences an instrument for practical use. 
When he spoke about the natural sciences in relation to 
his views on political and economic questions including 
the establishment of schools and buying machines, he 
praised the natural sciences, extolled their power, and 
made a good exposition ‘of them. But when he came 
to a fundamental philosophical problem, he at once 
halted, turned away from science and resorted to the 
mysterious principle of “love.” “Love,” he said, “is the 
source of all things. The world exists in the mind only; 
it is pure consciousness.” He became, in short, a true 
idealist. But Tan Ssu-tung considered that the self- 
sufficient economy of the feudal society was built on 
the principle of immovability and thrift and strongly 
attacked it. He regarded the traditional morals and in- 
stitutions as an instrument of the ruling class for oppress- 
ing the people and consolidating their own position. 
Of the Five Bonds of Relationships! he stressed the rela- 
tionship between friends, considering it to be an expres- 
sion of the principle of equality. This reflected his idea 
of bourgeois democracy based on commodity exchange. 

Among the liberal reformists Yen Fu* (1853-1921) was 
the most learned in the natural sciences and in the polit- 
ical and economic theories of the Western bourgeoisie. 
He lavished praises on the characteristic features of capi- 
talist society, saying, “In the sphere of learning, let truth 
prevail over falsehood; in the legal and political spheres 
subject private interests to those of the public.” By the 


1 Between ruler and subjects, father and son, husband and 
wife, elder and younger and between friends. 


92 


first statement he meant the study of the sciences of 
physics, mathematics, biology, logic, geology, etc.; by the 
second he was referring to the economic theory of Adam 
Smith and the political philosophy of Montesquieu. Yen 
Fu was deeply influenced in his thinking by Spencer. He 
explained social phenomena by the law of evolution, say- 
ing that society is governed by the law of “struggle for 
existence and natural selection.” The strong and intel- 
ligent survive while the weak and stupid are eliminated. 
If China went along the path of capitalism and strove to 
become a nation of wealth and power, she would, he 
thought, win in the struggle with nature. 

Yen Fu not only paid attention to the practical signif- 
icance of the natural sciences but also to the importance 
of their method of study. The method of studying the 
natural sciences, according to him, was to base theories 
on facts and to use facts to prove theories. The method 
used by the schools of Lu Chiu-yuan and Wang Shou-jen, 
he stated, was just the opposite. Their theories were not 
based on facts and they did not use facts to prove their 
theories. They thought that the laws of nature should 
obey their will and they spun theories out of their own 
minds. Yen Fu, therefore, exhorted people to reject 
the subjective method of these idealists and go to the 
natural sciences and logic for real knowledge. He con- 
sidered, however, the methods used in science to be noth- 
ing but a matter of logic: deduction and induction. To 
promote the study of logic, he translated John Stuart 
Mill’s Logic (translation unfinished) and William Stanley 
Jevons’ Elementary Lessons in Logic into Chinese. Be- 
ginning in 1900 he taught logic in Shanghai. His in- 
fluence was widely felt among the intellectuals of his 
time. 


93 


Yen Fu yoiced strong opposition to absolute monarchy. 
He did not, however, stand for the immediate abolition of 
monarchy in China. On the contrary, he supported the 
establishment of a constitutional monarchy. In the later 
years of his life he, like Kang Yu-wei, renounced the 
doctrine of reform and became a supporter of the con- 
servative ideas. 

During the period between the Yi Ho Tuan Move- 
ment! in 1900 and the Revolution of 1911, conditions in 
China may be described as follows: First, national and 
social crises which were interwoven were serious and 
the contradiction between the Chinese people and al- 
liance of the imperialist and feudal forces was becom- 
ing increasingly strong. A dark shadow fell over the 
whole land and the people lived and suffered in a stifling 
atmosphere of oppression. Secondly, forces were gather- 
ing for a great upheaval. The people’s revolution, ac- 
celerated by the national and social crises, rolled on like 
a wave, revealing a great historic panorama of popular 
struggle as it steadily developed. Ever since the time 
of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom (1851-1864), revolution 
in modern China has shown a markedly mass character. 
It was not the feeble moaning of a few reformists but 
an uprising of millions upon millions of people. “Mil- 
lions upon millions of people, oppressed and slumbering 
in medieval stagnancy, have awakened, demand a new 
life, and struggle for the elementary rights of man, for 
democracy.” (V. I. Lenin, The Awakening of Asia) . 
This was precisely the era of “the awakening of Asia.” 


1Originally known as Yi Ho Chuan (Society of Righteous 
and Harmonious Fists) and known in the West as the “Boxers.” 


64 


After the suppression of the Yi Ho Tuan Movement by 
joint imperialist and feudal forces, the national crisis in 
China deepened. Acting in accordance with the West- 
ern bourgeois theory of the equality of rights of man, 
progressive intellectuals such as Tsou Jung,* Chen Tien- 
hua,’ and Wu Yueh* challenged the feudal despotic system. 
Tsou Jung in his Revolutionary Army (published in 1903) 
and Chen Tien-hua in his Wake Up and Warning Bell 
(published in 1903-04) revealed the miserable life of the 
people under the oppression of the Ching dynasty and 
the foreign powers. With great eloquence they aroused 
in the mind of the people desire for freedom and 
democracy and encouraged their will to struggle. They 
showed a frantic enthusiasm which is characteristic of 
the petty bourgeoisie. In an article reviewing the Rev- 
olutionary Army, the Kiangsu Journal* said: 


The aim of the book is to drive away the Manchus 
and restore China to the Chinese. Its style is clear and 
precise. Its tone is profoundly pathetic. Anyone, who 
has the slightest feeling of nationalism, cannot help, 
after reading it, to jump up on his feet, swing his 
sword, and feel his blood boil with indignation. If 
this book can be popularized and its ideas implanted 
in the mind of 400 million people, China will doubt- 
lessly rise and become strong. Thus, our hope lies in 
the readers of the Revolutionary Army. 


In 1905, uniting the Society for the Revival of China,* 
the Restoration League* and China Revival League," a 
group of bourgeois revolutionary democrats founded the 
China Revolutionary League* in Tokyo, Japan. Their 
political programme of bourgeois revolution was: ‘Drive 
away the Manchus, restore China to the Chinese, estab- 


lish a republic, and equalize landownership.”” The Peo- 
ple’s Herald,* organ of the Revolutionary League, carried 
many articles and pictures about the Russian Revolution 
of 1905. This shows that China’s pioneer revolutionaries 
had a profound admiration for the Russian revolution. 
The Russian revolution proved, the People’s Herald 
pointed out, that the path of constitutional monarchy is 
a blind alley and that revolution is the only effective 
means of realizing democratic government. The con- 
fidence of the bourgeois revolutionary democrats in the 
success of the Chinese revolution and determination to 
carry it out was greatly strengthened by the example of 
Russia’s revolution. But they were entirely unable to 
see the special characteristics of what happened in Russia 
in 1905 which made it different from previous bourgeois 
revolutions. The 1905 Revolution testified that only the 
working class could assume leadership of a thorough- 
going bourgeois-democratic revolution, and that only the 
working class could lead and unite the broad masses 
of peasants, overthrow feudal rule, and clear the way 
for socialism. 

Writing in the New People’s Magazine,* Kang Yu-wei 
and Liang Chi-chao,* leaders of the Constitutionalists, 
strongly advocated the reformist method and opposed the 
transformation of China by revolution. They advocated 
the preservation of the monarchical form of government 
and feudal landownership by all possible means. They 
also disseminated theories such as “revolution will invite 
the partition of China,” “revolution will breed civil war,” 
etc., which were intended to discredit democratic revolu- 
tion. Liang Chi-chao (1873-1929), editor of the magazine, 
was the chief spokesman for the Constitutional Mon- 
archists. During the period 1895-98 he collaborated with 


96 


Kang Yu-wei in propagating their ideas of political refotm 
and introducing the political and scientific thought of the 
Western bourgeoisie. In those days this did have a pro- 
gressive significance. In 1902 he published an article in 
the New People’s Magazine entitled “On the New Peo- 
ple” which exerted a great influente on the public. In 
this article he called for a “great destruction” in China. 
The Chinese people, he said, should cultivate the spirit of 
adventure, consciousness of their own rights, self-respect, 
ability for self-government and co-operation among 
themselves. But his conclusion was that the masses 
were not yet qualified to talk about destruction, and the 
country could never be saved by the revolution of the 
‘trouble-makers” (i.e. the revolutionaries). From this 
we can see clearly the difference between the two lines 
followed by the reformists and the revolutionaries. 

To refute the false theories of the Monarchists who 
advised the “enlightened despots” to consider the estab- 
lishment of a constitution, the bourgeois revolutionary 
democrats founded the People’s Herald, organ of the Rev- 
olutionary League. Sun Yat-sen, Chu Chih-hsin,* Chang 
Tai-yen* and others contributed many articles in which 
they advocated democratic revolution, preparing the 
ideological background for the Revolution of 1911. 

In criticizing the theory of the Constitutionalists that 
“revolution will invite the partition of China,” the rev- 
olutionary democrats pointed out that the foreign powers 
carried out aggression in China because China was weak 
and her people poor. If China would only brace up but 
not becoming belligerent, the big powers would be less 
covetous of her. The revolutionary democrats, however, 
had no clear understanding of imperialism. They even 
declared that after the victory of the revolution the trea- 


07 


ties signed by the Manchu government with the foreign 
powers would be respected. 

In refuting the Constitutionalists’ theory that ‘‘revolu- 
tion will breed civil war,” the revolutionary democrats 
said that after the victory of the revolution a democratic 
republic would be established. The function of govern- 
ment would be divided into three parts — judicial, execu- 
tive, and legislative — and thus the monopoly of power 
by any single branch could be avoided. The power of 
the president would not be as great as that of the parlia- 
ment and members of the parliament would be elected 
according to electoral law. Therefore, they said, civil 
war could not occur. The idea of a bourgeois republic 
put forward by the democrats had a great influence on 
the intellectual world. It made people realize that under 
the rule of the Manchus constitutionalism was not the 
right road towards national salvation. 

About the same time, some leaders of the revolutionary 
democrats saw for themselves that the capitalist coun- 
tries of Europe and America had not succeeded in lead- 
ing their people into a land of happiness and that the prob- 
lem of socialist revolution was already on the agenda 
of these countries. They, therefore, thought that China 
might as well put socialism into practice at an early time 
so as to prevent difficulties from arising in the future. 
But they spoke of the “equalization of landownership,” 
which was an item in the platform of democratic revolu- 
tion, as a measure of social revolution. This, however, 
was a mistake. 

The Revolution of 1911, under the leadership of the 
revolutionary democrats headed by Sun Yat-sen, over- 
threw the rule of the Manchu dynasty. Although this 
revolution did not make China a real republic, it did 


98 


inspire the people with the spirit of democracy and the 
idea was deeply impressed on their minds. After the 
revolution, however, the bourgeois revolutionary demo- 
crats were rent by dissension. Some of them withdrew 
from the revolution and collaborated with Yuan Shih- 
kai, while others retailed the theories of the declining 
bourgeoisie of foreign countries and hoped through them 
to find a way out. As to the democrats headed by Sun 
Yat-sen, although they were also perplexed and dejected 
they had a strong will and a revolutionary spirit and 
therefore they marched forward without stopping. 

A section of the intellectuals among the revolutionary 
democrats turned from optimism to pessimism. This 
change was reflected most clearly in the philosophical 
thought of Chang Tai-yen. 

Chang Tai-yen was a great scholar and a political ac- 
tivist who took part in the early bourgeois-democratic 
revolutionary movement. When he participated in the 
anti-Manchu struggle in the earlier period of his life he 
denounced the compromising attitude of the Constitu- 
tionalists, and advocated democratic revolution. But after 
the 1911 Revolution he became pessimistic and despond- 
ent and lost confidence. So he escaped into the idealist 
world of Buddhism. 

In the earlier period, in his philosophical thought he 
followed the tradition of Hsun Ching and Han Fei. But 
during the formation of his philosophical system he soon 
began to adhere to the idealism of Chuang Tzu and the 
Buddhists. He combined these two forms of idealism and 
mixed them with the world of will and idea of Schopen- 
hauer and the agnosticism of Kant. In his world outlook 
he believed that time had no real existence and was purely 
a mental conception. He even said that all things in 


the universe were immaterial and hence illusory, and 
stated explicitly that ‘‘the universe was non-existent and 
that its existence had to be established by the mind.” 
Thus, he denied that the objective world has an existence 
independent of the mind. 

What has been said above, however, gives only one 
aspect of Chang Tai-yen’s philosophy. In his earlier 
works he reveals another. Participation in the anti- 
feudal political struggle and in the realm of thought to- 
gether with his realistic spirit of learning helped him to 
show in his philosophy, especially in his theory of knowl- 
edge, certain elements of materialism and atheism. The 
materialist elements and positive method in Chang Tai- 
yen’s philosophy was closely ‘connected with his sound 
political views in the earlier period of his life. He was 
sceptical about the capitalist system of Europe and 
America. He wanted China to practise the system of 
“direct participation by the people” as soon as a demo- 
cratic system was established. He also said that the 
abolition of land monopoly was the key to the imple- 
mentation of the democratic system. All these views 
were progressive. 

In studying Chang Tai-yen’s philosophy, we must first 
acquaint ourselves with his logic of linguistics. Speak- 
ing of the development of language and thought he stress- 
ed that practice through work gave rise to perceptional 
experience, which is the source of mental activity. He 
accepted Hsun Ching’s theory that “language must first 
go through the sensory organs” which meant perceptional 
experience. “During primitive times,” Chang Tai-yen 
said, “language was used to express the concrete things 
in man’s experience; the nature of objects and the relation 
between them came later.” His theory, in brief, was that 


100 


a man gets, through perceptional experience, the images 
of concrete things. After these images have appeared in 
a man’s brain many times and have been analysed and 
synthesized he begins to know the relation between them 
and their nature. This theory of treating the process of 
the formation of language as a natural process should, 
of course, be considered as materialist. - 

Speaking of the origin of knowledge Chang Tai-yen 
said that inference could not be made without perception. 
By this he meant that perceptional experience is the 
basis of thought. He also pointed out that if we rely 
solely on perceptional experience and ignore our reason- 
ing power we may mistake a wrong perception for a right 
one. We must therefore depend on reasoning for true 
knowledge. 

With regard to the Kungyang School,! which was 
known for its distorted interpretations of the Classics, 
Chang Tai-yen proposed to use the realistic method as a 
remedy for its defects. To neglect the realistic method 
and start with a priori ideas in reasoning, he pointed out, 
will lead one to the absurd ideas of theology. He there- 
fore taught that we should dispense with a priori ideas 
altogether. 

Using the positive method in studying Chinese philos- 
ophy Chang Tai-yen put forward many original and con- 
structive ideas. He was opposed, for instance, to the 
Kungyang School’s theory of love. He said that this 
idea which, in Confucius’ thought, implied ‘‘conscientious- 
ness and altruism” might be interpreted to mean the de- 
ductive and inductive methods of logic. He gave the 
idealist philosophers Tzu Ssu and Mencius no place in 


1See p. 86. 


101 


the history of philosophy. He considered the popularity 
of the mystical theory of the ‘five elements” to be the 
result of Tzu Ssu’s patronage. With regard to Chinese 
philosophy from the Han dynasty onwards he held many 
views notable for their veracity. He said, for instance, 
that Wang Chung was the only philosopher worthy of 
the name in the Han dynasty. He also considered Cheng 
Yi and Chu Hsi as arch-hypocrites. -All these ideas of 
his reveal his keen insight. 

Kang Yu-wei and others of the Modern Text School 
with a theological point of view wanted to apotheosize 
Confucius and establish a religion with Confucius as its 
founder. Chang Tai-yen, however, said that Confucius’ 
thought was not a religious doctrine and that all theolog- 
ical theories were untenable from the standpoint of 
logic. He considered all theories of the existence of 
God to be based on an external cause. The propounders 
of these theories consider that God transcends everything 
and is the creator of the universe. This is a dogmatic 
statement which contains within itself irreconcilable con- 
tradictions. If the theory of external cause is further 
pressed God, the supreme ruler of the universe, also 
needs to have a cause. He will then no longer be the su- 
preme ruler of the universe. Chang Tai-yen therefore 
said, “For this reason we must say that there is no 
God.” 

After the 1911 Revolution Chinese intellectuals who 
were groping for a solution to their various problems, 
both social and philosophical, began to look for it in the 
West. They introduced the various philosophies of the 
Western bourgeoisie extensively, such as Kant’s dualism, 
Comte’s and Spencer’s positivism, and Kropotkin’s theory 
of mutual aid. Wang Kuo-wei* (1877-1927) introduced 


102 


the philosophies of Kant, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche 
to the Chinese reading public. He also explained Chi- 


nese philosophical categories, such as “human nature” 


and “reason,” by the philosophical concepts of Kant and 
Schopenhauer. Wang Kuo-wei’s own philosophy, stated 
briefly in his own words, was as follows: “The idealist 
world outlook is attractive but not credible; the positive 
method of natural sciences is credible though not at- 
tractive.” 

Sun Yat-sen (1866-1925) was one of China’s most 
outstanding patriots dnd democratic revolutionaries. His 
thought can be divided into two stages. The first stage 
began in 1894 when he was first engaged in political ac- 
tivities and ended at the time of the May 4 Movement 
in 1919. During this period he put forward his idea of 
a bourgeois republic and fought for its realization, which, 
however, the concrete historical conditions of modern 
China did not permit at that time. Sun Yat-sen was 
most unhappy about it. During the several years which 
followed the 1911 Revolution he made a theoretical sum- 
mation of the experiences gained in the revolution and 
wrote the book The Doctrine of Sun Yat-sen.* In this 
he outlined his own philosophy. The second stage of 
his thinking began with the May 4 Movement in 1919 
and ended with his death in 1925. During this period he 
gradually abandoned his old platform for a bourgeois 


republic and accepted that of a people’s democratic re- _ 


public proposed by the Chinese Communist Party. And 
for the realization of this new aim, he waged a resolute 
struggle. 

Sun Yat-sen did not have a complete system of philos- 
ophy. It was rather a conglomeration of various ele- 
ments including many aspects of idealism. He often 


103 


showed a dualistic tendency, wavering between idealism 
and materialism. A careful analysis of his writings, 
however, reveals that there was a rational kernel in his 
philosophy, a simple, spontaneous materialism based on 
his profound belief in experimental and natural science. 
In his writings he made many references to great scien- 
tists and their theories, such as Darwin, Newton, Laplace, 
and Pasteur. He believed that the natural sciences cor- 
rectly explain the inherent laws of the objective world. 
From the history of the development of the natural sci- 
ences he came to two conclusions. First, as a consequence 
of this development man’s knowledge of the objective 
world increases. Secondly, the world is evolutionary and 
man’s knowledge, which reflects the conditions of the 
world, is also evolutionary. His philosophy which was 
deeply influenced by the theory of evolution, was just the 
opposite of the dogmatic, metaphysical, feudal philosophy, 
which says, “Heaven does not change nor will the ‘Way’ 
or ‘truth.’ ’’ Unfortunately, once he divorced himself from 
the realm of reality with its contradictions, and sought 
elsewhere for the cause of evolution, he unconsciously 
went the wrong way. 

On the fundamental problem of philosophy, i.e. the 
problem of matter and spirit, Sun Yat-sen affirmed that 
matter is substance and spirit is the functioning of sub- 
stance. The internal and external organs of the human 
body, for instance, are all substance while speech and 
motion are functions, performed by man’s spirit. Matter 
and spirit, or substance and function, co-ordinate with 
each other and are inseparable. By using the traditional 
terminology in Chinese philosophy Sun Yat-sen estab- 
lished the principle for his own simple materialist world 
outlook. 


104 


Sun Yat-sen thought in somewhat the same way as the 
natural scientists and philosophers of eighteenth century 
Europe. These men could not see the contrast be- 
tween the materialist and the idealist theories of knowl- 
edge. But because of their belief in natural science they 
ridiculed idealism, and refused to accept any theory of 
knowledge but that of the materialists. Their philosophy 
was decidedly materialist though they were not aware 
of the fact. It was the same with Sun Yat-sen. He 
believed that theory follows the observance of fact; 
fact precedes speech. In other words, there can be no 
theory before practice. He illustrated his point by the 
development of architecture and shipbuilding. Man prac- 
tises the building of houses and ships first then devel- 
ops a system of knowledge of architecture and ship- 
building. From facts in the development of science he 
concluded that the world and its laws are knowable. As 
an illustration he said that from the study of bacteriology 
we now know that certain diseases are caused by bac- 
teria and from studying the history of commodity ex- 
change we now know the function of money. 

It should be pointed out that Sun Yat-sen’s great revo- 
lutionary optimism, his fearlessness in encountering great 
obstacles in the tortuous path of revolution and persist- 
ent adherence to the principle of democracy were all the 
direct result of his philosophical outlook based upon 
reliance on science. He believed that science would 
make infinite progress possible, that the world and its 
laws are knowable, and that the world can be changed. 

Sun Yat-sen advanced the theory that “to know is 
difficult and to do is easy.” This theory has little signifi- 
cance so far as the theory of knowledge is concerned for 
the question of being difficult or easy does not arise with 


105 


regard to knowing and doing. The question here is 
rather one concerning the dialectical relation between 
knowledge and action, knowledge being derived from ac- 
tion. The proposition ‘‘to know is difficult and to do is 
easy” seems to be rather superficial. But historically 
speaking, it is not without progressive significance. It 
was meant to combat the old theory “to know is easy but 
to do is difficult,” which the feudal rulers had used for 
ages as an excuse for their complacency and procrastina- 
tion. It also served to warn the people against bureau- 
crats and politicians who hoped to fish in troubled waters 
in the time of revolution. It should be noted that the 
“doing” or “acting” Sun Yat-sen talked about did not 
refer to the practice of changing the existing conditions 
in the struggle for production and class struggle. What 
he meant was merely scientific experiment and personal 
conduct. He was still unable to reveal the concrete, 
historical unity between knowing (theory) and doing 
(practice). 

One of the characteristics of Sun Yat-sen’s philosophy 
was that he made “fact” a test of truth. Whether he 
was criticizing others or stating his own opinions he 
always substantiated his point with facts. But strictly 
speaking, Sun Yat-sen’s use of the term “fact” was rather 
restricted. The facts he used to illustrate or support his 
arguments were often partial and superficial and he often 
arrived at conclusions from them instead of gaining a 
knowledge of the laws of things. But it should always 
be remembered that he was interested in new things 
and had nothing in common with hidebound dogma- 
tists. He sought truth persistently. He was always 
ready to draw on his past experiences to correct his mis- 
takes. In his later years, under the influence of the Rus- 


106 


sian October Revolution and with the help of the Chi- 
nese Communist Party, Sun Yat-sen made great progress 
in his political thinking. Adopting the policy of allying 
with Soviet Russia, co-operating with the Communist 
Party, and supporting the workers and peasants’ move- 
ment in China, he revised his Three Principles of the 
People.* This was a big step forward in his political 
outlook. 

In short, we may say that Sun Yat-sen’s great em- 
phasis on facts was a notable contribution to the ma- 
terialist theory of knowledge. It was to his great 
credit that he had the courage, in the name of the Pres- 
ident of the Chinese Republic, to state that the Octo- 
ber Revolution was the hope of mankind, to recognize 
the Soviet Government and to announce his desire to 
learn from this great revolution. 

With the victory of the 1911 Revolution China became 
a republic. In an attempt to restore monarchy with 
himself as the emperor, Yuan Shih-kai betrayed the in- 
terests of the people and yielded to Japanese pressure in 
agreeing to the notorious Twenty-one Demands. This 
further aggravated the national crisis. A new path had 
to be found. It was the opinion of the more radical bour- 
geois-democratic intellectuals that the 1911 Revolution 
had only succeeded in nominally overthrowing the Manchu 
dynasty which, they thought, still existed in spirit if not 
in fact since the old ways of thinking and doing things 
still prevailed. It was, therefore, necessary to uproot 
all old ideas to found not a nominal republic but a real 
one. Therefore, around the year 1915 they launched a 
movement for cultural reform. Their aim was to abolish 
all the old rites, old ethical and moral standards, and 
superstitious belief in gods and spirits, all of which were 


107 


being perpetuated by the landlord class because they 
served its interests. This cultural movement was really 
a continuation of the democratic spirit of the 1911 Rev- 
olution. The democratic intellectuals connected with 
the movement had Chen Tu-hsiu* (1880-1942) and Wu 
Yu* (1871-1949) as their leaders, who used the natural 
sciences and the bourgeois theory of “equality of rights” 
as their weapons in their fight against feudalism. They 
advocated the establishment of a “free and independ- 
ent national government,” i.e. the capitalist political 
system. As Mao Tse-tung said in his On New Democ- 
racy: ‘At that time the ideology of the new learning 
played the revolutionary role of fighting the Chinese 
feudal ideology, and was in the service of the bourgeois- 
democratic revolution of the old period.”! This kind of 
ideology, however, did not answer the historical ques- 
tion: “Which road should China take?” And as long as 
this question remained unanswered, the people felt an 
increasingly strong desire to find the right solution. 

vr 


\Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, Lawrence and Wishart, 
London, 1954, Vol. III, p. 143. 


- 


Pe ee 


5. Contemporary Philosophy: the Two Main 
Trends in Philosophy Since the May 4 
Movement; the Development of 
Marxism in China 


PART I 


Lenin pointed out in 1913 that the historical mission 
of Marxism in the world was carried out in three stages, 
the last one beginning at the time of the 1905 Revolu- 
tion in Russia. Since then Marxism has demonstrated 
its truth and triumphed not only in the West but also in 
the East.’ It has given additional proof of its truth and 
gained further victories in the revolutions which sprang 
up in Asia. In 1917, the first great socialist country in 
the world was founded. The valuable experience 
gained by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 
its revolutionary struggle has since become a fountain- 
head of inspiration to Chinese revolutionaries as well as 
to the working péople of the whole world in their fight 
for emancipation. The militant theories formulated by 
Marxism-Leninism have been the guiding star for Chi- 
nese and all other revolutionaries. The course of the 
October Revolution reflected the universal law of the 
development of human society in its present stage. It 
is precisely for this reason that Mao Tse-tung frequently 
exhorts us to be humble pupils of the Soviet Union. 
Modern China was a semi-feudal, semi-colonial country. 


109 


The Marxist-Leninist theory of class struggle, proletarian 
revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat, are 
universal truths and are applicable to China. Lenin 
said: 


The Asiatic revolutions have revealed the same 
spinelessness and baseness of liberalism, the same ex- 
ceptional importance of the independence of the 
democratic masses, and the same sharp demarcation 
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie of all 
kinds. After the experience both of Europe and Asia, 
whoever now speaks of non-class politics and of non- 
class Socialism simply deserves to be put in a cage 
and exhibited along with the Australian kangaroo.} 


The new-democratic revolution of China was carried 
out under the influence of the October Socialist Revolu- 
tion. The May 4 Movement of 19192 marked a turning 
point in China’s struggle against imperialism and feu- 


1“Historical Destiny of the Doctrine of Karl Marx,” V. I. 
Lenin, Selected Works in Two Volumes, Foreign Languages 
Publishing House, Moscow, 1950, Vol. I, Part 1, p. 85. 


2The May 4 Movement began as a demonstration held by 
the students of Peking on May 4, 1919 to protest against the im- 
perialists’ aggressive activities in China, the Paris Peace Con- 
ference which was dominated by the imperialists and against 
the traitorous crimes committed by Chinese warlords. The 
patriotic movement soon spread to the other parts of the country. 
Strikes were held by students, workers, and business men and it 
soon became a nation-wide movement. It gave a great impetus 
to the cultural revolution. It aimed chiefly at overthrowing the 
old moral code, replacing it with a new one and also replacing the 
old literary style of writing. The movement laid the ideological 
foundation for the founding of the Chinese Communist Party 
in 1921 and preparing and training many revolutionary cadres. 


110 


dalism and China’s cultural revolution was one of the 
phases of that movement. It was during the May 4 
Movement that the Chinese working class, taking the 
leading role in China’s democratic revolution, first stepped 
into the political arena. At the same time the progressive 
intellectuals having been armed with some rudimentary 
ideas of communism served as a bridge between the 
Chinese working-class movement and scientific socialism. 
Not long after the May 4 Movement Mao Tse-tung, Liu 
Shao-chi and other revolutionaries began extensive 
educational and organizational work among the masses 
of workers. Marxism soon became the main trend of 
thought in China’s cultural revolution. Meanwhile the 
communist thinkers formed a cultural united front with 
the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois intellectuals against 
imperialism and feudalism. They launched an all-out 
attack on the old culture which had been the serving 
maid of the imperialist and feudal forces. 

The spread of Marxist thought in China owed much 
to the efforts of the pioneers of Marxism among Chinese 
intellectuals. Li Ta-chao* (1888-1927), for instance, ex- 
pounded the basic theory of historical materialism. He 
pointed out that Marxism alone exposes the whole truth 
of social development. In elucidating Marxist historical 
materialism he laid special emphasis on its theory of 
class struggle, describing it as a ‘‘golden thread” running 
through all Marxist philosophy. Speaking from the 
Marxist class viewpoint he praised the October Revolu- 
tion highly. “The bell of humanitarianism has rung!” 
he said, “and the light of freedom has dawned.” He 
declared: “The world of the future will be the world 
of the Red Flag.” The slogan calling for the overthrow 
of world capitalism, which was brought forward during 


ill 


the October Revolution, was, according to Li Ta-chao, 
“particularly significant” for the Chinese people long 
trampled under the iron hoofs of imperialism. This 
slogan made the Chinese people realize that to gain na- 
tional independence and emancipation they must carry 
out revolutionary struggles to overthrow imperialism 
in China. He believed that the Chinese people and the 
working people of the whole world, both being oppressed 
by imperialism, should form a united front against it. 
Li Ta-chao, therefore, considered the Soviet Union to 
be the motherland, the pioneer in revolution and the 
great centre of the world’s working people. 

In 1919 in the province of Hunan the Hsiangchiang 
Review,* a journal devoted to the propagation of 
Marxism, was founded by Mao Tse-tung. One of the 
issues carried an article written by him entitled “The 
Great Unity of the People.” The central thesis of the 
article later proved to be the prototype of the “united 
front” theory which has been the people’s powerful rev- 
olutionary weapon in China. Mao Tse-tung pointed 
out that the success of every revolutionary movement 
recorded in history, be it ideological, intellectual, polit- 
ical or social, depended on two things: the degree of 
solidarity achieved by the unity of the people and the 
truth and progressiveness of the thought which formed 
the basis of this unity. For instance, the victory of the 
October Socialist Revolution was due to the magnificent 
unity achieved by the masses of Russian workers and 
peasants and to the indisputably true and invincible 
doctrine of Marxism. He said that the October Revolu- 
tion had greatly influenced the people’s revolutionary 
movements in Asia and Europe and accounted for the 
birth of the May 4 Movement of 1919. He thought that 


112 


movement so important that it “animated the whole 
world and freed it of all evils.” He believed that if the 
force of the united Chinese people was built up and the 
revolution was guided by the principle of Marxism, ‘a 
golden world, a world of radiance and splendour, will 
be near at hand.” In 1920 he came into close touch with 
Li Ta-chao. By this time he had become a Marxist both 
in theory and in practice. In the letters he exchanged 
with Tsai Ho-shen* and in the preparatory documents 
for the founding of Communist Groups, he advocated the 
“organization of a communist party modelled on that of 
the Soviet Russia both in principle and in method” as a 
guide for the Chinese people in their revolutionary 
movement. 
Mao Tse-tung said in his On New Democracy: 


The cultural revolution eee in by the May 4 
Movement was a movement for thoroughly opposing 
feudal culture; since the dawn of Chinese history, 
there had never been such a great and thoroughgoing 
cultural revolution.! 


During this period a bitter struggle over which road 
to take was waged on the ‘cultural front, i.e. between 
Marxism and the reactionary alliance formed by the two 
cultures of imperialism and feudalism. The cultural 
revolution of this time, especially during its earlier 
period, made an ideological preparation for the founding 
of the Chinese Communist Party in 1921 and trained 
cadres for its new revolutionary task. From the very 
beginning members of the reactionary cultural camp who 
were the bitter enemies of Marxism did everything in 


Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 146. 


113 


their power to smother it and prevent its development 
in China, 

The struggle in the cultural field between taking one 
of these two roads was, first of all, a struggle between 
those who took one of two attitudes towards foreign cul- 
tures. Were the revolutionary activities of China to 
be linked up with the revolutionary culture of socialism 
or was the feudal culture of China to be linked up with 
the bourgeois culture of the imperialists? 

On June 8, 1919, one month after the May 4 Move- 
ment and five days after the June 3 Movement, in which 
the working class took part, John Dewey, an imperial- 
ist who was invited by Hu Shih* to come to China from 
the United States, made some very injudicious state- 
ments. He advocated that the political doctrine of 
Marxism, which was then gaining wide support in 
China, was something which could not be copied and he 
advised the Chinese people not to plagiarize this theory 
which was foreign to them nor try to apply it to their 
country where conditions were different. In July of 
the same year, Hu Shih published a series of essays bear- 
ing the general title of “Problems and Isms” in which 
he echoed Dewey’s absurd utterances. In these essays he 
advised people to “Talk less about isms and study more 
of problems,” in a vain attempt to stem the tide of © 
Marxism. Li Ta-chao, the well-known Marxist, repeat- 
edly refuted Hu Shih’s arguments, attacking them and 
successfully exposing their duplicity. He pointed out 
that the only way China could carry out reform was to 
link up the revolutionary practice of China with Marxism 
and that there was no other way. He said that the pop- 
ularity and growing influence of Bolshevism represented 
a great change in world culture. In the autumn of the 


114 


same year Dewey published another essay on social and 
political philosophy of pragmatism, in which he slandered 
Marxism as a spent force and denounced Marxism- 
Leninism as an over-radical and infectious doctrine. 
While he did not like others to talk about “isms” he 
seemed to have no reluctance in doing so himself, dis- 
playing his shop-worn ideas of pragmatic philosophy 
and sociology. He insisted that the bourgeois doctrine 
of individualism could be used as an antidote for the 
theory of class struggle. He shamelessly volunteered to 
be a go-between in bringing about a “marriage” between 
the old culture of China, i.e. feudal revivalism, and the 
“new culture” of American imperialism, i.e. bourgeois 
individualism. Before a revolution took place in China, 
he hoped to change the “former emperors’ paternalistic 
policy of protecting the people” into a “democratic policy 
of protecting the people.” In this way he thought it 
possible to preserve the existing social structure, which 
was essentially a feudal one, and to import piecemeal 
certain features of American imperialism, such as “trade” 
and “‘spirit,” thus achieving “great reform” in the coun- 
try. Obviously if his plan had been carried out, nothing 
but the colonization and enslavement of China by Amer- 
ican imperialism would have been the result. 

During the two years 1919-20 Hu Shih, who actually 
spoke of himself as a “ready-made go-between,” 
published many reactionary articles on the “mutual 
adaptability of the new and old cultures.” All the argu- 
ments in his writings were immediately refuted by the 
Marxists. In the journal New Youth,* for instance, issue 
No. 4, Vol. 6 carried an article by Hu Shih entitled 
“Pragmatism.” In its next issue appeared an article by 
Li Ta-chao entitled “(Marxism As I See It,” in which he 


————__ 


115 


introduced the Marxist theories of class struggle, surplus 
value, and historical materialism. In issue No. 1, Vol. 7, 
Hu Shih’s article “The Significance of the New Trend 
of Thought” was published. In No. 2 of the same volume 
appeared Li Ta-chao’s article “Changes in Modern Chi- 
nese Thought Explained in Terms of Economics.” Li 
Ta-chao showed, through an analysis of modern Chinese 
thought, that changes in the economic base of society 
will lead to changes in the superstructure, such as gov- 
ernment, law, family system, etc. Social reform in China 
should, therefore, be carried out only after first tackling 
the fundamental problem of changing the economic base. 
Awed by the growing influence of Marxism, Hu Shih, 
in alliance with the Right-wing writers, intrigued to gain 
control of the New Youth and make it his own mouth- 
piece. His plot, however, failed because of opposition 
by Lu Hsun and others. The journal was saved and its 
policy remained unchanged. It did not become an 
instrument of this would-be “go-between” for the 
realization of his plan to “marry Chinese and American 
cultures” and ‘“‘to reconstruct civilization through Sino- 
American collaboration.” Instead, it remained a vehicle 
for the spread of Marxism. It can be seen that the 
battle of ideas—the struggle about which road to 
take or the question of “who will win” — was a bitter 
one, necessitating a stand being taken either on one 
side or the other. A neutral or third position sim- 
ply did not exist. It was precisely at this time that Chen 
Tu-hsiu, a radical among the bourgeois democrats, 
showed his vacillation. From Hu Shih’s essay “My 
Thoughts at Forty” and Chen Tu-hsiu’s letters to Hu Shih 
we can see that Chen Tu-hsiu stood for compromise in 
China’s cultural revolution while Hu Shih was a die- 


116 


hard in the reactionary camp. Chen Tu-hsiu alleged 

that since dialectical materialism and pragmatism both 
emphasized the importance of the present and the 

future and since they were the two most important 
philosophical methods of our time, they should be com- 

bined to form a united front. Hu Shih, however, said that 

the two are different, “like man and animals,” and point- 

ed out that Chen Tu-hsiu’s hope was quite unwarranted. 

After Marxism had begun to take root in China, the 

anti-Marxist activities of the big landlords, the bourgeois 

Rightists and the imperialists, together with their hench- 

men, broke up the united front of the ‘“May 4” cultural 

revolution into factions. In the reactionary* cultural 

camp were various groups representing different reac- 

tionary interests, men of all types and shades of opinion 

appeared, each vaunting his own foresight and sagacity. 

They debated the question of which kind of foreign cul- 

ture should be imported into China. As has been said 

above, Hu Shih, the self-appointed “go-between” and 
ardent protagonist of Sino-American collaboration, in- 
vited John Dewey to lecture in China to sow the seeds 
of enslavement. This created a new tide of similar 
activities among other “knights of truth” who cham- 
pioned Sino-British, Sino-German, or Sino-Japanese col- 
laboration. They vied with one another in accepting 
the decadent theories of the imperialists which they 
hoped might prove a panacea for China’s ills and an 
effective antidote against Marxism. So, many West- 
ern philosophers came to China including Bertrand 
Russell from Britain and Hans Driesch from Germany. 
Most Chinese reactionaries hoped and believed that the 
mere presence of these peddlers of idealism would be 
sufficient to inoculate the Chinese youth and make them 


—_— 


117 


immune to revolutionary propaganda. About the same 
time the idealist doctrine of Bergsonism was preached 
with much fanfare. In their struggle against various 
reactionary theories the genius of Chinese Marxist 
philosophers was raised to a much higher level and the 
Marxist movement gained strength in the first stage of 
its development in China. This helped to lay a theoret- 
ical background and train cadres for the founding of 
the Chinese Communist Party. In the realm of philos- 
ophy and social science, the controversy regarding the 
introduction of foreign cultures was a struggle about 
which road to take. It was not only revolution versus 
reaction, but it also reflected a fight between thorough- 
going new-democratic revolution and all kinds of re- 
formism opposed to it. 

In 1920, when Chinese Communist Groups were being 
organized, and in 1921, when the Chinese Communist 
Party was founded, the line of demarcation between the 
two opposing forces — the Marxists and Anti-Marxists — 
in the realm of culture and thought became more clearly 
drawn. Following this great controversy regarding the 
question of introducing foreign cultures into China, 
another one arose concerning the problem of socialism,- 
which unfolded on an even larger scale. 

The Young China Association,* a united cultural front 
organization formed during the May 4 Movement, was 
now split into two groups — Right and Left. The bour- 
geois intellectuals who belonged to the Rightist group 
insisted that more time should be spent on the academic 
studies and less on talk about “isms.” They considered 
socialism to be an abstract theory having little or no 
practical value. They believed that science, philosophy, 
and sociology should be studied from a purely pedantic 


118 


interest detached from politics and reality. They tried 
to discourage young people from joining in the actual 
revolutionary struggle. Some of them maintained the 
idea that imported socialism would not meet the require- 


. ments of China and that a Chinese type of “national so- 


cialism” might evolve after long study. These Rightists 
were really reformists in a new disguise and their ideas 
were in direct opposition to those of the Marxists. Mem- 
bers of the Association who were Marxists immediately 
denounced this view. Among them Li Ta-chao and Teng 
Chung-hsia* were exemplary in the firmness of their 
stand and in the correctness of their views. They stated 
that Marxism which is scientific socialism is the only 
guide to thoroughgoing social reconstruction, that the 
tasks of propagating socialism and organizing a revolu- 
tion cannot be divorced from each other and that to talk 
vociferously about socialism without actually promoting 
revolution is the height of folly. In 1920 a similar con- 
troversy arose among the members of the New People’s 
Society* organized by Chinese students studying in 
France. A few of its members took a moderate reform- 
ist attitude while the Marxists, led by Tsai Ho-shen, 
insisted that China must “take the path of the Russians.” 
In his letters to Mao Tse-tung, Tsai refuted the reform- 
ists, who distorted socialism, and showed how absurd 
Russell was, who was then lecturing in China, in favour- 
ing the “study” of communism and upposing a revolution. 

In the same year even Chang Tung-sun,* Chang Chun- 
mai* and Liang Chi-chao, landowning bourgeois poli- 
ticians, “took up the study” of socialism. But the reason 
they studied socialism was only because they felt that 
the northern warlords. then in power were not clever 
enough in their anti-communist methods. They pro- 


EEC _O7_ 


119 


posed to follow Russell’s advice, to find proofs through 
“study” that “it would be better for socialism to come 
to China very slowly!” During the years 1920 and 1921 
they wrote and published a tremendous amount of reac- 
tionary literature. They borrowed from Russell the doc- 
trine of guild socialism, which has long been discredited, 
they slandered Marxism and the Chinese working-class 
movement, saying that their combination would lead 
to a form of “pseudo-socialism of the rabble.” They 
proceeded to spread the reactionary theory of “‘class har- 
mony.” The Marxists resolutely denounced all such 
false theories. They stressed the fact that capitalism 
was declining and that China was marching towards a 
bright future. They pointed to the success of the 
October Socialist Revolution and the correct path which 
it showed China; they pointed out that the universal 
truth of Marxism could be applied to China’s class strug- 
gle and revolution. The cogency of their arguments 
gave the lie to the theories of the bourgeois propagandists 
and warded off their attacks. Naturally, most of the 
Chinese Marxists of the early period were unable to 
make a clear distinction between propaganda for 
Marxism and a political programme. They could not, 
as Mao Tse-tung said in On New Democracy, “distinguish 
the dissemination of communist ideology and the com- 
munist social system from the implementation of the 
new-democratic programme of action; distinguish the 
communist theory and methods applied in examining 
various problems, in pursuing scientific studies, in or- 
ganizing work and in training cadres, from the new- 
democratic line provided for the national culture as a 
whole.’”? 


~ 1Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 153. 


120 


Chinese Marxists waged a relentless struggle in sup- 
port of socialism not only against the Rightist bourgeois 
scholars but also against certain “Leftists” of the bour- 
geois and petty-bourgeois scholars. These “Leftist” ele- 
ments were the chief representatives of imported 
anarchism and nihilism of the Chinese type. Taking 
advantage of the fanaticism of the petty bourgeoisie and 
its longing for freedom which was as deep as its hatred 
for despotism, for a time they slandered Marxism with 
the frenzy of mad men, vehemently opposing Marxist 
theories of proletarian revolution and dictatorship. Truly, 
as Lenin said, “The philosophy of the anarchists is bour- 
geois philosophy turned inside out. Their individualistic 
theories and their individualistic ideals are the very 
antithesis of socialism.”! Greatly disgusted with the 
respect for authority customary in the old society they 
went to the other extreme of demanding “absolute free- 
dom.” They even talked wildly about a “cosmic revolu- 
tion.” Some of them insisted that suicide and love-making 
were the means necessary for the carrying out of the 
revolution of mankind. All these absurd theories were 
refuted by the Marxists and shown to be sheer nonsense. 
In 1921 the Communist Monthly carried an article which 
said that anarchism is a false theory and is incompatible 
with true socialism. Mao Tse-tung also pointed out that 
absolute freedom and anarchism may sound good in 
theory but they are impracticable. These ideas were 
only a fantasy of the petty bourgeoisie. 

It should be noted that a small number of the early 
Marxists were strongly influenced by the anarchists with 


1“Socialism and Anarchism,” V. I. Lenin, Selected Works, 
Lawrence and Wishart, London, 194f, Vol. III, p. 344. 


121 


regard to both Marxist theory and the problem of trade 
union organization. It was only after such anarchism 
was severely criticized and those who had once believed 
in it were convinced of its deception that they abandoned 
the bourgeois theories of ‘‘absolute freedom” and “democ- 
racy in general” and accepted communism. This meant 
the rallying of the revolutionary intellectuals around 
the banner of Marxism and also greater unity and clarity 
of ideas among the members of the Chinese Communist 
Party which grew stronger and purer in organization. 
The victory of the Marxists in this struggle meant, there- 
fore, a consolidation of their position and an increase of 
their power. 

Making it clear that the democratic revolution against 
imperialism and feudalism should be led by the prole- 
tariat, the Chinese Communist Party formed a united 
front with the Kuomintang and helped Sun Yat-sen re- 
vise his Three Principles of the People. This was an 
epochal event not only in the sphere of politics but also 
in the sphere of culture. In accordance with Marxist 
principles the Chinese Communist Party outlined a pro- 
gramme of cultural revolution which was anti-imperialist 
and anti-feudal in nature. This soon attracted intel- 
lectuals from among the educational and academic cir- 
cles to its fold. As Marxism gradually won support in 
the hearts and minds of the masses of the people, the 
reactionaries, being isolated, had to take extraordinary 
measures to try and ensure their survival and devise 
new means and methods of hoodwinking the people. 

After a trip to Europe Liang Chi-chao wrote about the 
“poverty of science” and the impending’ “revival” of the 
orienta] feudal civilization to explain his new theory of 


122 


upholding “national characteristics.”! Liang Su-ming* 
also wrote a book on ‘Oriental Culture” which was full 
of absurdities. He said that the future of the world 
would be a transition from the Confucian culture of 
China to the religious culture of India. His conclu- 
sion was, of course, hostility to Marxism. He divided 
the development of socialism into three periods: 1) the 
religious socialism of the Saint-Simonists, 2) the scientific 
socialism of the Marxists, and 3) the philosophical so- 
cialism of Russell, Kropotkin, and the guild socialists. 
After maliciously attacking the Marxist theory of 
class struggle, he said that during the third period of 
socialism there would come an “intuitive understand- 
ing”-of the truth of Confucianism. Meanwhile, Chang 
Chun-mai advocated the “spiritual civilization” which 
stressed cultivation of the mind as propounded by 
the Confucians from Confucius and Mencius down to 
the Neo-Confucians of the Sung and Ming dynasties as 
an antidote to “material civilization,” which, according 
to him, made no sharp distinction between right and 
wrong. He arbitrarily mixed up the individualism of 
Adam Smith with the socialism of the Marxists and said 
that neither was “noble or sacred.” 

Hu Shih and Ting Wen-chiang,* two other reactionary 
thinkers, promoted what Hu Shih himself called “the 
systematization of the old learning.”* Putting for- 
ward the slogan “Save the nation by study,” they ex- 
horted the young people to devote themselves to the 
study of the Chinese classical literature. They loudly 
announced their doctrine of national nihilism. Hu Shih 
not only slandered the fine traditions of the revolution- 


1See footnote in the Foreword. 


123 


ary and progressive aspect of Chinese culture but also 
ingratiated himself with the feudal ruling class by sup- 
plying it with ‘useful lessons” by turning things upside 
down and collecting reactionary trash. He and his ilk 
wanted to substitute textual research for the study of 
history and to replace philosophy by a piecemeal 
study. Their aim was to show that Chinese culture 
was inferior to American imperialist culture. Hu Shih 
claimed to have “discovered” a ‘“‘truth” in China’s cul- 
tural legacy, that the characteristics of Chinese cul- 
ture were ‘“feminity, cosmopolitanism and passivity.” 
This made it easy for Hu Shih to do his work as a ‘‘go- 
between” and unite the Chinese and American cultures, 
a role which he had long wanted to play. He, therefore, 
- founded the journal Endeavour, of which he was the chief 
editor, and “endeavoured”’ to work to this end. He ad- 
mitted that his “systematization of the old learning” 
was closely connected with his practical political pro- 
gramme, i.e. “to weld the two worlds (the Chinese feudal 
and American imperialist worlds) together” ‘“‘so as to 
gradually link up practice with theory.” In short, he 
stood for “total Westernization” which was the essence 
of his arguments against the protagonists of the new 
theory of upholding “national characteristics.” This 
was also a direct attack on the Declaration of the Second 
National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party.! 


1The Declaration of the Second National Congress of the 
Chinese Communist Party in 1922 says: “All things point to 
the fact that the greatest suffering of the Chinese people (be 
they bourgeoisie, workers or peasants) is caused by the forces 
of capitalist imperialism and the feudal forces of the warlords 
and bureaucrats. The struggle against these forces by the 
democratic revolutionary movement is, therefore, very signifi- 


124 


Hu Shih was against the use of “anti-imperialism” in 
cultural terminology. He said that “anti-imperialism” 
meant “communism.” From his “textual research” he 
came to the conclusion that Chinese culture was inferior 
to other cultures. He said that the way out for China 
was an honest avowal that the Chinese people “did not 
even know enough to be ashamed of themselves and had 
no will to prove their own worth.” He hoped that by 
propagating such theory he could stop the anti-imperialist 
and anti-feudal Northern Expeditionary War (the war 
against the northern warlords launched from Kwang- 
tung in 1926 by the first Kuomintang-Communist coali- 
tion) and stem the tide of the cultural revolution. 

Tai Chi-tao,* a member of the Right-wing of the Kuo- 
mintang, was the author of another new theory of up- 
holding “national characteristics.”! He tried to make 
Sun Yat-sen one of the Confucian patriarchs. He boldly 
proclaimed that Sun Yat-sen’s philosophy was a con- 
tinuation of the Confucian tradition being in the line of 
succession from Emperor Yao through Emperor Shun, 
King Wen and King Wu, Duke Chou, and Confucius. 
This was, of course, a most preposterous and reactionary 
theory. “Worst of all, it deprived Sun Yat-sen’s revised 
Three Principles of the People of its most important ele- 
ments, i.e. anti-imperialism and anti-feudalism. 

The above-mentioned reactionary thinkers, though 
differing widely in their opinions when discussing cul- 
tural tradition, paid more attention to the past than to 
the present or extolled the past at the expense of the 


cant as the success of this revolution will give us independence 
and greater freedom.” 


1See footnote in the Foreword. 


125 


present. In this way they hoped to show that: Marxism 
did not fit into the Chinese social pattern. In an effort 
to discredit Marxism they spread the rumour that 
Marxism meant the end of China’s cultural heritage. 
The progressive thinkers had to show that by inducing 
people to alienate themselves from reality and politics 
the bourgeois scholars were leading them astray in their 
learning. To refute all falsehoods the true defenders of 
Chinese culture had to make a scientific analysis, apply- 
ing the principles of historical materialism to Chinese 
history and quoting from past and contemporary au- 
thorities to show that only the Marxists could carry on 
the real tradition of Chinese culture. In this, Lu Hsun 
and Chu Chiu-pai* did a considerable amount of useful 
work. Chu Chiu-pai first pointed out that Tai Chi-tao’s 
real aim in fabricating the Confucian line of succession 
was to distort Sun Yat-sen’s new Three Principles of the 
People, changing it into “a doctrine of benevolence 
and mercy,” and to make the work of revolution mere 
philanthropy. Next he showed that Tai Chi-tao wanted 
the broad masses of workers and peasants to stop their 
- struggle and “‘look up to the upper classes for their favours 
and directions.” It is easy to see that the Rightists within 
the Kuomintang began to show their counter-revolu- 
tionary tendencies very clearly. In a series of political 
and literary essays, Lu Hsun made a searching analysis 
of the situation and dealt a smart blow to the reactionary 
thinkers of all shades. He said bluntly that the “sys- 
tematization of the old learning” sponsored by “high- 
class people,” such as Hu Shih, was nothing but a ruse 
to prevent the intellectuals and students from taking part 
in real revolutionary struggles. 


126 


While disappointed politicians and the old cultured 
aristocracy were moaning about the wretched fate of 
the people and suggesting as a remedy the “re-study of 
the national heritage” or work in textual research as 
balm for national misfortune, the revolutionary war of 
the Northern Expedition broke out. This pricked the 
bubble of the reactionaries’ wishful thinking of trying 
to turn the intellectuals into bookworms. Some of the 
reactionaries had treated one another as friends while 
at other times posed as enemies. They were the men 
who were once in the limelight and had dazzled the 
people with their debates and quarrels. There was the 
debate on Oriental and Occidental cultures; there 
were arguments on the subject of “Science and Philos- 
ophy of Life.” But whatever role they played they 
were basically men of the same mind and purpose. They 
were essentially idealists though some of them were 
idealists of the old metaphysical schools while others 
were of the new, “scientific” and more fashionable type. 
They were “in the same boat” — all enemies of Marxism. 
Whatever the peculiar brand of their philosophy might 
be the idealists were all defeated by the Marxists and 
had to beat a hasty retreat. Their views, different in 
form but all counter-revolutionary in content, were soon 
swept away by the revolutionary tide of communism. 

In On New Democracy Mao Tse-tung said: 


But since the May 4 Movement things have gone 
differently. Since then a brand-new cultural force 
of fresh strength has appeared in China . .. the new 
cultural force too, in new uniform and with new weap- 
ons, mustering all possible allies and deploying itself 
in battle array, launches heroic attacks on imperialist 


127 


culture and feudal culture. .. . in whatever direction 
this new cultural force has turned its spearhead, a 
great revolution has taken place in both thought- 
content and form (such as the style of written 
language). Its influence is so great and its power so 
tremendous that it is practically invincible wherever 
it goes. 


Mao Tse-tung’s Analysis of the Classes in Chinese So- 
ciety and Report of an Investigation into the Peasant 
Movement in Hunan, both written during the First Rev- 
olutionary War (1924-27), show clearly that he had long 
applied the theory of dialectical materialism creatively 
to China’s revolution and linked up the actual work of 
the, revolution with the universal truth of Marxism- 
Leninism. Using the fundamental method of Marxism, 
ie. class analysis, he made a scientific analysis of the 
classes in the Chinese society, thus getting a correct 
solution to the foremost problem of Chinese revolution, 
which was: “Who are our enemies and who are our 
friends?” He stressed the point that the proletariat was 
the leading force in the revolution and that the peasant- 
ry was its most reliable ally. He sang the praises of 
the peasants’ revolutionary movement against the land- 
lords with great confidence; and called on his revolu- 
tionary comrades to lead the peasants on their march 
forward. He considered the alliance of workers and 
peasants to be the main question in the revolutionary 
movement and judged whether a man was revolutionary 
or counter-revolutionary by whether he stood for or 
against the peasant movement. He also made an analysis 
of the national bourgeoisie in which he pointed out its 


ISelected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. III, pp. 143-44. 


128 


dual character, by which he meant that to a certain ex- 
tent it was both revolutionary and vacillating. “Its 
right wing,” he concluded, “may become our enemy and 
its left wing may become our friend, but we must be 
constantly on our guard towards the latter and not allow 
it to create confusion in our front.”! The Kuomintang’s 
betrayal of the revolution in 1927 fully proved that Mao 
Tse-tung was right in his analysis. 


PART II 


(1) 


Civil strife in China between revolution and counter- 
revolution had two fronts during the ten years 
from 1927 to 1937. The first consisted of the in- 
tensification of the Communist-led peasant revolution 
and the “encirclement and annihilation campaigns” car- 
ried out by the Kuomintang while the second con- 
sisted of the intensification of the Communist-led cul- 
tural revolution and. the Kuomintang’s cultural “encir- 
clement and annihilation campaign.” Both of these 
Kuomintang campaigns ended in ignominious defeat. 

During this period among the Chinese communist 
thinkers a group of Left-wing writers was formed, with 
Lu Hsun as their standard-bearer. They made their in- 
fluence felt everywhere —in the realms of philosophy 
and the social sciences, literature and art. They soon 
won a magnificent victory over the reactionary writers 


1Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 20, 


129 


who were spokesmen for the Kuomintang. Although it 
had declared Marxism illegal and prohibited its propaga- 
tion under severe punishment, the Left-wing writers 
persisted in their propaganda by both legal and illegal 
methods. Marxist philosophy .and social sciences found 
their way into the Kuomintang-dominated colleges and 
universities, influencing many young revolutionary in- 
tellectuals. The December 9 Movement! was an important 
landmark in this period of China’s cultural revolution. 

During this period the reactionary cultural camp came 
to life again and showed great activity. 

The counter-revolutionary cultural leaders ieuaruea 
the “New Life Movement” which was largely a mixture 
of feudal and fascist slogans, such as the feudal formula 
of “propriety, righteousness, honesty, and sense of 
shame” and the fascist shibboleth of “simplicity and 
plainness.” The Kuomintang reactionaries gave false 
interpretations and did everything to distort Sun Yat- 
sen’s philosophy and political theories. They replaced 
the spirit of optimism in the new Three Principles of 
the People with their idealist theory of “vitalism” and 
used a form of culture “peculiarly characteristic of China” 
to misrepresent Sun Yat-sen’s revolutionary culture 
which stood for fairness and justice. 

In 1928 Hu Shih and a number of his followers founded 
the journal Crescent. For the purpose of carrying out 
political activities, this clique spread its reactionary doc- 


IThis refers to the students’ patriotic demonstration in Pe- 
king on December 9, 1935 under the leadership of the Chinese 
Communist Party. The movement called for the cessation of 
civil war and armed resistance to Japan, and won nation-wide 
support, 


130 


trine. of reformism in opposition to Marxism and the 
Chinese Communist Party. Meanwhile, Liang Su-ming 
put forward a theory of “rural construction,” which was 
thoroughly anti-Marxist, maliciously calling Bolshevism 
a “blind alley in politics.” Synchronizing his utterances 
with those of the Kuomintang reactionaries he attacked 
the Communists verbally with all kinds of lies. He was 
not only a man of speech but also a man of action. To 
carry out his plan of “opposing the Communist Party” 
he devised political, economic, and other kinds of “orders” 
with which the landlords could arm and protect them- 
selves, their property and their interests. 

Hu Shih and Liang Sou-ming said, ‘‘We are firemen 
and not incendiaries, we should collaborate with the gov- 
ernment (i.e. the Kuomintang) in maintaining social 
order and convincing the ‘opposition party’ (i.e. the Com- 
munists).” In Hu Shih’s words, “We shall make a 
thorough study and investigation with the Communists 
as our object.” 

But no reactionary systems of thought could stand 
against the strength of Marxism and the influence of re- 
actionary literature rapidly declined. The situation was 
well described in a letter written by a certain reaction- 
ary, Miss Su, to Hu Shih. This was what she said in 
part: 


The literary circle is now dominated by the Leftists. 
Books and periodicals propagating communism are 
welcomed by the young people. Lu Hsun sits on the 

+ pinnacle of the literary world, issuing orders and direc- 
tions. He is a great menace to the party and govern- 
ment (meaning the Kuomintang party and govern- 
ment). If communism continues to exist the Three 


131 


Principles of the People will disappear: ... The 
world as it is today has become a world of proletarian 
culture! 


During this period another struggle was waged in the 
field of sociology between the bourgeois scholars who 
propagated the theories of Comte, Malinowski, etc., and 
the progressives who accepted Marxist historical ma- 
terialism as their guide to study. 

In the study of history there was the struggle between 
bourgeois and Marxist historians. Some of the former 
were pragmatists who held that the study of theories 
and doctrines should be replaced by a textual research 
into historical materials while others stood for Oswald 
Spengler’s theory of historical cycles. The Marxists, 
however, advocated a scientific approach to history. 

In economic theories there was a struggle between the 
Marginal Utility School, theories of Keynes, etc. on the 
one hand and Marxist political economy on the other. 

In philosophic’ discussion the battle was between the 
Neo-Kantians, Neo-Hegelians, new realists, and prag- 
matic idealists on the one hand and the dialectical ma- 
terialists on the other. 

In the arena of political theories the combatants were 
the fascists, various kinds of reformists, Trotskyites, etc. 
against all those who advocated the Marxist-Leninist 
theory of the state. 

It is easy to see on how many different fronts the bat- 
tle was waged. The promoters of these reactionary 
theories, who were spokesmen for the landlords and 
bourgeoisie, vied with one another to gain Kuomintang 
support for their “cultural campaign.” But they and 
their theories had fallen behind the times. They were 


132 


completely'isolated from the broad masses of people who 
looked upon them with disgust. 

In the struggle between the reactionary thinkers and 
the Marxists one thing is particularly interesting and 
worthy of note. The bourgeois scholars were confident 
that they had something to show in the fields of Chinese 
history and the history. of Chinese philosophy. They 
‘thought that here they could hold the Marxists at bay. 
But to their great chagrin the battle-steeled Marxists 
were quite competent in these fields and their arguments 
were invincible. In controversies about the nature of 
Chinese society, the social history of China, and the his- 
tory of Chinese thought and culture, the Marxists fought 
the bourgeois scholars with a tenacity similar to that of 
Engels in his fight against Duhring. Led by Kuo Mo-jo 
and basing their arguments upon scientific research and 
an even larger amount of material than their enemies 
possessed, they emerged triumphant. They exposed the 
vacuity of bourgeois scholarship, revealing that its treas- 
ures were rubbish, that the bourgeois scholars were 
living in the past instead of the present and were wast- 
ing their time and deceiving the people. Held under 
the clear searchlight of Marxist criticism, the arguments 
and theories of all brands of idealism were exposed as 
false and bourgeois scholarship as useless. In thus de- 
bunking bourgeois scholarship and charting a new scien- 
tific approach to learning, the Marxists did a great serv- 
ice to China’s academic life. 

This is what Mao Tse-tung said in his On New Democ- 
racy about China’s cultural revolution in the twenty 
years after the May 4 Movement: 


133 


The progress achieved during the twenty years after 
the May 4 Movement surpasses not only that of the 
preceding eighty years but practically that of the pre- 
vious thousands of years in Chinese history as a whole. 
Can we not visualize the progress China will make in 
another twenty years?} 


Mao Tse-tung showed great foresight when he wrote 
this in 1940. He already foresaw the great progress 
China is making today. 


(2) 


In October 1927, Mao Tse-tung led the peasants in 
successfully staging the autumn-harvest uprising in 
Hunan. In the same month the first revolutionary base 
was established in Chingkang Mountain area in the 
border region between Hunan and Kiangsi Provinces by 
the workers’ and peasants’ armed forces. In 1930 it be- 
came the Central Soviet Area, the centre of China’s rev- 
olution. 

Mao Tse-tung frequently exhorted members of the 
Chinese Communist Party to apply the principle of ma- 
terialism to their work. A materialist approach means 
having a scientific and objective attitude towards every- 
thing. It was absolutely necessary for the Party to for- 
mulate its political line and policies strictly in accordance 
with objective conditions. 

After the failure of the First Revolutionary Civil War 
in 1927 Mao Tse-tung correctly formulated the political 
line of the Chinese Communist Party in accordance with 


\Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 151. 


134 


the actual conditions existing at that time. Befcre doing 
this he first made an analysis of the national situation 
and the activities of the various classes. In Why Can 
China’s Red Political Power Exist? which is part of the 
resolution drawn up by Mao Tse-tung for the Second 
Party Conference of the Hunan-Kiangsi Border Area in 
1928, he said: 


The present regime of the new Kuomintang warlords 
is still a regime of the comprador class in the cities 
and the landed gentry in the countryside, a regime 
which has in foreign affairs capitulated to imperialism 
and at home replaced old warlords with new ones, and 
has subjected the working class and peasantry to an 
economic exploitation and a political oppression more 
ruthless than before.} 


By this he meant that concrete conditions determined the 
nature of China’s revolution at that time which was still 
bourgeois-democratic with the proletariat as the leading 
force. 

Feudal relations of production were the basic form of 
oppressing and exploiting the peasants. The only way 
to emancipate the peasants was to abolish the feudal 
system of landownership. Only when the peasants were 
emancipated could the forces of agricultural production 
be developed and a big anti-imperialist army built up. 
It was, therefore, clear that the agrarian question was the 
focal question in China’s bourgeois-democratic revolu- 
tion and it was most important for the proletariat to lead 
the peasants in carrying out the agrarian revolution. 


\Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 63. 


135 


Owing to uneven economic development, modern in- 
dustry in China was limited to certain areas of the coun- 
try. The imperialists exercised direct economic control 
over those regions of modern economy but their influence 
had not then reached the remote places which lacked 
modern industry. Under such conditions China’s revolu- 
tion, led by the proletariat, had to first win success in the 
countryside, where enemy influence had not penetrated. 
Accordingly, the political line Mao Tse-tung formulated 
for the Party during the period of the Second Revolu- 
tionary Civil War (1927-37) contained the following 
points: to establish and consolidate strong Red political 
power in the countryside, to carry out a protracted rev- 
olutionary struggle there, to surround the cities from 
the countryside, and finally capture them. China’s ex- 
perience in revolution has proved that this political] line 
was entirely correct. It was correct because it was for- 
mulated in accordance with the objective conditions exist- 
ing in China and was based upon the requirements of 
the Chinese .people. This is one example of the way 
concrete problems of the revolution were solved by the 
scientific method of dialectical materialism. 

Mao Tse-tung’s knowledge and use of the scientific 
method in formulating the correct political line was in 
direct contrast with the “Left” opportunists’ reliance on 
their subjective ideas. They thought that China’s revolu- 
tion was gaining steadily in strength, whereas in fact the 
revolutionary forces were then on the defensive. They 
underestimated the value of guerrilla warfare waged by 
the peasants and the importance of the revolutionary 
bases in the countryside. They clung to the idea that 
revolutionary uprisings should begin in the big cities and 
clamoured for the start of armed insurrections in the 


136 


major ones. The errors committed by these “Left’’ op- 
portunists within the Communist Party resulted in a se- 
rious setback for the revolution. The trouble with these 
“Left” opportunists was that they ignored the principles 
of dialectical materialism, paid no attention to the objec- 
tive conditions necessary for China’s revolution nor to 
the requirements of the people, and mistook their subjec- 
tive desires, feelings and empty talks for facts. 
Materialism, dialectics and theory of knowledge are 
united in Marxist philosophy; materialism starting from 
objective reality and dialectics analysing the movement 
of opposites come together. Mao Tse-tung’s writings 
show great vitality of revolutionary dialectics. He set 
great store by Lenin’s saying that to make a concrete 
analysis of concrete conditions is the core of revolutionary 
dialectics. In Strategic Problems of China’s Revolutionary 
War which he wrote in 1936, he pointed out that Chinese 
Communists should learn from the experiences in revolu- 
tionary war of other countries, especially those of the 
Soviet Union. But these should not be applied to China 
mechanically. Above all, Chinese Communists should 
study the characteristics of China’s revolutionary war. 
They should realize that China is a land of uneven polit- 
ical and economic development, that it is led by the Com- 
munist Party, and that it is necessary to carry out 
agrarian reform. From these special characteristics Mao 
Tse-tung concluded that the revolutionary war in China 
was likely to develop and be successful. From the fact 
that the enemy was strong and the Red Army weak, he 
concluded that it was impossible for the Red Army to 
gain a nation-wide victory within a short period of time. 
These characteristics, said Mao Tse-tung, ‘determine the 
guiding line for China’s revolutionary war and its stra- 


_— ee 


137 


tegic and tactical principles.” Speaking specifically he 
advocated the strategy of a protracted war and quick de- 
cision in campaigns, and raised guerrilla warfare to a 
strategic level in China’s revolutionary war. These prin- 
ciples made it possible for the revolutionary people’s army 
to defeat Chiang Kai-shek’s four “encirclement cam- 
paigns.” 

The “Left” opportunists, however, did not understand 
how to use the dialectical principles of Marxism and paid 
no attention to the special characteristics of China’s rev- 
olutionary war. They applied the experiences of the 
other countries mechanically. They adopted the strategy 
of a war of quick decision and protracted campaigns. 
Under the circumstances, this was a wrong military prin- 
ciple but the “Left” opportunists thought that its cor- 
rectness was self-evident. The result was that the Red 
Army was defeated in the enemy’s fifth “encirclement 
campaign” and its main force had to move to a new area 
in the north, giving up its former position. 

In the “Resolution on Some Questions in the History 
of Our Party,” adopted on April 20, 1945 at the Enlarged 
Seventh Plenary Session of the Sixth Central Committee 
of the Chinese Communist Party, the experiences and 
lessons gained and learned during the Second Revolu- 
tionary Civil War were summed up according to the prin- 
ciples of Marxism. It was stated in the resolution: 


When Communists who live and fight in China study 
dialectical materialism and historical materialism, they 
should do so for the purpose of applying them, as Com- 
rade Mao does, to investigate and solve the actual 
problems of the Chinese revolution.’ 


\selected Works of: Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 208. 


—SeSe ae 


138 


Speaking from his experience in revolution, Mao Tse- 
tung stressed the importance of studying any complicated 
process in which more than two contradictions exist. He 
said, ‘‘We must do our utmost to discover the principal 
contradiction.”! By principal contradiction he meant the 
principal links in work. The Chinese Communist Party 
and Mao Tse-tung are past masters in using the method 
of Marxist dialectics to discover the changes in the prin- 
cipal contradictions at various stages of revolution. In 
this way they put forward at the appropriate time, correct 
political slogans encouraging the people to march in the 
right direction with revolutionary enthusiasm. This is — 
how the Marxist theory of uninterrupted revolution was 
applied to the actual conditions existing in China. In 
the essays On the Tactics of Fighting Japanese Imperial- 
ism, written in 1935, and The Tasks of the Chinese Com- 
munist Party in the Period of Resistance to Japan, writ- 
ten in 1937, Mao Tse-tung pointed out that owing to 
Japan’s savage invasion of China “the contradiction be- 
tween China and Japan has become the primary one and 
China’s internal contradiction a secondary and subor- 
dinate one.”* This made it possible in the fight against 
Japanese imperialism to create a national united front 
which included the masses of people, the national bour- 
geoisie, and certain members of the Kuomintang gov- 
ernment who were ready to resist Japanese invasion. Ac- 
cordingly the Party put forward the principal slogans of 
“An anti-Japanese national united front” and “A united 
democratic republic” and also slogans, such as “Make the 


1Mao Tse-tung, On Contradiction, Foreign. Languages Press, 
Peking, 1958, p. 33. 


2Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. ctt., Vol. I, p. 258. 


139 


War of Resistance a Fact!” “Stop civil war!” etc. In this 
way it mobilized, organized, and led the masses of. people 
to wage the war of national liberation and fight against 
Japanese imperialism. 

In On the Protracted War written in 1938 Mao Tse-tung 
formulated the military strategy for the War of Resist- 
ance to Japanese Aggression. This treatise is a vivid 
example of the application of Marxist dialectics in solving 
the actual problems of China’s revolution. It proves 
beyond doubt the power of the Marxist dialectics. It 
was so convincing that after a Kuomintang propagandist 
had read it he could not help exclaiming in fright, ‘‘The 
Kuomintang is finished!’ Mao Tse-tung said that in 
actual work revolutionaries should approach the question 
as a whole and guard against partiality. The ‘‘whole” re- 
quires that in studying anything account should be taken 
of all contradictions together with their different aspects 
in their various stages of development. He also analysed 
the strong and weak points of both China and Japan. He 
stated that Japan was a powerful nation, with a stronger 
military force——these were its strong points. But it 
also had weak points which would prove fatal. These 
were that the war waged by the Japanese imperialists 
was an unjust war and was not supported by the peace- 
loving peoples of the world; Japan had an insufficient 
command of manpower and material resources, etc. 
China’s strong points were that the war of resistance 
was a just war and was led by the Chinese Com- 
munist Party; it had a well-steeled Red Army; and it 
was likely to receive support from all the peace-loving 
peoples in the world, etc. But China was a semi-feudal, 
semi-colonial country and its military force was weak, 
etc. — these were its weak points. Taking all this into 


140 


consideration Mao Tse-tung reached the conclusion that 
the Anti-Japanese War would be a protracted war, but 
that the final victory would belong to China. According 
to him, those who believed that the Chinese nation would 
be subjugated and those who thought that a quick victory 
could be obtained were both one-sided in their views 
and did not grasp the whole situation. An old Chinese 
adage says, “A leaf held before the eyes blocks out the 
view of Mount Tai.” The defeatists saw only the rela- 
tive strength of the two countries but they did not see 
the other points. This was the reason why they held 
the erroneous view that “resistance spells inevitable de- 
feat.”” As to those who believed in a quick victory they 
had simply forgotten the relative strength of the mili- 
tary power of China and Japan while concentrating their 
attention on other conditions. 

Mao Tse-tung always maintains that one of the most 
effective ways to raise the level of Marxist-Leninist 
thinking in the Party is to analyse and sum up the history 
of ideological struggles between opposing schools | of 
thought within the Party. In 1937 he wrote the treatises 
On Practice and On Contradiction, in which he spoke 
about the development of Marxist philosophy in the prac- 
tical experience of Chinese revolution and forcefully 
criticized the two subjective tendencies of doctrinairism 
and empiricism. He attacked the former particularly 
because it had prevailed and caused serious damage to the 
Party during the period 1931-34 and held it up to Party 
members as a typical lesson in erroneous thought. 

Mao Tse-tung developed the Marxist theory of knowl- 
edge from actual experiences gained during the course 
of China’s revolution. He made a brilliant Marxist- 
Leninist analysis of the relation between knowing and 


141 


doing, which had been a controversial subject in Chinese 
philosophy from the time of Confucius to that of Sun 
Yat-sen. Mao Tse-tung’s conclusion was that knowledge 
is derived from practice. By practice he meant man’s 
activities in production, class struggle, scientific and ar- 
tistic pursuits, etc. He said that there are two 
kinds of knowledge: that of the natural sciences, i.e. man’s 
knowledge gained in production, and that of the social 
sciences, i.e. man’s knowledge gained in class struggle. 
Both are derived from practice. There are two closely 
related stages in the process of knowing: perceptual 
knowledge and rational knowledge; they are united on 
the basis of practice. There can be no real knowledge 
to speak of without revolutionary practice and knowledge 
based thereupon. If the importance of taking part 
personally in the practical struggle to change reality is 
denied, then it is not possible to be a materialist. Mao 
Tse-tung, therefore, tells us that if we want to do our 
work well we must join the masses in practical revolu- 
tionary struggles and temper ourselves among the masses 
instead of shutting ourselves in our rooms — that will 
not settle any question. The trouble with the doctri- 
naires is that they fail to link up theory with practice. 
He also tells us that knowledge must not stop at the lower 
stage of perception. If perceptual knowledge is not de- 
veloped to the rational stage, it becomes impossible to 
understand the laws of the objective world but it is quite 
easy to fall into the error of empiricism in actual work. 

In On Practice he also says that to discover whether a 
theory is true or whether a viewpoint is correct, 
it has to be tested by practice. Before the appearance of 
Marxist philosophy the question of the criterion of truth 
had never been satisfactorily solved. It was this philos- 


¢ 


142 


ophy which first made practice the criterion of truth. 
This theory has since become a powerful weapon of the 
masses in refuting the erroneous ideas of the idealists 
and reactionaries. The idealists have always tried to 
mislead the masses into believing that they are the sole 
possessors of truth. But what they call truth has in- 
variably turned out to be falsehood when tested by prac- 
tice. Decades of practice in the communist movement 
have demonstrated the truth of Marxism-Leninism. 
With reference to China’s revolutionary experience 
Mao Tse-tung made a profound analysis of the relation- 
ship between knowledge and practice. ‘‘Practice, knowl- 
edge, more practice, more knowledge,” he pointed out 
in his conclusion, ‘‘is a pattern of cyclical repetition to 
infinity in which with each cycle the content of practice 
and knowledge reaches a higher level.”! In accordance 
with the Marxist theory of knowledge the Chinese Com- 
munist Party through its directives and Mao Tse-tung 
through his writings summed up experiences in leading 
revolutionary work and laid down certain fundamental 
principles of correct leadership. To give an example 
there is the slogan: “From the masses to the masses!” 
This means that after careful study, the views of the 


masses are systematized and summed up. They are then’ 


taken back to the masses, explained and popularized until 
the masses embrace the ideas again as their own, stand 
up for them and translate them into action, to test their 
correctness. After testing they express their views and 
opinions again and the cycle is repeated. There is also 
the method of “linking the general directives with the 


1 Mao Tse-tung, On Practice, Foreign Languages Press, Peking, 
1958, pp. 21-22. 


143 


specific instructions; linking the leadership with the 
masses.” Under the guidance of such principles Party 
members and the masses are closely united and the Party 
derives constant fresh strength from the wisdom of the 
masses and consequently is able to lead the masses to 
win one victory after another. 

In On Contradiction Mao Tse-tung paid great attention 
to the principle enunciated by Lenin but once almost 
forgotten, i.e. the unity of opposites is the fundamental 
law of the objective world.. He made a profound analysis 
of this, illustrating it with concrete examples taken from 
China’s revolutionary experiences. He pointed out that 
the object of studying materialist dialectics is to enable 
a correct analysis to be made of the movement of op- 
posites of things and to find solutions to them. Contra- 
diction is a universal phenomenon. It exists in a thing 
from beginning to end in its movement. Everything has 
its individual and particular kind of contradiction. It is 
necessary, says Mao Tse-tung, to pay attention to the 
particularity of each contradiction and resolve different 
contradictions by different methods. The contradiction 
between the proletariat and bourgeoisie, for instance, is 
resolved by socialist revolution, that between the broad 
masses of the people and the feudal system by democratic 
revolution, and that between colonies and imperialism by 
national revolutionary war. The doctrinaires make no 
study of the particularities of contradictions. They apply 
the same method to all kinds of contradictions. They 
are unable to solve any problems; they can only make 
good things bad and bad things worse. Mao Tse-tung 
also made a detailed study of the problems of the prin- 
cipal contradiction and the principal aspect of a con- 
tradiction and the role of antagonism in contradiction. 


144 


When discussing the unity and the struggle of opposites 
he.supported and further developed the theory of Lenin 
when he said that the unity of opposites is conditional, 
temporary, and relative while the struggle of mutually 
exclusive opposites is absolute and that opposites can 
transform themselves into one another under certain con- 
ditions. When a new thing first appears it is compara- 
tively weak in strength and is in danger of being ousted 
by old things. If the law of the transformation of op- 
posites in a certain situation is understood, conditions 
can be created to accelerate the growth of new things 
and to ensure their victory and dominant position over 
the old. 

During 1941-42 Mao Tse-tung wrote Reform Our Study, 
Rectify the Party’s Style in Work, and Oppose the Party 
“Eight-legged Essay.” In them he discussed the two 
basic antagonistic attitudes towards Marxism-Leninism 
and the revolutionary practice in China. The first at- 
titude was one of militant materialism. It was the scien- 
tific attitude of objectivity, of “shooting the arrow at the 
target,” and of “seeking truth from facts.” It was an 
attitude in which theory and practice are linked and is 
a manifestation of the Party spirit. The second attitude 
was subjectivism. This was an expression of a subjec- 
tive wish, “shooting an arrow at random,” and is unscien- 
tific, theory and practice being divorced from each other. 
It was a manifestation of the lack of Party spirit or of 
impure Party spirit. In the course of the Party’s rec- 
tification campaign carried out in 1942, the first attitude 
and method of thinking stood the test and triumphed over 
the second. This created the ideological basis for the 
Party’s leadership in the victory of the revolution and 


145 


paved the way for successfully waging the great War of 
Liberation. 

Mao Tse-tung pointed out emphatically that to carry 
out the principle of militant materialism in revolutionary 
work it is necessary to study current events, the ex- 
periences of international working-class movements and 
history very carefully. To have “a blurred picture of 
the present-day China” and ‘“‘to be completely in the 
dark about the China of yesterday and the day before 
yesterday” will surely lead to subjectivism. In The 
Role of the,:Chinese Communist Party in the National 
War, Mao Tse-tung stated, “We must make a summing- 
up from Confucius down to Sun Yat-sen and inherit this 
precious legacy.”! But in inheriting this legacy we must 
distinguish its democratic traditions from its feudal 
dregs. We should discard the latter and preserve the 
former. But in preserving the former discretion should 
be exercised as ‘“‘we should never absorb anything and 
everything uncritically.” 


(3) 


Mao Tse-tung’s teachings guided the Chinese com- 
munist thinkers in their relentless struggle against the 
Kuomintang’s cultural tyranny and its theory of national 
capitulation and against those who opposed the war of 
resistance, national unity, and progressive thought. 

The advocates of the bourgeois theory of national ca- 
pitulation were in reality supporters of the Kuomintang‘s 
policy of cultural tyranny. Chang Nai-chi,* spokesman 


Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 260. 


naa 


146 


of the bourgeoisie, who supported capitulation, said at 
the beginning of the war of resistance, “Issue fewer ‘calls 
and make more proposals!” The Communists saw the 
danger of this statement and lost no time in refuting it. 
Mao Tse-tung called on the members of the Party to be 
vigilant in preventing the idea of national capitulation 
‘ from infiltrating into the Party. 
The Kuomintang reactionaries and the literary writers 
under their patronage were in a passive position every- 
where. Their so-called learned societies and associations 
| as well as their press and publishing houses rapidly lost 
their influence under the impact of the Left’s cultural 
\} offensive. The writings of Mao Tse-tung were especially 
popular. His treatise On New Democracy was widely 
read in the Kuomintang-controlled regidns. This enraged 
) the dictator Chiang Kai-shek, and he severely castigated 

the propaganda personnel of the Kuomintang for their in- 
competency. He decided to take the matter into his own 
} 


hands. With the help of hack writers he published a 

book called China’s Destiny, notorious for its fascist 
ideas. As to the “scholars” under Kuomintang patronage, 
they either revamped the old anti-Soviet, anti-Communist, 
I" and anti-Marxist theories which they had put forward 
during the earlier period of “cultural encirclement and 
annihilation” campaign or harped on their various old 
theories of idealism in the field of social sciences. But 
battered weapons are of little use in warfare and their 
use brought nothing but ridicule. 

In the realm of philosophy a number of backward anti- 
rationalist and pro-fascist tendencies appeared among 
certain reactionary thinkers. The school of “New Ra- 
tionalism” talked about the “most philosophical philos- 
ophy,” which was only metaphysics handed down from 


—<—- -- oa 


= 


147 


the long past. In the field of history many “historians” 
of the new Mirror of History* School! appeared. Their 
main theme was that the Kuomintang was leading China 
into a new era and that a future of great promise lay 
before the nation.. These philosophers and historians 
prided themselves as being modern Chu Hsis and Ssuma 
Kuangs and. thought they could combat historical ma- 
terialism. In the field of sociology there were all kinds 
of fantastic theories. Some men claimed to belong to 
a school of ‘‘comprehensive cultural knowledge” advocat- 
ing ‘““humanitarianism.” They alleged that belief in 
philosophical doctrines was the same as belief in religion, 
their aim being to cast a reflection on Marxism. They 
said that to reach “the road of freedom,” it was neces- 
sary- to be free from “isms.” They compared the gov- 
ernment of a state to business management which, they 
said, should be considered as having fulfilled its duty 
if it succeeded in procuring profits for shareholders. All 
these theories were intended to ward off criticisms of 
the Kuomintang dictatorship raised by the people under 
the guidance of the Chinese Communist Party. 
Towards the end of the Kuomintang regime there ap- 
peared a group of “liberal” thinkers known as the “Third 
Line.” Their aim was to rescue the rapidly collapsing 
Chiang Kai-shek regime from its final downfall. Hu 
Shih wrote an article entitled ‘Two Cultures of Two 
Worlds.” He poured blasphemy on socialist culture and 


1The Mirror of History was a general history from the War- 
ring States Period (475-221 B.C.) to the Five Dynasties (907- 
960) written by Ssuma Kuang (1019-1086), a historian of the 
Sung dynasty, and other scholars. These new “historians” claimed 
to be their successors. 


148 


called on the Chinese people to follow the ‘culture which 
has its centre in America.” ‘China need not be ashamed 
of having no culture of her own,” he said, ‘if she can 
assimilate the culture of other peoples.” Fearing that 
the reactionary thinkers might despair of China’s future 
he told them to wait patiently for cultural salvation by 
America. Liang Su-ming and others, too, came forward 
with a theory meant to justify Chiang Kai-shek’s policy 
of suppression. He wrote a book entitled The Meaning 
of Chinese Culture. In it he explained a system of 
“rationalist” philosophy, supposed to be the traditional 
philosophy of China, denying class struggle. “Both the 
rulers and the people,” he said, “should act as befit their 
station. They should take the most profitable and safest 
road ... and avoid all conflicts. Otherwise . . . the peo- 
ple may rise in revolt and the rulers will be in a position 
of danger.” With such a muddled “rationalist” philos- 
ophy he hoped to persuade the people to put down their 
arms, renounce class struggle, denounce Bolshevism, 
abandon their attempt at armed revolution; and thus 
“bring peace to the nation.” 

All these anti-Communist, anti-Soviet, and anti-Marxist 
ballyhoos of the various schools of reactionary thought 
of the bourgeoisie and landlord class answered Lenin’s 
description: “The lap-dog must be strong if at the ele- 
phant he barks!”! The power of these reactionary think- 
ers was exceedingly small though they did not seem to 
realize this. Their fantastic theories, which were com- 


1“What the ‘Friends of the People’ Are and How They Fight the 
Social Democrats,” Lenin, Selected Works in Two Volumes, For- 
eign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1950, Vol. I, Part 1, 
p. 129. 


149 


pletely unfounded and often antiquated, could not stand 
the impact of any counter-attack. They could not escape 
the fate of being rejected by the people and facing 
truth they simply vanished. 

During the war of resistance to Japanese aggression 
the revolutionary force on the cultural front fought in 
co-ordination with the armed forces on the war front. 
Its success in achieving unity among its own ranks and 
defeating the enemy may be described in Mao Tse-tung’s 
words. He said in Talks at the Yenan Forum on Art 
and Literature in May 1942: 


Since the May 4 Movement of 1919 this cultural army 
has taken shape in China and has helped the Chinese 
revolution in gradually reducing the domain and 
weakening the influence of China’s feudal culture and 
her comprador culture which is adapted to imperialist 
aggression. By now the Chinese reactionaries can only 
propose what they cali ‘‘quantity versus quality” as a 
means of opposing the new culture; in other words, the 
reactionaries who can afford to blow the expense are 
straining to turn out an immense quantity of stuff, 
though they are unable to produce anything good.) 


PART Ill 


(1) 


“The fundamental question of every revolution is the 
question of power,” said Lenin. In this respect, the found- 


1 Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung, op. cit., Vol. IV, p. 63. 


Ste Se 


<= ———— 


a 


150 


ing of the Chinese People’s Republic in 1949 was a victory 
scored by China’s bourgeois-democratic revolution and 
marked the beginning of its socialist revolution. 

In July 1949 Mao Tse-tung wrote. a book entitled 
On People’s Democratic Dictatorship on the 28th an- 
niversary of the birth of the Chinese Communist Party. 
He described how, after the Opium War, Chinese progres- 
sives went through infinite toil in search of methods of 
national salvation from the West. In his opinion, “Hung 
Hsiu-chuan, Kang Yu-wei, Yen Fu and Sun Yat-sen rep- 
resented the group of men who, before the birth of the 
Chinese Communist Party, looked to the West for truth.’ 


- But it was only after the October Revolution, beginning 


from the May 4 Movement, and due to the introduction 
of Marxism-Leninism into China and the fact that the 
Chinese workers appeared on the scene as leaders of the 
revolution, that the Chinese people, under the leadership 
of the Chinese Communist Party, were able to establish 
the dictatorship of the proletariat after a long and dif- 
ficult struggle. This was, to quote Mao Tse-tung again, 
a “people’s democratic dictatorship led by the working 
class (through the Communist Party) and based upon the 
alliance of workers and peasants, This dictatorship must 
unite with a]l international revolutionary forces.’ 

The establishment of the people’s democratic dictator- 
ship in China has proved beyond doubt that Marxism- 
Leninism is a universal truth applicable everywhere in 
the world. It has also proved that the path of the Oc- 
tober Revolution (i.e. the basic experience of the Russian 


1Mao Tse-tung, On People’s Democratic Dictatorship, Foreign 
Languages Press, Peking, 1959, p. 3. 


2 Ibid., p. 18. 


151 


revolution) reflected the universal laws at a particular 
stage in the course of development of human society. 
Mao Tse-tung vividly drew the conclusion: “Follow the 
path of the Russians.” 

As far back as 1920 Lenin had already pointed out that 
the Russian revolution had ‘a significance which is not 
local, not peculiarly national, not Russian only but in- 
ternational.” Again he said: “But at the present mo- 
ment of history the situation is precisely such that the 
Russian model reveals to all countries something, and 
something very essential, of their near and inevitable 
future.”2 In contrast with the modern spineless revi- 
sionists the Chinese people have a great desire for truth 
and believe in what Lenin said. They call their revolu- 
tion “a continuation of the great October Revolution.” 
-A leading article entitled ‘“More on the Historical Ex- 
perience of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” written 
by the Editorial Department of the Renmin Ribao (Peo- 
ple’s Daily) on the basis of a discussion at an enlarged 
meeting of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee 
of the Chinese Communist Party was published in that 
paper on December 29, 1956. It summarized the main req- 
uisites for the success of the October Revolution as being 
leadership of the Communist Party, alliance of the work- 
ers and peasants, proletarian revolution and proletarian 
dictatorship, socialist industrialization, agricultural co- 
operation, cultural revolution, and proletarian interna- 
tionalism. The article pointed out, “In the present in- 


1“ Veft-Wing’ Communism, an Infantile Disorder,” V..I. Lenin, 
Selected Works in Two Volumes, Foreighh Languages Publish- 
ing House, Moscow, 1952, Vol. H, Part 2, p. 341. 


2 Ibid., p. 342. 


152 


ternational situation, it is of particularly great signifi- 
cance to defend this Marxist-Leninist path opened by the 
October Revolution.’? The modern revisionists com- 
pletely ignore the basic experiences gained by the Soviet 
people during the past forty years since the October Rev- 
olution. They have tried to substitute bourgeois na- 
tionalism for proletarian internationalism, bourgeois 
theory of a non-class state for the Marxist theory of state, 
a subjective theory of a dual policy for the objective laws 
concerning social development and the decline of im- 
perialism, and sophistry of compromise for materialist 
dialectics. The contributions of the Chinese Communist 
Party to Marxism-Leninism have eloquently refuted the 
modern revisionists’ false accusation that Marxism has 
ceased to develop in the past forty years. Facts have 
proved that what the modern revisionists thought to be 
new ideas are really obsolete arguments used by former 
revisionists such as Bernstein and Kautsky. They all 
stem from bourgeois ideology and are a serious menace 
to the international working-class movement. 

‘In leading the people in their revolutionary struggles 
the Chinese Communist Party has taken into full account 
the special characteristics of China. It has skilfully ap- 
plied the basic experience of the October Revolution to 
Chinese conditions and linked up the universal truth of 
Marxism-Leninism with China’s revolutionary practice. 
Lenin explained this truth as early as in 1920: 


As long as national and state differences exist among 
peoples and countries — and these differences will con- 
tinue to exist for a very long time even after the dicta- 


“1More on the Historical Experience of the Dictatorship of the 
Proletariat, Foreign Languages Press, Peking, 1957, p. 12. 


153 


torship of the proletariat has been established on a 
world scale — the unity of international tactics of the 
communist working-class movement of all countries de- 
mands, not the elimination of variety, not the aboli- 
tion of national differences (that is a foolish dream at 
the present moment), but such an application of the 
fundamental principles of communism (Soviet power 
and the dictatorship of the proletariat) as will correct- 
ly modify these principles in certain particulars, cor- 
rectly adapt and apply them to national and national- 
state differences: Investigate, study, seek, divine, 
grasp that which is peculiarly national, specifically 
national in the concrete manner in which each country 
approaches the fulfilment of the single international 
task, in which it approaches the victory over oppor- 
tunism and “Left” doctrinairism within the working- 
class movement, the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, and 
the establishment of a Soviet republic and a prole- 
tarian dictatorship — such is the main task of the his- 

: torical period through which all the advanced coun- 
tries (and not only the advanced countries) are now 
passing.! . 

‘ Revisionists and Right opportunists of the present day 
like to quote this passage to support their own pet theory. 
But in doing this they frequently tuck away the words 
“single international task” and propagate “national com- 
munism.” As to the doctrinaires, they divorce theory 
from practice. In their hands theories become a lifeless 
abstraction. Unable to understand ‘the dialectical rela- 


1“ ‘Left-Wing’ Communism, an Infantile Disorder,” V. I. Lenin, 
op. cit., p. 420. 


154 
7; 


tion between unity and variety, they are of course unable 
to solve the concrete problems in revolutionary practice. 


(2) 


After the founding of the Chinese People’s Republic the 
Chinese Communist Party led the people to wage one 
revolutionary struggle after another. Through the five 
great political movements! and three great “transforma- 
- tions’ the socialist revolution with regard to property 
ownership was virtually completed. 

In accordance with the special conditions of China, 
Mao Tse-tung creatively developed Marxism-Leninism 
with regard to many important problems of socialist rev- 
olution. He formulated the policy of carrying out a 
peaceful socialist transformation of capitalist industry 
and commerce. This policy was formulated on basis of 
certain objective conditions. First of all, a people’s dem- 
ocratic dictatorship under the leadership of the working 
class and based on the alliance between the workers and 
peasants had been set up with the victory of the new- 


1The five great political movements are: the agrarian re- 
form; the campaign to resist American aggression and aid 
Korea; the suppression of the counter-revolutionaries; the san 
fan movement (against corruption, waste and bureaucracy 
among government employees), and wu fan movement (against 
capitalists’ bribery of government workers, tax evasion, theft 
of state property, cheating on government contracts, and spying 
out economic information for private speculation); and ideol- 
ogical remoulding of intellectuals. 

2The three socialist transformations are: the socialist trans- 


formation of agriculture, handicrafts, and capitalist industry 
and commerce. 


155 


democratic revolution. Secondly, a strong socialist state 
economy had become the leading force in the national 
economy. Thirdly, the people’s democratic united front 
had been consolidated. Fourthly, the international situa- 
tion was favourable to China. Finally, the characteris- 
tics of the Chinese national bourgeoisie were such as to 
warrant the formulation of such a policy. 

Mao Tse-tung said more than once that the peasant 
question was the main one both in the period of demo- 
cratic revolution and the period of socialist revolution. 
In 1955 he published his booklet The Question of Agricul- 
tural Co-operation. In it he made a Marxist analysis of 
class relations in the countryside after the agrarian re- 
form. He gave his timely advice that rapid socialist 
transformation of the small-peasant economy must be 
carried out simultaneously with the building of socialist 
industry. He foresaw a nation-wide upsurge in agricul- 
tural co-operation and grasped the significance of its 
inevitable change from possibility to realization. The 
firm leadership of the Party and the great eagerness of 
the peasant masses to go the socialist way were the basic 
reasons for the inevitable and rapid development of agri- 
cultural co-operation. These were the “essence, the crux 
of the matter.”! Mao Tse-tung frequently said that new 
things are always full of vitality; they are the essence of 
social development, the main trends. To be able to dis- 
cover the essence, i.e. the new and rising forces, 
it is necessary to associate closely with the masses, 
be appreciative of their talents and be ready to benefit 
from their wisdom. He criticized those who held Right 


1Mao Tse-tung, The Question of Agricultural Co-operation, 
Foreign Languages Press, Peking, 1956, p. 21. 


156 


conservative views about the question of agricultural co- 
operation because they were unable to see the new and 
rising forces, the rapid expansion of national economy and 
the enthusiasm of the poor and lower-middle peasants for 
socialism. In other words, they could not see the “es- 
sence, the crux of the matter.” They only saw the nega- 
tive side of things and their senses became dull. 

In The Question of Agricultural Co-operation, Mao 
Tse-tung also gave his advice to the Chinese people to 
give up the outworn idea that agricultural co-operation 
can only be carried out hand-in-hand with agricultural 
mechanization. China is still mainly an agricultural 
country. Although she has made big progress in in- 
dustry she is still unable to produce enough farm 
machines for the rapid mechanization of agriculture and 
agricultural co-operation cannot be put off until the day 
when sufficient machines are available. He pointed out, 
therefore, that socialist transfermation of agriculture 
should be carried out in two steps: the first being co- 
operation and socialist reform and the second, mechaniza- 
tion and technological reform. In accordance with con- 
ditions peculiar to China and with the experiences of 
the Chinese peasants, he laid down a series of transitional 
measures for the socialist transformation of agriculture, 
adopting the method of gradual advance. According to 
these steps the peasants organized themselves on a 
voluntary basis for mutual benefit. Usually mutual-aid 
teams are organized first. These teams are gradually 
changed into agricultural producers’ co-operatives of a 
semi-socialist nature or elementary co-operatives from 
which co-operatives of an entirely socialist nature or 
advanced co-operatives are finally formed. 


2  ————ES ——S—CC 


157 


“Theory becomes a material force as soon as it has 
gripped the masses,” said Marx. The Question of Agri- 
cultural Co-operation gave great encouragement to the 
peasants in their enthustasm for socialism. Thus, in 
the latter half of 1955, under the leadership of the Chi- 
nese Communist Party, an upsurge in the socialist trans- 
formation of agriculture took place in the whole country. 

It was at this time that Mao Tse-tung pointed out the 

“question confronting the Party and the people. He said: 


It affects agricultural production; industrial produc- 
tion (including state, joint state-private and co-opera- 
tive industries); handicraft production; the scale and 
speed of capital construction in industry, communica- 
tions and transportation; the co-ordination of com- 
merce with other branches of the economy; and the 
co-ordination of the work in science, culture, educa- 
tion, public health, and so on, with our various eco- 
nomic enterprises. In all these fields there is an 
underestimation of the situation which must be 
criticized and corrected if the work in them is to keep 
pace with the development of the situation ‘as a 
whole. ... The present problem is that many peo- 
ple consider impossible things which could be done 
if they exerted themselves. It is entirely necessary, 
therefore, to keep criticizing these Rightist conservative 
ideas, which still actually exist. 


Mao Tse-tung and members of the Central Committee 
of the Chinese Communist Party reviewed the scale and 
speed of socialist economic construction, the co-ordina- 
tion between the various kinds of construction as well 


\Socialist Upsurge in China’s Countryside, Foreign Languages 
Press, Peking, 1957, pp. 9-10 (Preface). 


158 


as the laws governing their progress, and the direction 
towards which socialism should proceed, arriving at a 
general principle which is: “‘to build socialism with 
greater, faster, better, and more economical results.” 

To call into play all the active factors necessary for 
realizing such an aim, Mao Tse-tung made a speech en- 
titled On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among 
the People at the Supreme State Conference held in 
February 1957. This speech, a brilliant analysis of the 
contradictions in Chinese society, became a powerful 
weapon for the people in carrying out the nation-wide 
rectification campaign and a guide for solving the various 
problems arising in the course of socialist construction. 

Starting from the actual conditions existing in China, 
Mao Tse-tung said that there are two types of contradic- 
tions. One is the contradiction between the masses of 
people on the one hand and the imperialists, anti- 
socialist bourgeois Rightists, overthrown landlord and 
comprador classes and other reactionaries on the other. 
This is a contradiction between the people and their 
enemies and is antagonistic in nature. The other is the 
contradiction among the people themselves. This in- 
cludes the contradiction between the working class and 
the national bourgeoisie. Mao Tse-tung said: 

The contradiction between the exploiter and the ex- 
ploited, which exists between the national bourgeoisie 
and the working class, is an antagonistic one. But, 
in the concrete conditions existing in China, such an 
antagonistic contradiction, if properly handled, can be 
transformed into a non-antagonistic one and resolved 
in a peaceful way.! 


1Mao Tse-tung, On the Correct Handling of Contradictions 
Among the People, Foreign Languages Press, Peking, 1958, p. 10. 


159 


For this reason, the contradiction between the work- 
ing class and the national bourgeoisie together with its 
intellectuals — the latter two having gradually accepted 
socialist transformation—is a contradiction among the 
people, being mainly an ideological one concerning two 
lines of thought. The contradictions among the people 
also include those within the working class, between the 
working class and the peasantry, and between the work- 
ing class and the working people who formerly worked 
on an individual basis. These contradictions reveal 
themselves mainly in conflicts between the advanced 
and the backward; between the progressive and the con- 
servative; between the method of doing things according 
to the principle of achieving greater, faster, better, and 
more economical results and that of doing things accord- 
ing to the reverse principle; and between the communist 
ideology and the ideological remnants of old China, such 
as bureaucracy, sectarianism, and subjectivism. All 
these, however, belong to the type of contradictions 
among the people. At present, owing to the differentia- 
tion of classes and to changes in the relative strength 
of the various classes, a small part of the contradictions 
in social relations have become contradictions between 
the people and their enemy while by far the greater part 
of them are contradictions among the people themselves. 
To resolve the contradictions among the people them- 
selves it is necessary to use the method of “unity — 
criticism — unity.” In the course of the nation-wide 
rectification campaign, a method of allowing people to 
freely air their views, to freely debate any problem and 
to post tatsepao! for resolving contradictions among the 


1QOpinions and criticisms written out in bold Chinese charac- 
ters on large sheets of paper and posted freely for everybody to see. - 


160 


people was evolved. These methods, highly demo- 
cratic in nature, were widely used by the people. As a 
result, a fresh scene of lively activity appeared in all 
constructive enterprises throughout the country. 

In the same speech Mao Tse-tung analysed the nature 
of contradiction from the philosophical point of view. 
He said that everything from its beginning to its end 
contains contradictions. Social progress is made through 
the overcoming of contradictions; a new contradiction 
appears as soon as an old one is resolved. In a socialist 
society the relations of production suit the development 
of the productive forces. But still there are contradictions 
in certain links between them though these contradictions 
are non-antagonistic and can be resolved promptly 
through proper handling. So, the progress of socialism 
is made through constantly overcoming these contradic- 
tions. To deny that there are contradictions in a so- 
cialist society is incorrect. A true Marxist should not 
be afraid to face the contradictions in a socialist society. 
He should analyse them in a scientific manner and try 
to find ways of resolving them. In his work he should 
try to create the necessary conditions for the masses to 
turn their creative genius to full account. As soon as 
one revolutionary task is completed he should im- 
mediately start a new one, with the help of the masses, 
thus helping the people to go forward constantly in un- 
interrupted revolution with ever increasing spirit and 
energy. In this way the constant appearance, growth, 
and development of new things is ensured. 

The conflict between socialism and capitalism is the 
main contradiction in China during the period of transi- 
tion. In 1956, after the socialist revolution in the owner- 
ship of the means of production had scored a decisive 


161 


victory (i.e. private industry and commerce was changed 
over to joint state-private enterprises en masse), this 
main contradiction showed itself obviously in certain 
links in the relation between the economic base and the 
superstructure. Mao Tse-tung made a scientific analysis 
of this contradiction. He said: 


The superstructure — our state institutions of peo- 
ple’s democratic dictatorship and its laws, and socialist 
ideology under the guidance of Marxism-Leninism — 
has played a positive role in facilitating the victory 
of socialist transformation and establishment of a 
socialist organization of labour; it is suited to the 
socialist economic base, that is, socialist relations of 
production. But survivals of bourgeois ideology, 
bureaucratic ways of doing things in our state organs, 
and flaws in certain links of our state institutions stand 
in contradiction to the economic base of socialism.? 


He showed that unless a complete victory was won for 
the socialist revolution in both the political and ideol- 
ogical fronts the question “Who will win?” in the fight 
between socialism and capitalism would not be finally 
answered. Mao Tse-tung said in the same speech that 
the ideological class struggle between the proletariat and 
the bourgeoisie ‘will still be long and devious and at 
times may even become very acute.” For this reason 
socialist revolution must continue in the political and 
ideological spheres. Failure to grasp this or to think 
that to settle the question of ownership is to settle the 
question of ‘‘Who will win?” in the struggle between so- 


1Mao Tse-tung, On the Correct Handling of Contradictions 
Among the People, op. cit., p. 25. 


162 


cialism and capitalism in our country will lead to serious 
mistakes. 

The question of socialist revolution in the political and 
ideological spheres is mainly one of how to remould the 
people’s thought and working style and how to improve 
their work. In May 1957, therefore, the Chinese Com- 
munist Party launched a new rectification campaign 
starting with its own members. From this the work of 
the Party and government received a new impetus. With 
the carrying out of the anti-Rightist struggle the recti- 
fication campaign soon became a nation-wide movement, 
which, as subsequent developments proved, was the 
practical application of the theory of how to correctly 
handle contradictions among the people. 

The campaign was a fight against bureaucracy, sec- 
tarianism, and subjectivism through self-education and 
self-remoulding; it was a socialist revolutionary move- 
ment in the political and ideological spheres participated 
in by the broad masses of people. 

In order to help the broad masses take up a position 
of direct support for the vanguard of the proletariat, 
Lenin said, ‘Propaganda and agitation alone are not 
enough. For this the masses must have their own polit- 
ical experience. Such is the fundamental law of all 
great revolutions.”! The Chinese Communist Party fol- 
lowed this advice. It consistently carried out the for- 
mula “unity — criticism — unity,” and the policy of cur- 
ing the illness to. save the patient and to give the man 
who has committed a blunder a chance to correct him- 
self. By criticizing themselves. first, members of the 


1“ ‘Left-Wing’ Communism, an Infantile Disorder,” V. I. Lenin, 
op. cit., p. 42}. 


163 


Party, as the vanguard of the proletariat, led the broad 
masses of people to practise criticism and self-criticism. 
The aim was to achieve ideological remoulding and im- 
prove their working methods by way of political educa- 
tion. In other words, it was the aim of the Party to carry 
out an ideological revolution so that a _ proletarian 
ideology would replace that of the bourgeoisie. 

Shortly after the Party had launched the rectification 
campaign, a group of bourgeois Rightists who opposed 
socialism and the Communist Party and desperately hoped 
for a revival of capitalism took advantage of the cam- 
paign to open an ignominious attack on the Party. 
Marxism-Leninism was an anathema to them. What 
they worked for was a return of bourgeois sociology. 

But Mao Tse-tung’s teachings in his speech On the 
Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People 
had instilled great fighting strength in the masses. They 
had learned how to distinguish “poisonous weeds” from 
“fragrant flowers.”’ Following his advice that, “poison- 
ous weeds should be fought against wherever they crop 
up,” they waged resolute struggles and counter-attacks 
against the reactionary views of these Rightists, which 
were the theoretical basis of the bourgeois design for 
staging a political comeback. In exposing the political 
schemes of the Rightists the Marxists and the broad 
masses of people pointed out that in dragging China back 
onto the path of capitalism the Rightists would really 
lead China to ruin and national extinction. After a 
hundred years of revolutionary struggle the Chinese peo- 
ple have fully realized that Marxism-Leninism and so- 
cialism is the only hope for China. They know there is 
no alternative. Through -their anti-Rightist struggle, 


164 


they became all the more determined in their desire to 
build socialism and more. confident in their future. 

The Marxists and the broad masses of people exposed 
the Rightists’ trick in propagating the theory of “social 
investigation” as proposed by the bourgeois sociologists. 
They pointed out that in doing this the Rightists were 
really standing on the side of the comprador and land- 
lord classes; that they were using the subjective method 
of the idealists, following the reactionary theory of 
functionalism in playing with figures and giving distorted 
descriptions of conditions in China, so as to oppose the 
working class and Marxism. 

Marxists and wide sections of the people showed that 
through the revolutionary activities of the international 
working-class movements during the last century, 
Marxism-Leninism had made great progress and would 
continue to do so in the future. The Rightists said that 
Marxism was “out of date” and that it was “at a stand- 
still.” But none of their fake theories stood the test of 
truth. 

The Marxists and millions of ordinary people pointed 
out that the basic Marxist method of class analysis is 
infallible. This method exposes the real class nature 
of the component parts of the superstructure — its law, 
morality, political power and so on. The “genuine 
democracy” and ‘‘genuine freedom of speech” advocated 
by the Rightists are merely hypocritical catchwords used 
by the bourgeoisie to camouflage the class nature of the 
bourgeois state. 

It was further pointed out that throughout history there 
was no such thing as “human nature” in the abstract, 
but that it was an expression of class character. The 
“human nature” which the Rightists talked about was 


165 


nothing but chicanery. The “greater freedom” for 
which they clamoured was but the freedom of the ex- 
ploiting class to cheat, oppress, prey upon the people and 
monopolize the profits, such being the characteristics of 
the “human nature” of the bourgeoisie. 

Relying on Lenin’s theory of the two kinds of cultural 
heritage, the Marxists showed the Rightists’ fabrication 
of a “purely national cultural heritage” and a non-class 
code of morality. They pointed out why it was that the 
Rightists opposed making a Marxist analysis of our cul- 
tural heritage and opposed making a distinction between 
the “democratic essence” of our cultural heritage and 
its “feudal dregs.” It became obvious to the people why 
the Rightists denied the fact of the struggle between 
materialism and idealism. They were making apolo- 
gies for reviving their multifarious theories of “national 
characteristics”! and looking for markets to sell their 
bourgeois idealism. 

In short, during the anti-Rightist struggle the people, 
led by the Party, succeeded in defeating the attack 
launched by the Rightists, and in doing so enlightened 
themselves still more. The Marxists were steeled and 
they expanded their ranks. 

After this smashing victory was won over the bour- 
geois Rightists and a nation-wide rectification campaign 
carried out, a big leap forward was made on all fronts. 
A socialist revolution was thoroughly carried out in all 
cultural and academic circles. Owing to deep-seated 
bourgeois ideas of philosophy and the social sciences, 
some intellectuals frequently distorted the laws of his- 
torical development and class struggle under the pre- 


1 See footnote in the Foreword. 


eee 


166 


_ tence of objectivity which was nothing but bourgeois 


claptrap. Under the pretext of carrying on our cultural 
heritage, some disseminated a new type of the revival 
of “national characteristics” while others held the de- 


, eadent view of “learning for learning’s sake,” trying to 


lead the young people away from politics and from the 
world of reality. The Chinese Communist Party took 
the lead in intellectual circles in criticizing the harmful 
style of extolling the past at the expense of the present 
and divorcing theory from reality as a result of reac- 
tionary bourgeois influences. The struggle between 
these two ideas is still being waged in the realms of 
philosophy and social sciences. It is quite certain that 
in this struggle, Marxism will continue to play a leading 
role in the social sciences and will show even greater 
power as a weapon of modern thought. ‘‘Marxism,” as 
Mao Tse-tung said, “can only develop through struggle — 
this is true not only in the past. and present, it is neces- 
sarily true in the future also.” At present, the philos- 
ophers and social scientists, as well as the natural 
scientists, are carrying out an ideological revolution. 
They are criticizing one another, but in the manner of 
“a mild breeze and gentle rain,” presenting facts, and 
giving reasons for their arguments. The aim of this rev- 
olution is to expose and discredit bourgeois individual- 
ism and make it possible for all to advance towards the 
goal of being “thoroughly Red and profoundly expert.” 
To successfully fulfil this task the Party persuaded and 
encouraged the intellectuals to leave their private 
studies, descend from their ivory towers and take part 


IMao Tse-tung, On the Correct Handling of Contradictions 
Among the People, op. cit., p. 51. 


167 


in the work of production together with the workers and 
peasants. In this way they might be better able to feel 
and think as the workers and peasants do and change 
their whole outlook on life by acquiring a rich store of 
practical experience. When the minds of the intellec- 
tuals are entirely emancipated in this way, so that they 
begin to think in the communist way, a big leap forward 
cannot but take place in the fields of philosophy and the 
social sciences. 

Scoring great victories in the rectification campaign 
and anti-Rightist struggle, the people were further en- 
lightened and willing to accept communist ideology. 
Under such conditions the Second Session of the Eighth 
Congress of the Chinese Communist Party was convened 
in May 1958. The session reviewed the people’s strug- 
gle and the practical experience of the past eight years 
together with the development of Mao Tse-tung’s 
ideological thinking, and formulated the general line of 
socialist construction, which is in brief: To go all out, 
to aim high, and achieve greater, faster, better, and more 
economical results in building socialism. At the same 
time they also promulgated the important measures to 
be taken in implementing the general line. These were: 
to carry out step by step the technical and cultural rev- 
olutions simultaneously with the socialist revolution on 
the economic, political, and ideological fronts; to develop 
both industry and agriculture at the same time with the 
condition that priority be given to the development of 
heavy industry; and to develop industries under central 
and local control while similarly developing big, medium, 
and small industrial enterprises, under the conditions of 
central. leadership, over-all planning, and co-operation 
in the division of labour. Under the guidance of this 


168 


general principle of socialist construction, technical and 
cultural revolutions are being carried out with great 
rapidity and thoroughness. The rate of agricultural pro- 
duction is increasing at high speed. Industrial enter- 
prises are now being set up in every township and co- 
operative. Every township will have a middle school. 
Technical reform is being carried out throughout the 
length and breadth of the country with new inventions 
being reported practically every day. The whole ‘leap 
forward” movement is characterized by close co-ordina- 
tion between industry and agriculture as well as between 
education and production. In this spirit and under such 
conditions we can say with confidence that, guided by 
the wisdom of Mao Tse-tung, we shall not only increase 
our productive forces in industry and agriculture, im- 
prove the material and cultural life of the people, but 
shall set a quicker pace for our socialist construction. 

It is only under a socialist system that full play can 
be given to man’s subjective activity which is built upon 
the knowledge of the laws of the objective world. The 
more man understands the objective laws, the better 
will he be able to develop his creative genius. The 
practical experience in our socialist construction has fully 
borne out the validity of this theory. 

Life’s realities have abundantly confirmed that Mao 
Tse-tung sets the best example of how to combine 
Marxism with revolutionary practice in China, and have 
testified that the philosophy of Marxism is the most 
powerful weapon in changing the world and that Marx 
was right when he said, “Theory becomes a material 
force as soon as it has gripped the masses’ — which has 
become one of the theories of Marxism-Leninism. At 
the Second Session of the Eighth Chinese Communist 


— 


= 


169 


Party Congress (May 1958), the Party members were 
encouraged to follow the examples of Mao Tse-tung and 
other leading comrades long known for their ability to 
get along well with the masses and especially for the way 
in which they apply the philosophy of Marxism to actual 
revolutionary work and the way they combine revolu- 
tionary zeal with realistic appraisal. Responding to the 
call of the Party, China’s millions of workers and peasants 
are rapidly abandoning, indeed, many of them have long 
since abandoned, the age-old opinion that philosophy is 
a mysterious and difficult subject to understand and be- 
yond the comprehension of the common people. Now 
they are diligently and systematically studying Marxism- 
Leninism and Mao Tse-tung’s writings. They are making 
great efforts to draw lessons from practical experience 


and crystallize them into theories and so turn the correct 
theories into a material force to make further advances 
in their practical work. All this shows that we are living 
in a great era in which we shall see Marxism-Leninism 
flourishing. 


INDEX 


Agriculturists (Nung Chia KX), 
Vy] 

Analects of Confucius (Lun Yu 
aaa), 57 

Analysis of the Great Learning, 
An (Ta Hsueh Pien A738), 
69 

Ancient Text Classics (School) 
(Ching Ku Wen Hsueh #45 %X% 
*%), 25, 86 

Appendices of the Book of 
Changes (Yi Chuan 55f€), 16 


Being (Yu#), 32 

Book of Changes, The (Yi Ching 
SAR), 25, 31, 63, 74 

Book of Peace (Tai Ping Ching 
Ling Shu AM AB), 30 

Book of Rites, The (Li Chi #. 
ac), 17 

Buddhism, Buddhist, 33, 34, 35, 
36, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 51, 56, 
58, 63, 70, 72, 98 


Careful Speech (Shen Yen t# 
B), 59 

Chang Chun-mai (3K 2b), 118, 
122 

Chang Heng (Cak#), #£ 

Chang Hsueh-cheng (#34), 
75, 76, 77 : 


Chang Nai-chi (J538), 145 


Chang Tai-yen (HAZE), 96, 98, 
99, 100, 101 


Chang Tsai Ck#&), 46, 63, 64 
Chang Tung-sun (Gk#7), 118 
Chen Chih (BERR), 84 

Chen Chueh (P£#%), 69 

Chen Liang (S836), 48, 49 
Chen Tien-hua (BEK42), 94 


Chen Tu-hsiu (#%%), 107, 115, 
116 


Cheng Hao (#4), 46 

Cheng Kuan-ying (iM), 84 
Cheng Yi (BD), 46, 101 

Chi Liang (2232), 5 

Chiao Hsun (#78), 75, 77, 78 


China Revival League (Hua 
Hsing Hui 42%), 94 


China Revolutionary League 
(Chung Kuo Tung Men Hui 
ARIS), 94 


Chou Tun-yi (ARH), 46 
Chu Chih-hsin (43/2), 96 
Chu Chiu-pai (2&A), 125 


Chu Hsi (KX), 47, 57, 58, 69, 
72, 101, 147 


Chu Shih-ching (tt), 37. 
Chu Yuan (HJR), 43 


172 


. 


Chuang Tzu or Chuang Chou (EH: 
+E), 9, 10, 11, 30, 31, 98 
Chuang-tzu (book) FEFC#). 31 
Chung Chang-tung Cf K i)» 30 
Chung Hsiang (#8), 44 
Commentaries on Mencius 
(Meng Tzu Wei m+), 88 
Commentary on the Great 
Learning (Ta Hsueh Chang 
Chu AHA), 48 
Comprehensive Discussions in 
the White Tiger Hall (Pai Hu 
Tung Yi Alia), 27 
Confucianism, 40, 70, 75, 82, 122 


Confucians, Confucian School 
(Ju Chia #§2), 5, 7, 8, 10, 16, 
17, 22, 49, 42, 56, 57, 62, 86, 
88, 89, 122, 124, 125 


Confucius ( FL4), 6, 7, 10, 19, 26, 
27, 42, 58, 81, 85, 86, 101, 122, 
124, 141, 145 


Cosmopolitanism, Cosmopolitan 
Society, Cosmopolitan World 
or Great Togetherness (Ta 
Tung XfAl), 17, 18, 19, 20, 82, 
89, 90 

Critical Essays (Lun Heng ® 
&), 27 


Diplomatists (Tsung Heng Chia 
EMR), 15 


Discourses on the Heavens (Chu 
Tien Chiang #38), 87 


Divinations and Distorted Com- 
mentaries (Hsien Shu ®@#. 
Wei Shu ###), 16, 24, 25, 27, 
30, 31, 46 


Doctrine of the Mean (Chung 
Yung Pig), 56 


Elegant Narrative (Ya Shu 7t 
ut), 59 

Emotion (ching fff), 47 

Essay on the Extinction of the 


Soul (Shen Mieh Lun iitRia), 
36 


“Evolution of Rites” (“Li Yun” 
4L3BR4), 17, 82 


Fa Yun G&Z), 36 


“Fairly prosperous conditions” 
(hsiao kang /)\E), 19 


Fan Chen (#8##), 35, 36, 37, 68 
Fan Hsun (#3), 37 

Fang Chung-li (4A), 60 
Fang Chung-tung (ii), 60 


Fang Yi-chih (GUM), 59, 60, 
61, 62 

Freemen (kuo jen fA), 3, 5, 6, 
7, 10, 13, 15 

Fu Hsuan ({@%), 34 


“Generative forces” (yin-yun 4 
id), 63 


Great Learning (Ta Hsueh * 
*), 73 


Han Fei (###), 14, 15, 76, 98 

Han Yu (@@), 41, 42, 43 

“Heaven” (tien X), 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 
12, 14, 16, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 
28, 30, 31, 34, 41, 46, 53, 57, 77, 
85, 87, 103 

“Heaven Asks” (Tien Wen K 
BA), 43 


—_— 


“Heaven Answers” (Tien Tui 
Ke), 43 

Historical Records (Shih Chi 
ac), 23 

Ho Cheng-tien (fa), 35 

Ho Hsin-yin Cfaibi), 54, 55, 58 

Ho Yen (fq), 31, 32 

Hsiang Hsiu (il%), 32 

Hsiangchiang Review (Hsiang- 
chiang Ping Lun #iIL#M), 
111 


Hsiao Tzu-liang (#+R). 35 

Hsueh Fu-cheng (#85), 84 
Hsing Shao C#SEB), 37 

Hsu Hsing (#77), 17 

Hsu Kuang-chi (@D68), 60 


Hsun Ching (AjMil), 10, 14, 15, 43, 
76, 98, 99 


Hu Shih ( #48), 113, 114, 115, 
116, 122, 123, 124, 125, 129, 130, 
147 


Huan Tan (#2), 25, 26, 34 


Huang Tsung-hsi (#¢5<#%), 59, 67, 
68, 69, 72 


Huang Wan (##), 59 
Hui Neng (he), 40 
Hui Shih (Sig), 11 


Hung Hsiu-chuan (#32), 82, 
150 


Hung Jen-kan (3t{C4F), 82 
Illustrated Records of Oceanic 


Countries (Hai Kuo Tu Chih 
SHENG), 79 


Innate character (hsing #), 47 


173 


Inquiry into Confucius’ Reform 
in the Name of the Ancients, 
An (Kung Tzu To Ku Kati 
Chih Kao FLFiGAKMA), 86 

“Instrument” (chi #3), 66, 76, 77 


“Intuitive knowledge” (liang 
chih Bl), 50, 51, 58, 59 


“Justice” (yi X), 10 


Kang Yu-wei (EH), 84, 85, 
86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 93, 95, 96, 
101, 150 


Kiangsu Journal (Su Pao #48), 
94 


Ko Hung (B§#t), 33 


Ku Yen-wu (M#H), 59, 69, 70, 
T1, 72 


Kuan School (Kuan Hsueh * 
=), 46 

Kung Chi (71%), 10 

Kung Tzu-chen (#8), 78, 79 

Kungsun Chiao (AFF), 5 

Kungsun Lung (AR), 11 


Kungyang School (Kungyang 
Hsueh Pai A2#3# ®), 78, 86. 100 


Kuo Hsiang (#3), 32 

Kuo Mo-jo (#ik#), 132 

Kuo Wen Kung (x4), 4 

Lao Tzu (2+), 8, 9, 15, 17, 30 
31, 32, 76 

Lao-izu or The Way and Its 
Power (Tao Teh Ching im 
#K), 8, 31 

“Law” (fa HE), 10, 13, 15 


“Legalists” (Fa Chia ®® ), 13, 
15 


174 


“Learning in the style of the 
Han dynasty scholars” or Han 
style learning (Han Hsueh % 
%), 75, 76 

Li Ao (4:8), 41, 42, 43 

Li Chih (48%), 56, 57, 58 

Li Kuei (4), 13 

Li Kung (#%&), 74 


Li Ta-chao (#8! ), 110, 111, 
112, 113, 114, 115, 118 


Liang Chi-chao C2 #4), 95, 121 

Liang Su-ming (2M), 122, 130, 
148 

Liu An (37#), 23 

Liu Chun (x2); 35 

Liu Hsin Gakk), 86 

Liu Tsung-yuan (Ma<7G), 42, 43, 
46 

Liu Yu-hsi ( 37/88), 42, 43 

“Love” or “benevolence” (jen 
£), 6, 54, 78, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91 


Loyang School of Philosophy 
(Lo Hsueh 7&3), 46 


Lu Chiu-yuan (f7UR ), 48, 50, 72, 
92 


Lu Hsun ( #34), 115, 125, 128, 
130 
Lu Tsai (87), 37 


Lute of Po Ya (Po Ya Chin {AF 
3), 50 


Lururiant Dew of the Spring 
and Autumn Annals (Chun 
Chiu Fan Lu 398%), 87 


Ma Chien-chung (3%), 84 


“Mandate of heaven” or 
“Heavenly mandate” (tien 
ming Xft), 3, 5, 7, 24, 46, 47 
Mao Tse-tung (works quoted): 
Analysis of the Classes in 
Chinese Society, 127 

On Contradiction, 138, 140, 143 

On New 'Democracy, 112, 119, 
132, 146 

On People’s Democratic Dicta- 
torship, 150 

On Practice, 140, 141 

On the Correct Handling of 


Contradictions Among the 
People, 158, 161, 163, 166 


On the Protracted War, 139 
On the Tactics of Fighting 
Japanese Imperialism, 138 
Oppose the Party’s “Eight- 
Legged Essay,” 144 

Rectify the Party’s Style in 
Work, 144 

Reform Our Study, 144 

Report of an _ Investigation 
into the Peasant Movement 
in Hunan, 127 

Strategic Problems of China's 
Revolutionary War, 136 

Talks at the Yenan Forum on 
Art and Literature, 149 

The Question of Agricultural 
Co-operation, 155, 156, 157 

The Role of the Chinese Com- 


munist Party in the Nation- 
al War, 145 


The Tasks of the Chinese 
Communist Party in the 
Period of Resistance to 
Japan, 138 


Why Can China’s Red Polit- 
ical Power Exist?, 134 
Matter or “force” (chi 4%), 26, 
28, 34, 45, 47, 48, 63, 64, 70, 73, 
77, 103 

Mencius ( &+ ), 10; 14, 16, 17, 
42, 49, 100, 122 

Mencius (book) (z--) ( #), 57 

Metaphysical School (Hsuan 
Hsueh %%*), 31, 34 

Mirror of History, The (Tzu 
Chih Tung Chien #i8i8%), 
147 


Mo Ti (8M), 7, 76 


Modern Text Classics (School) 
(Ching Chin Wen Hsueh #4 
3c), 25, 78, 86, 101 

“Modernization” (wei 
1). 85 

Mohists or Mohist School (Mo 
Chia ™2%), 5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 

. 15, 17, 19, 26, 31. 91 
Mortuary Book (Tsang Shu 3 
#), 69 

“Music” (yo 5), 3, 6 


hsin # 


‘National characteristics” (kuo 
tsui“ BIR’), 122, 123, 124 

“Negative” ‘vin fA), 4 

Neo-Confucians (Tao Hsueh 
Chia i? ), 40, 49, 53, 56, 
57, 58, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 
73, 75, 76, 122 


175 


Neo-Confucianism (Tao Hsueh 
M45), 34, 40, 41, 45, 48, 49, 60, 
72, 74 

New Discourses (Hsin Lun 
ia), 25 

New People’s Magazine (Hsin 
Min Tsung Pao $f MAH), 95, 
96 

New People’s Society (Hsin Min 
Hsueh Hui #24), 118 

New Youth (Hsin Ching Nien 
MAE). 114, 115 


Non-being (Wu 3%), 32 


Pai Yang Fu ( {4M842), 4 
Pao Ching-yen (#@{3),. 34 


“Peace Relision” (Tai Ping Tao 
APB), 30 

Pei Wei (22), 32 

Peng Meng (#23%), 13 

People’s Daily (Renmin Ribao 
ABA 48) 
Leading article “More on the 
Historical Experience of the 
Dictatorship of the Prole- 
tariat,” 151, 152 


People’s Herald (Min Pao & 
4). 95, 96 5 
Philosophical Theories of the 
Ming Dynasty (Ming Ju Hsueh 
An lite), 68 
Philosophical Theories of the 
Sung and Yuan Dynasties 
(Sung Yuan Hsueh An 7G 
238), 68 
“Political Reform” 


Stk), 84, 85 


(pien fa 


176 


“Positive” (yang [H), 4 
“Power” (tel. #), 8 
“Public Law” (kung fa Atk), 31 


“Reason” or “principle” (li FB), 
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 55, 61, 66, 73, 
74, 75, 77, 102 

Reformist, 84, 85, 88, 90, 95, 96, 
118, 131 


Restoration League (Kuang Fu 
Hui 482), 94 


Restoration Society (Fu Sheh 5 
tk), 63, 69 

“Rites” (li #L), 3, 6, 13, 15, 19 

“Ruler” (ti #7), 1, 2, 3 

School of Emblems and Num- 
bers (Hsiang Shu Hsueh Chia 
REUER), 46 


School of Names (Min Chia 4% 
%R), 11, 13, 31 


School of Positive and Negative 
Forces (Yin-Yang Chia [AM 
®), 16, 22, 23 


Shang Yang (#i®), 13 
Shao Yung (ABH), 46 
Shen Hsiu (ii%), 40, 41 
Shen Hui Cifig), 41 
Shen Tao (fH). 13 
Shen Pu-hai (HA), 13 


Six Classics (Liu Ching 7\#), 
57, 71, 76, 77, 78, 86 


Society for the Revival of China 
(Hsing Chung Hui X42 ), 94 


Ssuma Chien (@)Ri£), 23 
Ssuma Kuang (AJJ§36), 45, 147 


“Statecraft” (shu *®), 13, 15 


Study of Classics Forged Dur- 
ing the Hsin Period (Hsin 
Hsueh Wei Ching Kao #4 (% 
4), 86 
Sun Yat-sen, 90, 96, 97, 98, 102, 
103, 104, 105, 106, 121, 124, 129, 
141, 145, 150 
The Doctrine of Sun Yat-sen 
(Sun Wen Hsueh Shuo #h 
aM), 102 

The Three Principles of the 
People (San Min Chu Yi = 
EK = XM), 106, 121, 124, 125, 
129, 131 

Sung Chien (A#), 9, 10 

“Supreme absolute” (tai chi 
&), 47, 54 

“Systematization of the Old 
Learning” (cheng li kuo ku 
HHH AL), 122, 123, 125 


Tai Chen (@#), 74, 77 
Tai Chi-tao (Wi4My), 124, 125 


Taichow School (Taichow Hsueh 
Pai 2ii0R ), 53, 54, 56, 58 


Tan Ssu-tung (iidilAl), 78, 90 

Tang Chen (#3), 69 

Taoism, 23, 30, 31, 34, 39 

Taoist, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 19. 
32, 33, 40, 46, 54 

Teng Mu ($4). 50 

Teng Chung-hsia (iB), 118 


Theory of Five Elements (Wu 
Hsing Shuo Af), 4, 16, 46, 
101 


eee 


Theory of the Positive and 
Negative Forces (Yin-Yang 
Shuo PIM), 4, 16, 46 

Thoughts in Retirement (Chien 
Shu #2), 69 

Ting Wen-chiang (J 2221), 122 

Tsai Ho-shen (#Al##), 112, 118 

Tseng Shen, or Tseng Tzu (& 
2. @F), 10, 49 

Tsou Jung (487%), 94 

Tsou Shou-yi (4biF4a)» 51 

Tsou Yen CA8f7), 16 

Tung Chung-shu (if/(##¥), 23, 27 

Tzu Ssu (F/G), 49, 100, 101 


“Virtue” (teh #), 3 


Wang An-shih (F#A), 44, 45, 
46 : 


* Wang Chi (3%), 51 


Wang Chung (27-107) (E78). 25, 
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 34, 35, 63, 101 

Wang Chung (1744-1794) (ZEA), 
15, 76 

Wang Fu (£#f), 30 

Wang Fu-chih (£RZ ), 59, 63, 
64, 65, 66, 67, 72 

Wang Hsiao-po ( £/)\3¥ ), 44 

Wang Hsien-chih (4%), 44 

Wang Ken ( £8), 53 

Wang Kuo-wei ( lv), 101, 102 

Wang Pi (226-288) ( Ea# ), 31, 32 

Wang Pi (c. 800) (=), 42 


177 


Wang Shou-jen, or Wang Yang- 
ming ( ‘Ff. EPAAA), 50, 51, 
53, 57, 58, 59, 72, 92 
Wang Shu-wen ( £2), 42 
Wang Ting-hsiang ( :2£44 ), 58, 
59 
“Way, the” or “truth” (tao #4), 
8, 9, 13, 17, 19, 23, 45, 56, 57, 
58, 61, 66, 76, 103 
“the Way and the law” (tao 
fa MEK ), 13 ; 

“the Way and statecraft” (tao 
shu i4#*), 13 

“Way of heaven” (tien tao K 
34), 14, 15, 32, 85 

Wei Yuan (Mii ), 78, 79 

“Westernization” (Yang Wut%) 
Movement or ‘“Westernizing,” 
83, 84, 123 


Writings of Huainan (Huainan 
Tzu #EHF), 23 

Wu Chi (a), 13 

Wu Yu (4), 107 

Wu Yueh (#af@), 94 


Yang Chu (#§%), 10 

Yang Hsiung (@f), 25, 34 

Yeh Shih (Hi), 48, 49 

Yen Fu (f°), 91, 92, 93, 150 

Yen Yuan (3870), 59, 72, 73, 75 

Yin Wen (3*3c), 9, 10 

Young China Association (Shao 
Nien Chung Kuo Hsueh Hui 
A>DEEFP S#ae), 117 

Yu Chi (F7), 30 


FP Pa 
RAE 
RUS BER 
# oe KR 
Eee wm 


Wie 


e 
LC HARE Hh: HOR C dt D 
. 1959469 A BR 
ws; C%)2050—1 


AN 
OUTLINE HISTORY 
OF CHINA 


by TUNG CHI-MING 


This brief, popular Chinese 
history covers the period from 
prehistoric times to the found- 
ing of the People’s Republic of 
China in 1949. It deals with 
China’s long past, and her cul- 
tural achievements. It relates 
the revolutionary struggles of 
the peasants against the land- 
lords and the despotic feudal 
rule, as well as the Chinese 
people’s prolonged heroic strug- 
gles against imperialist aggres- 
sion from 1840 onwards and 
their final victory over imperi- 
alism, feudalism and bureaucrat- 
capitalism. 

470 pages 
cloth & board covers 
illustrated and indexed 


A SHORT HISTORY 
OF CLASSICAL 
CHINESE LITERATURE 


by FENG YUAN-CHUN 


A brief, systematic account 

of the development of Chinese 
literature from the earliest days 
to the May 4 Movement of 1919. 
Through this survey of a rich 
variety of literary forms, the 
realist tradition of classical Chi- 
nese literature is revealed, with 
its strong romanticism and deep 
humanism. The distinctive fea- 
tures of each historical period 
are described: the chief literary 
schools, and the position in 
literary history and _ achieve- 
ments of the main writers, as 
well as the literary trends of 
their period and their influence 
on later ages. Short analyses 
are made of major works. 


134 pages 
cloth & board covers 
illustrated and indexed 


Published by 
FOREIGN LANGUAGES PRESS 
PEKING, CHINA 


a ee a 


ts 
y 


AN OUTLINE HISTORY OF CHINA 


by Tung Chi-ming 
470 pages 


A SIMPLE GEOGRAPHY OF CHINA 
by Wang Chun-heng 


“CHINA KNOWLEDGE SERIES 


Illustrated 


258 pages Illustrated with maps and photos 


A SHORT HISTORY OF CLASSICAL CHINESE LITERATURE 


by Feng Yuan-chun 
134 pages 


Illustrated 
* 


A SHORT HISTORY OF MODERN CHINESE LITERATURE 


by Ting Yi 
314 pages 


A SHORT HISTORY OF CHINESE PHILOSOPHY 


by Hou Wai-lu 
178 pages 


AGRICULTURAL CO-OPERATION IN CHINA ~~ 4 | 


by Tung Ta-lin ° 
180 pages 


COMING SOON 


A HISTORY OF MODERN CHINESE REVOLUTION 


by Ho Kan-chih 
About 640 pages 


A BRIEF HISTORY OF CHINESE FICTION 


by Lu Hsun 
About 600 pages 


editeed i ia 


