This is an excellent collection with contributions from an impressive
number of top international scholars in Medieval and Ancient philosophy. The collection outlines and exemplifies important nuances of Professor Richard C. Taylor’s hermeneutic, “source-based contextualism.” It
will prove helpful to anyone concerned with philosophy as understood
through its own history.
Matthew Robinson, St. Thomas University, Canada

Contextualizing Premodern
Philosophy
This volume brings together contributions from distinguished scholars in the history of philosophy, focusing on points of interaction between discrete historical contexts, religions, and cultures found within the premodern period. The contributions connect thinkers from antiquity through the Middle Ages and include philosophers from the three major monotheistic faiths—Judaism, Islam, and Christianity.
By emphasizing premodern philosophy’s shared textual roots in antiquity, particularly the writings of Plato and Aristotle, the volume highlights points of cross-pollination between different schools, cultures, and moments in premodern thought. Approaching the complex history of the premodern world in an accessible way, the editors organize the volume so as to underscore the difficulties the premodern period poses for scholars, while accentuating the fascinating interplay between the Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, and Latin philosophical traditions. The contributors cover topics ranging from Aristotle’s cosmology, the adoption of Aristotle’s Organon
by al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, and the origins of the Plotiniana Arabica to the role of Ibn Gabirol’s Fons vitae in the Latin West, the ways in which Islamic philosophy shaped thirteenth-century Latin conceptions of light, Roger Bacon’s adaptation of Avicenna for use in his moral philosophy, and beyond. The volume’s focus on “source-based contextualism” demonstrates an appreciation for the rich diversity of thought found in the premodern period, while revealing methodological challenges raised by the historical study of premodern philosophy.
Contextualizing Premodern Philosophy: Explorations of the Greek, Hebrew, Arabic,
and Latin Traditions is a stimulating resource for scholars and advanced students
working in the history of premodern philosophy.
Katja Krause, a historian of philosophy and science, is professor of the history of
science at Technische Universität Berlin and leads the research group “Experience
in the Premodern Sciences of Soul and Body, ca. 800–1650” at the Max Planck
Institute for the History of Science, Berlin.
Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, professor of philosophy at Universidad Panamericana, Mexico, has published widely on classical Islamic philosophy. He is the
author of Classical Islamic Philosophy: A Thematic Introduction (2021), associate director of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group,” and editor
of Tópicos, Journal of Philosophy.
Nicholas A. Oschman is a scholar of classical philosophy in the lands of Islam
and a member and officer of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working
Group.” He currently teaches at the Harpeth Hall School in Nashville, Tennessee.

Contextualizing Premodern
Philosophy
Explorations of the Greek, Hebrew,
Arabic, and Latin Traditions
Edited by
Katja Krause,
Luis Xavier López-Farjeat,
and Nicholas A. Oschman
NEW YORK AND LONDON
First published 2023
by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 selection and editorial matter, Katja Krause, Luis Xavier
López-Farjeat, and Nicholas A. Oschman; individual chapters,
the contributors
The right of Katja Krause, Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, and
Nicholas A. Oschman to be identified as the authors of the
editorial material, and of the authors for their individual
chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78
of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
The Open Access version of this book, available at www.
taylorfrancis.com, has been made available under a Creative
Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives 4.0
license.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Krause, Katja, 1980- editor. | López Farjeat, Luis
Xavier, editor. | Oschman, Nicholas A., editor.
Title: Contextualizing premodern philosophy: explorations of
the Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, and Latin traditions / edited by
Katja Krause, Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, Nicholas A. Oschman.
Description: New York, NY : Routledge, [2023] | Includes
bibliographical references and index. Identifiers: LCCN
2022036712 |
Subjects: LCSH: Philosophy, Comparative. | Philosophy—Cross-cultural.
Classification: LCC B799 .C655 2023 | DDC
100—dc23/eng/20221115 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022036712
ISBN: 978-1-032-31468-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-31469-3 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-30989-5 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895
Typeset in Bembo
by codeMantra
This volume is dedicated to Richard C. Taylor

Contents
List of Contributors xiii
Acknowledgments xvii
Narrating Premodern Philosophy in Greek,
Hebrew, Arabic, and Latin: Origins,
Developments, Innovations 1
KATJA KRAUSE, LUIS XAVIER LÓPEZ-FARJEAT, AND NICHOLAS A. OSCHMAN
PART I
Traditions and Their Origins 27
1 Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final
Cause: Alexander of Aphrodisias and Averroes 29
DAVID TWETTEN 2 Philoponus and Forms 56
OWEN GOLDIN 3 Pseudo-Ammonius’ A ˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa and Its Influence
on Early Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ Thought 75
JANIS ESOTS 4 Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in His
Moralis philosophia 91
THÉRÈSE-ANNE DRUART 5 Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of
Aristotle’s Physics 114
JOSEP PUIG MONTADA
x Contents 6 The Influence of Mansuˉr Ibn Sarjuˉn (John of
Damascus) on Aquinas’ Philosophy of
Religious Worship 130
FRANCISCO J. ROMERO CARRASQUILLO 7 Ibn Taymiyya on Ibn Rushd in the Darʾ taʿaˉrud․
al-ʿaql wa-l-naql (with Special Attention to His
Quotations of Ibn Rushd’s Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut) 147
JULES JANSSENS PART II
Traditions Facing Forward 179 8 How Light Makes Color Visible: The Reception of
Some Greco-Arabic Theories (Aristotle, Avicenna,
Averroes) in Medieval Paris, 1240s–50s 181
THERESE SCARPELLI CORY 9 Anniyya faqat․
Again: Reading Liber de causis 8[9] with Richard C. Taylor 225
CRISTINA D’ANCONA 10 Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of
Truth: A Commentary on Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1.8 246
OLGA L. LIZZINI 11 Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ on What Is Known Prior to the
Syllogistic Arts in His Introductory Letter, the
Five Aphorisms, and the Book of Dialectic 276
TERENCE J. KLEVEN 12 Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 293
NICOLA POLLONI 13 Institution and Causality in Albert the Great’s
Sacramental Theology 308
ISABELLE MOULIN 14 Averroes’ Decisive Treatise (Fas․l al-maqaˉl ) and
Exposition (Kashf ) as Dialectical Works 326
PETER ADAMSON
Contents xi
15 Averroes on Imagination (takhayyul) as a
Cognitive Power 341
DEBORAH L. BLACK PART III
Forging New Traditions 361 16 The Emergence of a Science of Intellect: Albert the
Great’s De intellectu et intelligibili 363
HENRYK ANZULEWICZ 17 Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 393
MICHAEL CHASE 18 “Incepit quasi a se”: Averroes on Avicenna’s
Philosophy in the Long Commentary on the De anima 408
AMOS BERTOLACCI 19 Averroist by Contagion? Marsilius of Padua on
civilis scientia 436
JOERG ALEJANDRO TELLKAMP 20 Some Choice Words: Al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s Reconceptualization
of the Issue of the World’s Age 450
JON MCGINNIS 21 Unfounded Assumptions: Reassessing the
Differences among Averroes’ Three Kinds of
Aristotelian Commentaries 471
STEVEN HARVEY Appendix: “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’”—
A Short History 495
RICHARD C. TAYLOR AND BRETT YARDLEY
Index 499

Peter Adamson, professor of Late Ancient and Arabic philosophy at the
LMU in Munich, Germany, specializes in the reception of Greek philosophy in the Islamic world. Among his publications is The Cambridge
Companion to Arabic Philosophy, co-edited with Richard C. Taylor.
Henryk Anzulewicz is a faculty member of the Albertus Magnus Institute in Bonn, Germany, and editor of Albert’s Opera omnia. His research focuses on the history of the Latin Middle Ages, and especially
on Albert the Great.
Amos Bertolacci teaches history of medieval philosophy at the IMT
School for Advanced Studies Lucca, Italy. He has written on Avicenna’s
reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics and the influence of Avicenna’s and
Averroes’ metaphysics in the Latin Middle Ages.
Deborah L. Black is professor of philosophy and medieval studies at the
University of Toronto, Canada. She is the author of numerous articles
on epistemology and cognitive psychology in medieval Latin and classical Arabic philosophy.
Michael Chase, Researcher at the CNRS Centre Jean Pépin (UMR
8230-École Normale Supérieure-PSL), Paris-Villejuif, and visiting
scholar at the MPIWG, Berlin, works on Greco-Roman philosophy,
Patristics, medieval Latin and Arabic philosophy, and parallels between
premodern and contemporary science.
Therese Scarpelli Cory, John and Jean Oesterle Associate Professor of
Thomistic Studies at the University of Notre Dame, Indiana, specializes in medieval philosophy, especially Thomas Aquinas and the reception of Islamic philosophical psychology in early Scholasticism.
Cristina D’Ancona is a professor at the Dipartimento di Civiltà e Forme del Sapere, Università di Pisa, Italy. Her research interests include Late Ancient philosophy and medieval philosophy (Latin and Arabic).
Contributors
xiv Contributors
Thérèse-Anne Druart, professor emerita in the School of Philosophy at
The Catholic University of America, focuses on philosophy in medieval Islamic lands, its Greek sources, and its influence on the medieval
Latin world.
Janis Esots (d. 2021) was a researcher at the Ismaili Institute in London
and from 2009 the editor of the Islamic philosophy yearbook Ishraq. He
published widely on Islamic philosophy and intellectual history.
Owen Goldin is professor of philosophy at Marquette University, Wisconsin. He has written mostly on ancient philosophy and is the author
of Explaining an Eclipse: Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics 2.1–10. He has translated for the “Ancient Commentators on Aristotle” project.
Steven Harvey (PhD, Harvard University, 1977) is professor emeritus of
medieval Islamic and Jewish philosophy at Bar-Ilan University, Israel.
He is president of the Commission for Jewish Philosophy of the SIEPM.
Jules Janssens is a collaborator at the De Wulf-Mansion Centre, KU
Leuven, Belgium, associate researcher at CNRS, UMR 8230 (Paris),
and currently director of the “Avicenna latinus” project (Union
Académique Internationale).
Terence J. Kleven is Fulbright Research Scholar at the University of
Jordan, Amman, and Jacob and Gela Schnucker Sessler Professor of
Philosophy and Religion at Central College, Iowa. He works on political philosophy and biblical studies.
Katja Krause is professor of the history of science at Technische Universität Berlin, Germany, and leads the research group “Experience in the
Premodern Sciences of Soul and Body” at the Max Planck Institute for
the History of Science, Berlin.
Olga L. Lizzini is professor of Islamic studies and Arabic-Islamic philosophy at the Université d’Aix-Marseille, France. She has written on
Avicenna and on Arabic-Islamic metaphysics and its Latin reception.
Most recently she worked on Yahya ibn ʿAdıˉ.
Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, professor of philosophy at Universidad
Panamericana, Mexico, writes on classical Islamic philosophy. He is associate director of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working
Group” and editor of Tópicos, Journal of Philosophy.
Jon McGinnis is professor of philosophy at the University of Missouri,
St. Louis. He is the author of Avicenna (OUP, 2010), translator and editor of Avicenna’s Physics (BYUP, 2009), and author of numerous articles
on medieval philosophy and science.
Contributors xv
Isabelle Moulin, associate professor of philosophy at the Faculty of Catholic Theology, Université de Strasbourg, France, writes on topics including metaphysics, philosophy of religion, and ancient and medieval
philosophy, with a special focus on Albert the Great.
Nicholas A. Oschman is a scholar of classical philosophy in the lands
of Islam and a member and officer of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group.” He currently teaches at the Harpeth Hall
School in Nashville, Tennessee.
Nicola Polloni has worked at the universities of Pavia, Durham, and
Berlin. Since October 2020, he has been a senior FWO research fellow
at KU Leuven, Belgium. His cross-disciplinary research expands on
medieval hylomorphism and theories of matter.
Josep Puig Montada is professor emeritus of Arabic and Islamic studies
at Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain, focusing on medieval
philosophy and Islamic studies. He has published on Ibn Hazm, Avempace, Averroes, Maimonides, and Ibn Khaldun.
Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo is associate professor of philosophy
and classics at St. Gregory the Great Seminary, Seward, Nebraska, and
works on medieval philosophy of religion, religious studies, and ethics.
Richard C. Taylor is professor of philosophy at Marquette University,
Wisconsin, and a member of the De Wulf-Mansion Centre at KU Leuven, Belgium. He has directed the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group” since its inception in 2005.
Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp, professor of philosophy at the Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana in Mexico City, has published on
thirteenth-century philosophical psychology and on the political philosophy of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Spanish Scholasticism.
David Twetten, professor of philosophy at Marquette University, Wisconsin, works in classical and contemporary philosophy in the areas of
metaphysics, semantics, natural philosophy, and philosophical theology,
with a special focus on Averroes, Albert the Great, and Aquinas.
Brett Yardley is assistant professor of philosophy at DeSales University,
Pennsylvania. He has served in various roles of the “Aquinas and ‘the
Arabs’ International Working Group” since 2014.

Acknowledgments
Contextualizing Premodern Philosophy: Explorations of the Greek, Hebrew,
Arabic, and Latin Traditions arose as a tribute to Richard C. Taylor, doyen of
the history of premodern philosophy and co-founder of the “Aquinas and
‘the Arabs’ International Working Group” (AAIWG). Words cannot fully
express our gratitude for having Richard in our lives, for the invaluable
advice and inspiration he has given us over many decades and, of course,
for his friendship.
We would also like to thank the members and friends of the AAIWG,
and especially Brett Yardley for his crucial input during the early days of
this undertaking. In the project’s later stages, we had the good luck to
draw upon the expertise of the staff at Routledge/Taylor & Francis and the
indexing skill of Kellyann Wolfe.
Work on this book was generously supported by the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, Berlin. At the Max Planck Research
Group “Experience in the Premodern Sciences of Soul and Body, ca. 800–
1650,” led by Katja Krause at the MPIWG, Kate Sturge coordinated the
manuscript submission, making numerous constructive and indispensable
editorial suggestions; Anina Woischnig, Fabio Di Gregorio, and Emily
Philippi helped to prepare the bibliographies. We are especially grateful to
the Max Planck Research Group for funding the volume’s Open Access
version.
A portion of this work was also generously funded by the John Templeton Foundation and the University of Missouri-St. Louis, as part of
the project “The Christian West and Islamic East: Theology, Science,
and Knowledge,” without which the volume could have never come to
fruition.
Most importantly, we would like to thank our families for supporting
our work on this book. We owe a debt of gratitude to your boundless love
and support. In particular, Katja would like to thank Frank and Elisabeth;
Luis would like to thank Claudia, Santiago, and Esteban; and Nicholas
would like to thank Lauren, Felicity, Kara, and Melody.
During the final phases of preparing the manuscript, we received the
distressing news that one of the contributors, Janis Esots, had unexpectedly passed away. Janis was a researcher at the Ismaili Institute in London
xviii Acknowledgments
and from 2009 onward the editor of the Islamic philosophy yearbook Ishraq.
He published about fifty articles and encyclopedia entries on Islamic
philosophy and intellectual history, with a focus on the Ismaili philosophical tradition, and translated into Russian works by Mullaˉ S․adraˉ, Shihaˉb
al-Dıˉn Suhrawardıˉ, Mıˉr Daˉmaˉd, S․adr al-Dıˉn Quˉ nawıˉ, and Jalaˉl al-Dıˉn
Ruˉmıˉ. Our dear friend left us before the publication of his last book,
Patterns of Wisdom in Safavid Iran: The Philosophical School of Isfahan and the
Gnostic of Shiraz (I. B. Tauris, 2021), and also before the final production
of his contribution to our volume. May he dwell forever in a garden under
which rivers flow (Qurʾaˉ n 3:198).
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-1
On Tradition
by Katja Krause
Every tradition of thought, and likewise every tradition of practice—as
long as it has not been lost in the black hole of history—seems to remain
alive. For this reason, it has been rightly said that history and historiography keep traditions alive. Nonetheless, certain differences seem to arise
among the historiographies of traditions. Some historiographies look forward, dynamically adapting, reworking, and molding what they find in
their heritage to their own needs. Others look backward, seeking truth in
stable origins. Wherever truths are located in such stable origins, traditions
seem to be the subject measured against these origins. Do the traditions
thus capture the meaning of the original? Or do they defectively deviate
from it? Wherever traditions face forward, they seem free to find new
expressions, to encounter divergent viewpoints, to multiply in space and
time. The aliveness of traditions in this sense does not fall under a single
measure; there seems to be no preference for origins over adaptations.1
Whether traditions come to life in diversity or whether they flourish only
in light of their origins, therefore, makes a difference.2
This book proposes to take a fresh look at the Aristotelian traditions in
space and time, finding meaning in those traditions’ diverse expressions,
viewpoints, and multiplications of perspective without neglecting its thematic and methodological origin. Let us start by explaining more precisely
what this fresh look entails and what different aspects it embraces, in order
that it might be apprehended how history keeps tradition alive in both
senses.
History gives an account of individual thinkers, and also groups of
thinkers, who constructed or selected discourses from a stable origin—the
corpus Aristotelicum as it was known to these thinkers at any one point in
time—so as to commend or condemn ideas contained in those discourses.
These acts of commending or condemning, seen from the perspective
of their historical change, reveal the values and beliefs of the traditions’
Narrating Premodern
Philosophy in Greek, Hebrew,
Arabic, and Latin
Origins, Developments, Innovations
Katja Krause, Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, and
Nicholas A. Oschman
2 Katja Krause et al.
appropriators and adaptors—yet they need to be interpreted in light of the
origin. Values and beliefs arise from the motifs and emphases with which
tradition endows its Aristotelian origin, thus from the present needs and
purposes of the appropriators and adaptors, not from the Aristotelian origin itself.3 To be sure, the origin provides the canvas, the sine qua non condition without which historical change in its variety could not be grasped,
let alone explained. But the origin does not itself construct or prescribe
a linear causality in history that would be marked more by similarity in
the adaptations than by their dissimilarity. For historical change itself is
not a line of causation, not an accumulation of right repetitions and false
repetitions of the origin; it is driven, rather, by the “human factor.” That
is certainly the case for intentions, motifs, and emphases,4 since, for the
most part, discourses on parchment are shaped by the living debates of a
given time.5
Thus, it is through intimate familiarity with the objects of an inquiry
that we obtain knowledge, that is to say historical knowledge, of them. For
objects embody their conditions and means of creation. They contain their
particularities in expression and in constructed ontologies. And they encompass the specific functions that they have acquired in space and time.
We do not say that we know any historical fact until we are acquainted
with its primary conditions of construction and the ontology that results
from them, and until we have carried our analysis to the specific functions
fulfilled by the object in the general context of its construction in space
and time. Plainly, therefore, in the history of philosophy just as in other
branches of historical study, our first task is to establish what the conditions are for the construction of such an object.
The wise approach is to begin with the traditions, normativities, impediments, crises, institutions, sociologies, and so on that have brought
these acts of evaluation of traditions into being in their historically specific settings. Then one may proceed toward those that define the objects
in their philosophical ontologies and functionalities. For these features
are not knowable to us unless they are cognized under the conditions of
construction.6 In the present inquiry, we follow this order in generation,
advancing from what is specifically and circumstantially preconditioned in
each case of philosophical construction to what is constructed out of those
preconditions of history.
Let this description, however brief, suffice as a method that approaches
history and keeps tradition alive in both the senses described. Sketchy as it
is, it should enable the reader to recognize the shape of the tradition in the
contributions that follow.7
Response to “On Tradition”By Nicholas A. Oschman
Of course, such a “sketchy” prescription requires more methodological
precision to be truly sufficient, and more ought to be said, building upon
Origins, Developments, Innovations 3
and explicating the previously established foundation. For while the nature of this kind of project may seem familiar in both its commendations
and condemnations, it is the familiar nature of the corpus Aristotelicum itself that renders it so peculiar in its manifestation. The reader of this collection
will readily see that “As Aristotle says . . .” is as contentious a phrase as can
be written. Which Aristotle? The Stagirite, Ἀριστοτέλης, himself? Arist ․uˉ ?
Aristoteles? Alexander of Aphrodisias under the guise of Aristotle? Themistius under a similar guise? The misattributed Plotiniana Arabica? The Second Teacher? The Sheikh? The Commentator? Thomas? Aristotelianism,
as received, is not singular, but myriad.
Yet the corpus Aristotelicum is nonetheless a body of work, defined and definite, as is the tradition that follows in its wake. It is the source of the tradition that follows, the text to which all later authors must return. To ascribe difference is not to deny boundaries. To acknowledge the occurrence of growth out of the corpus Aristotelicum is not to deny that there is some something shared in its interpretation—a textual ground, an authorial historicity, and a way of thought—which gives the succeeding tradition a recognizable nature. In other words, recognizing that the Aristotelian tradition contains difference does not necessitate that it entails différance,8 as if all meaningful discussion of Aristotelianism and Aristotle’s texts, as such, must be deferred in perpetuity or denied in the first place.
To recognize that any understanding of “Aristotle” cannot be found
purely in reference to historicism need not deny the importance of history.
9 Context and history matter, as both the markers of continuity and
the mechanisms of division. Misreadings become novel readings. Novel
readings become standard readings. Standard readings become condemned readings. Condemned readings become rediscovered readings.
Yet this constant remains: the reading of Aristotle.
In recognition of that, what follows in this collection is less of a study
than simply one more contribution to a conversation that spans continents
and millennia, as were the contributions of the authors about whom many
of the following papers were written. “Aristotle,” it would seem, is ever
growing, yet always anchored in a text.
In this sense, while the text itself does not necessitate “a line of causation”
or “an accumulation of right repetitions and false repetitions of the origin,” it does demarcate itself from other traditions.10 The Aristotelian
tradition is not monolithic, yet the text serves as a monolith marking the
foundation of a school of thought, providing first principles that must be
known if one is to be acquainted with the tradition as a whole, as Aristotle
teaches about the sciences in Physics 1.1. Interpretations vary, yet the text
itself maintains a certain hegemony over any foreign influence. The text
is the source of the tradition. A return to the “true” Aristotle holds potent
and powerful rhetorical appeal.
Even while recognizing the chimerical character of understanding authorial intent,11 the tradition as such does have an author, bound
4 Katja Krause et al.
by texts written in a particular place and context. The commentators and adopters of these texts were themselves living individuals, with aims and intentions both hidden and apparent within their own writings. Though it is true that the Aristotelian tradition can be said to be “driven [. . .] by the ‘human factor,’”12 the directionality and particularity of its motion need not be considered inscrutable, as if each individual author interprets the text without a rudder, according to the whims of chance. Context, like text, can be discerned, as can purpose, even if imperfectly. While Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics 1.1 teaches us about disparate activities pursuant of disparate ends, it also reminds us that ends can be lexically prioritized, subordinated, in reference to that for the sake of which the activity is pursued. Just as the individual activities of the shipwright or bridle-maker can be judged according to the usefulness of building a ship or riding a horse, so too can individual commentators be judged according to their usefulness for understanding the corpus Aristotelicum.
Thus, what is needed is a method that itself discerns different methodological approaches to the corpus Aristotelicum, something that delineates
between the text, responses to the text, and the influence of texts upon
one another. (After all, it was Aristotle himself, in Topics 1.1, who taught
us that the manner by which we obtain conclusions is as crucial to our
understanding of said conclusions as the conclusions themselves.) Taken
together, these hermeneutics, which attend to the text and context while
maintaining a proper reference and orientation toward the texts that succeed and precede the text at hand, could be described as source-based contextualism,
a methodological approach demiurgically created by Richard C.
Taylor. This is a hermeneutic that assesses each text in reference to prior
texts yet preserves a clear vision toward historical context. The family tree
of the Aristotelian tradition can be charted from root to branch, based
upon what has come before and after each text. It is a complicated family
tree, to be sure, but one can limn it.
What follows in the body of our book are several novel attempts to map
out the various branches of this tradition. Each attempt lends detail to a
specific historical topic but also introduces brand-new outgrowths to the
tradition ready for exploration. Each author, then, examines the tradition
even while becoming part of it. In doing so, the authors add their voices
to an ongoing conversation, providing greater precision even while opening new avenues for discussion. Each contributes to our knowledge about
the content of Aristotelianism even while performatively displaying the
author’s understanding of the proper methodology for approaching texts
in the Aristotelian tradition. Put simply, Aristotelianism grows from its
textual roots.
Let this description suffice for an introduction to the research that
follows.
Origins, Developments, Innovations 5
Response to the Response to “On Tradition”
by Luis Xavier López-Farjeat
Of course, more needs to be said if we are to find a sufficient prescription for defining what is usually called the “Aristotelian tradition.” The
conversation always continues. In debates and writings, historical and
contemporary thinkers reexamine the texts to which they respond, while
their writings, in turn, become texts that require equally careful examination and response. The same has happened with the corpus Aristotelicum.
The text has been subject to adaptations, transformations, and appropriations, thus generating new thoughts, debates, and texts—in short, new
sources that become embedded in discussion, interpretation, and innovation in different cultural contexts. These processes have been crucial
for the development of the philosophical vocabulary and philosophical
problems that have shaped what we generally recognize as the “Aristotelian tradition.”13
Throughout the history of philosophy, for two and a half millennia, Aristotle has been there. However, as has been stated, the question “Which
Aristotle?” is imperative.14 Aristotle’s philosophy has been transformed
in different ways at different times, in books, in minds, in debates. There
have been Aristotelians and Aristotelianisms of many different kinds. Neither did Aristotle emerge out of nothing. Aristotle’s ideas were deeply
rooted in Plato’s philosophy. Despite their differences in method and content, Middle Platonists, Neoplatonists, and Late Antique commentators
thus adapted, transformed, and appropriated their Plato and their Aristotle
as two complementary, or at least compatible, philosophies.15 The attempt
to harmonize—in some cases to combine—these two philosophies extended into the Middle Ages, when philosophers and theologians of the
three Abrahamic traditions walked similar paths.
In some significant ways, therefore, philosophy and theology in the three Abrahamic traditions are rooted in Aristotle and in other sources that affirmed or rejected Aristotle or that tried to reconcile Aristotle with Plato.16 The result is the emergence of a multifaceted Aristotelianism, an Aristotelianism in constant transformation. From an Aristotle that had already been transformed in many ways, the medievals took ideas, structures, arguments, and methods to discuss problems relating to their own contexts and concerns. The first principles that were “most knowable and obvious” to each generation were, in part, artifacts of their milieu.17 For better or for worse, medieval thinkers kept their traditions alive through adaptations, transformations, and appropriations of the past.18 Without the medieval reworking of Aristotle, there would have been no Renaissance and no modernity in philosophy. Through the Arabic, Hebrew, and Latin translations of Aristotle and their formalized commentary cultures, Aristotle’s ideas, structures, arguments,
6 Katja Krause et al.
and methods were assimilated into the history of philosophy, theology, science, and even medicine.19
Abundant scholarly literature is devoted to exploring the different ways
in which medieval scholars inherited and transformed Greek philosophy—
especially Plato, Aristotle, and Neoplatonism.20 This literature mostly
approaches these inheritances and transformations through the lens of a
linear historical trajectory, in which the original provides the standard
against which the historically later contributions are to be measured. But
history, even if a record of natural things, is not a natural object that aims
at some teleologically endowed good.21 The reception and adaptation of
the Aristotelian tradition lacked any predetermined purpose. Every time
it was put to some purpose, something new was formed. The volume
complements these inheritances and transformations by emphasizing how
medieval philosophical appropriations were always bound to forge new
meanings, produce new ways of understanding philosophical vocabulary,
concepts, and arguments, and implement new ways of doing philosophy.
These acts of appropriation are particularly challenging given that, as each
contribution to this volume shows, they require careful examination of
the sources. Working with the sources, focusing on their specificities, is
essential to recognizing not only the appropriations but also the recontextualizations and reformulations of philosophical ideas.
The kind of work just described has its complexity. Historians working
with philosophical ideas engage with their sources in context, as part of a
specific space and a specific time. The historian of philosophy knows and
weighs the particular cultures and social spaces, the linguistic and religious
conventions, the motivations, intentions, and sets of questions; in short,
all the relevant conditions of a particular historical construction. Historians of medieval philosophy consider carefully under which circumstances,
how, and why the medievals departed from Aristotle and subsequently
transformed him.
Different languages often complicate this work further. Aristotle was
translated from Greek into Syriac, Arabic, Hebrew, Latin, and many vernaculars. Translations are themselves interpretations and innovations, as is
the generation of new ideas from translations.22 Adding even more complexity is the historian’s access to the actual historical events in which ideas
and concepts took shape—conversations over beer, wine, or shaˉy, discussions in university classrooms, madrassas, and synagogues, and debates in
private and public space are all lost; we can only read texts that have come
down to us. The same was true for medieval philosophers with regard to
their ancestors. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ could only read a version of Aristotle, his Aristotle (whoever that was), certainly not talk to him in person.
Medieval philosophers and theologians thus examined and mined philosophical texts to create meaningful philosophies and theologies within
their own lifeworlds. We as historians of philosophy, in contrast, examine
not only medieval philosophical and theological texts, but also the texts
Origins, Developments, Innovations 7
that medieval philosophers and theologians examined and other texts of
historical relevance, such as statutes of universities, letters, texts of other
literary genres, images, manuscripts in their material culture, etc. Discussion continues as to what is the most appropriate way to examine the
philosophical and theological texts produced by the medievals.
Members of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group”
(AAIWG) have, for many years now, discussed, adopted, and developed
what Richard C. Taylor, the founder of the group, has called “source-
based contextualism.” As has been said,23 this approach assesses each
medieval philosophical or theological text in light of other relevant philosophical and theological texts, leading to a root with different derivations
that allows us to recognize the complexity of each text and the different
ways in which a philosophical problem can be framed. This methodology
encourages a meticulous work of analysis and textual interpretation based
on sources. The interpretation of a text in light of other texts contributes,
in some cases, to the clarification of philosophical discussions and, in other
cases, to a more appropriate approach to the problems. Certainly, working
with this method also allows discovery of the variety of adaptations and
interpretations carried out by medieval scholars of the three Abrahamic
traditions.24 The contributions in this volume provide, precisely, new insights to understand the Aristotelianisms permeating the philosophical
and theological discussions of the Middle Ages.
Let this description suffice as the method scholars should adopt when
approaching texts in the history of philosophy.25
Liminal Spaces, Familial Narratives
by Katja Krause, Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, and
Nicholas Oschman
Of course, more needs to be said for a sufficient prescriptive approach to
tradition.
Understanding traditions requires wrestling with mereological problems. Traditions are not, after all, just the sum of their parts. Rather, they
are fashioned by a complicated nexus of influence, rejection, ignorance,
adaptation, and adoption. One cannot understand a tradition, especially
a tradition as long, storied, and complex as an Aristotelian tradition, by
simply delimiting its boundaries and deducing its shared characteristics.
Traditions are both narrative, in the sense of history unfolding, and familial, in the sense of sharing a common foundation. But they are also more
than that, for while authors are embedded in context, text, and the holistic
gravity of history, a certain dimension of them—the personal—escapes
these confines.
Traditions contain myriad liminal spaces, found wherever living human
beings are. Take, for instance, Averroes as a reader of Aristotle. Averroes
8 Katja Krause et al.
(Ibn Rushd) is credited with carrying out a “return to Aristotle,”26 as if
the precise meaning of that phrase were clear. In fact, the complexity of
what this really means can scarcely be detailed, even though the claim is
accurate on the whole. Within the phrase lies a whole history: Averroes’
personal context; the texts and translations available to him; the contexts
and texts of his predecessors, whose positions he either rejects, adopts, or
adapts; and his understanding of those authors. The intricacy of Averroes’
relationship to even a few of his predecessors alone is too complicated
to explicate in full: al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, commentator on and Neoplatonic adapter
of Aristotle; Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ), reader and adapter of both Aristotle
and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ; Ibn Baˉjja, advocate of Plato, often forgoing Aristotle and
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ; and Averroes’ erstwhile mentor Ibn T․ufayl, who rejects Aristotle, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, and Avicenna’s Shifaˉʾ in favor of Avicenna’s Eastern
philosophy—an entirely fabricated position constructed by Ibn T․ufayl himself.27 Each of these authors has their own “Aristotle,” and Averroes
rejects each “Aristotle” in favor of his own conception. But where is the
overlap? Where are the gaps? Where is the influence? Careful scholarship
can ameliorate these difficulties, but our approach to understanding even
this small sliver of Aristotelian tradition is asymptotic.
Concluding that traditions are complicated, murky things, muddled by
the messiness of human activity, is different from understanding them. For
this reason, we, the editors, have endeavored to prime the reader toward a
deeper engagement with these issues. In this introduction so far, we have
each in turn taken stances, some performatively insincere, about method-
ology, described in our private discussions as “contextualism” (Krause),
“textualism” (Oschman), and “holism” (López-Farjeat). None of these
stances, despite our claims above, is sufficient to describe the proper way
to interpret Aristotelianisms. Each is a prescription, responding in part to
the inadequacies of other prescriptions. But no prescription closes the conversation; the tradition, including its interpretation, remains open-ended.
By taking up clear points of view, our aim was to challenge (and even frustrate) you, the reader, inviting cognizance about the lens through which
each of our contributors approaches their topic. By interpreting one another in different ways, we hoped to remind you that the tradition invites
and, in fact, is made up of different types of interpretations.
Each “Aristotle” contained in this book is a scholar presenting a historical author, influenced by other authors, each of whom views “Aristotle”
through a different interpretive lens. There are layers upon layers of types
of interpretations, each driven by methodological and numerous other
choices, each creating new seams to explore. We hope you appreciate not
merely the texts, the contexts, and the historical whole of the tradition,
but the methodologies adopted by both contemporary and historical authors. And in considering these methodologies, we hope you consider the
liminal spaces, the human elements, the lacunae between authors, which
shape the tradition every bit as much as intention.
Origins, Developments, Innovations 9
This book thus addresses the various attempts that single historical actors made to shape and reshape Aristotelianism over its longue durée: how
some of them understood, adopted, and appropriated Aristotle’s corpus;
how others interpreted, transformed, and adapted Aristotle’s philosophy;
and how yet others used Aristotle’s ideas for their own sake. It is well beyond the scope of this book to give an exhaustive chronological account
of such developments in the Aristotelian tradition. But despite the particular and even idiosyncratic approaches of individual contributors to the
Aristotelian tradition, all of the historical actors studied in this book are
examined through three interrelated questions. First, given the availability of numerous possible ways to approach “Aristotle” and the tradition
which follows in his wake at various moments within the Aristotelian
tradition, using what approach did historical actors engage with “Aristotelian” works? Second, how did they view previous historical actors’
engagement with “Aristotelian” works? And third, what, if any, thematic
and methodological choices did the actors make according to their own
particular scientific ideals?
Approaching the historical in this way, the tension between thought options and choices in each case serves as an intellectual litmus test as to how we should describe the internal scientific factors that established and stabilized any Aristotelian tradition over the course of time. Indeed, by examining the spectrum of these factors and subsuming them under three broad analytic categories—origins, developments, and innovations—we hope to initiate a lively discussion about how our own thought options and methodological choices influence the ways that we describe the intentional space of our historical actors vis-à-vis their sources. This book is not, then, intended as a study of the historical, social, and cultural conditions under which an Aristotelian tradition was forged at any given time, even though these matters arise in different functions in a number of the contributions. Nor does it intend to study the material means with
which Aristotelianism could physically be carried forward in history, even though manuscripts, translations, prints, and editions play a crucial, even if implicit, role in all contributions. Rather, in each chapter, this book studies the intellectual practices that historical actors apply to their texts and templates in order to create knowledge and meaning through episteˉmeˉ,
ʿilm, scientia. As a whole, it engages with the intellectual practices and lenses that we as scholars apply when investigating our historical actors in the Aristotelian traditions.
These practices and lenses form our own liminal space. The lacuna between the contemporary scholar and historical author is, in each case, navigated by specific methodological decisions and concerns. But discussions
about methodology rarely capture the full entanglement of these issues,
because the most important methodological decisions are often the ones
that are not made, or are not made explicitly. Decisions about topic, style
or personal preference, personal exposure to specific scholarship and texts,
10 Katja Krause et al.
and values all contribute to the methodologies of contemporary scholarship and to scholarship itself, often superseding methodological decisions.
Again, the human comes to the fore, new spaces arise, new seams between authors (this time contemporary and historical) as they negotiate a
clear definition of the tradition. We are ourselves part of the mereological
problem. Our own encounter with the texts of the Aristotelian tradition
creates a new liminal space.
In order to remind you of these issues, we have organized this book
idiosyncratically. It is not a chronological account of the Aristotelian tradition, as if each developmental stage of understanding Aristotle builds upon
the last in a necessitated and determined way. Nor is the book thematically
coordinated, as if authors interested in certain topics share some core motivations. It is not even organized according to the characteristic methodologies of the historical authors themselves. Instead, we have grouped the
sections of this book according to the methodologies of the contemporary
scholars who have contributed. Rather than making Aristotle or history
the stars of the show, we give the scholars center stage. The lens through
which they look at history is the ordering principle of the study. But this
raises the question: Are we, as editors, already applying our own lens of
interpretation to our scholars, which colors the book throughout?
Given the disparate approaches of the contributions, we have catalogued the papers under three very general headings: those adopting methodologies that return to the origins of the tradition, those adopting methodologies that emphasize the continuity of the tradition, and those adopting methodologies that emphasize a de novo reading of the tradition. Though the methodological decisions made in each contribution are much more complicated than backward-looking, developmentalist, or forward-looking, our hope is that the methodological categorization and order of the contributions will invite you, the reader, to keep methodology—the historical author’s, the scholar’s, our own as editors, and yours—top of mind.
Two final things should be said before introducing the contributions.
First, organizing them according to the methodology of the contemporary
scholar alone leads to some interesting results. Whereas some of our chapters fit neatly according to expectations (e.g., David Twetten’s examination of the influence of Aristotle and Alexander on Averroes’ conception
of the Prime Mover as a methodology, which looks back to the origin, and
Therese Scarpelli Cory’s examination of light in Aristotle, Avicenna, and
Averroes as a developmentalist approach), others show a methodological
tension between scholar and author. For example, Thérèse-Anne Druart’s examination of the Arabic sources of Roger Bacon’s Moralis philosophia
takes a forward-looking author, Bacon, who uses sources for his own
novel ends, but applies a retrospective methodology that highlights the
influence of Avicenna and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ on Bacon’s thought. Similarly, Steven Harvey examines Averroes’ own retrospective methodology, which
aims to return to Aristotle, and shows the novelty of Averroes’ approach.
Origins, Developments, Innovations 11
Methodological decisions by authors talking about authors, talking about
still other authors, build upon one another in interesting, and sometimes
confounding, ways. The second thing to be remembered is that the organization of this book is itself a kind of lens, whose use betrays our own
motivations, methodologies, and values as editors. Our readings of the
contributions are not the authors’ own, nor need they be yours. By creating a whole out of the parts, we have incidentally (as is always the case)
created interstitial spaces. We invite you to examine, question, reject, and
adopt our interpretations as you please.
Part I: Origins
The authors in the first section of our book measure the premodern philosophers of Aristotelian tradition by their fidelity to the origins of their thought—the templates, or what are identified as such, from ancient Greek or Arabic lands, most notably of Aristotle and the Platonic and Neoplatonic tradition. Faithful renderings of these origins are marked by steadfast allegiance to the letter, unwavering loyalty to the thought, firm adherence to the idea, and even commitment to the culture of the author, text, and audience.28 Transformation is read as a departure from the original. But in order to know what it is in the letter, thought, idea,
and culture, the essays in this section review, reconstruct, examine, and determine these origins mostly on the basis of our own contemporary scholarship, and it is against this background that they analyze historical interpreters. The historical actors studied in this section are found to either meet or fail to meet the criterion of fidelity to the original. They either recognize or fail to recognize the theoretical ideals of the original—two criteria that are themselves imbued with the epistemic values of contemporary scholarship, even of future scholarship, as our knowledge of the original is in constant flux and depends on ever-new findings of its truth in history.
The historiographical question about the kind of causality that the First
Cause exerts according to Aristotle’s Metaphysics Λ 7 is the subject matter
of David Twetten’s contribution. Prominent contemporary Aristotle
scholars, Twetten suggests, render this causality narrowly as telos only. In
contrast, Twetten reasons that the medieval Arabic philosopher Averroes
takes a wider approach to the causality of the First Cause, which is the
“source” or “form” along with the telos of the cosmos. For Twetten, Averroes comes closest to Aristotle’s true intention, thus helping to measure
contemporary interpretations according to their fidelity to Aristotle.
Owen Goldin’s essay examines how Philoponus, the sixth-century
commentator on Aristotle often known as John the Grammarian, understands “form” (eidos) by harmonizing apparent tensions between Plato
with Aristotle, a recurring theme in the long Aristotelian tradition.
Though Philoponus’ sense of form as universal was entirely conceptual
12 Katja Krause et al.
and thus faithful to Aristotle, it nonetheless remained open to the view of
forms as conceptual logoi in the demiurgic mind of God and thus faithful
to Plato. With this solution, Goldin suggests, the sixth-century Christian
philosopher and scientist found new ways of explaining Plato and Aristotle that reconciled the opposing views of Ammonius and Proclus, even
while rejecting the Proclean metaphysics of mind-independent universal
forms. Goldin shows that Philoponus established new paths against the
background of his immediate predecessors; his solution was fundamentally
a return to its origins, to Plato and Aristotle.
Ascribing one’s own doctrines to Greek origins was, at least in the Isma
ˉ ʿıˉlıˉ context, a common stratagem in polemical writing. Studying the
Book of Ammonius on the Opinions of the Philosophers: “The Different Statements on the Principles [and] on the Creator,” Janis Esots raises this question of misattributed origin and fidelity to the Greek original. He shows how
the themes under scrutiny in the Book (misattributed to the Greek philosopher Ammonius)—creatio ex nihilo (i bdaˉʿ), the Divine Will, and the
Neoplatonic notion of return—suggest some familiarity with its Greek
origin, but not fidelity to it. When Esots moves on to later appropriations
of the book by early Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ thinkers such as Nasafıˉ, Raˉzıˉ, and Sijistaˉnıˉ,
he detects even greater deviations, for polemical purposes, from the Greek
original, an original known to us today but not available in the same way
to early Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ thinkers.
Josep Puig Montada’s essay guides us through the thicket of self-motion in Averroes’ three commentaries on Physics 7 and illustrates that
Averroes faithfully adhered to Aristotle in three different and evolving
ways. He reproduced Aristotle’s reasoning; he followed Alexander of Aphrodisias’ guidance in reading Aristotle; and he held Aristotelian tenets as
scientifically foundational. Three specific tenets guided Averroes’ mature
treatment of self-motion in his Long Commentary on the Physics: the divisibility
of per se movables, the equivalence between parts and wholes at rest,
and the inequivalence of mover and movable for those movables that display an equivalence between parts and wholes at rest. These tenets, Puig
Montada submits, aided Averroes in concluding—against most commentators, with the exception of Alexander—that the notion of a “primary per
se movable” is applicable to the First Mover alone. The mature Averroes
thus remained faithful to Aristotle not only in terms of method and authority but also, increasingly, in content.
Unaltered uses of passages from the original can be counted as faithful returns to it. Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo’s essay presents us
with Thomas Aquinas’ unaltered uses and receptions of John Damascene’s
teachings on the body and on images in religious worship. Building upon
a reconstructed understanding of the Damascene as an “Arab” in the cultural sense of the word (he was a Christian monk raised in Damascus
in the seventh century), Romero Carrasquillo surveys explicit quotations
and implicit excerpts of the Damascene in Aquinas’ works. He concludes
Origins, Developments, Innovations 13
that the Damascene was the Arab thinker most influential on Aquinas,
even more influential than thinkers that we have commonly come to consider “the Arabs,” namely al-Kindıˉ, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Avicenna, and Averroes.
Discrepancies between the original and later uses seem to stem from
the user’s own intentions and circumstances, almost all of which lie outside the truly exegetical endeavor. These discrepancies are what Thérèse-
Anne Druart finds in her reading of Roger Bacon’s use of the Latin
translations of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s Metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis.
Druart identifies misinterpretations of doctrines, appearances of false
facts, omissions of ideas, and cultural erasures in Bacon’s appropriations of
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ in his Moralis philosophia. She thereby reveals how
little Bacon was interested in the historical Ibn Sıˉnaˉ and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ and
their philosophical sophistication. Instead, Bacon’s use was geared to his
own doctrinal interests: with Avicenna, he classified moral philosophy as
the most important philosophical discipline; with al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, he molded
his own rhetoric to entice people to love of Christianity and to virtuous
action.
Infidelity to a system of philosophy despite fidelity to some of its ideas,
contextualizations that conflate one system of philosophy with another,
manipulations of ideas to fit in with one’s own system of thought, omitted
references to originals with purposes of a similar kind—all these transformations strike a reader as incorrect renderings of the original. Jules Janssens’ contribution on the presence of Ibn Rushd’s dialectical works
in Ibn Taymiyya’s Averting Contradiction between Reason and Revelation (Darʾ
taʿaˉrud․ al-ʿaql wa-l-naql) proposes just such a reading. Janssens identifies Ibn
Taymiyya’s epistemic standards of Islamic theology as standards extrinsic
to Averroes’ system. He concludes that it was precisely these standards that
ultimately provoked Ibn Taymiyya’s unfaithful renderings.
Part II: Developments
The authors in the second section of this book show the ways in which
philosophers in the Islamic and Latin lands adopted the philosophy of
their origins so as to develop their own philosophy. This “adoption” was
anything but mere repetition. It was a creative adaptation, recontextualization, and transformation, leading to new approaches, views, and understandings. The origins our authors treat are diverse: Aristotle, his Late
Antique readers, and Christian and Islamic thought. But the contributions
involve amalgamations of these origins, paying attention to the sophisticated, correlated, and synchronized transformative processes of the past.
The range of transformations they describe relied on a range of agents.
Editors, translators, and philosophers were all active contributors to a tradition. Their scholarly work gave rise to different Aristotelianisms, if we
may call them that. These Aristotelianisms can be studied in isolation, recognizing their value and originality in separation, or they can be reviewed
14 Katja Krause et al.
in common, appreciating the correlations and parallels they yield. The formation of this common core in the premodern Greco-Islamic-Christian
cultures and history was, we insist, an active intellectual appropriation,
in which the readers used their sources as fountainheads of living ideas.
Readers interacted with texts, constantly recovering, comparing, readapting, and transforming ideas to generate new approaches, new insights,
new concepts, new arguments, and indeed new sources. The use of Greek
sources within different cultures, religions, and historical contexts was dynamic, and its fruits deserve to be recognized in conjunction. The authors
in this section pinpoint the means by which medieval authors developed
their own received traditions, expanding and expounding upon them in
dialogue with other sources.
For medieval Arabic and Latin Scholastic philosophers, the figure of
light played an important instrumental role in explaining key theoretical
components of philosophical psychology within the Aristotelian corpus,
and it played a decisive theoretical role in optical intromission and extramission theories, mostly alongside the Aristotelian corpus. But it was Aristotle’s own theory of light, and with it the fundamental question of how
light is able to actualize color, that attracted the most intense discussion
within the Aristotelian tradition. Therese Scarpelli Cory’s chapter takes
us on a journey through the different transformations of light’s ability to
actualize color within this tradition. Cory argues that the two different
options of thought available in the Arabic tradition, from Avicenna and
Averroes, converged into one view in the three key proponents of Latin
Scholasticism in the 1240s and 1250s: Albert the Great, Bonaventure, and
Aquinas. The imagery that Cory finds in this univocal Scholastic view—
“the transference of the corporeal form of luminosity” (p. 208)—presents
us with a particularly striking case of transformation: Aristotle’s mostly
underdetermined functional theory led to a metaphysical rendering in
the Latin world. Cory’s essay reveals, therefore, that this development of
philosophical theory pursued neither faithful adherence to the original
nor a given theoretical preference. Rather, it resulted from bias and peer
pressure—a historical momentum that, on the level of the agents, aims to
legitimize or even canonize a given reading of the original theory.29
Rather than choosing one option of thought already available, a philosophical tradition can also develop by combining two available options to create a new one that is amenable to the convictions of the appropriating audience. Cristina D’Ancona’s contribution illustrates this kind of development in conversation with Richard C. Taylor’s research on the Liber de causis (a short Neoplatonic treatise that was composed anonymously in Arabic in the ninth century and translated into Latin in the twelfth). D’Ancona elucidates how, in proposition 8[9] of the Liber
de causis, the anonymous author combined Neoplatonic teaching on the causality of the first cause with an ontology that merged the Neoplatonic One with Pure Being and with Aristotle’s divine Intellect. Although this
Origins, Developments, Innovations 15
merging was obscured in Gerard of Cremona’s Latin translation of the proposition, which left the Arabic term hilya (the aggregate of attributes and qualities) untranslated and raised associations with the Greek term hyle (matter), D’Ancona suggests, in reference to Taylor, that Thomas Aquinas was nonetheless able to understand the proposition’s teaching due to the overall philosophical context. It seems that philosophical development within a tradition depends not only on merging of available theories but also on reading theoretical elements within larger, overarching contexts.
Epistemic norms, formulated as principles or axioms of theories, hold
traditions together. One such principle in Aristotle and the Aristotelian
tradition is that of truth. In her essay, Olga L. Lizzini uncovers how Avicenna transforms the meaning of truth (al-h․
aqq) found in Aristotle’s
Metaphysics through the Arabic Plotinus and other sources, thus building
a notion of “truth” with ontologically nuanced contents. For Avicenna,
Lizzini shows, truth is tied to being, a reality that remains outside philosophical analysis. As such, it can be one of four things: the Necessary Existent, propositions expressing necessity, the principle of non-contradiction,
or quiddity. None of these four falls under analysis or demonstration in the
realm of philosophical logic, and in this sense all are thus foundational. All
other truth outside these four ontological truths is true only secondarily,
in relation to them, and, perhaps unsurprisingly, it does fall under philosophical analysis and demonstration. The development undergone by the
notion of truth in Avicenna, in Lizzini’s reading, is most visible in logic’s
reflection of ontology, in an idealized replication of one order of being in
another. It was this secondary development, this implicit epistemic norm
of reflection and replication, that would survive and exert its far-reaching
impact on the philosophy of the Latin Middle Ages, if—once again—only
implicitly.
The ontological nuancing of the foundations of metaphysics was not
an issue for al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, at least not in his logical corpus. All the more important was a sophisticated rearrangement of the epistemic foundations
of Aristotelian logic, a logic that al-Faˉraˉbıˉ inherited in the form of the
Alexandrian organization of Aristotle’s Organon into five argumentative
arts: dialectic, sophistry, demonstration, rhetoric, and poetry. Terence J.
Kleven’s contribution shows that al-Faˉraˉbıˉ nuanced the foundations, the
epistemic things prior to the syllogistic arts, by promoting four of them—
received traditions, generally accepted opinions, sense perceptions, and
first intelligibles—in two works that he added to the Aristotelian Organon,
the Introductory Letter and the Five Aphorisms, and by discussing the application of one, “generally accepted opinions,” in his exposition of the art
of dialectic. Promoting the principled use of the syllogistic arts by paying
close attention to their manifold epistemic foundations, Kleven suggests,
enables al-Faˉraˉbıˉ to develop an Aristotelian logic that avoids the Scylla of
skepticism and the Charybdis of dogmatism.
16 Katja Krause et al.
Linguistic translations from Arabic either sprang new ideas on their
Latin audience or gradually imposed them, often mediated through an
initial phase of mental processing. For Dominicus Gundissalinus, archdeacon of Cuéllar and translator of key Arabic philosophical works, both scenarios applied at once, not least because he embodied both translator and
audience. As Nicola Polloni elucidates, Gundissalinus’ earliest treatise
De unitate et uno was written in close conversation with Ibn Gabirol’s Fons
vitae, the Latin translation of which he had made himself. Yet it would be
unjust to reduce the archdeacon’s treatise to a mere paraphrase of the Fons
vitae. References to earlier Latinate authors—openly to Boethius (resulting in a pseudo-epigraphical attribution to him); tacitly in all other cases—
were woven into De unitate et uno, probably, Polloni argues, with the aim
of legitimizing the ontological and cosmological ideas contained in the
Fons vitae. Polloni’s contribution to this volume includes the first English
translation of Gundissalinus’ short work. The promotion of Ibn Gabirol’s
thought that Gundissalinus thus attempted did not last: the philosophical
ideas of Avicenna later superseded those of Ibn Gabirol in his translation
project and in his own works. In his late De processione mundi, Gundissalinus corrected his initial advancement of Latin philosophy through ideas
from Ibn Gabirol and discarded these in favor of Avicenna’s, though with
the same aim of winning over his Latin audience.
Using Aristotelian philosophical concepts to expound systematic theological doctrines in new and better ways was a common practice amongst
Scholastic thinkers. The extent to which such concepts exerted a comprehensive explanatory force for theological doctrines is questionable, however, especially in light of competing frameworks stemming from more
proximate sources, such as Augustinian, Dionysian, and Cathedral School
theologies. In her contribution, Isabelle Moulin examines the specific
amalgamation of doctrinal backgrounds in Albert the Great’s early view
on sacramental theology. She suggests that in order to fully account for
his theology of the sacraments, Albert skillfully fused Hugh of St. Victor’s
theological notion of preparation (apparently an adaptation of the Dionysian power of reception) and Augustine’s theory of seminal reasons with
Avicenna’s notion of material disposition. Yet Albert’s prime objective was
not in fact the causation of the sacraments, but their character and efficacy
as signs. Moulin’s chapter shows, perhaps more than any other in the volume, that theoretical development relies on aligning seemingly equivalent
ideas from different traditions to build synthetic systems, as Albert the
Great’s certainly was.
Synthesis was also on Averroes’ mind when he composed his Decisive Treatise (Fas․l al-maqaˉl ), but this time it was a synthesis of themes in
philosophy and law. Set up as a legal determination of the role of philosophy
within Islam, the Treatise commands capable Muslims to do philosophy,
and proposes three distinct levels of discourse for that endeavor, all derived
from Aristotle’s logic: demonstration, dialectic, and rhetoric. The Treatise
Origins, Developments, Innovations 17
consciously promotes just one of these levels of discourse, dialectical argumentation, as its very own tool, Peter Adamson shows. This may seem
strange, Adamson suggests, since Averroes often uses “dialectic” as a term
of abuse, such as when he finds the mutakallimuˉn guilty of engaging in dialectical argumentation. Yet Averroes also saw a positive role for dialectic,
in clearing the ground for proper demonstrative, philosophical discourse.
He put to use techniques recommended in Aristotle’s Topics by way of a
silent methodological substitution in the Treatise and in a related work, the
Exposition (Kashf )—a practice that resulted in a show-case rather than a
tell-case of correct reasoning.
Appropriations of Aristotle’s ideas sometimes came at the price of seeming philosophical contradictions. A negative development of this kind comes to the fore in Deborah L. Black’s contribution, which carefully examines Averroes’ distinctive accounts of the imaginative faculty (takhayyul) in his commentaries on the De anima and the Parva
naturalia. Black shows that while Averroes sought criteria for distinguishing the imagination from the lower and higher internal senses, the paradigmatic criterion—the capacity to perceive sensible objects in their absence—created more philosophical tensions than clarity. Averroes commented on Aristotle’s works with the aim of demonstrating the truth of their content, and the different interpretations of the imagination given in his commentaries could not meet that aim. But though Averroes’ project of developing Aristotle’s notion of imagination may have failed in terms of philosophical demonstration, it does reveal the dangers inherent in a philosophical commentary tradition: if the origin is taken seriously, perhaps to its extreme, it may turn out not to be as coherent as one might wish.
Part III: Innovations
The authors who contributed to the final section of our book chose to emphasize their subjects’ originality without ignoring the historically
embedded contexts of medieval authors. Through a careful examination of the origins, their content, ideas, arguments, and thoughts, the contributors claim to find not sui generis insights, divorced from a tradition that came before, but caesuras in the rhyming of tradition that introduce new lines of thought, new constellations of argument, and new fusions of ideas and scientific systems. And yet our authors do not uncover some intrinsic innovative bent among the medieval sages they discuss—this would perhaps take matters too far. Instead, they approach their subjects in a way that highlights particular innovation in thoughts, arguments, and ideas. They thus underscore that medieval thinkers were not only faithful receivers of the origins of traditions within which they wrote, nor mere appropriators and developers of those origins, but also creators of traditions in their own right.
18 Katja Krause et al.
Whether the study of the intellect was subject to metaphysics or to
natural philosophy was a question left obscure in Aristotle. But Albert
the Great took a clear stand on the point when he composed his autonomous work De intellectu et intelligibili and integrated it into his Parva naturalia.
Henryk Anzulewicz submits that Albert was the only Scholastic
thinker to hold this position, for which he was vehemently attacked by
his student Thomas Aquinas. Nonetheless, he did not build his position
on sand. Anzulewicz shows how, by carefully selecting teachings of Peripatetic psychology and cognition theories relevant to his own scientia de intellectu et intelligibili and fending off erroneous views such as Averroes’
mono-intellectualism, Albert created a new discipline in natural philosophy with its own subject matter. This comprised the perfection of the
human intellectual nature, the conditions leading to such perfection, and
the modes and scope of its realization in both theory and practice. Albert’s
combination and consolidation of source material for his autonomous scientia de intellectu et intelligibili thus launched a new scientia naturalis, even
though its heirs did not continue the legacy.
That linguistic translations are not merely about faithfulness to their
original but bear surprising histories themselves is a theme rarely discussed
in the literature. Yet the origins of the Plotiniana Arabica, a text whose
authorship is unknown to this day, turn out to illustrate just such a case.
Michael Chase’s textual investigation of the paraphrastic translation of
Plotinus’ Enneads into Arabic reveals that the text is probably a multistage
project of commentary, partial translation, and edition: a commentary by
Plotinus’ student Porphyry on Plotinus’ Enneads written in the form of
marginal glosses, parts of which, along with parts of the Enneads, were
translated into Arabic by Ibn Naˉ ʾima H․ims․
ıˉ and probably then edited by
al-Kindıˉ. Each historical version of the text, if one may still call it that,
certainly transformed its shape and meaning, a process that Chase highlights by investigating the Plotiniana Arabica’s doctrine of creation by being
alone. The end product, as is well known, itself initiated a new textual
tradition and transformation history.
Claims made about one’s philosophical return to the origins, especially
when launched against an opponent who has supposedly turned his back
on those origins, sometimes turn out to reinvent the pursuit of philosophy. This is what Amos Bertolacci shows in his contribution, discussing
Averroes’ self-attested “return” to Aristotelian orthodoxy and critique of
Avicenna’s originality. It emerges from Bertolacci’s chapter that for Avicenna, doctrinal independence from Aristotle is one of the highest philosophical norms, both in saying and doing. For Averroes, in contrast,
that norm is doctrinal adherence to the letter of Aristotle. The values
of originality and orthodoxy—despite presenting contemporary scholars
with apparently conflicting philosophical approaches that lead to opposite
results—in fact turn out to be equally novel. What is at stake for both
Avicenna and Averroes, according to Bertolacci, is nothing less than what
Origins, Developments, Innovations 19
it means to do philosophy. But Averroes’ reactionary attitude to Avicenna’s originality was not the only new way of doing philosophy. With its
apologetic approach, al-Juˉzjaˉnıˉ’s defense of Avicenna’s orthodoxy in his
introduction to Avicenna’s Shifaˉʾ carves a middle way—more sophisticated
perhaps, but certainly more subdued than Averroes’ open opposition. In
its ultimate aim, however, it coincides with Averroes’ reaction: to alleviate
the fear of the unknown.
The subordination of the religious sphere to the demonstrative sphere
is a philosophical doctrine that most historians of medieval philosophy
associate with Averroes alone. But Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp reveals that Marsilius of Padua promoted very similar ideas in his own writing,
despite lacking access to their forerunners. Without being able to read
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Commentary on Plato’s Republic, Marsilius,
in his Defensor pacis, creatively reconceived Aristotle’s Politics by means of
a loose understanding of demonstration as found in Posterior Analytics and
by applying that method to his own political Lebenswelt. This combination sufficed for Marsilius to become an “Averroist without Averroes”—
through parallelism or correlation of approaches and ideas, and perhaps
just a little contagion.
Even subtle amendments to philosophical systems can have a lasting
impact and create new ways of framing debates or settling long-standing
arguments. Examining the reception of Avicenna’s discussions of God’s
causal role in the cosmos, this is what Jon McGinnis argues when he
explores al-T․uˉsıˉ’s harmonization between the theological view of creation
in time and the Avicennian notion of eternal creation. McGinnis suggests that Al-T․
uˉsıˉ brings new focus to the issue driving the passions at the
heart of the creation debate: whether creation is willed or necessitated. By
emphasizing a distinction between the agent and the sufficient reason for
which the agent acts, al-T․
uˉsıˉ is able to rebuff Fakhr al-Diˉn al-Raˉzıˉ’s claim
that eternal creation requires that God act of necessity, not will, even
while altering the Avicennian position criticized by al-Raˉzıˉ. In the end,
al-T․uˉsıˉ offered a philosophical solution devoid of the necessity to choose,
which, McGinnis shows, resulted in a free space for the philosophical debate to move on to other, seemingly more pressing themes.
Innovation and the emergence of new traditions in the history of philosophy come through the creation of new disciplines, layers of textual
transformation, negotiation of philosophical values, correspondence of
philosophical ideas, actors’ choices, and certainly many more types of advancements. The same may or may not hold for our historiographies. But
their correction by careful examination of the claims they make is another factor, and perhaps the key factor for innovation in this area. Steven Harvey’s contribution shows, by disposing of six long-held assumptions
about Averroes’ commentaries, that Averroes did not approach his commentaries in the rigid, architectonic way in which his corpus is sometimes
described. The commentaries are not always easily categorized. Some are
20 Katja Krause et al.
liminal cases, and all seem to be carefully tailored to the subject matter
at hand rather than following the formulaic structure that has long been
part of our historiographies. In fact, Harvey raises the possibility that the
structure of Averroes’ commentary corpus was initially unplanned, thus
suggesting that a commentary can itself be something novel. In his holistic
view, Averroes’ commentaries reveal the organic nature of writing and
its relation to the commentary author. Then and now, texts, styles, and
traditions, like the people who create them, must always grow and change.
*****
Concluding this book is an appendix by Brett Yardley. Written in consultation with Yardley’s mentor Richard C. Taylor, it details the history of
the AAIWG, a group spearheaded by Taylor during his illustrious career.
We include the piece for several reasons. First, in an effort to show that this
book is itself a continuation of the Aristotelian tradition, we wish to give
one example of the ways in which some of our authors are still part of that
tradition. There are, of course, many other such groups, but the appendix
chronicles what one of these communities looks like in our time. Second,
the AAIWG, and especially the work of Richard C. Taylor, has nourished, sharpened, rebutted, affirmed, and inspired many of the contributions to this book. Several of our authors are members of the organization
to which Taylor has devoted so much; all are friends and colleagues of the
man himself. And third, it was in the context of AAIWG and Taylor’s
wisdom that we, as editors, conceived of this book and everything it contains. Let this description suffice as an introduction to all of the ways that
Richard C. Taylor has advanced the study of premodern philosophy in the
Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, and Latin traditions. We are deeply indebted to
our dear friend.
Notes 1 The two distinct moments of historiography are aptly described by Bergemann et al. in their chapter “Transformation.” There, the authors refer to
what I call “the origins” as “reference culture” (Referenzkultur) as opposed to
“recipient culture” (Aufnahmekultur). Contrary to the artificial contrast that I
draw here, for rhetorical reasons, between different historiographies arising
from these two “cultures,” the authors of the chapter argue that there is a mutual creation of the reference culture and the recipient culture, a phenomenon
they call allelopoiesis: “Transformation thus means that the reference object is
not fixed, cannot be stipulated once and for all; instead, under each particular
set of media and other conditions of transformation it is changed, produced
afresh, indeed ‘invented’” (p. 40; here and throughout the volume, all translations are the authors’ own unless otherwise attributed). Bergemann and his
colleagues then provide a useful typology of transformation processes. Our
considerations in the present introduction were originally inspired by this
insight, but have since left the field of cultural studies to apply and adapt it to
the material at hand, namely, our historiographies in medieval philosophy.
Origins, Developments, Innovations 21
2 The preceding thoughts, in their structure and formulation, are inspired by
Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics 1. 1, 1094a1–1094a17. William David Ross’ English translation can be found in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, vol. 2. 3 This is an insight I owe to Bergemann et al., “Transformation.” 4 This point is made particularly clear in Böhme, “Einladung zur Transforma-
tion,” 11. There, Böhme suggests initially that
transformations generate dynamics of cultural production where that
which lies ahead of the transformation, to which it reflexively refers, and
which is itself engendered and specified in the course of the transformation
is always transformed as well. These processes [. . .] are marked by relations of interdependence. Transformation is a reciprocal, creative process
of production that is not necessarily symmetrical. Depending on whether
Antiquity is accorded unquestioned authority, to be venerated and imitated, or whether it is arbitrarily instrumentalized and used to consolidate one’s own position, the weighting of the agents of transformation
changes—sometimes more pathic and receptive attitudes prevail, sometimes more active and adapting ones—and with it the weighting, image,
and role of Antiquity. These insights anticipate on an abstract theoretical level our very concrete
arrangement of the papers in this book. 5 The preceding thoughts, in their structure and formulation, are inspired by
Aristotle’s Topics 1. 1, 100a20–101a24. W. A. Pickard-Cambridge’s English
translation can be found in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, vol. 1. 6 This is the particular approach of “historical epistemology,” as applied in
many studies in the history of science. Hans-Jörg Rheinberger’s On Historicizing Epistemology, 2–3, summarizes different versions of historical epistemology before and after coinage of the term: “My use of the term epistemology
requires a brief explanation. I do not use it as a synonym for a theory of
knowledge (Erkenntnis) that inquires into what it is that makes knowledge
(Wissen) scientific, as was characteristic of the classical tradition, especially
in English-speaking countries. Rather, the concept is used here, following
the French practice, for reflecting on the historical conditions under which,
and the means with which, things are made into objects of knowledge. It
focuses thus on the process of generating scientific knowledge and the ways
in which it is initiated and maintained” (original emphasis). Other important
recent publications that describe and also critique historical epistemology are Nasim, “Was ist historische Epistemologie?”; Feest and Sturm, “What (Good)
is Historical Epistemology?”; Sturm, “Historical Epistemology.” 7 The preceding thoughts, in their structure and formulation, are inspired by
Aristotle’s Physics l. 1, 184a10–184b14. R. P. Hardie and R. K. Gaye’s English
translation can be found in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, vol. 1. 8 Here, I am referring to the famous “neither a word nor a concept” coined
by Jacques Derrida and its link to the Latin differre (to defer), even though
the meaning of différance remains “irreducibly polysemic.” See Derrida, “La
différance.” 9 “Historicism” should be taken here in the sense used by both Karl Popper
and Leo Strauss. Popper describes historicism as futile, and one of his central
critiques is the inability of the historicists who adopt a gestalt theory of the
past to ever know the whole, given that only certain aspects can be chosen for
study at any moment and “all description is necessarily selective.” See Popper, Poverty of Historicism, 71. Strauss contrasts “historicism” with “historical
consciousness,” an attitudinal approach that emphasizes “historical exactness”
by striving to “understand the thinkers of the past exactly as they understood
themselves.” Strauss, “Political Philosophy and History,” 67.
22 Katja Krause et al. 10 See Krause, “On Tradition,” in this chapter. 11 One need not adopt the naive view endorsed by Johann Martin Chladenius that we can access the author’s conception of an event directly through the author’s account, or Friedrich Schleiermacher’s view that one can understand a text so thoroughly that the hidden motivations of the author can be uncovered. Chladenius, Einleitung zur richtigen Auslegung vernünftiger Reden und Schriften, 307; Schleiermacher, Hermeneutik und Kritik, 18.3. But neither need one endorse the opposite extreme by claiming that the author is gone, insofar as the author signals a finality to meaning, and that what is signified by the text remains infinitely remote, as Roland Barthes describes. Barthes, “La mort de l’auteur.” Something more conciliatory is possible, perhaps in line with Michel Foucault when he writes: “It is easy to see that in the sphere of discourse one can be the author of much more than a book—one can be the author of a theory, tradition, or discipline in which other books and authors will in their turn find a place. These authors are in a position that I will call ‘transdiscursive.’ This is a recurring phenomenon—certainly as old as our civilization. Homer, Aristotle, and the Church Fathers, as well as the first mathematicians and the originators of the Hippocratic tradition, all played this role [. . .]. They are unique in that they are not just the authors of their own works. They have produced something else: the possibilities and the rules for the formation of other texts.” Foucault, “What is an Author?,” 216–17. 12 Krause, “On Tradition,” in this chapter. 13 The Aristotelian tradition encompasses some Neoplatonic philosophers,
Late Antique commentators, and Syriac, Persian, Arabic, Jewish, and Latin
Christian translators and interpreters from the Middle Ages; it extends to
the Renaissance and even to modern and contemporary philosophy. The
number of monographic studies and collective volumes that continue discussing and interpreting the corpus Aristotelicum is amazing. Some of them offer
a broad historical approach, others focus on the reception of specific works
of the corpus, yet others discuss the development of concrete problems raised
within the corpus. Among many others, see Burnett, Glosses and Commentaries;
Gutas, “Starting Point of Philosophical Studies”; Sharples, Whose Aristotle?;
Leijenhorst, Lüthy, and Thijssen, Dynamics of Aristotelian Natural Philosophy;
D’Ancona, “Commenting on Aristotle”; Fazzo, “Aristotelianism as a Commentary Tradition”; Donini, Commentary and Tradition; Sorabji, Aristotle Transformed;
Perkams, “Syro-Persian Reinvention of Aristotelianism”; and Sorabji,
“Cross-Cultural Spread of Greek Philosophy.” 14 Oschman, “Response to ‘On Tradition,’” in this chapter. 15 See Gersh, Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism; Karamanolis, Plato and Aristotle in Agreement?; Gerson, Cambridge History of Philosophy in Late Antiquity;
Gerson, “What is Platonism?”; Gerson, From Plato to Platonism; Boys-Stones,
Platonist Philosophy.
16 Perhaps the most representative attempt to reconcile Aristotle and Plato
within the Islamic tradition is found in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s On the Harmonization of the
Opinions of the Two Sages (Alfarabi, The Political Writings, trans. Butterworth,
125–67). Marwan Rashed, in “Authorship of the Treatise,” has questioned
the authorship of this work. Beyond this discussion, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s philosophy is
characterized by the articulation of Platonic, Neoplatonic, and Aristotelian
features. Avicenna, Maimonides, and many other philosophers from the three
Abrahamic traditions inherited, directly or indirectly, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s philosophical ideas. Alongside the role of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ in reconciling Plato and Aristotle,
there are early attempts in al-Kindıˉ, the first philosopher of the Arabs (see
Endress, “Building the Library”). The development and transformations of
Platonism are as intriguing and fascinating as those of Aristotelianism.
Origins, Developments, Innovations 23
17 This is a clear, even if unintentional, ramification of Aristotle’s insights in
Phys. 1. 1. 18 Although in several cases the process of translation, adaptation, and transformation of Aristotle and other philosophical and scientific texts can be recon-
structed, the appropriation of vocabulary, concepts, and arguments began to
generate new discourses in which Aristotle and his interpreters became, involuntarily and unconsciously, part of a common intellectual heritage within
the Abrahamic traditions. The inheritance and exchanges between the three
traditions have also influenced our way of understanding Aristotle in this
volume. 19 See Badawıˉ, La transmission de la philosophie grecque; Butterworth and Kessel,
Introduction of Arabic Philosophy into Europe; d’Alverny, La transmission des textes
philosophiques et scientifiques; Taylor and Omar, Judeo-Christian-Islamic Heritage;
López-Farjeat and Tellkamp, Philosophical Psychology; and Fidora and Polloni,
Appropriation, Interpretation and Criticism.
20 For instance, see Peters, Aristoteles Arabus; Peters, Aristotle and the Arabs; Endress, “L’Aristote arabe”; Endress, “Circle of al-Kindıˉ”; Gutas, Greek Thought;
D’Ancona, “Greek into Arabic”; and Cameron and Marenbon, Methods and
Methodologies.
21 History itself decidedly lacks the kind of intended or essential teleology that
Aristotle discusses in EN 1. 1. 22 On the role of translation in premodern philosophy, see also Krause, Auxent,
and Weil, Premodern Experience of the Natural World.
23 Oschman, “Response to ‘On Tradition,’” in this chapter. 24 The work of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group”
has been published in several volumes and special issues. See Proceedings of the
Catholic Philosophical Association 86 (2012) (“Philosophy in the Abrahamic Traditions”);
The Thomist 76 (2012); Recherches de théologie et philosophie médiévales
79, no. 2 (2012); American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 88, no. 2 (2014)
(“Aquinas and Arabic Philosophy”); Tópicos 45 (2013); and Anuario Filosófico 48, no. 1 (2015) (“Tomás de Aquino y las tradiciones abrahámicas”). Furthermore, in 2018, Brepols opened the PATMA series (“Philosophy in the Abrahamic Traditions of the Middle Ages: Texts and Studies in Interpretation and
Influence among Philosophical Thinkers of the Medieval Arabic, Latin, and
Hebrew Traditions”). 25 At least in the sense that this method ought to ensure shared first principles
which empower dialectic, as described in Top. 1. 1. 26 Arnaldez, Averroes; Endress, “Le projet d’Averroès”; Mesbahi, “Ibn Rushd
critique d’Ibn Sıˉnaˉ”; and Baffioni, Averroes and the Aristotelian Heritage.
27 Gutas, “Ibn Tufayl on Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s Eastern Philosophy”; Conrad, World of Ibn
T․
ufayl; Puig Montada, “Philosophy in Andalusia.” See also Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition.
28 See the typology of transformation (Transformationstypen) in Bergemann et al.,
“Transformation,” 47–56. 29 See ibid., 47.
Bibliography
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Alfarabi: The Political Writings, vol. 2, “Political Regime” and “Summary
of Plato’s Laws.” Translated by Charles E. Butterworth. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 2015.
Arnaldez, Roger. Averroes: A Rationalist in Islam. Notre Dame, IN: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1998.
24 Katja Krause et al.
Badawıˉ, ʿAbd al-Rahman. La transmission de la philosophie grecque au monde arabe.
Paris: Vrin, 1993.
Baffioni, Carmela, ed. Averroes and the Aristotelian Heritage. Naples: Guida,
2004.
Barnes, Jonathan, ed. The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation.
2 vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991.
Barthes, Roland. “La mort de l’auteur.” Manteia 5 (1968): 12–17.
Bergemann, Lutz, Martin Dönike, Albert Schirrmeister, Georg Toepfer, Marco
Walter, and Julia Weitbrecht. “Transformation: Ein Konzept zur Erforschung
kulturellen Wandels.” In Transformation: Ein Konzept zur Erforschung kulturellen
Wandels, edited by Hartmut Böhme, Lutz Bergemann, Martin Dönike, Albert Schirrmeister, Georg Toepfer, Marco Walter, and Julia Weitbrecht, 39–56.
Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2011.
Böhme, Hartmut. “Einladung zur Transformation.” In Transformation: Ein Konzept
zur Erforschung kulturellen Wandels, edited by Hartmut Böhme, Lutz Bergemann,
Martin Dönike, Albert Schirrmeister, Georg Toepfer, Marco Walter, and Julia
Weitbrecht, 7–37. Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2011.
Boys-Stones, George. Platonist Philosophy 80 BC to AD 250: An Introduction and
Collection of Sources in Translation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2018.
Burnett, Charles, ed. Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts: The
Syriac, Arabic and Medieval Latin Traditions. London: The Warburg Institute,
1993.
Butterworth, Charles, and Blake André Kessel. The Introduction of Arabic Philosophy
into Europe. Leiden: Brill, 1994.
Cameron, Margaret, and John Marenbon, eds. Methods and Methodologies: Aristotelian Logic East and West, 500–1500. Leiden: Brill, 2011.
Chladenius, Johann Martin. Einleitung zur richtigen Auslegung vernünftiger Reden und
Schriften. Dü sseldorf: Stern-Verlag Janssen, 1969.
Conrad, Lawrence, ed. The World of Ibn T․ufayl: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on H․ ayy
ibn Yaqz․
aˉn. Leiden: Brill, 1996.
d’Alverny, Marie-Thérèse. La transmission des textes philosophiques et scientifiques au
Moyen Âge. Aldershot: Ashgate, 1994.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “Commenting on Aristotle: From Late Antiquity to the
Arab Aristotelianism.” In Der Kommentar in Antike und Mittelalter, edited by
Wilhelm Geerlings and Christian Schulze, 201–51. Leiden: Brill, 2002.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “Greek into Arabic: Neoplatonism in Translation.” In The
Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, edited by Peter Adamson and Richard C. Taylor, 10–31. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Derrida, Jacques. “La différance.” In Marges de la philosophie, 3–29. Paris: Minuit,
1972.
Donini, P. Commentary and Tradition: Aristotelianism, Platonism, and Post-Hellenistic
Philosophy. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2011.
Endress, Gerhard. “L’Aristote arabe: Réception, autorité et transformation du
Premier Maître.” Medioevo 23 (1997): 1–42.
Endress, Gerhard. “Building the Library of Arabic Philosophy: Platonism and
Aristotelianism in the Sources of al-Kindıˉ.” In The Libraries of the Neoplatonists,
edited by Cristina D’Ancona, 319–50. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Endress, Gerhard. “The Circle of al-Kindıˉ: Early Arabic Translations from Greek
and the Rise of Islamic Philosophy.” In The Ancient Tradition in Christian and
Origins, Developments, Innovations 25
Islamic Hellenism: Studies on the Transformation of Greek Philosophy and Sciences,
edited by Remke Kruk and Gerhard Endress, 43–76. Leiden: Research School
CNWS, 1997.
Endress, Gerhard. “Le projet d’Averroès: Constitution, réception et édition du
corpus des oeuvres d’Ibn Rušd.” In Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources,
Constitution and Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–1198), edited by
Gerhard Endress and Jan A. Aertsen, 3–31. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
Fazzo, Silvia. “Aristotelianism as a Commentary Tradition.” Bulletin of the Institute
of Classical Studies 47, Supplement 83/1 (2004): 1–19.
Feest, Uljana, and Thomas Sturm. “What (Good) is Historical Epistemology?
Editors’ Introduction.” Erkenntnis 75, no. 3 (2011): 285–302.
Fidora, Alexander, and Nicola Polloni, eds. Appropriation, Interpretation and Criticism: Philosophical and Theological Exchanges Between the Arabic, Hebrew, and Latin
Intellectual Traditions. Turnhout: Brepols, 2017.
Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” Translated by Josué V. Harari. In Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology, edited by James D. Faubion, 205–22. New York:
New York Press, 1998.
Gersh, Stephen. Middle Platonism and Neoplatonism. Vol. 1: The Latin Tradition.
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1986.
Gerson, Lloyd P., ed. The Cambridge History of Philosophy in Late Antiquity. 2 vols.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Gerson, Lloyd P. From Plato to Platonism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
2013.
Gerson, Lloyd P. “What Is Platonism?” Journal of the History of Philosophy 43, no. 3
(2005): 253–76.
Gutas, Dimitri. Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to Reading Avicenna’s Philosophical Texts. Rev. ed. Leiden: Brill, 2014.
Gutas, Dimitri. Greek Thought, Arabic Culture: The Graeco-Arabic Translation Movement in Baghdad and Early ‘Abbasaid Society (2nd–4th/5th–10th c.). London: Routledge, 1998.
Gutas, Dimitri. “Ibn Tufayl on Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s Eastern Philosophy.” Oriens 34, no. 1
(1994): 222–41.
Gutas, Dimitri. “The Starting Point of Philosophical Studies in Alexandrian and
Arabic Aristotelianism.” In Theophrastus of Eresus: On His Life and Work, edited by William W. Fortenbaugh, 115–23. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Books, 1985.
Karamanolis, George E. Plato and Aristotle in Agreement? Platonists on Aristotle from
Antiochus to Porphyry. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Krause, Katja, Maria Auxent, and Dror Weil, eds. Premodern Experience of the Natural World in Translation. New York: Routledge, 2022.
Leijenhorst, Cees, Chistoph Lüthy, and Johannes M. M. H. Thijssen, eds. The
Dynamics of Aristotelian Natural Philosophy from Antiquity to the Seventeenth Century.
Leiden: Brill, 2002.
López-Farjeat, Luis Xavier, and Jörg Alejandro Tellkamp, eds. Philosophical Psychology in Arabic Thought and Latin Aristotelianism of the 13th Century. Paris: Librairie philosophique J. Vrin, 2013.
Mesbahi, Mohamed. “Ibn Rushd critique d’Ibn Sıˉnaˉ ou le retour à Aristote.” In
Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources, Constitution and Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–1198), edited by Gerhard Endress and Jan A. Aertsen,
73–78. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
26 Katja Krause et al.
Nasim, Omar W. “Was ist historische Epistemologie?” Nach Feierabend: Zürcher
Jahrbuch für Wissensgeschichte 9 (2013): 123–44.
Perkams, Matthias. “The Syro-Persian Reinvention of Aristotelianism: Paul the
Persian’s Treatise on the Scopes of Aristotle’s Works between Sergius of Reˉš‘aynaˉ,
Alexandria, and Baghdad.” Studia graeco-arabica 9 (2019): 129–45.
Peters, Francis E. Aristoteles Arabus: The Oriental Translations and Commentaries on
the Aristotelian Corpus. Leiden: Brill, 1968.
Peters, Francis E. Aristotle and the Arabs: The Aristotelian Tradition in Islam. New
York: New York University Press, 1968.
Popper, Karl. The Poverty of Historicism. New York: Routledge, 2002.
Puig Montada, Josep. “Philosophy in Andalusia: Ibn Baˉjja and Ibn T․ufayl.” In
The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, edited by Peter Adamson and
Richard C. Taylor, 115–79. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Rashed, Marwan. “On the Authorship of the Treatise On the Harmonization of the
Opinions of the Two Sages Attributed to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
19, no. 1 (2009): 43–82.
Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg. On Historicizing Epistemology: An Essay. Translated by
David Fernbach. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010.
Schleiermacher, Friedrich. Hermeneutik und Kritik mit besonderer Beziehung auf das
Neue Testament. Berlin: G. Reimer, 1838.
Sharples, Robert W., ed. Whose Aristotle? Whose Aristotelianism? Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001.
Sorabji, Richard, ed. Aristotle Transformed: The Ancient Commentators and Their
Influence. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1990.
Sorabji, Richard. “The Cross-Cultural Spread of Greek Philosophy (and Indian
Moral Tales) to 6th Century Persian and Syriac.” Studia graeco-arabica 9 (2019):
147–63.
Strauss, Leo. “Political Philosophy and History.” In What is Political Philosophy?,
56–77. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Sturm, Thomas. “Historical Epistemology or History of Epistemology? The Case
of the Relation between Perception and Judgment.” Erkenntnis 75, no. 3 (2011):
303–24.
Taylor, Richard C., and Irfan A. Omar, eds. The Judeo-Christian-Islamic Heritage;
Philosophical and Theological Perspectives. Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University
Press, 2012.
Part I
Traditions and Their Origins

DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-3
Contemporary Scholarship: Advances and Retreats
The dominant reading of Aristotle today (as well as of the great Aristotelians, Alexander and Averroes) is still that the prime mover is an exclusively final cause. One can readily generate this reading from one text, the
“argument” of Metaphysics Λ 7 (1072a26–27): the first mover moves while
being unmoved, and, therefore, it moves as “an object of desire.” If one
starts and finishes one’s account of Aristotle by reading this chapter, this
reading is attractively simple.
There are two major versions of this reading. Since the nineteenth-century debate between Franz Brentano and Eduard Zeller, many have
found it possible to imagine, with Zeller, that Aristotle’s first exclusively
final cause is “desired” (metaphorically) by purely material, non-cognitive,
celestial bodies.1 This version is attractive given how difficult it is for us
to take seriously the claim that the heavenly bodies are ensouled. It seems
to fit Aristotle’s teleology, we think, that all physical bodies “aim at” or
“strive for” the prime mover. The alternate version is championed by
W. D. Ross and W. K. C. Guthrie: the animate heavens move through
desire for an exclusively final cause.2
The obvious problem with the “exclusively final cause” account is that it
is inconsistent with Aristotle’s Physics. There, everything moved is moved
by a distinct efficient cause, and the first unmoved mover in the (non-infinite) series is reached through efficient causality.
Recently, Enrico Berti and Sarah Broadie, among others, have questioned the claim that for Aristotle, the First Cause is an exclusively final
cause. Broadie, along with Aryeh Kosman, has defended the view that Aristotle’s prime mover is a sort of immanent soul of the outermost sphere.3
By contrast, Berti argues (along with Aquinas, Brentano, and David Bradshaw) that Aristotle’s prime mover is a kind of transcendent efficient cause
of the heavens.4 For Berti and Bradshaw,5 Aristotle’s heavenly bodies do
not have or need, in addition (except as a heuristic hypothesis), souls efficiently moving them.6 For Berti, the introduction of souls is an innovation
1 Why the Prime Mover Is
Not an Exclusively Final
Cause
Alexander of Aphrodisias and
Averroes
David Twetten
30 David Twetten
of Alexander of Aphrodisias.7 That innovation makes possible the “traditional interpretation” of the prime mover, passed on subsequently by the
Greek Neoplatonists to the entire tradition (found also in Ross): ensouled
heavens desire to imitate and to be assimilated to the divine.8 This reading
fit a theological conception of the world, foreign to Aristotle but prevalent
since the third century CE.9 On Berti’s reading, Aristotle’s God is no final
cause, even of himself.10 For Berti, all of the medievals (Averroes included)
were deceived by the Platonic idea that the world imitates the divine by
exemplar causality, an idea first introduced, not by Aristotle, but by Alexander.
11 Thus, Berti blames Alexander for the “traditional interpretation”
of the causality of Aristotle’s prime mover: that we are dealing “essentially
with final causality, namely, with the fact that the immobile mover moves
insofar as it is an object of love on the part of what is moved by it.”12
The argument of this chapter is, first, that Alexander of Aphrodisias is
not the source of the “final cause only” interpretation,13 since the greatest
commentator on Aristotle, in fact, takes Aristotle’s prime mover to be an
efficient cause.14 For Alexander, celestial ensoulment, rather than being
a threat to the prime mover’s efficiency, is precisely that through which
efficiency is discovered. Second, Averroes largely agrees with Alexander
on the causality of the heavens and Aristotle’s god, and, where Averroes
disagrees, he is closer to Aristotle’s mind than is Alexander. I make these
points largely by lining up, successively, the surprisingly parallel teachings
of the two great commentators, then by introducing considerations from
the text of Aristotle that lend support to their readings.15
Alexander and Averroes’ Parallel Defenses of the
Prime Mover’s Efficient Causality
How is it that Averroes and Alexander (unlike the majority of Aristotle scholars) come to bring out the prime mover’s efficient causality? First, they systematize Aristotle’s corpus, taking the results to be the grounds of “best science,” which they personally adopt. As a result, they are personally invested, unlike us, “in the details,” and they are convinced of the dependence of the terrestrial world on supernal efficient causes, the heavens, and their efficient movers. Indeed, in their systematizing, they do not ignore the claim of Physics 7–8 that everything in motion—and therefore, also the spheres—requires a distinct efficient cause. Each celestial sphere must have a distinct efficient cause proper to it, without which it cannot, as Ross has seen, “desire” a separate intellect (the object of desire in Metaphysics Λ 7). The following twofold causal account results: a celestial soul is the proximate efficient cause that rotates the heavenly spheres; and each celestial soul undergoes causation, in a way that is not exclusively final, by a separate intellect. Perhaps this latter is the most surprising historical point in my research on the two commentators. With it, I hope to honor my esteemed colleague, Richard C. Taylor, who, despite his respect for Aristotle, is the
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 31
Platonic form of a mentor in our profession, and whose effusion of goodness has done so much for colleagues and for the field. In what follows, I present textual evidence for this twofold non-final causality in Alexander and Averroes. Then, I show why Averroes’ account of the prime mover’s non-final causality is closer to Aristotle’s own view than Alexander’s is. In fact, I present a new interpretation of the causality of Aristotle’s First Cause.
The Proximate Efficient Cause of the Heaven’s
Motion: A Sphere-Soul
Alexander on Celestial Ensoulment
On the Principles of the Universe, extant only in Syriac and Arabic, is the best
source for Alexander’s doctrine on the celestial souls (although we find
other references, especially in the Quaestiones16). First, Alexander gives an
argument for celestial ensoulment, an argument repeated by Averroes in
the Tahaˉfut al-Tahaˉfut :
The divine body in its entirety is ensouled since the divine body is the
best of bodies [. . .] and there exists a body which is better than all the
soulless bodies, namely the ensouled body.17
Alexander immediately explains that celestial souls differ in kind from
terrestrial souls because of their powers of intellectual desire:
[T]he souls of the divine bodies are not specifically the same as any
of the souls that exist in material things [. . . T]he souls of the divine
things do not share in any of the less perfect faculties [. . . T]he desire
which is in these is by will [i ktiyaˉr ], and the true and excellent will
is the love of the good [. . .]. The cause of the natural motion of this
divine body, then, is the impulse towards the true good. Desire in
these things only exists through the intellect [. . . I]t is insofar as they
perceive by their intellect that they desire the thing perceived.18
There follows in the same work the famous doctrine of Alexander, identifying the nature of the celestial body and its soul. But far from reducing
souls to natures, Alexander concludes, apparently, that the soul does not
form a hylomorphic composition with a body:
As for the divine body, since it is simple—because it could not be
eternal if it were composite—and its motion is also one and simple, it
does not have any nature at all other than the soul [. . .]. The divine
body surpasses all simple bodies in that its nature, although it is a simple body, is soul and nature in utmost perfection. Therefore this soul
is not the form of a body.19
32 David Twetten
Nevertheless, perhaps all that Alexander means is that the celestial soul
does not enter into a new composition (which can therefore also cease
to exist) with a body that itself independently already has some form, nature, and natural motion of its own, as in the case of terrestrial souls.
Unlike Averroes, Alexander does not develop the notion of a purely non-hylomorphic, Platonic celestial soul (or of formless celestial matter). Elsewhere, Alexander (as also Averroes, in the next section) still speaks of the
celestial soul as the form, in some sense, of the body.20 Yet, unlike Averroes, Alexander does not think that the special relation of celestial soul to
body frees the soul from being per accidens moved in place along with its
body. As Alexander puts it:
[T]he prime mover [. . .] is not moved even accidentally, and in this
way it differs from the souls that are always causing motion; for, these
are moved accidentally by being in what is moved.21
Averroes’ Non-Hylomorphic Celestial Souls
In other writings, I have laid out in detail Averroes’ theory.22 Here, one
quotation will suffice to show the Commentator’s substantial agreement
with Alexander. In the Long Commentary on the Physics, Book 8, after Averroes’ Aristotle has shown that, in order not to be moved per accidens with the heavens, the celestial soul must be non-hylomorphic, Averroes observes, inspired, I believe, by his reading of Alexander:
Ex hoc ergo patet corpus celeste non componi ex materia et forma et
ipsum esse simplex, et quod forma ipsius non habet subsistere per ipsum, et quod ipsa est que movet ipsum, et quod in ipso non est forma
materialis omnino.23
From this it is clear, therefore, that the celestial body is not composed
of matter and form, and that it is simple, and that its form does not
have subsistence through it, and that this [form] is what moves it, and
that in it [the celestial body] there is absolutely no material form.
The doctrine that the celestial soul has no subsistence in the celestial body
is confirmed more than once also in Averroes’ extant Arabic works. And,
of course, his view that the heavens matter is purely actual and lacks any
substantial form is well known from On the Substance of the Sphere, among
other works.24
The Prime Mover as Part of a First Self-Mover in Aristotle’s
Physics 8.525
Averroes and Alexander take quite seriously the causal account of motion
in Aristotle’s Physics 8. They both, with good reason, read Aristotle here
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 33
as taking for granted that the heavens are self-moved,26 and I draw special
attention to the presupposition in the following texts:
Aristotle, Physics 8.5, 256a33b1 (ed. Ross): If this [first mover] is moved, and there is not another moving it, it is necessary that it move itself.
Physics 8.5, 256b1–3: [. . .] so that [. . .] either immediately that which is moved is moved by what moves itself, or at some time we arrive at such.
Physics 8.5, 257a26–33: [S]o, either the first thing moved will be
moved by what is at rest, or it will move itself. But, certainly, were it
requisite to investigate whether what moves itself or what is moved by another is the cause and principle of motion, everyone would affirm the
former. For, what is per se is always a cause prior to what is a being per
aliud and is itself [a cause]. So, beginning again, we must investigate
whether something moves itself, how and in what way.
If the heavens are ensouled, as for Aristotle, one must ask whether their
soul’s causality requires a superior cause of some kind.
The Prime Mover Is an Intellect That Causes the
Intellection of the Sphere-Soul
Alexander’s Separate Intelligence Is an Efficient Cause of the
Sphere-Soul’s Intellection
The existence of a separate Intelligence as an object of desire,27 which only moves “in the way of perfection” (ʿala jiha al-istikmaˉli),28 is evident
in Alexander’s On the Principles of the Universe and in his Commentary on
Metaphysics Λ 1–7, extant in quotations by Averroes. What is surprising is
the evidence for the claim that a separate Intelligence is, for Alexander, in
some way an efficient cause of the celestial soul’s intellect and desire. First,
consider the fragment of Alexander’s lost Physics commentary, quoted by
Simplicius and by a Byzantine scholiast (I translate only the latter). Alexander comments on the famous passage in Physics 8.10 on the location of
the prime mover (found after Aristotle’s argument there that it has infinite
power):
οὐχ ὡς ἐν τόπῳ δεῖ νῦν τὸ ἔν τινι ἀκούειν (<ἀ>μερὲς γὰρ <ἐ>
δείχθη), ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ὡς <εἴ>δους ὄντος τοῦ ἐν ᾧ ἐστιν—οὕτως γὰρ
ἂν ψυχὴ εἴη καὶ ἐντελέχεια τῆς δυνάμεως τοῦ πρώτου σώματος—, ἀλλ’ ὡς οὐσίας ἐν οὐσίᾳ ἀσωμάτου αὐτῆς καθ’ αὑτὴν ἀλλ’ οὐχ ὡς
εἶδος. καὶ γὰρ εἰ ἔμψυχον ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ κινεῖται κατὰ τὴν ἐν αὐτῷ
ψυχήν, ὃ εἶδός ἐστι αὐτοῦ, ἀλλὰ πρός γε τῷ κατὰ τὴν ἐν αὑτῷ ψυχὴν
κινεῖσθαι ἄλλου τινὸς δεῖται τοῦ τὴν ἀρχὴν αὐτῷ τῆς κινήσεως
παρέχοντος. ἐπὶ πάντων γὰρ τῶν ἐμψύχων ἔξωθέν τι ὂν αἴτιον αὐτοῖς
34 David Twetten
καὶ ἀρχὴ γίνεται τῆς κατὰ τὴν ψυχὴν <τοπ>ικῆς κινήσεως, εἴ γε ὁρμὴ
<καὶ> ἔφεσίς τινος τὴν κατὰ τόπον κίνησιν τῶν ἐμψύχων ἀποτελεῖ.29
[O]ne should understand the “in something” here [in the phrase “in the center or in the circumference”], not as “in a place,” but [also] not as [the “in”] of a form that is in [something]; for, [the prime mover] is shown to have no parts. For, in this way it would be a soul and actuality of the potency of the first body. Instead, [one should understand it] as [the “in”] of an ousia that is per se incorporeal, [which is] in [another] ousia, but not as [its] form. For, if the heaven is ensouled and is moved in accord with the soul in it—which [soul] is its form—in addition to being moved, as is the case, in accord with the soul in it, it needs something other providing30 to it the principle of motion. For, in the case of all ensouled things, there is some cause that is from outside [such things] [exoˉthen], which becomes the principle of the local motion in accord with [their] soul, if, as is the case, impulse [hormeˉ] and desire [ephesis] for something accomplish the locomotion of ensouled things.
I have underlined the words that are roughly equivalent to “whence is the
beginning of motion,” the phrase that Aristotle routinely contrasts with
“that on account of which,” i.e., words referring to efficient versus final
causality. By contrast, the wording is clear and decisive in the Byzantine
scholiast’s final fragment from the end of Alexander’s commentary on the
Physics, edited recently by Marwan Rashed:
τὸ πρῶτον κινοῦν ἠρώτηται αὕτη ἡ δεῖξις τοῦτο. πῶς τὸ κινούμενον ὑπό τ<ινος> κινεῖται ἔξωθεν ὄντος; καὶ γὰρ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν αὐτ<οκ>ινήτων οὕτως ἔχον ἐδ<ε>ίχ<θη>. καὶ γὰρ τούτοις τὸ ἐνδό<σι>μον τῆς κινήσεως ἔξωθεν. δ ιὸ καὶ ὁ αἰθήρ, καίτοι ἔμψυχος ὤν, δεῖται καὶ ἔξωθέν τινος αἰτίου ποιητικοῦ.31
How is what is moved, moved by something that is from the outside [exoˉthen]? For, even in the case of self-movers, it has been shown that the same thing is the case. For, even in these, “what endows” [to endosimon]
motion is from the outside. Wherefore, even the aitheˉr, although it is ensouled, needs also some efficient cause [aition poietikon] from the outside.
It is important to notice in these two texts the relation of efficient causality
between the celestial soul and its prior cause. Another text has been recently brought to light in which Simplicius emphasizes, beyond any doubt,
that Alexander’s prime mover is an efficient cause.32 Simplicius writes:
ἐπειδὴ δέ τινες οἴονται ποιητικὸν αἴτιον τοῦ παντὸς μὴ λέγειν τὸν
Ἀριστοτέλην, ἀλλὰ μόνον τελικὸν καὶ τοῦτο καὶ τὸν Ἀλέξανδρον
ἀρέσκειν νομίζουσιν, ἀναγκαῖον δοκεῖ μοι τῶν ἐνταῦθα λεγομένων
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 35
ὑπὸ Ἀλεξάνδρου τοῦ γνησιωτάτου τῶν Ἀριστοτέλους ἐξηγητῶν
ἀκούειν αὐτοὺς ἐχόντων οὕτως. “τὸ δὲ πρῶτον εἶδος καὶ ὡς
ποιητικὸν ἂν εἴη αἴτιον. λέγει γὰρ ἐν τοῖς Μετὰ τὰ φυσικά, ὅτι τοῦτο
τὸ κινούμενον ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ, τοῦτο δέ ἐστι τὸ πέμπτον σῶμα, τὰ ἄλλα
κινεῖ τὰ ἐν γενέσει καὶ φθορᾷ. οὕτως μὲν οὖν ποιητικόν. καθόσον
δὲ πάντα τῇ τούτου ἐφέσει τῆς οἰκείας τελειότητος τυγχάνει, ὡς καὶ
μικρῷ πρόσθεν εἴρηται, καὶ καθόσον, ὡς αὐτὸς εἴρηκε πάλιν ἐν τοῖς
Μετὰ τὰ φυσικά, ‘κινεῖ δὲ ὡς ἐρώμενον,’ εἴη ἂν ὡς τὸ τέλος καὶ τὸ οὗ
χάριν αἴτιον. τοιοῦτον γὰρ τὸ ὀρεκτόν.” ἰδοὺ σαφῶς καὶ κατά τι μὲν
ὡς ποιητικὸν κατά τι δὲ ὡς τελικὸν αἴτιον ὑπέθετο τὸν νοῦν, αὐτὸς
παρέστησεν.33
Some think that Aristotle does not affirm an efficient cause [poietikon aition] of the universe [to pan], but only a final [cause], and they believe
that this [conclusion] satisfies also Alexander. So, it seems to me necessary that they listen to what is said at this point by Alexander, the most
authoritative of the interpreters of Aristotle, which goes as follows.
“The first form would be a cause also as efficient. For, he [Aristotle]
says in the Metaphysics: this thing that is moved by it—namely, the fifth
body—moves the rest, namely, what is in generation and destruction.
Now, on the one hand, it is in this way an efficient cause. On the other
hand, to the extent that all things attain their proper perfection by desire for this—as was also stated a little earlier—and to the extent that,
as [Aristotle] himself says in the Metaphysics, it moves as what is loved,
it would be a cause as end and as ‘that on account of which.’ For, what
is desired is such a thing.” See how he [Alexander] has set forth clearly
his [Aristotle’s] thesis, including in what respect the intellect is an efficient cause and in what respect it is a final cause.
Still, this text by itself does not make clear what efficient causal relation
obtains between the prime mover and what it immediately causes. As a
result, the Alexander fragment can be made compatible with the claim
that the prime mover is an exclusively final cause of its immediate effect.34
Could a relation of efficient causality obtain between the first intellect and
the celestial soul, in keeping with the analogy in the previous two texts
between a locally self-moving animal and the external source of its locomotion through desire?
Elsewhere, as is well known, Alexander identifies the agent (poietikon)
intellect in human intellection with the First Cause, the cause of our intellection.
35 This same reasoning applies equally to the efficient cause of
the intellection of the sphere-souls. For, Alexander writes in his treatise
On the Soul:
ἐν πᾶσιν γὰρ τὸ μάλιστα καὶ κυρίως τι ὂν καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις αἴτιον τοῦ
εἶναι /89/ τοιούτοις. τό τε γὰρ μάλιστα ὁρατόν, τοιοῦτον δὲ τὸ φῶς,
36 David Twetten
καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις τοῖς ὁρατοῖς αἴτιον τοῦ εἶναι ὁρατοῖς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ
μάλιστα καὶ πρώτως ἀγαθὸν καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀγαθοῖς αἴτιον τοῦ εἶναι
τοιούτοις. τὰ γὰρ ἄλλα ἀγαθὰ τῇ πρὸς τοῦτο συντελείᾳ κρίνεται. καὶ
τὸ μάλιστα δὴ καὶ τῇ αὑτοῦ φύσει νοητὸν εὐλόγως αἴτιον καὶ τῆς τῶν
ἄλλων νοήσεως. τοιοῦτον δὲ ὂν εἴη ἂν ὁ ποιητικὸς νοῦς. εἰ γὰρ μὴ ἦν τι νοητὸν φύσει, οὐδ’ ἂν τῶν ἄλλων τι νοητὸν ἐγίνετο, ὡς προείρηται.
ἐν γὰρ πᾶσιν ἐν οἷς τὸ μὲν κυρίως τί ἐστιν, τὸ δὲ δευτέρως, τὸ δευτέρως
παρὰ τοῦ κυρίως τὸ εἶναι ἔχει. ἔτι, εἰ ὁ τοιοῦτος νοῦς τὸ πρῶτον
αἴτιον, ὃ αἰτία καὶ ἀρχὴ τοῦ εἶναι πᾶσι τοῖς ἄλλοις, εἴη ἂν καὶ ταύτῃ
ποιητικός, ᾗ αὐτὸς αἴτιος τοῦ εἶναι πᾶσι τοῖς νοουμένοις. καὶ ἔστιν ὁ
τοιοῦτος νοῦς χωριστός τε καὶ ἀπαθὴς καὶ ἀμιγὴς ἄλλῳ [. . .] ἀπαθὴς δὲ ὢν καὶ μὴ μεμιγμένος ὕλῃ τινὶ καὶ ἄφθαρτός ἐστιν, ἐνέργεια ὢν
καὶ εἶδος χωρὶς δυνάμεώς τε καὶ ὕλης. τοιοῦτον δὲ ὂν δέδεικται ὑπ’
Ἀριστοτέλους τὸ πρῶτον αἴτιον, ὃ καὶ κυρίως ἐστὶ νοῦς. τὸ γὰρ ἄυλον
εἶδος ὁ κυρίως νοῦς. διὸ καὶ τιμιώτερος οὗτος ὁ νοῦς τοῦ ἐν ἡμῖν τε
καὶ ὑλικοῦ, ὅτι ἐν πᾶσιν τὸ ποιοῦν τοῦ πάσχοντος τιμιώτερον καὶ τὸ
χωρὶς ὕλης τοῦ σὺν ὕλῃ.36
[I]n all things, “what is” [to on] properly and maximally with respect
to something is causal of the being [to einai] also for others [so that they
are] of such a kind. For [. . .] that which is primarily and maximally
good is causal also for other good things of their being [to einai] such.
For, the other good things are judged in association with this [maximal good]. Therefore, it is quite fitting that what is maximally and
by its own nature intelligible should be causal of the intellection of
other things;37 and the agent [poietikon] intellect would be such a being
[toiouton on]. For, were there not something intelligible by nature,
then none of the other things would have become intelligible, as was
said before. For, in all things in which one is “something” properly,
and another secondarily, [what is] secondarily has being [to einai] from
[what is] primarily. Further, if the First Cause, which is the cause and
principle of being for all other [beings], is the intellect of such a kind,
it would be an agent insofar as it is causal of being [to einai] for all
things intellected [so that they are such].38 The intellect of such a kind
is separable, impassible, and unmixed with another [. . .] And, since it
is impassible and unmixed with any matter, it is also immortal, being
actuality and form separate from potency and matter. The First Cause,
which is also intellect properly speaking, has been shown to be such a
being by Aristotle.
Here, for Alexander, the prime mover is the efficient cause, in the case of all intelligibles, of the fact that they are intelligible to an intellect, including—we may add what is entailed—to the intellect of the celestial soul. We are left to speculate how this is the case.39 What is clear is that the First Cause is the agent intellect in some way, not only for humans
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 37
but also for the living celestial bodies.40 Because there are celestial souls that use intellect in moving their spheres with particular directions and velocities, the efficient cause of the intelligibles that they intellect, and thus of their intellection, must be said to be the prime mover and agent intellect.41
A feature of this passage from On the Soul, then, is its reasoning as to
why the first being or prime mover is a first efficient cause. The highest
intelligible is intelligible by nature and the agent cause of all other intelligibility. Implicit therein are Alexander’s systematic grounds for why the
First is related as efficient cause to the proximate movers of the heavens.
We see the results of this relation in an important passage, Quaestiones
1.25 (on providence), where Alexander juxtaposes his theology, intellect
theory, and cosmology:
Τῶν οὐσιῶν κατὰ Ἀριστοτέλη ἡ μέν ἐστιν ἀσώματός τε καὶ ἄνευ σώματος εἶδός τι ἄυλον καὶ χωριστόν, ἐνέργειά τις οὖσα πάσης δυνάμεως κεχωρισμένη, ἣν οὐσίαν καὶ νοῦν καλεῖ, νοῦν δὲ τὸν κατ’ ἐνέργειαν, ἀεὶ γὰρ νοοῦντα καὶ νοοῦντα τὸ τῶν ὄντων ἄριστον, τοῦτο δ’ ἐστὶν αὐτός. αὑτὸν δὴ ἀεὶ νοεῖ ὁ νοῦς οὗτος. τὸ γὰρ
μάλιστα νοητὸν ὁ μάλιστα νοῦς νοεῖ, μάλιστα δὲ νοητὸν τὸ χωρὶς ὕλης εἶδος. τῇ γὰρ αὑτῆς φύσει ἡ τοιάδε οὐσία νοητή [. . .] ἀλλὰ
μὴν ἡ τοιαύτη οὐσία ὁ προειρημένος νοῦς ἐστιν, διὸ ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ. καὶ γὰρ εἰ ἡ τοιαύτη οὐσία μηδὲν ἔχουσα δυνάμει ἀεὶ ἐνεργείᾳ ἐστὶ νοητή, ἐνεργείᾳ δέ ἐστι νοητὸν τὸ ἀεὶ κατ’ ἐνέργειαν νοούμενον, εἴη ἂν νοούμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ νοῦ τοῦ ἀιδίου τε καὶ ἐνεργείᾳ, τοιοῦτον δὲ ἡ προειρημένη οὐσία ἦν, πρώτη οὐσία νοῦς τε ὁ πρῶτος καὶ νοητὸν τὸ πρῶτον καὶ νοῦς ἀεὶ νοῶν καὶ ἐν τούτῳ τὴν οὐσίαν ἔχων.
[. . .] /40/ καὶ τοιαύτη μέν, ὡς διὰ βραχέων ἐπιδείξασθαι, ἡ πρώτη τε καὶ ἀσώματος καὶ ἀκίνητος καὶ ίδιος οὐσία, καὶ μετ’ ἐκείνην τὸ θεῖον σῶμα τὸ κυκλοφορητικὸν ἔμψυχον καὶ κατὰ ψυχὴν κινούμενον. καὶ ἐπεὶ πᾶν τὸ κατὰ ψυχὴν κινούμενον ἐφέσει τινὸς ἢ ἀποστροφῇ κινεῖται, καὶ τὸ κυκλοφορητικὸν δὲ σῶμα κατὰ ψυχὴν κινεῖται τὴν κίνησιν τὴν κύκλῳ, ἣ μόνη κινήσεων πασῶν ἀίδιός τέ ἐστι καὶ συνεχὴς καὶ ὁμαλή τις, δῆλον ὡς καὶ τοῦτ’ εἴη ἂν ἐφέσει τινὸς κινούμενον. ἀλλὰ μὴν <εἰ> πᾶσα σωματικὴ οὐσία ὑστέρα τοῦ σώματος ἐκείνου, οὐδενὸς τούτων ἐφέσει κινεῖσθαι οἷόν τε αὐτό. τῆς ἄρα πρώτης οὐσίας ἀιδίου τε καὶ ἀκινήτου λείπεται ἐφιέμενον αὐτὸ κινεῖσθαι τὴν ἀίδιον περιφοράν. ἡ δ’ ἔφεσις αὐτῷ οὐ τοῦ λαβεῖν αὐτό, ἀλλὰ τοῦ ὁμοιωθῆναι κατὰ δύναμιν αὐτῷ, ὁμοιοῦται δ’ αὐτῷ κατὰ τὴν κίνησιν (τῷ τε ἀιδίῳ καὶ τῇ ὁμοιότητι καὶ ὁμαλότητι τῆς κινήσεως).42
Of ousiai, according to Aristotle, one [sort] is incorporeal and without
body, a form which is immaterial and separate, being an actuality
separated from all potentiality. This ousia he also calls intellect, and
38 David Twetten
intellect in actuality; for, [he says,] it is always intellecting, and intellecting the best of beings—and that is itself. /83/ This intellect
always intellects itself; for, what is maximally intellect intellects what
is maximally intelligible, and what is maximally intelligible is the
form apart from matter. For, this sort of ousia is intelligible by its own
nature [. . .]. But certainly the aforementioned intellect is such an
ousia, and for this reason it intellects itself. For, if such an ousia, possessing nothing in potentiality, is always intelligible in actuality, and
what is intelligible in actuality is what is always actually intellected,
it will be intellected by the intellect that is eternal and in actuality;
and the aforementioned ousia is such a thing: the primary ousia and the
primary intellect and the primary intelligible and an intellect that is
always intellecting and that possesses its ousia in this [. . .]. /84/ And,
on one hand, to express it briefly, of such a kind is the primary and
incorporeal and unmoved and eternal ousia; and after it [is] the divine
body that moves in a circle, that is ensouled and that is moved with
respect to its soul. And since, on the other hand, everything that is
moved with respect to its soul is moved by desire for or aversion from
something, and the body that moves in a circle is moved as to its soul
with respect to circular motion,43 which alone of all motions is an
eternal and continuous and uniform [motion], it is clear that this too
will be moved by desire of something. But certainly if every corporeal
ousia is posterior to that body, it cannot be moved by desire for one of
these. Therefore, it remains for it to be moved in its eternal rotation
by desiring the primary, eternal and unmoved ousia. Its desire is not
to acquire it, but to be made similar to it according to [its] potency;
and it is made similar to it with respect to its motion, by the eternity,
similarity and uniformity of the motion.44
It follows from the preceding passages from Alexander’s De anima and
Physics commentary that the prime mover, for Alexander’s Aristotle, is
both an efficient and a final cause of the operations of the outermost celestial soul, namely, of its intellection and desire.45
Averroes’ Separate Intelligence Is a Cause of the Infinite
Operation of the Sphere-Soul
Averroes follows Alexander and all previous Aristotelian cosmologists in
distinguishing celestial soul from Intelligence. Thus, he writes:
[I]t has by now been shown that this [everlasting] motion must be put
together [muˉ ʾalifa] through two movers: a mover that is finite with respect to causing motion [al-tah․r ıˉk]—and this is the soul that is in it [the heavenly body]; and a mover that is infinite with respect to causing
motion—and this is the power [al-quˉwa] that is not in matter. According
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 39
as [the heavenly body] is moved by the finite power that is in it, it is
moved in time. [. . .] Through the difference in the proportion [al-
nisba] in the heavenly bodies—namely, between their bodies and their
souls—there is a difference in [their] quickness and slowness. And,
through their agreement in the fact that they are not moved except by
a power that is in what is not material, there exists in them the permanence and continuity of their motion.46
So, here we see Averroes’ doctrine, developed elsewhere, that the celestial
soul causes the determinate velocity and direction of the spheres, whereas
the separate Intelligence or prime mover is responsible for the infinite duration. If the proximately moving celestial soul were infinitely powerful,
argues Averroes elsewhere, the heavens would be moved with an infinite
velocity.47 But if there were only celestial souls of finite power, and no
separate Intelligence that is infinitely powerful, the heavens would come
to a rest. The argumentation is partly stated in Averroes’ On the Substance
of the Sphere 2:
Et debes scire quod istud corpus celeste non indiget tantum uirtute
mouente in loco sed eciam uirtute largiente in se et sua substancia
permanenciam eternam. Quoniam etsi sit simplex, non habens in se
potenciam ad corrupcionem, tamen est finite accionis necessario quia
est finitum dimensionum determinatarum a superficie continente ipsum. Et omne tale, cum intellectus posuerit id existens per se absque
hoc quod aliud largiatur ei permanenciam et eternitatem, necesse est
ut ita sit de finitate sue permanencie sicut est de finitate sue accionis. Et ideo necesse est esse hic intellectum potenciam largientem ipsi
permaenciam eternam quemadmodum largitur ipsi motum eternum.
Et non hoc tantum sed necesse est hic esse uirtutem que largiatur ei
motum proprium sue accione que est eternitas inter ceteros motus,
scilicet motum localem, qui est in circuitu et figuram sibi propriam
isti motui, scilicet, spericam, et mensuram propriam uniquique istorum corporum, et conuenienciam inter ea ad inuicem in ordine et
quantitate. Ita quod ex omnibus perficitur unus actus, scilicet, totus
mundus.48
You should understand that that celestial body needs not only a power
moving it in place but also a power imparting in itself and in its substance eternal permanence. For, even if the [celestial] body is simple,
having no potency in itself for corruption, nevertheless it is necessarily
of finite action, since it is finite, having dimensions determined by the
surface containing it. And, it is necessary in the case of every such
thing, though the intellect might have supposed it to be something
existing per se and lacking another imparting to it permanence and
eternity, that there belong to it a finitude of its permanence just as a finitude of
40 David Twetten
its action. And for this reason, it is necessary that there be an intellect as
a power imparting to it eternal permanence just as it imparts to it eternal
motion. And, not only this, but it is necessary that there be a power
that imparts to it a motion proper to its action [. . .] namely, circular
locomotion, and a shape proper to this motion, namely, spherical, et
cetera.
What is especially worthy of attention in Averroes’ reading of the prime
mover is, first of all, that the separate Intelligence for the outermost sphere
is proved already in Physics, and therefore specifically in Physics 8.10 (whereas no more than a celestial soul is proved in Physics 8.6), in the affirmation of an infinite power. As Averroes sees things, Metaphysics Λ picks up on the prime mover proved in Physics 8.10 and asks what it is and how
it moves. We see the causal role of the Intelligence also in On the Substance
of the Sphere 2:
[E]t cum considerauit in istis uirtutibus declaratum est ipsi ipsam esse uirtutem appetitiuam de uirtutibus anime tantum. Et cum considerauit in uirtutibus appetitiuis celestibus, uidit eas moueri ad appetibile nobilius ipsis. Et cum considerauit de uirtutibus appetitivis celestibus, inuenit eas infinitarum potenciarum. Et cum considerauit continuacionem motus eterni, fuit declaratum ei quod continuacionis motus non est quo mouentur. Sed illud quod largitur eis continuacionem, est illud appetibile. Et quia continuacio non uenit nisi a motore non moto, sequitur quod illud mouens non sit corpus nec potencia in corpore, et quod est intelligencia abstracta. Quia declaratum est in libro de anima quod omne quod est tale, est intelligencia abstracta. Et istud corpus /248/ celeste intelligit hanc intelligenciam.49
And when [Aristotle] considered these powers [in the celestial body],
it was declared that there belongs to it, from among the powers of the
soul, only the appetitive power itself. And when he considered the
celestial appetitive powers, he saw that they are moved toward an appetible [object] that is more noble than they. And when he considered
the celestial appetitive powers, he found them to be among the finite
powers. And when he considered the continuation of eternal motion,
it was declared that the cause of the continuation in their motion is
not that by which they are moved, but what imparts to them continuation
is that appetible [object]. And, because continuation only comes from
an unmoved mover, it follows that that mover is neither a body nor a
power in a body, and that it is an “abstract” [i.e., separate] intelligence.
For, it was declared in the book On the Soul that everything that is of such a kind is an “abstract” intelligence. And that celestial body50
/248/ understands this intelligence.
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 41
Could we imagine that for Averroes, as for Alexander, the prime mover is
an efficient, productive cause, and agent intellect, of the intelligibles in the
intellect of the celestial soul? On this point, I argue, Averroes’ thought is
more Aristotelian than Alexander’s.
Averroes’ Aristotelian Account of the Prime Mover’s
as Non-Final Cause
Aristotle’s Prime Mover Moves as the Art Rather Than
as the Artist
My argument begins with a reading of Aristotle I developed starting from
two recent scholarly advances. First, Jean-Baptiste Gourinat has shown
that our standard characterization of one of Aristotle’s “four causes” as
“efficient” (to poietikon, to poioun) stems from Alexander, not from Aristotle
himself.51 Aristotle uses the term “maker” and “making cause” (to aition
poietikon, though only once, as Gourinat observes), but his preferred term
is “whence is the source of motion” (hothen heˉ archeˉ teˉs kineˉseos). As a designation of one of the four causes, this term, together with its variations,
is found, in a partial or complete way, on some forty-five occasions.52 We
should therefore, I argue, speak of the third of the four causes, not as an
“efficient” versus a “final cause,” but as a “source cause” versus an “end
cause”: “that whence begins motion” versus “that on account of which.”
What does one discover when one examines the forty-plus texts in Aristotle on “source causality”?
On the one hand, Alexander does have grounds for taking “efficiency” as the model for the third cause. Aristotle gives as examples of what he calls a “maker,” “changer” (to metableˉtikon), “generator” (to
genneˉtikon), or “mover” (to kineˉsan, to kinoun) the following: the father and mother, the doctor, the builder, the carpenter, the teacher, as well as fire, a torch, the soul, the appetitive part of an animal, the nutritive soul, and the heart. On the other hand, Thomas Tuozzo has recently drawn attention to the following text (Physics 2.3, 195b23–26), in which Aristotle speaks of, not these, but a prior “source cause” as chief or foremost:53
One must seek out the cause that is topmost [to aition . . . to akrotaton]
[. . .]. A human, for example, builds a house [not as human but] because [he or she is] a builder; and a builder [builds] in accord with the
building art [oikodomikeˉ]. Therefore, this is the prior cause, and so [it
is] in the case of all things [pantoˉn].
In fact, over one-tenth of the forty-plus passages containing “source cause”
language speak of art as a source cause whence begins motion, whether
the art of statuary, or the art of medicine, or the art of building. Similarly,
42 David Twetten
the adviser (bouleusas) is said to be a source cause, as are chance and luck,
and the “right” and “left” of animals. None of these are “efficient” causes,
makers, or artisans. But if we think of them as, literally, “whence motion
begins,” we may see that this “source” is something on which depends the
artisan, builder, or doctor. It is the form in the artist’s mind, the blueprint
in the builder, the medical knowledge in the doctor.
Aristotle’s prime mover is the final cause of the proximate efficient
causes that move the heavenly bodies, the sphere-souls: it moves them as
their end. But the prime mover is not an exclusively final or “end cause.”
Once we understand that to deny exclusively final causality is not to affirm
“efficient causality,” we can approach Aristotle’s prime mover in a new
light. The prime mover is not only a final cause but also a source cause,
whence begins the motion of the heavens. Whereas in itself it is a separate
ousia, as cause it is the form or art in the intellect of the sphere-soul. We
will thereby be able to read texts of Aristotle, such as the following, in a
new way, as does Averroes (see below, on Anaxagoras’ teaching):
The mover is (1) in the case of natural things, [another] human [for
example,] in the case of a human, and (2) in the case of what comes
from thought, the form or its contrary. Thus, there will be in a way
three causes, but in [another] way four. For, the medical [art] is in a
way health, and the building [art] is the form of the house, and a human begets a human. Further, besides these there is the way that the
first of all things moves all.
(Metaphysics Λ 4, 1070b30–35)
In other words, the First moves as the art in the first artist’s mind, and it is
thereby both a source cause and an end cause.54
Averroes’ Prime Mover Is an Agent Only by Being Form
As Averroes divides the sciences, physics proves the existence of the prime
mover as the source of infinite celestial motion. Metaphysics, by contrast,
investigates the same substance as form and end. Thus, Averroes writes:
[N]atural philosophy [. . .] provides the material and efficient causes of
movable substance; the formal and final causes are not in its capacity.
But the expert in this science [metaphysics] makes clear the cause of
movable substance under the description of formal and final.
For, he knows that the moving principle whose existence has already
been shown in natural philosophy is the principle of sensible substance
as form and end.55
How, then, and where does Averroes discover the prime mover’s formal
causality?
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 43
The key to Averroes’ account of the prime mover is his analogy of the
baths in Λ 7, text-commentary 36. In the case of immaterial causes, an end
desired (analogous to the baths) is one with the agent that desires it. Such
an object of desire, he says, would be agent by being form. Averroes puts
the matter as follows:
If the form of the baths, for example, were not in matter, it would be
motive in the way of an agent and in the way of an end without there
following any multiplicity at all. And so, one must realize that in the
movers of the [ensouled] heavenly bodies, it [form] is motive in both ways
without being multiplied. Insofar as these intelligibles are form for them
[the heavenly bodies], they are motive in the way of the agent, and insofar as these are ends for them, they [the heavenly bodies] are moved by
them with respect to [their] desire.56
Insofar as Averroes uses the notion of “agent,” he is in the tradition of Alexander, seeing the prime mover as a “maker.” But, as Averroes clarifies,
that agency consists only in being form for the intellect of the celestial
soul. Unlike Alexander, Averroes does not see God as the agent or active
intellect of intellects of humans and celestial souls alike (let alone in the
same way). So, agency or efficiency is being used in an extended sense, as
Averroes explains elsewhere:
Eternal things do not have an agent except by similitude, and of
the four causes they have only formal and final. Were they to have
something like an agent, it will only be insofar as it is form for it, conserving it.57
Of course, Averroes takes such an interpretation to be what Aristotle
means in saying that the prime mover moves as an object of desire. That
is, it moves not only as an end to be attained, but it moves as a form or
perfection already completely attained by the intellect that loves it. Thus,
Averroes agrees with Aristotle’s criticism in Metaphysics Λ 10 of Anaxagoras, for whom the First Cause was merely a productive intellect:
[Anaxagoras’ teaching is] unlike our teaching that the prime mover
moves in the way of perfection and completion. In the same way we
find that medicine “moves” toward itself—since it moves toward
health, and medicine is the form of health. If health were not in a
subject, as is the case with the prime mover, medicine would
move in both ways together, I mean insofar as it is the agent and end
of motion.58
In this text, we see the Commentator capturing Aristotle’s mind better
than even the greatest of the Greek commentators: The prime mover is the
44 David Twetten
art for the mind of the divine artist, the celestial soul, who by moving the
heavens, causes terrestrial generation and preserves the forms of all things.
To move by being form and perfection, by being intelligized by the celestial soul, is what it means to move as “object of desire.” But such causation
embraces both “whence begins motion” and “that on account of which” it
occurs. W. D. Ross famously explained the prime mover’s causality with
this formula: It is “the efficient cause by being the final cause, but in no
other way.”59 Averroes comes the closest to capturing the Stagirite’s mind:
The prime mover is efficient by being formal and otherwise not at all. In
other words, the prime mover acts as an agent only by being intelligized as
a form by the celestial soul, which is an efficient cause in the proper sense.
Contrary to Alexander, the prime mover is the art in the intellect of the
celestial soul, and, as such, is the first source cause and the final cause of
all other change.
Conclusion
Aristotle, as is well known, has a comparatively thin view of the causality
of the First Cause. But this is counterbalanced by his thick view of the
efficient causality of the proximate movers of the heavenly spheres: on
their causality depend, immediately or remotely, all generated terrestrial
substances. Experts steeped in Aristotle’s Physics 8, like Broadie and Paulus, have seen, with the ancient and medieval commentators, that celestial
ensoulment is presupposed by Aristotle’s argument there, as makes sense
against the Platonic background.
If celestial souls are efficient causes of celestial motion, they appear to
make redundant a prior efficient cause. Aristotle does not live in a theological age, as Berti aptly puts it, such as an age heavily influenced by the
Hebrew scriptures. Aristotle says that the immobile mover moves as an
object of desire. His lack of further explanation has sometimes been taken
for a lack of theological interest, though this account contradicts famous
statements in his Nicomachean Ethics 7–8 and Parts of Animals 1.5. On my
view, Aristotle has systematically envisioned for his topmost cause a thinner causality than our term “efficiency” suggests. Nevertheless, the notion
of a “source cause,” a source whence motion or change begins, remains
conceptually distinct from a final cause. The prime mover is both a source
and a goal of the co-eternal acts of a subordinate intellect. For Alexander
and Averroes, to move as an object of desire involves both. Each commentator distinguishes in the celestial soul the “moment” of intellection—
an assimilation in some way to the form of something higher—from the
“moment” of desire, or better, love, which is for the sake of something
notionally posterior to the assimilation. Alexander explains the source as
a true efficient cause: the prime mover is the agent intellect of celestial
intellection (however that is to be interpreted). Averroes instead takes formal causality modeled on art or medicine to explain the agency or source
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 45
causality of the prime mover. A superior intellect serves as form for a subordinate eternal, immaterial intellect, to the intellect of the celestial soul.
The form is the art or “kinetic code” of the celestial soul’s own notionally
distinct desire and subsequent efficient causality. In this way, the prime
mover is a non-exclusively final cause of the intellection of the celestial
soul, and thereby of all terrestrial things.
Acknowledgments
I express my deep gratitude to Fouad Ben Ahmed for hosting the conference in Rabat where this chapter was presented, and especially to Abdelali
Elamrani-Jamal for his appreciative remarks. Also, my colleague Pol Vandevelde provided gracious assistance, and John Lunt and team were ready
with valuable research help at short notice.
Notes 1 Zeller, Die Philosophie der Griechen, 2/2:455–56; Schwegler, Die Metaphysik des
Aristoteles, 4:263–64 (cited by Berti, “Da chi è amato,” 69); Duhem, Le système
du monde, 1:175; Wolfson, “Plurality of Immovable Movers,” 238; Randall,
Aristotle, 139–44. For inanimate heavens as Aristotle’s middle position, see
Guthrie, “Development of Aristotle’s Theology,” 169. 2 Aristotle, Aristotle’s Metaphysics, ed. Ross, 1:136*–37*; Guthrie, “Introduction,” xvii–xx, xxxvi. Ross here actually criticizes a view he ascribes to Averroes: that God is the first celestial soul. If so, then the celestial matter desires
its form—a claim that Ross argues is not Aristotelian. 3 Broadie, “Que fait le premier moteur,” 380, 398–99. For Broadie, the prime
mover is not “a source of motion as though metaphysically exterior to the
sphere” (I quote from her unpublished English original). The classic defense
of this position, in Mugnier, La théorie du premier moteur, arose in response
to the claim that Aristotle’s prime mover is a world soul (see Werner, Aristote). For Kosman, “Aristotle’s Prime Mover,” 139, 144–47, 150–51, the prime
mover is “like” a soul: “On the reading I shall recommend, therefore, there is
a sense in which Aristotle’s Prime Mover remains a self-mover” (139). 4 Berti, “Unmoved Mover(s),” 186–87; 190: not an immanent soul; Berti, “De
qui est fin.” The latter paper is quite different from the 1997 Italian version,
Berti, “Da chi è amato.” 5 Bradshaw, Aristotle East and West, 32, 38–44. 6 Berti, “La causalità,” 646–47, 652. The “heuristic hypothesis” refers to Berti’s interpretation of Metaph. 12. 6 as affirming what is at least a “transcendent soul,” assumed hypothetically, but which turns into a separate substance;
Berti, “Da chi è amato,” 62–63. 7 Berti, “Il dibattito odierno,” 289; Berti, “La causalità,” 637. For Berti, perhaps Alexander derives this claim from middle Platonism, especially from
the Didaskalion of Alcinous (Berti, “La causalità,” 653); it had been suggested
by Theophrastus, but opposed as Platonic (Berti, “La causalità,” 651–52; also
Berti, “Il movimento del cielo,” 227–28). 8 Berti, “Da chi è amato,” 66–75; Berti, “La causalità,” 637. 9 Berti, “Continua il dibattito,” 213; Berti, “Il movimento del cielo,” 243. The
medieval version might at first face appear similar to Berti’s: the universe
46 David Twetten
imitates and is assimilated to God, who is both a first efficient and final cause
of all. But the efficiency of most medievals is creative or emanative, and not
Aristotelian; see also Berti, “Da chi è amato,” 70. 10 Berti, “Ancora sulla causalità,” 16–25; Berti, “La finalità”; and Stevens, “La
causalité de l’intellect.” 11 Berti, “Il movimento del cielo”; Berti, “Continua il dibattito,” 207, 213. See
also Broadie, “Que fait le premier moteur,” 385; Berti, “Da chi è amato,” 67
and 74, where Berti agrees with Broadie that exemplar causality is not the
same as formal causality. For a response to Berti, see Rashed, “Introduction,”
135–39. 12 “L’interpretazione tradizionale della causalità del Motore immobile, [. . .]
cioè che il Motore immobile muova in quanto oggetto di amore, [. . .] è stata
formulata per la prima volta, a nostra conoscenza, in maniera rigorosa dal
primo grande commentatore della Metafisica, Alessandro di Afrodisia.” Berti,
“La causalità,” 637; see also Fazzo, “L’exégèse,” 607, 625; Salis, Il commento di
pseudo-Alessandro, 401–2 (although at 142–43, Salis ascribes efficient causality
to Alexander’s prime mover). Berti notes elsewhere that Averroes disagrees
with (this reading of) Alexander. For Averroes’ prime mover is both an efficient and a final cause: efficient insofar as it is a form or idea existing in the
celestial soul; Berti, “Il movimento del cielo,” 241. Thus, Berti corrects his
previous view that for Averroes, the prime mover is both an efficient celestial
soul and an intelligence that is a final cause (cf. the “sphere mover monism”
of Moses of Narbonne’s reading of Averroes); Berti, “Da chi è amato,” 68. As
to Alexander, Berti by 2007 has changed his mind, or at least his emphasis,
seeing Alexander’s prime mover as both efficient and final cause, as for most of
the subsequent tradition. Berti, “Ancora sulla causalità,” 7. 13 Syrianus is the first I have found for whom Aristotle’s prime mover is a final
cause only. Syrianus, In Metaphysica commentaria, ed. Kroll, B.1, 8.30–33 and
10.20–11.9; M.5, 117.16–20. 14 Berti, “Da chi è amato,” 70, aptly observes that the creationist/emanationist
reading of Aristotle has been an obstacle to a contemporary appreciation of
the efficiency of Aristotle’s prime mover. Accordingly, when Simplicius famously criticizes Alexander for taking god to be a final cause, not efficient,
of the heavens, we readily imagine Simplicius to be ascribing the “exclusively
final cause” interpretation to Alexander. On the contrary, Simplicius repeatedly ascribes to Alexander efficiency over the motion, though not over the
very being, of the heavens. For discussion, see Sharples, “Aristotelian Theology,” 19 n. 94; Twetten, “Aristotelian Cosmology,” 335–37. Nevertheless,
an investigation of what “efficient causality” means is clearly in order, as I
undertake in a preliminary way below. 15 I treat other parallel argumentation in Alexander and Averroes in Twetten,
“Whose Prime Mover,” 379–90. 16 For references and discussion, see especially Sharples, “Alexander of Aphrodisias on Divine Providence,” 206–9. For the recent view that “Alexander did
not attribute a distinct self-moving soul to the spheres,” see Blyth, “Heavenly
Soul,” 451 n. 43. 17 Alexander of Aphrodisias, On the Principles, §7, ed. Genequand, 46.9–10
(I quote Genequand’s translation throughout). For the view that the Arabic
De principiis is a heavily adapted work based on Alexandrine materials, see
D’Ancona, “Review.” In a fine study, Adam Takahashi infers from the use of
“divine” in Aristotle and Alexander (as here), that “Alexander adopted Aristotle’s ‘immanent’ view of deity by respecting the conception of celestial bodies
as gods.” Takahashi, “Interpreting Aristotle’s Cosmos,” 35; see also 42, 45, 50,
and 52, where the same view is ascribed to Averroes and to Albert following
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 47
him. I suggest that the semantic range of theos and theios is wider than our
capital-G term “God” and need not signify the First Cause or the highest
being in the universe. 18 Alexander of Aphrodisias, On the Principles, §9–13, ed. Genequand, 48.3–50.11. 19 Ibid., §19–20, 52.15–54.3. For the claim, made also by Averroes, that “soul”
in the case of the heavens is used in an equivocal sense in comparison to
terrestrial souls, see Alexander of Aphrodisias, De anima, ed. Bruns, 28.25–
29.10; Averroes, Tahafot at-Tahafot, ed. Bouyges, 14, 473.2–5. See also Accattino, “Alessandro di Afrodisia e gli astri,” 41, 47–51; Fazzo, Aporia e sistema,
143–44. 20 Alexander of Aphrodisias, On the Principles, §17, ed. Genequand, 52.7–8; Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu à la Physique, 818 (267b6–7), ed.
Rashed, 639, quoted in full below at note 29. 21 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu à la Physique, 652 (8. 6, 258b14–
259a8), ed. Rashed, 564. As I read this passage, Phys. 8. 6 for Alexander affirms a prime mover that is beyond the eternally moving celestial souls, which
are per accidens moved with their bodies. For Golitsis, it appears, Phys. 8. 6 for
Alexander concludes to a final cause only, since all efficient causes are moved
with their effects, even if only accidentally. Golitsis, “La réception,” 255. 22 Twetten, “Averroes on the Prime Mover,” 114–23; Twetten, “Averroes’ Prime
Mover Argument,” 12–27; and for the background, see Twetten, “Aristotelian Cosmology.” 23 Averroes, Commentarium magnum super Aristotelis librum VIII Physicorum, c. 10,
t. c. 79 (f. 427AB), ed. Guldentops, 13.148–51. 24 Averroes, Averroes’ De substantia orbis, ed. Hyman, c. 1. 46–53, 98–101,
124–32, 187–88; c. 2. 2–8; c. 3. 100–6. 25 There is an ambiguity here that is never dealt with in Aristotle or in the
classical texts; “prime mover” is used in different senses, as appropriate to
the “scientific” context of its use. The prime unmoved mover in Phys. 8. 6
must later be understood to be a celestial soul, especially on the readings of
Alexander, Simplicius, and Averroes. The prime unmoved mover of Metaph. Λ, perhaps also of Phys. 8. 10, must be, by contrast, a separate intellect. Albert
the Great will later distinguish between “primarily prime” and “secondarily
prime” movers. 26 See also the important findings of Paulus, “La théorie du premier moteur,”
267–77, 293, 421. 27 Alexander of Aphrodisias, On the Principles, §15–25, ed. Genequand, 54.2–
56.10; §50, 68.8–12; §97–100, 94.16–98.6. 28 Averroes, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd at-tabıˉʿat Λ 4, t. c. 24 (on 1070b30–35), ed. Bouyges,
3:1529.14–15. See also below for Averroes’ explanation of moving by way of
perfection, which it is likely he thinks is Alexander’s reading. 29 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu à la Physique, 818 (267b6–7), ed.
Rashed, 639. 30 The language of to parechon here is suggestive of to periechon, which is causal in
the case of animal self-movers in Phys. 8. 2 and in 8. 6, 259a4, b12. 31 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu à la Physique, 826 (8.10, 267b17–
18), ed. Rashed, 644. This passage invites consideration of the view that the
heavens have been wrongly said to be self-moved for Aristotle; see Blyth,
“Heavenly Soul,” esp. 460–63. On Blyth’s reading, which he thinks may
have been Alexander’s (ibid., 430 n. 5), the heaven is ensouled, but its only
psychic function is the wholly passive or responsive function of aitheˉr (cf. Simplicius on the passive nature of celestial body as distinct from its soul), which is
analogous to the function of pneuma in animals. The advantage of this reading
is that aitheˉr needs “no additional agent except the entirely independent and
48 David Twetten
self-sufficient intellect that is the prime mover” (ibid., 462). For Blyth, the
prime mover is an exclusively final cause, which stimulates “a spontaneous
psychophysical response of rotation,” just as “the joyful physical response of
a lover in the presence of his beloved” is the “spontaneous, non-deliberate
increase in the lover’s heart rate [. . .] and so forth” (ibid., 463). But if celestial
motion requires no distinct efficient cause, it is difficult to see what argument,
whether in Phys. 7–8 or in Metaph. Λ, requires us to affirm a distinct final
cause of celestial motion. Also, variations in the spheres’ speed and direction
must be ascribed, since not to a first intelligent efficient cause, to different
kinds of celestial aitheˉr or their souls. We should grant to Blyth that there is
no literal ascription of self-motion to the heavens in Phys. 8 and the De motu
animalium; still, as Paulus, “La théorie du premier moteur,” has shown, the
ascription follows from Aristotle’s words and analysis there. 32 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentario al De caelo, primo libro, ed. Rescigno, 430–31; see also Golitsis, “Alexandre d’Aphrodise,” 229 n. 27. Rescigno,
Commentario al De caelo, primo libro, 433–35, in the end agrees that Alexander
affirms a prime mover that is both a final and an efficient cause of celestial motion (although it is not clear how, given that the heavens are moved by soul).
Rescigno cites other important evidence: Simplicius, In Aristotelis Physicorum
libros 2. 6 (198a5–6), ed. Diels, 354.18–28, 356.18–30. Asclepius (Ammonius)
ascribes both efficient and final causality to the prime mover of both Aristotle and Alexander; Asclepius: In Aristotelis Metaphysicorum, ed. Hayduck,
28.20–35. For Alexander’s account of the prime mover as lying behind Plotinus’ account of causality at the level of Intellect, see Chiaradonna, “Plotinus’
Account,” 40–43. 33 Simplicius, In Aristotelis Physicorum libros, 1. 9 (192a34–b1), ed. Diels,
258.14–25. 34 For Golitsis, “Alexandre d’Aphrodise,” 220–27, Simplicius has altered Alexander’s position in order to defend the “harmonizing” view of the school of
Ammonius contrary to the school of Proclus. Golitsis’ Alexander, by contrast,
holds the prime mover to be an efficient cause only insofar as it “moves,” as
object of desire, the heavens—which are true efficient causes of generation
and corruption (ibid., 225, 230–33). In short, Alexander’s prime mover for
Golitsis is an exclusively final cause of celestial motion, and Proclus draws on
this account and ascribes it to Aristotle. I suggest that when Simplicius refers
to “some” who ascribe to Aristotle an exclusively final First Cause, he has in
mind Syrianus and Proclus, never Alexander (see note 14 above); and that the
weight of evidence supports the view that Simplicius accurately reports Alexander in this case. See also the important study Golitsis, “Simplicius, Syrianus
and the Harmony.” 35 For the rejection of this standard reading, see Papadis, “‘L’intellect agent.’”
For a criticism, following Philoponus, of Alexander’s reading, see Boeri,
“Alejandro de Afrodisia.” The standard view, that Alexander’s prime mover
is the (human) active intellect, need not by itself entail that it is an efficient
cause, given the familiar reading that Aristotle’s active intellect is an exclusively final cause. For this reading in Alexander, see, for example, Tuominen,
“Aristotle and Alexander,” 67; Guyomarc’h, L’unité de la métaphysique, 295,
and cf. 286–91; Guyomarc’h, “Alexandre d’Aphrodise,” 159–60, 165. For
discussion, see Sharples, “Alexander of Aphrodisias,” 1206–8. 36 Alexander of Aphrodisias, De l’âme, ed. Bergeron and Dufour, 88.26–89.18. 37 This appears to be an objective genitive, so that what is intelligible by nature
is the cause of the intelligibility in all other things. 38 In my 2016 study, I took this sentence in a purely hypothetical way. However,
Accattino, “Alessandro di Afrodisia interprete,” 286, argues that, in addition
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 49
to the witness of Philoponus (ibid., 279–80), a passage from Quaestiones 1. 25
removes all doubt as to Alexander’s position (see next quotation). 39 The “Principle of the Causality of the Maximum” (PCM) is a key guiding
principle that allows Alexander to unify the discipline of metaphysics, as has
been brought out by Guyomarc’h, L’unité de la métaphysique, 104–11, 117, 300–
1. No one imagines that the PCM is being used, as one finds in Aquinas, to
demonstrate that the First Cause is, even for Aristotle, productive of all being
ex nihilo. Nor need we suppose, as some do, that the agent intellect efficiently
introduces intelligible forms into human and cosmic intellects, although the
medieval doctrine of a dator formarum appears to be traceable to this passage of
Alexander’s De anima. Alexander uses the PCM in a non-univocal way, observe Accattino and Donini (Alexander of Aphrodisias, L’anima, ed. Accattino
and Donini, 291). In the case of the heavens, the PCM applies in an efficient
sense: the source of the celestial souls’ intelligible objects is, not themselves,
but a superior being (Averroes will work out the metaphysics as to how this
can occur for Aristotle). If the PCM can be read as involving an exclusively
final cause in the case of the “good,” such a reduction cannot be made in
the case of the celestial souls, or in the case of light, another of Alexander’s
examples. For another appeal to the PCM as efficient, see Fotinis, “Alexander on Aristotle’s Notion of the Intellect,” 164–65. Accattino and Donini,
ibid., 292–93, give a plausible account as to how the First Cause indirectly
causes (the permanence of) forms in matter in the terrestrial world by being
the ultimate source of generation and corruption, as for De caelo 2. 10. On a
minimalist account, the agent intellect thus causes very indirectly the intelligible forms abstracted by the human intellect from our sense awareness of
these material forms. In short, the preponderance of evidence indicates that
the prime mover and the agent intellect are in some sense efficient causes for
Alexander. The main reason to reduce efficient to final causality has been
our inability to see how any sense of efficiency distinct from finality can be
ascribed to Aristotle and his Peripatetic commentators. 40 The prime mover as efficient cause of intellection in the heavens is ascribed to
Aristotle in contemporary scholarship: Menn, “Aristotle’s Theology,” 446–
47; Menn, “Aim and the Argument,” ch. IIIg1, 3–4 and 9, ch. IIIg2, 11–14;
Tuozzo, “Aristotle and the Discovery,” 46. Others, of course, interpret Aristotle’s active intellect as God in the sense of an exclusively final cause. Salis,
Il commento di pseudo-Alessandro, 175 and 185, ascribes celestial souls to Alexander, and subsequently raises the question (discussing ps.-Alexander) of how
it is possible for the spheres to be moved by an external mover (efficiently) as
well as by their own souls (386). The answer must have to do with the fact
that a celestial soul causes motion through its intellect. Alexander may answer
that a separate Intelligence is the source of a soul’s intelligibles through which
it moves. Salis herself (414) highlights in Metaph. Λ. 10 what we shall see is
one of the bases for Averroes’ answer: subsistent medicine would be one with
the mind of a cosmic doctor (the celestial soul). 41 Alexander is the ultimate source of the claim, developed by Avicenna and
subsequent medieval commentators, that the celestial soul, as a finite power
of a body, does not account for the infinite duration of celestial motion, a
duration that requires a separate intellectual cause. See the fragment found in
Simplicius: Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentario al De caelo, secondo, terzo e
quarto libro 2. 1, 129d.29–35 (380.13–19), ed. Rescigno, 136; as well as the passage quoted above, Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu à la Physique, 818 (267b6–7), ed. Rashed, 639. Moraux, Der Aristotelismus, 3:380, 388–89,
emphasizes that Alexander’s De anima, unlike his De intellectu, does not specify
the relation of the active intellect to the human intellect. It implies merely an
50 David Twetten
indirect influence, in that the active intellect is the cause of the intelligibility
in intelligible material things (presumably by being the ultimate cause of
their existence). By contrast, Alexander’s De intellectu describes a direct role
of the active intellect (which is not there identified with God): it “makes”
the intellect in potency to be in act, and, as itself intelligible, it can of itself
become an immediate object of thought. It is not far-fetched to suppose that
for Alexander, the active intellect’s causality of non-material intelligibles in
the celestial soul is similar. 42 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Quaestio 1. 25, in La provvidenza, ed. Fazzo, 184–88
(De anima, ed. Bruns, 39.9–40.20). 43 The fact of the celestial soul’s per accidens motion is used to argue that it desires
something external and higher than itself. 44 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Quaestiones 1. 25, trans. Sharples, 82–84 (trans.
significantly modified). 45 The Syriac translation (alone) of On the Principles of the Universe, which often gives a better reading than either Arabic translation, three times uses
the expression “maker of the whole” of the prime mover; Fiori, “L’épitomé
syriaque,” 147–48, 152–53 (§ 12 and § 28). See Fazzo and Zonta, “Toward a
‘Critical Translation,’” 87, 89.
46 Averroes, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd at-t ․abıˉʿat Λ 7, t. c. 41, ed. Bouyges, 3:1630.2–5 and 8–11. 47 Averroes, Commentarium magnum super Aristotelis librum VIII Physicorum, c. 10,
t. c. 79 (f. 426HI), ed. Guldentops, 11.104–14. For the reasoning, see Twetten,
“Averroes’ Prime Mover Argument,” 28–36. 48 Averroes, De substantia orbis 2, in Alvaro de Toledo, Commentario al “De substantia orbis,” ed. Alonso, 151.1–152.3; cf. Hebrew, Averroes’ De substantia orbis,
ed. Hyman, 2.59–68. 49 Averroes, De substantia orbis 4, in Alvaro de Toledo, Commentario al “De substantia orbis,” ed. Alonso, 247.1–248.1; cf. Hebrew, Averroes’ De substantia orbis,
ed. Hyman, 4.15–23 (in two cases my translation follows, instead, the
Junta and Hyman editions). 50 Averroes frequently uses “celestial body,” etc., in a way that includes celestial
soul; see Twetten, “Averroes’ Prime Mover Argument,” 62 n. 204. 51 Gourinat, “Origine du movement,” 91–92; see also Bonelli, “Alexandre
d’Aphrodise,” 121. For the prior observation that “efficient” is our categorization, not Aristotle’s, see Natali, “Causa motrice,” 111–12. For the position
that Alexander turns form into a moving cause, perhaps under the influence
of stoicism, see Natali, “Causa formale.” 52 I take a “complete” formula to designate the third of the four causes through
all three components of the “whence formula”: (1) “whence” (ὅθεν, πόθεν, ἐντεῦθεν, ἔκ τινος ἔξω, or ὅπου); (2) source, principle, or beginning (ἀρχή, ἄρχεται, πέφυκεν ἄρχεσθαι, πρῶτον [ἐστι], ὑπάρξει, or γίνεται); and
(3) motion, change, or becoming (κίνησις, μεταβολή or γένεσις). By contrast, we find over fifteen “partial” formulae that use two of the components:
“whence is motion” (ὅθεν ἡ κίνησις) or “as the principle of motion” (ὡς ἀρχὴ
κινήσεως). For details, see Twetten, “Aristotle Less Transformed.” 53 Tuozzo, “Aristotle and the Discovery,” 32; Tuozzo, “How Dynamic,” 448. 54 After this paper was completed, I discovered Hamlyn, “Aristotle’s God.” For
Hamlyn, the prime mover is the art rather than an artist, and is thereby understood as a final and formal, not an efficient cause. In a forthcoming paper,
I show that for Aristotle it will be correct to call the prime mover not only a
source cause but also an “efficient cause” in his sense, even though the prime
mover moves efficiently only by being the art in the intellect of the celestial
soul.
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 51
55 Averroes, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd al-t ․abıˉʿat Λ 1, t. c. 6, ed. Bouyges, 3:1433.8–14. 56 Ibid. Λ 7, t. c. 36, 3:1594.14–1595.2. 57 Averroes, Commentum magnum super libro De caelo 4. 1, t. c. 1, ed. Carmody and
Arnzen, 654.16–19. 58 Averroes, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd al-t ․abıˉʿat Λ 10, t. c. 55 (1075b8–11), ed. Bouyges,
3:1724.3–8. 59 Ross, Aristotle, 187.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alexander of Aphrodisias. L’anima. Edited and translated with an introduction by
Paolo Accattino and Pierluigi Donini. Bari: Editori Laterza, 1996.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. Commentaire perdu à la Physique d’Aristote (livres IV–
VIII): Les scholies Byzantines. Edited by Marwan Rashed. Berlin: De Gruyter,
2011.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. Commentario al De caelo di Aristotele: Frammenti del
primo libro. Edited by Andrea Rescigno. Amsterdam: Adolf M. Hakkert, 2004.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. Commentario al De caelo di Aristotele: Frammenti del secondo, terzo e quarto libro. Edited by Andrea Rescigno. Amsterdam: Adolf M.
Hakkert, 2008.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. De anima liber cum mantissa. Edited by Ivo Bruns. Berlin: Reimer, 1887.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. De l’âme. Edited by Martin Bergeron and Richard
Dufour. Paris: Vrin, 2008.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. On the Principles of the Universe (De principiis) =
On the Cosmos, edited and translated by Charles Genequand. Leiden:
Brill, 2001.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. La provvidenza: Questioni sulla provvidenza. Edited by
Silvia Fazzo. Milan: Biblioteca Universale Rizzoli, 1999.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. Quaestiones 1.1–2.15. Edited and translated by Robert
Sharples. London: Duckworth, 1992.
Alvaro de Toledo. Commentario al “De substantia orbis.” Edited by Manuel Alonso.
Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 1941.
Aristotle. Aristotle’s Metaphysics. A revised text with introduction and commentary by William David Ross. 2 vols. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1924.
Asclepius. In Aristotelis Metaphysicorum libros A–Z commentaria. Edited by
Michael Hayduck. Berlin: Georg Reimer, 1888.
Averroes (Ibn Rushd). Averroes’ De substantia orbis: Critical Edition of the Hebrew
Text with English Translation and Commentary. Edited by Arthur Hyman. Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy of America, 1986.
Averroes. Averrois cordubensis Commentarium magnum super Aristotelis librum VIII
Physicorum. Edited by Guy Guldentops. Leuven: Peeters, 2002.
Averroes. Commentum magnum super libro De caelo et mundo Aristotelis. Edited by
Francis J. Carmody and Rüdiger Arnzen. Leuven: Peeters, 2003.
Averroes. Tahafot at-Tahafot, texte arabe. Edited by Maurice Bouyges. Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1930.
52 David Twetten
Averroes. Tafsıˉ r maˉ baʿd at-tabıˉʿat (“Grand Commentaire” de la Métaphysique). Edited
by Maurice Bouyges. 3 vols. Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1938–48.
Simplicius. In Aristotelis Physicorum libros quattuor posteriores commentaria. Edited by
Hermann Diels. Berlin: Georg Reimer, 1895.
Syrianus. In Metaphysica commentaria. Edited by Wilhelm Kroll. Berlin: Georg
Reimer, 1902.
Secondary Literature
Accattino, Paolo. “Alessandro di Afrodisia e gli astri: L’anima e la luce.” Atti dell’
Accademia delle Scienze di Torino 126 (1992): 39–62.
Accattino, Paolo. “Alessandro di Afrodisia interprete del De anima di Aristotele.”
Studia graeco-arabica 4 (2014): 275–88.
Berti, Enrico. “Ancora sulla causalità del motore immobile.” Méthexis 20 (2007):
7–28.
Berti, Enrico. “La causalità del motore immobile secondo Aristotele.” Gregorianum
83 (2002): 637–54.
Berti, Enrico. “Continua il dibattito sulla causalità del motore immobile.” In
Κάλλος καὶ ἀρετή, Bellezza e Virtù: Studi in onore di Maria Barbanti, edited by R.
Loredana Cardullo and Daniele Iozzia, 205–13. Rome: Bonanno, 2014.
Berti, Enrico. “Da chi è amato il motore immobile? Su Aristotele, Metaph. XII
6–7.” Méthexis 10 (1997): 59–82.
Berti, Enrico. “De qui est fin le moteur immobile?” In Essais sur la théologie d’Aristote: Actes du colloque de Dijon, edited by Michel Bastit and Jacques Follon, 5–28.
Leuven: Peeters, 1998.
Berti, Enrico. “Il dibattito odierno sulla cosiddetta ‘teologia’ di Aristotele.” Par-
adigmi 21 (2003): 279–97.
Berti, Enrico. “La finalità del motore immobile di Aristotele tra Metafisica Λ 7 e
Λ 10.” Humanitas 46 (2011): 555–67.
Berti, Enrico. “Il movimento del cielo in Alessandro di Afrodisia.” In La filosofia in età imperial: Le scuole e le tradizioni filosofiche, edited by Aldo Brancacci,
227–43. Naples: Bibliopolis, 2000.
Berti, Enrico. “Unmoved Mover(s) as Efficient Cause(s) in Metaphysics Λ 6.” In
Aristotle’s Metaphysics Lambda: Symposium Aristotelicum, edited by Michael Frede
and David Charles, 181–206. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000.
Blyth, Dougal. “Heavenly Soul in Aristotle.” Apeiron 48 (2015): 427–65.
Boeri, Marcelo. “Alejandro de Afrodisia como intérprete de la noética aristotelica.” Estudios de filosofía 40 (2009): 79–107.
Bonelli, Maddalena. “Alexandre d’Aphrodise et la cause ποιητική.” In Aitia II
avec ou sans Aristote: Le débat sur les causes à l’âge hellénistique et imperial, edited by
Carlo Natali and Cristina Viano, 119–35. Leuven: Peeters, 2014.
Bradshaw, David. Aristotle East and West: Metaphysics and the Division of Christendom.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Broadie, Sarah. “Que fait le premier moteur d’Aristote?” Revue philosophique de la
France et de l’Étranger 183 (1993): 375–411.
Chiaradonna, Riccardo. “Plotinus’ Account of Demiurgic Causation and Its Philosophical Background.” In Causation and Creation in Late Antiquity, edited by
Anna Marmodoro and Brian D. Prince, 31–50. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 53
D’Ancona, Cristina. Review of Les principes du tout selon la doctrine d’Aristote, by
Charles Genequand. Studia graeco-arabica 8 (2018): 436–44.
Duhem, Pierre. Le système du monde: Histoire des doctrines cosmologiques de Platon à
Copernic. 10 vols. Paris: A. Hermann, 1913–56.
Fazzo, Silvia. Aporia e sistema: La materia, la forma, il divino nelle Quaestiones di
Alessandro di Afrodisia. Pisa: ETS, 2002.
Fazzo, Silvia. “L’exégèse du livre Lambda de la Métaphysique d’Aristote dans le De
principiis et dans la Quaestio I.1 d’Alexandre d’Aphrodise.” Laval théologique et
philosophique 64, no. 3 (2008): 607–26.
Fazzo, Silvia, and Mauro Zonta. “Toward a ‘Critical Translation’ of Alexander of
Aphrodisias’ De principiis: Based on the Indirect Tradition of Syriac and Arabic
Sources.” Chora 13 (2015): 63–101.
Fiori, Emiliano. “L’épitomé syriaque du Traité sur les causes du tout d’Alexandre
d’Aphrodise attribué à Serge de Resh‘ayna: Édition et traduction.” Le Muséon
123 (2010): 127–58.
Fotinis, Athanasios. “Alexander on Aristotle’s Notion of the Intellect as
Agent.” In Πρακτικά Παγκοσμίου “Αριστοτέ λης”: Θεσσαλονίκη, 7–14
αυγούστου 1978 = Proceedings of the World Congress on Aristotle: Thessaloniki August 7–14, 1978, 160–67. Athens: Ministry of Culture and Sciences,
1981.
Golitsis, Pantelis. “Alexandre d’Aphrodise, Simplicius, et la cause efficiente de
l’univers.” In Alexandre d’Aphrodise et la métaphysique aristotélicienne, edited by
Anne Balansard and Annick Jaulin, 217–36. Leuven: Peeters, 2017.
Golitsis, Pantelis. “La réception de la théologie d’Aristote chez Michel d’Éphèse
et quelques auteurs néoplatoniciens.” In Réceptions de la théologie aristoteliciénne: D’Aristote à Michel d’Éphèse, edited by Fabienne Baghdassarian and Gweltaz
Guyomarc’h, 239–56. Leuven: Peeters, 2017.
Golitsis, Pantelis. “Simplicius, Syrianus and the Harmony of Ancient Philosophers.” In Die Kunst der philosophischen Exegese bei den spätantiken Platon- und
Aristoteles-Kommentatoren, edited by Benedikt Strobel, 69–99. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2018.
Gourinat, Jean-Baptiste. “‘Origine du movement’ (ὅϑεν ἡ ἀρχὴ τῆς κινήσεως) et
‘cause efficiente’ (ποιητικὸν αἴτιον) chez Aristote.” In Aitia I: Les quatre causes
d’Aristote, origines et interpretations, edited by Cristina Viano, Carlo Natali, and
Marco Zingano, 91–121. Leuven: Peeters, 2013.
Guthrie, William K. C. “The Development of Aristotle’s Theology, I.” The Classical Quarterly 27 (1933): 162–71.
Guthrie, William K. C. “Introduction.” In On the Heavens, edited and translated
by William K. C. Guthrie, xi–xxxvi. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1939.
Guyomarc’h, Gweltaz. “Alexandre d’Aphrodise et le premier moteur comme
principe.” In Les principes cosmologiques du platonisme: Origines, influences et systématisation,
edited by Marc-Antoine Gavray and Alexandra Michalewski, 143–
65. Turnhout: Brepols, 2017.
Guyomarc’h, Gweltaz. L’unité de la métaphysique selon Alexandre d’Aphrodise. Paris:
Vrin, 2015.
Hamlyn, David W. “Aristotle’s God.” In The Philosophical Assessment of Theology:
Essays in Honour of Frederick C. Copleston, edited by Gerard J. Hughes, 17–33.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 1987.
54 David Twetten
Kosman, Aryeh. “Aristotle’s Prime Mover.” In Self-Motion: From Aristotle to Newton,
edited by Mary-Louise Gill and James G. Lennox, 135–53. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1994.
Menn, Stephen. “The Aim and the Argument of Aristotle’s Metaphysics.” Online drafts, accessed May 18, 2020. https://www.philosophie.hu-berlin.de/de/
lehrbereiche/antike/mitarbeiter/menn/contents.
Menn, Stephen. “Aristotle’s Theology.” In The Oxford Handbook of Aristotle, edited by Christopher Shields, 422–64. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Moraux, Paul. Der Aristotelismus bei den Griechen, vol. 3: Alexander von Aphrodisias.
Edited by Jü rgen Wiesner. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2001.
Mugnier, René. La théorie du premier moteur et l’évolution de la pensée aristotélicienne.
Paris: Vrin, 1930.
Natali, Carlo. “Causa formale e causa motrice in Alessandro d’Afrodisia.” In
Alessandro d’Afrodisia e la “Metafisica” di Aristotele, edited by Giancarlo Movia,
153–65. Milan: Vita e Pensiero, 1999.
Natali, Carlo. “Causa motrice e causa finale nel libro Lambda della Metafisica di
Aristotele.” Méthexis 10 (1997): 105–23.
Papadis, Dimitris. “‘L’intellect agent’ selon Alexandre d’Aphrodise.” Revue de
philosophie ancienne 9 (1991): 133–51.
Paulus, Jean. “La théorie du premier moteur chez Aristote.” Revue de philosophie
33 (1933): 259–94, 394–424.
Randall, John H. Aristotle. New York: Columbia University Press, 1960.
Rashed, Marwan. “Introduction.” In Commentaire perdu à la Physique d’Aristote
(livres IV–VIII): Les scholies Byzantines, edited by Marwan Rashed, 3–166. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2011.
Ross, William David. Aristotle. Edited by John Lloyd Ackrill. 6th ed. London:
Routledge, 1995.
Salis, Rita. Il commento di pseudo-Alessandro al libro Λ della Metafisica di Aristotele.
Rubbettino: Soveria Mannelli, 2006.
Schwegler, Albert. Die Metaphysik des Aristoteles: Grundtext, Übersetzung und Kommentar nebst erläuternden Abhandlungen. 4 vols. Tübingen: L. Fr. Fues, 1847–48.
Sharples, Robert. “Alexander of Aphrodisias on Divine Providence: Two Problems.” Classical Quarterly 32, no. 1 (1982): 198–211.
Sharples, Robert. “Alexander of Aphrodisias: Scholasticism and Innovation.”
Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt 36, no. 2 (1987): 1176–1243.
Sharples, Robert. “Aristotelian Theology after Aristotle.” In Traditions of Theology: Studies in Hellenistic Theology, Its Background and Aftermath, edited by Dorothea Frede and Andre Laks, 1–40. Leiden: Brill, 2002.
Stevens, Annick. “La causalité de l’intellect dans la Métaphysique et le traité De
l’Âme.” In La causalité chez Aristote, edited by Lambros Couloubaritsis and Sylvain Delcomminette, 125–38. Paris: Vrin, 2011.
Takahashi, Adam. “Interpreting Aristotle’s Cosmos: Albert the Great as a Reader
of Averroes.” PhD diss., Radboud University Nijmegen, 2017.
Tuominen, Miira. “Aristotle and Alexander of Aphrodisias on the Active Intellect.” In Mind and Modality: Studies in the History of Philosophy in Honour of Simo
Knuuttila, edited by Vesa Hirvonen and Toivo J. Holopainen, 55–70. Leiden:
Brill, 2006.
Why the Prime Mover Is Not an Exclusively Final Cause 55
Tuozzo, Thomas. “Aristotle and the Discovery of Efficient Causation.” In Efficient
Causation: A History, edited by Tad Schmaltz, 23–47. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.
Tuozzo, Thomas. “How Dynamic Is Aristotle’s Efficient Cause?” Epoché 15
(2011): 447–64.
Twetten, David. “Aristotelian Cosmology and Causality in Classical Arabic
Philosophy and Its Greek Background.” In Ideas in Motion in Baghdad and Beyond: Philosophical and Theological Exchanges Between Christians and Muslims in
the Third/Ninth and Fourth/Tenth Centuries, edited by Damien Janos, 312–433.
Leiden: Brill, 2016.
Twetten, David. “Aristotle Less Transformed: Averroes and the Prime Mover as,
not Artist, but Art” (forthcoming).
Twetten, David. “Averroes on the Prime Mover Proved in the Physics.” Viator: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 26 (1995): 107–34.
Twetten, David. “Averroes’ Prime Mover Argument.” In Averroès et les averroïsmes juif et latin, edited by Jean-Baptiste Brenet, 9–75. Turnhout: Brepols, 2007.
Twetten, David. “Whose Prime Mover Is More (un)Aristotelian: Broadie’s, Berti’s or Averroes’?” In La philosophie arabe à l’étude: Sens, limites et défis d’une
discipline modern, edited by Jean-Baptiste Brenet and Olga L. Lizzini, 347–92.
Paris: Vrin, 2019.
Werner, Charles. Aristote et l’idéalisme platonicien. Paris: F. Alcan, 1910.
Wolfson, Harry A. “The Plurality of Immovable Movers in Aristotle and Averroes.” Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 63 (1958): 233–53.
Zeller, Eduard. Die Philosophie der Griechen in der geschichtlichen Entwicklung. 6 vols.
Leipzig: O. R. Reisland, 1921.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-4
Koenraad Verrycken has argued that we can make a clear distinction
between the earlier and later thought of Philoponus.1 On his account,
Philoponus changed his mind in the course of his career, moving from
an acceptance of Platonic forms to a rejection of them,2 and evidence of
Philoponus’ attitude towards forms is a primary basis for dating Philoponus’ texts. I here argue that the matter is not so simple. For in later
Neoplatonism “form” (eidos or idea) can refer to a number of entities:
(1) an exemplar subsisting prior to the demiurgic intellect, (2) the idea
within the mind of a demiurgic intellect, (3) a universal characteristic
shared by a number of particulars, and (4) a universal within the human
mind. If these distinctions are kept in mind, and if we keep in mind the
need to distinguish between those texts in which Philoponus reports the
views of others and those in which he presents his own views, there is no
need to attribute to Philoponus any change of mind concerning forms.
Philoponus comes to disagree with Ammonius concerning forms only regarding how to interpret Plato and Aristotle, not what kinds of being there
are. Ammonius thinks that Plato rejects pre-demiurgic forms; Philoponus
thinks that Plato accepts them. Ammonius thinks that Aristotle thinks
that Plato rejects pre-demiurgic forms; Philoponus comes to think that
Aristotle thinks that Plato accepts them.
Clarity on this matter is helpful in two respects. First, as scholarship of
the last several decades has revealed, Philoponus is an extremely interesting philosopher. He is working in the margins that separate both Platonic
and Aristotelian thought, and pagan and Christian thought. Like a number of his contemporaries, and like many medieval successors (on some of
whom he was an important direct or indirect influence), he is aware of the
philosophical problems that emerge when integrating these traditions. His
keen and original philosophical mind allows for innovative and intriguing
solutions to those problems. This is why the manner in which Philoponus
himself navigated these issues, as both philosopher and commentator, is of
considerable interest. Second, the story told here is illustrative of a general
tendency among late ancient and medieval philosophers. Terms, like eidos
and idea, that have their origin in nontechnical language are employed
by philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle in different ways that impart
2 Philoponus and Forms
Owen Goldin
Philoponus and Forms 57
to them considerable theoretical weight. Later syncretic philosophers are
compelled by such texts to distinguish different senses of the same term,
but there are pressures that muddy these distinctions. Some of these are
philosophical (as when Neoplatonists take the forms of physical things to
be not only the effects but the manifestations of intelligible forms) and
some derive from the context in which they are working (as when translations of Scripture and its exegetes employed pneuma in ways suggestive of
both theoretical and nontheoretical uses). Analysis of the ways in which a
philosopher like Philoponus navigates such waters could shed light on the
larger themes of how medieval philosophy, indeed all philosophy, has built
on and responded to early and contemporary theoretical and nontheoretical usage in doing its work.
Philoponus’ Neoplatonic Background
Within the Platonic dialogue that is his namesake, Timaeus relates that
forms exist by themselves, independent of any cognitive agent, eternally
inviolate. Because they are perfectly what they are, they are the paradigms according to which other things, to the extent possible, participate
in goodness. A divine agent, the Demiurge, employs them as patterns by
which he (with his assistants) creates the physical cosmos. It is by virtue
of these patterns that the particulars have the structural and intelligible
characteristics that they have (29d–30d).
Timaeus was a central text for the Neoplatonic enterprise of synthesizing
Plato’s metaphysical explorations into a grand system. The central figure
is Plotinus, who derived from the dialogue a metaphysical map, details of
which were filled, elaborated upon, and occasionally corrected by Proclus.
The teachings of Proclus were adopted and employed (again, not without revision) by his student Ammonius in his commentaries on Aristotle.
Ammonius was the teacher of Philoponus, and it is his commentaries that
allow us to see when Philoponus is following his tradition and when he is
making a decisive break.
Plotinus, writing more than six centuries later than Plato but three centuries before Philoponus, tried to unpack the metaphysical relationships
that hold among paradigm, Demiurge, and image. He accepts the Aristo-
telian principle that an intellect knows an intelligible form by becoming
identical to that form (DA 3.8, 431b29–432a1; Enn. 5.5), and accordingly
holds that there is no ontological distinction between the Demiurge and
the forms. The trans-human intellect is responsible for human intellection
of form. As the pattern of created beings, it is their exemplary cause. As
Demiurge, it is their efficient cause (through the intermediacy of soul).
Plotinus accounts for this activity by means of the same metaphor that he
employs in accounting for the generation of intellect out of the One: that
of overflow.3 The metaphor of an artisan shaping images is supplemented
by that of a unity gushing forth a multiplicity. This allows for a blurring
58 Owen Goldin
of the ontological divide between form as intelligible pattern and form as
inherent characteristic, which as we shall see was taken advantage of by
syncretic readings of Plato and Aristotle.
For Plotinus, it is not at all clear how the Demiurge, the cosmic intellect, and the particular human intellect by which we know forms are all
related. Human intellect cannot be the same as cosmic intellect, as we do
not always know all things. But if it is different, how are the forms that
are identical with cosmic intellect going to be identical with us, when we
know them? Further, how can intellect, a perfect whole, give of itself to
lower levels, which necessarily involve greater multiplicity, without compromising its integrity and unity?
Plotinus addressed these problems by asserting that although there is
only one intellect, it nonetheless has a multiplicity of effects. Insofar as
it participates in noetic activity, thought of forms is the activity of what
Plotinus calls “undescended soul” (Enn. 4.8, 8.1–11), soul insofar as it is
unified with intellect. But as temporally localized, this activity occurs at
the level of “descended soul.” He further addressed the ontological problem of how forms are unities with many manifestations by claiming that
although forms are unified, insofar as they are identical with the demiurgic intellect, the very same forms are actively emanating participants at the
levels of soul and nature.
One might well think that metaphysical moves of this sort are no solution at all. For it would seem that the unified intellect has been broken up
into a multiplicity, and the sort of unity proper to intelligible reality has
been attributed to temporal things.
Many of the complexities of Proclus’ metaphysics, written some two
hundred years after Plotinus’ Enneads and two generations before Philoponus in the fifth century CE, can be understood as new attempts to deal
with the same issue we just encountered in Plotinus. His starting point is
Plato’s distinction between two kinds of principle, the Demiurge and the
forms that He looks upon, a distinction in kind which he takes more seriously than Plotinus. Proclus rejects Plotinus’ view that the particular soul
can, as such, engage in noetic activity, by virtue of the undescended soul
(Elem. Theol. §211). The soul’s activity is noetic, though its essence is eternal
(Elem. Theol. §191). All noetic activity is at the level of intellect, and only
intellect. But within any thinker, including the Demiurge, a distinction is
to be made between what is thinking and what is thought. As Proclus puts
the distinction in Tim. 323.20–22, “the Paradigm is both prior to the Demiurge and in him, prior to him in the intelligible mode [noeˉtoˉs ], in him
in the intellective mode [noeroˉs ].”4 Accordingly, Proclus posits two kinds of
intellect. The participated intellect (metakhomenos nous) is intellective and
looks to the forms and is implicated in their dispersal among particulars.
The unparticipated intellect (amethektos nous), in which the forms that are
looked have their primal undispersed status (Elem. Theol. §101, 166) is
intelligible. The participated intellect is the Demiurge, which, as in Plato,
Philoponus and Forms 59
is distinct from and lower than the intellect that contains those forms that
stand outside of all direct relation to their participants. It is participated intellect which contains the forms that are implicated in the dispersal among
particulars. Forms also exist within the participated intellect, as ideas
within the demiurgic mind.5 (It is important to note here that what Proclus calls “participated Forms” are not these forms in the participated intellect but forms as they are particularized within their participants.6) The
forms in the mind of the Demiurge are intrinsically productive, which is
why one must recognize within them an implicit multiplicity by which
corresponding formal characteristics are imparted to the many particulars
that participate in them.
Accordingly, in the context of Proclus’ metaphysics, there are three different things that one can mean in affirming that eternal forms exist. (It
is important to distinguish these three levels of form since it is possible to
subscribe to a generally Platonist metaphysics, yet not accept them all.)
(1) Forms exist, all together, as the unparticipated intellect. (2) They exist,
discretely, as object of knowledge of the participated intellect. (3) Finally,
they exist at the level of soul, as causal principles informing matter, emanating from the participated intellect. It is in this sense that Proclus refers
to them as demiurgic logoi. They are demiurgic not insofar as they inhere
within the Demiurge, as objects of thought, but insofar as they themselves
penetrate the ontological levels of soul and physicality, giving them formal
characteristics and what limited intelligibility they can accept.7
Aristotle, whose works were well known to Proclus, understood Platonic forms as universals, and much of his criticism of Plato (in Metaph.
A 9 and elsewhere) is accordingly based on his denial of the existence of
subsistent universals. What role do universals play in Proclus’ ontology?
Proclus distinguishes three kinds of beings that can be called a universal. There are the universals “before the many,” those “in the many,” and
those “after the many” (In Eucl. 1, 50.24–51.9). Universals “before the
many” are conceptual entities in a mind that abstracts and thereby thinks
of a common feature. It is by the intermediacy of these that human minds
can, to a limited extent, grasp the intelligible forms of which they are imperfect copies. They are not truly universals, as it is not concepts as such
that are predicated of things.8 Likewise, a universal before the many is a
form which “produce[s] plurality by offering its appearance to the many
instances.”9 This sort of form is a perfect pattern and is not itself predicated
of imperfect particulars. Accordingly, it would not constitute a universal
according to Aristotle’s definition of a universal, as what is predicated of
many particulars (DI 17a37).10 The universal before the many is a universal only insofar as it is a single thing to which many stand in relation,
for which reason, as Richard Sorabji puts it, its status as a universal to is
“heavily qualified.”11 In contrast to universals that are dependent on those
particulars of which they are predicated,12 they are ontologically independent of the things modeled after them. For this reason, when Aristotle
60 Owen Goldin
presents arguments against forms as subsistent universals, this does not
speak to whether or not there are demiurgic forms, as Proclus understands
them. A fortiori, forms as they exist prior in a pre-demiurgic mode, too,
would not be universals, in the strict Aristotelian sense.
The other kind of universal, whose status as universal is unqualified, is
that of the common features that are predicated of many things (“the universal in the many”). Aristotle would have no problem with positing the
existence of this, but as inherent in particulars, it is not a Platonic form.
For many years, scholars of Late Antiquity understood Ammonius,13
Proclus’ student, as having adopted a metaphysical scheme that is a radically simplified version of that of Proclus.14 Although the simplification is
not as extensive as that argued for by earlier scholars,15 there is evidence
that Ammonius explicitly rejected Proclus’ distinction between participated and unparticipated intellect, that is (in the terms employed by Plato)
between the Demiurge and the forms existing independently of the Demiurge, to which it looks.
One finds in much late Neoplatonism the hermeneutic principle that
Plato and Aristotle are in agreement in nearly all respects. Proclus did not
follow Iamblichus in this attempt to harmonize Platonic and Aristotelian
metaphysics,16 but many Aristotelian commentators in the Platonic tradition, including Ammonius, did. Ammonius accordingly follows Aristotle
in denying that universals, in the Aristotelian sense, can be subsistent. In
his commentary on the Categories, Ammonius explicitly endorses Aristotle’s assertion at Cat. 2a36 that universals, which are predicated of substances, are dependent on the substances that they are in.17
Evidence concerning Ammonius’ views on the ontological standing of
ideas within the Demiurge is found primarily in a commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics by his student Asclepius, expressly labeled as derived from
the lectures of Ammonius.18 Asclepius is explicit that Aristotle and Plato
are in agreement concerning forms (71.27–29). At 44.31–36, Asclepius
discusses Aristotle’s view that it was Socrates who first sought universal
definienda:
Plato called all such things Ideas, saying that they were demiurgic
logoi, from which the things here come to by participation—what is
beautiful here from what is beautiful without qualification, and what
is good from what is good without qualification, and the human being
from The Human Being. You yourself say this, Aristotle!
After all, Aristotle had said that the Unmoved Mover (the Demiurge) is
to the cosmos as the general is to the army (Metaph. Λ 1075a12–7); just as
the order in the army is due to what has been planned by the general, the
order in the cosmos arises from metaphysically prior patterns in the mind
of the Demiurge. Further, it was Aristotle himself who said: “Those who
say that the soul is the place of forms are right, except that this is true not
Philoponus and Forms 61
of is not the entire soul, but the intellectual soul [oute holeˉ all’ heˉ noeˉtikeˉ]”
(DA 3.4, 429a27–28). Aristotle’s assertion explicitly concerns the (human)
potential intellect; Asclepius glibly cites the passage to support the interpretation of Aristotle as positing forms as present in the active (demiurgic)
intellect (69.19–20, 167.29–33).19 Such a theoretical commitment to demiurgic logoi, however, does not entail positing forms at an ontologically
higher level, as independent of the demiurgic intellect.
At 393.34–394.2 Asclepius comments on Aristotle’s Metaph. Z 6,
1031a28–31, where Aristotle wonders whether a substance that is ontologically primary (as Platonic ideas are said to be) is the same as its essence.
Asclepius writes: “He refers to those who place Ideas in the highest rank
and say that they are self-subsistent substances [ousias einai authupostatous],
towards which the Demiurge looks when he makes what he makes.” Here,
Asclepius interprets Aristotle as referring disparagingly to the hypostasis of
an intelligible substance prior to the Demiurge, not to that positing intelligible entities in the mind of the Demiurge, for, according to Ammonius,
Aristotle believes in these.20 Aristotle departs from Plato only in regard to
his terminology. Plato would call these logoi substances (ousiai); Aristotle
would not. He calls them demiurgic logoi.21 Both posit what the Demiurge
knows as the grounds of intelligibility of particular things. When Aristotle
denies that there are forms that are separate, he is in agreement with Plato,
who likewise did not believe in
transcendent Ideas, that is to say, Forms in what Proclus would call
“the unparticipated intellect” (165.35–167.2922). [. . .] But that is not
to go further and say that there is horse-itself and cow<-itself> and
such things existing in reality by themselves, just like perceptibles
[οὐκέτι μέντοι γε αὐτοΐππος καὶ βοῦς καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα αὐτὰ καθ’ αὑτὰ ἐν
ὑποστάσει ὄντα, ὥσπερ καὶ τὰ αἰσθητά].
(67.33–34)
Only if there were forms existing independently of the Demiurge would
there be a point to the criticism Aristotle makes of the forms in Metaph. A
(that positing forms needlessly reduplicates an ontology, insofar as forms
are eternal versions of perceptible substances) (167.35–168.18).
We see on the basis of these passages that Ammonius does not take Aristotle to be in conflict with Platonic metaphysics, rightly understood. This
is confirmed by Ammonius In Isag. 41.21–47.7, where there is an explicit
and unqualified identification of the universals “before the many” with
ideas in the mind of the Demiurge. It shall be further confirmed by passages from Philoponus, who needs to be treated independently, on account
of the complex nature of his texts.
We have seen that Plato offers a metaphysical scheme according to which intelligible forms are ontologically distinct from imminent characteristics; it is just this distinction with which Aristotle takes issue. The distinction
62 Owen Goldin
was blurred among the Neoplatonists for two reasons: first, in order to solve the puzzle of participation, and second, under the pressure of a tradition of reading Plato and Aristotle as in fundamental agreement. Eidos and idea
refer to intelligible structural principles as present in both participated and unparticipated intellect, to formative principles in soul, which is the intermediary between the intelligible and the sensible, and to universal characteristics in sensibles. The terms are not strictly speaking equivocal, as it is the same form manifesting itself in different ways at different ontological levels. We shall see Philoponus insist on a more robust kind of equivocity. On his view, Plato and Aristotle must be understood as referring to different kinds of things as “forms.” This allows for a forthright declaration that the universals that we cognitively grasp are not Platonic forms.
Philoponus on Forms
We turn now to Philoponus, who at first sight, in different texts, says different things about Platonic forms and Aristotle’s stance concerning them.
As Pantelis Golitsis has argued,23 dating Philoponus’ texts by appealing to
seeming inconsistencies within them (as Verrycken does) is a risky business. Some texts are commentaries; some are not. A primary purpose of
a commentary is to explicate the meaning of the text. Philoponus is not
shy about disagreeing with Aristotle in the course of his commentaries,
but that is not to say that every time Philoponus offers an exegesis of a
text he is thereby endorsing the (purportedly) Aristotelian teaching he
is presenting. The narrative of Philoponus’ development that Verrycken
reconstructs is also challenged by the occasional appearance of a supposedly later view in a supposedly earlier text.24 That said, there are no doubt
some discrepancies in Philoponus that must be accounted for developmentally. The challenge is to do so only when appropriate. How does it stand
in regard to what Philoponus says concerning the paired issues of whether
Plato and Aristotle were in agreement concerning the forms and whether
there are in fact Platonic forms?
We begin with a passage from Philoponus’ commentary on De anima,
one of his early commentaries said to be transcribed from the lectures of
Ammonius with “some critical observations of his own.”25 Philoponus is
discussing DA 402b5–7, in which Aristotle aporetically wonders whether
the inquirer into the soul must seek a single definition, as one would seek
a definition of “living thing,” or rather a plurality of definitions for different kinds of soul, as one would seek the definitions of individual species
of living being. Aristotle explores the possibility that the latter is the case,
as “the living being in general [katholou] either is nothing or something
posterior.” According to a standard reading of the passage, Aristotle is
(aporetically) claiming that the discrete object of definition is an infima
species, not its genus. On Philoponus’ interpretation, however, the question
is not whether “living thing” is independently definable, but whether it
Philoponus and Forms 63
is independently existing.26 He takes Aristotle’s answer to be “no”—an
answer thought to be consistent with the existence of Platonic forms. Aristotle’s point is that all beings are particulars; accordingly, any definition of
a universal (whether genus or infima species), such as Proclus’ universals “in
the many” and “after the many,” is a definition of a non-entity, or of some
derivative aspect of a particular. “Some have thought that here he speaks
of the Forms, alluding to Plato. But this is not the case. For Aristotle, too,
thinks that the genera and species exist prior to the plurality <of the individual instances>.” Philoponus echoes Ammonius in supporting his view
that Plato and Aristotle agree on the priority of forms over particulars by
citing Aristotle’s assertions that the order within the cosmos derives from
a single commander and that the soul is a place of forms. He concludes:
“Consequently he also is aware of the transcendent formal logoi of things”
(37.25–26). Aristotle’s dismissive words concerning universals are taken to
refer only to those which Proclus called “after the many.”
[T]he living being, when viewed as a universal, is nothing or is something posterior. If he wishes the definition of living being to apply
universally, and definitions do not concern the genera that are before
the many [. . .] (for it is not even possible to define these, since they are
demiurgic logoi) and since we define the things that exist in thought
only (for what we express in the definition is the notion we have about
things) and since these things came into being later, we have been
right in saying that he says these things in reference to the things that
came into being later.27
We note that demiurgic logoi are here said to be causes of things, not
objects of definition or knowledge. Particulars are known by virtue of a
universal conceptual entity whose existence is derivative on the human
mind that thinks them.28
In his Posterior Analytics commentary, also said to be derived from Ammonius’ lectures with critical remarks by Philoponus, we find this description of the common, defined feature, which Proclus would have called the
universal “in the many”:
[W]e say that each is among the existing things and subsists by virtue
of being defined by a common account, even if it has its subsistence in
the particulars [. . .]. Therefore the universal is not among the things
that do not exist, but rather <exists> to a higher degree than particulars do, given that it is imperishable, and all particulars are perishable,
and that that which imperishable is among things that are, to a higher
degree than that which is perishable.29
Philoponus (presumably following Ammonius) is not here talking of
forms but of universals “in the many.” Within Metaph. Z, Aristotle makes
64 Owen Goldin
clear that the substantial form of a composite substance, although in one
sense dependent for its existence on that in which it inheres, in some sense
exists as a real, eternal being, on which that particular depends. This view
echoes those made explicit by Alexander of Aphrodisias, surely no enthusiast of Platonic forms.30 However Platonic it sounds, the present passage
is not evidence of Philoponus’ belief in mind-independent Platonic forms.
We turn next to another text from the Posterior Analytics which bears on
these questions. Verrycken cites it as evidence of a change of attitude, but
we need not draw this conclusion, if we keep in mind the Proclean distinction between form as unparticipated and as participated, as well as the
distinction between the question of whether there are subsistent universals
and whether there are Platonic forms.
The context is a commentary on Aristotle’s discussion of whether it is
possible for demonstrative chains to be infinite in length. Aristotle employs the premise that the minor term of any demonstration must be substantial. A quality like “white” cannot be a subject term. What of the
form of white? Understood as Plato understands it, the form is indeed a
basic subject that is an object of scientific understanding, and accordingly
could be an ultimate minor term of a demonstration. Aristotle rejects this
possibility, and accordingly Platonic forms. As he puts it: “So goodbye to
the Forms. For they are but noodling, and even if there were such things,
they would be irrelevant in regard to the argument. For demonstrations
are concerned with these sorts of things” (83a32–35) (i.e., not with the
whiteness that is separate from colored objects, but with the whiteness of
colored objects). The conclusion is that demonstrative chains must have
bottoms, the substantial kinds that constitute the genus of a science.
Philoponus agrees with Aristotle that terms like “white,” “humanity,”
and “equal,” which are studied by the sciences, always subsist in another
subject:
For how can there subsist whiteness or humanity or equality itself by
itself? For since all of these forms and those like them are material
[i.e., such as must be inherent in matter], they cannot subsist otherwise
than in some subject, I mean in a body or in absolute matter.
(242.17–20)31
Philoponus’ exposition of Aristotle is problematic, first, because the notion
of matter is absent from Posterior Analytics and second, because “human”
is precisely the sort of term (a substantial kind, falling under a biological
genus) that can serve as an ultimate subject of demonstration. Be that
as it may, Philoponus interprets the text as concerning substantial and
non-substantial terms alike, and what is at issue for him is the universality
of the terms employed by demonstration. Such terms are real only as inherent in matter. Aristotle’s point, as Philoponus (approvingly) interprets
it, need not bear on whether there exists a “white” or “humanity” which
Philoponus and Forms 65
is not itself a direct object of human knowledge, but is rather a cause of the
whiteness and humanity that we do know.
Philoponus tells of some exegetes who deny that the universal terms that
are known must subsist in a subject and appeal to Aristotle’s own writings
to support the view that there is such a thing as a form of “white”: “And
when people speak in support of them [the forms] they say that Aristotle
explicitly proclaims on every occasion that the demiurgic logoi of things
are ideas.” The evidence that these people are reported to have cited in
support of this reading of Aristotle is familiar to us. The Unmoved Mover
is like a general, responsible for the order of his subordinates (243.2–6).
The Unmoved Mover thinks itself; this means that it thinks all things
(243.6–7). The soul is the place of forms (243.7–8). Ammonius is no doubt
one of the Aristotelian exegetes that Philoponus has in mind.
They say that it is in regard to those who misunderstand the doctrines
concerning the ideas and think that whiteness subsists by itself and not
in the demiurgic logos or think this of a bodiless humanity, as if it had
nose and feet and hands and such things, that he was always wont to
attack the argument about such ideas.
(243.9–13)
Ammonius’ argument that Plato and Aristotle are in agreement concerning the forms was directed against unnamed opponents who argued that
Plato posited humanly knowable forms that exist independent of the Demiurge. Philoponus gives us new evidence that according to Ammonius,
Aristotle himself did not believe that there are forms that subsist by themselves, independent of the Demiurge. Given Ammonius’ view that both
Plato and Aristotle offer true accounts, this is additional evidence that
Ammonius did indeed simplify Proclean metaphysics and eliminated unparticipated intellect as intermediate between the One and the Demiurge.
He affirmed forms as subsistent within participated intellect and takes this
to be consistent with the principle that known forms always exist in some
sort of material substrate. These demiurgic ideas are not the universals that
we know, namely, the referents of the terms employed in demonstration.
Philoponus continues with a sentence that Marije Martijn and I have
translated as follows:
But I find thoroughly unconvincing the defense to the effect that
even though it was Plato who posited the Forms as demiurgic logoi
existing within the Demiurge, Aristotle himself always says the same
things and never objects to this, and that, even if he meant the same
thing [as Plato], while Plato says that ideas are such a thing [i.e., demiurgic logoi], others misunderstood him [ἐμοὶ δὲ πάνυ δοκεῖ ἀπίθανος
ἡ τοιαύτη ἀπολογία. εἰ γὰρ λόγους δημιουργικοὺς ἐν τῷ δημιουργῷ
ἐνόντας τὰ εἴδη ὑπετίθετο ὁ Πλάτων, οὐκ ἄν ποτε πρὸς τοῦτο ἐνέστη
66 Owen Goldin
ὁ Ἀριστοτέλης πανταχοῦ ὁ αὐτὸς ταὐτὰ λέγων. κἂν ἐπεσημειοῦτο δὲ
αὐτὸ τοῦτο, ὅτι Πλάτων μὲν τοιάσδε ἔλεγε τὰς ἰδέας, ἕτεροι δὲ κακῶς
ἐκλαμβάνουσι].
(243.13–17)
On our account, Philoponus is now saying that Aristotle does not agree with Plato. In his own voice, he continues: “Rather it is obvious that he is always doing battle against the doctrine [of forms], not those who conceive of it incorrectly.” Philoponus cites the Timaeus, according to which the Demiurge looks to forms as external exemplars, as evidence that Plato’s forms were not mere ideas in the demiurgic mind. Rather, Philoponus says that Plato thinks that they have existence independent of the Demiurge.
In a recent article, Golitsis has amended our translation in a way that has
the passage register agreement with Plato:
But I think that such a defense is thoroughly unconvincing; for if
Plato had posited the Forms as demiurgic logoi existing within the
Demiurge, Aristotle himself, who everywhere says the same things,
would have never objected to this; and he would have pointed out that
Plato meant the Ideas to be such, but others misunderstood him.32
Martijn and I understand ἡ τοιαύτη ἀπολογία as referring to the account
that he is about to work through. We take Philoponus to be rejecting as
“unconvincing” the defense that Aristotle and Plato were not in agreement concerning the forms. In contrast, in line with his general strategy of
countering Verrycken’s hypothesis concerning Philoponus’ development,
Golitsis apparently takes it to be retrospective: ἡ τοιαύτη ἀπολογία refers to the view that Plato and Aristotle were in agreement that forms exist as
demiurgic logoi. We interpret the phrase “Aristotle always says the same
things,” attributed to those with whom Philoponus disagrees, as indicating that he always agrees with Plato. Philoponus takes them to be wrong:
Plato and Aristotle do not always agree. A case in point is the matter of
whether there are pre-demiurgic forms. Golitsis, in contrast, apparently
understands it as Philoponus’ proclamation of Aristotle’s consistency (at
least in regard to forms). As Golitsis translates the passage, Philoponus says
that Plato did not in fact believe in demiurgic forms at all, and it is on this
point that Aristotle rightly calls out Plato. But note how the passage continues, in lines not quoted by Golitsis:
And it is obvious that in reality Plato did not say that the forms are simply [ἁπλῶς] logoi within the Demiurge, but he granted them subsistence in themselves and said that the equal itself and the animal itself and such things were something, and also said that it is in regard to these, as paradigms of images, that the Demiurge fabricated the things here. (243.17–25)
Philoponus and Forms 67
The use of ἁπλῶς (simply) is significant. Philoponus’ objection is against
the view that forms were only demiurgic logoi, that is to say, against the
denial that Plato took there to be forms prior to the Demiurge. This is
indeed a modification of Ammonius’ teaching (which may or may not be
a new development on Philoponus’ part),33 but it does not constitute evidence that he himself rejects demiurgic forms, or that he takes Aristotle to
reject demiurgic forms.
Golitsis takes the passage in question to be evidence that Philoponus departed from Ammonius—not, as I suggest, in regard to the question of whether Aristotle or Plato (or Plato as interpreted by Aristotle) believed in pre-demiurgic forms, but in regard to the question of whether there are forms at all. In Golitsis’ view, in line with his general strategy of minimizing Philoponus’ development, Philoponus clearly registers his opposition to Platonic forms and, if one appreciates the context of the various passages that bear on the question, there is no reason to think that Philoponus ever changed his mind on the matter. I agree with Golitsis that the passages from the De anima and Posterior Analytics
commentaries do not signal development, but that is because the teachings they put forward are simply not in conflict. The first passage concerns the status of universals; Philoponus endorses Aristotle’s view that universals are human conceptions, not forms. The second concerns whether there are forms at all; Philoponus does not dispute the views of Ammonius and Aristotle (as he understands him) that there are forms as demiurgic logoi.
Philoponus’ treatise Against Proclus’ On the Eternity of the World is devoted to showing that the metaphysics of Proclus, according to whom
forms have a kind of existence prior to the demiurgic intellect, is philosophically problematic. Philoponus has in his sights Proclus’ emanative
scheme according to which higher, more unified beings necessarily give
of themselves, resulting in entities at a lower level of reality, marked by
higher degree of multiplicity. On this view, it is, as it were, of the essence
of an entity at a higher level that it be productive in this manner. Proclus
adopts Plato’s metaphor of paradigm and image to account for this productive activity:34
If the pattern of the world is eternal, and if its essence [to ti eˉn einai]
is being a pattern and it has this power not accidentally but in itself,
being a pattern by its very being,35 then, since it is eternal in its being,
it would presumably be eternally a pattern. And if being a pattern is
present to it eternally, there would necessarily always be a copy too;
for a pattern its relative to [its] copy.
(24.2–9)36
Philoponus does not indicate what a grievous error Proclus made: the move from the eternality of the forms to the sempiternity of their productive agency. Instead, he focuses on the very existence and nature
68 Owen Goldin
of the forms, which, Philoponus points out, are assumed by Proclus to both exist and to “have their essence in being patterns.” This premise is a kind of endoxon of Proclus’ dialectical argument. But not everyone believed that there were such forms. Most notably, Aristotle did not. Philoponus mentions the arguments of Metaph. A 9 to show that Aristotle’s arguments against the forms were not, as some (no doubt including Ammonius) suggested, against the forms as misunderstood, but against the forms as Plato, in fact, understood them. The present passage very definitely marks a change from the interpretation of Aristotle’s criticisms that we saw in other writings. Again, however, it is important to be careful concerning what kind of form is under consideration. According to the passage from Aristotle, which Philoponus quotes at length, Socrates’ inquiry into definitions was a search for “universals,” and Plato “took the view that this had to do with other things and not with anything perceptible; for a common definition cannot be of any perceptible thing, since they are always changing” (987b4–6). Form here is a knowable commonality, the universal in the things, which is the object of knowledge. Philoponus understands Plato to be saying that this is a form. That, for Philoponus, is Plato’s mistake. Philoponus cites the fact that Aristotle criticizes not Socrates, who defined the common features of things, but Plato, who misunderstood Socrates, in support of his view that Aristotle accepted that there are indeed definable universals in things. The question at issue for Aristotle is exactly what it is that is being defined, and what it is that is known by virtue of such a definition. It is not a subsistent form. This conclusion, however, does not entail denying the existence of demiurgic logoi. Nothing in the present text contradicts those other texts in which, following Ammonius, Philoponus takes Aristotle to accept that these demiurgic logoi exist.
Philoponus’ remark here that Aristotle’s target is the positing of forms as “separate from perceptibles” (28.11–12) has Aristotle concerned with the ontological status of universals, and accordingly does not preclude his acceptance of demiurgic logoi ontologically independent of and prior to their participants.
Accordingly, when Philoponus supports his interpretation of Aristotle’s
criticism of the forms by writing that
if Aristotle had not been attacking Plato’s own position on the Forms
but, as these [commentators] claim, [that of] people who had misunderstood him, he would have specified precisely this at the outset
and not have refuted the doctrine of the Forms generally and without
qualification [ἁπλῶς καὶ ἀδιορίστως],
(29.8–12)
the sense is not that Aristotle rejected all forms without reservation, but
that Aristotle rejected point blank one of Plato’s lines of argument to the
Philoponus and Forms 69
effect that there is a certain kind of form (that which is said to exist prior
to and independent of the Demiurge), without distinction between the
argument as Plato intended it and as misinterpreted.37
Conclusion
I draw the following conclusions concerning Philoponus’ stance concerning Platonic forms. For Philoponus, all universals are conceptual, and
arise through the human effort to understand the world through grasping commonalities. Philoponus never decisively rejects Platonic forms, as
understood in as logoi in the mind of God, identified with the Platonic
Demiurge. So understood, these forms are not universals. Rather they are
particulars that are such as can cause a multiplicity of particulars to exist.
He attributes such causal principles to Aristotle, and to Plato as interpreted
by Aristotle, without correction. He does, however, implicitly take issue
with forms subsisting prior to the demiurgic intellect, and accordingly
follows his teacher Ammonius in rejecting the Proclean interpretation of
Plato’s metaphysics. In earlier commentaries, he echoes Ammonius in his
assertion that those who attribute to Plato the existence of pre-demiurgic
principles err in the interpretation of Plato. In other works, he signals that
they got Plato right.
This chapter is not the occasion for the task of offering a full history
of the cognate terms eidos and idea from their senses in everyday Greek to
their technical philosophical senses, or to fully work through the philosophical ramifications of the blurry nature of the boundaries between
these senses. I have instead concentrated on Philoponus’ response to state
of play of these terms and the theoretical entities to which they were
intended to refer, at the cusp of the transition from ancient to medieval
philosophy. Nonetheless, some general observations would be in order.
Philosophy begins with reflection on the everyday world and employs
nontechnical language to allow for greater precision and sophistication in
this sort of reflection. Examples are Meno 72b, where Socrates appeals to
the common look (eidos) of different bees to indicate what it means to look
for a common eidos for virtue, and Aristotle’s frequent appeals to shapes
of artifacts such as sculptures and spheres as examples of the role played
by form according to his hylomorphic analysis. These root meanings continued to have semantic pull even as the analyses of Plato, Aristotle, and
their exegetes and followers gained in philosophical significance, and one
can speculate that this may have played a role in how Plotinus and Proclus tried to find a place for Aristotelian hylomorphism in the context of
Platonic ontology: the form that is the paradigm for the particular that
participates in it is understood as akin to the shape that an intelligent artisan imparts to unstructured stuff. In the case at hand, this semantic pull
seems to have been strengthened by a widespread conviction that Plato
and Aristotle were in basic agreement (which was at least partially rooted
70 Owen Goldin
in a general societal veneration for the ancients). But it is always an option
for a philosophical free spirit like Philoponus to look at the texts afresh, in
order to come to a new understanding of how different philosophers were
using the same terms in different ways, in the context of arguments for
quite different conclusions, and to use this realization as a starting point
for fresh philosophical analyses. We can speculate that immersion in an
alternative textual tradition (that of early Christianity) may have played
a role in allowing Philoponus to realize that there are radically different
ways of reading the same texts and of making sense of the ontological
structure of the world.
Acknowledgments
It is an honor to dedicate this contribution to Richard C. Taylor, friend
and colleague of many years, who has done so much to clarify the intricate and philosophically rich story of the reception of Aristotelian thought
from late ancient to medieval thought. The paper is an expansion, reworking, and rethinking of ideas originally put forward in Philoponus, Posterior Analytics, trans. Goldin and Martijn, 2–6. I owe much to discussions with
David Twetten and Dirk Baltzy, and to the suggestions of Katja Krause
and Nicholas Oschman, but any missteps into the Neoplatonic bog are
mine alone.
Notes 1 Verrycken, “Development”; Verrycken, “John Philoponus.” 2 Throughout, I employ the lower case for both “form” and “idea,” making
no typographical distinction between the terms as employed in nontechnical
contexts, Aristotelian contexts, and a Platonic or Neoplatonic context. This
chapter is intended to trace some of the consequences of how the terms eidos
and idea were or were not understood as having different senses in different
contexts, so although such a typographical device could add clarity in some
contexts, it would detract from clarity in others. 3 See esp. Enn. 5. 2. 1. 4 Proclus, Plato’s Timaeus, trans. Runia and Share, 178. Gerson, Aristotle, 215,
takes the distinction to have its root in what he takes to be a mistaken interpretation of Tim. 29a–e. 5 “[T]he Forms in the Living Being Itself, which are established within the
bounds of the intelligible, are not said by Plato to move or ‘leap’ in among
bodies, but to give being to all things by their existence alone. If then, to
create through activity and motion is secondary to the creation that is prior
to action and motion, it is clear that what is established intelligibly and immovably in the Living Being Itself has a higher rank than the demiurgic ideas.
And the Demiurge is form-giving in two ways, both by virtue of the source
in himself, and by virtue of the intelligible Ideas; for among the latter are the
universal causes of all things” (802.22–35), Proclus, Plato’s Parmenides, trans.
Morrow and Dillon, 170. 6 See, for example, Proclus, In Parm. 3, 797.4–798.26. 7 Helmig, Forms and Concepts, 191–95.
Philoponus and Forms 71
8 See ibid., 208–9. 9 Proclus, First Book of Euclid’s Elements, trans. Morrow, 41. On such universals,
see also In Parm. 796.37–797.3. 10 See Sorabji, “Universals Transformed,” 291–95. 11 Ibid., 308. See also Philoponus, Categories, 16–17. 12 Ammonius, In Cat. 41.3–11. 13 The present account of Ammonius’ views of the forms (and, by extension,
that offered by the earlier Philoponus) differs from that put forward in Philoponus,
Posterior Analytics, according to which Ammonius, like Proclus, took
forms to exist at both pre-demiurgic and demiurgic levels. 14 Praechter, “Richtungen.” 15 See Verrycken, “Metaphysics”; Verrycken, “La Métaphysique.” 16 On which see Elias, In Cat. 123.1–3. 17 Ammonius, In Cat. 41.3–11. On the complexities encountered in reconstructing Ammonius’ position from this passage, see Sorabji, “Universals
Transformed,” 308. 18 Its subtitle is ΣΧΟΛΙΑ ΕΙΣ ΤΟ ΜΕΙΖΟΝ Α ΤΗΣ ΜΕΤΑ ΤΑ ΦΥΣΙΚΑ
ΑΡΙΣΤΟΤΕΛΟΥΣ ΓΕΝΟΜΕΝΑ ΥΠΟ ΑΣΚΛΗΠΙΟΥ ΑΠΟ ΦΩΝΗΣ
ΑΜΜΩΝΙΟΥ ΤΟΥ ΕΡΜΕΙΟΥ.
19 Other passages in which Asclepius attributes to Aristotle’s Demiurge a plurality of demiurgic logoi are collated by Verrycken, “Metaphysics,” 220 n. 172. 20 In contrast, Ammonius does sometimes distinguish between intellect as
thinker and forms as thought; see, for example, 165.36–37. But there is no
evidence that this is more than a verbal distinction between two aspects of
the same realities. Ammonius, In Porph. 42.16–20: οὐδὲ γὰρ ἁπλῶς νοήσεις
αὐτὰ εἶναι τοῦ δημιουργοῦ βούλεται, ἀλλὰ πάντως οὐσίας νοητάς, πρὸς ἃς
ἀφορῶντα τὸν δημιουργὸν ὡς πρὸς ἀρχετύπους εἰκόνας τὰ τῇδε ποιεῖν (“For
he does not mean to say that they [universals prior to the many] are only
thoughts of the Demiurge, but they are to be sure intelligible substances,
towards which the Demiurge looks when making the things here, as one
looks towards archetypes”), is denying that forms are mere thoughts, not that
they subsist at the ontological level of the Demiurge. (On the commentators’
denial that forms are thoughts, see Gerson, Aristotle, 214.) I should, however,
mention two problematic passages. Asclepius, In Meta. 363.1–5, raises the possibility that Aristotle may have been right in taking Plato himself to be among
those who misunderstood the forms as existing prior to the Demiurge, but
the text is noncommittal on the issue. (See Gerson, Aristotle, 225, on how
Asclepius is open to the possibility that Plato and Aristotle’s views on forms
are not identical, even if “in harmony.”) At In Porph. 43.25–44.4, Ammonius
seems to interpret Plato as taking the Demiurge to have within it impressions
(ektupoˉmata) of independently existing forms. The commentary, however, is
thought to be contaminated with a number of later interpolations. See Busse,
“Praefatio,” vi; Blank, “Ammonius.” 21 Ammonius, In Isag. 41.21–42.7. Ammonius employs this term in a way different from the manner seen in Proclus, according to whom demiurgic logoi are
ontological and epistemological principles at the level of soul. Henceforth I
use this phrase in its Ammonian sense. 22 On this passage, see Madigan, “Syrianus and Asclepius,” 151–52. 23 Golitsis, Les Commentaires, 27–37; Golitsis, “John Philoponus’ Commentary,”
401–6. 24 Verrycken deals with these cases by means of what might seem like an extravagant appeal to the possibility that later material was inserted into earlier text.
72 Owen Goldin
One example is in Philoponus, An. Post. 242.14–243.25, on which see below.
See Verrycken, “Development,” 257. 25 On the sense of epistasis, see Golitsis, “John Philoponus’ Commentary,”
401–6. On Philoponus’ stance in regard to Ammonius in those texts in which
he feels free to add his own “critical observations,” see Golitsis, Les Commentaires,
23–27; Golitsis, “John Philoponus’ Commentary,” 401–6; Sorabji,
“Dating,” 367–73. It is not certain that in these commentaries Philoponus is
presenting interpretations of Aristotle with which he agrees, for there is evidence that Philoponus registered disagreements with his teacher Ammonius
while the latter was still alive. See Philoponus, In Phys. 583.13–29. On this
passage, see Golitsis, “John Philoponus’ Commentary,” 401. 26 In this regard, Philoponus is following the second of the two possible interpretations that Alexander of Aphrodisias offers of the Aristotle passage, at
Quaestiones 1.11, 23.21–24.22. But for Alexander the point is that the genus
insofar as it is a universal is nothing or posterior, since a particular would still be
what it is even if things so happened that it was a unique instantiation of the
genus, while for Philoponus the question is whether the genus as such exists
at all. See Alexander of Aphrodisias, Quaestiones, trans. Sharples, 50–55, with
references to the extensive discussion this text has occasioned. 27 Translation modified from Philoponus, On the Soul, trans. van der Eijk,
53–54. 28 The view that what Ammonius called demiurgic logoi are not definable can be traced back to Proclus’ denial that Plato’s Forms are objects of definition (In Parm. 939.10–22; 986.10–14), on which see Sorabji, “Universals Transformed,” 295–96. This approaches the more radical view Philoponus expresses late in his career (Arbiter 7 = John of Damascus, Book of Heresies 83.52–68) that universals have conceptual existence alone. See Sorabji, “Universals Transformed,” 310–11. This view, too, is not in tension with positing demiurgic forms which, as unique exemplars serving as causes, are not universals. 29 Translation modified from Philoponus, Posterior Analytics, trans. Goldin and
Martijn, 73. 30 See Sorabji, “Universals Transformed,” 300–3. 31 The translation of this and the comment by Aristotle just above are from
Philoponus, Posterior Analytics, trans. Goldin and Martijn, 43. 32 Golitsis, “John Philoponus’ Commentary,” 402. 33 See note 28 above. 34 Proclus discusses the limitations of the metaphor at In Parm. 910.13–24. 35 As Share points out, this phrase is used among Neoplatonists in reference to
causal relationships in which the agents “exercise causation while themselves
remaining absolutely immutable.” Philoponus, Against Proclus, trans. Share,
93 n. 50. 36 Philoponus, Against Proclus, trans. Share, 32–34. 37 The rest of Philoponus’ refutation of Proclus here is a reductio, proceeding on
the assumption these forms do, in fact, exist. The Forms, Philoponus tells us,
must be substances. As such, they are not inherent in the mind of the Demiurge but are posited as independent of the Demiurge (33.6–17; 36.16–17)—
that is to say, they are Forms in the unparticipated intellect. But in this case,
Proclus’ argument does not go through. “But if they will claim that they are
not substances but certain demiurgic logoi or concepts in accord with which
the creator frames things—for what else could they be if they are not substances?—even so there is no obvious necessity that products based on these
demiurgic logoi should in every case coexist with them. Once more the necessity is in the other direction” (36.17–24), translation modified from Share,
in Philoponus, Against Proclus, trans. Share, 39.
Philoponus and Forms 73
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alexander of Aphrodisias. Quaestiones 1.1–2.15. Translated by Robert W. Sharples. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1992.
Philoponus. Against Proclus’ “On the Eternity of the World 1–5.” Translated by Michael J. Share. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005.
Philoponus. On Aristotle Categories 1–5 and A Treatise Concerning the Whole and the
Parts. Categories translated by Riin Sirkel, Martin Tweedale, and John Harris;
Concerning translated by Daniel King. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2015.
Philoponus. On Aristotle on the Soul 1.1–2. Translated by Philip J. van der Eijk.
London: Duckworth, 2005.
Philoponus. On Aristotle Posterior Analytics 1.19–34. Translated by Owen Goldin
and Marije Martijn. London: Duckworth, 2012.
Proclus. A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements. Translated with an
introduction and notes by Glenn R. Morrow. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Proclus. Commentary on Plato’s Timaeus. Vol. 2/2: Proclus on the Causes of the
Cosmos and Its Creation. Translated with an introduction and notes by David T. Runia and Michael J. Share. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2008.
Proclus. Proclus’ Commentary on Plato’s Parmenides. Translated by Glenn R. Morrow and John M. Dillon. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Secondary Literature
Blank, David. “Ammonius.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2014
Edition, edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
fall2014/entries/ammonius/.
Busse, Adolf. “Praefatio.” In Ammonius in Porphyrii Isagogen sive Quinque Voces,
edited by Adolf Busse, v–vii. Berlin: Reimer, 1891.
Gerson, Lloyd. Aristotle and Other Platonists. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
2005.
Golitsis, Pantelis. “John Philoponus’ Commentary on the Third Book of Aristotle’s De Anima, Wrongly Attributed to Stephanus.” In Aristotle Re-Interpreted: New Findings on Seven Hundred Years of the Ancient Commentators, edited by Richard R. K. Sorabji, 393–412. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2016.
Golitsis, Pantelis. Les commentaires de Simplicius et de Jean Philopon à la Physique d’Aristote. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2008.
Helmig, Christoph. Forms and Concepts: Concept Formation in the Platonic Tradition.
Berlin: De Gruyter, 2012.
Madigan, Arthur. “Syrianus and Asclepius on Forms and Intermediates in Plato
and Aristotle.” Journal of the History of Philosophy 24, no. 2 (1986): 149–71.
Praechter, Karl. “Richtungen und Schulen im Neuplatonismus.” In Genethliakon für Karl Robert, 103–156. Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1910.
Sorabji, Richard R. K. “Dating of Philoponus’ Commentaries on Aristotle and of
His Divergence from His Teacher Ammonius.” In Aristotle Re-Interpreted: New
Findings on Seven Hundred Years of the Ancient Commentators, edited by Richard
R. K. Sorabji, 367–92. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2016.
74 Owen Goldin
Sorabji, Richard R. K. “Universals Transformed in the Commentators on Aristotle.” In Aristotle Re-Interpreted: New Findings on Seven Hundred Years of the Ancient
Commentators, edited by Richard R. K. Sorabji, 291–312. London: Bloomsbury
Academic, 2016.
Verrycken, Koenraad. “The Development of Philoponus’ Thought and Its
Chronology.” In Aristotle Transformed: The Ancient Commentators and Their Influence,
edited by Richard R. K. Sorabji, 233–74. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1990.
Verrycken, Koenraad. “John Philoponus.” In The Cambridge History of Philosophy
in Late Antiquity, edited by Lloyd Gerson, 2:733–55. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
Verrycken, Koenraad. “The Metaphysics of Ammonius Son of Hermeias.” In
Aristotle Transformed: The Ancient Commentators and Their Influence, edited by
Richard R. K. Sorabji, 199–231. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1990.
Verrycken, Koenraad. “La Métaphysique d’Ammonius chez Zacharie de
Mytilène.” Revue des sciences philosophiques et théologiques 85, no. 2 (2001): 241–66.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-5
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Kitaˉb Amuˉniyuˉs fıˉ aˉraˉʾ al-falaˉsifa [al-mawsuˉm bi] ikhtilaˉf al-aqaˉwıˉl fıˉ al-mabaˉdıˉ [wa] fıˉ al-baˉriʾ (Book of Ammonius on the Opinions of the Philosophers [entitled] “The Different Statements on the Principles [and] on the Creator”) is a doxographical text that was paraphrased from one or several Greek sources—directly or via Syriac—into Arabic at some point in the mid-ninth century CE, by a scholar who remains anonymous, but was probably associated with al-Kindıˉ’s circle.1 It claims to represent a summary of the views of several major Greek philosophers, ranging from Thales to Proclus, on issues including the unity of God, the creation of the world, the hierarchy of being, and soteriology. The only surviving copy, which forms part of the unicum MS Aya Sofya 2450 (fols. 107a–135b), was discovered in 1958 by Samuel Miklos Stern.2 It seems to have been copied in Iran in the fourteenth century CE.3 Unfortunately, a significant portion of the text appears to be corrupt, and the scribe seems to have had only a limited command of Arabic.4 The A ˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa was edited by Ulrich Rudolph in 1989, along with a German translation and detailed commentary.5
In a later article,6 Rudolph describes the work as “a treatise of philosophical and religious persuasion, concealed behind the façade of a doxography.”
7 However, he admits that the author had some genuine knowledge
of ancient Greek philosophy—this being evident from the short remarks
he occasionally makes (e.g., the remark about Plutarch of Chaeronea’s
opinion about the eternal presence of ideas in God’s mind8). Rudolph
concludes that “within the Arabic doxographic texts of the ninth century,
the genuine identities and doctrines of the Greek philosophers [. . .] are
not the most central issues,” because “they are given a new role,” which is
“explained by the context in which they are quoted.”9
In his turn, Paul Walker, an expert on early Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ thought, believes that the existence of the Pseudo-Ammonius may be due to Ismaili interest
in proving the philosophers wrong, or at least predominantly so. The
motive in both cases is to demonstrate philosophical incoherence specifically in areas involving knowledge of the spiritual realm, i.e. the
world of intellect, soul, origination and the Originator.10
3 Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ
al-falaˉsifa and Its Influence
on Early Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ Thought
Janis Esots
76 Janis Esots
On the other hand, Walker continues, Pseudo-Ammonius’ text seems to
support Abuˉ H․aˉtim Raˉzıˉ’s preference for Proclus, Democritus, and possibly Plato over Aristotle, for the same reasons that Raˉzıˉ cites in favor of
those thinkers. He and Pseudo-Ammonius agree so closely, Walker speculates, that possibly they both belong to the same movement, the Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ daʿwa.11 This is not a bad conjecture—but it does not go much further:
there is no further evidence of Pseudo-Ammonius’ Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ affiliation.
Walker is right to say that “by providing a catalog of philosophical
sectarianism, the Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ writers could [. . .] show how there was truth in
philosophy but also how only properly oriented persons could find it.”12
The choice of the Pseudo-Ammonius and the Longer Theologia as the key
philosophical texts by the early Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ missionaries (especially Nasafıˉ and
Sijistaˉnıˉ), however, could have been dictated by the summary character and
conciseness of these texts, not solely by certain type of information
and concepts found in them. In other words, at the time when Nasafıˉ
and Sijistaˉnıˉ were active, these texts—in the absence of better ones—were
regarded as reliable compendiums of Greek philosophical knowledge not
only by the representatives of the Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ daʿwa but also by the educated
elite of different parts of the Islamic world in general. A generation later,
the works of al-Faˉ raˉbıˉ, which reflected the Greek philosophical heritage
to a much fuller extent, became available. Then, another Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ daˉʿıˉ,
H․
amıˉd al-Dıˉn Kirmaˉnıˉ, did not hesitate to use them and to incorporate
some of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s teachings into his own doctrine, thus subjecting to a
substantial revision the Neoplatonic cosmological system that Nasafıˉ and
Sijistaˉnıˉ had reproduced.
That said, the influence of Pseudo-Ammonius on early Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ thought appears to be undeniable. In what follows, I will discuss how this influence may have shaped the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ treatment of three major theological
and philosophical problems: the creatio ex nihilo (i bdaˉʿ) and its relation to
procession, God’s will and action, and the return or reversion.
Creatio ex nihilo (ibdaˉʿ)
The creation from nothing is one of the key articles of faith of the three
major monotheistic religions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam)—and,
simultaneously, an opinion that none of the Greek philosophers would
endorse. The history of medieval Arabo-Islamic philosophy can, to a significant extent, be described as an arduous attempt to reconcile the two
stances, which led to the emergence of a variety of eclectic ontological
and cosmological theories. As early as in the early tenth century CE, the
Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors offered their own solution, to which the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉs have adhered until our day. It consists in splitting the process of origination
into two radically different phases: the creation (i bdaˉʿ) of the First Intellect
by the Creator and the subsequent procession (inbiʿaˉth) of other levels or
degrees of the world from that Intellect. Pseudo-Ammonius, who offers a
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 77
good number of quotations from Greek thinkers in which they apparently
endorse the creatio ex nihilo, rendered the early Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors a much-appreciated assistance.
There were two important issues to be sorted out: whether the Creator
created all things from absolute nothing or had some form or model of
these things in His mind (which could have been either the model of the
world as a whole or the models of its parts—the latter option, in turn,
raises the question about the way in which God knows or does not know
the particulars); and whether this creation took place during a certain period of time or happened instantaneously.
Pseudo-Ammonius quotes the alleged opinion of Thales, according to
which the Creator
created what He created, at which creation there was no form in His
essence present, because, before the creation, there was only Himself,
and none else [. . .]. The creation consists in making something from
what was nothing. And when something is made, it is made not in
the aspect of the essence of the Maker, but in the aspect of the essence
which is external to that. Inevitably, the maker of something possesses
no form of what it makes something [from nothing]—otherwise, he
would not be the maker of something [from nothing]. Since, however,
he is the maker of something [from nothing], that making of something is not from something that precedes the making, and what is
made something, is [previously] nothing. If the case is such, the maker
of the things does not need the form of the thing in order to make it.
Had he possessed that form, he would be coupled [muqaˉrin] with that
form: whosoever has a form, which is its discrete constituent, is inevitably coupled with that form. Since the First Creator attains to the
infinite, he is not obliged to possess a form without which He cannot
create. Rather, if He possessed the form, He would not be the Creator
[from nothing].13
This opinion, of course, has nothing in common with the teachings of the
historical Thales of Miletus—the one who speaks here is an apologist of
the creatio ex nihilo theory in its pure form, which rules out the possibility
of the presence of any form, model, or paradigm of the created things (or
the world as a whole) in God’s knowledge. He attributes the opinion to
an ancient sage in order to adduce importance to his creationist agenda.
A similar view is attributed to Xenophanes:
The First Creator is an eternal ipseity, God, who is the source of permanence and beginninglessness. Being the principle of every logical
and rational attribute, He cannot be perceived through these attributes. And, since it is so, it is meaningless to claim that the form of
some created thing is with Him, or is not with Him, and to speculate
78 Janis Esots
how He created and why, because the Intellect is created, and whatever is created, is preceded by the Creator, and the preceded thing
will never perceive [properly] the preceder. And, since the preceded
cannot perceive the preceder, how can it describe the latter?14
However, a radically different view is ascribed to Plutarch of Chaeronea:
The Creator [. . .] always is in His eternity, which is the Eternity of
eternities; and He is the Creator, and nothing else. But the form of every creature which emerges in the precincts of creation, [before that]
is present in His preceding knowledge; and there are infinitely many
forms with Him; and if the form [of the creature] were not eternally
with Him, it could not remain.15
Hence, it is asked how the thing can subsist and preserve its identity in
the absence of the form of that thing in God’s knowledge. “Plutarch”
answers that if the form of the thing were absent from God’s knowledge,
the thing would perish together with its matter. This, however, he argues,
would mean the invalidation of “hope and fear,” i.e., the promise of reward and the threat of punishment in the hereafter. Pseudo-Ammonius
dismisses this “argument from the afterlife” without examining it in detail, as self-evidently wrong.16
Let us see how the issue is treated by the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors. Nasafıˉ, in his
al-Mah․
s․
uˉl , writes:
The Intellect issues the forms from its cause, which is the Word, in the same way as the sun gives the recipients a share of its light, but not of its body. Since its pouring out of what is in it, namely, the potency of its cause, which is the Word, and its endowment of the recipients, occurs in this way, the cause of the things that emerge from the Intellect is the Word, not the ipseity of the Intellect, except that the Intellect becomes an intermediary between the Word and what is below the Intellect.17
The Word (kalima) is represented here as a storage place of the forms of the
created things: the Intellect acquires or “borrows” them from the Word
and transfers to the existents of lower levels. The passage does not directly
address the issue of whether the Creator creates using a form preexistent in
His knowledge or not. Implicitly, however, it relates the forms to the level
of the Word, which represents an intermediary between the Creator and
the Intellect. (One is tempted to identify these forms with the Stoic and
Neoplatonic logoi, rather than with Plato’s eide.)
In his Kitaˉb al-yanaˉbi ʿ, Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb Sijistaˉnıˉ (who was probably Nasafıˉ’s
student), says:
The world’s acquiring a form conceived in made things is a sign of the
inability of the maker to manifest a thing whose form does not precede
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 79
it. As for the true Creator, whose command is creation from nothing,
He does not require the form of what He creates to be known to Him
in order for His wisdom and power to reach the fullest limit of perfection and organization. Do you not observe concerning the lowest of
universals among the beings created from nothing, which is Nature,
how it causes natural things to appear by the power that was given
to it by its own cause without having to conceive for these a form in
knowledge? Rather, the power that was given to it puts everything in
its place and settles each in its position. Accordingly, we say that the
Creator, who is He (there being nothing with Him), whose command
is pure creation from nothing, pure truth, pure knowledge, and pure
word, is the Creator of the [two] worlds and what is in them both,
their form not being a known thing with Him.18
As we see, Sijistaˉnıˉ believes that even Nature, the lowest and weakest of the
beings created from nothing, manifests the things (not being their creator
proper) without previously conceiving their form. Such being the case,
it is unreasonable to assume that the Creator needs to conceive/possess
the forms of the things in order to create them. Let us bear in mind that
Sijistaˉnıˉ is probably the most outspoken representative of the apophatic or
negative theology among the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors (known for his employment
of the method of double negation, possibly borrowed from Damascius):
in this view, his treatment of the issue could hardly have been different.
The view that the Creator from nothing has no need in the forms of the
things which He creates was shared (if not initially proposed) by the authors of such Arabic paraphrases of Plotinus as Pseudo-Aristotle’s Theology
(a paraphrase of selected passages from Enneads 4–6) and Pseudo-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s
Risaˉla fıˉ al-ʿilm al-ilaˉhıˉ, and was endorsed by the majority of theologians
(mutakallimuˉn).
Thus, Pseudo-Aristotle’s Theology (Ut huˉl uˉji yˉa) argues:
When the Creator intends to make a thing, He does not [first] make
a model [of it] in Himself and [then] reproduce it externally, because,
before He creates from nothing, there is no thing. Likewise, He does
not create a model in Himself, because His essence is the model of
every thing, and the model does not imitate [anything else].19
In turn, Pseudo-Faˉraˉbıˉ states in his Risaˉla fıˉ al-ʿilm al-ilaˉhıˉ:
It is impossible that any created form would exist before the Creator makes it present in some matter. Similarly, Nature originates the
forms in matter, but is not able to produce any self-subsistent form
which would exist outside that matter.20
As for the position of the mutakallimuˉn, Ashʿarıˉ in his Maqaˉlaˉt asserts that
God does not create His creation following a preceding example.21
80 Janis Esots
A crucial passage in the Kitaˉb al-khayr al-mah․d․
(§17) explains that the Creator from nothing and other makers/givers act in two different ways: whereas the Creator gives things their ipseity by creating them from nothing (bi nawʿ ibdaˉʿin/per modum creationis), the others give the things their respective benefits by imposing on the beneficiary a certain form (bi nawʿ s․
uˉratin/per modum informationis/specificationis).22 If that is so, the form is not involved in the i bdaˉʿ at all. One is tempted to conclude that ipseity (huwiya, literally “he-ness”) here is identical with the existence of the thing.
Peter Adamson believes that this is exactly the case: “God creates being,
and this created being is then delimited by form through the act of Intellect.” A few pages later, he explains: “Pure being, then, can be the only
immediate expression of the power of God, and this being can only be
differentiated through the further activity of something that has a certain
degree of multiplicity, namely Intellect.”23
The situation is, however, complicated by another brief passage, found
among the so-called “scattered quotations” (al-nus․
uˉs․ al-mutafarriqa) from
Plotinus.24 According to this,
although [it is correct to say that] the Intellect is the cause of the things
that are below it, [this must be qualified to the effect that] it is only
the cause of the form of the thing, not the cause of its ipseity [JE: that
is, existence]. The First Agent, however, is the complete cause of the thing.
This means that He is the [direct] cause of the ipseity and the form of the thing,
without the intermediary of the Intellect and the Soul.25
So one wonders whether the Creator from nothing, the First Agent, creates the ipseity (= existence/being) only, creates both the ipseity and the
form, or creates only the ipseity (= existence) but is nevertheless the direct
cause of the ipseity and the form. The third case is evidently absurd and
can be dismissed. Apparently, the dominant stance was expressed by the
first opinion: the Creator from nothing creates only the ipseity or existence which subsequently receives the form and is delimited by it. Is this
the view that was held by Nasafıˉ and Sijistaˉnıˉ? I would give a cautious
reply: to some extent, yes (as we remember, Sijistaˉnıˉ views nature as the
existentiator of natural things). Nevertheless, one is still tempted to think
that this view implies the presence of the possible or hypothetical essences
of these things in God’s knowledge. In other words, the problem remains
without a definite solution.
The view that God creates the things ex nihilo without a previous form
or model is not unrelated to the opinion that such creation occurs at once
(dafʿatan waˉh․idatan), i.e., instantaneously. Pseudo-Ammonius tells us that
such is the opinion of at least three ancient Greek thinkers: Democritus,
Zeno of Citium, and Chrysippus. Democritus holds that
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 81
the first created thing is not the matter, or the Intellect—rather, it is
the four mixtures, namely the elements, from which all simple things
are then instantaneously created. As for the compound things, they
are created from matter as both lasting and perishing, although their
lasting and perishing differs in kind.26
The two Stoics, Zeno and Chrysippus, in turn, believe that “the First
Creator is pure one and identical to Himself, and only to Himself. He
created the Intellect and the Soul instantaneously; [then,] through their
mediation, He created all that is below them.”27
The latter statement is repeated almost verbatim by Abuˉ H․aˉtim Raˉzıˉ, an Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ missionary in central Iran, a contemporary of Nasafıˉ and his
opponent on a number of issues:
The Creator is [one and] pure, [and] He is only “That.” He created the
Intellect and the Soul instantaneously; then, through their mediation,
He created all that is below them.28
Incidentally, the Theology of Pseudo-Aristotle also refers to the instantaneous (or, more precisely, atemporal) character of the Creator’s action: the
Pure Agent, “when He acts, looks at His essence and performs His action
at once.”29 Could this, rather than Pseudo-Ammonius, have been the ultimate source of the principle of the instantaneous creation? We know that
the Theology was translated into Arabic before AH 227/842 CE; the Arabic version of Pseudo-Ammonius dates back to approximately the same
time.30 Both texts were part of a major project—a “programme de propaganda philosophia,” to quote Endress—initiated by al-Kindıˉ and his circle,31
and were extensively used by the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors. It seems, nevertheless,
that each early Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ author had his own preferences: while Sijistaˉnıˉ (in
particular in his late Kitaˉb al-Maqaˉlıˉd al-malakuˉtiyya) extensively quotes from the longer version of the Theology, Raˉzıˉ in his Aʿlaˉm al-Nubuwwa
(particularly in section 4.2, “On the differences between the philosophers
concerning the principles”) draws heavily on Pseudo-Ammonius.
God’s Will and Action
Another important issue discussed by both Pseudo-Ammonius and the Isma
ˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors is that of God’s will and action. Pseudo-Ammonius presents a range of opinions on the subject, attributing them to Thales, Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Plato, Aristotle, and Plutarch. The quoted statements elucidate the relationship between the willer (willing subject), the will, and the willed (object). As noticed by Rudolph, some of these statements bear a remarkable similarity with the views of certain Muʿtazilites, contemporaries of the paraphraser. Thus, the opinion ascribed to Anaxagoras and Plutarch, according
82 Janis Esots
to which will does not possess a form of its own but is identical with the willer and the willed, coincides with the view of al-Naz․z․aˉm (d. between 220 and 230/835 and 845).32 In turn, the alleged position of Plato and Aristotle, according to which will and action (i.e., i bdaˉʿ) each has a form of its own, coincides with that of al-H․
udhayl (d. 226/840).33 Furthermore, Thales and Empedocles allegedly adhered to the belief that from the point of view of the Creator, the will is identical with Him, while from the point of view of the creation, it is identical with the creation.34 According to yet another position (not attributed to any particular thinker), from the point of the view of the Creator, the form of will is identical with the form of action, whereas from the point of the view of the “trace” or creation, will is identical with the creation itself.35 This, again, is not entirely different from al-Naz․z․aˉm’s point, according to which the will for creation is identical with creation.36
There appears to be a remarkable difference in the views of the early
Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors regarding the problem of will and action, which stems
from their disagreement concerning the presence or absence of an intermediary between the Creator and the creation. In his al-Maqaˉlıˉd, Sijistaˉnıˉ,
who treats the Command (amr) or Word (kalima) as a separate hypostasis between the Creator and the Intellect, identifies God’s will with His
command (“His command which is His will”37). However, this opinion is
dismissed by Kirmaˉnıˉ. In his al-Riyaˉd․, Kirmaˉnıˉ argues that
the Intellect is not different from the Word, and vice versa, rather they
are a single essence and a single entity, which, when it is considered in
relation [to different things] receives names with different meanings.38
Simultaneously, the Intellect is also “the essence of God’s command, and
as such the cause of the existence of all things.”39 In Kirmaˉnıˉ’s opinion, it
is impossible to consider the (divine) Word, Command, or will as a separate entity or hypostasis that mediates between the Creator and the creation. The Creator and the creation have nothing in common, he argues;
thus, by definition, there cannot be an intermediary of any sort between
them.40 Hence, the will is nothing but the Intellect.
Sijistaˉnıˉ’s position, according to which God’s will is an intermediary
between Him and His creation, is compatible with the views of “Anaxagoras” and “Plutarch” (will does not possess a form of its own, but is
identical with the willer and the willed) and the belief of “Thales” and
“Empedocles” (from the point of view of the Creator, the will is identical
with Him, while from the point of view of the creation, it is identical with
the creation), and may represent a combination of both (and thus, in fact, a
combination of the views of certain Muʿtazilite thinkers). The position of
Kirmaˉnıˉ, who identifies the will with the First Intellect and claims there is
an unbridgeable abyss between the latter and the Creator, cannot be identified with any of the opinions on the issue quoted by Pseudo-Ammonius;
hence, it must be based on different theories and sources.
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 83
Return/Reversion
The return of the result and the end to its beginning and principle, one of
the key tenets of Platonism, is interpreted in Islamic thought in a number
of ways. Pseudo-Ammonius proposes at least four important considerations on this issue, which resonate to differing extents in the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ texts.
a The lower world subsists owing to the presence of the (particles of)
light of the first principles in it.41 Rudolph points to the possible Manichaean origin of this opinion, attributed to Anaximenes.42 According to the Manichaean tenets, the liberated particles of light form a
“Column of Light” (ʿamuˉd min nuˉr ).43 Although Pseudo-Ammonius
does not mention the term, the idea of the liberation of the particles
of light from matter and their subsequent return or ascent is implicitly present in the passage. Later, in T․ayyibıˉ Ismaˉ ʿıˉlism, this seminal
idea developed into an elaborated teaching on the Column of Light,
understood as an uninterrupted chain of lights of influx (maˉdda) and
support (taʾyıˉd) that descends from the Creator to the First Intellect,
and then, in due order, to other levels. Acting as a divine magnet
(magnaˉt․
ıˉs ilaˉhıˉ), this column attracts the forms of the lower degrees to
those of the higher ones.44 The soul of the believer is connected to
the column via the point of light, situated in its innermost part. Upon
the increase of the illumination it receives from the column of light,
this point expands into a form of light, which experiences permanent
attraction from the column of light. Upon the soul’s separation from
the body, it unites with the form of light (which manifests itself to the
dying individual in his imagination, representing the personification
of his acquired divine knowledge and good deeds performed), and
they become a single angelic light.45
b Separation of the particular intellects from the Universal Intellect and the particular souls from the Universal Soul occurs due to their immersion in the prime matter, whereas their escape from it takes place through a reunion with the Universal Intellect or the Universal Soul, respectively.
Pseudo-Ammonius attributes to the Stoics an opinion according to
which the pollution of the soul and grubbiness of the bodies afflict the human
being in the aspect of its particularity, whereas the purification and refinement occur in the aspect of its universality. When the particular soul
separates from the Universal Soul, and the particular intellect from the
Universal Intellect, they coarsen and enter the domain of the body, because whenever the particular soul and the particular intellect descend,
they unite with the body, which belongs to the domain of water and
earth, both of which are heavy and tend to move downwards. In turn,
whenever the particular soul unites with the Universal Soul, and the
84 Janis Esots
particular intellect with the Universal Intellect, they ascend due to their
unification with the body, which pertains to the domains of fire and air,
both of which are light and tend to move upwards.46
Raˉzıˉ quotes the opinion about the two bodies of the particular
soul (earthy and watery, and airy and fiery) in his Aʿlaˉm al-nubuwwa
merely as a doxographical curiosity, without explicitly approving or
disapproving of it.47 As discussed above, later the T․ayyibıˉ Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉs produced an elaborate theory of the ascent of the particular soul along
the Column of Light, which, acting as a divine magnet, attracts the
souls to itself.48 The Universal Soul and Universal Intellect were interpreted as different levels of the spiritual reality of the Imam.
c The particular souls immersed in the matter make supplication to
the Universal Soul, which supplicates the Intellect, which, in turn,
invokes the Creator. In reply to her supplication, the particular soul
receives support from the Universal Soul and, eventually, after the
lapse of many eons, becomes permanently united with it. This rather
elaborate theory—which inter alia implies the periodical renewal or
rebirth of the world owing to the divine support received and hence
presupposes the occurrence of periodical cycles in natural and human
history—is attributed by Pseudo-Ammonius to Empedocles and Heraclitus.
49 While it is by no means the only source of the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ teaching on the divine support (taʾyıˉd) that from the Creator, via the First
Intellect, descends and spreads to all levels of the world, this source
gives a strong endorsement to that teaching and may have contributed
to giving it the particular shape in which we encounter it in the works
of early Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors.
The opinion attributed to Empedocles and Heraclitus also implies
that if the particular souls can unite with the Universal Soul, they
are parts, not traces, of the latter—which was the view of Nasafıˉ and
Sijistaˉnıˉ, 50 whereas Raˉzıˉ and Kirmaˉnıˉ believed the particular soul to
be the trace of the Universal one:51 the part can and does return to the
whole, but the trace cannot return to its author.52
d Pseudo-Ammonius attributes to Democritus the opinion that the “husks” (that is, bodies) will eventually (at the end of the great cycle?) disappear, and the world will become a simple spiritual affair.53 Such an opinion is an indispensable part of any messianic worldview, and clearly not unreminiscent of the Qarmaˉt․
ıˉ (and Nizaˉrıˉ) Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ teaching of the qiyaˉma as the abolishment of the exoteric layer and laws pertaining to it.
Conclusion
The discovery of the manuscript of Pseudo-Ammonius by Samuel Miklos Stern, its edition and German translation by Ulrich Rudolph, and the research on it by Everett Rowson, Paul Walker, Daniel De Smet, and
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 85
Rüdiger Arnzen have made the aˉraˉʾ al-falaˉsifa known to a wider circle of scholars and established its important role in the formative period of Arabo-Islamic philosophy. However, due to the loss of the original version of the book (which was apparently significantly more extensive), a number of questions about its influence on the development of subsequent philosophical tradition, in particular in the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ milieu, currently cannot be answered with full certainty. The paraphraser certainly took a very relaxed attitude towards his source(s), adjusting it/them as, in his opinion, the current theological and philosophical discourse required. On many occasions, he ascribed certain opinions of his contemporaries to the ancient Greek thinkers, thus apparently attending to the demands of circumstances. Hence, the Arabic version of Pseudo-Ammonius can by no means be treated as an impartial scholarly doxography; on the contrary, it was intentionally designed as a polemical tool, in order to reshape the contemporary philosophical and theological discourse in the desired way.
Were the early Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ authors Nasafıˉ, Raˉzıˉ, and Sijistaˉnıˉ, who lived
and worked some three or four generations later, aware of this? I believe
they were. They used Pseudo-Ammonius for their own polemical purposes, in order to show the intellectual superiority of the Ismaˉ ʿıˉlıˉ doctrine and, by doing so, to win the support of the local elites in different parts of
the Islamic world. The names of the Greek sages, whose alleged opinions
they endorsed or dismissed, gave additional weight to the teaching they
were propagating, whereas the establishment of the historical veracity of
the opinions associated with the ancient thinkers was not their primary
concern.
Notes 1 This can be concluded from the paraphraser’s use of certain philosophical
terms, coined by the translators of the Plotiniana Arabica, in most cases either
belonging to al-Kindıˉ’s circle. See Endress, Proclus Arabus, index (76–153);
also Esots, “Image of the Sage.” 2 Rowson, “Al-ʿAˉ mirıˉ on the Afterlife,” 256; cf. Altmann and Stern, Isaac Israeli,
70 n. 1. 3 De Smet, “La Doxographie du Pseudo-Ammonius,” 497. 4 See Rowson, “Al-ʿAˉ mirıˉ on the Afterlife,” 257. 5 Pseudo-Ammonius, Doxographie, ed. Rudolph.
6 Rudolph, “La connaissance des présocratiques”; in an abridged English version as Rudolph, “Presocratics.” 7 Rudolph, “Presocratics,” 68. Cf. Walker’s description: “a collection of opinions, falsely attributed to the ancient philosophers” (Walker, Early Philosophical Shiism, 52). 8 Rudolph, “Presocratics,” 68. 9 Ibid., 72. 10 Walker, Early Philosophical Shiism, 40. 11 Ibid., 52. 12 Ibid., 152.
86 Janis Esots 13 ةع وأبدع الذى أبدع ولا صور بدَ ع كان ولا شىء م دِ المب نّ له هو أ دّ القول الذى لا مر نّقال ثاليس إ
تايًيس ا لم يكن و ممّ ييس شىء تاً ما هو نّما هو فقط... والإبداع إ نّ قبل الإبداع إ نّله عنده فى الذات لأ
مه ل نّس بل نحو ذات ما هو خارج منه فلا محالة أ وُيِّ س ليس يكون حينئذ نحو ذات الم يِّ الشىء إذا ا
نييس لا م لتاً س الأشياء فا وُيِّ س فإذا كان هو م وُيِّ فليس هو بم ّ لإو س صورة البتة وُيِّ يكن لذلك الم
هس الأشياء لا يحتاج إلى أن يكون عند وُيِّ س فإذا كان كذلك فم وُيِّ شىء متقادم ولا شىء إنما هو م
نّ للصورة التى عنده لأ ناً ته وإلا فقد لزمه إن كانت الصورة عنده أن يكون مقار يّصورة الشىء بأيس
ما ل إذا بلغ وّع الأ بدِ ه مقارن لتلك الصورة والم نّمن كانت الصورة عنده قائمة منفصلة فلا محالة أ
ما ولو كانت الصورة عنده ل دِعً ه لا يلزمه أن تكون الصورة عنده وإلا فليس هو مب نّ لا غاية بعده فإ
بدِعًا يكن م (Doxographie 2, 1–12, ed. Rudolph, 34–35). Cf. Arnzen, Platonische Ideen, 51–52. 14 ية موية ازلية، الإله الذي هو ينبوع الديم نّل هو أ وّع الأ بدِ الم نّه كان يقول إ نّقال كسنوفانس فإ
ن كل صفة وكل نعت منطقي وعقلي وإذا كا اْة، مبد قليّ ة ولا ع يّة لا يدرك بنوع صفه منطق يّوالقدم
ل أبدع محا لِمَ هذا هكذا فقولنا إن صورة ما في هذا العالم المبدع لم تكن عنده أو كانت أو كيف أبدع و
ك فإذا كان المسبوق لا يدر اًع ولا يدرك المسبوق السابق ابد بدِ ع مسبوق بالم بدَ ع والم بدَ العقل م نّلأ
؟السابق فكيف يجوز أن يصف المسبوق السابق (Doxographie 4, 1–6, ed. Rudolph, 36).
Cf. Arnzen, Platonische Ideen, 52.
15 تظهر عبدَ ع فقط وكل م بدِ ات وهو م ليّ ة الأز ليّ ة التى هي أز ليّ وعلا لم يزل بالأز جلّ البارئ نّقال فلوطرخس إ
معه ل والصورة عنده بلا نهاية ولو لم تكن الصورة وّ الإبداع فقد كانت صورته في علمه الأ دّصورته في ح
يته لم تكن لتبق ليّ في از . (Doxographie 3, 1–4, ed. Rudolph, 35). Cf. Arnzen, Platonische Ideen, 52. 16 Doxographie 3, 5–12, ed. Rudolph, 35–36. 17 ،ئها و العقل إنما يفيد الصور من علته التي هي الكلمة كما ان الشمس تفيد القابسين من ض نّإ
نها لا من جرمها، وإذا كان إخراجه لما فيه من قوة علته التي هي الكلمة وإفادته اياهم كذلك م
قل استبان ان الكلمة هي التي صارت علة الاشياء البارزة من العقل، لا هوية العقل، وإلا ان الع
نه صار واسطة بين الكلمة وما دو (al-Nasafıˉ, al-Mah․
s․
uˉl , quoted in al-Kirmaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb
al-riyaˉd․ , ed. Taˉmir, 226.14–18). 18 Walker, Wellsprings of Wisdom, 151 (ch. 33; translation modified). The Arabic
text runs: روان اكتساب العالم للصورة المتصورة في المصنوعات آية عجز الصانع عن اظها
ما ع الحق الذي أمره الإبداع فلا يحتاج أن يكون صورة بدِ ا الم مّالشيء لم يتقدم عليه صورته. فا
تيبدعه معلومة عنده، لتكون حكمته وقدرته في غاية الكمال والهيئة. الم تر أن ادنى المبدعا
ير كيف تظهر الاشياء الطبيعية بقوتها الموهبة لها من علتها من غ طبيعة – وهي لكلية – في ا
لك تصوير لها صورة علمية؟ بل قوتها الموهبة لها تضع كل شيء موضعه وتنزله منزلته. وكذ
ةع الذي هو كان ولا شيء معه، أمره إبداع محض، وحق محض، وعلم محض، وكلم دِ المب نًنقول: إ
هع العالمين بما فيهما ولا تكون صورهما معلومة عند بدِ محضة، م (al-Sijistaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb al-
yanaˉbi ʿ, ed. Ghaˉlib, 151). 19 نك ي ه لم نّل في نفسه ولا يحتذى صنعة خارجة منه، لأ ثّه لا يم نّ شيء فإ لَه إذا أراد فع نّا البارئ فإ مّوأ
ثلّ شيء، فالمثال لا يتم لّشيء قبل أن يبدع الأشياء، ولا يتمثل في ذاته لأن ذاته مثال ك (Aflut ․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿarab, ed. Badawıˉ, 163.2–4). 20 رصارها الصانع في بعض العن وّلا يمكن أن تكون صورة من الصور الصناعية موجودة قبل ان يص
ئمة وكذلك تفعل الطبيعة الصور في بعض العناصر ولا تقوى على أن تفعل صورة من الصور قا
ربذاتها إلا في عنص (Pseudo-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Risaˉla fıˉ al-ʿilm al-ilaˉhıˉ, 167–68). 21 بق لم يخلق الخلق على مثال س (al-Ashʿarıˉ, Maqaˉlaˉt al-islamiyyıˉn, 156, l. 9). 22 عوبن ة فإنها تعطيها يّها الهو كلّ الهوية الاولى ساكنة وهي علت العلل، وإن كانت تعطى الأشياء نّ
قل . وكذلك الع ةٍها تعطى ما تحتها الحياة لا بنوع إبداع، بل بنوع صور نّا الحياة الأولى فإ مّ. وأ عٍإبدا
وما ه نّ نوع الإبداع إ نّ، لأ عٍ، لا بنوع إبدا ةٍمن العلم وسائر الأشياء بنوع صور ته – ما يعطى ما تح نّإ
اللعلة الأولى وحده . (Kitaˉb fıˉ al-khayr al-mah․
d․, 19). 23 Adamson, Arabic Plotinus, 133 and 141. 24 In Aflut ․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿarab, ed. Badawıˉ, 185–98. 25 ةروما هو علة ص نّه للشيء، لأنه إ مّه ليس بعلة تا نّوإن كان العقل علة الأشياء التي تحته، فإ
ته ة. وذلك أنه علة هوية الشيء وصور مّه علة تا نّل فإ وّا الفاعل الأ مّالشيء فقط لا علة هوية. فأ
سبلا توسط العقل والنف (Aflut ․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿarab, ed. Badawıˉ, 185). Emphasis added.
Apparently, the First Agent acts as a cause of the thing in two different ways,
in respect to its ipseity and its form (cf. the discussion on the causality of the
One as the dunamis ton panton in D’Ancona, “Plotinus.”)
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 87
26 بل ه ليس هو العنصر فقط و لا عقل إنّ ل وّع الأ بدَ يمقراطيس واصحابه. . .كانوا يقولون في الم
كّبة ا المر مّها دفعة واحدة فأ كلّ منها أبدعت الاشياء البسيطة مّات ث سّالأخلاط الأربعة وهي الأسطق
ع ديمومتها بنوع ودثورها بنو نّ أ ّ لإ ةنت دائمة داثر وّها ك نّفإ (Doxographie 8, 1–3, ed. Rudolph, 41). 27 ضمح ل واحد وّ البارئ الأ نّكان خروسبوس وزينون من اهل المظلة وكان رأيهم وقولهم الخالص أ
طهما أبدع جميع ما تحتهما بتوس مّ فقط أبدع العقل والنفس دفعة واحدة ث نّوهو هو أ (Doxographie 17, 3–6, ed. Rudolph, 61). 28 طهما سو أبدع جميع ما تحتهما بت مّ ث ةً واحد فعةً فقط، أبدع العقل و النفس د نّ البارئ محض هو أ نّإ
(al-Raˉzıˉ, Aʿlaˉm al-Nubuwwa, 143). 29 ةًدح وا فعةً فاذا فعل فإنما ينظر إلى ذاته فيفعل فعله د (Aflut ․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿarab, ed. Badawıˉ,
51.14; cf. Doxographie, ed. Rudolph, 150, where the references to several Isma
ˉʿıˉlıˉ texts are given). 30 D’Ancona, “Theology Attributed to Aristotle,” 16.
31 Endress, “New and Improved Platonic Theology,” 569. 32 هدا الإر نّه كان نخب مذهب فلوطرخس في البارئ والإرادة وفعل فكان يزعم أ نّا أنكساغورس فإ مّفأ
لا الفعل ليس غير الفاعل ولا غير المفعو يضً ا غير المريد وكذلك ا يضً ليست غير المراد ولا هي أ
مّا ا بالفاعل وإ مّما تقومان وتكونان إ نّ صورة الإرادة وصورة الفعل إ نّ فإ يةًّ الإرادة لا صورة لها ذات نّلأ
لبالمفعو (Doxographie 24, 1–5, ed. Rudolph, 72; see Rudolph’s commentary
ibid., 199). 33 ةرو ص نّهما كانا لا يقبلان هذا من أنكساغورس بل كانا يقولان إ نّا أفلاطون وأرسطاطاليس فإ مّفأ
طع هما قالا انظروا إلى القا نّهما أبسط من صورة المراد وذلك أ نّالإرادة و صورة الفعل قائمتان لأ
ثِر للشيء، وهو الفاعل إذا قطع الشيء وانظروا إلى المقطوع وانظروا إلى القطع فالقاطع هو المؤ
ثَّر ر ولا المؤ ثِّر فالأثر ليس هو المؤ ثِّر فيه القابل لأثر المؤ ثَّه في الشيء والمقطوع هو المؤ رَ أث
يه ف (Doxographie 24, 8–12, ed. Rudolph, 72–73; see Rudolph’s commentary
ibid., 199). 34 نم ع هي بدِ الإرادة الأولى أعنى إرادة الم نّهم قالو بأ نّلون مثل ثاليس وأنبادقليس فإ وّا الأ مّفأ
بدَع ع هي الم بدَ ع وهي من جهة الم بدِ ع هي الم بدِ جهة الم (Doxographie 24, 29–30, ed.
Rudolph, 74). 35 لب ن الإرادة و الفعل من جهة صورة في البارئ ليست هناك صورة الإرادة و صورة الفعل متفرقي
دَع هما صورة واحدة متحدة و من جهة الاثر فالإرادة هي المب (Doxographie 24, 22–23, ed.
Rudolph, 73–74). 36 ين ولتك إرادة لتكوين هي ا (al-Ashʿarıˉ, Maqaˉlaˉt al-islamiyyıˉn, 190.13; see Rudolph’s
commentary in Doxographie, ed. Rudolph, 200). Could this identity of the (alleged) opinions of Greek sages and the (true) views of the Muʿtazilite thinkers—contemporaries of the Arabic version of Pseudo-Ammonius—be treated
as evidence of an intentional misattribution, to the effect that the principal
purpose of the compiler of the latter text was to reflect the spectrum of the
opinions current in his own time and pertaining to the issues that preoccupied him and his contemporaries? I am inclined to think so, but this is the
subject of a separate discussion, in which I cannot engage here. 37 هتدأمره الذي هو إرا (al-Sijistaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb al-maqaˉlid al-malakuˉtiyya, 111). Cf. a slightly
modified statement دِع فالإرادة من أمر الله هو ما عند المب in al-Sijistaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb al-Iftikhaˉr, 106. 38 ةدحليس العقل شيئا هو غير الكلمة ولا الكلمة شيئا هي غير العقل بل الذات واحدة والعين وا
يوبالإضافة يستحق الاسماء المتناثرة المعان (al-Kirmaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb al-riyaˉd․ , 66; cf. ibid.,
126 and 227). 39 اهء كلّ لوجود الأشيا لّةَ هو ذات إمر الله ع قل . . . الع (al-Kirmaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb al-riyaˉd․, 172). 40 For a detailed analysis of Kirmaˉnıˉ’s position, see De Smet, La quiétude de l’intellect,
123–46. 41 وه ما نّه ثفل ذلك العالم الروحاني البسيط الشريف، وإ نّهذا العالم يدثر ويدخله الفساد من أجل أ
قل ى الع فّما ثباته بقدر ما يص نّة تلك الأوائل لما ثبت طرفة العين وإ يّقشر ولولا ما فيه من نور
رت هذه الجواه فّرة الشريفة وإذا ص لنيّ ى النفس جزءها الذي فيه وفي الأجزاء ا فّجزءه الذي فيه وتص
يه ا قد عدم ذلك )النور( القليل كان ف ظلمً الكريمة التي فيه دثر وفسد فيبقى )العالم( م (Doxographie 21, 7–13, ed. Rudolph, 70–71).
88 Janis Esots 42 Doxographie, ed. Rudolph, 196. 43 See, e.g., Rudolph, Gnosis, 337. 44 Al-Walıˉd, Al-Dhakhıˉra, 79. 45 Ibid., 143. Daniel De Smet has recently published an interesting and detailed
article on the subject (De Smet, “La colonne de lumière”). Unfortunately, he
does not deal with the Manichaean motifs of Pseudo-Ammonius there. جهة] 46 ما تكون لازمة لهذا الإنسان من نّ دنس النفس أوساخ الأجساد ا نّ ذكروا أ [ظلة لم ا حكماء اهل
لكلّية ه إذا انفصلت النفس الجزئية من النفس ا نّما التهذيب والتطهير من جهة الكل لأ نّالأجزاء، وإ
دحتتّ ما نّما سفلت فإ كلّ ها نّز الجرم لأ يّي غلظت وصارت من ح لكلّ والعقل الجزئي من العقل ا
ئية صلت النفس الجز تّما ا كلّ و ً لسف ز الماء والأرض وهما ثقيلان يذهبان يّبالجرم والجرم من ح
رز النا جيّ ها تتحد بالجسم والجسم من نّا لأ وًّي ذهبت عل لكلّ ية والعقل الجزئي بالعقل ا لكلّ بالنفس ا
وًّا والهواء وكلاهما لطيفان يذهبان عل . (Doxographie 17, 22–28, ed. Rudolph, 62–63). 47 Al-Raˉzıˉ, Aʿlaˉm al-Nubuwwa, 143. 48 Al-Walıˉd, Al-Dhakhıˉra, 79. 49 Doxographie 22, 1–6, ed. Rudolph, 71–72. 50 See, e.g., al-Sijistaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb al-yanaˉbi ʿ, 110 (ch. 18). 51 See, e.g., al-Raˉzıˉ, Kitaˉb al-is․l aˉh․, 31; al-Kirmaˉnıˉ, Kitaˉb al-riyaˉd․ , 88; al-Kirmaˉnıˉ,
Raˉh․at al-ʿaql, 496. 52 See De Smet, Philosophie ismaélienne, 113–25, for further discussion. 53 ذّب لمه ا ا بقى جوهر نيَّ ا روحا طًت قشوره وذهب دنسه صار بسي لّ هذا العالم إذا اضمح نّإ (Doxographie 26, 20–21, ed. Rudolph, 78).
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Ashʿarıˉ, Abuˉ al-H․
asan. Maqaˉlaˉt al-islamiyyıˉ n (Die Dogmatischen Lehren der Anhänger des Islam). Edited by Hellmut Ritter. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, 1963.
Al-Kirmaˉnıˉ, H․
amıˉd al-Dıˉn. Kitaˉb al-riyaˉd․ fıˉ al-h․
ukm bayna al-s․aˉdayn s․aˉ h․ibayn al-
is․l aˉh․ wa al-nus․
ra. Edited by ʿAˉ rif Taˉmir. Beirut: Daˉr al-thaqaˉfa, 1960.
Al-Kirmaˉnıˉ, Ḥamıˉd al-Dıˉn. Raˉh․at al-ʿaql. Edited by Mus․t․afaˉ Ghaˉlib. Beirut: Daˉr
al-andalus, 1983.
Al-Raˉzıˉ, Abuˉ H․aˉtim. Aʿlaˉm al-Nubuwwa. Edited by S․alaˉh․ al-S․aˉwıˉ and Ghulaˉm
Rid․aˉ Aʿwaˉnıˉ. Tehran: Intishaˉraˉt-i Anjuman-i Shaˉhanshaˉhıˉ-yi Falsafa-yi ıˉraˉn, 1977.
Al-Raˉzıˉ, Abuˉ H․aˉtim. Kitaˉb al-is․l aˉh․. Edited by H․asan Mıˉnuˉchihr, under the supervision of Mehdi Mohaghegh, English introduction by Shin Nomoto, 2nd
edition. Tehran: Daˉnishgaˉh-i Tihraˉn, 2004.
Al-Sijistaˉnıˉ, Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb. Kitaˉb al-Iftikhaˉr. Edited with notes and comments by
Ismail K. Poonawala. Beirut: Daˉr al-Gharb al-Islaˉmıˉ, 2000.
Al-Sijistaˉnıˉ, Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb. Kitaˉb al-maqaˉlid al-malakuˉtiyya. Edited by Ismail K.
Poonawala. Beirut: Daˉr al-Gharb al-Islaˉmıˉ, 2011.
Al-Sijistaˉnıˉ, Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb. Kitaˉb al-yanaˉbi ʿ. Edited by Mus․
t․
afaˉ Ghaˉlib. Beirut:
al-Maktab al-Tijaˉrıˉ, 1965.
Al-Walıˉd, Alıˉ ibn Muh․ammad Ibn. Al-Dhakhıˉ ra fıˉ al-h․
aqıˉqa. Edited by Muh․ammad
H․asan al-Aʿz․amıˉ. Beirut: Daˉr al-thaqaˉfa, 1971.
Badawıˉ, ʿAbd al-Rah․maˉn, ed. Aflut ․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿarab. Cairo: Maktabat al-nahd․a
al-mis․
riyya, 1955.
Pseudo-Ammonius. Die Doxographie des Pseudo-Ammonios: Ein Beitrag zur neuplatonischen Überlieferung im Islam. Edited by Ulrich Rudolph. Stuttgart: Deutsche
Morgenländische Gesellschaft, 1989.
Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉ raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 89
[Pseudo-Aristotle.] Kitaˉb al-ıˉ d․aˉh․ li Arast․
uˉt․aˉl ıˉ s fıˉ al-khayr al-mah․
d․. In Al-Afluˉt․uˉ niyya al-muh․datha ʿinda al-ʿarab, edited by ʿAbd al-Rah․maˉn Badawıˉ, 1–33. Cairo:
Maktabat al-nahd․a al-mis․
riyya, 1955.
Pseudo-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Risaˉla fıˉ al-ʿilm al-ilaˉhıˉ. In Al-Afluˉt․uˉniyya al-muh․datha ʿinda al-
ʿarab, edited by ʿAbd al-Rah․maˉn Badawıˉ, 167–83. Cairo: Maktabat al-nahd․a
al-mis․
riyya, 1955.
Secondary Literature
Adamson, Peter. The Arabic Plotinus: A Philosophical Study of the “Theology of Aristotle.”
London: Duckworth, 2002.
Altmann, Alexander, and Samuel M. Stern. Isaac Israeli: A Neoplatonic Philosopher
of the Early Tenth Century. 2nd edition. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 2009.
Arnzen, Rüdiger. Platonische Ideen in der arabischen Philosophie: Texte und Materialien
zur Begriffsgeschichte von s․uwar aflaˉt․uˉ niyya und muthul aflaˉt․uˉniyya. Berlin: De
Gruyter, 2011.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “Plotinus and Later Platonic Philosophers on the Causality
of the First Principle.” In The Cambridge Companion to Plotinus, edited by Lloyd
G. Gerson, 368–80. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “The Theology Attributed to Aristotle: Sources, Structure,
Influence.” In The Oxford Handbook of Islamic Philosophy, edited by Khaled
El-Rouayheb and Sabine Schmidtke, 8–29. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2016.
De Smet, Daniel. “La colonne de lumière, une notion manichéenne dans l’ismaélisme
t․ayyibite.” In Gnose et manichéisme entre les oasis d’Égypte et la Route de
la Soie: Hommage à Jean-Daniel Dubois, edited by Anna Van den Kerchove and
Luciana G. Soares Santoprete, 349–75. Turnhout: Brepols, 2017.
De Smet, Daniel. “La Doxographie du Pseudo-Ammonius dans ses rapports
avec le néoplatonisme ismaélien.” In Études de logique aristotélicienne et de
philosophie grecque, syriaque, arabe et latine offertes à Henri Hugonnard-Roche,
edited by Elisa Coda and Cecilia Martini Bonadeo, 491–518. Paris:
Vrin, 2014.
De Smet, Daniel. La philosophie ismaélienne: Un ésotérisme chiite entre néoplatonisme
et gnose. Paris: Cerf, 2012.
De Smet, Daniel. La quiétude de l’intellect: Néoplatonisme et gnose ismaélienne dans
l’oeuvre de Hamîd al-Dîn al-Kirmânî. Leuven: Peeters, 1995.
Endress, Gerhard. “The New and Improved Platonic Theology: Proclus Arabus
and Arabic Islamic Philosophy.” In Proclus et la théologie platonicienne, edited by
Alain-Philippe Segonds and Carlos G. Steel, 553–70. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2000.
Endress, Gerhard. Proclus Arabus: Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio Theologica in
arabischer Übersetzung. Edited with an introduction by Gerhard Endress. Beirut:
Orient-Institut der Deutschen Morgenlä ndischen Gesellschaft, 1973.
Esots, Janis. “The Image of the Sage in Pseudo-Ammonius’ Aˉraˉʾ al-falaˉsifa.” In
Prophets, Viziers and Philosophers: Wisdom and Authority in Early Islamic Literature,
edited by Emily J. Cottrell, 51–64. Groningen: Barkhuis, 2020.
Rowson, Everett K. “Al-ʿAˉ mirıˉ on the Afterlife: A Translation with Commentary of His al-Amad ʿalaˉ al-abad.” PhD diss., Yale University, 1981.
90 Janis Esots
Rudolph, Kurt. Gnosis: The Nature and History of Gnosticism. Translated by
P. W. Coxon and K. H. Kuhn. San Francisco, CA: Harper, 1987.
Rudolph, Ulrich. “La connaissance des présocratiques à l’aube de la philosophie
et de l’alchimie islamiques.” In L’alchimie et ses racines philosophiques: La tradition
grecque et la tradition arabe, edited by Cristina Viano, 155–70. Paris: Vrin, 2004.
Rudolph, Ulrich. “The Presocratics in Arabic Philosophical Pseudoepigrapha”
(abridged translation of Rudolph, “La connaissance”). In Islamic Crosspollinations: Interactions in the Medieval Middle East, edited by Anna Akasoy, James E.
Montgomery, and Peter E. Pormann, 65–75. London: E. J. Gibb Memorial
Trust, 2007.
Walker, Paul E. Early Philosophical Shiism: The Ismaˉ‘ıˉ lıˉ Neoplatonism of Abuˉ Ya‘quˉb
al-Sijistaˉnıˉ. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Walker, Paul E. The Wellsprings of Wisdom: A Study of Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb al-Sijistaˉnıˉ’s Kitaˉb
al-yanaˉbi ʿ Including a Complete English Translation. Salt Lake City: University of
Utah Press, 1994.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-6
For a long time, scholars have been aware of Arabic influences on Roger Bacon, particularly Avicennian influences. In 1926, on the Latin side of medieval scholarship, Gilson even called Bacon “le type accompli de l’augustinisme avicennisant,”1 and, on the Arabic side, Fr. Bouyges, SJ, wondered whether Roger Bacon read books in Arabic, even though he ultimately concluded that it was unlikely.2 In 1934, in his study on “Latin Avicennism,” Fr. De Vaux, OP, claimed that “among the great thirteenth-century authors, Bacon is the best informed on Avicenna’s life and works.”3 In a rather scathing article, Fr. Crowley, OFM, rejected both Gilson and De Vaux’s claims and argued that Bacon is neither Avicennist nor avicennisant. Yes, Bacon calls Avicenna “Aristotle’s main imitator and expositor, second only to Aristotle” (“Praecipuus imitator Aristotelis, et dux ac princeps philosophiae post eum”), but Bacon did not adopt Avicenna’s views on key issues, such as the active intellect or an emanationist and necessitarian conception of creation.4 Crowley seems to have brought research on this issue to a halt, until John D. North published a substantive paper in 1999 on “Roger Bacon and the Saracens,” in which he lists many cases of Bacon’s using Avicenna even while arguing positions that would have surprised Ibn Sııˉnaˉ a great deal. Jules Janssens, in the second supplement to his annotated bibliography on Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, which covers the years 1995–2009, gives no fewer than eighteen further references to this topic.5
More recent studies have shown that al-Faˉraˉbıˉ also had some influence on Roger Bacon’s moral philosophy.6 Yet such studies have not much analyzed how Roger Bacon deploys his “Arabic” sources and understands them. This paper asks how Bacon uses such sources in what he considered the most important part of his Opus maius: the
seventh and last part, his moral philosophy.7 In the second half of this part, Roger Bacon calls on Avicenna in order to argue for the importance
of moralis philosophia, and he calls on al-Faˉraˉbıˉ in order to argue for the necessity to develop a little-known form of rhetoric, namely poetics.
My aim in this article is, first, to briefly list all the “Arabic” sources I found in the Moralis philosophia and then locate the two main sources—Avicenna’s 4 Roger Bacon and His
“Arabic” Sources in His
Moralis philosophia
Thérèse-Anne Druart
92 Thérèse-Anne Druart
Metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ (especially 9.7 and 10.2–5)8 and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis
(especially 2 and 5, in Gerard of Cremona’s translation) in the general structure of the text.9 Second, I show how Bacon uses Avicenna to bolster his main claim, that moral philosophy is the most important philosophical discipline, and go through each of the six parts of Moralis philosophia to examine how these sources are used. Finally, I present some tentative conclusions.
The Arabic Sources for the Moralis philosophia and the
General Location of the Two Main Sources in the
Structure of the Text
Bacon must have been a voracious reader, enjoying the hunt for unusual
sources. Here is a list of all the “Arabic” sources Bacon uses in his Moralis philosophia:
Albumasar: De magnis coniunctionibus
Introductorium in astronomiam
Algazel: Logica (he does not realize this is al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s Arabic adaptation
of one of Avicenna’s Persian texts, Daˉnesh-Naˉmeh)10
Alfarabius: De scientiis, Chapters 2 and 5 in Gerard of Cremona’s translation
as explained above
Commentary on Rhetoric, probably Didascalia in rhetoricam Aristotelis
ex glosa Alpharabii11
Commentary on Physics, misattributed to Averroes12
The pseudo-Farabian De ortu scientiarum13
Avicenna: Metaphysics, mainly 10.2–5 and 9.7, but also 1.1
Preface to the Shifaˉʾ (Sufficiencia)14
De anima 5.1 and 4
De arte medicinae
Logic
(Bacon indicates that De caelo is a spurious text, despite its
attribution to Avicenna)
Averroes: De caelo 1.2
Physics 2
Rhetoric
Poetics, but Bacon complains of its poor translation
Others: Book of Causes
Secretum secretorum, which he falsely attributes to Aristotle
Two of these sources, Avicenna’s Preface to the Shifaˉʾ and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s
Commentary on the Physics, were used by Bacon despite their seeming lack
of circulation.
As most of these sources are little used or simply referenced, I shall
concentrate on the sources that Bacon quoted extensively or with which
he engaged. While writing Moralis philosophia, Bacon certainly had the
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 93
text of Avicenna’s Metaphysics 9.7 and 10.2–5 on his desk,15 as he quotes it
often and, at times, at some length, whereas his references to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s
De scientiis, ch. 2 and 5 are not quotations but simply allusions to parts of
a chapter.16 The location of both texts in the general structure of Moralis philosophia is interesting.17 Bacon considers Parts 1–3 theoretical and Parts
4–6 practical. His theoretical Part 1 includes the general proemium and
the principles or roots of moral philosophy, i.e., our relation to God. This
part refers to Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10, even quoting it at times. Part 2,
which centers on one’s relation to neighbors and family, also quotes the
same text—even, surprisingly, on the importance of matrimony, though
Avicenna’s views on matrimony are far from Christian (and his own reputation concerning sexual matters, of which Bacon probably knew nothing,
does not recommend him for expertise on this topic).18 Part 3, which deals
with one’s relation to oneself, and so with virtues and vices, is mostly derived from Seneca.
The practical part shifts to arguments for the true religion, since philosophy leads to theology. Part 4 argues for the superiority of Christianity over the other religions and makes surprising use of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis 5, which deals with the perfect and imperfect states. As the historical al-Faˉraˉbııˉ subordinates religion to philosophy and not the other way around, this choice of source is puzzling. I was rather relieved to discover that in the third and last distinction, which focuses on the Eucharist, Bacon abstains from any “Arabic” sources. Part 5 explains how to incite love for and practice of the true religion by means of a specific kind of rhetoric, namely a kind of poetics that is little known among the Latins, except as practiced by Augustine in his De doctrina christiana, but
is explored in the texts of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ (De scientiis 2). The very brief Part 6 (only one page) addresses forensic oratory and laments the poor Latin translation of Aristotle’s Rhetoric and Averroes’ Commentary on the Poetics,
as well as the lack of a translation of Aristotle’s own Poetics. Once again it refers to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ.
This very general sketch suggests that Roger Bacon is unconcerned
with exegesis. He simply uses his sources as authorities to convince the
pope of his own views and manipulates them for his own purposes. Of
course, at times one may ask whether some of his most astonishing statements arise from a lack of knowledge of both Islam and Islamic culture,
or from inevitable shifts in meaning resulting from the translation process.
Besides, Bacon had no access to most of Avicenna’s and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s other
works, and therefore had very limited knowledge of their positions on
some key issues. A thirteenth-century Latin reader would not have been
as surprised and dismayed by Bacon’s strange use of his sources as current
scholars in Arabic philosophy surely are. Before turning to a careful examination of the parts of this text, let us first look at how Bacon justifies the
whole enterprise of his moral philosophy.
94 Thérèse-Anne Druart
Bacon’s Justification for Considering Moral Philosophy
the Crown of the Philosophical Enterprise and Closest
to Theology
Bacon regards moral philosophy as the end and mistress (dominatrix) of all
the philosophical sciences (1, proemium, 6–7). For him, the study of metaphysics not only precedes that of moral philosophy, but is for its sake, as
providing its principles or roots (radices). Surprisingly, the main authority
for this subordination of metaphysics to moral philosophy—which in fact
comprises ethics, economics, and politics—is none other than Avicenna.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, of course, wrote very little on moral philosophy, even if he is
“the most outstanding expositor of Aristotle” (precipuus Aristotilis expositor,
1.2, 6). It is still more surprising to realize that Bacon was fully aware of
this fact: he may well be the only medieval Latin philosopher who refers
to Avicenna’s preface to the whole Shifaˉʾ, in which Avicenna explains that,
being unsure if he would ever write a standalone ethics, he has briefly addressed ethics at the end of his metaphysics. This is Bacon’s account:
By these principles metaphysics is continuous with moral philosophy
and comes down to it as its end: thus Avicenna joins them beautifully at the end of his Metaphysics. The other principles, however, are
peculiar to this science and are not to be explained in metaphysics,
although Avicenna adds a number of them. But in the beginning of
his volume he gives the reason for this: that he had not constructed a
moral philosophy and he did not know whether he would complete
one; and therefore he mixed with these metaphysical principles many
that are nevertheless proper to moral philosophy.
(1.1, 6, trans. MMF19)
Bacon’s peculiar reading of Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10.3–5, as crowning
the whole philosophical enterprise (rather than as an accidental feature),
justifies his own emphasis on and understanding of moral philosophy. Curiously, in proemium 8, Bacon claims that the main authors for moral philosophy are Avicenna, Aristotle, and Averroes, though during his life only
some of their texts were available in Latin. Bacon also extensively uses
Augustine, particularly his De doctrina christiana, as well as either Cicero or
Seneca, and also makes reference to Boethius.
Part 1: Our Relation to God or the Principles of
Moral Philosophy
As we saw earlier, Bacon explains that the purpose of metaphysics is to provide the fundamentals or roots (radices) of ethics. Bacon reads Avicenna’s Metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ as illustrating this view, since the last chapter of Book 9, its penultimate book, as well as the last four chapters of the
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 95
whole book deal with moral issues. Bacon then lists seventeen metaphysical principles for his moral philosophy and goes into more detail, focusing upon an abbreviated list of six principles. He begins with the triune God, moves to incarnation, then to creation, the immortality of the soul and the bodily resurrection, felicity in the afterlife, and finally misery in the afterlife. Once he has gone through all six principles, he deals with the last root, the law of divine worship (cultus). Bacon finds support in Avicenna not only for his claim that moral philosophy is the crown of the philosophical enterprise but also for each of the six primary principles except incarnation, even using Avicennian philosophy to support the notion of the triune God and bodily resurrection. He also relies upon Avicenna for the laws of divine worship. At the beginning, Bacon’s main sources are Metaphysics 10.2, 3, and 5 and 9.7. On the immortality of the soul, resurrection of the body, felicity and misery in the afterlife, Bacon frequently quotes Metaphysics 9.7. The Arabic title of this chapter is fıˉʾl-maʿaˉd (“On the Return”), but the Latin version speaks of de promissione divina or divine promise, and Bacon enthusiastically adopts this expression.
In what follows, I examine in more detail how Bacon integrates, so to
speak, Avicenna into his own project.
The Introduction
In his introduction to moral and civil philosophy or science, Bacon tells
us that such science “is concerned with the salvation of the human being
to be perfected through virtue and felicity, and this science aspires to
that salvation as far as philosophy can” (1, proemium, 4, trans. MMF with
modifications). Of course, salvation is essential and, thus, so too is moral
philosophy, which is the dominatrix (1, proemium, 7) or “mistress” of human
wisdom. Therefore, moral philosophy must be founded upon principles
from metaphysics, which Bacon explains in Part 1 (1, proemium, 14). For
Bacon, metaphysics and moral philosophy maxime convenient (1, proemium,
16), and so metaphysics inquires into God, eternal life, and so on, for the
sake of ethics.
The Seventeen Principles
Bacon lists no fewer than seventeen principles to serve moral philosophy,
all of which are established through metaphysics. The thirteenth speaks
of God’s promise of rewards and punishment in the afterlife, referring to
Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10.2 (533.24–28 and 535.51, de promisso), though
later on, the main source for this topic will be Book 9.7. The seventeenth
and final principle is his most detailed and longest account and deserves
particular attention, as it seems to speak of the pope. In clever but curious
fashion, it mixes what Avicenna writes concerning the prophet in 10.2
96 Thérèse-Anne Druart
with his examination of the roles of the caliph and the imaˉm in 10.5. The
Latin translation makes the imaˉm a sumus sacerdos and the caliph a “successor” in the title but a vicarius in the body of the chapter.
Bacon Latin
Decimoseptimo, quod uni tantum debet fieri revelatio, quod iste
debeat esse mediator Dei et hominum, et vicarius Dei in terra, cui
subiciatur totum genus humanum, et cui credere debeat sine contradicione, quando probatum fuerit certitudinaliter quod iste sit talis,
ut nunc est assignatum; et iste est legis lator et summus sacerdos, qui in
spiritualibus et temporalibus habet plenitudinem potestatis, tanquam
“Deus humanus, ut dicit Avicenna in decimo Metaphisice, quem licet
adorare post Deum.”
Bacon English (MMF)
Seventeenth, that the revelation must be made to one only; that he
must be the mediator of god and men and the vicar of God on earth,
to whom is subjected the whole human race, and in whom one must
believe without contradiction when it has been proved with certitude
that he is such as I have described him; and he is the lawgiver and the
high priest who in spiritual and in temporal things has the plenitude
of power, as a “human God,” as Avicenna says in Book X of the Metaphysics,
“whom it is permissible to adore after God.”
Avicenna Latinus
2, 533.14: Igitur necessarium est prophetam esse, et necessarium est
ipsum esse hominem, et necessarium est eum habere proprietatem
quae non est ceteris hominibus, ita ut homines percipiant in ipso esse
quiddam quod differat ab ipsis, et illud est miracula quae praediximus.
5.552–3.14–17: In quocumque autem convenerit cum illiis sapienta
speculative, hic iam factus est felix; et cui cum hoc datae fuerint proprietates prophetiae, fortasse fiet deus humanus, quem licet adorari
post Deum quia ipse est res terreni et mundi et est vicarius Dei in illo.
(This is the last line of the whole text.)
This comparison of Bacon’s and Avicenna’s passages offers a good example
of the way in which Bacon often plays with Avicenna’s text. Notice that
Bacon neglects to quote the final refrain concerning the topic of prophecy
from Avicenna’s text, though he speaks of revelation (while “revelation” is
also used in Chapter 2 to explore prophecy). He also expunges Avicenna’s
cautious fortasse from the last sentence.
Bacon’s section listing these seventeen principles concludes by showing
how ethics continues metaphysics, which regards ethics as its end. Bacon
goes on to explain that the lawgiver should speak of “the properties of
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 97
God in particular, and of angels, and the happiness and the misery of the
other life, and the immortality of bodies, and things of this sort to which
the metaphysician could not aspire” (1.1, 7, trans. MMF), as the metaphysician focuses on showing simply that the thing is. Hence, the moral philosopher will at times add to what the metaphysician says, but, as a moral
philosopher, he does not need to explain all the secrets (secreta) of God,
the angels, and others, but only those that are necessary to the multitude,
on which all men should agree lest they fall into questions and heresies,
as Avicenna teaches in the chapter “Roots of Moral Philosophy” (1.1, 8).
This warning not to teach secrets refers to 10.2 (534.29–535.57), in which
Avicenna claims that ordinary people (vulgus) have trouble understanding
complex philosophical views which the wise “legislator,” also known as
the prophet, will hide under metaphors and similes.
The Six Primary Principles
Having completed his introduction, Bacon reduces his seventeen principles to only six: the triune God; the incarnation and the antichrist; creation; the immortality of the soul and the resurrection of the body; felicity
in the afterlife; and misery in the afterlife. What the philosophers know
about these topics derives from revelation to the patriarchs and prophets.
This derivation explains how philosophers attained some glimpse of the
Trinity and attested to its existence, but could not explain it fully. Bacon
indicates that Avicenna (1.2., 6.3–4), precipuus Aristotilis expositor, maintains
that there is a Holy Spirit (spiritus sanctus) in the “Roots of Moral Philosophy” (10.2, 533.20, et revelatione sancti spiritus). The Arabic text in fact
quotes “the descent of the Holy Spirit” from Qurʾaˉn 16, The Bee, 102,
which is a reference to the angel Gabriel involved in the revelation to Muhammad. Bacon takes the spiritus sanctus as referring to the third person of
the Trinity and infers from there, thanks to a curious a fortiori argument,
that as the procession of the Holy Spirit from Father and Son is most difficult to understand, any philosopher maintaining that there is a Holy Spirit
is also aware of the Father and the Son. One may wonder whether Bacon’s
limited knowledge of Islam explains his misunderstanding of what Ibn
Sıˉnaˉ meant by the Holy Spirit or whether he is being somewhat disingenuous here.
Having dealt with the theme of the triune God and ascertained that
Avicenna at least glimpsed the existence of the Trinity, Bacon moves on
to discuss the incarnation and the antichrist, to which he is unable to find
any allusions in Avicenna’s “Roots of Moral Philosophy.”
Curiously, concerning the next theme, creation, Bacon shows little
knowledge of Avicenna’s views. He begins this section by explaining that
Aristotle in his Regimen of Kingdoms—of course, a pseudonymous work—
assumes the reality of creation and even refers to Adam and Enoch. His
next authority is Abuˉ Massar. As for Avicenna, Bacon simply says that he
98 Thérèse-Anne Druart
too “explicitly establishes that there is creation” (Et Avicenna, in Moralibus,
omnino ponit creationem, 1.4, 2.25–26). This must refer to 9.1. Next, Bacon
turns to the topic of angels. He assimilates Avicenna’s separate intelligences (the unmoved movers of Avicenna’s cosmology) into his angelology, as is common in the Islamic and Christian traditions, and conflates
the views of Aristotle and Avicenna:
In regard to the beings first created we find another principle of this
science; of this kind are the angels, good and bad. In the first place,
therefore, because of the motions of the bodies of the world, which
they have discovered to be about sixty, philosophers have assumed that
there are that many good angels, because those motions are voluntary
[voluntarii] and therefore are caused by the angels. This, moreover, is
evident from the Metaphysics of Aristotle and Avicenna.
(1.4, 3; Burke’s trans. modified, 646)
Aristotle did wonder whether there were fifty-five or forty-seven unmoved movers, but Avicenna posits only ten intelligences in his emanationist system. Crowley claims that Bacon is neither Avicennian nor
avicennisant as he “does not lapse, even momentarily, into teaching the necessity of creation.”20 Bacon’s affirmation that the motions of the heavenly
bodies are voluntary certainly supports Crowley’s claim.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ presents a very sophisticated and complex approach to creation
in his metaphysics, allowing for continuous creation, but Bacon does not
take Avicenna’s sophistication into account, seriously misrepresenting it.
In this section, he expounds more upon the angels than on the act of
creation. He quotes at length Apuleius of Maudara, whose De deo Socratis
relays the doctrine of the guardian angels in Plato’s Symposium.
Bacon then moves to the fourth theme, the immortality of the soul. In
fact, he dedicates most of this section to the resurrection of the body, as
the immortality of the soul has already been touched upon in metaphysics, whereas metaphysicians could not express an opinion (dare sententiam),
either general or particular, about the resurrection of the body. Aristotle
and Avicenna have given us universal ways (vias universales) to the soul’s
immortality (1.5, 1). Despite his claim that metaphysicians cannot express
an opinion, Bacon is very happy to assert that Avicenna accepts the resurrection of the body:
Moreover, Avicenna says in the Morals that Muhammad spoke only
of the glory of the body; but we know, as he says, that the glory of
our souls is greater, since we are not asses, reckoning only the delights
of the body; and therefore he finds fault with his own lawgiver and
wishes to investigate another who promises not only the glory of our
bodies, but rather that of our souls.
(1.5, 4; Burke’s trans. modified, 649)
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 99
This refers to the beginning of 9.7.21 As for the reference to the pleasures
of the asses, it comes from two pages further down (509.37–43). Bacon asserts that Seneca, Socrates, and Plato concur with Avicenna’s views on the
importance of the soul’s glory, and returns to Avicenna’s position:
Avicenna, moreover, says in the Morals that the resurrection of our
bodies must be assumed and that the entire man will be glorified in
soul and body if he obeys the commands of God.
(1.5, 5; Burke’s trans. modified, 649)
One understands that Bacon can construe corporalis autem felicitas iam assignata est in lege—bodily felicity has already been assigned in the law (by
law, he means Scripture)—as an endorsement of bodily resurrection, thus
attributing to Avicenna the view that the entire human being (totus homo)
will be glorified in soul and body. Yet one wonders why he does not
perceive Avicenna’s strongly dualistic outlook in 9.7 or in the De anima.
Perhaps Bacon’s repeated insistence that the human being is not simply a
soul or a body—being, rather, both in unity—blinded him or led him to
suppress this dualism.
Bacon did not make much use of Avicenna on the immortality of the
soul, but he mined Avicenna’s 9.7 for his discussion of felicity in the afterlife. He often quotes sentences, sometimes almost successively, and his
quotations are word for word, with any minor differences generally stemming from inconsistencies in the manuscripts. He also paraphrases in order
to summarize. Concerning felicity, Bacon claims that one needs to add
principles beyond those touched upon by the metaphysicians, even if the
philosophers have excellently (pulchre) identified the four causes hindering our knowledge of eternal life. These causes are sin, the care for the
body, the embrace of the sensible world, and the lack of revelation (1.6, 1).
Avicenna is his source for the first three causes. First, however, Bacon acknowledges that philosophers can have knowledge of the eternal promise,
but argues that they were not able to give precision about it due to the four
causes he lists. As justification, he immediately quotes Avicenna as saying:
Our condition as regards these matters is like that of a deaf person
who has never heard in his privation of the power of imagining the
delight of harmony, although he may be certain of the reality and
nature of its sweetness.
(1.6, 2; Burke’s trans., 651; 509.46–48)
Bacon backs up the point by making another reference to Avicenna, this
time at 514.40–50, on the paralytic who could not enjoy delicious food
before he was cured. Comparisons with disabled people are metaphors
for sin, according to Bacon, and sin hinders our knowledge of the afterlife. This example also illustrates the second cause of human ignorance,
100 Thérèse-Anne Druart
care for the body. Piling up quotations from Avicenna, Bacon tells us that
Avicenna elegantly (eleganter) says that we “in our age and in this body
have been plunged in much turpitude, and therefore do not perceive that
delight, although there are in us some of its causes,” etc. (512.4–10). Bacon
comments that we lack perception of this delight because revelation is still
necessary. The last quotation from Avicenna brings the section on sin to
a conclusion:
The comparison of our perfect delight with our imperfect one will be
like a comparison of the sensible delight in smelling the odors of delicious foods with the delight we experience in actually eating them.
(1.6, 5; Burke’s trans. modified, 652; 513.32–35)
Bacon then moves on to care for the body. Two quotations from Avicenna
constitute the whole passage (513.32–35; 518.22–28). The end of the second one speaks of the relation between soul and body, and once again
Bacon does not seem to notice its dualist overtones:
Not that the soul has been impressed on the body and immersed in it;
but because there is a bond [ligatio] between these two, which is the
natural desire to direct the body and to excite its affections.
(1.6, 6; Burke’s trans. 652; 518.25–28)
Attention paid to the sensible world constitutes the third impediment to
precise knowledge of felicity in the afterlife. Bacon simply paraphrases
Avicenna’s views:
The third [but Delorme-Massa reads fourth, apparently with all the manuscripts] is the attention one bestows on this world of sense, although a man may not sin nor be occupied with bodily interests. For since we are given over to the world of sense, we neglect the insensible and spiritual world, as Avicenna shows. In these statements he clearly and greatly [in quibus evidenter et magnifice tangit causas impedientes] touches upon the causes that hinder us in our consideration and love of felicity. (1.6, 7; Burke’s trans. 652–53)
Not only does Avicenna identify the causes that hinder human beings but
he also indicates what can help us to know, love, and taste the delight of
the future life: purification from sin; withdrawal from the desire to govern the body; moving the mind from the sensible to the intelligible; and
confirmation, through revelation and prophecy, of what the human mind
cannot attain. In these matters, as Avicenna says, “we believe the testimony of the prophet and the legislator who receives the law from God”
(1.6, 8; Burke’s trans., 653; the last sentence is an allusion to 507.93–96).
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 101
Bacon then claims that Aristotle and Cicero were, in fact, prepared for
divine enlightenment (illuminationes), received it, and thus knew that felicity is a beatitude of the whole human being, both in body and soul, which
“eye has not seen nor ear heard,” as Avicenna says (1.6, 12). Although
Bacon is quoting Avicenna when he speaks of what “eye has not seen nor
ear heard” (10.2, 535.55–56), he does not realize that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ did not coin
this phrase, but was quoting a famous hadith.
This long section about felicity in the afterlife ends with a summary description of beatitude, focusing first on the speculative intellect and second on the practical intellect; in both cases, Bacon appeals, via quotation, to Avicenna’s thought. Avicenna claims that in beatitude, the speculative intellect becomes an intelligible world and understands the form of the whole intelligible world. In this intelligible world, it will “perceive that which is absolute beauty and true grace” (cernens id quod est pulcritudo absolute et decor verus) (1.6, 15; 9.7, 510.72 and following). As for the practical intellect, its delight will not be sensible delight, but rather the delight befitting pure and spiritual living substances. Such delight is more excellent than any other delight and constitutes felicity (1.6, 16; 514.51–55).
For this section, Bacon closely follows Avicenna’s text, quoting Avicenna heavily and accurately. This five-page section is lifted from Avicenna (9.7), but Bacon does not slavishly copy Avicenna: he reorders the
material to fit his own design. The quotations do not always follow Avicenna’s order of exposition.
After the section on felicity in the afterlife, Bacon moves to a shorter
discussion of eternal misery. He introduces it with a quotation from Avicenna in support of his claim that philosophers
have maintained that God has prepared a promised felicity which
eye has not seen [this is an allusion to the hadith quoted earlier] nor
the heart of human beings apprehended for those who obey him and
dreadful punishment [promissionem terribilem] for those who disobey
him.
(1.6, 1; Burke’s trans. modified, 655)
This quotation does not come from 9.7, but from 10.2, 533.24–26. The
rest of this section ignores Avicenna.
Having presented the six principles that metaphysicians have touched
upon, Bacon moves to the last of the roots or fundamentals of moral philosophy. This root involves the laws of divine worship (leges cultus). Once
again, Bacon focuses on showing that non-Christian philosophers have
discovered some of them. All his authorities are either pagans or Muslims,
as he expresses contempt for Jewish practices. Again, Avicenna is often
quoted.
102 Thérèse-Anne Druart
Bacon introduces his views with a summarizing paraphrase of the passage in 10.2, the chapter on prophecy, which he used at the beginning of
the section of misery in the afterlife:
It is evident that because of our infinite reverence for God a worship
is his due. This is due him also because of the blessing of our creation,
which is the effect of his infinite power, and because of future felicity.
Because of the first, Avicenna says in his Moral Roots that “obedience
to God’s precepts is right”; because of the second, he says that “obedience must be given to the commands of him whose creatures we
are.” Because of the third, he says that God “has prepared a promised
felicity for those obedient to him and for the disobedient a terrible
future punishment.”
(1.8, 2; Burke’s trans. modified, 656; 10.2, 533.19–28)
Moving to more specific prescriptions, Bacon tells us:
In this worship, according to Avicenna and others, temples, prayers,
oblations and sacrifices, and fasts must be appointed for the faithful,
and also pilgrimages particularly to the seat of the legislator, in order
that he may be kept in memory and held in veneration.
(1.8, 7; Burke’s trans. modified, 657; 10.3, 537.92–538.03)
The Latin paraphrase of the Arabic text may have hidden from Bacon that,
in this passage, Ibn Sıˉnaˉ tries to give a rational justification for three of
the five pillars of Islam: prayer, Ramadan, and the pilgrimage to Mecca
and Medina (where Muhammad had lived). Still unaware of what Ibn Sıˉnaˉ
is referring to (or deliberately ignoring it), Bacon indicates how to show
proper humility toward God, once again by quoting Avicenna:
“The teacher ought to instruct one who prays in the proper means
by which he may be prepared for prayer, just as a human being is
wont to prepare himself to meet a human king in cleanliness and
with a becoming appearance. Such a teacher should cause his pupil
to form the habit of cleanliness and of presenting a becoming appearance, and should train him in the manner of a human being
preparing himself to meet a king with humility and downcast look,
with limbs restrained, and without needless turning of the body and
disturbance.” (1.8, 8; Burke’s trans. modified, 657; 10.3, 538.4–539.2)
In this passage, Ibn Sıˉnaˉ is justifying ritual ablutions before prayer, as well
as both the specific garment to be worn during the pilgrimage and the
ritual postures to be executed during prayer. All these prescriptions were
set by the prophet Muhammad. But Bacon wishes to go further and adds
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 103
a paraphrase of what, for Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, a caliph or an imaˉm would institute to
properly motivate their people:
Philosophers such as Avicenna and others decide that great festivals
should be appointed, for the reason that “they cause nations to assemble and give them boldness in the law [“in the law” is added by Bacon]
and inspire an emulation of it. Such festivals also give an opportunity
for the prayers of the multitude to be heard; and because of these
prayers they receive blessings from God. And similarly for the same
reasons general fraternities should be formed.”
(1.8, 9, Burke’s trans. modified, 657–58; 10.5, 549.74–550.79)
Interestingly, Bacon skips the fact that such solemnities should be organized only in the presence of the “successor” of the prophet—the caliph.
Interestingly, after quoting Hermes Mercurius at length, Bacon indicates that we should not dwell on such sacrifices, oblations, and ceremonies, as they were superstitious and for the most part ineffectual. Whether
Bacon’s recommendation to avoid over-consideration of these things refers
only to Hermes Mercurius’ points or also to Avicenna’s prescriptions is not
clear to me. But he justifies his dismissal by saying: “Hence also the philosophers themselves practiced such customs because of civil statutes and
because of popular prejudice, not because of their truth, as Seneca states”
(1.8, 13; Burke’s trans., 658).
Having discussed the first part of Moralis philosophia, I may now draw
preliminary conclusions about the way Roger Bacon uses Avicenna’s Metaphysics
9.7 and 10.2–3 and 5. There is no doubt that Bacon has Avicenna’s
text on his desk and knows it well. There is also no doubt that he does not
slavishly copy passages, but rather reorders the quotations for his own purpose. Despite railing against the uncritical use of authorities at the beginning of the Opus maius, Bacon loves to use Avicenna to support his own
views. Avicenna is his main authority to justify making moral philosophy
the crown of philosophy and claiming that metaphysics’ aim is to provide
principles for it. Though Bacon is aware that Avicenna’s metaphysics ends
with ethics only by accident, he deliberately selects Avicenna as his model.
Bacon desires to show that philosophers derive their views not only from
philosophy itself, but from revelation, as given to the patriarchs and the
prophets. He illustrates this concerning his six main principles: the triune
God, the incarnation and the antichrist, creation, the immortality of the
soul and the resurrection of the body, felicity in the afterlife, and misery
in the afterlife. Each time he claims that metaphysicians address an issue,
he is happy to use Avicenna’s text for the purpose.
Bacon at times misconstrues that text, and so attributes to Avicenna
views he does not hold as well as erasing the Islamic context of some passages. Concerning philosophical views that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ does not hold, Bacon
does not transmit Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s distinctly dualist view of the human being or,
104 Thérèse-Anne Druart
consequently, his caution about affirming bodily resurrection in the Metaphysics.
Bacon also suppresses the necessitarian character of creation in Ibn
Sıˉnaˉ. Whether the language of the available Latin translation misled him,
I cannot say. It is also possible that Bacon’s strong commitment to God’s
freedom with regard to creation blinded him, just as his commitment to
the unity of the human being may have blinded him to Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s own
view. Or perhaps he was aware of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s positions, but deliberately
ignored them. Concerning allusions to Islamic views and practices, Bacon
misinterprets spiritus sanctus as referring to the third person of the Trinity,
rather than to the angel Gabriel (and seems not to recognize its source in
Qurʾaˉnic verse). Catching the Qurʾaˉnic reference and its true meaning
requires a familiarity with Islam that was likely unavailable to Bacon.
His use of the last sentence of the Metaphysics to speak of the pope in
rather exaggerated terms may not be so innocent, as he must have been
aware that this sentence referred to the prophet, spoken of in 10.2, and his
successors, spoken of in 10.5. After all, Bacon was preparing his text for
the pope. But the vocabulary used by the Latin translator did not make
the allusions to the caliph and the imaˉm very clear. What is obvious for a
reader of the Arabic text, with basic knowledge of Islam and its technical
vocabulary, may not be so clear to a reader of the Latin version, who had
very little knowledge of Islam. The same goes for allusions to pillars of
Islam and Muslim rituals. Let us now see whether Bacon uses Avicenna
(and later on al-Faˉraˉbıˉ) in similar ways in the rest of his Moralis philosophia.
Part 2: Our Relation to Other People
Part 2, which is rather brief (only four pages), addresses the laws and statutes
dealing with relations between human beings.22 Most of it is lifted from
Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10.4–5, though Bacon shifts quotations around as
he reorders them for his own purposes.23
Bacon begins by excising and excluding fornicators and sodomites from
the community, as they draw human beings away from institutions of superior importance for cities, especially marriage (10.4, 544.98–100; 2.1, 2,
39 MMF). Probably finding little useful material concerning marriage in
Avicenna’s text, Bacon says nearly nothing about it, but moves on to the
hierarchical organization of the city and the necessity for every member
of the community to work. All idle people should be expelled, except in
cases of infirmity or old age. The infirm and old should be taken care of by
means of taxation and so on. This much longer section quotes extensively
from Avicenna’s rational defense of zakaˉt , one of the five pillars of Islam
(2.1, 4–5; 10.4, 542.67–543.80). Bacon then moves to the topic of inheritance, still quoting Avicenna, and inserts a sentence about contracts imported from 10.5, 550.79–80. Returning to 10.4, he condemns professions
such as gambling and teaching inappropriate subjects, for example, teaching a pupil how to steal. He crowns this section by following Avicenna
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 105
on fighting enemies of the law, tolerating other good constitutions at least
until the time when “the best law” (of course, the Islamic one for Ibn Sıˉnaˉ)
“must be extended throughout the whole world” (Bacon 2.1, 9; Avicenna,
10.4, 550–80). Bacon ludicrously concludes with the comment: “and in
this statement the Christian law is hinted at.”24
The next section of the text, 2.2, talks of the lawgiver’s succession
(propheta, but there is a variant, legislator), i.e., Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10.5, 548–49.55–71.
Having closely and almost exclusively followed Avicenna, Bacon concludes Part 2 in a surprising manner: according to him, Latin laws derive
from the Greek laws, but their principles apparently can only be found in
Avicenna—who, of course, born in 930 CE, is considerably posterior to
the Greeks:
In this part is comprehended the civil law, which is now in use among
the Latins, as is manifest from the roots of this part. Moreover, it is
certain that the Latins have derived their rights and laws from the
Greeks, that is, from the books of Aristotle and Theophrastus, his
successor, as well as the laws of the twelve tables, which are taken first
from the laws of Solon the Athenian.25
Bacon’s suppression of Avicenna’s Islamic outlook is either impressively
original (but disingenuous) or the result of an extremely naive reading
(and some disregard for truth).
Another thirteenth-century philosopher, Gundissalinus, in the section on practical philosophy in his own De divisione philosophiae, also follows Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10.2–4 fairly closely, but without citing him
explicitly.26
Part 3: In Relation to Ourselves
The very long Part 3 (140 pages) focuses on virtues and vices and makes
very little use of Avicenna. At its beginning (3, proemium, 1), it simply refers to Avicenna’s De anima 5.1 (69–7.9–12) and Metaphysics 10.2 (530.82–
85), which indicate that the human being “should not live alone like the
brute animal, which in its life suffices to itself alone.”27
In the second distinction, 3, which treats of sensuality (voluptas), in 13,
Bacon quotes Avicenna’s Metaphysics 9.7, 516.95–98:
The human being will not be set free from this world and its allurements, unless after becoming wholly dependent on that celestial
world, he desires that which is there, and the love of those things that
are there withdraws him completely from the consideration of that
which is behind him.
(Burke’s trans. mod., 685)28
106 Thérèse-Anne Druart
In this part, the paucity of references to and quotations of Avicenna is not
surprising, given that in the Shifaˉʾ Avicenna does not deal at all with the
topic of virtue and vice. Bacon therefore mainly pillages Seneca.
In Parts 2 and 3 of the speculative section of the Moralis philosophia,
Bacon uses Avicenna’s Metaphysics in the same way as in the first part.
He quotes Avicenna extensively and does not hide his source, nearly always making overt references to him. He does, however, change the order of Avicenna’s arguments, jumping from one chapter to another, and
pays almost no attention to the context. At times Bacon “de-islamicizes”
the Metaphysics, as does Gundissalinus, but in a less casual manner. Now
that we have examined the speculative section of moral philosophy, let us
move to the practical sections.
Part 4 of Practical Moralis philosophia
The practical section of Bacon’s moral philosophy focuses on true religion.
29 Part 4 tries to persuade us to believe and receive the true religion;
Part 5 tries to persuade believers to love that religion, perform appropriate
works, and detest and turn away from what is contrary to true religion.30
The sixth part concerns forensic oratory in the service of justice.
Bacon moves from the principles of speculative moral philosophy to an argument in favor of the true religion—that is, of course, the Christian religion—in contradistinction to the pagans, who have little knowledge of God and no priests (among them the Pruceni, who seem to be the Prussians31); the idolaters, who at least have priests; the Tartars, who worship the unique God; the Jews; and the religion of the antichrist.32
At times, Bacon distinguishes the Tartars from the Saracens (i.e., the Muslims), but the exact relation between these two groups remains obscure to me.33
One may wonder how Bacon manages to conflate political philosophy
with an attempt to defend the true religion against rivals. First, he equates
the Greek notion of happiness with the aim of human salvation or happiness in the afterlife. He uses Avicenna’s 10.2, 535.55–56, who quotes
the hadith describing the afterlife as that which “eye has not seen nor ear
heard,” which he already used twice in Part 1. Needless to say, Bacon did
not recognize it as a hadith, but he seems to love it and quotes it again
more than once.
Second, Bacon uses al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis 5 to present al-Faˉraˉbıˉ as a
follower of Aristotle concerning the description of the various imperfect
political regimes, which are distinguished by their aims: pleasure, riches,
honor, power, and fame.34 Since al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, in his own text, had gradually introduced the word “religion” (milla) and his translator, Gerard of
Cremona, translated this as secta, Bacon abandons the focus on political
regimes and turns instead to sects or religions. He therefore attributes the
aims of the imperfect states to the various religions: the Saracens illustrate
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 107
voluptuousness with their many wives,35 the Tartars illustrate lust for
power (libido dominandi). Some pagans favor riches and so are buried with
gems and gold. Idolaters yearn to accumulate goods that they will enjoy
in the afterlife; the Jews look for temporal blessings and corporeal rewards
in the afterlife. As for the Christians, they look for spiritual blessings by
spiritual means.36 To build up his case for the supremacy of Christianity,
Bacon uses both Avicenna and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. He still quotes from Avicenna directly, but pays little attention to the finer points of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s text, simply
making reference to it or vaguely alluding to it.
In the second distinction, 1.1, without indicating that he is doing so,
Bacon points to a passage in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis 5, which indicates that
there are two methods by which one can convince people of the validity
of a religion: by using rational arguments (that is, philosophy) and by appealing to miracles (ed. Galonnier, 306.203–7). Bacon refers to these two
modes again near the end of this distinction (8.14), but this time attributes
them to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ explicitly. In section 1.15 of this same distinction, Bacon
alludes to Avicenna’s claim in Metaphysics 1.1 that metaphysics demonstrates the existence of God.37
In the same distinction, in 2.1, Bacon argues that human beings ought
to do God’s will, serving Him with all reverence. In 3, he quotes Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10.2, 533.23–26 about the necessity of obeying God’s
precepts, and in 4, he quotes Avicenna’s assertion that the obedient are
promised felicity. These passages have already been quoted in Part 1. Bacon interjects that felicity is such that “eye has not seen nor ear heard,”
once again unknowingly quoting his favorite hadith. He adds that “for
the disobedient he has prepared terrible promise.” In 6 and 14, in order to
emphasize the importance of spiritual reward in the afterlife, Bacon quotes
Metaphysics 9.7, 507.94–98, in which Avicenna criticizes Muhammad for
speaking only of corporeal rewards and punishments.38 In 18, wishing to
highlight the grandeur of heavenly life after death compared with pleasure
in this life, Bacon makes reference to Avicenna’s contrast between the
blind, the deaf, and the paralytic and those who see, hear, move, and enjoy
food, as spelled out in 9.7 (not in quinto as Bacon says). Again, Bacon has already quoted these passages in Part 1. The next section refers to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ,
who had established a similar contrast between the uneducated child and
a wise man.39 Following Avicenna in 10.2, Bacon then conjectures the
political necessity of prophecy.
Part 4 returns to the subject of prophecy, and in 1 there is a hidden
reference to Avicenna’s 10.2, echoing that revelation comes to one person
only, as otherwise discords and heresies arise. Roger avoids referring to
Avicenna’s requirement that the legislator be a human being, possibly having realized that this goes against Christ’s divinity. The legislator is once
again said to be vicarius of God on Earth (last line in 10.5) and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ
is said to hold the same view. Part 5 once again indicates that Avicenna
criticized Muhammad for speaking only of corporeal pleasures rather than
108 Thérèse-Anne Druart
spiritual ones (4) and in 5 indicates that among the Saracens and the Tartars, the caliph occupies the same position as the pope.
In 8.3 of Part 4, Bacon presents al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis 5 in such a way
as to suggest that Christ is the legis lator perfectus and Christianity is therefore the true religion (in fact, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s text refers to the rex perfectus,
294.96–298.137). Commenting on this fourth part, North dryly indicates that “again it is odd that Bacon uses Avicenna and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ as his
authorities.”40
Parts 5 and 6 of Practical Moralis philosophia: The
Importance of Rhetoric (and Poetics) in Moral
Philosophy
Having argued that Christianity is the true religion, Bacon aims to convince people to love Christianity and to live morally, according to its
edicts, so that they may be saved. He recognizes that it is more difficult
to inspire love for something in someone than it is to convince them of
the truth. Likewise, it is difficult to put theory to practice, convincing
someone to act properly. The difficulty in the transition from knowledge
to action stems from the feebleness of the human intellect concerning
“operables” (operabilia), which are much more difficult to understand than
the objects of speculative knowledge (sciencialia). This difficulty is compounded by the corruption of human will, which does not like moral
restrictions and finds no pleasure in them (5.1, 1). Bacon illustrates this
intellectual difficulty by referring to Avicenna’s Metaphysics 9.7 and citing
those born deaf, who have no appreciation of harmony (1.2), an example
he also used earlier in the text, in Part 1. Just as those born deaf lack an
appreciation of harmony, human beings in their natural state lack an appreciation of moral strictures. Bacon illustrates the will’s corruption by referring to another of Avicenna’s examples in 9.7, the paralytic who cannot
sense tasty food though it is presented to him (1.3). Again, he had made
use of this example earlier, in Part 1, but this marks the end of Avicenna’s
presence. References to him now fade, leaving space for al-Faˉraˉbıˉ and his
rhetoric, or, more precisely, his poetics.41
In fact, Bacon says that what is generally called rhetorical, Aristotle
properly calls poetical. In an excellent article, Irène Rosier-Catach explains how little Aristotle’s Rhetoric and Poetics were known in Bacon’s
time.42 Bacon repeatedly bemoans Hermann’s poor translation of Averroes’ commentary on the Poetics and Hermann’s neglect of the project of
translating Aristotle’s Poetics itself (see particularly 5.3, 9; 5.4, 21; and again
at length in 6.2–4). Aristotle’s Rhetoric fared better, but few people made
use of it or of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s commentary in Bacon’s day (5.2, 6–7, and 6.2).
The type of rhetorical argument that Bacon advocates inclines people to
love proper actions and to perform them, but does not concern the truth
or falsity of propositions (5.3, 19).
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 109
Part 5 proposes a Farabian type of rhetorico-poetical argument, but
Bacon does not explore it in detail, simply acknowledging that Augustine
takes a similar tack in De doctrina christiana 4. Bacon refers to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s
De scientiis and Glosa, but does not really quote from them, preferring
to make his references through allusions or hints. Hackett, Galonnier,
and Rosier-Catach provide material from Bacon’s Opus tertium, which
fleshes out the brief remarks in the Moralis philosophia.43 Both Hackett and
Rosier-Catach indicate that in the Opus tertium, persuasion reaches its climax when it includes music. Hackett also gives an English translation of
a relevant passage from the first part of the Opus maius, in which Bacon
claims to find the importance of music for persuasion in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis,
though there is no such claim therein.44 Yet al-Faˉraˉbıˉ does highlight
the importance of music for persuasion in several other texts. As far as we
know, none of these, or even parts of them, were translated into Latin, but
somehow Bacon knew about this Farabian feature.45 Did somebody orally
translate an element of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s work for him?
Obviously, Bacon had Avicenna’s Metaphysics 9.7 and 10.2–5 on his
desk, but he seems to rely on memory when advocating the use of the
Farabian rhetorico-poetical argument.
Tentative Conclusion
Having considered only one of Bacon’s texts, my conclusions here must
be limited. Moreover, any definitive study would have to also address the
way Bacon uses his “Arabic” sources in comparison with his use of Christian or ancient sources, an interesting topic that is worthy of study.
Does Bacon treat other sources as high-handedly as he does his “Arabic”
sources? He is not ashamed of these sources, since he highlights them,
often giving specific citations for the passages he quotes or to which he
refers. He even emphasizes them for some of his key claims, such as his appeal to Avicenna’s Metaphysics for the dominance of moral philosophy over
all other philosophical disciplines and his appeal to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ for requesting
a specific kind of rhetoric conducive to love of the true religion and to the
performance of appropriate action. Yet Bacon pays no attention to context
or the authors’ intentions, and casually manipulates the texts to serve his
own purposes. Roger Bacon’s Avicenna and Alfarabi have little to do with
the historical Ibn Sıˉnaˉ or al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. His pragmatic approach to Avicenna’s
text, in particular, badly neglects the philosophical sophistication of Ibn
Sıˉnaˉ’s thought. In short, Bacon causes bewilderment for any true Farabian
or Ibn Sinian scholar.
Notes 1 Gilson, “Pourquoi Saint Thomas,” 104. 2 Bouyges, “Roger Bacon.”
110 Thérèse-Anne Druart 3 De Vaux, Notes et textes, 57. 4 Crowley, “Roger Bacon and Avicenna,” 82. 5 Janssens, Annotated Bibliography, 708. 6 For instance, Hackett, “Moral Philosophy”; Hackett, “Roger Bacon”; Rosier-Catach, “Roger Bacon, al-Fârâbî et Augustin.” 7 Roger Bacon, Moralis philosophia, ed. Delorme and Massa. This edition, based
on Bacon’s own manuscript, is divided into parts, then into sections, and,
finally, into numbered paragraphs. I will use this system of reference. Robert
B. Burke’s English translation, based on an earlier and less complete edition,
lacks half of Part 4 and the whole of Parts 5 and 6 (Roger Bacon, Opus
majus, vol. 2). The second edition of Parens and Macfarland, Medieval Political Philosophy, includes partial translations of Moralis philosophia (based on the
Delorme-Massa edition) by Richard McKeon, Donald McCarthy, and Ernest
Fortin, using Delorme-Massa’s reference system (referred to in the following
as “MMF”). Jeremiah M. G. Hackett and Thomas S. Maloney are working
on a full translation with introduction and notes, to be published by the Franciscan Institute, Saint Bonaventure University. 8 For the Latin version of Avicenna’s Metaphysics, I use Avicenna, Avicenna latinus,
ed. Van Riet, referring to page and line. Delorme-Massa, published before Van Riet’s edition, refers only to the 1508 Venice edition. For an English
translation of the original Arabic, see Avicenna, Metaphysics, ed. Marmura. 9 For the Latin version of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis (Enumeration of the Sciences), see
Gerard of Cremona, Le De scientiis Alfarabii, ed. Galonnier (129–46 discuss Bacon’s use of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ). This edition includes a full French translation of
the Latin text. Delorme-Massa is referring to an older edition. The so-called
translation by Gundissalinus of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s De scientiis is incomplete, more a
free adaptation than a translation, and not the one used by Bacon, as he refers
to the very end of the text dealing with kalaˉm, which Gundissalinus carefully
skipped. There are several English translations of ch. 5 of the original Arabic
text, but none of ch. 2. For ch. 5, see Charles E. Butterworth’s translation
in the second edition of Parens and Macfarland, Medieval Political Philosophy,
19–23. 10 The Logica is the first part of a text known in Latin as the Summa theoricae philosophiae. For its influence on Latin thinkers, including Bacon, see
Minnema, “Algazel Latinus,” in particular 212, which gives an impressive list
of Baconian references. 11 Al -Faˉraˉbıˉ, Deux ouvrages, ed. Langhade and Grinaschi. The Didascalia in rhetoricam Aristotelis ex glosa Alpharabii, of which we have only fragments of the
original Arabic text, can be found at 123–252. 12 Delorme-Massa gives no reference, but it seems to be a text edited by Birkenmajer, “Eine wiedergefundene Übersetzung.” The original Arabic seems to
be lost. This text contains a summary of Phys. 5–8, and does not seem to have
circulated much. 13 Al -Faˉraˉbıˉ, De ortu scientiarum, ed. Baeumker. Bacon thinks it was written by
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. 14 See Birkenmajer, “Avicennas Vorrede,” which includes an edition of the brief
introduction by Avendeuch, the translator, then a text by Avicenna’s disciple
followed by Avicenna’s own introduction. This text seems to have been used
by Bacon only. Bertolacci, “Albert the Great,” argues that Albert too probably
had access to this text. 15 For this text I use Avicenna, Avicenna Latinus, ed. Van Riet, to which Delorme had no access. For an English translation based on the Arabic, I refer to
Avicenna, Metaphysics, ed. Marmura. 16 For this text I shall refer to Galonnier’s Latin edition, to which Delorme had
no access. For a partial English translation based on the Arabic, but that covers
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 111
ch. 5, I refer to that of Charles E. Butterworth in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, The Political Writings, 76–84. 17 For a useful general presentation of Moralis philosophia, which highlights some
of the points made here, see Hackett, “Moral Philosophy.” 18 Lameer, “Avicenna’s Concupiscence,” tries to minimize this bad reputation. 19 “MMF” refers to the Delorme-Massa edition and translation. For the Latin
translation of the preface, see Birkenmajer, “Avicennas Vorrede.” 20 Crowley, “Roger Bacon and Avicenna,” 88. 21 “Tu autem iam scis delectationes corporum et gaudia quid sunt. Lex enim
nostra quam dedit Mahometh ostendit dispositionem felicitatis et miseriae
quae sunt secundum corpus. Et alia est promissio quae apprehenditur intellecte et argumentatione demonstrative et prophetia approbat” (507.94–99). 22 See Part 2. 1, 1: “Secunda pars descendit ad leges et statuta hominum
inter se.” 23 The Latin translator of Avicenna’s Metaphysics 10. 3–5 had summarized some
passages and used a vocabulary that Christianized some specifically Islamic
terms. For instance, Arabic 10. 4, 9 refers to a raʾıˉs, a leader or chief, as a praelatus.
The reader of the Arabic with some knowledge of Islam will notice that
in these two chapters, Ibn Sıˉnaˉ defends four of the five pillars of Islam, but the
medieval Latin reader was probably unaware of this. 24 See Part 2. 1, 9.16–17: “Et in hoc verbo lex christiana innuitur,” trans. MMF. 25 “Et sub hac parte comprehenditur ius civile, quod nunc est in usu latinorum,
ut manifestum est ex radicibus huius partis. Et certum est quod Latini a Grecis
habuerunt iura et leges, scilicet a libris Aristotilis ac Theophrasti, eius successoris, preter leges duodecim tabularum, quae primo transtulerunt de legibus
Solonis Atheniensis” (2. 2, 3; trans. MMF). 26 Dominicus Gundissalinus, De divisione philosophiae, ed. Fidora and Werner,
252–60. 27 “Nam homo est animal sociale, et de sua proprietate est, ut dicit Avicenna
quinto De anima et in Radicibus moralis phylosophie, ut non vivat solus sicut
brutum animal, quod sibi soli in vita sufficit” (3, proemium, 1). 28 The reference in Delorme-Massa to 10. 3 must be a typographical slip. 29 Useful context on the second half is given by North, “Roger Bacon and the
Saracens,” particularly the section on the Sects, 147–53. 30 See Part 5, proemium, 1: “Tacti sunt iam articuli quarte partis Moralis philosophie seu civilis scientiae, quae consistit in persuasione secte fidelis, ut recipiatur et credatur. Nunc sequitur pars quinta, que nititur persuadere ut ametur
et operibus debitis comprobetur in observa[n]cia legum et morum honestate,
cum desiderio future felicitatis, ut omnia contraria legibus et virtutibus et
beatitudini abhorreamus, odio habemus et fortiter detestemur et opera declinemus,” trans. MMF. 31 See North, “Roger Bacon and the Saracens,” 148. 32 See Part 4, First Distinction, 1 and 2; trans. MMF. 33 North, “Roger Bacon and the Saracens,” 142, says: “The Tartars, or as we
should say the Mongols, were not to be confused with the Saracens. They
were by tradition Shamanists, and their gradual acceptance of Islam had not
at that time [Bacon’s time or that of his source Willem van Ruysbroeck] gone
very far.” 34 Bacon is not aware that al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s political philosophy derives far more from
Plato than from Aristotle, as Aristotle’s Politics does not seem to have been
translated into Arabic. He reads the same aims in Boethius’ Consolation.
35 An interesting point, given that in his use of 10. 4 in his own Part 2, Bacon
had skipped everything concerning divorce and remarriage. 36 See Distinction 1. 1, 5–12. 37 This refers to the general argument of 1. 1, rather than to a specific passage.
112 Thérèse-Anne Druart 38 A favorite passage for Bacon: he had already quoted it in Part 1.4, 4. 39 Gerard of Cremona, De scientiis Alfarabii, ed. Galonnier, 304.179–91, of which
Bacon gives a very free summary. 40 Ibid., 151. 41 On the role of rhetoric in moral philosophy according to Bacon, see Hackett,
“Moral Philosophy,” and Galonnier in Gerard of Cremona, Le De scientiis
Alfarabii, 129–45. Both provide interesting passages from other Baconian
works, which show the importance of this theme. 42 Rosier-Catach, “Roger Bacon, al-Fârâbî et Augustin.” 43 Hackett, “Moral Philosophy,” 31–33; Rosier-Catach, “Roger Bacon, al-
Fârâbî et Augustin,” 103–6. 44 Hackett, “Moral Philosophy,” 35–37. 45 I found a hint of the importance of music for poetics and persuasion in
Dominicus Gundissalinus, De divisione philosophiae, 194–200. On the importance of music to perfect poetry, see Druart, “Why Music Matters”; Druart,
“What Does Music.”
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ (Alfarabi). Deux ouvrages inédits sur la rhétorique. Edited by Jacques Langhade and Mario Grinaschi. Beirut: Dar el-Machreq, 1971.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Alfarabi: The Political Writings, vol. 1, “Selected Aphorisms” and Other
Texts. Translated by Charles E. Butterworth. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 2001.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Über den Ursprung der Wissenschaften (De ortu scientiarum): Eine mittelalterliche Einleitungsschrift in die philosophischen Wissenschaften. Edited by Clemens
Baeumker. Münster: Aschendorff, 1916.
Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ). Avicenna latinus: Philosophia prima sive scientia divina. Edited by
Simone Van Riet, vols. 1 (I–IV), 2 (V–X), and lexiques I–X. Leuven: Peeters,
1977–83.
Avicenna. The Metaphysics of The Healing. Parallel English-Arabic text, translated, introduced, and annotated by Michael E. Marmura. Provo, UT: Brigham
Young University Press, 2005.
Bacon, Roger. The Opus majus of Roger Bacon. Translated by Robert Belle Burke.
Vol. 2. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1928.
Bacon, Roger. Rogeri Baconis moralis philosophia. Edited by Ferdinand Delorme and
Eugenio Massa. Zurich: Thesaurus Mundi, 1953.
Birkenmajer, Aleksander. “Avicennas Vorrede zum ‘Liber Sufficientiae’ und
Roger Bacon.” Revue néo-scolastique de philosophie 36, ser. 2, no. 41 (1934):
308–20.
Birkenmajer, Aleksander. “Eine wiedergefundene Übersetzung Gerhards von
Cremona.” In Geisteswelt des Mittelalters: Studien und Texte, edited by Albert
Lang, Joseph Lechner, and Michael Schmaus, 472–81. Münster: Aschendorff,
1935.
Dominicus Gundissalinus. De divisione philosophiae: Über die Einteilung der Philosophie, Lateinisch-Deutsch. Edited, translated, introduced, and annotated by Alexander Fidora and Dorothée Werner. Freiburg: Herder, 2007.
Roger Bacon and His “Arabic” Sources in Moralis philosophia 113
Gerardus Cremonensis. De scientiis Alfarabi. Critical edition and French translation by Alain Galonnier. In Le De scientiis Alfarabii de Gérard de Crémone: Contribution aux problems de l’acculturation au XIIe siècle, edited by Alain Galonnier,
158–313. Turnhout: Brepols, 2017.
Parens, Joshua, and Joseph C. Macfarland, eds. Medieval Political Philosophy: A
Source Book. 2nd edition. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011.
Secondary Literature
Bertolacci, Amos. “Albert the Great and the Preface of Avicenna’s Kitâb al-Shifâ’.”
In Avicenna and His Heritage, edited by Jules L. Janssens and Daniel De Smet,
131–52. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2002.
Bouyges, Maurice. “Roger Bacon a-t-il lu des livres arabes?” Archives d’histoire doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Âge 5 (1930): 311–15.
Crowley, Theodore. “Roger Bacon and Avicenna.” Philosophical Studies 2 (1952):
82–88.
De Vaux, Roland. Notes et textes sur l’avicennisme latin aux confins des XIIe–XIIIe
siècles. Paris: Vrin, 1934.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne. “What Does Music Have to Do with Language, Logic,
and Rulership? Al-Fârâbî’s Answer.” In The Origin and Nature of Language and
Logic: Perspectives in Medieval Islamic, Jewish, and Christian Thought, edited by
Nadja Germann and Steven Harvey, 193–210. Turnhout: Brepols, 2020.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne. “Why Music Matters for Language and Interpretation:
al-Fârâbî.” Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph 66 (2015–16): 167–79.
Gilson, Étienne. “Pourquoi Saint Thomas a critiqué Saint Augustin.” Archives d’histoire doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Âge 1 (1926): 5–127.
Hackett, Jeremiah M. G. “Moral Philosophy and Rhetoric in Roger Bacon.”
Philosophy and Rhetoric 20, no. 1 (1987): 18–40.
Hackett, Jeremiah M. G. “Roger Bacon on the Classification of the Sciences.”
In Roger Bacon and the Sciences: Commemorative Essays, edited by Jeremiah M. G.
Hackett, 49–65. Leiden: Brill, 1997.
Janssens, Jules. An Annotated Bibliography on Ibn Sînâ: Second Supplement (1995–
2009). Tempe, AZ: ACMRS, 2017.
Lameer, Josep. “Avicenna’s Concupiscence.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 23,
no. 2 (2013): 277–89.
Minnema, Anthony H. “Algazel Latinus: The Audience of the Summa theoricae
philosophiae.” Traditio 69 (2014): 153–215.
North, John D. “Roger Bacon and the Saracens.” In Filosofia e scienza classica,
arabo-latina medievale e l’eta moderna, edited by Graziella Federici Vescovini,
129–60. Turnhout: Brepols, 1999.
Rosier-Catach, Irène. “Roger Bacon, al-Fârâbî et Augustin: Rhétorique, logique
et philosophie morale.” In La Rhétorique d’Aristote: Traditions et commentaires de
l’Antiquité au XVIIe siècle, edited by Gilbert Dahan and Irène Rosier-Catach,
87–110. Paris: Vrin, 1998.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-7
Aristotle’s tenet that everything that moves is moved by something else
did not remain uncontested by his readers; the possible existence of self-movers or—put the other way—self-moved movables could not be disregarded concerning the motion of the celestial spheres, the animals, and,
in particular, the four elementary bodies. Averroes had to face this issue
while reading and interpreting Aristotle’s Physics. Since he did so in different forms and periods, I start this chapter with some observations on the
formats he used to understand and explain Aristotle.
About the Commentaries and Their Structure
Averroes wrote three kinds of commentaries on Aristotle’s works in addition to the so-called “Questions,” but some observations about this division into short, middle, and long commentaries should be made. The first
kind should not be called a commentary, since it is a kind of abstract of the
original work—the Arabic term is mukhtas․
ar—and can be part of a collection (j awaˉmi ʿ) that abridged Aristotle’s logical or natural works.
In the Latin Middle Ages and into the late Renaissance, Averroes was best known for his long commentaries, which he wrote on only five works of Aristotle that he considered to be of main import: Posterior Analytics,
Physics, On the Heavens, On the Soul, and Metaphysics. The Arabic term for this kind of work is tafsıˉr, sometimes sharh․
.1 Averroes follows the method of the Greek commentators of Aristotle, and even the Muslim commentators on the Qurʾaˉn. The commentary is lemmatized—that is, Aristotle’s text is divided into units, known as lemmata (textus in the Latin version)—and in Arabic they are announced by the verb qaˉla, “he said.” Each unit is commented on (commentum) sentence by sentence, and digressions may follow.
When writing his Long Commentary on the Metaphysics, Averroes could
already read the complete text of the Metaphysics that had been translated
by Us․
t․
aˉth (Eustathius) for al-Kindıˉ (d. 873 CE) except the first book, Alpha Meizon, which it probably lacked. However, the first two books of the
Metaphysics appear in reverse order with respect to the Greek in the Long
Commentary:2 Alpha Elatton (“the lesser”) is placed before Alpha Meizon. As
Cecilia Martini writes, Alpha Meizon is very critical of Plato’s doctrines,
5 Averroes’ Commentaries
on Book 7 of Aristotle’s
Physics
Josep Puig Montada
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 115
and its absence from the first translations made the general understanding
of the Metaphysics easier.3 When the Alpha Meizon became available to
Averroes in the tenth century via Naz․ıˉf Ayman al-Ruˉmıˉ’s Arabic translation, it made sense to Averroes to place the Alpha Meizon, which explains
what wisdom and philosophy are, after Alpha Elatton, which deals with
some previous questions of method.
His exegesis of Book 7 (Z) of the Metaphysics, namely Tafsıˉr al-maqaˉla
al-saˉbi ʿa min-maˉ baʿd al-t ․abıˉʿa (literally: Explanation of the seventh book of
what comes after nature), opens with an introduction to its content:
This treatise is the first treatise in which the kinds of being [mawjuˉd]
are investigated and investigation of them is here intended initially,
because this science divides first into three main sections; the first
is the division of being into substance and accident, the second, its
division into potentiality and actuality, and the third one into unity
and plurality.4
After the introduction, the lemma containing Metaphysics 7, 1028a10–13 follows in the Arabic translation of Eustathius, who renders to on as huwıˉya, which is an abstract noun (iyya) derived from huwa, the d․
amıˉr al-fas․l
or personal pronoun used to contrast the subject with the nominal predicate; it usually means “identity.” After the lemma, different parts of it are
reproduced and explained, often as paraphrases. When the subject matter
requires it, Averroes extensively comments on it and draws the opinion of
former scholars into the discussion, with a preference for the viewpoint of
Alexander of Aphrodisias.
For the middle commentaries, he uses two methods. The first is the
method of paraphrasing, which is similar to that of the Long Commentary.
The Middle Commentary on the Metaphysics exemplifies such a method. Let
us take the beginning of Book Z, or 7, as an instance. The Ross translation
of the passage, 1028a10–15, reads:
There are several senses in which a thing may be said to “be,” as we
pointed out previously in our book on the various senses of words; for
in one sense the “being” meant is “what a thing is” or a “this,” and in
another sense it means a quality or quantity or one of the other things
that are predicated as these are. While “being” has all these senses,
obviously that which “is” primarily is the “what,” which indicates the
substance of the thing.
1028α [10] τὸ ὂν λέγεται πολλαχῶς, καθάπερ διειλόμεθα πρότερον
ἐν τοῖς περὶ τοῦ ποσαχῶς: σημαίνει γὰρ τὸ μὲν τί ἐστι καὶ τόδε τι, τὸ
δὲ ποιὸν ἢ ποσὸν ἢ τῶν ἄλλων ἕκαστον τῶν οὕτω κατηγορουμένων.
τοσαυταχῶς δὲ λεγομένου τοῦ ὄντος φανερὸν ὅτι τούτων πρῶτον ὂν
τὸ τί ἐστιν, ὅπερ σημαίνει [15] τὴν οὐσίαν.
116 Josep Puig Montada
It is important to remember that Book 7 was only Book 6 in the old
Arabic order, since Alpha Meizon was unknown for a long time, even to
Averroes at the time he wrote the Middle Commentary. This is the order
in the Hebrew version, the only version extant from the Arabic original,5
which starts:
Exposition of the issues of Aristotle’s Sixth Book on the Metaphysics
He said
Existing and being are predicated in many kinds according to what
we have explained in the previous book. Among them is that which
denotes “what is” the determinate thing that is not in a substrate, and
among them is that which denotes qualities in a determinate [thing],
or quantities, or something else than those things which do not inform about the determinate thing that is not in a substrate, what it is,
and they are the other nine categories.6
Averroes employed huwıˉya and mawjuˉd as synonyms for “being” and the
Hebrew gives both nims․
a and yeshut, although in the reverse order. The
paraphrase is, however, “enhanced” by an observation on the “other nine
categories” how being is predicated of them in addition to substance.
There has been discussion whether Aristotle’s positions in the Categories
and in the Metaphysics are compatible, but, as we see, Averroes integrates
the classification of the Categories directly into the Metaphysics.
The second method followed by Averroes in the middle commentaries
is much more ambitious. He was convinced that Aristotle’s doctrines had a
demonstrative character, so that they could be articulated in a thoroughly
systematic way, and he tried to present them in the form of syllogisms. He
also organized the content of each book, as much as possible, in divisions,
jumla (“paragraph”)—summa in the Latin translations—and subdivisions,
fas․
l (“chapter”), Latin capitulum. The Middle Commentary on the Physics fits
this pattern. There are two Hebrew translations and they are fully extant,
although in manuscript only (as we will see below). The Arabic original
contains a summary that was placed at the beginning of its extant commentary. The summary was edited twice, first by Maʿs․
uˉmıˉ and then by
al-ʿAlawıˉ.7 The summary of Book 7 contains the following kinds of headings, paragraphs, and chapters:
Seventh Book of the Hearing
What is discussed in it is enclosed in six chapters:
First [chapter]: Every movable has a mover
Second: In the movables in place must be a first movable by itself
and not moved by anything external.
Third: Demonstration that every mover moves by contact, by comprehensive discourse on all kinds of change.
Fourth: There is neither motion in the genus of quality like shape
and figure, nor in the genus existing in the soul and in the animated
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 117
[animals] under the aspect that they are animated, like science, health
and illness, that they exist in quantity insofar as quantity.
Fifth: Demonstration that not every motion is commensurable with
every other and that their relation in velocity is not of an equal, larger
nor smaller ratio.
Sixth: Demonstration of the properties and accidents existing in the mover and the movable under the aspect of multiplication and division.8
When Averroes takes on the organization of the subject matter of an Aristotelian work in this way, he goes a step further than he did in the so-
called short commentaries, insofar as he highlights the coherence of the
Aristotelian arguments by producing a systematic exposition as far as possible. Still, Averroes cannot be as detailed as in the long commentaries,
which became the major instruments for understanding Aristotle in the
medieval Latin world.
The Self-Mover Question in the Commentaries
of Averroes
Aristotle’s Physics deals with a wide range of issues extending from mechanics to metaphysical concepts such as cause or principle. I would venture to say that Averroes’ contributions are related to at least these three
issues: Is motion a category in itself? Are there minimal parts of the elemental bodies? How are Aristotle’s arguments for the existence of a first
unmoved mover to be understood?
When Averroes argued for the existence of a first unmoved mover, he
developed a cosmological theory that would reverberate in theological
doctrines. David Twetten has carried out extensive research showing how
the arguments for motion and its causes found mainly in the Physics played a key role in building late Greek and medieval cosmology, the latter being
where Averroes made his contribution. Twetten shows that the Arabic
philosophers had “an understanding of Aristotle’s cosmology heavily influenced by the intermediate Greek thought.” The Greek philosopher he
points to and examines first is Alexander of Aphrodisias and his commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, specifically the discussion of the first unmoved
mover in Book 8.9 Alexander’s commentary is lost, but Marwan Rashed
succeeded in reconstructing some of its parts, which is of help to us here.10
Book 8 is the last of the Physics and the ancient editors placed it there for
good reason. Books 5, 6, and 8 form a unity revolving about the knowledge of motion: Aristotle classifies motions and changes, examines the
contrariety and the unity of motion and rest, defends the continuity and
divisibility of motion, realizes that there always has been and will be mo-
tion, proves that what is moving is moved by something else (but that a
first mover is needed that is not moved by anything else), and concludes
that there is a first mover that is eternal and one. Therefore, the transition
from a cosmological description to a theological doctrine is smooth.
118 Josep Puig Montada
Book 7 seems to be redundant in the context: it repeats the argumentation that whatever is moving is moved by something else and claims that
there is a primary mover which is not moved by anything else. Aristotle’s
arguments as they are given in Physics 242a38–49 and 242a5–15 can be
organized in the following six theses: 1 Let us divide AB at point G: AG + GB. 2 If GB does not move, AB will not move. 3 If AB moved, AG would have to be moving while GB would be at
standstill—this 3) is a proof by supposition of contradictory, suppositio ex contrario.
4 If so, AG is the primary per se movable and AB the ab alio movable. 5 But we assumed that AB moves per se primarily. 6 Thus if GB does not move, neither does AB.
The long chain of commentators—Greek in particular, but also Arabic
writing11—had already observed this possible redundancy. Averroes’ Andalusian predecessor Avempace (Ibn Baˉjja) knew about the discussion on
Book 7:
Some people said that its doctrine was superfluous [ fad․
l], others said
it was repetitive. Themistius expunged all its beginning because the
thought that all these meanings had been proved by adequate demonstrative arguments in Book 8. The discrepancy was so strong that
Galen composed his famous book on the essence [qalb] of Aristotle’s
written arguments there.12
Avempace does not say whether he had Themistius’ or Galen’s books.
However, Averroes, who had read this work of Avempace, was a careful
scholar and he would have sought them out as much as possible. In any
case, he was aware of the issue and took a stand.
The Short Commentary, the Primary Movables
We will look first at the Short Commentary on the Physics, which Averroes
composed in or shortly before April 1159.13 He shows he is familiar with
the doubts and qualms of former commentators. However, straight away
he formulates three premisses that he considers Aristotle to employ in this
Book: 1º Every per se and primary movable is divisible and composite of parts. 2º If we assume any part of a primary movable to be at rest, the whole
must be at rest. 3º Everything that is at rest because of one of its parts is at rest, moves
because of something else, and the mover in it is other than the
movable.14
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 119
Averroes reminds us that Premiss 1º was demonstrated in Book 6, and he
is right in the valuation. There, Aristotle concluded that anything moving
is divisible and that which is without parts cannot be moving except accidentally (6.10, 240b8–241a26).
Premiss 2º is self-evident for Averroes “if we understand what a primary movable is” (Jawaˉmi ʿ, 114.3). According to him, a primary movable
is that movable which does not move because of one of its parts, and he
names the four elements, fire, air, water, and earth, as instances of primary
movables. Physics 8.4 may be the passage that inspires Averroes, since there
Aristotle addresses so-called natural motion of, for instance, fire or earth,
and asserts that such movables contain the principle of motion in themselves and not accidentally (255a25–26). Nevertheless, Alexander seems to
be Averroes’ main source of inspiration here.15
Premiss 3º is, again, self-evident for Averroes because if the primary
movable ceases from motion because of one of its parts, it is not moved by
itself: “If the mover were the movable, the rest of it would not come to a
standstill” in this case (Jawaˉmi ʿ, 114.18–115.1).
Averroes’ use of these premisses here has an antecedent in Alexander of Aphrodisias. Franz Rosenthal described and Shlomo Pines analyzed an Istanbul manuscript in which Alexander refuted the innovative ideas of Galen (d. 210 CE) criticizing and amending Aristotle’s natural philosophy.16
Nicholas Rescher and Michael Marmura used this manuscript and a better one from El Escorial library for their edition and English translation The Refutation by Alexander of Aphrodisias of Galen’s Treatise on the Theory of Motion. There we read that Galen disputed the statement in Book 7.1 that everything that moves is moved by something because if one imagines that one part of it comes to rest, then one necessarily imagines that the whole stops. Galen thought that only things “whose source of motion is internal to them and whose motion is not due to anything from the outside” match this description.17 We also read that Alexander defended Aristotle, insisting on the distinction between motion per se, and accidentally: only the things that move per se move as a whole.18 Galen had his own understanding of motion as a whole and of the things that move per se and he argued against Aristotle:
Since the things whose natural principle of motion is in them are the
first simple bodies, and since these consist of similar parts, the part in
these things is no other than the whole. Hence, Aristotle was not definitely right with respect to continuous things [in holding] that when
one part of them stops the whole then stops.19
In his answer, Alexander denied that the thing that moves per se “and according to the first intention” refers only to the simple bodies; “according
to the first intention” is interpreted as “according to the whole.” Aristotle
maintained, in Alexander’s words, that “among the things that move [tatah․
arrak] essentially, some move by themselves, some naturally, and some
unnaturally by compulsion.”20
120 Josep Puig Montada
Alexander pointed out that each element has a minimal possible size, thus each part is other than the whole. Interestingly, Averroes emphasizes this aspect: there are minimal parts or magnitudes of the elements that have the capacity of motion; if there were a lesser part, it could not move. Ruth Glasner has discovered the influence of Alexander of Aphrodisias in particular upon Averroes concerning this question.21
Thanks to her research, we are able to understand the remarks that Averroes already makes in his Short Commentary on what is a primary movable:
This doubt arises in the elements and there [the first movable per se] is
the smallest magnitude of fire than can move upwards or the smallest
magnitude of earth that can move downwards.
(Jawaˉmi ʿ, 114.4–7)
Glasner’s monograph, Averroes’ Physics: A Turning Point in Medieval Natural
Philosophy, deals masterfully with the complexity of Averroes’ sources. Her
philological work has shed new light on issues that concerned Averroes
and were of great significance for the development of natural science. One
of these is the Aristotelian doctrine of the continuum as opposed to atomism. According to Aristotle, a body can be infinitely divided. Glasner
sustains that Averroes developed a third position, “a theory of actual parts,
that is, a corpuscular theory.”22
Whether the smallest part actually exists or is a physical qualification
(limitation of divisibility) is something that Averroes does not answer,
because he continues his summary with no other explanation than “this
is so because the dimensions of the beings are limited” (Jawaˉmi ʿ, 114.9).
The context, however, hints at an answer in the second direction, namely,
physical qualification, which opens the path to both atomism and corpuscular theory.
Although Averroes seldom enters into discussion with his predecessors
in his short commentaries or epitomes, he does so here. There have been
doubts, he recounts, about Aristotle’s affirmation “Every movable insofar
as movable has a mover” (Jawaˉmi ʿ, 115.18). Something can come to rest
because rest is altogether possible but if rest is not possible at all, as in the
celestial bodies, the demonstration is incomplete. Averroes believes he can
solve the objection by distinguishing between being movable as such and
being movable with a certain character, s․
ifa, namely, being eternal and not
having a contrary that can stop it.
Avempace had already raised the issue in his commentary on Book 7
and given a similar answer for the celestial bodies: “No part of the circular bodies can come to rest because their mover has no contrary, but not
because their bodies are moving.”23 Averroes, who makes the answer his
own, does not give him credit but makes the following comment:
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 121
One might wonder why Abuˉ Bakr [Avempace] solved this doubt here with this solution and he did not in Book 6 where he said that there is neither a faster nor a slower movable for every movable, and he went from the demonstration by Aristotle to another, but this is not something that we are now following, and let us return to where we were. (Jawaˉmi ʿ, 116.13–16)
His reference to Avempace is most probably in the passages regarding individuals and the geometrical line in Avempace’s commentary on Book 6,24
which distinguishes between first and second intentions, literally intelligibles
(maʿquˉl ˉat ). Specific variation in velocity is something that only the first
intentions have and it is not something that exists proportionally. Then, if
the faster moved instantaneously and the slower in an indivisible magnitude, there would be no faster motion.
Averroes’ criticism above seems to be unjustified, and he will bring back
the discussion about celestial bodies in his Long Commentary on the Physics
7.1. Next, the text of the Short Commentary proceeds to summarize the
arguments of Physics 7.1, 242a49–243a31, regarding a first movable and a
first mover, which are also found in the Middle Commentary on the Physics.
For this reason, one should compare what Averroes has just said here with
what he says in the Middle Commentary.
The Major Role of the Middle Commentary
Averroes finished what we should consider the first draft of the Middle Commentary in Seville on 1 Rajab 565 (March 21, 1170). It is not preserved
in Arabic, but we have two Hebrew translations: one by Zerah․ya ben
Yish․aq She’altiel H․ en (d. Rome 1284) and another some decades later by
Kalonymos ben Kalonymos (d. Arles 1316). Over fifty copies of the latter
are extant, but both translations are still unpublished. Their colophons
record the same date for the completion of the Middle Commentary on the
Physics.25
Three Latin translations were made from the Hebrew versions: one by
Abraham de Balmes (Vatican City, Bibliotheca Apostolica, Vat. Lat. 4548),
another by Vitalis Dactylomelos (Paris, BnF, lat. 6507),26 and a third by
Jacob Mantino (Iuntina edition, Venice 1526, fols. 434–456, only the first
three books). All of these were men of the Italian Renaissance: Abraham de Balmes ben Meir (ca. 1460–1523) was a Jewish physician from
Lecce; Vitalis Dactylomelos made the translation for Cardinal Grimani,
who died in 1523; Jacob Mantino, Giacomo Hebreo (d. 1549), was also
a Jewish physician, to whom David Kaufmann devoted a well-known
monograph.27 Folio 169 (169r. 21–28) of the Vatican manuscript has the
same colophon as the Hebrew translations:
122 Josep Puig Montada
The work on this exposition was finished on Saturday, 1st of Rajab
of the year 565 according to the Moorish computing in the town of
Seville. Since we already composed in our youth an exposition for the
general audience in form of a short epitome [qis․
ur], now I decided to
make this improved exposition of it and I hope by God to make [the
same] for all other books of Aristotle.28
Glasner has explained that the two Hebrew translations of the Middle Commentary
rely on different originals, both authentic, that Averroes composed
in different stages. In some cases, Zerah․ya’s and Kalonymos’ translations
may reflect different views, and one should search there for any progress in Averroes’ thought as this is known to occur at the beginning of
Book7.29 Therefore, I will refer to Kalonymos’ translation as representative of Averroes’ last viewpoint and use the Bodleian manuscript Huntington 79, a Byzantine manuscript of the late fifteenth century.
Like all the other books, Book 7 begins with a summary: “What is discussed in this book is enclosed [nikhlal, continetur] in six chapters, etc.” and
the first chapter, pereq, begins with the well-known “He says that”:
Every movable [mitnoʿeʿa, mobile] in place without something external
must be moved by something moving it and being different from the
movable. In those movables that are moved externally the subject is
evident since they are moved by a mover that is different from the
movable. That about which doubts arise is about those things that
move in place without something external, and in particular, the
simple bodies, like earth, water, air, and fire, because one could believe that they move by themselves and that in them, the movable and
the mover are identical, as well as in the animals. It was shown [in
the animals] that the movable is different from the mover since it is
self-evident that the soul is its mover and the body its movable because
motion ceases when the soul ceases.
(Kalonymos 72rº 9–17; Balmes 122vº 26–123rº 7)
Averroes has preferred another way of reading Aristotle, by focusing on
the two classes of motion where doubts arose: the local motion of the elements and that of the animals. These are the two categories mentioned by
Alexander in the scholium mentioned above;30 the natural motion of the
elements seems to be more relevant in the context.
Next Averroes defines what a primary and per se movable is, and this
should help show how he understands Aristotle. A per se movable is moved
by itself and can be primary or not. A primary movable does not move
because one of its parts moves by itself, or “it can move.” Here is Glasner’s
translation of the passage:
The demonstration of this [of Aristotle’s moving-agent argument] is:
That which is moved essentially is either First or not-First. [1] The
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 123
First-Moved is that which is not moved due to a part of it that is
moved essentially or can be moved essentially, e.g., a part of earth or
water [so small] that no smaller part can assume the form of water, for
a limited magnitude is inherent to the natural bodies.31 [2] The not-
First[-Moved] is that which is moved as a whole because a part of it
moves essentially, e.g., the motion of any magnitude of earth greater
than the smallest part, or the local motion of an animal due to the vital
heat that is in it. It is thus clear that the not-First-Moved is moved by
something else, which is the First-Moved.32
I would like to draw attention to the distinction that Averroes makes
when he says that a part of the movable “moves or can move” per se. It is
obvious that “can move” is related to the natural motion of the elements:
“A magnitude smaller than this magnitude cannot receive the form of
water, because this [minimal] magnitude is inherent to the natural bodies” (Kalonymos 72vº 20–21). Some minimal magnitude is a necessary
condition for any element and no form [s․
urah] can be impressed if it does
not have this magnitude; however, Averroes remains unclear about the
dimensions of the magnitude. I would say that he opposes the hypothetical
motion of a minimal magnitude of fire or any element, on the one hand,
and the actual motion of any magnitude larger than the smaller part of
earth, on the other. The motion of the animal in place is caused by the
motion of the elementary heat existent in it, which is also factual motion
(Kalonymos 72rº 23–24).
Therefore, the natural motion of the elements and the motion of the
animals “can” have a primary movable, because “it has been proved that if
something exists moving itself, so that the mover and the movable in it are
one thing in itself, it must be primary” (Kalonymos 72rº 24–25). Averroes
does not expound on the activity of the minimal partes because what matters is the right understanding of the concept of “per se primary movable”
and because his aim is to prove that a “per se primary movable” cannot be
moved and come to rest by itself. That is to say, the Platonic doctrine of
self-motion is false and the solution goes another way.
In order to prove this, he links Aristotle’s argumentation to the content
of Book 6, saying that “in the previous treatise has been explained everything movable is divisible” and that for this reason, he can assume that the
movable AB is necessarily divisible at G (Greek E, Kalonymos 72vº 7–9).
Then Averroes reproduces Aristotle’s arguments found in Physics 242a38–
49/242a5–15 as mentioned above.
We have no need to indicate either the weakness of the arguments or
the discussion between Galen and Alexander, since even Simplicius’ commentaries show that there was awareness of it long before contemporary
scholarship pointed it out, as W. D. Ross did, for instance.33 Nevertheless, for Averroes and his mentor Alexander, Aristotle was right. Averroes rec-
ognizes that he found it difficult to understand Aristotle’s words because
he first had to grasp what a primary movable is: “Men fell into many errors
124 Josep Puig Montada
concerning this demonstration so that we were very confused for some
time. For us it was very hard to grasp the depth of Aristotle” (Kalonymos
72vº 27–73rº 2). And if the first condition is not comprehended, then the
argument is invalid.34
The Long Commentary, the Validation
Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Physics, as published in the Iuntina edition, represents the same viewpoint and creates the impression that Averroes had sufficiently dealt with the problem, indicating that it was clear to
him what primary per se movable meant.
In this commentary, there must be first movables because natural bodies
do not divide infinitely into that for which they are natural bodies—for
example, because the first movable in fire is the minimal part that is capable of being fire in actuality. Similarly, the first movable of natural heat
is its minimal part of heat that can move the animal. Therefore, Averroes
concludes, should any particle of such mobile come to rest, the whole of
it would rest too.35
Although bodies are infinitely divisible, the elements insofar as they
have essential properties are not, and fire cannot subsist as fire unless it
does have a minimal or numbered magnitude. Four kinds of movables
were eligible as movable per se: the four elements, the natural heat of the
animated beings, the animals, and the heavenly body. Here, the Long
Commentary asserts that “the doubt concerned the elements because in the
case of the animals it is obvious that the mover is different from the movable” (Venetiis 1562, 307K).
For Averroes, that doubt was dispelled, but he also saw the limitations of
the proof. Aristotle’s proof is true but “it belongs to [the category] of true
signs.”36 Demonstratio per signum vel per effectum (sometimes distinguished)
was opposed to demonstratio essendi in Latin Scholasticism, since the first
proves a cause from its effect while the second proves the ontological cause
for its existence.37 In the demonstratio per signum, the middle term is cause
only for our knowledge of the conclusion, not for our knowledge of its
existence. For Averroes, this proof (and others in Book 7) were true but
relative, that is not absolute, demonstrations.
He now analyzes the difficulties raised by heavenly bodies in regard to
the proof. One cannot imagine that the whole would come to rest should
one part of it stop. While one cannot imagine it, it is an admissible hypothesis. The hypothesis, however, does not stand because the heavenly
bodies do not move by themselves, and he gives an odd instance:
Therefore when we say that if one small part of the heavenly body
comes to rest the whole would come to rest, it is necessarily moved by
another, this is a true inference, for instance, as when we say: “If the
stone flies it has wings, and if it is impossible that the stone has wings,
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 125
so too it is impossible that one part of the heavenly body comes to
rest.” However, should we assume that the heavenly body moves by
itself, the opposite of the preceding connection necessarily follows,
that is, if that some part comes to rest, verily the whole comes to rest,
as if something could be supposed from which it would follow that
what flies does not have wings, for instance, if we assumed that it flew
per se, it would keep in the air.38
It belongs to the very essence of a heavenly body that none of its parts can
come to rest, just as it is impossible for a stone to have wings. This is because it does not move by itself, and we would expect Averroes to proceed
to demonstrate that the heavenly body is moved by another. However, he
does not do this because he is only paving the way for the Eighth Book.
Concluding Remarks
We have seen Averroes’ stand on the value of Book 7 in his three commentaries. Glasner has shown the steps of an evolution of Averroes’ thought
in her detailed analysis of all available commentaries, and in particular of
the Hebrew translations and manuscripts.39 Thus, for a more extensive
examination I refer readers to her work.
Here I would like to mention the role that Averroes’ knowledge of
The Refutation by Alexander of Aphrodisias of Galen’s Treatise on the Theory
of Motion most probably played in the development of his position. He is
likely to have heard of it through Avempace, but he may not have had the
treatise when he wrote the Short Commentary. If he received it later, he
probably then revised his previously written versions of the middle and
long commentaries and developed the distinction between primary and
not-primary movables.
Concerning the doctrine of the minima naturalia, it should first be noted
that the comparable Latin construction we find in Scotus’ translations is
minima pars (Venetiis 1562, 307I); in Abraham de Balmes’ translation, it is
numerata (Balmes 123rº 17). The doctrine was later discussed by Scholastic and Renaissance philosophers. Glasner and McGinnis have proved in
regard to Averroes and Avicenna, respectively, that it must be taken into
serious consideration, and that further investigation is necessary.40
Nevertheless, Averroes did not expand on the doctrine, because his
main concern here—and in general—was to argue for the existence of a
First Unmoved Mover, and by doing so to integrate Aristotle’s philosophy
into Islamic theology. Thomas Aquinas would go further, making the
argument of motion the first via to prove God’s existence.
The proof from motion requires two premisses: everything that moves
is moved by another, and the chain of movers–movables cannot proceed
to infinity. Both tenets are asserted in Book 7 and, of course, Aristotle’s proofs are valid for Averroes. Book 8 leads the argumentation in a
126 Josep Puig Montada
similar direction and doubts arose among the commentators. Averroes
was aware of these, but he was convinced that Aristotle had good reasons for “inserting” Book 7. He found it necessary in order to reinforce
the first premiss: everything that is in motion is moved by another, excluding any self-moved movable. The argumentation that a young Aristotle may have formulated intending to reject Plato’s doctrine of the
self-mover was directed by Averroes toward establishing God as the
Unmoved Mover.41
The Long Commentary on the Physics was translated by Michael Scot into
Latin at the beginning of the thirteenth century and became very influential in the Latin West during the late Middle Ages. It helped to explicate
Aristotle as well as to encourage a discussion on many issues that Aristotle
had brought to light, including that of the self-mover.
Averroes’ defense of the tenet omne quod movetur necesse est ab aliquo moveri
delayed the progress of the new science, but we should see it primarily
as one of the confronting positions in the discussion about self-motion.
Interest in Averroes’ viewpoints enjoyed a revival in the Renaissance; the
Middle Commentary was as useful and documented as the Long Commentary,
but it was a systematic exposition in which Averroes argued straightforwardly. This could be the reason why three translations were commissioned for the Middle Commentary in which the hypothesis of the minimal
part gained relevance.
Finally, we see that from the beginning of his reading of Aristotle,
Averroes was very aware of the doubts raised by adversaries of the principle that every movable has a mover. He considered the simple elements
and the celestial bodies to be the main instances of possible self-movers.
Averroes rejected the possibility of both instances, and his argumentation
developed increasingly in the course of the three so-called commentaries,
a process in which the Middle Commentary made a major contribution by
clarifying the meaning of “primary per se movable.”
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Brett Yardley, Marquette University, for help with editing
the text. The remaining errors are, of course, my own.
Notes 1 See Puig Montada, “Averroes’ Commentaries.” 2 Ibn Rushd, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd al-T․abıˉʿa, ed. Bouygues. 3 Martini, “Arabic Version,” 173–84. 4 Ibn Rushd, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd al-T․abıˉʿa, ed. Bouyges, 744.1–745.10. 5 It is most likely that Elia Del Medigo partially translated the long commentary, but not the middle, in spite of this affirmation by the editor: “Habes, studiose lector, Mediam huiusque Auerrois Cordubensis Commentationem tantopere expectata, ex Arabico in nostrum ab Helia Cretense, uiro
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 127
Philosophiae et Medicinae consultissimo, conuersam.” Aristotle, Metaphy.,
fol. 233E. 6 Averroes, Il Commento medio, ed. Zonta, 108.1–7. 7 Maʿs․
uˉmıˉ, “Ibn Rushd’s Synopsis”; al-ʿAlawıˉ, “Min Talkhıˉs․ al-Samaˉʿ al-T․abıˉʿıˉ.” 8 Al-ʿAlawıˉ, “Min Talkhıˉs․ al-Samaˉʿ al-T․abıˉʿıˉ,” 247–48. 9 Twetten, “Aristotelian Cosmology and Causality,” 319–21. 10 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu, ed. Rashed. 11 Lettinck, Aristotle’s Physics, 513–15. 12 Ibn Baˉjja, Sharh․ al-Samaˉʿ al-T․abıˉʿıˉ, ed. Fakhry, 42.11–14. 13 Madrid, BNE, árabes 5000, fol. 66vº, colophon closing the j awaˉmi ʿ of four
Aristotelian books on nature—Physics, Coming-to-be and Passing-away, Meteorologica,
and On the Heavens—reads “Monday 16 Rabıˉʿ I, 554 H.,” should be
Tuesday, April 7, 1159. 14 Ibn Rushd, Jawaˉmi ʿ fi-l-Falsafa (Short Commentary on the Physics; hereafter
Jawaˉmi ʿ) ed. Puig Montada, 113.5–8. 15 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu, ed. Rashed, 427 *433. 16 Pines, “Omne quod movetur necesse.” 17 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Refutation, ed. Rescher and Marmura, 33. 18 Ibid., 19–20. 19 Ibid., 33–34. 20 Ibid., 36, 45. 21 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 152–59. 22 Ibid., 145. 23 Ibn Baˉjja, Sharh․ al-Samaˉʿ al-T․abıˉʿıˉ, ed. Fakhry, 102.1–12. 24 Ibid., 78.13–79.5. 25 The following manuscripts were used. For Zerah․ya: Jerusalem, The National
Library of Israel, Online catalogue of manuscripts, Heb. 4° 1108, here fol.
71vº 17–18. For Kalonymos: Adolph Neubauer Catalogue of the Hebrew
manuscripts in the Bodleian Library, vol. 1. Oxford, 1886: Neubauer 1380,
Huntington 79 (Uri 393), here fol. 99rº 1–3. 26 Catalogus codicum manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Regiae, 250. 27 Kaufmann, Jacob Mantino.
28 I thank the Thomas Institut, Cologne, for the free access: http://dare.
uni-koeln.de. The passage was compared with the Hebrew, Kalonymos, Huntington 79, fol. 99rº 5–11. 29 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 163–65. 30 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentaire perdu, ed. Rashed, 427 *433. 31 Glasner translates “for such a magnitude is bounded in natural bodies,” I cannot figure out the Arabic word that lies beyond the Hebrew terms למֻגבְָּ [mugbal],
רמוּגדָ [mugdar], or הנמְִנָ , [nimnah] according to the various manuscripts.
Abraham de Balmes seems to write magnitudo numerata [permeat?] corpora naturalia,
(123r.18) “a numbered magnitude is inherent to the natural bodies.” The
pivotal idea is one and the same. 32 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 152; cf. Balmes 123rº 11–20. 33 Aristotle, Physics, 669. 34 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 165. 35 Aristotelis De physico, Iuntina edition (hereafter Venetiis 1562), 307I TC2;
Averroes, Commentarium magnum, ed. Schmieja, 6.10–16. 36 Venetiis 1562, 308A; ed. Schmieja, 6.26–28. 37 Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics 1.13 (also Prior Analytics 2.27) has been seen as the
source of the distinction between the two kinds of demonstration. The distinction was well studied by the Greek commentators (see Martijn, Leunissen,
and de Haas, Interpreting Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics), and some of their works
entered the Arabic tradition. Thomas Aquinas’ commentary on the Posterior
128 Josep Puig Montada
Analytics of Aristotle is a good instance of the distinction in Scholasticism; see
lect. 7, cap. 8. 38 Averroes, Commentarium magnum, ed. Schmieja, 8.1–9. Because of some contradiction in the Iuntina wording (Venetiis 1562, 308B–D), I prefer Schmieja’s edition here. 39 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 163–68. 40 See McGinnis, “Small Discovery.” 41 Lang, Aristotle’s Physics, 37–44.
Bibliography
Manuscript Abbreviations
“Balmes”: Abraham de Balmes, Latin translation, from the Hebrew, of the Middle Commentary on the Physics, Vatican City, Bibliotheca Apostolica, Vat. Lat. 4548.
“Kalonymos”: Kalonymos ben Kalonymos, Hebrew translation of the Middle Commentary on the Physics, Oxford, Bodleian Library, catalogue A. Neubauer
1380, Huntington 79.
Primary Sources
Al-ʿAlawıˉ, Jamaˉl al-Dıˉn. “Min Talkhıˉs․ al-Samaˉʿ al-T․
abıˉʿıˉ. Taqsıˉm al-Samaˉʿ al-
T․
abıˉʿıˉ l-Ibn Rushd.” Majallat Kullıˉyat al-Adaˉb bi-Faˉs 8 (1984): 205–55.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. Alexandre d’Aphrodise, Commentaire perdu à la Physique d’Aristote (Livres IV–VIII). Edited, translated, and annotated by Marwan
Rashed. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2011.
Alexander of Aphrodisias. The Refutation by Alexander of Aphrodisias of Galen’s
Treatise on the Theory of Motion. Translated, with an introduction, notes, and
an edition of the Arabic text, by Nicholas Rescher and Michael E. Marmura.
Islamabad: Islamic Research Institute, 1965.
Aristotle. Metaphy. Tomus octauus operum: Aristotelis Stagiritae . . . Venice: apud
Cominum de Tridino Montisferrati, 1560.
Aristotle. Physics: A Revised Text with Introduction and Commentary. Edited by
W. David Ross. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1936.
Averroes (Ibn Rushd). Aristotelis De physico Auditu libri octo cum Averrois Cordubensis
variis in eosdem commentariis. Quartum Volumen. Venice: apud Iuntas, 1562.
Averroes. Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis Physicorum librum septimum (Vindobonensis, lat. 2334). Edited by Horst Schmieja. Paderborn: Schöningh,
2007.
Averroes. Il Commento medio di Averroè alla Metafisica di Aristotele nella tradizione
ebraica. Edited with an introduction by Mauro Zonta. Pavia: Pavia University
Press, 2011.
[Averroes] Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ l-Walıˉd Muh․ammad. Jawaˉmi ʿ fi-l-Falsafa, al-. Kitaˉb
al-Samaˉʿ al-T․
abıˉʿıˉ. Edited by J. Puig Montada. Madrid: CSIC-IHAC, 1983.
[Averroes] Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ l-Walıˉd Muh․ammad. Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd al-T․
abıˉʿa. Edited by
Maurice Bouyges. Vol. 6. Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1942.
Ibn Baˉjja, Abuˉ Bakr Muh․ammad Ibn al-S․aˉʾigh. Sharh․ al-Samaˉʿ al-T․abıˉʿıˉ. Edited by
Majid Fakhry. Beirut: Daˉr al-Nahaˉr li-l-Nashr, 1973.
Maʿs․uˉ mıˉ, Muh․ammad S․aghıˉr H․ asan al-. “Ibn Rushd’s Synopsis of Aristotle’s
Physics.” Dacca University Studies 8 (1956): 84–98.
Averroes’ Commentaries on Book 7 of Aristotle’s Physics 129
Secondary Literature
Catalogus codicum manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Regiae. Part 3, vol. 4. Paris: Typographia regia, 1774.
Glasner, Ruth. Averroes’ Physics: A Turning Point in Medieval Natural Philosophy.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Kaufmann, David. Jacob Mantino: une page de l’histoire de la Renaissance. Versailles:
Cerf, 1894.
Lang, Helen S. Aristotle’s Physics and Its Medieval Varieties. Albany: SUNY Press,
1992.
Lettinck, Paul. Aristotle’s Physics and Its Reception in the Arabic World: With an Edition of Unpublished Parts of Ibn Baˉjja’s Commentary on the Physics. Leiden: Brill,
1994.
Martijn, Marije, Mariska Leunissen, and Frans A. J. de Haas, eds. Interpreting Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics in Late Antiquity and Beyond. Leiden: Brill, 2010.
Martini, Cecilia. “The Arabic Version of the Book Alpha Meizon of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics.” In Les traducteurs au travail: Leurs manuscrits et leurs méthodes, edited
by Jacqueline Hamesse, 173–206. Turnhout: Brepols, 2001.
McGinnis, Jon. “A Small Discovery: Avicenna’s Theory of Minima Naturalia.”
Journal of the History of Philosophy 53, no. 1 (2015): 1–24.
Pines, Shlomo. “Omne quod movetur necesse est ab aliquo moveri: A Refutation of
Galen by Alexander of Aphrodisias and the Theory of Motion.” Isis 52, no. 1
(1961): 21–54.
Puig Montada, Josep. “Averroes’ Commentaries on Aristotle: To Explain and
to Interpret.” In Il commento filosofico nell’Occidente latino (secoli XIII–XIV), edited by Gianfranco Fioravanti, Claudio Leonardi, and Stefano Perfetti, 327–58.
Turnhout: Brepols, 2002.
Twetten, David. “Aristotelian Cosmology and Causality in Classical Arabic Philosophy and Its Greek Background.” In Ideas in Motion in Baghdad and Beyond:
Philosophical and Theological Exchanges between Christians and Muslims in the Third/
Ninth and Fourth/Tenth Centuries, edited by Damien Janos, 312–434. Leiden:
Brill, 2015.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-8
Any serious discussion on medieval Arabic philosophy and its influence
on Aquinas is bound to ask what exactly Arabic philosophy is. This issue
is not only a matter of historical speculation: there is a practical need to
decide which thinkers should be considered part of the “canon” of Arabic
philosophers, along with the greats: al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Avicenna, and Averroes.
This issue has been raised many times in the meetings of the “Aquinas
and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group,” organized by Richard C.
Taylor and his colleagues.
Although different scholars answer the question differently, I am not
alone in understanding the term “Arabs”—in the phrase Aquinas and “the
Arabs”—to be primarily a linguistic and cultural term.1 I emphatically do
not take it to be a necessarily religious reference. Likewise, “Arabic” philosophy and “Islamic” philosophy are not synonymous, even if in practice some members of our profession use the terms interchangeably. The
non-identity of these terms explains why scholars of medieval Arabic philosophy often include non-Muslims, such as Avicebron and Maimonides,
within the canon of Arabic philosophers.2 Understanding the term in a
religiously neutral sense can lead to a much deeper appreciation of the rich
interreligious dialogue that is at the heart of medieval Arabic philosophy.
It forces us to consider Muslims, Christians, and Jews as being part of the
great philosophical conversation that is Arabic philosophy. It precludes us
from imagining the Islamic thinkers as philosophizing in isolation from
other religious traditions.
In this vein, I wish in this essay to point to one particular medieval Arab—a Christian theologian from Syria—who had a significant influence on Aquinas’ philosophical and theological thought. His Arabic name
was Mansuˉr Ibn Sarjuˉn (d. 750 CE), although he is far more commonly
known by his religious name, John of Damascus or John Damascene. Although as an adult Ibn Sarjuˉn became a Christian monk and later wrote in
Greek, his origins were Syrian. He was born and raised in Damascus in the
late seventh century, shortly after the region came under Arab Umayyad
rule. Before entering religious life, he served as a fiscal administrator at
6 The Influence of Mansuˉr
Ibn Sarjuˉn (John of
Damascus) on Aquinas’
Philosophy of Religious
Worship
Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 131
Damascus. He not only spoke Arabic, but was fully immersed in the nascent Islamic world. Ibn Sarjuˉn preceded al-Kindıˉ and the falsafa tradition that he inaugurated in the ninth century, but was steeped in works of Aristotelian thought and was, therefore, one of the first thinkers within the
Arab world to come into contact with Greek philosophy.
One of Ibn Sarjuˉn’s major contributions to later Christian theology came
from his involvement in the controversy around Iconoclasm, a Byzantine
religious movement with Islamic undertones that vehemently opposed the
use of images in Christian worship as idolatrous. The controversy led Ibn
Sarjuˉn to develop a philosophical account of religious worship, one that
includes a nuanced understanding of “veneration” and “adoration” and of
the role of the body in worship. His account is ultimately grounded on a
(vaguely) Aristotelian hylomorphic view of the nature of human beings
and of human knowledge, which begins with the senses and only thereby
reaches intelligible and spiritual realities.
St. Thomas Aquinas was deeply influenced by Ibn Sarjuˉn’s thought,
especially on the topic of religious worship. And yet the reception of “the
Damascene,” as he was nicknamed in the Latin West, has not been sufficiently studied in the secondary literature. This essay addresses the gap
by presenting Aquinas’ account of the use of the body and of externals in
worship as dependent on John’s work. My aim is twofold. I argue, first,
that besides Avicenna, Averroes, Maimonides, and so on, we should consider Mansuˉr Ibn Sarjuˉn/John Damascene as an important figure among
those other “Arabs” who had a massive influence in the thought of St.
Thomas. Second, I wish to present Thomas’ account of religious worship
as an area in which he was heavily influenced by John Damascene.
Thus, in the first section, I review the historical context in which John
Damascene developed his theory of worship, highlighting his origins in
the Arab world. In the second section, I present Aquinas’ dependence on
John for his account of physical religious practices such as eastward prayer,
“adoration,” or the offering of sacrifices. In the third section, I address
the particular issue of the use of icons or religious images, and the type of
worship offered to icons of Christ, in these two thinkers.
Ibn Sarjuˉn: An Aristotelian in the Early Arab World
Mansuˉr Ibn Sarjuˉn was born to a Syrian Christian family prominent in the fiscal administration of Damascus. In 651, Muʿaˉwiya, the first Umayyad caliph, had made Damascus the capital of his empire. Ibn Sarjuˉn’s grandfather, whose name was also Mansuˉr Ibn Sarjuˉn, not only survived this transition of the city of Damascus and the Middle East from Persian to Arab rule, but even managed to retain his position as fiscal administrator or vizier. Later on, in the eighth century, his grandson came into the scene, pursuing a classical Greek education (the enkyklios paideia), and then seems to have inherited the vizier position, as some scholars have suggested.3 He
132 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
then left the administrative post to become a monk in Arab Palestine, near Jerusalem, possibly at the monastery of Mar Saba. He died there around 750 CE.
Ibn Sarjuˉn’s theological work must be seen within the Islamic context in which he was immersed. His career as a theologian was spent in
the company of Melkite Christians, Arab Palestinian monks, who were
“living and working almost literally under the shadow of the mosques of
the Dome of the Rock and of al-Aqsa.”4 Ibn Sarjuˉn lived his whole life
within the Umayyad Empire. He never set foot in the Byzantine Empire,
but he belonged to it at least intellectually, and was perhaps the greatest
expositor of its theology. In this sense, he is a Byzantine theologian among
the Arabs: a “Melkite” theologian, that is, a Christian immersed in the
Arabic world but a supporter of the Christianity of the Byzantine emperor
(Syriac: malkaˉ; Arabic: malik). He wrote in Greek, because the transition
to Arabic as the language of learning in the region had not yet been accomplished, but within a generation of his death, his early disciples already
wrote in Arabic, as did his earliest biographers. Moreover, his works were
translated into Arabic shortly after his death (long before they were translated into Latin), “for the benefit of John’s successors in the Middle East
who in the generation after John began to think and express their faith in
what had become their vernacular.”5
His principal work, the Peˉgeˉ gnoseoˉs, known in English as The Fountain of Knowledge, has a complex manuscript tradition and has come down to us in many different forms. It was originally divided by Ibn Sarjuˉn into three parts, and the different parts eventually were published as separate works, or as partial combinations of sections. Only one early manuscript contains all three sections; most manuscripts contain only one of the three sections as a stand-alone text. Different versions of the first part, which later became known as the Dialectica, contain synopses of Aristotelian and Porphyrian logic as well as a presentation of the philosophical terminology considered necessary for defending Christian Orthodox theology, including terms such as physis, ousia, hypostasis, and energeia. This philosophical preamble to a Christian dogmatic work is not unprecedented, for since the seventh century in Palestine, there had been a tradition developing that produced several small books on logic, written in Greek for Christian apologists involved in the great Christological disputes of the time—for example, Monophysitism, Monotheletism, or Monoenergism.
These logical treatises, Ibn Sarjuˉn’s included, drew “on the logical treatises of Aristotle and later philosophers, such as Porphyry and the sixth-century Aristotelian commentators of Alexandria.”6 Whether or not Ibn Sarjuˉn was directly familiar with Aristotle’s texts, he certainly had access to Aristotelian ideas through this Greek Palestinian tradition of Christian polemical works.
The second section of The Fountain of Knowledge consists of a long catalogue of doctrines that Ibn Sarjuˉn considered to be heretical. This section
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 133
is now known by the title On Heresies. Interestingly, the last chapters of On
Heresies contain an exposition and attack of the so-called “heresy of the
Ishmaelites,” in other words, Islam.7 These chapters very likely make Ibn
Sarjuˉn the first author of a Christian polemic against Islam.8 In them, he
quotes the Qurʾaˉn and hadith texts—some scholars have argued that he is
translating directly from Arabic—and argues dialectically against Islamic
beliefs. He gives a definition of Islam, situates Muhammad historically,
summarizes his teaching and relationship to Christianity, and responds to
Muslim objections to Christianity.
The third section of the work, titled An Exact Exposition of the Orthodox
Faith (Ekdosis akribes teˉs Orthodoxou Pisteoˉs), is historically the first systematic and comprehensive presentation of Christian theology from the perspective of Greek Patristics. Although Aquinas and his contemporaries in
the thirteenth-century Latin West had access to a few other works by Ibn
Sarjuˉn (mainly letters and homilies), only the third section from The Fountain of Knowledge was available to them, under the title De fide orthodoxa. It
was translated from the original Greek into Latin by Burgundio of Pisa in
the twelfth century.9 By 1224, the manuscript tradition had divided Burgundio’s translation into four books, corresponding to the division of the
Sentences. In that form it gradually became “the principal means of access
to the dogmatic tradition of the Greek East for the scholastics of the High
Middle Ages.”10 Modern scholars of medieval philosophy typically see in
this work the great precursor of the later Scholastic summae, and the only
one written in Greek.
Beyond The Fountain of Knowledge, Ibn Sarjuˉn also wrote other dogmatic treatises, some of great importance for the development of religious
thought in Byzantine theology, but they were not available in Latin translation in the thirteenth century. Among them are his three treatises titled
On Images, which contain one of Ibn Sarjuˉn’s most original contributions
to Christian theology: his defense of the use of images in worship. These
works were surely occasioned by the decision made by the Byzantine Emperor Leo III in 727 CE to issue a ban on the use of images or icons in
Christian worship, giving rise to the Iconoclast controversy, a Christian
theological dispute in Byzantium in the eighth and ninth centuries over
the use of icons (or religious images). Through these treatises, Ibn Sarjuˉn
became one of the protagonists in the controversy. His fervent defense of
the use of icons in worship became highly influential in the debate that
culminated with the Second Council of Nicaea (787 CE), which condemned Iconoclasm as a heresy. The target of his works on images was
Byzantine Iconoclasm, but as scholars have noted, the sources of his arguments also suggest the influence of local Islamic Iconoclast concerns.11
Besides containing a Christian theological defense of the use of images in
worship, based—as one would expect—on Scripture and the Greek Patristic tradition, these treatises also contain a few underlying points relating to the philosophy of religion, the philosophy of mind, and semiotics,
134 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
which serve him as a rational foundation whereby he could defend his
conclusions without reference to Scripture or tradition. Like later medieval Christian philosophers, Ibn Sarjuˉn was able to use Aristotelian teachings to defend his faith rationally. In particular, he uses the Aristotelian
view of human knowledge as beginning in the senses to argue for and
defend the physical, sensible elements that are characteristic of Christian
worship, especially icons.
Although these treatises did not make it to the Latin High Middle Ages,
the De fide orthodoxa did, and it contains in summary form the same philosophical content relating to religious worship. Aquinas was deeply familiar
with the De fide orthodoxa, and it is in this form that he inherited and utilized the work of “the Damascene” (Damascenus). This work was of massive importance not only for Aquinas’ theology (the Trinity, Christology,
etc.) but also for his philosophy, including areas such as the philosophy of
mind and the philosophy of religion.
The foregoing discussion shows that John Damascene was culturally
an Arabic thinker, even if he did not write philosophy in Arabic. If we
accept this premise,12 then it follows that he is among the most influential
“Arabs” in Aquinas’ thought, on a par with Avicenna and Averroes. This
is evidently so if we take the sheer number of citations of the Damascenus
in Aquinas’ works as an indication of the extent of Aquinas’ debt to him.
A search in the Index Thomisticus for the term Damascenus and inflected
variants of the name (Damascen*) turned up 953 “places,” that is, distinct
texts. This is more than any other Arab author in Aquinas’ corpus, leaving
aside the Liber de causis, to which Aquinas dedicated an entire commentary. In fact, it is slightly more than the total number of results for both
Averroes and Avicenna combined: a similar search resulted in 537 places
in the whole corpus for Averroes or Commentator and their variants (Averro*
AND Commentat*) and 410 places for Avicenna and its variants (Avicen*).
In order to illustrate one area of influence—and because it is an inherently interesting philosophical theme—I shall devote the rest of my essay
to Aquinas’ reception of John Damascene’s philosophy of religion. In the
next section, I present his dependence on John for the exterior acts of religious worship, and in the third section, I delve into the particular issue of
the worship of religious images.
Damascene and Aquinas on the Rationale for Exterior
Religious Worship
In both the Sentences commentary and the Summa theologiae, Aquinas develops a philosophical and theological doctrine of latria or religio—both of
these terms denoting the worship due to God alone, as distinct from dulia,
a sort of respect owed to other religious figures, such as the saints. In both
works, he makes ample use of Damascene’s philosophy of religion to defend his conclusions. Explicit references to Damascene on worship are not
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 135
frequent, but when they do occur, they tend to furnish Aquinas with the
fundamental premises of his argument.
In the Sentences commentary, distinction 9, Aquinas addresses the question of whether the humanity of Christ can be worshipped with latria.
This “distinction” of course implies ascertaining first the very nature of
latria. Aquinas conceives latria as a virtue that gives to God alone what is
His due. It is the kind of worship that is due to the Creator alone, and not
to any creature. He explicitly contrasts latria with dulia, a lesser form of
“veneration” that may be given to creatures that have some sort of excellence. After a philosophical discussion of the nature of latria in general, the
distinction ends with a theological defense of the thesis that the humanity
of Christ, in virtue of its hypostatic union with the Second Person of the
Trinity, is worthy of latria.
Later in the Summa, we find these two issues—the nature of latria, and
the latria due to Christ—addressed separately. In the “Treatise on Religion” in the Secunda secundae (qq. 81–100), Aquinas addresses the nature
of religio or latria, which is now placed within the context of the virtues
annexed to justice, and defined as the virtue that offers to God His due
worship. It is not until the Tertia pars, within the Christological section of
the Summa theologiae, that we find the question of whether the humanity of
Christ is deserving of latria. In this section of the essay, I will focus on the
Secunda secundae texts where Aquinas makes use of Damascene’s doctrine
on latria. I shall leave the discussion from the Tertia pars to the third section
of the essay.
Among Aquinas’ first references to Damascene within the discussion
of the nature of latria or religio in the Summa theologiae is one that relates
to exterior religious worship. In the first question on the nature of religio,
Aquinas asks whether it includes exterior actions or is an interior or
spiritual act only. His reply is that religio must include both exterior and
interior acts, and ultimately his rationale for this is the hylomorphic nature
of human beings. His response in the first text focuses on the nature of
human cognition:
Now the human mind, in order to be united to God, needs to be
guided by the sensible world, since “invisible things [. . .] are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made,” as the Apostle
says (Romans 1:20). In divine worship, therefore, it is necessary to
make use of corporeal things, that the human mind may be aroused
thereby, as by signs, to the spiritual acts by means of which he is
united to God. Therefore the internal acts of religion take precedence
of the others and belong to religion essentially, while its external acts
are secondary, and subordinate to the internal acts.13
Following this reasoning, Aquinas makes a fundamental distinction
between the interior or mental acts of worship and the corresponding
136 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
exterior or physical acts of worship. The interior acts of worship are two:
prayer and devotion. The exterior acts fall into three general categories:
acts of “adoration”; acts whereby something external is offered to God
(e.g., sacrifice or oblations); and acts whereby something belonging to God
is “assumed” (e.g., vows and oaths, whereby someone “assumes” God’s
name).14 Much of the section on religio in the Summa theologiae is ordered
according to this division.
The first of the exterior acts of religio, that of “adoration” (adoratio), is
of particular interest here. First of all, the terminology can be misleading.
We might be inclined to think of adoration as simply being synonymous
with “worship,” the kind of reverence that is reserved to the deity. But
Aquinas and Damascene, who in this regard simply follow the traditions
in which they are immersed, already have a particular term for divine
worship, namely, latria (latreia). Adoratio for Thomas, and proskyneˉsis for John, mean concretely any kind of a physical humbling of the body, such
as genuflections, prostrations, or bowing down, before something sacred
or something that is worthy of respect or veneration. As such, adoratio and
proskyneˉsis signify primarily physical acts comprising a set of bodily postures. In the context of divine worship, these acts of adoratio or proskyneˉsis
are of course done as signs of an interior attitude of latria, but in themselves
they are physical acts.
Second, it is within this discussion of adoratio that John’s influence is
felt most strongly. Aquinas cites him explicitly to this effect in a later text
within the discussion of religio:
As Damascene says in the fourth book, since we are composed of a
twofold nature, intellectual and sensible, we offer God a twofold adoration; namely, a spiritual adoration, which consists in the internal
devotion of the mind; and a corporeal adoration, which consists in an
exterior humbling of the body.15
In this passage, Aquinas is actually paraphrasing a text where Damascene
gives a defense of the practice of worshipping toward the East. There, we
read:
It is not without reason or by chance that we worship towards the
East. But seeing that we are composed of a visible and an invisible
nature, that is to say, of a nature partly of spirit and partly of sense,
we render also a twofold worship to the Creator; just as we sing both
with our spirit and our bodily lips, and are baptized with both water
and Spirit, and are united with the Lord in a twofold manner, being
sharers in the mysteries and in the grace of the Spirit.16
In other passages where John draws heavily from the ascetical and mystical theology of Dionysius the Areopagite, he offers an epistemological
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 137
rationale for exterior worship: the exterior actions of worship are means
by which the mind moves from sensible images to grasp intelligible, spiritual reality.17 For example, in his third treatise On Images, we read:
For since we are twofold, fashioned of soul and body, and our soul is
not naked, but as it were, covered with a veil, it is impossible for us
to go to the spiritual apart from the bodily. So just as we hear with
our bodily ears audible words and understand something spiritual, so
through bodily sight we come to spiritual contemplation.18
Although Aquinas did not have access to this last text, he concludes his
argument defending the need for exterior adoration in a similar vein:
And since in all acts of latria that which is without is referred to that
which is within as being of greater import, it follows that exterior adoration is offered on account of interior adoration; in other words we
exhibit signs of humility in our bodies in order to incite our affections
to submit to God, since it is connatural to us to proceed from the sensible to the intelligible.19
This fundamental principle derived from Damascene will reappear without a mention of its source in many of Aquinas’ texts that aim to give a
rationale for any given exterior act of worship. In reference to sacrifices,
for example, Aquinas says:
The mode befitting to humans is that they should employ sensible signs in order to signify anything, because they derive knowledge from sensibles. Hence it is a dictate of natural reason that humans should use certain sensibles, by offering them to God in sign of the subjection and honor due to Him, like those who make certain offerings to their lord in recognition of his authority. Now this is what we mean by a sacrifice, and consequently the offering of sacrifice is of the natural law.20
In the Contra Gentiles, he expresses the same doctrine in a more detailed
way:
Because it is connatural to humans to receive knowledge through the
senses, and most difficult to transcend sensible things, God has provided for human beings that even among sensible things there should
be made for them a commemoration of things divine, so that thereby
the intention of human beings be called back toward divine things.
And for this reason sensible sacrifices have been instituted, which humans offer to God, not as though God needed them, but to represent
to humans the fact that they ought to offer themselves and all they
have to God, as to their end, Creator, Ruler, and Lord of all.21
138 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
Thus, we see that Aquinas had Damascene in mind when constructing
his “Treatise on Religion.” This awareness is especially noticeable when
Aquinas discusses the exterior acts of religion. He follows Damascene in
using the Aristotelian account of human knowledge as beginning in the
senses as the rationale for all exterior religious worship. Aquinas may not
have been fully aware of the historical circumstances in which Damascene
arrived at his account of exterior religious worship, that is, in the midst
of the nascent Islamic world and in reaction to the Iconoclast controversy.
But he certainly was an eager recipient of this doctrine, which was in fact
developed among “the Arabs.”
Aquinas’ Reception of Damascene’s Doctrine on the
Use of Images in Worship
Another key area in Thomas’ thought where we see a reception of John’s
philosophy of religion is the discussion on the adoration that is due to
Christ. In the Summa theologiae, this discussion appears within the Christological section of the Tertia pars. There, Aquinas raises several important
theological issues with interesting philosophical underpinnings: for example, the question (inherited from the Sentences) of whether Christ’s humanity is deserving of the adoration of latria, as well as other related questions,
such as whether the adoration of latria is to be given to the image of Christ
and whether latria is to be given to the cross of Christ, to His mother, and
to the relics of the saints.
One of Aquinas’ most basic points in this question is that Christ’s humanity, though in itself created, is deserving of latria by virtue of its hypostatic or personal union with the Second Person of the Trinity: “the
adoration of latria is not given to Christ’s humanity by reason of itself, but
by reason of divinity to which it is united.”22 In the sed contra, he quotes
Damascene directly as his authority on the matter: “Damascene says in
the fourth book, ‘On account of the incarnation of the Divine Word, we
adore the flesh of Christ not for its own sake, but because the Word of God
is united thereto in person.’”23
In his reply to the arguments, he also cites John Damascene to the effect
that if we were to consider the humanity of Christ abstractly, prescinding
from the hypostatic union and thinking of it strictly as a creature, then
we would have to say that the adoration due to it is only the “adoration
of dulia,” which is the respect or veneration owed to some creatures, not
to God:
But since, as Damascene says in the fourth book: “If by a subtle distinction you divide what is seen from what is understood, it cannot
be adored insofar as it is a creature”—that is, with the adoration of
latria. And then thus understood as separate from the Word of God,
the adoration of dulia is owed to it; not just any kind of dulia, such as
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 139
that which is universally given to other creatures, but a more excellent
kind of dulia, which is called hyperdulia.24
As he explains in later articles in this question, the “adoration of dulia” is
the kind of veneration given to the saints and their relics, and hyperdulia is
given to the mother of Christ.
Yet, perhaps surprisingly, the humanity of Christ is not the only creature which is in some way deserving of latria. Other created things that
deserve latria (without this entailing the sin of idolatry) are the true cross
of Christ—the actual historical instrument of Christ’s passion—as well
as any image or icon of Christ. “Icons” or images can mean any pictorial
representation of Christ or of the cross of Christ, whether in fresco form or
mosaics, “made of colors, pebbles, any other material that is fit, set in the
holy churches of God, on holy utensils and vestments, on walls and boards,
in houses and in streets,” in the words of the Second Council of Nicaea,
addressing the issue of Iconoclasm.25
Interestingly, in another sed contra Aquinas relies again on St. John Damascene for a quote by St. Basil the Great on this point. “Damascene quotes
Basil as saying: ‘The honor given to an image reaches to the prototype,’
that is, the exemplar. But the exemplar itself, namely, Christ, is to be
adored with the adoration of latria; therefore also His image.”26 What follows the sed contra is a remarkable text in which Aquinas uses Aristotelian
semiotics as a basic premise to address the issue on his own terms:
As the Philosopher says in the book De memoria et reminiscentia, there
is a twofold movement of the mind toward an image: one indeed toward the image itself as a certain thing; another, toward the image insofar as it is the image of something else. And between these movements there is this difference; that the former, by which one is moved toward an image as a certain thing, is different from the movement toward the thing: whereas the latter movement, which is toward the image as an image, is one and the same as that which is toward the thing. Thus therefore we must say that no reverence is shown to Christ’s image, as a thing, for instance, carved or painted wood: because reverence is not due save to a rational creature. It follows therefore that reverence should be shown to it only insofar as it is an image. Consequently the same reverence should be shown to Christ’s image as to Christ Himself. Since, therefore, Christ is adored with the adoration of latria, it follows that His image should be adored with the adoration of latria.27
In other words, we can think of an image in two ways: as a thing in itself,
or as a sign. When we think of it as a thing in itself, we do not necessarily
treat it as we treat the object of which it is a sign, but when we do think of
it as a sign, we treat it in the same way as we treat the object of which it is a
140 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
sign. For example, if I look at a picture of my wife, it is entirely reasonable
for me to point to the picture and say “I love her.” No one would think
that what I mean is that I love the picture itself, qua inanimate object. All
of my affection in this case is directed at the person of my wife, almost
as though the picture were not involved. I do not give the picture itself a
different kind of love from the love I give my wife. To paraphrase Basil
and Damascene, my attitude toward the image is directed at the exemplar.
Hence, it matters not whether I point to the picture and say “I love her”
or actually point to my wife and say “I love her”: it is the same love that is
expressed in both cases. Aquinas is therefore saying that similarly, in the
case of religious worship, it matters not whether the latria given to Christ
is given to Him directly or by means of an image or icon: it is latria all the
same. The worship given is not directed at the image in itself as a thing,
but to Christ through the image, the latter being only a sign that leads the
mind to Christ.
Given this doctrine on the adoration of images, Aquinas now has the
trouble of explaining why, even though in the Hebrew scriptures the use
of images was forbidden in worship, the prohibition nonetheless no longer
applies since the coming of Christ. He cannot simply claim that the prohibition is only of adoring images, and that Christians only venerate them,
as many Christians argue today. Rather, he is committed to the doctrine
he received from John Damascene that images of Christ are deserving of
latria. His response focuses on the doctrine of the twofold movement of
the mind toward an image, affirming that whereas in the case of Old Testament idolatry, the adoration of images was adoration of the gods of the
Gentiles, since the coming of Christ the adoration of images has been of
God Himself made man:
[B]ecause, as was said above, the movement toward the image is the
same as the movement toward the thing, adoration of images is forbidden in the same way as adoration of the thing whose image it is.
Therefore here we are to understand the prohibition to adore those
images which the Gentiles made for the purpose of venerating their
own gods. [. . .] But no corporeal image could be made of the true
God Himself, since He is incorporeal; because, as Damascene says,
“It is the highest absurdity and impiety to make a figure of what is
Divine.” But because in the New Testament, God was made man, He
can be adored in His corporeal image.28
In other words, according to Aquinas, the great difference between Judaism and Christianity with regards to the adoration of images is that in
Judaism, God cannot be represented in imagery because God is strictly
incorporeal, whereas in Christianity, God is believed to have taken human
flesh and it is, therefore, possible not only to represent Him, but also to
worship him, through imagery.
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 141
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have reviewed Aquinas’ reception of John Damascene’s doctrine of religious worship. Damascene heavily influenced Aquinas’ philosophy of religion, especially his understanding of the role of the body and of images in religious worship. Damascene’s and Aquinas’ account of the use of bodily postures in worship is grounded on the hylomorphic nature of human beings and on the nature of human knowledge, which begins with the senses and only thereby reaches intelligible and spiritual realities. Physical religious practices such as eastward prayer, adoration—bodily postures such as bowing, kneeling, or prostrations—as well as the offering of sacrifices and the use of religious images are means whereby the human mind is led by the senses to the contemplation of higher realities. On this foundation, both Damascene and Aquinas develop a theory of the type of worship due to images of Christ in particular. Both authors make the bold claim that images of Christ are deserving of the worship of latria. For John, this is so not because these images are creatures but because they are images of God-
made-man, and the worship given to an image is directed to the prototype of the image. Aquinas develops this thinking through Aristotelian semiotics, explaining that the movement of the mind towards an image is the same as the movement of the mind to the thing of which it is an image. Hence, it matters not whether Christ is worshipped directly or through an image: what is being worshipped in the image is not a creature, but God Himself as represented by the image, the latter being only a sign that leads the mind to God.
Beyond these points on the two authors’ philosophy and theology of worship, I have also argued that Mansuˉr Ibn Sarjuˉn is one of the sources that ought to be considered in any discussion regarding “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs.’” In fact, John is perhaps the most influential of all of these “Arabs.” This is evidenced both by the number of references in Aquinas’ corpus to the De fide orthodoxa, which exceeds the number of references to any other “Arab” author, as well as the scope of these references, which includes topics as central for Aquinas as Trinitarian theology, Christology, philosophy of mind, semiotics, and the philosophy of religion. Ibn Sarjuˉn is usually thought of as a Christian monk whose thought is representative of the Byzantine Orthodox tradition. But in fact, he was a Melkite theologian, a Middle Eastern Christian who was loyal to his Byzantine faith background but nonetheless was fully involved in the Islamic world and lived his entire life as a subject of the Umayyad Empire. Although he preceded al-Kindıˉ and the falsafa tradition by about a century, he was steeped in the works of Aristotle and is, therefore, not only one of the first thinkers within the Arab world to come into contact with Greek philosophy but also Aquinas’ most influential source from the Arab world.
142 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
Notes 1 For the purposes of this essay, I use the term “Arabs” to refer not only to thinkers who wrote in Arabic, but more broadly to those who worked and lived in
lands dominated by Arabic culture, independently of their religious beliefs.
In this sense, I call John of Damascus an “Arab,” and an “Arabic” thinker,
even though he did not write in Arabic—not unlike the way I would call
Aquinas an Italian even though he did not write in Italian. See the footnote
regarding the term “Arabs” on the homepage of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’
International Working Group”: “The project title reference to ‘the Arabs’
comes from the works of Aquinas who, like other thinkers of the Latin West,
was unaware of ethnic differences among the Arabic-writing thinkers of the
classical rationalist tradition in the Islamic cultural milieu. Al-Kindıˉ, known
as ‘the Philosopher of the Arabs,’ was of Arab lineage. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ was born in
Turkestan and studied in Baghdad. Ibn Sıˉnaˉ (Avicenna) was born to a family
culturally Persian in Afshana, near Bukhara, in present-day Afghanistan. Ibn
Rushd (Averroes) was born in Cordoba and probably should be considered
Andalusian or Maghrabi. Note also that Maimonides is included among the
philosophers of the tradition since his philosophical thought was importantly
formed through study of Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Avicenna, and Averroes, among other
sources, and in significant respects is a continuation of that tradition.” 2 See Adamson and Taylor, “Introduction.” 3 See Louth, St. John Damascene, 14. 4 Louth, St. John Damascene, 14. Besides situating John in a specific cultural
setting (Middle Eastern Christian Orthodoxy), the term has also theological
implications. See Griffith, “‘Melkites,’ ‘Jacobites.’” 5 Louth, St. John Damascene, 84. 6 Ibid., 12. Cf. Koterski, “Aristotelian Heritage.” 7 See Rhodes, “John Damascene in Context.” 8 See Janosik, John of Damascus. 9 See Backus, “John of Damascus.” 10 Louth, St. John Damascene, 84. 11 See Schick, Christian Communities, 180–219; Louth, St. John Damascene, 197. Incidentally, there is another work on Islam associated with Ibn Sarjuˉn, a dialogue titled A Dispute Between a Saracen and a Christian. This work has been
traditionally attributed to Ibn Sarjuˉn and was known in the West in the thirteenth century in the Latin translation by Robert Grosseteste; it is probably
not of Ibn Sarjuˉn’s direct authorship, but is likely based on his oral teaching.
Regardless, it is inherently interesting in that in it we find a Christian engagement with early Muslim speculative theology (kalaˉm), including issues such
as the reconciliation of divine predestination and human free will, and the
question of the created or uncreated nature of the word of God. 12 Aquinas obviously did not view John in the same way as modern scholarship, which has identified him as an Arab. As mentioned in note 1 above, Aquinas was unaware of ethnic differences among Middle Easterners. But this should not lead the reader to object that I am reading John’s influence on Aquinas through an anachronistic lens. I do not wish—or need—to argue that Aquinas was deeply aware of John’s ethnic or even cultural and linguistic background. Aquinas knew John primarily as a Greek theologian, as a venerable representative of the Byzantine tradition. However, he knew that John was from Damascus. And Thomas was not entirely oblivious to Middle Eastern Christianity. Both the crusades and the Dominicans’ missionary activity surely made him aware of it to some extent—enough for him to dedicate one of his works to the “cantor of Antioch” (see Aquinas, De rationibus fidei,
ed. Leonina). Therefore, it is not unreasonable to think that Thomas viewed
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 143
John at least vaguely as a Middle Eastern Christian. At any rate, whatever Aquinas’ awareness may have been of the cultural background of the Damascenus,
it is an undeniable fact that in reading and following him, Aquinas was being influenced by another “Arab” besides the members of the later falsafa movement. 13 Aquinas, Summa theologiae, ed. Leonina (hereafter: ST), 2a–2ae, q. 81, a.
7c:“Mens autem humana indiget ad hoc quod coniungatur Deo, sensibilium
manuductione, quia invisibilia per ea quae facta sunt, intellecta, conspiciuntur, ut apostolus dicit, ad Rom. Et ideo in divino cultu necesse est aliquibus
corporalibus uti, ut eis, quasi signis quibusdam, mens hominis excitetur ad
spirituales actus, quibus Deo coniungitur. Et ideo religio habet quidem interiores actus quasi principales et per se ad religionem pertinentes, exteriores
vero actus quasi secundarios, et ad interiores actus ordinatos.” This and all
translations of Aquinas’ texts are taken (with slight modifications) from Aquinas,
Summa Theologica, trans. Fathers of the English Dominican Province. See
also Quoëx, “Les actes exterieurs”; Romero, “Finality of Religion.” 14 To pray is to approach God in order to ask something from him—in doing so
we implicitly acknowledge our utter dependence upon him and therefore our
subjection to him (cf. ST 2a–2ae, q. 83, a. 17c). Devotion is “nothing else but
the will to give oneself readily to things concerning the service of God” (ST
2a–2ae, q. 82, a. 1c). Adoration is the practice whereby one uses one’s body to
reverence God. See Curran, “Thomistic Concept”; Dewan, “St. Thomas.” 15 ST 2a–2ae, q. 84, a. 2c: “[S]icut Damascenus dicit, in IV libro, quia ex duplici
natura compositi sumus, intellectuali scilicet et sensibili, duplicem adorationem Deo
offerimus, scilicet spiritualem, quae consistit in interiori mentis devotione; et
corporalem, quae consistit in exteriori corporis humiliatione.” 16 John of Damascus, On the Orthodox Faith, 4. 12, trans. Chase, 352–33. 17 For more on this theme in John and his dependence on Aristotelian epistemology, see Koterski, “Aristotelian Heritage.” For more on John’s epistemology with regard to the Divine Essence, see Steineger, “Naturally Implanted
Knowledge.” 18 John of Damascus, On Images, trans. Louth, 3.12. 19 ST 2a–2ae, q. 84, a. 2c: “Et quia in omnibus actibus latriae id quod est exterius refertur ad id quod est interius sicut ad principalius, ideo ipsa exterior
adoratio fit propter interiorem, ut videlicet per signa humilitatis quae corporaliter exhibemus, excitetur noster affectus ad subiiciendum se Deo; quia
connaturale est nobis ut per sensibilia ad intelligibilia procedamus.” 20 ST 2a–2ae, q. 85, a. 1c: “Est autem modus conveniens homini ut sensibilibus
signis utatur ad aliqua exprimenda, quia ex sensibilibus cognitionem accipit.
Et ideo ex naturali ratione procedit quod homo quibusdam sensibilibus rebus
utatur offerens eas Deo, in signum debitae subiectionis et honoris, secundum similitudinem eorum qui dominis suis aliqua offerunt in recognitionem
dominii. Hoc autem pertinet ad rationem sacrificii. Et ideo oblatio sacrificii
pertinet ad ius naturale.” 21 Aquinas, Summa contra Gentiles 3, c. 119, ed. Leonina, 370: “Quia vero connaturale est homini ut per sensus cognitionem accipiat, et difficillimum est
sensibilia transcendere, provisum est divinitus homini ut etiam in sensibilibus
rebus divinorum ei commemoratio fieret, ut per hoc hominis intentio magis
revocaretur ad divina, etiam illius cuius mens non est valida ad divina in
seipsis contemplanda. Et propter hoc instituta sunt sensibilia sacrificia: quae
homo Deo offert, non propter hoc quod Deus eis indigeat, sed ut repraesentetur homini quod et seipsum et omnia sua debet referre in ipsum sicut in
finem, et sicut in Creatorem et Gubernatorem et Dominum universorum.” 22 ST 3a, q. 25, a. 2 ad 1: “Adoratio latriae non exhibetur humanitati Christi
ratione sui ipsius, sed ratione divinitatis cui unitur.”
144 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo 23 Ibid., s.c.: “Damascenus dicit, in IV libro, adoratur autem caro Christi, incarnato Deo verbo, non propter seipsam, sed propter unitum ei secundum
hypostasim verbum Dei.” 24 Ibid., c.: “Sed quia, ut dicit Damascenus, si dividas subtilibus intelligentiis
quod videtur ab eo quod intelligitur, inadorabilis est ut creatura, scilicet adoratione latriae. Et tunc sic intellectae ut separatae a Dei verbo, debetur sibi
adoratio duliae, non cuiuscumque, puta quae communiter exhibetur aliis
creaturis; sed quadam excellentiori, quam hyperduliam vocant.” 25 Second Council of Nicaea, in Mansi, Sacrorum conciliorum, 13:377C: “[T]am
quae de coloribus et tessellis, quam quae ex alia materia congruenter in sanctis
Dei ecclesiis, et sacris vasis et vestibus, et in parietibus ac tabulis, domibus et
viis.” 26 ST 3a, q. 25, a. 3, s.c.: “Damascenus inducit Basilium dicentem, imaginis
honor ad prototypum pervenit, idest exemplar. Sed ipsum exemplar, scilicet
Christus, est adorandus adoratione latriae. Ergo et eius imago.” 27 ST 3a, q. 25, a. 3c: “Respondeo dicendum quod, sicut philosophus dicit, in libro de Mem. et Remin., duplex est motus animae in imaginem, unus quidem
in imaginem ipsam secundum quod est res quaedam; alio modo, in imaginem
inquantum est imago alterius. Et inter hos motus est haec differentia, quia
primus motus, quo quis movetur in imaginem prout est res quaedam, est alius
a motu qui est in rem, secundus autem motus, qui est in imaginem inquantum
est imago, est unus et idem cum illo qui est in rem. Sic igitur dicendum est
quod imagini Christi inquantum est res quaedam, puta lignum sculptum vel
pictum, nulla reverentia exhibetur, quia reverentia debetur non nisi rationali
naturae. Relinquitur ergo quod exhibeatur ei reverentia solum inquantum est
imago. Et sic sequitur quod eadem reverentia exhibeatur imagini Christi et
ipsi Christo. Cum igitur Christus adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est
quod eius imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda.” 28 ST 3a, q. 25, a. 3 ad 1: “Et quia, sicut dictum est, idem est motus in imaginem
et in rem, eo modo prohibetur adoratio quo prohibetur adoratio rei cuius
est imago. Unde ibi intelligitur prohiberi adoratio imaginum quas gentiles
faciebant in venerationem deorum suorum [. . .]. Ipsi autem Deo vero, cum sit
incorporeus, nulla imago corporalis poterat poni, quia, ut Damascenus dicit,
insipientiae summae est et impietatis figurare quod est divinum. Sed quia
in novo testamento Deus factus est homo, potest in sua imagine corporali
adorari.”
Bibliography
Primary Sources
John of Damascus. On Images: Treatise III. In Three Treatises on the Divine Images,
translated by Andrew Louth, 81–158. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir’s Seminary
Press, 2003. (Greek text: Die Schriften des Johannes von Damaskos, vol. 3: Contra imaginum calumniatores orationes tres, translated by Bonifatius Kotter, Berlin: De
Gruyter, 1975).
John of Damascus. On the Orthodox Faith. In Writings, translated by Frederic H.
Chase, Jr., 165–406. New York: Catholic University of America Press, 1958
(Greek text: Die Schriften des Johannes von Damaskos, vol. 2: Expositio fidei, translated by Bonifatius Kotter, Berlin: De Gruyter, 1973).
Mansu¯r Ibn Sarju¯n and Aquinas on Religious Worship 145
Mansi, Joannes Dominicus. Sacrorum conciliorum nova et amplissima collectio. 54 vols.
Florence: Antonio Zatta, 1759–98.
Thomas Aquinas. De rationibus fidei contra Saracenos, Graecos et Armenos ad Cantorem
Antiochenum. Editio Leonina 40B. Rome: Ad Sanctae Sabinae, 1968.
Thomas Aquinas. Summa contra Gentiles, lib. 3. Editio Leonina 14. Rome: Garroni, 1926.
Thomas Aquinas. The Summa Theologica. Translated by the Fathers of the English
Dominican Province. New York: Benziger, 1947.
Thomas Aquinas. Summa theologiae IIa–IIae pars, qq. 57–122. Editio Leonina 9.
Rome: Polyglotta, 1897.
Thomas Aquinas. Summa theologiae IIIa pars, qq. 1–59. Editio Leonina 11. Rome:
Polyglotta, 1903.
Secondary Literature
Adamson, Peter, and Richard C. Taylor. “Introduction.” In The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, edited by Peter Adamson and Richard C. Taylor,
1–9. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Aquinas and “the Arabs” International Working Group. “An International
Working Group on Medieval Philosophy in the Abrahamic Traditions.”
https://academic.mu.edu/taylorr/Aquinas_and_the_Arabs/Aquinas_&_the_
Arabs.html.
Backus, Irena. “John of Damascus, De fide orthodoxa: Translations by Burgundio
(1153/54), Grosseteste (1235/40) and Lefèvre d’Etaples (1507).” Journal of the
Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 49 (1986): 211–17.
Curran, John W. “The Thomistic Concept of Devotion.” The Thomist 2 (January,
1940): 410–43 and 546–80.
Dewan, Lawrence. “St. Thomas and the Ontology of Prayer.” Divus Thomas 77, no. 3/4 (1974): 392–402.
Griffith, Sidney. “‘Melkites,’ ‘Jacobites’ and the Christological Controversies in
Arabic in Third/Ninth Century Syria.” In Syrian Christians Under Islam: The
First Thousand Years, edited by David Thomas, 9–55. Leiden: Brill, 2001.
Janosik, Daniel J. John of Damascus, First Apologist to the Muslims: The Trinity and
Christian Apologetics in the Early Islamic Period. Eugene, OR: Pickwick, 2016.
Koterski, Joseph. “On the Aristotelian Heritage of John of Damascus.” In The
Failure of Modernism: The Cartesian Legacy and Contemporary Pluralism, edited by
Brendan Sweetman, 58–71. Washington, DC: American Maritain Association,
1999.
Louth, Andrew. St. John Damascene: Tradition and Originality in Byzantine Theology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.
Quoëx, Franck M. “Les actes exterieurs du culte dans l’histoire du salut selon
saint Thomas d’Aquin.” PhD diss., Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas
“Angelicum,” 2001.
Rhodes, D. Bryan. “John Damascene in Context: An Examination of ‘The Heresy of the Ishmaelites’ with Special Consideration Given to the Religious,
Political, and Social Contexts During the Seventh and Eighth Century Arab
Conquests.” St. Francis Magazine 7, no. 2 (2011): 96–173.
146 Francisco J. Romero Carrasquillo
Romero, Francisco. “The Finality of Religion in Aquinas’ Theory of Human
Acts.” PhD diss., Marquette University, 2009.
Schick, Robert. The Christian Communities of Palestine from Byzantine to Islamic
Rule. Princeton, NJ: Darwin Press, 1995.
Steineger, Joseph. “The Naturally Implanted Knowledge of God’s Existence:
Two 13th-Century Scholastic Interpretations of John of Damascus and Anselm
of Bec.” PhD diss., University of Chicago, 2014.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-9
Even if Ibn Taymiyya’s fame has significantly increased among scholarly
circles in the West over the last fifty years, he is not always as well-known
as one would expect. Before entering this chapter’s topic proper, I therefore give a brief outline of his life. Ibn Taymiyya was born in the city
of Harran in 1263 CE. Due to the Mongol invasions, his family fled to
Damascus six years later. After his father’s death in 1284, he started his
public life there as a teacher of several Islamic sciences in different H․ anbalıˉ institutions—H․
anbalism was one of the four schools of “law” ( fiqh) in
Sunni Islam. Ibn Taymiyya participated actively in the resistance against
three successive Mongol attacks against Damascus during the years 1299–
1303. Due to some of his entirely new ideas in legal and theological matters, he came into conflict with other scholars, even among his H․anbalıˉ colleagues. He was several times sentenced to imprisonment, inter alia in
1306–07 in Cairo, a city to which he was sent after a serious debate in
Damascus about the orthodoxy of his creed, and in Damascus, to which
he had returned in 1313. He was imprisoned for the last time in 1326 in
the citadel of Damascus, where he died in his cell in 1328. In his own
time, then, Ibn Taymiyya was a rather contested figure, even inside his
own school. The available biographical evidence suggests that he had only
a small group of intimate, faithful disciples, and that for several centuries
after his death he was considered a rather unimportant scholar in the history of the H․anbalıˉ legal school.1
At first sight, Ibn Taymiyya’s works do not appear to have received
much attention, and only after the rise of the Wahhabıˉs in Saudi Arabia
during the eighteenth century does he seem to have become an important
thinker in the Islamic world.2 In the West, it was not until the second half
of the twentieth century that his works received any serious attention.
Thereafter, the number of publications on Ibn Taymiyya increased explosively, both in the Arab and the Western world. The major tendency seems
to consist in considering Ibn Taymiyya an outstanding scholar who, based
7 Ibn Taymiyya on Ibn
Rushd in the Darʾ taʿaˉrud․
al-ʿaql wa-l-naql (with Special Attention to His
Quotations of Ibn Rushd’s
Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut)
Jules Janssens
148 Jules Janssens
on a profound knowledge of a wide range of writings of very different
kinds, constructed a new rational system by far superior not only to those
of his time but—in the eyes of many, especially Muslim, scholars—even
to those of the present day.
I certainly do not deny that Ibn Taymiyya was an erudite man. He
clearly read a large number of books, including work by thinkers such as
Ibn Rushd (known in Latin as Averroes).3 However, I will try to show
that he read the works of this Andalusian philosopher mostly, if not exclusively, in function of his own personal agenda, which, as already indicated,
was far from being approved by the majority of his contemporary Muslim
colleagues either in law or in kalaˉm (theology). Even more importantly, I
will try to show that Ibn Taymiyya often disregards the precise context in
which Ibn Rushd himself makes his affirmations, and is highly selective
in what he quotes, and especially in what he comments on (readers can
find an overview of his quotations in Table 7.1 at the end of this chapter).
In his critical edition of Ibn Taymiyya’s Darʾ taʿaˉrud․ al-ʿaql wa-l-naql
(Averting Contradiction between Reason and Revelation), Muh․ammad Rashaˉd Saˉlim identified—in spite of a few omissions and minor mistakes—most passages of Ibn Rushd’s works that formed the basis for
Ibn Taymiyya’s references.4 Based on Saˉlim’s index of names, as well as
on the references he provides in the footnotes, it is easy to detect that
Ibn Taymiyya’s quotations of Ibn Rushd derive from only three works of
the great Andalusian philosopher: al-Kashf ʿan manaˉhij al-ʾadilla fıˉ ʿaqaˉʾid
al-milla (Uncovering the Methods of Proofs with Regard to the Articles
of Faith of the Creed), Masʾala (Question), generally known as D․
amıˉma
(Appendix), and Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut (The Incoherence of the Incoherence).5
Significantly absent from this list is Ibn Rushd’s Fas․l al-maqaˉl (Decisive Treatise). The absence is significant not only because, together with
the three works mentioned, it constitutes Ibn Rushd’s dialectical, non-demonstrative, theological-philosophical corpus,6 but also—and perhaps
even more importantly—because it offers the actual basis for the further
doctrinal developments of Ibn Rushd’s Kashf. Indeed, in the opening lines
of that work, Ibn Rushd states that he has already dealt with the convergence between (rational) wisdom and Revelation (sharʿ) in an earlier work,
undoubtedly referring to the Fas․
l al-Maqaˉl. In particular, he underlines
that in the earlier work, he specified the sharp and crucial distinction between the outer sense of the sharıˉʿa (destined for the masses), and its being
in need of taʾwıˉl (exclusively reserved to the elite)—a distinction he had
precisely drawn in the Fas․
l.7
Since Ibn Taymiyya, as will soon become evident, almost certainly possessed a complete copy of the Kashf, he also in all likelihood read Ibn
Rushd’s remark about the Fas․
l, even though one looks in vain for any
reference to it in the Darʾ. Moreover, Ibn Taymiyya had access to the Fas․
l,
as evidenced by the quotation of passages of the work in his Bayaˉn talbıˉs
al-Jahmiyya fıˉ taʾsıˉs bidaʿihim al-kalaˉmiyya (Demonstration of the Deceit of
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 149
the Jahmiyya in Their Founding Innovative Kalaˉm Ideas)—though he
mentions it there under a somewhat different title, Taqrıˉr al-maqaˉl fıˉ taqrıˉr maˉ bayna ʾl-sharıˉʿa wa-ʾl-h․
ikma min ittis․
aˉl (Decisive Determination about
the Continuity between Sharia and Wisdom [Philosophy]).8 Given that
the Bayaˉn is almost certainly earlier than the Darʾ, it looks likely that
Ibn Taymiyya consciously disregarded the Fas․
l in the Darʾ, and that he
did so on doctrinal grounds. Despite Ibn Taymiyya’s full agreement with
Ibn Rushd regarding the idea that there exists only one truth, there is a
clear difference: he in no way accepts the existence of a radical distinction
between an outer and an inner sense of Revelation. On the contrary, for
Ibn Taymiyya the Qurʾaˉnic truth is a rational truth, or better, the rational truth, and is accessible to both the masses and the elite. He regards Ibn
Rushd as belonging to the ʾahl al-wahm wa-ʾl-takhyıˉl (people of delusive
imagination and fancy), for whom the prophetic, revealed revelation, at
least in its very outer wording, does not correspond to the truth, but nevertheless has to be believed by the common people for their welfare.9 I
therefore am inclined to believe that Ibn Taymiyya considered the Fas․
l to
be utterly mistaken in its basic conception.
But why did he quote the other dialectical, “theological” works of Ibn
Rushd? One paper alone will not suffice to answer this question comprehensively. However, in what follows, I will begin to indicate some
elements that might pave the way for such an answer.
Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd’s Kashf
First of all, I will concentrate on Ibn Taymiyya’s quotations of the Kashf.10
In his Darʾ, Ibn Taymiyya refers to this work once (7:345.3) as al-Us․uˉ l fıˉ
ʾl -aqaˉʿid and another time (6:212) as Manaˉhij al-ʾadilla fıˉ al-radd ʿalaˉ al-us․
uˉ liyıˉn. Of its five parts (plus the conclusion), he quotes Parts 1–4 completely,
except for the very first lines of chapter 1. He divides Ibn Rushd’s Kashf
into smaller entities, each of which is introduced by qaˉla (“he said”). This
is similar to Ibn Rushd’s longer commentaries, which divide Aristotle’s
texts into lemmata. However, unlike Ibn Rushd, Ibn Taymiyya does not
provide a commentary on each lemma. He leaves some lemmata without
any comment, while for others he provides only a partial comment.
Relevant in this respect is that in volume 6 of the Darʾ (in a chapter
where Ibn Taymiyya discusses the issue of God’s “overness,” ʿuluˉw11), the
second half of chapter 4 of the Kashf (which deals with the topics of directions and vision) is quoted almost without interruption, though divided
into nineteen long parts.12 The only exception is a small inserted comment (233.9–13) in which Ibn Taymiyya remarks on the explanation given
by al-Juwaynıˉ (a major early Ashʿarite theologian, d. 478/1085) for the
vision of what is not a body. This explanation, Ibn Taymiyya tells us, is of
the same “genre” as the alternative Ashʿarite view previously mentioned
by Ibn Rushd. Certainly, Ibn Taymiyya admits that compared to his
150 Jules Janssens
Ashʿarite predecessors, al-Juwaynıˉ innovates when he specifies that things
differ from each other through their “states” (ah․waˉl ). But he observes that
al-Juwaynıˉ nevertheless does not substantially deviate from their basic
opinion on this issue: that a thing is seen or perceived only insofar as it is
“existing.” Consequently, Ibn Taymiyya seriously weakens the difference
between the two views. He seems to suggest that Ibn Rushd’s presentation
in its actual formulation makes, or at least gives too much the impression
of, a distinction between two substantially different views.
Still, preceding the inserted long quotation of the Kashf, Ibn Taymiyya stresses (6:211–12) that Ibn Rushd’s intellectual and demonstrative
discussion on direction sharply diverges from the dialectical (rhetorical)
discussions that prevailed in kalaˉm.13 Ibn Taymiyya notes, however, that
the philosophers (Ibn Rushd is explicitly mentioned as one of them) are
unjustified in their claim to have given “demonstrative” knowledge on
many issues, and this applies not only to metaphysics but also to physics
and even mathematics.
Moreover, in his general and concluding consideration (6:237.8–249)
on the same inserted quotation of the Kashf, Ibn Taymiyya states (238)
that Ibn Rushd is simply mistaken in what Ibn Taymiyya calls muʿtazilite,
“inspired,” rejection of the existence of attributes in God. Nevertheless,
Ibn Rushd dismisses Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s way of demonstrating the impossibility of
the existence of attributes in God as inaccurate—on this point, according
to Ibn Taymiyya, Ibn Rushd agrees with al-Ghazaˉlıˉ that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s proof
shows only the impossibility of composition in God, not of the existence
of multiple attributes in Him. Similarly, when Ibn Rushd replaces the
argument (which Ibn Taymiyya claims is defended by Ibn Sıˉnaˉ and the
Muʿtazilite and Ashʿarite mutakkalimuˉ n) for God’s incorporeality, related to
the impossibility of “seeing” God, by an argument based on the immateriality of the soul, he is utterly mistaken—all the more so since al-Ghazaˉlıˉ
has shown that the incorporeality of God cannot be proved along these
lines. Ibn Taymiyya concludes (239) that Ibn Rushd praises al-Ghazaˉlıˉ
where Muslim scholars condemn him, and condemns him where they
praise him. All in all, he shows himself highly critical of Ibn Rushd’s view.
But several remarks and observations arise from this passage. First, Ibn
Rushd’s discussion of how to understand a plurality of attributes in God
is developed in not the fourth but the third part of the Kashf, so that the
link with the preceding quoted passage from the Kashf is extremely loose.
However, everything indicates that Ibn Taymiyya’s “historical” characterization of Ibn Rushd’s denial of a multitude of divine attributes is based
on elements derived from the Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut’s fifth Discussion (more
precisely, the point where Ibn Rushd discusses al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s presentation
of the philosophers’ proof for the denial of a plurality in the necessary
existent), and from the sixth Discussion (where al-Ghazaˉlıˉ argues that the
philosophers have no proper demonstration for denying a plurality of attributes in God).14
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 151
Second, as to divine incorporeality, one finds in the Kashf section just
quoted a long refutation of both the Muʿtazilite and the Ashʿarite proofs,
but looks in vain for any criticism of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. For a beginning of such
criticism, one might refer anew to the fifth section of the Tahaˉfut al-taha
ˉfut,
in a rather short passage where Ibn Rushd affirms that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ is the only
philosopher who believed the heavenly body is composed of matter and
form (hence indirectly implying that God, given His simplicity, cannot
be a body).15
Third, Ibn Taymiyya’s interpretation of Ibn Rushd’s rejection of Ibn
Sıˉnaˉ’s way of proving the absence of multiple attributes in God, as fully
aligned with al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s, is questionable. For Ibn Rushd, Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s way
simply does not lead to the denial of an eternal compound, whereas for
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, the very idea that God is uncompound forms the absolute basis
for the philosophers’ denial of the divine attributes.16
Fourth, even if nobody will deny that there is a major resemblance
between the views of Ibn Rushd and the Muʿtazilites on identifying the
divine attributes with the divine essence, it sounds surprising to state, as
Ibn Taymiyya does, that Ibn Rushd has “chosen” (i khtaˉra) the Muʿtazilites’ way, unless this qualification is to be understood in a very broad sense—
especially in view of Ibn Rushd’s criticism, formulated near the end of the
third part of the Kashf, that the Muʿtazilites publicly affirmed the identity
between the divine Self and His attributes (which is something beyond
the comprehension of the common man, and therefore must not, in Ibn
Rushd’s view, be revealed).17
Fifth, Ibn Taymiyya suggests that when he rejects the possibility of “seeing” something incorporeal, Ibn Rushd completely dismisses al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s
argumentation that the immateriality of the soul cannot constitute a basis
for proving God’s incorporeality, in which one cannot but detect a reference to the ninth Discussion of the Tahaˉfut—however, Ibn Taymiyya pays
no attention whatsoever to Ibn Rushd’s counterarguments.18
Finally, Ibn Taymiyya gives the impression that Ibn Rushd, if not often, then at least several times, rates some of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s doctrinal views
very positively. In fact, as far as I can see, Ibn Rushd never speaks about
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ in eulogistic terms. In the Kashf, he mentions only one such
case—al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s affirmation that God is the One from whom the mover
of the first heaven has proceeded—but not without noting that the expression of this philosophically inspired metaphysical idea is limited to a single
one of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s works, Mishkaˉt al-anwaˉr (The Niche of Lights), and,
moreover, largely contradicts what he says elsewhere about such metaphysical affirmations.19 As to the Tahaˉfut , Ibn Rushd only very seldom
states that al-Ghazaˉlıˉ is in agreement with the philosophers—and when
he does, he limits himself to noting that no further examination or discussion is needed. More importantly, Ibn Rushd often stresses that al-Ghazaˉlıˉ
misrepresents the prevailing, and in his view correct, philosophical doctrines due to his use of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s innovative philosophical ideas. Ibn
152 Jules Janssens
Rushd’s criticism of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ is thus not restricted to the instances where
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ expresses himself in a “theological” way.
Even if, as discussed above, Ibn Taymiyya’s observations offer interesting insights into Ibn Rushd’s place in the history of schools of thought
in the Islamic world, it is obvious that they miss important nuances. Ibn
Taymiyya does not offer any precise source reference. The long quoted
section of the Kashf plays a surprisingly limited role, and above all, he
remains silent about details that might require a more qualified judgment.
Therefore, these observations must be described as rough generalizations
that are clearly based on Ibn Taymiyya’s conviction of the presence of full
rationality in the Islamic revelation, as understood (most of the time perfectly) in the first generations of Islam.20
In this sense, it comes as no surprise that Ibn Taymiyya approves (242)
Ibn Rushd’s comment in the Kashf that “all wise men [h․
ukamaˉʾ] are in
agreement that God and the Angels are in Heaven, as also all religions are
in agreement on it.”21 Indeed, he does not hesitate to point out that this
view is of the same genre as that of the early mutakallimuˉn, who defended
the reality of the divine attributes (designated by Ibn Taymiyya as al-mutakallimuˉn al-s․i faˉtiyya). According to Ibn Taymiyya, for both Ibn Rushd
and those mutakallimuˉn, the qualification of God and the angels as being
in Heaven does not require that they have corporeity or that Heaven is a
spatial place. In discussing these matters, Ibn Taymiyya repeats (243) a few
lines of the Kashf (B, 84.21–23; Q, 178.12–14):
Thus, if the demonstration [can be] founded on the being of an existent in that direction [i.e., the direction of being “elevated”], [that
existent] must be other than a body. What is impossible there is the
existence of a body, not the existence of what is not a body.
Based on this affirmation, Ibn Taymiyya justly claims that for Ibn Rushd,
the existence of an incorporeal entity, and only of an incorporeal entity, is
possible outside the outermost sphere (not at least because of the Aristotelian definition of place as the containing surface—explicitly referred to by
Ibn Taymiyya, and repeated again in a slightly modified way on page 248).
In addition, he detects an almost complete identity between Ibn Rushd’s
view and that of the Kullaˉbiyya, an early kalaˉm school, characterized by
its anti-Muʿtazilism, of which otherwise little is known, probably because
it became integrated in early Ashʿarism.22 According to the heresiography of the tenth-century Ismaili scholar Abuˉ Tammaˉm, Ibn Kullaˉb (d.
ca. 241/855), the founder of the school, “maintained that God is on the
Throne but not in a particular place and not in a body.”23 For Ibn Kullaˉb and other members of his school, God is seated on His throne in His
essence. Note, however, that this is to be understood not in a metaphorical way, but in a literal kind of qualified anthropomorphism (qualified
in that no divine attribute is either identical with, or non-identical with,
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 153
God’s essence).24 Certainly, Ibn Rushd denies, as the Kullabites do, that
God is a body or in a place. But his Aristotelian concept of God as Unmoved Mover and First Cause (referred to later by Ibn Taymiyya on page
246) unmistakably implies that one has to interpret an expression such as
“God’s seating on the Throne” (Q, 25, 59) in a metaphorical way.25
Moreover, it is striking how Ibn Taymiyya, in what I would describe as
a personal rewording of Ibn Rushd’s argumentation (244–45), develops a
complex syllogism. This concludes that the affirmation of the existence of
something incorporeal, which is above the world and can be designated, is
stronger than that of a self-subsistent thing, which is neither in nor outside
the world and cannot be designated. I looked in vain for the expression of
this alternative in exactly these terms in Ibn Rushd. As already noted, Ibn
Rushd sees the absence of place in the surface of the outermost sphere as
being what excludes the existence of a body there and, moreover, reveals
the surface to be a “position” (wad․ʿ) devoid of place and time. Of course, it
may reasonably be deduced, as Ibn Taymiyya does, that Ibn Rushd accepts
the existence of something incorporeal above the world that can be designated. Strictly speaking, the same conclusion can be drawn with regard
to the position of the Kullabites. However, their point of departure lies
not in the supra-lunar sphere, but in their conception of the divine attributes as being neither God nor not-God, and in their complete rejection
of any metaphorical interpretation. I therefore cannot see that Ibn Rushd
objects to the Muʿtazilites in exactly the same terms as the Kullabites did
before him, as Ibn Taymiyya claims. In bringing together the two views,
Ibn Taymiyya seems to want to show that even in philosophy, one can
find arguments consistent with the traditional “orthodox” point of view.
These philosophical ideas are not really innovative, however, since they
find support in earlier “good” theology, as expressed in this particular case
in the Kullabiyya school.
Another fragment of Ibn Rushd’s Kashf, quoted a few lines later
(245.5–7, Kashf B, 83.18–20; Q, 177.3–4), further confirms this impression. In this fragment, which opens the treatment of direction (al-qawl fıˉ
ʾl-jiha), Ibn Rushd states:
As to this attribute [Ibn Taymiyya specifies in a small addition: the
attribute of “overness,” ʿuluˉw, but note that this terminus technicus is
absent in Ibn Rushd’s Kashf ], the people of the Law at first did not
hesitate to affirm it with regard to God, until the Muʿtazilites negated
it; then afterwards the later Ashʿarites followed them in denying it.
Ibn Rushd indicates that it was a generally accepted belief among the
early Muslims that “heaven” is in the direction of “above,” in accordance
with the face value of the letter of the Qurʾaˉn. Now the Muʿtazilites, one
of the first great kalaˉm schools (which originated as early as the second/
eighth century), based on rational considerations, estimated that placing
154 Jules Janssens
God somewhere “above” cannot be done without making Him a body,
and thus making oneself guilty of anthropomorphizing Him. Undoubtedly influenced by Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s criticism of an overly “physical” approach to
God, the latter Ashʿarites, starting with al-Juwaynıˉ, found it necessary to
free God of any directionality. Ibn Taymiyya, however, finds Ibn Rushd’s
observation correct. He also underlines that it is superior to Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s
(which considers the statement “every existent being can be designated” a
notoriously estimative proposition, meaning that it is false with regard to
a non-sensible subject).26
Most significantly, Ibn Taymiyya puts Ibn Rushd, at least as far as his
acceptance of God’s “overness” goes, in the company of the devotees of
the Karraˉmiyya—founded by Ibn Karraˉm (d. 255/869), who defended
the idea that God is “above”27—and the H․anbalites. In contrast, he places
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s view in line with the Muʿtazilites, the Raˉfid․ites (followers of
a Shiʿıˉ movement, to be dated at the same period as early Muʿtazilism), t he Ismaˉ ʿilites (adherents of another Shiʿıˉ movement, which gave rise to
an important theological-philosophical current in the fourth–fifth/tenth–
eleventh centuries: the Bat․
iniyya, severely criticized by al-Ghazaˉlıˉ), and
thinkers of other groups who are guilty of bidʾa, in other words inventors
of innovative views in matters of belief that are condemnable, but do not
constitute unbelief.
Hence, Ibn Rushd corroborates the correct opinion expressed in two
earlier schools, whereas the wrongness of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s doctrine is revealed
by its resemblance to the highly questionable view of several “dubious”
theological currents. But is not clear why Ibn Taymiyya mentions the
Karraˉmiyya, who were a marginal current inside the s․i faˉtiyya,28 together with H․anbalism, a strict Salaf school of jurisprudence and tradition. Does
he want to show that the same idea has been expressed in three extremely
different currents of thought? This cannot be excluded, but he does not
explicitly indicate as much. Similarly, the presence of the Raˉfid․a in the list
linked with Ibn Sıˉnaˉ is not easy to understand, at least not in view of the
existence of serious elements of dispute between Raˉfid․ites and Muʿtazilites, as shown in the refutation by al-Khayyaˉt (a Muʿtazilite theologian, d.
ca. 300/913) of Ibn al-Rawandıˉ (fl. third/ninth century).29
Through this list, Ibn Taymiyya in all likelihood wants to show how
far away from the “genuine” Islamic interpretation Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s point of
view really is. Indeed, Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s stance is similar not only to what Ibn
Taymiyya considers the erroneous view of the Muʿtazilite school (Sunnıˉ
in origin), but, even worse, two Shiʿite schools. Ibn Rushd, in contrast,
is placed in much better company because of his statement that there is
no strict need to interpret God’s being in Heaven metaphorically for the
broad public. Nonetheless, Ibn Taymiyya stresses (246) that Aristotle and
his followers (among whom Ibn Rushd normally figures as one of the
main representatives) have no real doctrine on prophecy and only little to
tell on “divine matters,” on which they have very few correct views and
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 155
are mostly mistaken. He underlines that there are two distinct philosophical discourses: that of the Aristotelian philosophers, such as Ibn Rushd,
whom he has previously (137) labeled “philosophical bat․
inites,” and that
of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ and his school. To be sure, he mistakenly regards Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s
school as representing the one, real philosophy, as Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ
affirms and as is evidenced by al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s criticisms. More importantly,
Ibn Taymiyya remarks (248) that the Aristotelians, in spite of speaking
confusedly about the people of the Sunna and the experts in tradition such
as Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt al-Baghdaˉdıˉ (d. 547/1157) and Ibn Rushd, are more in
accordance with sound reason and authentic tradition (s․
arıˉh․ al-maʿquˉl wa-
s․
ah․ıˉh․ al-manquˉl ) than Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, whose view aligns with the Muʿtazilites and the Shiʿites. Disregarding a few of Ibn Taymiyya’s further comments
on this issue, I limit myself to indicating that in a final passage (248–49),
he concentrates on the issue of God’s being, or not, in place. He points
out divergences on both the intentional and the lexical side of the word
“place,” which can give rise to answering the question in different ways.
However, he insists once more that everyone has agreed on this point with
the exception of some “later philosophers”—not specified, but undoubtedly a reference to Ibn Sıˉnaˉ and his school.
Up to this point, Ibn Taymiyya seems to make little use of Ibn Rushd’s
Kashf, and only in selected contexts. As just discussed, three passages of
the Kashf receive more detailed attention (one directly, when quoted; the
two others in a more general, final consideration). Given this limited use,
it is extremely puzzling that Ibn Taymiyya quotes the whole section of the
Kashf. More important still is that Ibn Taymiyya nowhere discusses the
same fundamental question as Ibn Rushd does, namely the idea that one
must not interpret what the religious law itself does not indicate as open to
interpretation, in order not to mislead the masses.
When we survey other parts of the Kashf quoted by Ibn Taymiyya, the
picture becomes even more complex. Sometimes he offers (1) a larger,
general commentary, either (a) with repetition of earlier quoted passages of
parts thereof (e.g., 9:98.1–107.6, related to 94–95) or (b) without such repetition (e.g., after 7:345.3–347.8). At other times, he presents (2) a specific
commentary, either (a) related to a specific fragment in a series of fragments (e.g., 9:78.7–17; 79.6–80.2; 80.11–81.2) or (b) isolated and strictly
limited to what is affirmed in the fragment (e.g., 9:82.13–84.2; 9:91.5–
92.20; 9:110.10–112.4). Finally, (3) a commentary placed in a broader perspective (e.g., 9:113.3–119.18) is occasionally inserted.30 Only in cases 1a
and 2a–b is a division of the text fully understandable.
Also worthy of attention is the fact that the chapters of the Kashf are
quoted in different parts of the Darʾ and do not follow the original order
of Ibn Rushd.
The quotation of the very beginning of chapter 1 of the Kashf is offered
in volume 7, “aspect” (wajh) 44 (miscellaneous point 20), which has as its
object the question whether rational inquiry is required or not in fixing
156 Jules Janssens
the sense (literally: the hearing, samʿ) of the Revelation. In these opening
lines of the Kashf, Ibn Rushd insists that there exist many divergences
about the exact meaning of the Revelation, and distinguishes mainly four
groups in his day: the Ashʿarites, the Muʿtazilites, the Bat․
inıˉs, and the
h․
ashwiyya or literalists. According to Ibn Taymiyya (347), Ibn Rushd is
misleading in his exposition of the positions of the kalaˉm, primarily (although not only) because he does not mention that the Salaf, the spiritual
leaders and the most outstanding of the Muslims, do not belong to any of
these four groups. All in all, Ibn Rushd cannot be trusted as a guide for
both a complete survey and a correct judgment of the different theological
schools and currents.
The remaining part of chapter 1 is quoted in volume 9 (though starting with a brief reminder, on pages 68–69, of Ibn Rushd’s mentioning of
four groups at the beginning of the chapter, already quoted in volume 7).
It is divided into two separate sections. In the first (69–132), Ibn Taymiyya outlines Ibn Rushd’s survey of the different methods that have been
used to show God’s existence: literalist, early and late Ashʿarites (together with a reference to Ibn Sıˉnaˉ), Sufis, and a brief note in which he indicates—cautiously, because of the unavailability of their writings in Andalusia—that the Muʿtazilites probably had a doctrine very similar to that of
the Ashʿarites. This section, in turn, is spread over three chapters. In the
first chapter (66–107), Ibn Taymiyya quotes the exclusively Revelation-based acceptance of God’s existence as defended by the literalists, as well
as what Ibn Rushd labels the “first method” to prove God’s existence,
i.e., the showing of the necessity of the creation in time of the world, as
the ancient Ashʿarites advocated. The second chapter (107–20) reproduces
Ibn Rushd’s discussion of the first premise underlying the second method
held by the later Ashʿarites (especially as expressed for the first time by
al-Juwaynıˉ in his work al-Niz․aˉmiyya), i.e., that it is possible for the world
to be the opposite of what it actually is (according to Ibn Rushd, Ibn Sıˉnaˉ
also accepted this premise, though only to a certain degree). As to the
third chapter (120–211), it opens (120–32) by quoting Ibn Rushd’s presentation of the second premise of the late Ashʿarites, namely that every
possible being is created, followed by his discussion of the Sufis and his
brief note on the Muʿtazilites.31 In the next two chapters, Ibn Taymiyya
argues that the views of the mutakallimuˉn with regard to God’s action and
the forthcoming of the possible things from Him is closer to the (rational) truth of the Revelation than to that of the philosophers. At the same
time, Ibn Taymiyya strongly stresses that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s idea of the possible in
itself, as necessary through another, is opposed to that of the Aristotelians,
as expressed, for example, in the Concise Exposition (talkhıˉs․) of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics by Thaˉbit Ibn Qurra (d. 288/901).32
After all this, at the beginning of a new and last chapter (321–434) Ibn
Taymiyya quotes the last part of the first chapter of the Kashf, in which
Ibn Rushd sets out his own method to prove God’s existence, namely by
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 157
way of two principles: providence and invention. It is startling that he begins this section with the expression “and then Ibn Rushd said” (thumma qaˉla Ibn Rushd), as if he had quoted something of Ibn Rushd’s just before,
whereas in reality there is a gap of almost two hundred pages. At first sight,
one might think of a misplacement originating during the transmission of
the text. But it looks more reasonable to suppose that Ibn Taymiyya consciously opted to place it where it actually is. In fact, in his “concluding”
remark to this section (333–36), Ibn Taymiyya observes that Ibn Rushd is
right to reject certain intellectual proofs of the mutakallimuˉn—although the better mutakallimuˉn were already aware of this—and to pose the Qurʾaˉn as
alerting all men, both masses and elite, to God’s existence. On the other
hand, he stresses that Ibn Rushd’s view, with its sharp distinction between
common men and elite, is ultimately weaker than the one expressed in
kalaˉm. In fact, Ibn Rushd does not recognize the profound rationality
inherent to the Revelation. Ibn Taymiyya finds a further strong confirmation for his fundamental rejection of Ibn Rushd’s point of view in the
latter’s discussion of divine unity, as given in the second chapter of the
Kashf. He quotes it in its entirety (336 ff.), but—unlike in his quotation of
the last part of the first chapter, where one finds only one such substantial
comment—several times interspersed with rather long commentaries.33
Immediately after quoting the last paragraph of chapter 2, in which Ibn
Rushd indicates that the true understanding of the divine “unity” implies
two meanings (the affirmation of God’s existence and the negation that
there is any other god similar to Him), Ibn Taymiyya quotes the beginning (379) of chapter 3 of the Kashf, a passage that concentrates on God’s
knowledge (in its entirety, the chapter is dedicated to the issue of the
divine attributes). Ibn Taymiyya places this discussion in the framework
of an all-encompassing examination of the topic of divine tawh․ıˉd (God’s unicity and unity) (336). For him, Ibn Rushd’s treatment of the divine
attributes, whether positive, negative, or active, suffers from the same kind
of shortcoming as his exposition on God’s existence. However, it should
be noted that in his final remark on chapter 2, Ibn Rushd does not refer
to the topic of God’s attributes, but only specifies that a true confession of
tawvıˉd implies the affirmation of God’s existence and the denial of the existence of another godhead. This affirmation receives not a single comment
by Ibn Taymiyya. Certainly, Ibn Rushd would not deny that a correct understanding of the divine attributes is intimately related to the confession
of the divine tawh․ıˉd, but he presents it primarily as a “description” of God,
the profound sense of which is strictly reserved to the few men who have
a measure of knowledge sufficient to attain demonstrative knowledge, in
other words the philosophers. This is undoubtedly the reason why he deals
with it in three separate chapters, the first of which discusses the ascription
of attributes to God, the second the denial of any resemblance between
God and man, and the third God’s way of acting. This actual order of
presentation is more in line with Ibn Taymiyya’s own agenda than with
158 Jules Janssens
that of Ibn Rushd. Once he has taken the decision to include here the
exposition on God’s knowledge that opens the third chapter of the Kashf,
it is indeed quite natural that Ibn Taymiyya follows it with that of the
Masʾala/D․
amıˉma (to which we will return somewhat later), since divine
knowledge is its central theme.
Hereafter, Ibn Taymiyya pays extensive attention to Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt
al-Baghdaˉdıˉ’s view on God’s knowledge, as developed in his Kitaˉb al-Mu
ʾtabar. For the present investigation, it is interesting to note that Ibn
Taymiyya mentions three major philosophical views (401): Aristotle as
restricting God’s knowledge to His own essence; Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, who defends
a divine knowledge of the particulars in a universal way; and a third that
accepts a divine knowledge of the particulars as particulars. In this third
case, Ibn Taymiyya introduces a distinction between two views: Ibn
Rushd’s, qualified here as bringing the divine knowledge close to what is
changeable; and Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt’s own, which admits that the changeable,
both with regard to its generation and its corruption, can be fully known
by God—this, according to Ibn Taymiyya, being in line with the view of
several mutakallimuˉn, as well as with what is indicated in the Revelation
and in the Sunna. This distinction is clearly based on a prima facie acceptance of what the two authors state. It does not take into account the
unmistakably rhetorical nature of Ibn Rushd’s Masʾala/D․
amıˉma, or Abuˉ
al-Barakaˉt’s idea that God’s knowledge of the world depends on His ideas,
which are the ʾumm al-Kitaˉb, the mother of the Book.34
The remaining part of chapter 3 of the Kashf, which investigates the
other six of the usually recognized seven essential attributes of God—
life, power, will, hearing, vision, and speech—is quoted in volume 10
(197–229). In a final note on the whole section (229–43), Ibn Taymiyya
stresses inter alia that the philosophers, contrary to what they claim, have
not offered any demonstrative proof for denying the divine attributes. As
to Ibn Rushd, he presents the following interesting remark (242): “This
man [i.e., Ibn Rushd] has sometimes taken the path instructed by the
sense of Revelation [sharʾ], sometimes that instructed by the mutakallimuˉn,
and sometimes he expresses what he thinks to be the doctrine [qawl] of
the philosophers.” This gives the strong impression that Ibn Taymiyya
regards Ibn Rushd as an eclectic thinker who, in spite of his considering
himself a philosopher, has taken ideas from other paths of thought that do
not necessarily agree with the view of the philosophers. Obviously, in Ibn
Taymiyya’s view, these “deviant” opinions brought Ibn Rushd closer to
genuine Islam.
Immediately after the quotation of the remaining part of chapter 3 follows the quotation of the first part of chapter 4 of the Kashf, which deals
with God’s transcendence. In that first part, one finds a particular emphasis on the absence of any similarity between God and His creatures,
as well as the denial of any corporeality to Him. Several passages receive
more detailed comment, but they are all related to Ibn Rushd’s discussion
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 159
of the attribute of corporeality, more specifically to the final part, which
explains why God is called “light” and why Revelation does not mention
this. Here, I want to pay special attention to one comment, Ibn Taymiyya’s
claim (270) that Ibn Rushd has taken his exposition of God as “light” from
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s Mishkaˉt al-anwaˉr (The Niche of Lights). Indeed, both thinkers have in common the idea that the highest being deserves to be called
“light.” But Ibn Rushd justifies this designation by stating that light is the
noblest of all sensible things, noting, moreover, that the identification of
God with something insensible would lead common people to deny God’s
existence. For al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, on the contrary, the reason why God deserves to
be called “Light” is that He is the source that enlightens all other things,
which in themselves would be nothing without His enlightment.35 It is
obvious that their interpretations are anything but identical. Even though
there is no doubt that Ibn Rushd knew the work, al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s Mishkaˉt can,
at best, have functioned as a distant source of inspiration.36
As to the first part of chapter 4, it is, as I have mentioned, quoted in
the sixth volume of the Darʾ. It is included in aspect 43, which focuses on
the notions of direction ( jiha) and place (makaˉn) with regard to God and
offers a long, detailed rebuttal of the view of Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ.37 As
noted, the quotation of Ibn Rushd’s exposition on the notion of direction
is natural, but the addition of that on vision receives almost no attention.
When Ibn Taymiyya formulates critical remarks on Ibn Rushd’s objection
to “seeing God,” he completely disregards the passage of the Kashf, but,
without acknowledging it, refers to the Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut (see below).
If, generally speaking, the quoted fragments can well be placed in the
context of Ibn Taymiyya’s own object of focus, there remain nonetheless
a few more puzzling cases, such as the great distance separating the quotation of the last part of chapter 1 from that of its first part, or the attaching
of the very beginning of chapter 3 to the end of chapter 2. They clearly
deserve more detailed examination—as does, certainly, the omission of
the complete fifth chapter on God’s attributes of action—but all this must
wait for another occasion.
Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd’s Masʾala (D․
amıˉma)
Ibn Rushd’s Masʾala, commonly known as D․
amıˉma,38 which explicitly and uniquely focuses on the question of God’s knowledge of particulars,
is quoted in its entirety in volume 9 of the Darʾ (383.10–390.7). Ibn Taymiyya refers to it under the title Maqaˉla fıˉ al-ʿilm (Treatise on Knowledge)
(9:382.16), within a comment on a quoted passage of the beginning of
chapter 3 of the Kashf (9:382.6–383.9). There, Ibn Taymiyya reproaches
Ibn Rushd with having incorrectly formulated the mutakallimuˉns’ view
on divine knowledge, so that it became easy for Ibn Rushd to reject it,
although it is actually better than Ibn Rushd’s view. Also, this time, Ibn
Taymiyya subdivides the text into different parts, each introduced by qaˉla.
160 Jules Janssens
Especially the last three of these subdivisions are far from self-evident
and cannot be easily explained. Moreover, only a small part of the text
receives a more detailed commentary. In this (9:390.8 ff.), Ibn Taymiyya
stresses that Ibn Rushd offers no appropriate answer regarding the precise nature of divine knowledge. According to Ibn Taymiyya, Ibn Rushd,
in line with the “philosophers,” limits himself to distinguishing God’s
knowledge, as being the cause of existence of the things, from the knowledge of creatures, as being dependent on their existence. Ibn Taymiyya
(9:392.13–394.16) offers a detailed reply to five affirmations (quoted before, 9:388.3–389.2), which in Ibn Rushd’s original text closely succeed
each other (D․
amıˉma, B, 41.18–19, 21.22–24; 42.1–2, 3–5/Bu, 41.4, 7.8–10,
11–13, 13–15).39 Since one finds the very crux of Ibn Rushd’s own opinion in those passages, it is quite normal that they receive particular attention. They are not just uncritically mentioned by Ibn Taymiyya. On the
contrary, he expresses some serious reservations and criticisms. As to the
other passages of the treatise, they are not completely ignored, but only
vaguely referred to. This can be illustrated by the following two observations, for example: (1) Ibn Taymiyya’s defense (to a certain degree) of
the mutakallimuˉn doctrine of God’s eternal knowledge of the particulars as
they will come to be (see, e.g., 9:390.8–391.5)—Ibn Taymiyya particularly stresses that God’s knowledge alone does not explain the existence of
these particular things, as Ibn Rushd suggests (near the beginning of the
Masʾala/D․
amıˉma); and (2) Ibn Taymiyya’s allusion to and criticism of (see,
e.g., 9:398.8–16 and 401.1–2—in the latter case with explicit reference to
Ibn Rushd) to the fact that according to the (Peripatetic) philosophers,
God knows particulars, as is evidenced by their acceptance of the phenomenon of premonition with respect to, inter alia, dreams (as indicated near
the end of the Masʾala/D․
amıˉma).
It is perhaps worthwhile to note that Ibn Taymiyya, in his final conclusion to this chapter (9:434.3–6), claims that with regard to the explanation
of God’s knowledge of particulars, Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt al-Baghdaˉdıˉ is closer
to the tradition and the truth than Ibn Rushd, but that Ibn Rushd’s view
is itself better than Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s. As we shall see, he expresses the same judgment with regard to the explanation that each of these three thinkers gives
of divine will, namely in a comment related to a fragment of Discussion
11 of the Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut (more will be said on this below). We have
already seen that he declared both Ibn Rushd and Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt superior
to Ibn Sıˉnaˉ in their conception of God’s “overness.” Regardless of whether
his remark is justified or not, he clearly has good reasons to group them
together in opposition to Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, insofar as both were what Gutas has
called “anti-Avicennist Peripatetics.”40
So there are objective grounds to point out the existence of a sharp divide within philosophy as it had developed in the Islamic world. In showing that the philosophers express different opinions concerning several
important issues, Ibn Taymiyya, like al-Ghazaˉlıˉ before him, detects an
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 161
incoherence between their views, and at once dismisses the philosophers’
claim to possess absolute, demonstrative knowledge as unjustified. Even
inside the school of the “anti-Avicennist Peripatetics,” and not just between them and Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, one finds substantially different views on given
topics, as illustrated by Ibn Rushd’s and Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt’s view on God’s
will and being-above. For Ibn Taymiyya to know which is the better of
the two, hence the closest to the truth, the only criterion is the rational
truth of the Revelation and the doctrine of the Salaf. On this ground, he
affirms that in both the latter is superior to the former, and both are superior to Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s. However, this does not mean that Ibn Taymiyya distinguishes the different philosophers according to an absolute hierarchical
order of preeminence. He judges case by case, and even if he often finds
the views of the “Peripatetics” better than Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s, this is not always the
case, as we will see below.
Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd’s Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut
Finally, Ibn Taymiyya also quotes a number of passages of the Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut. They cover fragments of six of the discussions, 1, 3, 4, 6, 10, and
11, although none of them completely.
Regarding Discussion 1 of the Tahaˉfut , which al-Ghazaˉlıˉ entitles “On
the past eternity of the world,”41 Ibn Taymiyya quotes Ibn Rushd’s objection to al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s way of presenting the philosophers’ first proof (Ibn
Rushd underlines the equivocal nature of the term “possible” and the
need, or not, in what is possible for a determinant); part of Ibn Rushd’s
reply to al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s first objection to that first proof (Ibn Rushd points
out that a genuine idea of “agent” impedes the Ashʿarite idea of a creation
in time, eternally willed by God); (a paraphrase of) Ibn Rushd’s very first
affirmation that immediately follows upon al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s articulation of the
philosophers’ fourth proof (it stresses that what becomes is possible before
it becomes, hence needs a substratum to be received); and, finally, the first
part of Ibn Rushd’s criticism against al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s “second rational proposition” (Ibn Rushd insists once more that the possible needs a substratum,
since in its state of non-being it is in potency, not “impossible”). The notion of “possible” is eminently present in three of the four fragments, all
of which are quoted in volume 8 of the Darʾ. They do not receive a proper
detailed comment, but Ibn Taymiyya probably considers them additional
evidence for Ibn Rushd’s criticism against Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s concept of “possible”
as expressed in a fragment of Discussion 4 (see below). As to the fragment
in which the idea of “agent” prevails, it is present in a chapter devoted to
God’s being an “agent” (and hence as possessing attributes) in the third
volume of the Darʾ. It is there embedded in a larger discussion that is more
properly developed in Discussion 6, and therefore seems to have been used
exclusively as an additional indication for Ibn Rushd’s particular view on
this issue.
162 Jules Janssens
From Ibn Rushd’s remarks on al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s third Discussion, “On showing their obfuscation in saying that God is the world’s enactor and maker, that the world is His handiwork and act; showing that this is with them a metaphor not reality,” Ibn Taymiyya quotes mainly four passages. The first, although quoted as last in the Darʾ (volume 8), concerns Ibn Rushd’s extensive rejection of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s (and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s) theory of emanation and of the principle ex uno non fit nisi unum. The second, which is referred to in Darʾ, volume 10, is rather brief and figures inside a long commentary on a passage in which al-Ghazaˉlıˉ asks whether or not God knows things outside Himself—in the quoted lines, Ibn Rushd rejects the Ashʿarite doctrine of divine knowledge (and other attributes) and indicates that the philosophers’ theory of the First Principle approaches that of the Muʿtazilites. The third consists in Ibn Rushd’s final observation with regard to al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s second objection against the doctrine of the ex uno, in which Ibn Rushd stresses that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s concept of the “possible” is not that of the genuine philosophers, for whom nothing eternal is “possible.” Finally, the last quotation offers the text of a complete comment by Ibn Rushd, in which the latter strongly argues against the ex uno idea of his major predecessors in the Arabic world. In the middle of the passages that express Ibn Rush’s third remark, Ibn Taymiyya (8:189.1–190.4) briefly highlights Ibn Rushd’s rejection in name of the “Ancients” of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s concept of the possible and acceptance of the ex
uno principle. He points as well to Ibn Rushd’s criticism—once more, in name of the Ancients—of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s explanation of inspiration (wahy) and premonitory dreams (manaˉmaˉt ) by an action of the celestial soul. Unless I am mistaken, this is a direct reference to a passage related to Discussion 16, more precisely to the comment following the second quoted passage of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s Tahaˉfut (SD, 751 ff., esp. 754.16–20; Bo, 495 ff., esp. 500.13–16). Noteworthy is also Ibn Taymiyya’s observation that in these cases, the opinion of the “Ancients,” and hence of Ibn Rushd, is much weaker than Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s, which, however, is inferior to that of the ʾAhl
al-Islaˉm, that is, the Salaf and their faithful followers (in fact, according to Ibn Taymiyya, the best part of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s doctrine only touches the very beginning of the view of the ʾAhl al-Islaˉm).
As to Ibn Rushd’s rejection of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s (and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s) theory of
emanation and of the principle Ex uno non fit nisi unum, Ibn Taymiyya
(8:216.1–225.11) offers a general commentary. For him, Ibn Rushd remains fully in line with Aristotle, who proved the existence of God on
basis of his being, as the desired object of love, First Mover—a theory
which Ibn Taymiyya judges utterly wrong.42 Certainly, Ibn Rushd, compared to Aristotle, adds a reference to the divine “Command,” but he fails
to establish—at least explicitly—that the servitude of the creatures to God
is due to their being created by Him, that the “Commander” is necessarily
incorporeal, or that the “Commander” is not only the final beloved goal
but also the “agent creator” of the celestial sphere.
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 163
In the context of indicating these failures in Ibn Rushd, Ibn Taymiyya
quotes a second time a few lines of Ibn Rushd’s rejection, i.e., 222.3–4,
222.14–15, and 223.8–11 (quoted before 214.8–9, 211.7–8, and 206.8–12
respectively), and furnishes them with a more detailed commentary. They
concern Ibn Rushd’s affirmations that the heavenly bodies possess an obediential servitude to God in their very essence; that the Commander of
the Universe, God, is necessarily incorporeal; and that God, as first ruler,
bestows on all existents the characteristic through which they become existent through the mediation of those who are under His command. With
regard to the first affirmation, Ibn Taymiyya observes that it is not mistaken as such, but only insofar as this obedience is understood in terms of
an eternal motion, as Aristotle, and probably also Ibn Rushd, does. As to
the second, Ibn Taymiyya characterizes it as a non-conclusive argument,
while noting inter alia that a subjecting intellect or body is not necessarily
part of all the subjected intellects or bodies. Against the third, he objects
that it is not proven that the influences of the heavenly bodies on earthly
events are uniquely and fully due to an act of obedience to God. He also
notes that in beings living on Earth, the need for earthly things is greater
than that for heavenly things. Note, however, that one looks in vain for
similar detailed commentaries with respect to other fragments related to
Discussion 3.
Out of Discussion 4, “On showing their inability to prove the existence
of the maker of the world,” Ibn Taymiyya has chosen those comments
by Ibn Rushd in which he clarifies his understanding of the notions of
agent and cause. They are quoted quite separately from each other, partly
because of the formulation of some objections against Ibn Rushd’s first
comment (8:138.13–145.13), but mainly due to a very long intervening
quotation of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s Tahaˉfut (8:146.1–155.8, with further general
commentary at 155.9–163.19). One of the basic objections with respect
to Ibn Rushd’s first comment is that God is not the cause of the existence
of the world, but only of one if its accidents, motion (8:440.3–4). In the
framework of his reply, Ibn Taymiyya repeats two of Ibn Rushd’s affirmations: (1) the distinction between two kinds of agents—one only related
to its object during the object’s becoming, the other convertible with its
object (141.17–142.5, repeats 137.4–14 and 138.3–4, with minor modifications), but Ibn Taymiyya objects that we observe only the first kind of
agent, and (2) the agent who both brings forth and conserves is a more noble agent than the one who only produces (144.11–13)—a saying approved
by Ibn Taymiyya, who, however, remarks that it does not conform to the
view of Ibn Rushd’s “philosophical brothers.”
With regard to Ibn Rushd’s second comment, Ibn Taymiyya (8:165.7–
14) stresses that the former’s discussion (in which the distinction between
four kinds of causes is emphasized) does not refute al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s point of
view, since this clearly refers only to the efficient cause. In the third quoted
fragment, Ibn Rushd rejects al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s claim that the philosophers must
164 Jules Janssens
admit that the First Principle which has no cause is the celestial bodies.
It is striking that in the quotation itself (166.5–6), Ibn Taymiyya already
introduces two specifications, namely, “the way of those who imitate philosophy” as “the way of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ” and “the (proper) philosophers” as “the
Ancients.” In a general response, Ibn Taymiyya (166.10–167.10) insists that
Ibn Rushd rejects Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s way of combining elements of earlier falsafa
and of kalaˉm, more particularly the specific way it implies the denial of
attributes and corporeality in God. In the fourth and last fragment, Ibn
Rushd, after emphasizing that no philosopher has ever accepted the existence of an actual infinite, underlines that al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s actual formulation
of the proof that shows the impossibility of an infinite causal series, based
on the distinction between necessary and possible, is strictly proper to
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. This last discussion receives very detailed attention, as is evidenced by the many recurrences of passages (many times followed by a
specific observation): 171.8–12 (repeats 169.9–13); 171.13–172.2 (repeats
169.13–170.1); 172.7–9 (repeats 169.14–170.1); 172.19 (repeats in a slightly
modified form 172.7–8); 174.2–5 (repeats 169.15–170.4, somewhat reworded); 175.3–10 (repeats 170.4–11); 177.8–9 (repeats 170.6–7); 182 (repeats 170.6–11); 183.10–15 (repeats 170.11–171.2); 184.15–19 and, again,
185.5–8 (repeats 170.12–171.2); 198.14 (repeats 170.6); 199.1–2 (repeats
170.3–4); 199.3 and, again, 201.15 (repeats 170.4); 199.8–200.2 (repeats
170.6–171.2).
This whole area deserves a separate study, especially since several lines
(and even passages) are repeated more than once. But generally speaking,
Ibn Taymiyya pays great attention to what Ibn Rushd qualifies as Ibn
Sıˉnaˉ’s way. Among other things, he states that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s way was inspired
by Proclus, not Aristotle (172.11–15); that for Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, the possible is what
has a cause to it, but is further divided into the real possible (identical with
what is temporally originated) and the necessary (identical with what is
eternal) (174.6–175.2); that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ deviates from the Peripatetic tradition (which sharply distinguishes between necessary [waˉjib] and possible)
by using the notion of “necessary” (d․a ruˉrıˉ ) with regard to things that are
caused (175.3–177.7; see also 186.1–187.8, where Ibn Taymiyya notes that
Ibn Rushd rightly wants to show that on this matter, Ibn Sıˉnaˉ breaks
with the Aristotelian philosophical tradition); that it is not the division of
being into necessary and possible, but the idea of the possible as being in
need of a maker that allows us to establish the existence of the Necessary
Being (177.10–181.14); that Ibn Rushd (inspired by al-Ghazaˉlıˉ) correctly
criticizes the weakness of Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s way insofar as it does not respect the
proper notion of “possible,” which is coextensive with what is originated
(200.3–203.1).
Of Discussion 6, “On the divine attributes,” Ibn Taymiyya quotes four fragments explicitly. In the first two of these, Ibn Rushd emphasizes that al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s rejection of the philosophers’ claim—the fact that the Necessary Being is existent in itself implies the denial of attributes to
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 165
Him—concerns only Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s doctrine. They receive no proper comment. As to the third fragment quoted (divided into two parts), it concentrates on the notion of “composition.” Ibn Rushd, in sharp reaction against al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, underlines that “composition” is not like “existence” because it is a passive quality. Ibn Taymiyya remarks (3:402.7–10) that al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s refutation of the philosophers’ view is sound and that Ibn Rushd’s reply is mere quibbling over words and even more erroneous than Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s, despite the latter’s weakness. After explaining the correctness of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s refutation (402.11–405.17), Ibn Taymiyya extensively criticizes Ibn Rushd’s view (406.1–423.16). In this context, he repeats several affirmations: 406.1–2 (repeats 399.11–400.1);43 406.11–12 (repeats 400.1–2); 407.3–5 (repeats 400.3–5); 407.14–16 (repeats 400.6–
8); 408.14–409.4 (repeats 400.6–9);44 the lines 408.16–409.1 are quoted again on 409.15–16 and the lines 409.1–4 on 411.6–8; 419.1–3 (repeats 400,10–401.1, slightly modified); and 419.3–6 (repeats 401.2–4, lines 419.4–5 being repeated on 420.10).
Ibn Taymiyya points out that Ibn Rushd does not pay enough attention to the intellectual meaning of the terms involved (406.4–5; compare 408.2–4 and 419.7–420.10); that al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s formulation is inspired by the philosophers’ definition (407.6–9); that Ibn Rushd’s identification of composition with motion is mistaken (408.1–14); that potency is not the same as privation (410.3–11); that the existence of a first efficient cause cannot be proved from motion (411.9–418.19);45 and that attributes are intrinsic to what they are said of and therefore do not imply composition (420.11–423.16).
In the last quoted fragment (divided into four parts), which in the Tahaˉ -
fut al-tahaˉfut precedes the other three, Ibn Rushd outlines the difficulties
involved in the view that one must distinguish between essence and attributes; makes clear that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ and the Ashʿarites fail to show that God
has no cause at all, or is not composed; and specifies that the quality which
anything acquires from another thing is in itself more apt to possess the
concept which is acquired. Again, one finds in the Darʾ a repetition of lines:
427.6–9 (repeats 423.18–424.3); 428.12–14 (repeats 426.8–10); 428.16 and
429.13–14 (repeats 426.10–11); 430.6 (repeats 426.11–12); 430.17–431.2
(repeats 426.12–15); 432.16–17 (repeats 424.11–14, modified); 434.3–4 (repeats 424.14–15); 435.3–6 (repeats 425.2–4); and 437.1–2 (repeats 426.5–7,
slightly modified). A specific comment is given on the occasion of each of
these repetitions: Ibn Taymiyya mentions that Ibn Rushd must have said
that the identification between essence and attributes is utterly sophistical, not just problematic (427.9–428.14); that the identification between
knower and known (discussed by Ibn Rushd in the last part of the quoted
fragment) is also clearly sophistical (428.15–430.5); that the philosophers
are confronted with limitations in their knowledge of God (431.9–10);
that to speak of a composition between God’s essence and His attributes
does not imply the necessity of an external factor for that composition
166 Jules Janssens
(433.2–434.2); that the Ashʿarites and their followers do not call the divine
attributes “accidents,” unless in a very special sense (434.6–12); and that
the philosophers cannot demonstrate the impossibility of something that
is composed out of its essence (435.16–436.13).
With regard to Discussion 10, “On their inability to show that the world
has a maker and a cause,” Ibn Taymiyya quotes the last two-thirds (subdivided into seven parts). In this quoted part, the focus is entirely on what is
the correct philosophical proof for God’s existence. Ibn Rushd once again
makes clear that Ibn Sıˉnaˉ presented an innovative way that deviates from
the proper traditional “philosophical” one, which is summarily presented
at the very end. Ibn Taymiyya, in his reply, first (8:232.8–234.4) notes that
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s proof is much better than that of the Ancient philosophers.46
He then (234.5–238.7) argues against Ibn Rushd’s wording of the proof,
which in Ibn Taymiyya’s view is a very loose argument, especially insofar
as it deduces the existence of God as the necessary existent in substance
from the motion of the celestial spheres. In this context, a few lines are
quoted a second time: 234.5–7 (232.9–10, but substantially modified in
that the qualifications related to “possible” and “necessary” in the original text are omitted—in this way, Ibn Taymiyya can easily present Ibn
Rushd’s affirmation as being in complete agreement with the common
kalaˉm view); 234.9–10 (=232.11–13, but omits part of lines 12–13); 234.12–
13 (=232.13–233.1, modified); and 235.4–6 (=233.1–4, but omits almost
completely lines 3–4 and reformulates the end). Finally, Ibn Taymiyya
concludes (238.917) that the philosophical and kalaˉm proofs for God’s existence always fail in one or another respect, and hence one has to admit
that the prophets’ way of showing God’s existence is the best.
The last quoted fragments of the Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut belong to Discussion
11, “On showing the impotence of those among them who perceive that
the First knows other(s) and knows the genera and species in a universal way.” The first fragment (subdivided into three parts) consists in Ibn
Rushd’s insistence that the philosophers do not deny God’s possession of
a will, but that for them the divine will is not the same as the will in humans. Ibn Taymiyya does not discuss this topic in detail, but remarks in
a general way that al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s view, the reciprocal implication between
knowledge and will, is the correct one (10:144.1–2, further developed at
144.2–149.3). Ibn Rushd, Ibn Taymiyya tells us, uses the notion of will
in its “sectarian” philosophical sense, but his explanation of divine will
is generally speaking better than Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s, although it is inferior to Abuˉ
l-Barakaˉt al-Baghdaˉdıˉ’s (143.6–11). In the second fragment quoted by Ibn
Taymiyya, Ibn Rushd states that God must know everything since His
knowledge is perfect. In reply to this, Ibn Taymiyya (149.9–10) suggests
that to deny that all knowledge in God is implied in, or limited to, His
self-knowledge is indeed the correct opinion. As far as I can see, he nonetheless pays no serious attention to Ibn Rushd’s defense of the view of the
“philosophers” with regard to this issue.
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 167
Conclusion
Ibn Taymiyya’s quotations of Ibn Rushd present us with a rather negative judgment that Ibn Taymiyya seems to make of Ibn Rushd, especially
when he explicitly sides with Aristotle. Only occasionally is Ibn Rushd
said to come closer to the truth, but then he is, according to Ibn Taymiyya’s understanding, de facto largely in agreement with what has been said
in kalaˉm, and at the same time closer to the ultimate truth as expressed by
the prophet and Revelation. Up to a degree, one can detect here a kind of
nuanced and critical approach.47 But one cannot deny the overall negative
tone in Ibn Taymiyya’s final reception of Ibn Rushd. Moreover, most cases
of more positive evaluations of Ibn Rushd, as I have shown, are accompanied with a remark that Ibn Rushd’s opinion, even if it is better than Ibn
Sıˉnaˉ’s, still remains inferior to the correct theological views.
This sounds “ideological” insofar as it denies any serious, independent
contribution of philosophy in the acquisition of true, rational insights. For
Ibn Taymiyya, philosophy is a largely mistaken, and therefore superfluous, tool in the search for truth.48 Ibn Taymiyya’s additional emphasis on
the superiority of Ibn Rushd’s opinions—and, in addition, those of other
Peripatetics—in these cases over Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s appears to be largely guided
by his vehement opposition to the Ashʿarite kalaˉm of his time, which was
mainly inspired by Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ. As Jon Hoover notes, Ibn Rushd
provided Ibn Taymiyya with rational resources to resist and marginalize
several of the Razian ideas and arguments that he estimated to be erroneous.
49 But such positive evaluations of Ibn Rushd as being superior to
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ are always isolated, and one also finds affirmations of the exact
opposite.
Thus, Ibn Taymiyya’s statements about Ibn Rushd (and every other
philosopher or thinker) have to be examined cautiously in the context in
which they are expressed. He is not so much interested in the complete
system of Ibn Rushd’s philosophy as in particular ideas. Furthermore,
large parts of the quoted fragments of Ibn Rushd’s texts receive almost
no serious attention. As we have seen, they are often placed in a broader
context of prima facie similar expressions in works belonging to quite
other traditions than Ibn Rushd’s philosophical one. Once these expressions are contextualized, they reveal themselves to be, at best, similar in
meaning, and not without serious qualification. Finally, it is striking that
in a work, the Darʾ, that has as its overarching theme taʾwıˉl, the figurative
interpretation of the Qurʾaˉn, not a single reference is found to Ibn Rushd’s
Fas․
l, which has the same theme at its core. As I have already indicated, it is
unlikely that Ibn Taymiyya had no access to this work when he composed
the Darʾ, given its use in his Bayaˉn—in all likelihood an earlier work.50
All in all, one has the impression that Ibn Taymiyya very much instrumentalizes Ibn Rushd (and at the same time all philosophers), insofar as
his major goal remains to demonstrate the absolute superiority, also on
168 Jules Janssens
a purely rational level, of the prophetic Revelation. In that sense—and
I am inclined to add: only in that sense—he finds many insights of the
Cordoban scholar better than those circulating in the Avicennian tradition. But, and I have the impression that this has been largely overlooked
in contemporary scholarship, he now and then reverses that evaluation.
This means that the apparent hierarchy of excellence he articulates with
regard to philosophers—and, most likely, to all kinds of thinkers, except
the Salaf and their faithful followers—is never valid in absolute terms, but
only in a given context. Even if, in such a perspective, he offers often very
percipient judgments, he nevertheless fails at times to give an in-depth
justification for linking a particular philosophical idea with a doctrine in
kalaˉm that transcends a prima facie similarity. Certainly, this conclusion
is based on a basic survey of one work by Ibn Taymiyya. A more detailed
analysis of all materials referred to, as well as an examination of references
to Ibn Rushd in other of Ibn Taymiyya’s works, might bring to the fore
some new nuances in evaluating his attitude to the Cordoban scholar, but
I seriously doubt that they will fundamentally contradict the conclusion I
present here.
Table 7.1 Comparison between Ibn Rushd’s and Ibn Taymiyya’s works
Ibn Rushd’s Kashf Ibn Taymiyya’s Darʾ
Chapter 1 (divine existence)
B. 45.17–47.2; Q 134.4–135.12 7, 345.3–347.5
B. 47.3–4; Q. 135.12–14 7, 347.6–8
B. 47.5–9; Q. 135.14–19 9, 69.5–11
B. 47.10–17; Q. 135.20–136.7 9, 69.12–70.8
B. 47.17; Q. 136.7–8 9, 70.9
B. 47.18–48.13; 136.3–137.7 9, 70.10–72.2
B. 48.13–16; Q. 137.7–10 9, 73.3–6
B. 48.16–51.5; Q. 137.11–140.8 9, 73.7–78.6
B. 51.5–9; Q. 140.9–13 9, 79.1–5
B. 51.10–16; Q. 140.14–20 9, 80.3–10
B. 51.16–19; Q. 140.21–141.2 9, 81.3–6
B. 51.20–52.6; Q. 141.4–14 9, 81.7–82.7
B. 52.6–10; Q. 141.14–18 9, 82.8–12
B. 52.10–55.3; Q. 141.19–144.20 9, 84.3–89.10
(addition by IR in another version?) 9, 89.10–12
(addition by IR in another version?) 9, 90.15–91.4
B. 55.4–7; Q. 144.20–145.3 9, 93.1–4
B. 55.8–9; Q. 145.3–4 9, 93.5–6
ms. Taymuˉriyya, h․
ikma 129 (see Saˉlim) 9, 93.7–97.10
ms. Taymuˉriyya, h․ikma 129 (see Saˉlim) 9, 97.11–13
B. 55.9–17; Q. 145.6–14 9, 107.7–108.7
B. 55.18; Q. 145.15–146.22 9, 108.8–110.9
B. 56.21–57.1; Q. 147.1–5 9, 112.5–9
B. 57.1–7; Q. 147.5–11 9, 112.10–113.2
B. 57.8–12; Q. 147.12–16 9, 122.16–123.5
B. 57.12–24; Q. 147.17–148.9 9, 124.16–125.12
B. 57.24–58.3; Q. 148.10–13 9, 126.1–4
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 169
B. 58.3–16; Q. 148.14–149.4 9, 127.1–13
B. 58.16–59.2; Q. 149.5–14 9, 127.14–128.10
B. 59.2–9; Q. 149.15–21 9, 129.1–130.1
B. 59.10–60.2; Q. 150.1–19 9, 130.2–131.9
B. 60.3–5; Q. 150.21–151.2 9, 132.1–3
B. 60.5–61.2; Q. 151.3–152.5 9, 321.4–323.6 B. 61.3–11; Q. 152.6–15 9, 323.7–324.2
B. 61.11–62.22; Q. 152.16–154.12 9, 326.6–329.10
B. 62.23–63.6; Q.154.13–21 9, 329.11–330.10
B. 63.7–9; Q.154.21–23 9, 330.11–13
B. 63.9–10; Q. 155.1–2 9, 331.4–5
B. 63.10–17; Q. 155.2–9 9, 331.6–13
B. 63.17–64.6; Q. 155.9–21 9, 332.1–333.1
Chapter 2 (divine unity)
B. 65.2–66.4; Q. 156.2–157.2 9, 336.6–337.16
B. 66.4–8; Q. 157.3–6 9, 348.10–16
B. 66.8–19; Q. 157.7–17 9, 349.5–350.3
B. 66.19–67.1; Q. 157.17–158.5 9, 351.9–16
B. 67.1–13; Q. 158.6–17 9, 351.17–352.14
B. 67.13–68.5; Q. 158.18–159.11 9, 353.1–354.6
B. 68.5–7; Q. 159.11–13 9, 354.7–9
B. 68.7–69.1; Q. 159.14–160.9 9, 370.14–371.13
B. 69.1–7; Q. 160.10–16 9, 378.12–379.2
Chapter 3 (divine attributes)
B. 70.1–71.16; Q. 161.1–162.13 9, 379.3–381.8
B. 71.16–19; Q. 162.13–16 9, 381.9–12
ms. Taymuˉriyya, h․ikma 129 (see Saˉlim) 9, 381.13–382.5
B. 71.20–72.7; Q. 163.1–10 10, 197.2–11
ms. Taymuˉ riyya, h․ikma 129 (see Saˉlim) 10, 197.12–198.11
B. 72.7–11; Q. 163.12–16 10, 199.16–200.3
B. 72.11–13; Q. 163.16–18 10, 207.4–6
B. 72.14–73.6; Q. 163.18–164.14 10, 207.7–208.12
B. 73.6–7; Q. 164.14–15 10, 208.13–14
B. 73.6–8; Q. 164.14–16 10, 214.1–3
ms. Taymuˉ riyya, h․ikma 129 (see Saˉlim) 10, 214.4–6
B. 73.8–9; Q. 164.17–18 10, 215.9–10
B. 73.9–12; Q. 164.18–21 10, 219.8–11
B. 73.15–17; Q. 165.2–4 10, 219.17–220.2
B. 73.18–74.10; Q.165.5–21 10, 220.3–221.5
B. 74.10–22; Q. 166.1–12 10, 224.6–225.5
B. 74.23–75.22; Q. 166.14–167.15 10, 225.12–227.14
B. 75.23–76.18; 167.15–168.14 (but last two lines
in ms. Taymuˉriyya, h․ikma 129 (see Saˉlim)
10, 228.1–229.11
Chapter 4 (divine transcendence)
B. 77.2; Q. 169.1–2 10, 243.3
B. 77.3–12; Q. 169.3–12 10, 243.4–244.2
B. 77.13–78.3; Q. 169.13–170.3 10, 244.3–245.3
B. 78.3–6; Q. 170.3–6 10, 245.6–9
B. 78.6–7; Q. 170.6–7 10, 245.10–11
B. 78.8–11 (lacks 2 lines); Q. 170.8–12 10, 245.12–246.4
B. 78.11–24; Q. 170.13–171.4 10, 246.9–247.10
B. 78.25–79.6; Q. 171.4–11 10, 247.11–248.6
B. 79.6–15; Q. 171.13–172.2 10, 248.7–249.7
(Continued)
170 Jules Janssens
ms. Taymuˉriyya, h․ikma 129 [Saˉlim] and ms.
Koprülü 1601 [G. 887.13–19])51
10, 249.7–14
B. 79.16—80.5; Q. 172.3–17 10, 259.13–261.1
ms. Koprülü 1601 (G. 888.36–46) 10, 261.2–13
B. 80.5–11; Q. 172.18–173.4 10, 262.14–263.2
B. 80.12–81.17; Q. 173.5–174.13 10, 263.3–265.13
B. 80.18–82.22; Q. 174.14–176.2 10, 266.1–269.2
B. 82.22–83.3; Q. 176.3–7 10, 269.3–10
B. 83.3–6; Q. 176.7–11 10, 281.6–10 B. 83.6–11; Q. 176.11–15 10, 282.10–14
B. 83.11–12; Q. 176.16–17 10, 289.10–12
B. 83.12–18; Q. 176.17–177.1 10, 289.13–290.2
ms. Taymuˉriyya, h․ikma 129 (see Saˉlim) and ms.
Koprülü 1601 (see G. 893.140–894.47)52
10, 298.16–299.9
ms. Taymuˉriyya, h․ikma 129 (see Saˉlim) and ms.
Koprülü 1601 (see G. 894.147–52)
10, 299.10–300.3
B. 83.18–84.7; Q. 177.2–14 6, 212.10–214.1
B. 84.7–10; Q. 177.14–17 6, 214.2–5
B. 84.10–85.16; Q. 178.1–179.8 6, 214.6–216.8
B. 85.17–86.8; 179.9–180.5 6, 216.9–217.13
B. 86.9–87.4; Q. 180.6–181.6 6, 217.14–219.7
B. 87.5–17; Q. 181.7–19 6, 219.8–220.4
B. 87.17–88.21; Q. 181.21–183.6 6, 220.5–222.6
B. 88.21–90.20; Q. 183.6–185.17 6, 222.7–226.6
B. 90.20–25; Q. 185.17–186.2 6, 226.7–12
B. 91.1–12; Q. 186.4–15 6, 226.13–227.15
B. 91.12–92.18; Q. 186.16–188.2 6, 228.1–229.14
B. 92.19–23; Q. 188.3–7 6, 230.1–5
B. 92.23–93.9; Q. 188.7–17 6, 230.6–231.4
B. 93.9–94.4; Q. 188.17–189.19 6, 231.5–232.16
B. 94.4–11; Q. 189.19–190.3 6, 233.1–8
B. 94.11–20; Q. 190.3–13 6, 233.14–234.8
B. 94.20–22; Q. 190.14–15 6, 234.9–11
B. 94.22–96.8; Q. 190.16–192.4 6, 234.12–237.4
B. 96.9–11; Q. 192.5–7 6, 237.5–7
Ibn Rushd’s Masʾala/D․
amıˉma Ibn Taymiyya’s Darʾ
B. 39.4–40.24; MBu. 38.2–40.353 9, 383.10–386.6
B. 41.2–8; MBu. 40.6–13 9, 386.7–387.2
B. 41.8–13; MBu. 40.13–18 9, 387.3–9
B. 41.14–42.17; MBu. 40.19–42.8 9, 387.10–390.2
B. 42.18–20; MBu. 42.9–11 9, 390.3–5
B. 42.21–22; MBu. 42.12–13 9, 390.6–7
Ibn Rushd’s Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut Ibn Taymiyya’s Darʾ
Discussion 1
SD. 64.1–65.23; Bo. 5.1–6.554 8, 195.7–196.14
SD. 65.24–66.12; Bo. 6.5–12 8, 197.1–8
SD. 66.13–20; Bo. 6.12–16 8, 197.9–13
SD. 66.22–67.3; Bo. 6.17–7.4 8, 198.1–5
SD. 69.1–5; Bo. 8.5–8 3, 412.15–18
SD. 69.6–70.4; Bo. 8.8–9.3 3, 415.10–416.8
SD. 70.5–9; Bo. 9.3–7 3, 416.9–12
SD. 189.13–16; Bo. 100.7–9 (paraphrase) 8, 192.9–10 SD. 194.16–196.10; Bo. 104.10–105.13 8, 193.6–194.10
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 171
Discussion 3
SD. 310.6–313.3; Bo. 184.6–186.4 8, 203.6–205.13
SD. 313.5–314.14; Bo. 186.4–187.4 8, 205.14–206.15
SD. 314.16–18; Bo. 187.4–6 8, 207.1–3
SD. 314.20–315.2; Bo. 187.7–9 8, 207.5–7
SD. 315.3–11; Bo. 187.9–13 8, 207.8–12
SD. 315.12–320.5; Bo. 187.13–191.4 8, 207.13–212.2
SD. 320.7–323.8; Bo. 191.4–193.9 8, 212.3–215.6
SD. 323.10–16; Bo. 193.10–12 8, 215.7–9
SD. 323.17–21; Bo. 193.12–194.1 8, 215.10–13
SD. 371.1–372.5; Bo. 224.12–225.11 10, 251.8–252.7
SD. 372.6–7; Bo. 225.11–12 10, 252.8–9
SD. 387.16–22; Bo. 236.6–9 8, 188.2–5
SD. 388.1–2; Bo. 236.9–10 8, 188.6–7
SD. 388.5–9; Bo. 236.11–14 8, 188.8–11
SD. 400.9–401.3; Bo. 245.6–13 8, 190.6–191.2
SD. 401.5–15; Bo. 245.13–246.4 8, 191.3–8
SD. 401.16–402.2; Bo. 246.5–10 8, 191.9–192.3
SD. 402.4–13; Bo. 246.10–14 8, 192.4–8
Discussion 4
SD. 427.21–429.14; Bo. 264.1–265.2 8, 137.4–138.12
SD. 431.5–432.6; Bo. 266.1–13 8, 164.2–165.6
SD. 440.1–11; Bo. 272.5–9 8, 166.1–4
SD. 440.13–21; Bo. 272.9–13 8, 166.5–9
SD. 443.4–13; Bo. 274.9–14 8, 167.11–168.3
SD. 443.14–21; Bo. 274.15–275.4 8, 168.4–10
SD. 443.22–444.12; Bo. 275.5–11 8, 168.11–169.4
SD. 444.23–446.25; Bo.276.1–277.11 8, 169.6–171.2
Discussion 6
SD. 494.2–15; Bo. 312.3–10 3, 423.17–424.7
SD. 494.16–495.5; Bo. 312.10–313.2 3, 424.8–16
SD. 495.7–496.19; Bo. 313.2–314.5 3, 425.1–426.7
SD. 496.21–497.8; Bo. 314.6–13 3, 426.8–16
SD. 504.1–8; Bo. 320.2–5 3, 397.6–11
SD. 504.16–505.14; Bo. 320.11–321.9 3, 398.2–13
SD. 516.17–517.11; Bo. 331.3–13 3, 399.11–400.9
SD. 517.20–519.18; Bo. 331.15 –333.12 3, 400.10–402.6
Discussion 10
SD. 635.9–636.7; Bo. 417.13–418.10 8, 227.2–12
SD. 636.9–21; Bo. 418.10–15 8, 227.13–228.4
SD. 637.14–638.12; Bo. 419.8–420.3 8, 229.2–14
SD. 638.13–639.16; Bo. 420.4–421.3 8, 230.1–231.5
SD. 639.18–640.7; Bo. 421.4–10 8, 231.6–12
SD. 640.9–19; Bo. 421.11–422.1 8, 231.13–232.5
SD. 640.21–642.4; Bo. 422.1–423.5 8, 232.6–233.7
Discussion 11
SD. 662.23–663.7; Bo. 438.6–9 10, 141.6–10
SD. 663.8–664.10; Bo. 438.9–19 10, 141.11–142.8
SD. 664.12–665.12; Bo. 439.1–10 10, 142.9–143.5
SD. 666.11–20; Bo. 440.5–9 10, 149.4–9
172 Jules Janssens
Notes 1 See Bori, “Ibn Taymiyya wa-jamaˉ‘atuhu.” Very significant is Bori’s affirmation
(41) that “for the majority of traditionalist scholars, H․anbalıˉs and Shaˉfi‘ıˉs alike,
he [i.e., Ibn Taymiyya] appears to have been somewhat of an embarrassment.” 2 As far as I know, no serious study has been made of the reception of Ibn Taymiyya’s works immediately after his death and in the following centuries. 3 The city of Damascus at the time was culturally highly developed and had
many libraries inside its walls. See Hirschler, Medieval Damascus, esp. 1–16. 4 Ibn Taymiyya, Darʾ taʿaˉrud․ al-ʿaql wa-l-naql, ed. Saˉlim (hereafter Darʾ). It is
worth noting that Saˉlim, in the introduction to his edition (Darʾ 1:1–73), observes that the work is referred to under different titles both by Ibn Taymiyya
himself and in the manuscript tradition (which is complex insofar as none of
the manuscripts offers the complete text). As will become evident in this paper, there is still a serious need to determine the exact nature of the Darʾ. In all
likelihood, this will require a new, in-depth examination of the manuscript
tradition, for which Saˉlim has undoubtedly already laid a valuable foundation. 5 For references to Ibn Rushd (name index), see Darʾ 11:77–78. As to the references to Ibn Rushd’s works, see for a first approach the index of book titles:
11:329–30 Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut (unfortunately, the last four references to vol. 10
are mistaken); 11:238 D․
amıˉma fıˉ masʾalat al-ʿilm al-qadıˉm; 11:345–46 Manaˉhij al-ʾadilla (=Kashf ). The reader will find the details, including the correspondences with Ibn Rushd’s texts, in Table 7.1 at the end of this chapter. For a
first (rough) list of correspondences between Darʾ and Kashf, see Geoffroy, “À
propos de l’almohadisme d’Averroès,” 86,1 n. 32, where Geoffroy insists that
Ibn Taymiyya quotes the Kashf according to its longer version (part of which
Geoffroy publishes in an appendix—as far as I can see, this is the very first
critical edition of a part of the Kashf ’s longer version). 6 Regarding the characterization of these works as “dialectical, non-demonstrative,” see Taylor, “Introduction,” xvii, n. 7. 7 Beirut edition (hereafter Kashf B): Ibn Rushd, Kitaˉb al-Kashf ‘an manaˉhij
al-ʾadilla, 45.8–14; Qaˉsim edition (hereafter Kashf Q): Manaˉhij al-ʾadilla fıˉ aqaˉ‘id
al-milla, 133.12–134.4. 8 Ibn Taymiyya, Bayaˉn talbıˉs, 1:235. It is perhaps worthwhile to note that Ibn
Taymiyya quotes three passages of the Fas․
l: one about the coming into existence of the world (Averroes, Decisive Treatise, 16.6–21 Ar., quoted by Ibn
Taymiyya, Bayaˉn talbıˉs, 1:458–59); a second, immediately following this,
mentioning two kinds of errors with regard to the Law (Averroes, Decisive
Treatise, 17–18 Ar., quoted by Ibn Taymiyya, Bayaˉn talbıˉs, 2:80–84); and a
third, divided into two parts, where Ibn Rushd distinguishes three kinds of
verses and traditions with regard to their being open or not to interpretation
(Averroes, Decisive Treatise, 19.11–20, 19.12 Ar., and 20.13–22.11, quoted by
Ibn Taymiyya, Bayaˉn talbıˉs, 2:90–93 and 101–6). 9 See von Kügelgen, “Poison of Philosophy,” 286–87, and Tamer, “Curse of
Philosophy,” 371–72, who stresses: “The Koran—not human reason—was
the appropriate guide on this path; as such, scripture was the basis for all truth
and took precedence if in conflict with reason. In this context, Ibn Taymiyya
would consider it a curse to be called a philosopher.” Of course, this does not
mean that Ibn Taymiyya completely dismisses reason. On the contrary, he
insists that Revelation invites people to use their reason (see Ibn Taymiyya,
Lettre à Abû l-Fidâ, 17–18), but for Ibn Taymiyya reason can at best confirm
insights already present in Revelation. 10 As noted by Hoover, “Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd,” 473, Ibn Taymiyya
used what Geoffroy labeled the second version of the Kashf, while in his Bayaˉn talbıˉs, he copies the first version, either because he had only that version or
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 173
consciously for his personal purposes. According to Ben Ahmed, “Ibn Rushd
in the H․
anbalıˉ Tradition,” 572, Ibn Taymiyya uses still another version in his
Darʾ, given the lack of the quotation of a passage in which Ibn Rushd explicitly criticizes Ibn Tuˉmart’s position on direction. Is this a sufficient indication,
however? Can one exclude a conscious omission? Note that Ben Ahmed also
more prudently adds: “it seems that the manuscript containing this text was
not in his hands” (571). 11 I owe this translation to Hoover, “Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd,” 477. 12 The section on “direction” is also quoted by Ibn Taymiyya, Bayaˉn talbıˉs,
1:158–66, i.e., Kashf B, 83.18–87.17 / Q, 177.3–181.19; the passage Kashf B,
83.18–84.13 / Q, 177.3–178.2 is repeated at 248–49 and, once again, except
the last two lines, 403–5 (but adding, at 405, two isolated sentences—once
more referred to in Bayaˉn talbıˉs, 2:93–94—and also providing a small comment where Ibn Taymiyya stresses that Ibn Rushd agrees with the ancient
mutakallimuˉn that God and the angels are in heaven), almost without any comment. See Hoover, “Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd,” 477–79, where, however, no mention is made of the repetition of a passage present at Bayaˉn talbıˉs,
1:248–49. 13 As already indicated, in what follows Ibn Taymiyya does not limit himself to
quoting the section on direction. He also quotes the discussion on when and
for whom the interpretation of Qur’aˉnic verses is allowed, and, moreover, the
section on “vision.” 14 See Ibn Rushd, Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut, ed. Dunyaˉ (hereafter Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut SD), 2:475–81; Ibn Rushd, Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut, ed. Bouyges (hereafter Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut Bo), 297–303; and al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Incoherence of the Philosophers, 97–110, esp. 97–100. 15 Ibn Rushd, Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut SD, 2:476 / Bo, 299. 16 See Ibn Rushd, Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut SD, 2:495–96 / Bo, 313; and al-Ghazaˉlıˉ,
Incoherence of the Philosophers, 97. 17 Ibn Rushd, Kashf B, 75 / Q, 167. With regard to the view that the denial of
a plurality of attributes in God is common to the philosophers and the Muta
ʿzila, see already al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Incoherence of the Philosophers, 97. 18 As far as I can see, the Darʾ does not contain a single explicit reference to the
Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut related to Discussion 9. See Table 7.1. 19 Ibn Rushd, Kashf B, 89 / Q, 183–84. 20 In the subsequent chapter, with regard to the affirmation God is “above” the
heavens, Ibn Taymiyya notes that the Salaf have understood “above” in the
literal physical, directional sense. Because they adhered to this literal interpretation, Ibn Taymiyya qualifies every form of symbolic interpretation as
illegitimate. See El-Tobgui, Ibn Taymiyya, 205–6. 21 Ibn Rushd, Kashf B, 84 / Q, 177. 22 For a substantial outline of its basic ideas, as well as its significance for Ibn
Taymiyya, see the seminal study by van Ess, “Ibn Kullaˉb und die Mih․na.” 23 Madelung and Walker, Ismaili Heresiography, 57. 24 Van Ess, “Ibn Kullaˉb und die Mih․na,” 124. 25 Ibn Taymiyya does not mention this verse in this context, and neither does
Abuˉ Tammaˉm, but al-Maqdisıˉ, Kitaˉb al-badʾ wa-l-taˉrıˉkh, 1:104.7–8, explicitly notes that Ibn Kullaˉb interprets the expression “on the throne” as “not
in place.” But even if Ibn Taymiyya’s source did not mention this, it still
remains obvious that for Ibn Kullaˉb the absence of place has nothing to
do with Ibn Rushd’s conception of the absence of place in the outermost
sphere. 26 See Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, al-Najaˉt , 63–64. On Ibn Taymiyya’s highly critical stance toward Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s theory of estimative propositions, see Marcotte, “Ibn Taymiyya et sa critique.”
174 Jules Janssens 27 On al-Karraˉm’s affirmation of God as being “above,” see al-Shahrastaˉnıˉ,
al-Milal wa-l-Nihal, 1:347–48. 28 Al-Shahrastaˉnıˉ, al-Milal wa-l-Nihal, 1:180, stipulates that he includes the Karraˉmiyya among the s․i faˉtiyya only because they affirm the divine attributes;
at the same time, he emphasizes that in the final analysis, they adhered to
corporealism and assimilationism in this matter, in other words to an anthropomorphic approach to God. 29 See al-Khayyaˉt, Kitaˉb al-Intis․
aˉr, where one finds several explicit condemnations of Raˉfid․ite theses. See esp. 5–6 (French) / 14 (Arabic), where al-Khayyaˉt
stresses that the vast majority of the Raˉfid․ites defended an anthropomorphic
picture of God (including a change in His knowledge and will); a rare few
among them renounced doing so, but they became Muʿtazilites. So far, I have
not found any discussion by a Rafidite author on God’s being in Heaven. One
cannot therefore exclude that Ibn Taymiyya found a text ascribed to one of
them in which God’s being in Heaven is explained in a metaphorical sense,
although this looks unlikely, given their doctrine on divine attributes. 30 The examples mentioned are all related to Kashf, ch. 1, but they are in my
view perfectly illustrative for Ibn Taymiyya’s treatment of the rest of the
work. I am therefore convinced that they suffice to give us at least a basic idea
of how Ibn Taymiyya uses the Kashf.
31 In the rest of the chapter, Ibn Taymiyya explores passages mainly dealing
with the origination of the world as showing the necessity of God’s existence,
especially in three authors: Abuˉ al-H․
usayn al-Bas․
rıˉ (a Muʿtazilite theologian,
d. 436/1044)—this particular attention to him, and some other Muʿtazilite
authors as well, can be considered a natural supplement of Ibn Rushd’s brief
remark on the Muʿtazilites (note, moreover, that Ibn Taymiyya pays special
attention to the difference between the Muʿtazilite viewpoint and that of
the eternalist philosophers [al-falaˉsifa al-dahriyya], especially Ibn Sıˉnaˉ); al-Juwaynıˉ, in his work al-Irshaˉd; and Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ, in his al-Mabaˉh․
ith
al-Mashriqiyya—
mentioning these two last authors in all likelihood constitutes a further development related to the late Ashʿarites. 32 For the critical edition of Ibn Qurra’s text, see Reisman and Bertolacci,
“Thaˉbit Ibn Qurra’s Concise Exposition.” On the quotations from Ibn Qurra’s
Concise Exposition in the Darʾ, Reisman and Bertolacci observe (729–30) that
Ibn Taymiyya has often altered the text in order to make it more amenable
to the grammatical and syntactical arrangement of his commentary; they also
point out the possibility of mistaken editorial choices by the contemporary
editor of the Darʾ, Saˉlim. 33 An examination of these commentaries clearly exceeds the limits of this
chapter. 34 Regarding Ibn Rushd’s Masʾala/D․
amıˉma, see Butterworth, “Translator’s Introduction,” xlii; as to Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt al-Baghdaˉdıˉ, see his Kitaˉb al-Muʾtabar
fıˉ ʾl-h․
ikma, 3:88–93, esp. 93. Let me add that Ibn Taymiyya’s placing them in
line with the genuine Islamic thought, in sharp opposition with both Aristotle and Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, is questionable, even if he is critical of both views. Indeed, it
is far from evident that Ibn Rushd and Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt really explain or defend
a divine knowledge of particulars as particulars, whereas Ibn Sıˉnaˉ at least tries
in an innovative way to offer a philosophically rational explanation, which is
far away from Aristotle’s view and undoubtedly the result of the will to elaborate a philosophical solution for a basic affirmation present in Islamic thought.
That Ibn Taymiyya condemns Aristotle’s view as kufr (unbelief) is easily understandable. However, that he qualifies Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s view in the very same way,
while excluding Ibn Rushd and Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt from this harsh accusation,
is less evident. Of course, Ibn Taymiyya (402) finds support for this view in
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 175
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s mention in the Conclusion to the Tahaˉfut that the philosophers
are guilty of kufr because they deny that God’s knowledge encompasses the
temporal, individual particulars. At the same time, it becomes clear that he
reads Ibn Sıˉnaˉ largely through al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s lenses, just as Ibn Rushd, in my
view, had done before him. 35 Al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Mishkaˉt al-anwaˉr, 54. In addition, one can note that the Tradition
relating that God’s light is veiled is quoted by al-Ghazaˉlıˉ more according
to the wording as given by Ibn Fuˉrak (seventy-thousand, or seventy veils),
whereas Ibn Rushd accords more with the version in al-Harawıˉ (one or seventy veils). See al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Die Nische der Lichter, 85 n. 176. 36 Regarding Ibn Rushd’s familiarity with al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s work, see Ibn Rushd,
Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut SD, 2:495–96 / Bo, 313; and al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Incoherence of the
Philosophers, 97. 37 In fact, Ibn Taymiyya mainly uses as his reference text the epitome of al-
Raˉzıˉ’s al-Arbaʿıˉ n fıˉ us․uˉl al-dıˉn by Siraˉj al-Dıˉn al-Urmawıˉ (d. 612/1283), entitled
Lubaˉb al-Arbaʿıˉ n (Quintessence of the Forty). 38 According to Butterworth, “Translator’s Introduction,” xil, this masʾala has
no title, but Ben Ahmed, “Ibn Rushd in the H․anbalıˉ Tradition,” 566, based
on Barnaˉmaj list (ms. Escorial 884, f. 83r) gives as a title Masʾala fıˉ anna al-Laˉh
tabaˉrak wa taʿaˉlaˉ yaʿlam al-juzʾi yaˉt (Quaesitum on God’s knowledge of particulars). Whatever is the case, both agree that this masʾala does not constitute an
appendix to the Fas․
l, but was written before it. Hence, the title is clearly mistaken, but I still refer to it—although putting it in parentheses after Masʾala,
which clearly was the whole or part of the original title—because it is widely
known under that title. 39 D․
amıˉma, B refers to the Beirut edition; D․
amıˉma, Bu to Müller’s edition as
reprinted in Butterworth. 40 Gutas, “Heritage of Avicenna,” 97. 41 Here and in the following, I use Marmura’s English translation of the titles as
given in al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Incoherence of the Philosophers.
42 Ibn Taymiyya, Darʾ 8:217.11–220.14, explicitly formulates six objections. 43 The actual wording of 406.1–2 is awkward, and is probably due to a copyist’s
error. 44 In fact, lines 409.1–4 are missing in the actual quotation of 400.6–9, but they
correspond to the missing lines between the two parts of the quoted fragment, i.e., SD, 517.12–18 / Bo, 331.13–15, and are repeated at 411.6–8. It is
therefore likely that their absence in the quotation on page 400 is accidental
(due to a quasi-omission by homoioteleuton). 45 This section, which includes quotations of Discussion 1, undoubtedly deserves a more in-depth analysis. 46 It should be noted that instead of al-fuqahaˉʾ (233.11), one must in all likelihood
read al-qudamaˉʾ.
47 For a concrete case of such a critical handling, namely with respect to Ibn
Rushd’s view on divine corporeality, see von Kügelgen, “Dialogpartner im
Widerspruch,” esp. 462–70. 48 In this sense, I agree with Tamer, “Curse of Philosophy,” esp. 369–74, that
Ibn Taymiyya cannot be qualified as a philosopher in the proper sense, since
his philosophy would be an “islamicized philosophy.” However, as Tamer
correctly observes, this means not that Ibn Taymiyya’s works are devoid
of any philosophical components, but that they are used only in support
of his “theological” views, and that it would therefore be more appropriate to call Ibn Taymiyya a theologian. Let me add that in his paper, Tamer
surveys the most important contemporary Arabic publications that discuss
this topic.
176 Jules Janssens 49 Hoover, “Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd,” 488. Even if Hoover—in my
view, rightly—insists that Ibn Taymiyya is no Averroist philosopher, but did
put Ibn Rushd to use for his own traditional ends, he presents him as the
“foremost and perhaps only medieval advocate [emphasis added] of Ibn Rushd’s
ideas, or at least some of them.” How can one be the advocate of someone’s
ideas when one rejects the very framework in which they are articulated? 50 Ibn Taymiyya, Risaˉla fıˉ ʿilm al-baˉt․in wa-ʾl -zaˉhir, 230–69, also does not mention
Ibn Rushd’s Fas․
l. Michot, “Philosophical Exegesis in Context,” says nothing
about this absence, but judiciously notes (588) that Ibn Taymiyya’s approach
of philosophical exegesis in his Epistle (of which Michot offers an English
translation) is problematic because it is too general. For example, it neglects
the very fact that the philosophers address their interpretations only to an
elite and insist that they should be kept apart from all those unworthy to understand them. Michot concludes with a question that seems rhetorical at first
sight: Should Ibn Taymiyya be blamed for operating not just as a historian of
ideas, but also as a theologian-mufti? The answer to this question, in Michot’s
formulation, is obviously No. However, in my view, Ibn Taymiyya is constructing too much a history of ideas in function of his own theological and
legal agenda. 51 On the latter, see Geoffroy, “À propos de l’almohadisme d’Averroès.” 52 Ibn Taymiyya seems to have consciously omitted the first lines of the added
fragment (Geoffroy, “À propos de l’almohadisme d’Averroès,” 883, lines 136–
40), given that he replaces in the beginning of the quoted fragment bi-dhaˉlik
by bi-nafy al-jismiyya, to which bi-dhaˉlik in the original text indeed refers. 53 B refers to the Beirut edition of Kitaˉb al-Kashf ʿan manaˉhij al-adilla, in Falsafat Ibn Rushd; MBu refers to Müller’s edition, as reproduced in Averroës, Decisive
Treatise, 38–42 (Arabic). 54 SD refers to the edition of Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut by Dunyaˉ, Bo to Bouyges’ edition.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Baghdaˉdıˉ, Abuˉ al-Barakaˉt. Kitaˉb al-Mu ʿtabar fıˉ ʾl-h․
ikma. Edited by M Şerefeddin Yaltkaya. Haidarabad: Daˉʾirat al-maʿaˉrif al-ʿuthmaˉnıˉya, 1938.
Al-Ghazaˉl ıˉ, Abuˉ H․
aˉmid. The Incoherence of the Philosophers. Parallel English-Arabic
text, translated, introduced, and annotated by Michael E. Marmura. Provo,
UT: Brigham Young University Press, 1997.
Al-Ghazaˉl ıˉ, Abuˉ H․ aˉmid. Mishkaˉt al-anwaˉr. Edited by Abuˉ ʾl-ʿAlaˉʾ ʿAfıˉfıˉ. Cairo:
Al-Daˉr al-qawmiya li-l-t․i baˉʿa wa-l-nashr, 1964.
Al-Ghazaˉl ıˉ, Abuˉ H․ aˉmid. Die Nische der Lichter. Edited, introduced, and annotated
by Abd-Elsamad Elschazlıˉ. Hamburg: Meiner, 1987.
Al-Khayyaˉt, ʿAbd al-Rahıˉm ibn Muh․ammad. Kitaˉb al-Intis․
aˉr: Le livre du triomphe
et de la réfutation d’Ibn al-Rawandıˉ , l’hérétique muʿtazil par Abuˉ al-h․
usayn b. ‘Othmaˉn
al-Khayyaˉt, le muʿtazil. Translated by Albert N. Nader. Beirut: Les Lettres Orientales, 1957.
Al-Maqdisıˉ, Mut․
ahhar ibn T․aˉ hir. Kitaˉb al-badʾ wa-l-taˉrıˉkh. Edited and translated
by Clément Huart. 6 vols. Paris: Leroux, 1899–1919.
Al-Shahrastaˉnıˉ, Abuˉ ʾl-Fath․ Muh․ammad. Kitaˉb al-Milal wa-l-Nihal. Edited by
F. Badraˉn. 2 vols. Cairo: Mat ̣ baʿat al-Azhar, 1947–55.
Ibn Taymiyya’s Quotations of Ibn Rushd 177
Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ ʾl-Waˉlid (Averroes). Masʾala/D․
amıˉma. Edited by Marcus Joseph
Müller (Munich, 1859), reproduced in Averroës, Decisive Treatise and Epistle
Dedicatory, translated with introduction and notes by Charles E. Butterworth,
38–42. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 2001.
Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ ʾl -Waˉlid. D․
amıˉma al- Masʾala allatıˉ dhakaruhu Abuˉ al-Walıˉ d fıˉ Fas․
l
al-Maqaˉl. Edited by Al-Junnat Ih․yaˉʾ al-Turaˉth al-Arabıˉ. Beirut: Daˉr al-Afaˉq
al-Jadıˉda, 1982.
Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ ʾl -Waˉlid. Kitaˉb al-Kashf ʿan manaˉhij al-ʾadilla. In Falsafat Ibn Rushd,
edited by Al-Junnat Ih․yaˉʾ al-Turaˉth al-Arabıˉ, 43–142. Beirut: Daˉr al-Afaˉq al-
Jadıˉda, 1982.
Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ ʾl -Waˉlid. Manaˉhij al-ʾadilla fıˉ ʿaqaˉʾid al-milla. Edited by M. Qa
ˉsim.
3rd edition. Cairo: Maktaba al-Angluˉ l-mis․
riyya, 1964.
Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ ʾl -Waˉlid. Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut. Edited by Maurice Bouyges. Beirut:
Imprimerie Catholique, 1930.
Ibn Rushd, Abuˉ ʾl -Waˉlid. Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut. Edited by Sulaymaˉn Dunyaˉ. 2 vols.
Cairo: Daˉr-al-Maʿaˉrif, 1980–81.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, Abuˉ ʿAlıˉ (Avicenna). Al-Najaˉt . Edited by M. al-Kurdıˉ. 2nd edition.
Cairo: Al-Saʿaˉ da, 1936.
Ibn Taymiyya, Taqıˉ ʾl-dıˉn ʾAh․mad. Bayaˉn talbıˉ s al-Jahmiyya fıˉ taʾsıˉ s bidaʿihim al-kal
aˉmiyya. Edited by Yah․yaˉ ibn Muh․ammad al-Hunaydıˉ. 10 vols. Medina: Majma
ʿ al-Malik Fahd li-T․i baˉʿat al-Mus․
h․af al-Sharıˉf, 1426/2005.
Ibn Taymiyya, Taqıˉ ʾl-dıˉn ʾAh․mad. Darʾ taʿaˉrud․ al-ʿaql wa-l-naql. Edited by
Muh․ammad Rashaˉd Saˉlim. 11 vols. Riyadh: Muh․ammad Ibn Saʿuˉd University,
1979–83.
Ibn Taymiyya, Taqıˉ ʾl-dıˉn ʾAh․mad. Lettre à Abû l-Fidâ. Translated with introduction and notes by Jean R. Michot. Louvain-la-Neuve: L’Institut Orientaliste,
1994.
Ibn Taymiyya, Taqıˉ ʾl-dıˉn ʾAh․mad. Risaˉla fıˉ ʿilm al-baˉt․in wa-ʾl -zaˉhir. Vol. 13 of
Majmuˉʿ al-fataˉwaˉ, edited byʿA. Ibn Qaˉsim. Rabat: Maktabat al-maʿaˉrif, 1981.
Reisman, David C., and Amos Bertolacci. “Thaˉbit Ibn Qurra’s Concise Exposition of Aristotle’s Metaphysics: Text, Translation and Commentary.” In Thaˉbit
Ibn Qurra (826–901): Science and Philosophy in Ninth-Century Baghdad, edited by
Roshdi Rashed, 715–76. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2009.
Secondary Literature
Ben Ahmed, Fouad. “Ibn Rushd in the H․
anbalıˉ Tradition: Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn
Qayyim al-Jawziyya and the Continuity of Philosophy in Muslim Contexts.”
The Muslim World 109, no. 4 (2019): 561–81.
Bori, Caterina. “Ibn Taymiyya wa-jamaˉ‘atuhu: Authority, Conflict and Consensus in Ibn Taymiyya’s Circle.” In Ibn Taymiyya and His Times, edited by Yossef
Rapoport and Shahab Ahmed, 23–52. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Butterworth, Charles E. “Translator’s Introduction to the Epistle Dedicatory.” In
Averroës, Decisive Treatise and Epistle Dedicatory, translated with introduction
and notes by Charles E. Butterworth. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University
Press, 2001.
El-Tobgui, Carl Sharif. Ibn Taymiyya on Reason and Revelation: A Study of Darʾ
taʿaˉrud․
al-ʿaql wa-l-naql. Leiden: Brill, 2020.
178 Jules Janssens
Geoffroy, Marc. “À propos de l’almohadisme d’Averroès: l’anthropomorphisme
(t ag˘s ıˉm) dans la seconde version du Kitaˉb al-Kašf ‘an manaˉhig˘ al-adilla.” In Los Almohades: Problemas y perspectivas, edited by Patrice Cressier, Maribel Fierro, and
Luis Molina, 2:853–94. Madrid: Consejo superior de investigaciones científicas, 2006.
Gutas, Dimitri. “The Heritage of Avicenna: The Golden Age of Arabic Philosophy, 1000–ca. 1350.” In Avicenna and His Heritage, edited by Jules L. Janssens
and Daniel de Smet, 81–97. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2002.
Hirschler, Konrad. Medieval Damascus: Plurality and Diversity in an Arabic Library.
The Ashrafiya Library Catalogue. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2016.
Hoover, Jon. “Ibn Taymiyya’s Use of Ibn Rushd to Refute the Incorporealism
of Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ.” In Islamic Philosophy from the 12th to the 14th Century,
edited by Abdelkader Al Ghouz, 469–91. Göttingen: V&R Unipress, 2018.
Madelung, Wilferd, and Paul Walker. An Ismaili Heresiography. The ‘Baˉb al-Shayt․
aˉn’ from Abuˉ Tammaˉm’s Kitaˉb al-shajara. Leiden: Brill, 1998.
Marcotte, Roxanne D. “Ibn Taymiyya et sa critique des produits de la faculté
d’estimation (wahmiyyaˉt ) dans le ‘Darʾ taʿaˉrud․ al-ʿaql wa-l-naql.’” Luqman 18, no. 2 (2002): 43–58.
Michot, Yahya M. “Philosophical Exegesis in Context: Some Views by Ibn Taymiyya.” The Muslim World 109, no. 4 (2019): 582–94.
Tamer, Georges. “The Curse of Philosophy: Ibn Taymiyya as a Philosopher in
Contemporary Islamic Thought.” In Islamic Theology, Philosophy and Law: Debating Ibn Taymiyya and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, edited by Birgit Krawietz and
Georges Tamer with Alina Kokoschka, 329–74. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2013.
Taylor, Richard C. “Introduction.” In Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba, Long
Commentary on the De Anima of Aristotle, translated with an introduction and
notes by Richard C. Taylor with Thérèse-Anne Druart, xv–cx. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
van Ess, Josef. “Ibn Kullaˉb und die Mih․na.” Oriens 18/19, no. 1 (1965/66): 92–142.
von Kügelgen, Anke. “Dialogpartner im Widerspruch: Ibn Rushd und Ibn Taymı
ˉya über die ‘Einheit der Wahrheit.’” In Words, Texts and Concepts Cruising
the Mediterranean Sea: Studies on the Sources, Contents and Influences of Islamic Civilization and Arabic Philosophy and Science, edited by Rüdiger Arnzen and Jörn
Thielmann, 455–81. Leuven: Peeters, 2004.
von Kügelgen, Anke. “The Poison of Philosophy: Ibn Taymiyya’s Struggle For
and Against Reason.” In Islamic Theology, Philosophy and Law: Debating Ibn
Taymiyya and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, edited by Birgit Krawietz and Georges
Tamer with Alina Kokoschka, 253–328. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2013.
Part II
Traditions Facing Forward

DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-11
It is due in no small part to the efforts of Richard C. Taylor that recent years
have seen an increasing appreciation, among scholars working on Aquinas
and his contemporaries, of the central role played by Islamic philosophical
sources in the development of Scholastic philosophy. In particular, Taylor
has advocated a hermeneutic practice that he has called “source-based contextualism”: the strategy of reading an author in tandem with the sources
with which he or she is in dialogue, in order to understand the conceptual
frameworks operating in the background. This methodology is crucial for
historians of medieval philosophy seeking to recover the significance of
philosophical concepts that have been sedimented over, in the intervening
eight centuries, with the detritus of countless seismic paradigm shifts.
In this study, I will examine a theme that is long overdue for elucidation
through just such a contextualizing approach, namely, light and its role in
making objects visible. The theories of light that were in circulation in the
European universities of the thirteenth century are not well understood.
Many questions arise: Which theories were known, how were they interpreted, and which of them were taken seriously? It is surprising that these
questions have not received more scholarly attention,1 given the crucial
metaphysical questions surrounding the nature of light and the frequent
use of light analogies as a leitmotif of thirteenth-century philosophical
psychology. (One might think, for instance, of the light of the agent intellect, the light of the first principles of reason, the supernatural lights of
faith and prophecy, the light of glory in the beatific vision of the saints,
and, of course, doctrines of divine illumination.)
Due to constraints of space, I will here examine just one of the many
questions that occupy light-theorists in the Greco-Arabic-Latin tradition:
What is light’s role in making vision of colors possible? My particular interest is the period of the 1240s–50s, a pivotal moment in the Latin Scholastic reception of Islamic natural philosophy. Thinkers at that time were
8 How Light Makes Color
Visible
The Reception of Some Greco-
Arabic Theories (Aristotle,
Avicenna, Averroes) in Medieval
Paris, 1240s–50s
Therese Scarpelli Cory
182 Therese Scarpelli Cory
familiar with a wide variety of theories addressing this problem, originating from a wide variety of sources—Christian theological sources such
as Augustine, Pseudo-Dionysius, Gregory of Nyssa, and Peter Lombard;
and Greek or Arabic philosophical sources such as Democritus, Empedocles, Aristotle, Ibn Baˉjjah, Avicenna, and Averroes.2 Two philosophical sources, however, appear to have acquired special credibility in accounting
for light’s role in vision, namely Aristotle and Avicenna.
In the time period in question, both Aristotle and Avicenna are cited
as proponents of what I will call a “color-actualizing role” for light. In
its color-actualizing role, light makes the objects of vision actually colored (color itself being construed as a kind of luminosity inhering in surfaces
in dependence on some illuminator). While Avicenna unambiguously
defends light’s color-actualizing role, Aristotle’s commitments are not so
clear. There is, however, a role that Aristotle does unambiguously attribute to light—I will call it the “receiver-disposing role”—according to which
light makes the patient or receiver of color’s agency (whether the medium, such as air, or the viewer’s eye) susceptible to being acted upon by color.
This role is extensively discussed by Aristotle’s Andalusian commentator
Averroes (Ibn Rushd), who finds a way of reducing all claims about light’s
actualizing color to a receiver-disposing role.
In examining mid-thirteenth-century Parisian theories of light against
the background of this Greco-Arabic discussion of light, some interesting
patterns emerge. The authors we will review—mainly Albert the Great,
but also Bonaventure and the early Aquinas—uniformly defend light’s
color-actualizing role. But they integrate it into a larger, tripartite theory
of light as a bodily quality inhering in three different kinds of bodies differently: (1) in light-sources such as the sun, stars, and fire, light inheres as
brilliant shining; (2) in the air, it inheres as a brightness; and (3) in solid
opaque bodies, it inheres as color-radiance. Aristotle and Avicenna align
with certain parts of this theory, but our Parisian authors take them to
endorse the entire theory. And curiously, one of the key points of dispute
in the Greco-Arabic tradition, the receiver-disposing role of light, gains
almost no traction in the Latin Scholastic discussion at the time we are
considering, although Albert makes some cautious concessions to it (Aquinas begins to endorse it only in the late 1260s). Instead, our Latin authors
prefer to characterize light’s presence in air as something active: a brightness whereby light-sources actualize colors in solid surfaces.
By placing the Latin Scholastic treatments of light in conversation with
the debates in their main Greco-Arabic sources, we can elucidate some of
the puzzling terminology and theoretical choices that motivate our three
Parisian authors. Indeed, this historical episode provides an interesting
window on some of the dynamics at work in the Scholastic appropriation
of Greco-Arabic natural philosophy.
My study unfolds in three parts. It begins with some puzzles in Aristotle’s remarks about light’s relationship to color and transparency and
How Light Makes Color Visible 183
examines how Averroes resolves these puzzles. It then considers Avicenna’s highly influential account, before turning to the question of how these
Greco-Arabic approaches to light were received in Paris in the 1240s–50s
by Albert the Great, Bonaventure, and the early Aquinas.
The Aristotelian Light-Theory and Its Interpretation
by Averroes
Let us begin by examining Aristotle’s own seminal remarks about light,
with the textual and philosophical ambiguities that will set up divergent
readings among Aristotle’s Arabic and Latin readers.
Aristotle on Light as “Actuality of the Diaphanous”: A Quick
Sketch
In De anima 2.7, Aristotle famously describes light as the “actuality of the
diaphanous”:
Light is the actuality of this, the diaphanous, insofar as it is diaphanous. Where this is there is also, potentially, darkness. Light is a sort of
color of the diaphanous, whenever it is made in actuality diaphanous
by fire or something that is like the body above.3
“The diaphanous” (from the Greek dia-phanein) has a curious technical
sense, which I wish to underscore by substituting the archaic term “diaphanous” for the common “transparent.” In Aristotle, “the diaphanous” is a
nature. Here in De anima 2.7, he ascribes the diaphanous to air, water, and
the crystalline sphere of the outermost heaven, which gives the impression
that he is referring to transparency (though in De sensu et sensato 5 he states
that all bodies in varying degrees partake of the nature of the diaphanous).4
Light is the actuality of this mysterious nature—the “actuality of the
diaphanous.” More precisely, light seems to be “actual diaphaneity.” Conversely, the “diaphanous nature” of certain (or all) bodies seems to be
a potency or receptivity for light. Bodies with a diaphanous nature are
not actually diaphanous yet; rather, they are naturally in potency to actual diaphaneity, or light. For Aristotle, then, diaphaneity is an actuality to
which the air is in potency, and darkness is the privation of that actuality.5
He further emphasizes that light is not itself a body but, rather, a “positive state” (hexis) of bodies. It is a corporeal accidental form to which the
“nature of the diaphanous” is in potency and whose absence is darkness.6
(These remarks are highly obscure, and scholars disagree on whether Aristotle thinks of light as transparency or as brightness,7 and whether he is
getting at anything more than a cumbersome way of describing “the state
of the transparent in which one can see color through it,” in a purely functionalist sense.8)
184 Therese Scarpelli Cory
Aristotle observes also that “nothing is visible without light.”9 So how
does light—this “actuality” or “positive state” to which bodies are in potency in virtue of their diaphanous nature—enable us to see? Aristotle’s
account seems to be that “colour is capable of setting in motion that which
is actually diaphanous; and this is its nature.” The standard interpretation
of this formulation today runs as follows: color, as an agent, is ordered
toward the “actually diaphanous” as its proper patient.10 Consequently,
the air and, ultimately, the eye can be acted upon by color only if they are
actually diaphanous. Conversely, the darkness of the air and eye makes
them unreceptive to color’s agency. Light’s role in vision is to serve as the
disposition, inhering in air and the eye, that makes them susceptible to
being acted upon by color.
We can call this account of light’s role in vision the “receiver-disposing”
role. By way of illustration, suppose that Annie is standing in a pitch-dark
room containing a green vase. The reason she cannot see the vase is that
the air and her eyes are dark, i.e., they are unreceptive to the vase’s green
color. But when sunlight is let into the room, the air and her eyes acquire a
new disposition—light, i.e., actual diaphaneity—enabling the vase’s green
color to act upon them. With the obstacle removed, color now acts on
Annie’s eyes, causing her to see green.
Colors in the Dark and Other Interpretive Obscurities
Now, does Aristotle think light plays any additional role relative to color?
Does anything change in the vase when sunlight streams into the room,
or was it already green in the dark? These questions are not so easily answered.
11 In particular, his Arabic and Latin interpreters are confronted
with four significant interpretive difficulties.
First, in De anima 3.5, Aristotle goes on to compare the “intellect that
makes all things”—what would become known in the commentary tradition as the “active intellect”—to light, which he now describes as having
a color-actualizing role: it is “as a kind of positive state, like light. For in
a certain way, light makes colours which are in potentiality colours in actuality.”
12 This famous comparison sets up a long tradition of treating the
active intellect as the intellectual analogate to light. But the analogy seems
to depend on light’s having some sort of color-actualizing role, which the
discussion of light in De anima 2.7 does not straightforwardly provide.13
A second difficulty lies in De anima 2.7’s ambiguous remarks about the
relationship of light, color, and visibility. Aristotle states that “nothing is
visible without light.”14 Yet, he also says that color is “visible in itself (per
se)”—at least according to the Arabic and Latin versions read by Averroes
and by our three Scholastic authors. How does one reconcile the claims
that “nothing is visible without light” and that “color is visible per se”?
In reality, although Aristotle’s original Greek does not help clarify the
relation of color and visibility, the appearance of direct inconsistency is
an artifact of the translation. In the Greek, Aristotle is apparently merely
How Light Makes Color Visible 185
listing two kinds of entities that are visible, namely colored things and
things which shine by themselves, apparently referring to the phosphorescent creatures that are discussed a few lines later:
The visible is [a] color, and [b] that which is on the surface of [epi]
what is visible in itself [kath’ auto].15
In the Arabic and Latin versions, the preposition vanishes, and the distinction between “color” and the “visible in itself” collapses. Color itself
becomes that which is per se visible (a claim that seems to be supported
by Aristotle’s subsequent remark that it belongs to the nature of color to
move sight).16 So the lemma in Averroes’ Long Commentary on the De anima
(hereafter LCDA) reads:
Color is visible, and this is visible per se.17
In the “old” Latin translation of De anima by James of Venice, the mid-
twelfth-century translation that was mainly responsible for transmitting
Aristotelian light-theory to Scholastic thinkers before Moerbeke’s revision
in 1267, the passage reads:
Color is visible; and it is of [= numbered among] the visible-
in-themselves.18
As we will see, this mistaken formulation that color is “per se visible”
causes subsequent Arabic and Latin authors considerable grief in attempting to work out why light is necessary for vision.
Third, Aristotle’s term horaton, “visible,” is ambiguous: it is not clear
whether he is equating visibility with the power to move the actually
diaphanous air/eye or with actually moving the actually diaphanous air/
eye.19 The same goes for the claim that color is “motive of” (kineˉtikon) the
diaphanous, which could refer either to the power to move or to actual
moving.20 With respect to the latter case, we will see that, again, two different translation decisions are responsible for diverging interpretations of
this passage in Averroes and Albert.
Fourth, further complications are introduced by reading De anima 2.7 together with the more extensive discussion of color in De sensu et sensato
3, which was widely cited in Latin Scholastic treatments. There, Aristotle
ascribes diaphaneity to all bodies and relates light and color to two kinds
of bodies. Light “is a nature inhering in the diaphanous when the latter
is without determinate boundary,”21 meaning fluidly edged bodies such
as air or water. Color, in turn, is “the limit of the diaphanous in determinately bounded body,”22 meaning, apparently, the surface of solids. In
other words, color is a property of something that has a fixed surface, a
claim evoking the De anima remark that color “is motive of the actually
diaphanous,” since it is likewise only at its surface that a body is in contact
186 Therese Scarpelli Cory
with the illuminated air.23 Yet Aristotle then adds that a body’s color is
due to the presence (or absence, or a mixture of both) in it of “that which
when present in air produces light”—apparently, the “fiery element” in
sun or fire.24 So the two parts of this account seem to be in tension: does
color exist only at surfaces, or are solid bodies colored all the way through,
due to the presence of the fiery substance in them?
This accumulation of interpretive difficulties sets up a central question,
which can be rendered precise with the following illustration. Suppose
that within the vase, which is made of clay under its green glaze, there
inheres a mixed fiery quality (call it B), corresponding to the color brown
(though let us at this moment leave open whether B actually is a color
or not). And now suppose that B is successively in the three following
conditions:
• At t1, B is not exposed at any surface of the vase.
• At t2, the vase is broken, exposing B at a surface, but in a dark room.
• At t3, the light is switched on in the room, illuminating the surrounding air or eye and hence placing B into contact with an appropriately
disposed receiver; at that moment, B immediately “moves the actual
diaphanous.”
The question will be as follows. Let us assume that to be visible, on the
Aristotelian account, is to be “motive of what is actually diaphanous” (in
other words, the medium of air or water and, ultimately, the eye). Now
at which of these times is B visible, i.e., “motive of what is actually diaphanous”? The answer depends on how one construes the “visibility/
motivity” in question.
Suppose that “being motive of” means that the agent has internally
the relevant causal power to move, regardless of any other conditions that
might need to be satisfied in order for motion to occur. On that construal,
there are three possible options for locating B’s visibility:
Option 1: B has this causal power essentially (and thus is visible already
at t1).25
Option 2: B acquires this causal power only at a “limit” or surface, regardless of light conditions (and thus is visible at t2).
Option 3: B acquires this causal power from light only at an illuminated
surface (and thus is visible at t3).
Now suppose instead that “being motive of” is equated with satisfying all
the conditions internal and external to the agent, i.e., actually moving.
Then on that construal, we also have a fourth option:
Option 4: B is visible only at t3, when a properly disposed (actually diaphanous) patient is available. On this construal, being capable of moving
sight would entail actually moving sight.
How Light Makes Color Visible 187
We shall see two medieval strategies for meeting this interpretive challenge. One is chosen by Averroes in his Long Commentary on the De anima,
who defends Option 2 in order to protect the claim that color is per se
visible without light. But he also allows for another sense of “visible” that
legitimates Option 4 as well (among other reasons, to accommodate the
claim that “nothing is visible without light”). The other strategy is that adopted by the three mid-thirteenth-century Scholastic writers. As we will
see, they attribute to Aristotle Option 3, and hence put him in Avicenna’s
color-actualizing camp.
Averroes’ Two Senses of Visibility
In his Long Commentary on the De anima, Averroes is fully aware of these
interpretive difficulties. His Andalusian predecessor, Ibn Baˉjjah, had read
Aristotle as proposing a color-actualizing theory of light (Option 3). Averroes rejects this interpretation as forced (expositio valde difficilis). Instead,
he sets out to show that Aristotle believed that “actual colors exist in the
dark” and that light’s sole role in vision is “to make the potentially diaphanous actually diaphanous,” i.e., to dispose the receiver.26
Averroes’ strategy for reconciling the divergent texts and clarifying the
relationship between color, visibility, and “moving the diaphanous” is to
distinguish two senses of visibility: one according to which it is true that
“color is per se visible,” and the other according to which it is true that
“color is invisible without light.” (Keep in mind that Averroes’ version of
De anima incorrectly has Aristotle saying that color is per se visible.) Averroes’ remarks are worth quoting and discussing at length.
In the first sense, to be visible is to have “the habit and form” for moving
something actually diaphanous, i.e., the causal power for affecting sight (=
visible1). This is the sense in which color is per se visible in the dark (per
Option 2, above):27
When we keep [in mind] what Aristotle said at the beginning of that
account (and he asserted it as self-evident), then it is clear that light
must be necessary for the being of colors moving the diaphanous, only
insofar as it gives the diaphanous some form whereby it receives motion from color, namely illumination. For Aristotle asserted that color
is visible per se, and that saying that color is visible is like saying that
a human being is risible. In other words, [such propositions belong
to] the kind of essential proposition in which the subject is the cause of
the predicate, not [the kind in which] the predicate [is] the cause of
the subject, e.g., “Human being is rational.”28 He meant this when
he said: but insofar as a cause is found in it for its being visible, as we have
expounded. And I concede that it is manifestly impossible to say that
light accords to color a habit and form whereby it becomes visible.
For if it were so, then color would not be related primarily to sight,
but only accidentally and secondarily, through [acquiring] some habit.
188 Therese Scarpelli Cory
For obviously sight is posterior to the visible. And obviously “visible”
is related to “color,” not as “rational” is related to “man,” but as “capable of laughter” is related to “man.” And in this way color is visible
in virtue of being color, not in virtue of some form that happens to
accrue to it.29
Visibility1 is the formality corresponding to sight; to be visible1 is to have
the causal power to affect what is actually diaphanous (including, ultimately, the eye). By asserting that color as such is visible1, then, Averroes
is designating color as sufficient in itself on the side of the agent for causing
vision. Hence he denies, contra Avicenna and Ibn Baˉjjah, that light contributes any additional formality on the side of the vision-causing agent.
Merely to be colored is to have sufficient causal power for “moving what
is actually diaphanous.” The exercise of that power, however, additionally
hinges on the presence of a properly disposed receiver. (Similarly, when a
metal pot is heated to 100°C, it is sufficient in itself for vaporizing water,
although the exercise of this causal power requires that there actually be
water in the pot to be vaporized.)
In another sense, however, something is visible (=visible2) when it is
actually exercising its diaphanous-moving power. An object that is visible2
is actually seen. It is in this secondary sense that light makes color visible
(per Option 4, above):
Since [color is visible without the accrual of another form, e.g., light], light is not necessary for the being of actually-moving color, except insofar as it gives the subject proper to it the ability to receive motion from [color].
It seems that in asserting what he asserted, Aristotle only intended to provide a solution to that question. It is in this way that we should understand his statement that colors [only] potentially move the sense of sight in darkness. For light is that which makes them actually motive [motivos in actu], and hence he likens light to the agent intelligence and colors to universals. For what is introduced loosely by way of example is not like what is introduced by demonstration, and he does not intend the example as a verification, but merely as a clarification. And no one can say that color is found in act only when light is present. For color is the boundary of a determinate transparent; but light is not the boundary of a determinate transparent and for this reason it is not necessary for the being of color [in essendo colorem], but for its being visible [in essendo visibilem], as we determined. Let us return, then, and say that when [Aristotle] had explained that color, insofar as it is visible, moves the transparent in act and that this is its nature on account of being visible per se, and that it is impossible for there to be sight without light, he returned to recounting what should be considered first concerning those things. And he said: “But it is necessary that each color, etc.” In other words, because each color is
How Light Makes Color Visible 189
only visible in light, one must say first about light that it is one of the things that complete vision. [TSC: I take it that “first” in the previous sentences refers to what seems prima facie or pre-philosophically true of light’s role in vision, as opposed to precise philosophical claims about its causal role.]30
Light is necessary for the object to be visible2, i.e., actually moving sight—
only because light constitutes the appropriate disposition in air and the
eye, enabling them to be affected by color. With the patient properly disposed, color instantly unleashes its active power. Making color visible2,
then, light functions as a per accidens cause of color’s activity on sight, in
that it satisfies on the side of the patient a condition necessary for this activity to occur.
In short, on Averroes’ view, objects have the “being of color” and, hence, the causal power for moving the actual diaphanous, independently from light, so they are visible1 independently from light. But they do not actually move the actual diaphanous unless light disposes air and the eye to receive their activity. Hence, light is required for them to be visible2.
Capitalizing on this distinction between visible1 and visible2, Averroes goes on to take astonishing liberties in comparing the agent intellect to light. In those contexts, his remarks about visibility are hardly distinguishable from Avicenna’s, e.g., “Color is visible only in virtue of the sun” (presumably meaning visibility2).31 Even the terms “color” and “actuality” are infected by this deliberate ambiguity on the having versus the exercising of a power. For instance, in LCDA 3.18, Averroes states that “sight is not moved by colors except when they are in act, which is not realized unless light is present since it is what draws them from potency into act.”32 And in LCDA 3.36, he states: “Similar to this is the diaphanous which receives color and light at one and the same time; and light effects color [lux est efficiens colorum].”33 These formulations are only consistent with the receiver-disposing view of light that he has defended in LCDA 2, if one assumes that there are two senses for both “actual” and “color,” for example, although the tree’s green color actually exists by itself (color1 or actuality1, parallel to visibility1), the exercise of its activity on a receiver (color2 or actuality2, parallel to visibility2) requires light’s properly disposing the receiver.
What Averroes is doing, in sum, is this: he is reducing claims about light’s color-actualizing role to claims about its receiver-disposing role. Thus, conveniently, even though the behavior of light cannot serve as a strict model for the behavior of the agent intellect as an actualizer of intelligibility, nevertheless, by equivocating, he can assert that light “makes colors visible” (i.e., visibility2) and even that it “effects colors” (i.e., color2), so as to serve as a loose analogue for intellectual light.34
190 Therese Scarpelli Cory
The Avicennian View of Light
A Few Light Errors
Interestingly, Averroes was not alone among Islamic philosophers in interpreting Aristotle as assigning solely a receiver-disposing role to light
in his account of vision. Roughly a century and a half earlier, the Persian
philosopher Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, known in Latin as Avicenna, had read Aristotle in
much the same way. But in the lengthy third book of his Liber de anima
(translated into Latin by Ibn Daud and Gundissalinus around 1152–66),
Avicenna rejects that account and unfolds his own theory. Light, as Avicenna sees it, has two roles in vision:
a to actualize color in nonluminous opaque bodies (= color-actualizing
role)
b to make the potentially translucent be actually translucent.35
This second role sounds at first like Aristotle’s receiver-disposing role, but
in reality, Avicenna understands it quite differently. We will discuss each
role in turn below, focusing not on Avicenna’s original Arabic text, but
on “the Latin Avicenna,” i.e., Avicenna as he appeared to Latin readers
through the Latin translation.
Beforehand, however, a few remarks about Avicenna’s terminology are
in order. Avicenna’s light-theory rests on a central distinction between
two terms for light: d․awʾ and nuˉr in Arabic, or lux and lumen in the medieval Latin translation, which I will translate “luminous light” and “radiant
light,” respectively, following Jon McGinnis.36 Luminous light (lux) is an
essential quality that belongs to luminous bodies (lucida), such as the sun
and fire, and that is independently visible; it is “seen by itself.”37 From
luminous bodies, there “shines forth” or “descends” radiant light (lumen),
i.e., “a splendor that falls upon bodies and uncovers in them whiteness or
blackness or greenness.”38
As Dag Nikolaus Hasse has shown, however, the medieval Latin translators of the Liber de anima were not consistent in rendering d․awʾ and nuˉr , respectively, as lux and lumen. Sometimes they reversed the terms, and they further obscured the definition of lumen by glossing it as a “splendor.” As we will see later, they also misinterpreted Avicenna’s second kind of light, nuˉr (lumen).39
Color-Actualizing, Visibility, and Self-Diffusion in Avicenna
The key role of light in vision, for the Latin Avicenna, is to actualize colors. He writes that radiant light makes nonluminous opaque bodies, such
as walls or a vase, actually colored and, hence, visible:
As a potentially colored body, [the wall] is not shining [lucens] from
itself, for actual color [color in effectu] accrues to it only on account of
How Light Makes Color Visible 191
radiant light. For when radiant light [lumen] illuminates some body,
there accrues to that body actual whiteness or blackness or greenness
and others of this sort. But if it is not illuminated, it is black only in
the sense of being dark, and it is potentially colored, if we want to call
whiteness or blackness or redness or paleness or anything of the sort
“actual color” [color in effectu].40
For example, a vase in a dark room has an “aptitude” to be green and
becomes actually green when illuminated by radiant light—for example,
when I turn on a lamp.
But how, exactly, is light responsible for the vase’s color? Avicenna considers and rejects several possibilities. Light is not itself the vase’s actual
green, otherwise it could not actualize all colors.41 Nor is it the sum of
all colors—otherwise, it would harbor contraries within itself.42 Nor is it
the manifestness (manifestatio, apparentia) of greenness to a viewer, since it
exists independently of viewers.43 Rather, Avicenna explains, an actual
color, such as green, is “composed” by the “mixing” of luminous light and
the object’s disposition for green:
We say that luminous light [lux] is part of the composition of this visible thing that we call color. When it is mixed with potential color,
from the two comes forth actual color on account of the intermingling; but if there is not such an aptitude [for color—namely, if the
receiver of light is translucent], it will be radiant light [lumen] and
splendor by itself alone; for luminous light [lux] is, as it were, a part
of that which is color and a mixing of it, just as white and black have
mixtures from which other middle colors result.44
The distribution of the terms lux and lumen here suggests that by means
of radiant light, the sun causes luminous light to occur as a quality in the
vase, which is not any actual color, but rather an ingredient necessary for
the being of any actual color. “Mixed” together, luminous light and the
vase’s disposition for green constitute actual green. Hence, luminous light
“perfects color,”45 granting the vase “the being of a certain property”—i.e.,
color.46 We can call this the “color-actualizing” role of light. As Avicenna
explains it, “Colors have being, and the being [of color] does not derive
from the fact that they are luminous light, nor is luminous light their manifesting, although they are not actual apart from luminous light.”47
But why must light be “mixed in” in order for color to be perfected?
The key lies in Avicenna’s construal of actual color as essentially visible:
“There is no whiteness except as belonging to something to which it is
proper to be seen.”48 Now what is visible, for Avicenna, is light.49 Actual
color, then, is necessarily a lesser, derivative kind of luminosity, which the
vase does not have in its own nature, but acquires through an “admixture”
of light, in continuous dependence on a naturally luminous body. What
luminous light thus contributes to our vase is the luminosity or visibility
192 Therese Scarpelli Cory
that is essential to being green. The determinacy of a given color (e.g.,
greenness, not redness) is specified by the corporeal dispositions preexisting in the vase. Avicenna thus distinguishes two related luminosities: that
of a naturally luminous body, which “is seen by its own essence and not
by another,”50 and that of color, which is seen by another. Actual color
is what makes opaque bodies visible, just as luminous light is what makes
the sun visible.
The notion of “visibility” operative here is one of dynamic self-display. For Avicenna, to be visible is to be luminous and, hence, capable of displaying oneself: “Light is visible, and that in which there is light is visible.”51 What is actually visible, whether by natural brilliance or acquired color-luminosity, properly diffuses its likeness outward, contingent, of course, on the presence of a suitable receiver and translucent medium:52
The following is proper to the body that shines by itself [e.g., sun,
fire] and the illuminated colored thing: namely, when there is a body
opposite to them that is receptive of a likeness (for instance, in the
way that sight is receptive), [shining and colored bodies] tend to perform upon [the receptive] body an action that is a form like their own
form.53
For Avicenna, the receiver of this self-diffusive activity need not be an
eye. The sun causes its likeness (visibility) in potentially colored objects
by casting light on them. Similarly, but to a lesser degree, actually colored
bodies are able to affect some kinds of nonperceptual recipients, as when
the green vase causes its likeness in a mirror, from which, under the right
light conditions, color can even (dimly) be reflected onto a wall.54 The projecting of a likeness is simply what visible things automatically do,
given the presence of a suitable receiver—indeed, the tendency to cause
such likenesses is precisely what visibility is.
If the receiver is a properly disposed eye, however, then this effect of the
visible object (whether the sun or the green vase) constitutes the object’s
“appearance” or “manifestation.” A colored object “needs first to be illuminated by what we call radiant light so that it may appear.”55 Avicenna explains: “Although we say that luminous light is not the manifestation
of color, we do not deny that luminous light is the cause of color’s being
manifest and the cause of [color’s] being effected in another.”56
Now this construal of visibility in terms of active self-diffusion raises
an interesting puzzle: Is something visible when it is merely capable of
causing vision, or does visibility (and hence actual color) imply actually
causing vision? To put it another way: Given that visible or colored objects
are naturally active self-diffusive, is the exercise of this activity essential to
being visible or colored or not? Is the illuminated vase actually green, even
if there is no one around to see it?
How Light Makes Color Visible 193
On this issue, the textual evidence seems inconclusive. On the one hand,
Avicenna writes that “white is not white, nor is red red, except according
as we see it; but it is not made such that we see it unless it is illuminated.”57
On the other hand, this remark comes at the end of a passage in which
he says that color is a “quality of [opaque, nonluminous] bodies” and that
“when radiant light illuminates a body, there occurs in it actual whiteness
or greenness or blackness.”58 In reconciling these two remarks, a defender
of viewer-dependent color might claim that, in attributing actual color to
bodies, Avicenna means that these bodies are actually causing the sight of
color. Conversely, a defender of viewer-independent color might claim
that, when Avicenna says that actual red only exists “according as we see
it,” he means, not that “it exists only at the moment when we see it” (i.e.,
there is no color except when seen), but rather that “the way in which red
is when we see it—i.e., illuminated—is the only way that actual red can
exist at all” (i.e., no color is seen that is not illuminated).
McGinnis defends a version of the former interpretation, according to
which actual green is never in the vase for Avicenna, but exists only in
the eye as the seeing of green, effected by the mixture of light and color-disposition in the vase.59 On balance, however, I tend toward reading Avicenna as a defender of viewer-independent color, for a few reasons. One is
that Avicenna typically triangulates the conditions for color’s actualization
in terms of spatial relationships among a luminous body, a potentially colored body, and a translucent medium, without signaling that a viewer is
necessary.60 Another is that if actual color were viewer-dependent, then,
correspondingly, so too should be the visibility of luminous bodies such
as the sun—but Avicenna specifies that luminous bodies are visible per se.
Another, finally, is that the viewer-dependent theory seems to collapse
color into its manifestation, a move that Avicenna rejects.61 A proponent
of viewer-dependent color could explain away each bit of evidence, but it
seems to me that, taken together, they provide a certain weight of plausibility on the side of viewer-independent color.
Before proceeding to the rest of Avicenna’s light-theory, it is worth
pausing to underscore that the text is not free of ambiguity; indeed, the
same sort of ambiguity as the one we saw in Aristotle. Does the claim that
light perfects or actualizes color mean that light makes color exist, or that
it makes color act on something, or both? (Alternatively, does it make
color exist precisely by making it act on something, if the existence of
color is contingent on its affecting some receiver?)
Making the Medium Translucent
Now, on Avicenna’s view, the sun can actualize the vase’s greenness (and
the greenness can further actualize the eye) only through a “penetrable”
or “translucent” (pervium, translucens) medium. In fact, Avicenna defines
a translucent body as one which, when placed as a medium between a
194 Therese Scarpelli Cory
luminous body and its patient, does not prevent, but rather assists, the former in acting on the latter.62 Therefore, Avicenna says that in addition to
actualizing color, light makes the medium “actually translucent.”63
Now some modern readers have equated Avicenna’s “making the medium translucent” with Aristotle’s receiver-disposing role of light. But as
Hasse has pointed out, one should not be misled by Avicenna’s language.64
Unlike Aristotle, Avicenna does not think the actualizing of translucence
is a real change (permutatio) in the air itself. Rather, to say that the air has
become translucent is merely to say that a luminous body has moved into
the air (e.g., the sun has risen) and is actualizing the color of some object.65
In other words, the actual “trans-lucence” of air is not some new quality
added to air. It is merely the name for the situation that obtains when the
sun is actualizing color in an opaque body (or the colored body is causing
sight in the eye) through the intervening air. Nor is darkness (obscuritas)
a real quality of the air that blocks the reception of light, as though dark
air were resistant to receiving light. Rather, air’s darkness merely refers
to the fact that there is nothing to see in it (i.e., no luminous or actually
colored bodies).66 So “becoming actually transparent” on Avicenna’s view
is what contemporary metaphysicians call a “mere Cambridge change,” as
when one might describe a water-pipe becoming “actually aquiferous,”
although there is no real change in the pipe, but only in the water, which
changes from potentially flowing to actually flowing.
Our Latin medieval authors are also misled by Avicenna’s description
of light as “making the medium transparent,” which they take as agreeing
with Aristotle. But since they also simultaneously misread Aristotle, this
confluence of misreadings creates an interesting effect, as we will now see.
Avicenna Revivified: The After-Image of Islamic
Accounts of Light at Paris, 1240s–50s
Let us summarize the key distinctions so far. In characterizing the role of
light in vision, we have seen two possibilities: a color-actualizing and a
receiving-disposing view. It seems reasonably certain that Aristotle views
light as a corporeal quality in the air, in which capacity it plays the role
of disposing the receiver to be affected by color. But due to misleading or
incorrect formulations in the Arabic and Latin translations, as well as simply to fundamental ambiguities in his position that continue to generate
competing interpretations today, it was possible to disagree about whether
Aristotle thinks light also has a color-actualizing role.
Avicenna and Averroes, however, do not disagree in that respect: both are convinced that Aristotle accords light only a receiver-disposing role. But they respond in exactly opposite ways. Rejecting Aristotle’s receiver-disposing role (as he understands it), Avicenna argues that light is properly a color-actualizer. Although he nominally states that light makes the medium translucent, translucence is not a real quality inhering
How Light Makes Color Visible 195
in the air, but is merely a way of describing sunlight’s travel through air in order to reach the potentially green surface. In contrast, Averroes accepts Aristotle’s receiver-disposing role (as he understands it), arguing that light is properly the disposition of transparency that makes its subjective receptive to be acted on by color. Although he nominally states that light actualizes color, the claim turns craftily on distinguishing color1 as what has the power to cause sight, from color2 as what is actually causing sight.
In other words, for Avicenna, the real change that light effects is on the
side of the color-agent, giving it the form whereby it acts on sight—while
the medium is affected only in the incidental sense that light and color
are now acting through it. Conversely, for Averroes, the real change is
on the side of color’s patient, which acquires light as the disposition of actual transparency—while the color-agent is affected only in the incidental
sense that with the receiver now properly disposed, the activity of color
immediately follows.
At the same time, there is some important common ground underneath
the structural differences. As far as I can tell, all three thinkers understand
color as a radiance or luminosity: green, yellow, and red are ways in which
a body shines or glows at its opaque surfaces. The theoretical disagreements
concern whether this luminosity is a dependent participation in the luminosity of naturally shining bodies, e.g., the sun and fire, or whether it is
attributable to the colored object’s material constituents, which are like those
found in those naturally shining bodies (or both).
So, how were these Greek and Arabic theories of light received in Scholasticism? Let us fast-forward now to mid-thirteenth-century Paris.
Color as the Radiance of Surfaces
Remarkably little has been written about medieval Scholastic theories of
light. Without attempting to fill that lacuna, which would require an entire history in its own right, I focus on the works, written during the
1240s–50s, of just three thinkers: Albert, Bonaventure, and Aquinas.67
These works display an almost entirely uniform account of how light
makes objects visible. On that shared account, naturally luminous sources
(e.g., sun or fire) cause light in two different kinds of receivers. Light is received in air as the “act of the diaphanous.”68 And by means of the illuminated air, light comes to exist in opaque surfaces as the missing ingredient
that constitutes color in solid bodies.
The picture painted in these works, then, is one in which luminosity
cascades outward in a tripartite hierarchy: (1) an essentially luminous cause
causes (2) brightness in the air which, in coming into contact with certain
rightly disposed surfaces, causes in them (3) color, itself a kind of luminosity. Let us first examine light’s color-actualizing role before considering
the nature of light in the air.
196 Therese Scarpelli Cory
Perhaps the most striking feature of these theories of light is their agreement that light’s role in vision is precisely to actualize color. The most detailed treatment is that of Albert the Great, who significantly influences Aquinas’ and Bonaventure’s theories. In explaining light’s color-actualizing role, Albert sometimes uses the hylomorphic language of matter and form to differentiate within color a material component (the body’s physical make-up) and a formal component (consisting in light):
The being of color is twofold, namely material and formal. I call “material” what [color] has in the matter in which it is, not that it is from
some matter. The matter in which it is, is a determinate body—that
is, not transparent [pervium], and color has this material being from the
first active and passive qualities, namely hot, cold, moist, and dry. But
the formal being of color is the being of color, whereby it is actually
in an active potency for actually immuting vision, and color has that
[formal being] from light.69
He also describes light as “mixing” with color at the boundary between
illuminated air and solid bodies. For instance, interpreting Aristotle’s De
sensu 3 maxim that “color is the limit of the diaphanous,” he explains:
Concerning the second definition [viz., “color is the edge of the diaphanous (here: perspicui) in a determinate body”], it must be understood such that “extremity of the transparent” means the edge of the transparent that is touching the colored thing, and of the actual light [in the diaphanous medium] mixing itself with [the colored body’s] surface and conferring on it the formal being of color. And consequently, when it is said that “color is the edge of the diaphanous,” this should not be understood in reference to just any diaphanous, but in reference to that part which mixes itself with the surface of the colored thing. And that is what he adds: “the edge of the diaphanous in a determinate body,” implying that the light mixed with the diaphanous is supposed to be the being of color existing in the surface of a determinate body. For color always exists in a surface, which is why the Pythagoreans called it an epiphany, that is, something appearing-over [superapparentem]. Nor should we understand this definition as referring to just any being of color, but the being according to which color alters sense, not the being whereby it alters bodies.70
Interestingly, in interpreting Aristotle, Albert introduces the Avicennian
language of light’s “mixing” with a body’s natural properties to colorize it.
We can also see why the De sensu 3 maxim is so often cited by Scholastic
authors in order to attribute to Aristotle a color-actualizing view. After
How Light Makes Color Visible 197
all, supposing that a ball is made of the same clay all the way through,
why should it be said to be red only at its surface (limit), unless something
happens to it at the surface—which is precisely where it meets the illuminated air?
Albert thus allows that the term “color” can be understood in two ways. On the one hand, if by “color” one merely means a certain elemental composition, then bodies are certainly colored in the dark. But if “color” means the object of sight, properly speaking—the “visible per
se,” or “the being according to which color alters sense,” i.e., color qua sensible—there is no color without light. Rather, sensible color is composed or mixed of an elemental composition as its matter and light as its form.71 In this way, Albert is able to meet the challenge of reconciling two claims in the Latin Aristotle: namely, that color is “per se visible,” and that nothing is visible without light. The solution, for Albert, is that light is what makes something be colored in the proper sense, i.e., visible, in the first place.
Bonaventure similarly gives light a color-actualizing role, but he formulates the light-color relationship differently than Albert does. Light,
he explains, “does not belong to the composition of color as an intrinsic
principle, but as an effective principle.”72 Rather, light (lumen) and illuminated color (color illuminata) are distinct forms, such that color is “ordered
to” light and
completed through its presence. […] Color is a quality of a determinate body, which is beautified and completed by the presence of light,
so that it can move sight […] [The light illuminating the air conjoined
to the determinate body] makes color luminous.73
Here, color is something that a body already naturally has imperfectly,
but which is completed or perfected by becoming visible, i.e., able to move sight.
Light exists in the air, and efficiently causes color to be perfected, i.e.,
making it visible. It does not enter into the composition of perfect color.
Still, the view is roughly equivalent to Albert’s, since, as we just saw, Albert had already allowed that the term “color” can be understood in two
ways: either as “the form that immutes sight,” i.e., “the visible” (in which
case light is a formal constituent) or as a property that bodies naturally
have in virtue of their elemental makeup (in which case, light is not a
constituent, but an additional form).
Formulations echoing both Albert and Bonaventure appear in the early
Thomas Aquinas, who defends light’s color-actualizing role at least until
the mid-1260s (see below for a description of the shift). Sometimes, in
a more Albertist strain, Aquinas describes light as a formal constituent
of color. For instance, he says that “light belongs to the composition of
color,”74 that “color is none other than an embodied light,”75 or even that
“all colors are founded in the nature of light,” just as “substance is the
198 Therese Scarpelli Cory
foundation and basis for all beings.”76 But sometimes, in a more Bonaventurean strain, he treats light and color as two distinct forms related as matter
and form, the former perfecting the latter to constitute “the visible,” i.e.,
the object of sight. On this construal, light does not make color colored,
but rather it makes it “bright” (clarus).77
To summarize: writing in the 1240s–50s, Albert, Aquinas, and
Bonaventure share the same underlying conception of color and light’s
color-actualizing role in vision:
1 Color (or at least perfect color) is a kind of radiance or luminosity
whereby a body with opaque surfaces acts on sight.
2 In the dark, a body with opaque surfaces naturally has certain color-relevant properties in virtue of its material composition; what it lacks
in order to be visible is some kind of luminosity.
3 Light’s role in vision is to actualize potential objects of sight by granting them color-luminosity.
4 Luminous sources are the agents of this color-actualization, acting on
bodies through illuminated air.
Where Albert and Bonaventure disagree, the divergences turn out to be
insignificant. For instance, Albert is unwilling to call anything “color”
unless it is actually visible (i.e., luminous and hence able to move sight),
whereas Bonaventure is willing to describe the material constituents of
color as “imperfect color,” which is “completed” by being made visible.
But they both agree on the underlying substantive claim: namely, that perfect color is luminous, and that actual visibility consists in a kind of radiance
that is capable of moving sight.
Again, in explaining how precisely the light of the air makes a body’s
surface color-luminous, Albert describes the air’s light as “mixing” with
an opaque body’s natural properties at their shared boundary and, thereby,
constituting the form of the color that is “the visible.” Bonaventure, in
contrast, treats the air’s light as extrinsically effecting some lesser luminosity
in the body’s surface. As a result, they draw up their taxonomy of luminosities differently. Albert seems to say that light is, in some sense, the
very nature of color,78 whereas Bonaventure denies that light and color
are “one in essence”;79 rather, perfected color is merely like lumen in its
luminosity. Nevertheless, whether or not they think that a univocally same
kind of light is in the air and in color, all three thinkers consider perfected
color to be some kind of luminosity acquired in contact with illuminated
air—a luminosity that is active relative to sight.
Our three Latin Parisian thinkers (correctly) credit Avicenna as a supporter of the view that light actualizes color. But interestingly, they also adopt an “Avicennizing” reading of Aristotle on this point, taking it as obvious that Aristotle likewise held that light makes color be what it is.80
How Light Makes Color Visible 199
What about Light in the Air?
Between the luminous source and the vase being made actually green,
however, there is a body of air (or sometimes water), and in our Latin authors, as we just saw, the illumination of the air plays an important role in
explaining how color comes to be actualized. How, then, do they construe
light’s presence in the intervening air? We saw two theoretical options in
the Greco-Arabic sources above: (a) Aristotle’s and Averroes’ “receiver-disposing” construal of light as a quality in the air which disposes air to
be affected by color; (b) Avicenna’s reductive construal of light as merely
passing through air without changing it.
In Albert, Bonaventure, and the early Aquinas, a third option emerges:
Light inheres in air as a quality that makes air “transparent” (lucidum). But
where a modern reader might automatically construe “transparency” as
colorlessness, our Latin Scholastic authors seem to have taken the term more
in the sense of brightness. Indeed, the primary sense of lucidum is “bright”
or “shining”; it means “transparent” only secondarily by extension. The
ambiguity goes back to Aristotle’s Greek. In discussing Aristotle’s labeling
of light as an “act of the diaphanous,” Katerina Ierodiakonou notes that
the term diaphaneˉs in Greek means not only “transparent,” but also “manifest” or “apparent.” That, she suggests, explains why Aristotle holds that
the more diaphaneity a body has, the more color it has (exactly the oppo-
site of what one might expect).81 And in the “old” Latin translation of De
anima by James of Venice—the mid-twelfth-century translation that was
mainly responsible for transmitting Aristotelian light-theory to Scholastic
thinkers of the 1240s–50s—the ambiguity is perpetuated by translating diaphane
ˉs as lucidum.82 Subsequent Latin translations (the Latin-from-Arabic
translation included in the Latin translation of Averroes’ Long Commentary,
which was already available by the 1240s, and Moerbeke’s nova translatio
of 1267) more cautiously substituted a transliteration of the Greek, diaffonum
or dyafanum. In Avicenna Latinus, incidentally, the bright (lucidum) is
equated with the light source and explicitly distinguished from the transparent
(pervium).83
Now, it seems to me that there is a significant theoretical difference between construing light as the “act of the transparent” (the transparency of a
nature that is of itself only potentially transparent) versus as “the act of the
shining” (the brightness of a nature that is only potentially bright). If light
is actual transparency in the sense of colorlessness, then one can make sense
of light as a (passive) disposition for receiving color. But if light (lumen) is a
brightness to which Aristotle’s “diaphanous nature” is in potency, as Albert
explicitly states,84 then it can be construed as an active power that causes brightness (and hence actual color) in in other things.
The latter is precisely the sense, I contend, in which Albert, Bonaventure, and the early Aquinas construe the illumination of air. In air, light is
not a disposition making air receptive to color, but precisely the opposite:
200 Therese Scarpelli Cory
it is an active quality that communicates the sun’s brightness to potentially colored surfaces. The result, for our Latin authors, is that light is a
brightness wherever it inheres, though what it means to be “bright” differs
in different kinds of bodies. In luminous light-sources, light inheres per
se, e.g., as the brilliance in the surface of the sun. In nonluminous opaque
(determinate) surfaces, it inheres as color. Between the two, light inheres
in air as the “brightness” that enables air to mediate the sun’s causation on
the potentially-colored object. The sun causes the quality of light instantaneously through the entire indeterminate body of air, making air bright.
And the air’s brightness crystallizes into color at the air-body’s determinate “edges,” i.e., in the surfaces of vases and trees and cats, and rocks.
Illuminated air thus plays an important role in the “color-actualizing”
theory of light that our three Latin authors have in common, as the “medium” whereby light-sources actualize colors in our world, and whereby
colors act on other receivers. At the same time, air can function as such a
medium precisely because its indeterminacy prevents it from being visible
in itself. (An assumption that seems to operate in the background is that
luminosity must be determinate, i.e., instantiated in some opaque surface,
in order to be visible, i.e., exercise agency upon sight. Hence, lacking determinate edges of its own, air can be bright or illuminated without being
visible, and hence facilitate the activity of other things on vision.)
Now, this view of light’s presence in air thus reflects none of the Greco-Arabic theories that we have seen—neither Aristotle’s and Averroes’ receiver-disposing view nor Avicenna’s reductive view of air as a conduit
for light. Interestingly, however, our Latin authors once again take both
Aristotle and Avicenna to be on their side, holding that light is a quality
in air. As evidence, they point to Aristotle’s remark (often routed explicitly through Averroes), that light is a “positive state” of bodies (Gk: hexis,
rendered habitus or dispositio in Latin). While not unreasonably construing
Aristotle’s light as a corporeal quality in the air, they apparently take for
granted that this quality is active in causing color, rather than passive in
disposing for color’s action.85 Avicenna is ranged alongside the view, and
even quoted as stating that “light is a quality affecting a diaphanous body.”
(He makes, of course, no such statement.86)
Albert’s Criticisms of Averroes: A Development?
Our Scholastic authors, then, are reproducing a tune that they believe
Avicenna and Averroes—not to mention numerous other authorities—are
singing with one voice. The one off-key note in this harmonious story is
sounded by Averroes’ Long Commentary on the De anima, which unequivocally insists that light plays only a receiver-disposing role in vision because
colors already have visibility in the dark independently of light.87
The only one of our authors who addresses this divergence is Albert.
Indeed, in De homine he dispatches Averroes’ position so vigorously and
How Light Makes Color Visible 201
dismissively that it is perhaps no surprise to find no mention of it at all in
Bonaventure and the early Aquinas. Incidentally, although Thomas Aquinas does not acknowledge the existence of the receiver-disposing account
of light at all in his early works, he must have been aware of it, since his
own doctrine of the lumen gloriae appears to be modeled on precisely a
receiver-disposing notion of light.88 In the mid-1260s, however, in his
Quaestiones disputatae de anima 4, ad 4, he has a change of heart, perhaps
as the result of having read Averroes’ Long Commentary more carefully
in preparing his own commentary on the De anima, and endorses the receiver-disposing view from that point on as the scientifically correct and
authentically Aristotelian view of light.89
In any case, in the 1240s–50s, only Albert, of our three Parisian thinkers, addresses Averroes’ light-theory, focusing on the claim that colors
exist independently of light. Against this claim, Albert marshals three very
interesting and revealing arguments in De homine.
One argument appeals to experience: “When something colored is
placed in the light—its own light or one foreign to it—and the intervening
air is dark beyond the place of contact [between the object and the air], and
the eye is likewise in the dark, the eye nonetheless sees it.” For instance,
someone standing in a dark cave can see the green grass outside the cave
(we saw this example in Avicenna). Albert points out that “in contrast,
when the eye and air are in the light, and the colored object is in the dark,
the eye does not see it.”90 For instance, when standing in a lamplit room,
one cannot see objects in the dark yard outside. While Albert’s main goal
here is to demonstrate empirically that light’s role in vision is to actualize
color, these cases seem to be intended also as counterevidence against the
receiver-disposing view. If so intended, however, they are successful only
in showing that the illumination of air and eye is not sufficient for vision. They do not show that it is unnecessary, since in the first case, one might
plausibly argue that the intervening air is not, in fact, completely dark.
Another argument, targeting Averroes by name, is that a philosophically
indefensible construal of the object of sight results from the claim that colors are per se visible. No one in their right mind, Albert thinks, could deny
that the light inhering in the sun or fire is visible. So if, as Averroes claims,
color is per se visible apart from light, then the power of sight would have
two objects—color and light—in contradiction to the long-held view that
the objects of a single cognitive power must be unified under a single formality according to which they are able to affect that power.91
A third argument of Albert’s, again targeting Averroes by name, is textual, and this argument is perhaps the most interesting of the three. Albert
accuses Averroes of misreading Aristotle’s remark concerning the nature
of color at De anima 418a30–b1: “All color is motive [kineˉtikos] of the diaphanous in actuality [kat’ energeian].”92 In James of Venice’s vetus translatio
of De anima, the phrase is translated into Latin: “Color motivus est secundum
actum lucidi.”93 The Latin translation is correct but ambiguous, and Albert
202 Therese Scarpelli Cory
emphasizes the ambiguity. On the one hand, secundum actum lucidi might be taken as a complete prepositional phrase modifying the verb motivus est, giving the sentence the following sense (which Albert endorses as the
correct interpretation): “Color has its power to move in virtue of the act
of the diaphanous.” Since Aristotle identifies light as the “act of the diaphanous,” Albert concludes that this sentence expresses a commitment
to the color-actualizing theory of light, whereby color has its “being and
species” in virtue of light (through contact with the illuminated air).94
Of course, on this reading, the sentence is left without a direct object: of
what is color motive? But Albert is happy to supply one conducive to his
interpretation, making Aristotle say that “color is motive of sight [motivum visus] in virtue of the act of the diaphanous.”95
Averroes, however (says Albert), incorrectly divided up and mismatched
the modifiers in the sentence. This alternate reading treats secundum actum
as a technical phrase, designating “actual” as opposed to “potential” possession of a form,96 and makes it modify lucidi, which is, in turn, read as the
object of motivum est. On this reading, then, the sentence identifies “what
is actually diaphanous” as the object of color’s motive power, consistent
with the receiver-disposing view: “Color [in and of in itself] is motive of
what is actually diaphanous.”97
Here in De homine, Albert singles out for criticism Averroes’ thesis about
the nature of color, namely, that color is visible (motive of sight) even in
the dark. Albert does not directly address the companion thesis that light
disposes the receiver. Perhaps he thinks that light in the air cannot both
actively induce color and dispose the air to receive color’s action.
Interestingly, however, roughly twelve to fifteen years later, in his commentary on the De anima, Albert seems to allow for just such a possibility.
After laying out arguments from Avicenna, Avempace, and Aristotle’s De
sensu in support of light’s color-actualizing role and arguments from Alexander of Aphrodisias and Averroes in support of a receiver-disposing
role, Albert concedes cautiously that “as far as we can understand, we
ought to judge that both views are true in some respect.”98 The truth of
the color-actualizing view consists in the claim that light adds the formal
being of color to the color-matter of bodies (as we saw him argue in De
homine).99 With respect to light’s receiver-disposing role, he concedes that
“if the medium is totally dark, then color is not seen; indeed, it is necessary
that [the medium] be illuminated next to color at least enough for [color]
to generate its intention [intentio] in the medium.” The reason, he suggests,
is that color is a “light bound to matter.” Hence, it can act on air only if air
is “disposed” by light “to receive the likeness of color, which is why the
illuminated diaphanous is the proper medium for sight.”100 (Notice that,
consistent with the tendency to think of light’s role as “actuality of the
diaphanous,” in terms of brightness rather than transparency, the obstacle
to the agency of color is formulated in terms of air’s lack of illumination.) In
contrast, luminous bodies, such as the sun, fire, and stars, have a light that
How Light Makes Color Visible 203
is not bound to matter (lumen calcatum et non obligatum materiae), so they can
diffuse their likeness in a darkened medium.
Now Albert seems, here, to be trying to accommodate the receiver-disposing view in such a way as to avoid the difficulty I suggested above,
in which illuminated air both actively causes and is passively disposed to
one and the same color. Although describing light as “disposing” air to
receive color, he conspicuously avoids identifying any obstacle or natural
indisposition in the air that makes it unreceptive to color. Instead, he places
the obstacle in color itself. As a matter-bound and weak luminosity, color
cannot diffuse its similitude (intentio) outside itself unless the receiver is
already illuminated.
How Albert thinks air’s illumination helps color diffuse its likeness—
and hence how close he really is to Averroes—is unclear. One possibility is
that Albert construes the air’s illumination as properly receiver-disposing,
in the sense that since color is also a light, the medium’s illumination
quasi-quantitatively reducing the dissimilarity that a weakly luminous
color must “overcome” in order to induce its likeness in the air (somewhat
like boiling some water in a kettle before adding it to a pot, to reduce the
amount of heating that the stove must contribute). But there is another
more plausible possibility, i.e., that despite the language of disposition,
Albert thinks of illuminated air as placing some active causal role in color’s diffusing of its likeness. Indeed, a few chapters later, he says that color can
only cause sight through a medium by a “formal and spiritual action,”
and indicates that light “abstracts” color, giving it intentional being in the
medium and ultimately in the eye.101 The motivating idea, perhaps, is that
of distinguishing color as it inheres in a body’s surface from color in sight,
where it has “intentional being.” Color in the surface cannot “move sight”
because it lacks the power to generate intentional color; the illuminated medium (inasmuch as light has an unrestricted character there) somehow
provides the necessary causal assistance to “make color move sight.” If this
latter reading is the right one, then Albert would be according illuminated
air two roles: on the one hand, light from the medium mixes with the surface dispositions of the vase, constituting actual green, and, on the other
hand, light remaining in the medium abstracts this newly constituted color
from its material conditions by granting to color the self-diffusive action
that is proper to light in its unrestricted state, but that color-light cannot
have on its own due to its enmattered condition. Thus Albert is able not
only to hold with Avicenna that illuminated air causes green to exist in
the vase’s bodily surface in the first place but also to hold with Averroes that
illuminated air plays a further role in “making color move sight.”
Interestingly, a similar solution attributing color’s impotence to its being a “light bound to body [lux alligata corpori],” and more strongly emphasizing the illuminated air’s role in making it active, occurs in an early De
anima commentary which has been attributed variously to Petrus Hispanus
and recently to Richard Rufus (and in the latter case dated to roughly
204 Therese Scarpelli Cory
1236–37). This earlier work considers the same Latin Aristotelian passage
that Albert’s De homine had found ambiguous: Color est motivum lucidi secundum actum, but construes the interpretive options differently: Aristotle
means either that an illuminated medium enables color to act, or that air must
be disposed by light in order to receive the act of color. The commentator
endorses the former reading:
The need [for an illuminated medium] is not on the part of the receiving air, but on the part of color. For incorporated light is the cause
of color. And because it is a light of this sort, bound to body [alligata
corpori], color cannot make itself outside itself. And therefore it is not
in itself sufficient to move the medium, but needs the presence of light
that is not incorporated in this way. And since the light of this sort
that makes color move the air cannot be in the colored body itself—
otherwise it would be bound and could not free itself—that light must
be contiguous with color in the air outside, where it cannot be bound
or terminated.102
Here there is a clearer resonance with Averroes’ claim that color does
not become a mover (color2, visibility2) except in the presence of illuminated air. And more explicitly than Albert, the commentator rejects
receiver-disposing language, explicitly granting illuminated air an active
role in making color move.103 The notion clearly goes back to Grosseteste,
who writes, e.g., “Color is an embodied light [lux incorporata], which on
account of its embodiment does not move itself toward sight except when
light is poured out upon it.”104
In this way, it turns out that even though Averroes’ receiver-disposing
analysis of light’s role in vision does not “catch on” in the mid-thirteenth-
century Latin tradition, Averroes nonetheless does have some influence—
tellingly, where his remarks seem to align with an existing view in
Grosseteste. We have seen the acknowledgment in at least two sources of
Averroes’ distinction between color in itself (color1, visibility1), and color
as actually moving air and the eye (color2, visibility2). And thus light in the
air thus comes to take on not only the role of generating color in the first
sense (lux incorporata) but also the role of making color be a mover in the
second sense. Hence light becomes part of a discussion of how forms come
to exist in sensible, intentional, or spiritual being, i.e., the being that color has
in vision.
Procrustean, Misinformed, or Just Oblivious?
With all this in mind, we can now consider some interesting features of
the reception of Greco-Arabic theories of light in our three Latin Parisian authors in the 1240s–50s. All three Latin authors unfold a tripartite
hierarchy of brightness. At the top there are the lights per se that are the
How Light Makes Color Visible 205
sun, moon, stars, and fire, then the illumination in the air, and finally the
color-luminosity of opaque sublunary bodies. The top rung of luminous
bodies (e.g., sun or fire) are preeminent lights, in dependence on which
other things have their brightness. A central pillar of their account is the
claim that color is a luminosity or radiance in things that must be actualized
by the sun through the illuminated air as intermediate cause. Light’s role
in vision, then, is (largely) one of color-actualizing.
In developing this tripartite account of the transference of luminosity to
colored surfaces by means of an illuminated body of air, our authors professed themselves to be following both Avicenna and Aristotle. This philosophical unanimity was secured by an Avicennizing reading of Aristotle,
who becomes a straightforward proponent of light’s color-actualizing role
(despite a mistranslation that appeared to commit him to the existence of
colors in the dark!), and an Aristotelianizing reading of Avicenna, who is
said to hold that light exists in the air as a corporeal quality.
Why did they read their sources this way? The case is particularly interesting, I think, because none of the usual explanations offers a fully satisfactory explanation. For instance, it is not unusual for textual ambiguities
or translation errors to prevent the innocent reader from detecting an
authority’s true position. Similarly, it is not unusual for Scholastic authors
to exercise Procrustean pressure upon a text to force it into line with another, preferred position. Again, Katja Krause has also identified patterns
of “dissociated transformation,” in which a concept is detached from its
context and reworked in service of a new theoretical goal, often without
mentioning the source at all.105
In this case, however, none of the usual proposals satisfactorily explain
the evidence. On the one hand, the Latin translations in question are, for
the most part, not corrupted and ambiguous enough to warrant concluding that they could not have communicated the source’s true view to Latin
readers. On the other hand, there are enough ambiguities and errors in
the translated source texts that the case is not a clear-cut instance of deliberate misrepresentation. We saw, for instance, the repeated inversion of
lux and lumen in the Latin Avicenna and the seeming echoes of Aristotle
in describing light’s effecting of actual translucence, as well as Aristotle’s
ambiguities about the relationship of color and visibility in Aristotle, exacerbated in crisis-inducing ways by mistranslations.
I contend that the force primarily at work in this case is one that is
perhaps more often operative in the transmission of ideas than we usually
admit, namely, that of confirmation bias, the ordinary human tendency
to notice those details that fit prior expectations and fail to see those that
do not. Consider a reader who has a strong attachment to a certain philosophical idea P and great respect for the intelligence of the author encountering a set of extremely dense and technical texts. It is not surprising
that formulations that seem to support P, and hence fulfill the reader’s set
of expectations, would stand out and that, conversely, more problematic
206 Therese Scarpelli Cory
formulations simply may not appear as disruptive at all, but are automatically read in a way that preserves expectations. One need not suspect readers of deliberately sweeping counterevidence under the carpet.106 They may well have simply read past the counterevidence, failing to see it at all,
much as one still does today when encountering a difficult new text and
implicitly interpreting it in light of what is already familiar.
The tripartite hierarchy of luminosity that Albert, Bonaventure, and
Aquinas outline could easily have generated precisely such a blindingly
strong attachment. The hierarchy of cascading participants in a first, per se
cause is one that is compellingly familiar from all sorts of other metaphysical contexts. And there was already circulating a strong precedent for just
such a tripartite hierarchy. Hasse has pointed out that earlier Latin theories
of extromissive sight had deployed a similar threefold division with similar names before the psychology of Avicenna, Aristotle, and Averroes was
introduced to Latin European thinkers:
There already existed an indigenous tradition of differentiating between the entities involved in vision, the theory of the tria necessaria:
Calcidius, Macrobius, William of Conches, the Sigtuna commentary
on the Timaeus and other writers discuss the necessary conditions for
vision, usually naming interior light, an illuminated medium and an
illuminated object. This discussion, based on the theory of extramission, already operated with the terms lux, lumen and splendor.107
What Albert, Bonaventure, and the early Aquinas sketch, then, is precisely
the correlate to that older tripartite extromissive hierarchy—but for an intromissive
theory of sight. In an intromissive account, it is crucial for color
to be radiant—a kind of luminosity in its own right—so that it can serve as
an active principle of sight. Strengthening this impulse, prior to the 1240s,
there was already a strong Latin Scholastic tradition of viewing color as a
kind of light. In formulations that were already used as maxims by our Parisian authors, Nicolaus Peripateticus described light as the “hypostasis of
color,”108 and Robert Grosseteste described color as “embodied light.”109
Indeed, although Grosseteste is, of course, not cited by name, his influence
is pervasive on our authors, and clearly provided some of the interpretive
framework that made this account so compelling.110
Internally, too, this tripartite hierarchy of luminosity is extremely compelling. Once one holds (a) that color is an active radiance (as an intromissive theory demands) and that (b) colors do not exist in the dark, then one
is committed to holding that the existence of color depends on something
that is per se visible: the “luminous lights” that are the sun, stars, and fire.
And since none of our authors subscribe to a theory of action at a distance, it would be natural to suppose that luminosity cannot be induced
in potentially colored surfaces, unless it is first present in the body of air
between.
How Light Makes Color Visible 207
My suggestion is that the strange interpretive patterns in our Latin
Scholastic authors illustrate the ways in which confirmation bias can shape
the transmission of philosophical ideas (perhaps, in this case, largely originating in Albert’s irenicizing, eclectic tendencies). On the assumption that
Aristotle and Avicenna are trustworthy authorities, it would have been
easy for a reader to fit their remarks unconsciously to a framework that
already carried its own extrinsic plausibility. The account has such strong
precedents, and such internal cohesion, that one might easily leap to the
conclusion that any serious defender of intromission, especially one who
explicitly defends some parts of the account, holds the entire account. This
expectation, which could almost acquire support from ambiguous formulations in both Avicenna and Aristotle, leads both sources to be read quite
innocently in the 1240s–50s as defenders of the entire account.
There is a further methodological lesson to be learned from this episode:
namely, the extreme variable potential within even the most straightforward formulations as they become maxims passed on from thinker to
thinker. As we saw, even a claim as simple as “light makes colors visible” turns out to be fundamentally ambiguous on multiple levels, open to
theory-altering differences in construing “making,” “color,” and “visibility.” In general, I would suggest interrogating medieval theories of light’s
color-actualizing as follows, in order to avoid being led astray by potential
ambiguities:
• Terminology of “color,” “visibile,” “movens visum”: Is the term “color”
used exclusively for color-as-empowered-to-move-sight, or could it
also refer to the material properties of an unilluminated body, or both?
Similarly, do “visibility” and “sight-moving” refer to the possession of
an active power or to the actual exercise of that power?
• Ontology of light: Is light in the sun, in illuminated air, and in color,
all in the same way? That is, do they have the same “being of light,”
belonging to univocally the same genus, or are the illuminated air and
color merely lesser participations in the sun’s preeminent light?
• The mechanics of color-actualizing: Does light “mix with,” “inform,” or
extrinsically cause color-luminosity in an opaque body’s surface?
• The contribution(s) of light to vision: Is light’s role in actualizing color
sufficient for color to exercise agency on the eye? As we saw, Albert
seems to have thought that the illuminated air plays two roles: one
actualizing color, and another enabling actualized color to exercise
agency on the eye.
Conclusion
As we have seen, the newly translated Avicennian and Aristotelian traditions of natural philosophy offered Latin readers two main ways of accounting for light’s necessity in vision, either as the actualizer of color (which
208 Therese Scarpelli Cory
instantly moves the air once actualized) or as the disposition enabling for
air and the eye to be affected by actual color. It is the color-actualizing theory
that carries the field in the Scholastic thinkers we surveyed during the
1240s–50s, while the receiver-disposing view is treated as an Averroist
idiosyncrasy scarcely worth mentioning.111
Interestingly, this color-actualizing role of light has a strongly metaphysical cast. In discussing it, the authors we examined stress the transference of the corporeal form of luminosity from one body to another, rather than
the optical imagery of rays traveling and reflecting. Luminosity is an active
quality whereby one body acts on a neighboring body, rendering it bright
in whatever mode the recipient body can naturally be bright: the dazzling
sun instantaneously illuminating the whole air, and the illuminated air
instantaneously generating color at its opaque boundaries. And thus color,
too, as a kind of diminished luminosity or “embodied light,” has an active
role in causing sight.
This account gives us a provocative picture of visibility, which is here
not a disposition in the object to be related to sight, but rather an active
causal power that the object exercises on the eye. To be visible is to be
luminous, to press in upon sight. Indeed, luminosity is teleologically coordinated with the eye: it is a luminosity for causing sight. Perhaps the active
character of the visible, together with light’s active role in generating visibility, must be kept in mind in interpreting cases in which light-language
is applied to intellectual cognition, and should make us reconsider what it
means to be “intelligible” and how objects get intelligibility.112
Acknowledgments
I am indebted to the Gerda Henkel Foundation for supporting the initial research for this project at the Universität Würzburg, as well as to
Dag Hasse, Jon McGinnis, Zena Hitz, Katerina Ierodiakonou, and Katja
Krause for helpful discussions of the topic.
Notes 1 The main scholarly works in this area are more focused on optics (the behavior of light) than the nature and causal role of light. See Lindberg, Theories of
Vision; Tachau, Vision and Certitude; and most recently, Smith, From Sight to
Light.
2 A remarkably comprehensive list can be gleaned from the array of arguments
that Albert considers in the article titled “De visu ex parte obiecti et medii,”
in Albertus Magnus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 153–63. 3 Aristotle, De anima 2. 7, 418b9–12, trans. Shields, 36; I have changed the
English “transparent” to “diaphanous” throughout. 4 Aristotle, De anima 2. 7, 418a5–9, trans. Shields, 35–36: “Of this sort [i.e.,
diaphanous] are air, water, and many solids; these are not diaphanous insofar
as they are air or water, but because there is an indwelling nature which is
the same in them both, as well as in the everlasting body above”; and De
How Light Makes Color Visible 209
sensu 5, 439a21–24, trans. Beare, 1:697: “But what we call diaphanous is not
something peculiar to air, or water, or any other of the bodies usually called
diaphanous, but is a common nature and power, capable of no separate existence of its own, but residing in these, and subsisting likewise in all other
bodies in a greater or less degree.” For illuminating discussions of Aristotle’s diaphanous, see Ierodiakonou, “Aristotle and Alexander of Aphrodisias”;
Vasiliu, Du diaphane; Kalderon, Form without Matter, 40–60. 5 Darkness is a privation rather than a contrary quality. See De anima 2. 7,
418b18–20; De sensu et sensato 3, 439a19; and Polansky, Aristotle’s De anima,
271. 6 See De anima 2. 7, 418b14–20, trans. Shields, 36. 7 For the latter view, see Ierodiakonou, “Aristotle and Alexander of
Aphrodisias.” 8 Sorabji, “Aristotle on Color, Light, and Imperceptibles,” 132; see also
Kalderon, Form without Matter, 52–56. Kalderon, “Aristotle on Transparency,” equates brightness and transparency as a disposition of air that enables
color to act on sight “through” it (but not such that anything new is received
in the air when it is illuminated). 9 De anima 2. 7, 418b1, trans. Shields, 35. 10 Ibid., 418b1–2, trans. Shields, 35. For an example, see Sorabji, “Aristotle on
Color, Light, and Imperceptibles,” 129. 11 The answer is not obvious to contemporary Aristotle scholars either. The
case for reading Aristotle as a color-realist seems to me persuasive. See Silverman, “Color and Color-Perception”; Kalderon, Form without Matter, 74–91;
Polansky, Aristotle’s De anima, 263–84; and the treatment of color-agency in
Bynum, “A New Look,” 165–68. For a contrasting view of color in Aristotle
as merely phenomenological (existing only in the seeing eye), see Modrak,
Aristotle, 58. 12 De anima 3. 5, 430a16–19, trans. Shields, 61. 13 In fact, Miles Burnyeat appeals to this passage to show that, for Aristotle,
light is “the condition for the colour itself to be present in actuality.” Burnyeat, “How Much Happens,” 424. 14 De anima 2. 7, 418b1, trans. Shields, 35. 15 Ibid.; I have inserted [a]/[b] for clarity. Some other Aristotle scholars alternatively read the sentence as asserting simply that color is on the surface of
everything that is per se visible (e.g., trans. Smith, 567; trans. Hicks, 77)— a
claim which, however, is still not equivalent to the claim that color is per se
visible. 16 De anima 2. 7, 418b1–2. 17 Lemma of 418b28–30 in Averroes, Commentarium magnum (hereafter LCDA)
2. 66, ed. Crawford, 229: “Quoniam visibile est color, et hoc est visibile per
se. Et est dicere per se non secundum intentionem, sed in eo invenitur causa
in hoc quod est visibile.” Today, the text exists only in its Latin translation. 18 Iacobus Veneticus translator Aristotelis, De anima, ed. Decorte, 418b28–20: “Visibile enim est color. Hoc autem est secundum se visibilium; secundum se
ipsum autem non ratione, sed quoniam in se ipso habet causam esse visibile.”
Moerbeke’s nova translatio revision of the text recovers the missing preposition, but not really in such a way as to make things clearer: “Visibile enim
est color, hoc autem est in eo quod secundum se visibile; secundum se autem
non ratione, set quoniam in se ipso habet causam essendi uisibile.” William
of Moerbeke, De anima, ed. Gauthier, 114. 19 See Shields, “Commentary,” 230. If one agreed with Averroes that Aristotle’s colors are already visible in the dark, then one might think horaton
denotes actual vision-causing, in order to account for statements such as
210 Therese Scarpelli Cory
“nothing is visible without light.” On the other side, Silverman, “Color and
Color-Perception,” 272–73, argues that horaton is something that objects
must be independently of vision, in order for Aristotle to avoid a circular
definition of sensible and sense; see also Kalderon, Form without Matter, 85. 20 De anima 2. 7, 418a28–b3, 419a7–10, trans. Shields, 35–36. See Kelsey,
“Color, Transparency, and Light,” arguing that this must be taken in the
sense of actual moving. 21 De sensu 3, 439a26–27, trans. Beare, 1:697. 22 Ibid., 439b12–13, trans. Beare, 1:698.
23 I here follow the suggestion of Polansky, Aristotle’s De anima, 266, that Aristotle’s accounts of color in De anima and De sensu are not incompatible, but
should be combined for a complete account. 24 De sensu 3, 439b15–16, trans. Beare, 1:698, and see 439a19, 1:697. The view is
that the privation of such element causes blackness in its subject; its presence
without privation causes whiteness, and the mixing of whiteness and blackness produces all the intermediate colors. For an extensive treatment of the
generation of hues in Aristotle, see Kalderon, Form without Matter, 109–36. 25 In support of which one might argue that B’s causal powers should derive
from what B is in itself, not depend on extrinsic factors such as whether B
happens to be located at a surface or not. But Aristotle’s medieval readers
were too impressed by his association of color and surface in De sensu 3 to
take this option seriously. 26 Averroes, LCDA 2. 67, ed. Crawford, 231.14–17, as part of a set of alternatives, describing the one that Averroes thinks is correct: “Ipse opinatur
quod colores existunt in obscuro in actu, et si lux sit necessaria in videndo
colorem, non est nisi secundum quod facit diaffonum in potentia diaffonum
in actu.” 27 Not Option 1, since Averroes also stresses in LCDA 2. 67, ed. Crawford,
234, that color is “ultimum diaffoni terminati,” i.e., the surface of a determinate body’s diaphaneity. 28 In other words, all and only visible things are colored, and the causal dependence runs from color to visibility, i.e., a tree is not colored in virtue of being
visible, but rather visible in virtue of being colored. 29 LCDA 2. 67, ed. Crawford, 232.68–233.92: “Et est manifestum quod,
quando conservaverimus quod dicit Aristoteles in principio istius sermonis
(et posuit ipsum positione quasi manifesta per se), tunc necesse erit ut lux non
sit necessaria in essendo colores moventes diaffonum nisi secundum quod
dat diaffono formam aliquam qua recipit motum a colore, scilicet illuminationem. Aristoteles enim posuit principium quod color est visibilis per se,
et quod simile est dicere colorem visibilem et hominem risibilem, scilicet
de genere propositionis essentialis in qua subiectum est causa predicati, non
predicatum causa subiecti ut cum dicitur: homo est rationalis. Et hoc intendebat cum dixit: sed secundum quod in eo invenitur causa in hoc quod est visibile,
secundum quod exposuimus. Et hoc concesso, manifestum est quod impossibile est dicere quod lux est illud quod largitur colori habitum et formam
qua fit visibilis. Quoniam, si ita esset, tunc comparatio visionis ad colorem
esset accidentalis et secunda, non prima, scilicet mediante isto habitu. Visio
enim manifestum est quod est aliquid posterius visibili, et quod proportio
eius ad colorem non est sicut proportio rationalis ad hominem. Manifestum
est igitur quod proportio eius est sicut proportio risibilis ad hominem; et sic
color, secundum quod est color, est visibilis non mediante alia forma sibi
contingente.” For the English translation of LCDA, I rely on Richard Taylor’s translation, Long Commentary, 182–83, with some modifications of my
own.
How Light Makes Color Visible 211 30 LCDA 2. 67, ed. Crawford, 233.92–234.117 (original emphasis): “Et cum
ita sit, lux non est necessaria in essendo colorem moventem in actu, nisi
secundum quod dat subiecto sibi proprio receptionem motus a se. Et Aristoteles videtur quod non posuit hoc quod posuit nisi intendendo dissolutionem istius questionis. Et secundum hoc intelligendus est sermo eius quod
colores movent visum in obscuro in potentia; lux enim est illud quod facit
eos motivos in actu; unde assimilat lucem intelligentie agenti, et colores
universalibus. Quod enim inducitur secundum exemplum et large non est
simile ei quod inducitur secundum demonstrationem; de exemplo autem
non intenditur nisi manifestatio, non verificatio. Et non potest aliquis dicere
quod color non invenitur in actu nisi luce presente. Color enim est ultimum
diaffoni terminati; lux autem non est ultimum diaffoni terminati, et ideo
necessaria non est in essendo colorem, sed in essendo visibilem, ut determinavimus. Revertamur igitur et dicamus quod, cum declaravit quod color,
secundum quo est visibilis, movet diaffonum in actu, et quod ista est natura
eius propter hoc quod est visibilis per se, et quod impossibile est ut visio sit
sine luce, reversus est ad narrandum illud quod considerandum est de istis
rebus prius. Et dixit: sed necessarium est ut unusquisque color, etc. Idest, sed quia
unusquisque color non est visibilis nisi in luce, dicendum est prius de luce;
lux enim est unum eorum quibus completur visio.” 31 LCDA 3. 36, ed. Crawford, 488.248; Taylor, Long Commentary, 389: “color
non est visibilis nisi per solem.” 32 LCDA 3. 18, ed. Crawford, 439.66–68; Taylor, Long Commentary, 351:
“Quemadmodum enim visus non movetur a coloribus nisi quando fuerint
in actu, quod non completur nisi luce presente, cum ipsa sit extrahens eos
de potentia in actum.” See also LCDA 3. 5 (Crawford, 401.402–8): “Quemadmodum enim subiectum visus movens ipsum, quod est color, non movet
ipsum nisi quando per presentiam lucis efficitur color in actu postquam erat
in potentia, ita intentiones ymaginate non movent intellectum materialem
nisi quando efficiuntur intellecte in actu postquam erant in potentia.” 33 LCDA 3. 36, ed. Crawford, 499.565–66: “Et simile huic est diaffonum,
quod recipit colorem et lucem insimul; et lux est efficiens colorum.” 34 LCDA 2. 67, ed. Crawford, 233.98–234.105: “Lux enim est illud quod facit
eos motivos in actu; unde assimilat lucem intelligentie agenti et colores universalibus. Quod enim inducitur secundum exemplum et large non est simile
ei quod inducitur secundum demonstrationem; de exemplo autem non intenditur nisi manifestatio, non verificatio. Et non potest aliquis dicere quod
color non invenitur in actu nisi luce presente.” 35 Since we are concerned here with the Avicenna that was read in Latin translation in the thirteenth century (the so-called “Avicenna Latinus”), I here
present the doctrine of light and color as it stands in the Latin translation
of the Kitaˉb al-Nafs, i.e., the Liber de anima seu sextus De naturalibus, ed. Van
Riet (hereafter LdA). The view is nicely summarized in LdA 3. 3, ed. Van
Riet, 1:194.49–59: “Iam ergo cognovimus dispositionem lucis et dispositionem luminis et dispositionem coloris et dispositionem translucentis. Lux
enim est qualitas quae ex sua essentia est perfectio translucentis secundum
quod est translucens, et est etiam aliqua qualitas in eo quod est visibile ex sua
essentia et non per aliud, et sine dubio visibile ex sua essentia prohibet videri
id quod est post ipsum. Lumen vero est qualitas quam mutuat corpus non
translucens a lucido, et translucens efficitur per eam translucens in effectu.
Color autem est qualitas quae perficitur ex luce, et solet ponere corpus prohibens affectionem lucentis ab eo inter quod et lucens fuerit ipsum medium.
Ergo corpora sunt lucida et colorata et pervia.” The Arabic text is published
in Avicenna, Avicenna’s De anima, ed. Rahman. For studies of Avicenna
212 Therese Scarpelli Cory
on physical light, see Gätje, “Zur Farbenlehre”; Hasse, Avicenna’s De anima,
107–27, which addresses also the Latin medieval reception of this doctrine;
and McGinnis, “New Light on Avicenna.” A useful treatment of an earlier
Islamic attempt to deal with Greek light and color theories appears in Adamson, “Vision, Light and Color,” esp. 225–36. Lindberg, Theories of Vision, 49,
misleadingly characterizes Avicenna as subscribing to an Aristotelian view,
which is also ambiguously characterized: it is true in the most general sense
that both thinkers hold that color acts on the eye through the medium (they
are both intromissivists), but it is not at all clear that they agree in other
respects. 36 McGinnis, “New Light on Avicenna,” 45–46. 37 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:170.11–13: “[Lux] est qualitas quam apprehendit
visus in sole et igne, ita ut non discernatur esse albedo vel nigredo vel rubor
aut aliquis aliorum”; 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:194.52–53: “[Lux] est aliqua qualitas in eo quod est visibile ex sua essentia et non per aliud”; 3. 1, ed. Van Riet,
1:171.23–24: “Hoc autem quod vocamus lucem, sicut id quod habet sol et
luna, est id quod videtur per seipsum.” 38 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:170–71.13–15: “[Lumen] est id quod resplendet ex
his, scilicet splendor qui videtur cadere super corpora et detegitur in eis albedo aut nigredo aut viriditas.” In 3. 2 (1.177–83), he extensively refutes the
view that radiant light consists in a stream of minuscule particles detached
from luminous bodies and traveling through the air; Van Riet suggests that
he has Democritus in mind. 39 Hasse, Avicenna’s De anima, 114–19, tracing the mistake to “a story of misleading translations, of a partially corrupt textual transmission, of careless
citation, and of the readers’ tendency to conflate Aristotle or Grosseteste
with Avicenna” (117). I would add that the usage patterns of lux and lumen
throughout LdA 3. 2–4 strongly (though not without exception) associate
lux with opaque bodies—whether these are innately luminous, such as the
sun, or merely colored—and lumen with “the transparent.” So it would be
interesting to investigate whether the mistaken interpretation may have preceded the translation, causing the translators to attempt (incorrectly) to reg-
ularize the terminology in service of that interpretation. Note that Hasse is
here overturning an earlier interpretation (e.g., Lindberg’s) on which Avicenna accepts Aristotle’s theory of light and color. 40 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:173.48–174.64: “Nec est [paries] ex seipso lucens,
qui est corpus coloratum in potentia; color enim in effectu non accidit nisi
ex causa luminis. Lumen enim cum illustrat aliquod corpus, accidit in eo
albedo in effectu aut nigredo aut viriditas et cetera huiusmodi; si vero non
illustrat, est nigrum tantum fuscum, sed in potentia est coloratum, si voluerimus dicere colorem in effectu hoc quod est albedo aut nigredo aut rubor aut
pallor aut his similis. Non putes autem quod albedo quae non est hoc modo
ut eam videamus aut rubedo aut cetera huiusmodi, habeat esse in corporibus
in effectu, unde cum aer obscurus prohibet nos a videndo, ipse aer non est
obscuratus: non est enim obscuratum nisi quod erat illuminatum; aer autem
quamvis non est in eo aliquid lucidum, tamen non prohibet apprehendi luminatum nec obtegit colorem qui est in effectu in aliquo.” The last sentence
is a rejection of Aristotle’s receiver-disposing role for light (see above). See
also 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:175.86–176.89: “Si autem homo appellat colores
aptitudines diversas quae sunt in corporibus quae, cum illuminantur, una
earum est albedo et alia rubedo, hoc potest esse, sed fiet propter aequivocationem nominis: albedo etenim certissime non est nisi cuius est proprium
videri.”
How Light Makes Color Visible 213 41 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:188.61–66, and 3. 4, against identifying light with
the color white. 42 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:188.66–189.73.: “Si autem lux non fuerit solummodo albedo, sed omnis color, tunc aliquid quod est lux erit contrarium alii
quod est lux; sed luci non est opposita nisi tenebra; ergo illud est impossibile. Item intentio qua nigrum est lucidum, est praeter nigredinem eius sine
dubio, et ob hoc etiam est praeter albedinem. Color autem, scilicet natura
generis eius quod est in nigredine, est nigredo, et color quie st in albedine,
est ipsa albedo, non accidens illi. Ergo color absolutus generalis non est ipsa
lux.” 43 See LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:186.39–187.46. 44 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:192.26–32: “Dicemus igitur quod lux est pars compositionis huius visibilis quod vocamus colorem et est quiddam quod, cum
admixtum fuerit colori qui est in potentia, ex utroque proveniet id quod est
color in effectu propter commiscibilitatem; si autem non fuerit haec aptitudo, erit lumen et splendor per se tantum; lux enim est sicut pars eius quod
est color et commixtio eius, sicut albedo et nigredo habent commixtiones ex
quibus accidunt alii colores medii.” 45 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:194.56–57: “Color autem est qualitas quae perficitur ex luce.” 46 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:172.43–173.45: “Et quiddam eorum [corporum,
viz. coloratum] est quod eget ut sit ibi aliud quod faciat illud esse alicuius
proprietatis, et hoc est coloratum.” 47 LdA 3. 4, ed. Van Riet, 1:212.23–25: “Ergo colores habent esse, et non est
esse eorum ex hoc quod sunt lux, nec lux est apparentia eorum, quamvis id
quod sunt in effectu, non sunt sine luce.” 48 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:176, quoted in note 40 above. 49 See LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:175.78–79. 50 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:194.52–53, quoted in note 37 above. 51 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:175.78–79: “Lumen enim visibile est, et id in quo
est lumen est visibile.” 52 This likeness may, but need not be, of the same “genus” or exist in the same
way and under the same conditions as the form in the visible object. See LdA
3. 7, ed. Van Riet, 1:262–63: “Modus autem ad quem accedimus, hic est scilicet quod non oportet ut omne imprimens imprimat in aliud similitudinem
sui, quia, sicut est possibile imprimere in aliud similitudinem sui, sic etiam
est possibile ut non imprimat in aliud similitudinem sui; possibile est autem
ut lucens imprimat aeri aliquam impressionem quae non est ex hoc quod
formetur forma simili formae lucentis et illuminati, sed ut imprimat aeri tale
quid quod non apprehenditur sensu visibili nec ullo aliorum sensuum [and
he then goes on to describe at length how the same is true of a mirror]”;
and the comparison drawn to intellectual understanding later in 5. 5, ed.
Van Riet, 2:128.: “Cum autem accidit animae rationali comparari ad hanc
formam nudam mediante luce intelligentiae agentis, contingit in anima ex
forma quiddam quod secundum aliquid est sui generis, et secundum aliud
non est sui generis, sicut cum lux cadit super colorata, et fit in visu ex illa
operatio quae non est similis ei ex omni parte. [. . .] immo sicut operatio quae
apparet ex formis sensibilibus, mediante luce, non est ipsae formae sed aliud
quod habet comparationem ad illas, quod fit mediante luce in receptibili
recte opposito.” 53 LdA 3. 7, ed. Van Riet, 1:261.13–18: “[D]icemus ergo quod corpus lucens
ex seipso et illuminatum coloratum solet agere in corpus sibi oppositum,
cum fuerit receptibile simulacri sicut visus est receptibilis, et fuerit inter ea
214 Therese Scarpelli Cory
corpus quod non habet colorem, actionem quae est forma qualis eius forma,
ita ut nihil agat in id quod est medium, quia est non receptibile eo quod est
translucens”; and 3.6, ed. Van Riet, 1:246.77–79: “Illuminatum solet reddere
formam suam sibi opposito, nisi fuerit inter ea aliquid interpositum quod
est coloratum, sed si medium fuerit translucens.” Avicenna occasionally also
describes color’s transmission of its likeness as the “dislodging” of the likeness from a colored surface that is “struck” by light; see 3. 7, ed. Van Riet,
1:254.100–9: “Sunt enim quaedam rerum quae non patiuntur nisi offendendo et sunt quaedam quae, cum offenderint, discedit ab eis aliquid quod est
necessarium ad hoc ut afficiat eorum affectio. Et hoc est in hoc loco radius,
quem necesse est continuari cum forma visibili ad hoc ut habens formam
iactet ex sua forma simulacrum in aliud, quod est similitudo eius quod videtur iactare suum simulacrum debile, cum intenditur super illud lux, ita ut
inficiat suo colore id quod est illi oppositum et transferat in illud certissime,
cum id quod est ei oppositum fuerit receptibile huius.” Compare Albert’s
remarks about the abstraction of color by light, discussed later in the present
essay. 54 LdA 3. 7, ed. Van Riet, 1:264.62–66: “Contingit autem videre reverberari a
speculo formam et colorem in pariete, tamquam sita sint in pariete, quae non
moventur secundum situm videntis nec suet sita aliquo modo in speculo, sed
sciuntur venire a speculo ad parietem; quae, etsi videantur in speculo, non
tamen videntur sita in eo.” 55 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:172.28–32: “[. . .] sed eget ut id quod vocamus lumen prius illustraverit illud ad hoc ut appareat tunc, et hoc lumen erit in eo
affectio corporis habentis lucem, cum oppositum fuerit illi et fuerit inter ea
corpus quod non solet obtegere affectionem lucidi et receptibilis lumen, sicut
aer et aqua, quae adiuvant et non impediunt.” 56 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:192.23–25: “Nos enim, quamvis dicimus quod lux
non est manifestatio coloris, non negamus tamen lucem esse causam manifestandi colorem et causam resultandi in alio.” 57 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:173.55–57: “Non enim albedo est albedo nec
rubedo est rubedo, nisi secundum hoc quod videmus; non autem fit hoc ut
videamus, nisi fuerit illustratum.” 58 See the text quoted in note 40. 59 See McGinnis, Avicenna, 106–7, 110, 135 (drawing an analogy between the
generation of actual color in the eye, and the generation of intelligibles in the
material intellect). 60 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:171.24–172.32 and again 176.91–177.2; 3.3, ed. Van
Riet, 1:194.56–58. 61 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:192.23–25. 62 LdA 3. 7, ed. Van Riet, 1:261.13–18: “[D]icemus ergo quod corpus lucens
ex seipso et illuminatum coloratum solet agere in corpus sibi oppositum,
cum fuerit receptibile simulacri sicut visus est receptibilis, et fuerit inter ea
corpus quod non habet colorem, actionem quae est forma qualis eius forma,
ita ut nihil agat in id quod est medium, quia est non receptibile eo quod est
translucens”; 3. 1 (171.24–172.32): “Corpus enim quod gerit hanc qualitatem
[viz., lux], cum fuerit inter ipsum et visum aliquid sicut aer aut aqua, videbitur necessario, ita ut non egeat, sicut eget id cui non sufficit ad hoc ut sit esse
eius visibile sicut est, esse aerem aut aquam aut similia eorum inter ipsum et
visum, sed eget ut id quod vocamus lumen prius illustraverit illud ad hoc ut
appareat tunc, et hoc lumen erit in eo affectio corporis habentis lucem, cum
oppositum fuerit et fuerit inter ea corpus quod non solet tegere affectionem
lucidi et receptibilis lumen [here instead of “et receptibilis lumen,” the Arabic has the equivalent of “in receptibili luminis”], sicut aer et aqua, quae
How Light Makes Color Visible 215
adiuvant et non impediunt.” As I understand it, the latter part of the sentence
characterizes translucent bodies as “not blocking the shining body’s effect in
the opaque body that is receptive to radiant light.” 63 LdA 3. 3, ed. Van Riet, 1:194.49–59, cited in note 35 above. 64 See the discussion in note 39 above. 65 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:176.91–177.102: “Pervium autem aliquando est
pervium in effectu, aliquando in potentia. Sed ad hoc ut sit in potentia pervium, non est necesse ipsum permutari in se, sed permutari in aliud et moveri in aliud, et hoc est commeabile et pervium; ad hoc autem ut sit in effectu,
non eget in se aliquo, sed ad existendum commeatorem et perviatorem in effectu. Permutatio vero qua eget pervium in potentia ad hoc ut sit pervium in
effectu, est permutatio corporis colorati ad hoc ut illuminetur et ut color eius
habeatur in effectu; motus vero est ut corpus lucidum moveatur ad illud sine
permutatione illius (iam autem in praemissis cognovisti certitudinem huius).
Cum autem acquiritur unum istorum, redditur visibile et fit hoc pervium in
effectu propter esse alterius ab ipso.” See also the remark that light “nihil agat
in id quod est medium, quia est non receptibile eo quod est translucens,” in
3. 7, note 62 above. 66 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:174.60–72: “Cum aer obscurus prohibet nos a
videndo, ipse aer non est obscuratus: non est enim obscuratum nisi quod
erat illuminatum; aer autem quamvis non est in eo aliquid lucidum, tamen
non prohibet apprehendi luminatum nec obtegit colorem qui est in effectu
in aliquo. [. . .] Ergo obscuritas non est nisi dispositio nihil videndi, scilicet
quia qualitates quae sunt in corporibus non translucentibus nondum sunt
illuminatae, sed sunt tenebrosae, in potentia autem visibiles, sed non videntur nec videtur aer.” Avicenna appeals to empirical evidence: Someone in a
dark cave (the Latin has instead “deep water,” which renders the example
unintelligible, though Albert seems to have understood it nonetheless) cannot see anything that is inside the cave, yet she can see colored objects in the
illuminated air outside the cave. If her inability to see objects in the cave
were due to the obscuring quality of “darkness” clogging up the air inside
the cave, then that darkness should also block her from seeing objects in the
illuminated air outside the cave. Albert refers to this case in De homine, ed.
Anzulewicz and Söder, 158.5–19. 67 The works discussed here, in chronological order, are: Albert’s De homine
(1241–42, also known as Part II of the Summa de creaturis), where he comprehensively reviews every theory of light that was known to him and attempts
to synthesize all the intromissive theories into a single account; Albert’s Sentences
commentary (1243–49); Bonaventure’s Sentences commentary (written
1250–52 and revised 1254–57); Aquinas’ Sentences commentary (1252–56); and Albert’s De anima commentary (written between 1254 and 1257). Remarkably little has been written about their theories of light, color, and visibility (scholarly interest has tended to focus on Grosseteste; see below), but
see Hedwig, Sphaera lucis; Panti, “I sensi nella luce dell’anima.” For very
thorough considerations of Aquinas’ use of light imagery throughout his
corpus, see Whidden, Christ the Light, focusing on Aquinas’ revised doctrine
after the mid-1260s; Kieninger, Das Sein als Licht, which unfortunately does
not attend to the mid-1260s doctrinal development (see 32); and LaZella, “As
Light Belongs to Air.” See also Long and Noone, “Fishacre and Rufus.” 68 See Albertus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 160.41–44: “Unde et
ille habitus [viz., lumen] communis est organo et medio et obiecto visus;
oculus enim habet aliquod lumen innatum, et lumen est actus diaphani, ut
dicit Philosophus, et actus coloris, per quem movet visum”; Aquinas, Sent.
2. 13. 1. 3, ad 10, ed. Mandonnet, 2:337: “[S]icut dicit Dionysius, lumen
216 Therese Scarpelli Cory
solis recipitur in diversis corporibus diversimode secundum diversam capacitatem eorum; et ideo aliqua sunt quae illuminantur in superficie tantum, ut
corpora opaca; aliqua vero sunt quae illuminantur etiam in profundo, sicut
diaphana, quae tamen lucem non retinent, quia imperfecte lumen recipiunt,
unde oportet quod lumen in eis cesset absente illuminante.” 69 De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 161.41–50: “[N]otandum quod duplex
est esse coloris, scilicet materiale et formale. Dico autem materiale quod habet in materia in qua est, non quod sit ex materia aliqua. Materia autem eius
in qua est, est corpus determinatum, idest non pervium, et hoc esse materiale
habet color a qualitatibus primis activis et passivis, scilicet calido, frigido,
humido et sicco. Esse autem formale coloris est esse coloris, quo est actui in
potentia activa immutandi visum secundum actum, et hoc esse color habet a
luce.” 70 De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 166.82–167.15: “De secunda vero
diffinitione dicendum quod sic intelligitur quod perspicui extremitas’ dicitur ultimum perspicui tangens rem coloratam, et in actu luminis immiscens se sua superficiei, et per hoc conferens esse formale colori. Et propter
hoc, quando dicitur quod ‘color est extremitas perspicui,’ non intelligitur
de quocumque perspicuo, sed de perspicuo, quod est secundum actum per
lumen, quod est in ipso; nec intelligitur de quacumque parte perspicui, sed
de illa parte, quae immiscet se superficiei rei coloratae. Et hoc est quod adiungit: ‘perspicui extremitas in corpore determinato,’ innuens quod lumen
perspicui immixtum debet esse colori existenti in superficie corporis determinati. Color enim semper est in superficie, et ideo Pythagorici vocaverunt
eum epiphanem, hoc est superapparentem. Nec etiam intelligitur diffinitio
de quocumque esse coloris, sed de illo esse secundum quod color alterat sensum, non secundum quod alterat corpora.” 71 De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 166.43–52: “Dicamus igitur quod est
considerare colorem secundum relationem ad primas qualitates, quae causant
ipsum in corpore determinato. Et hoc est esse ipsius quod habet in materia,
hoc est in corpore determinato; et sic color bene est in tenebris, et sic non
diffinitur in aliqua dictarum diffinitionum, quia sic non infert passionem in
potentia visiva. Est etiam considerare colorem secundum relationem ad agens
illud quod dat ei esse formale, quo possit immutare visum et medium visus.
Et sic color habet esse in lumine et non in tenebris, et sic diffinitur in supra
dictis diffinitionibus.” 72 Bonaventure, Sent. 2. 13. 2. 2, ad 1, ed. Quaracchi, 2:321: “Lux non dicitur
esse de compositione coloris tanquam principium intrinsecum, sed tanquam
principium effectivum, cum accidentia simplicia sint; forma autem substantialis bene potest esse principium effectivum accidentis.” 73 Bonaventure, Sent. 2. 27. 1. 2, ed. Quaracchi, 2:657–58: “Et ideo est tertius
modus dicendi, quod quemadmodum, cum dico lumen et colorem illuminatum,
dico aliam et aliam formam, licet una sit ordinata ad aliam, et quodam modo
altera compleatur ex alterius praesentia; similiter intelligendum est de gratia
et virtute gratuita. Quemadmodum enim ‘color qualitas est corporis terminati,’ quae a praesentia luminis influxi venustatur et completur, ut possit
movere visum; sic virtus, quae est habilitatio potentiae, absque gratia gratum
faciente informis est, sicut color sine lumine; sed ea adveniente, ex qua tota
anima in se et in suis potentiis decoratur, formari et vivificari dicuntur habitus
virtutum et effici Deo accepti. Et quemadmodum ex lumine infuso et colore
non fit unum per essentiam, sed per ordinem; et iterum, lumen, in quantum illuminat aërem coniunctum corpori terminato, et in quantum colorem reddit
luminosum, non est aliud et aliud per essentiam, sed sola comparatione differens
et secundum esse; et sicut unum lumen diversos colores ad actum reducere
How Light Makes Color Visible 217
sine sui multiplicatione: sic in influentia gratiae et habitu virtutis intelligendum est esse, scilicet quod gratia superveniens cum habitu virtutis, quem
formare dicitur, non facit unum per essentiam, sed ideo format, quia ad finem suum ordinat.”
74 Aquinas, Sent. 2. 26. 1. 4, ed. Mandonnet, 2:677: “Quia cum dicitur, quod
ex lumine et colore efficitur unum, aut accipitur lumen quod est de compositione coloris, cum hypostasis coloris sit lux.” 75 Aquinas, Sent. 1. 17. 1. 1, ed. Mandonnet, 1:394: “Ad cujus explanationem,
quidam dixerunt, quod sicut lux dupliciter potest considerari, vel prout est
in se, et sic dicitur lux; vel prout est in extremitate diaphani terminati, et sic
lux dicitur color (quia hypostasis coloris est lux, et color nihil aliud est quam
lux incorporata).” 76 Aquinas, Sent. 3. 23. 2. 1, ad 1, ed. Mandonnet, 3:719–20: “[S]icut enim substantia est fundamentum et basis omnium aliorum entium, ita fides est fundamentum totius spiritualis aedificii. Et per hunc modum dicitur etiam quod
lux est hypostasis coloris, quia in natura lucis omnes colores fundantur.” 77 Aquinas, Sent. 2. 27. 1. 2, ad 1, ed. Mandonnet, 2:699: “Forma enim specialis
quae informat subjectum aliquod, non informatur alia forma ejusdem rationis; sicut color non informatur colore, sed forte luce; unde non potest dici
color coloratus, sed forte clarus; et similiter nec albedo colorata. Contingit
autem quod illud quod est perfectio unius secundum unam rationem, sit perfectum ab alio secundum rationem aliam; sicut lux perficit colorem, et color
perficit superficiem, et superficies corpus, cujus terminus est”; and 3. 24. 1.
1. 1, ed. Mandonnet, 3:762: “Formale in [obiecto viso] est lumen, quod facit
colorem visibilem actu; materiale vero ipse color, qui est potentia visibilis”;
De veritate 23. 7, ed. Leonina, 671.190–92: “In obiecto visus color est quasi
materiale, lux vero quasi formale, quia per eam efficitur color visibilis in
actu.” 78 See Albertus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 166.61–63, glossing Aristotle: “Actus enim lucidi lumen est, et hoc nequaquam diceret esse coloris
naturam, nisi aliquo modo daret ei esse et speciem.” 79 Bonaventure, Sent. 2. 27. 1. 2, ed. Quaracchi, 2:657–58, cited in note 73
above. 80 At the beginning of his treatment of the nature of color in De homine, Albert
cites three definitions which he first problematizes individually and then
harmonizes so that they amount to the same thing: Aristotle’s De anima 2
claim that “Color est motivum secundum actum lucidi, et hoc est ipsius
natura,” his De sensu 3 claim that “Color utique erit perspicui extremitas in
determinato corpore, et ipsorum perspicuorum,” and Avicenna’s Liber de anima
3 claim that “Color est qualitas, quae perficitur ex luce” (ed. Anzulewicz
and Söder, 164.75–165.6). 81 See Ierodiakonou, “Aristotle and Alexander of Aphrodisias” (I am grateful
to her for sharing a preprint version); she points particularly to De sensu
439b14–18 and 442a25–26. 82 See note 93 below. 83 LdA 3. 1, ed. Van Riet, 1:176.91–99, and 3.2, 1:178.22–23. 84 Albertus Magnus, De anima 2. 3. 8, ed. Stroick, 110.30–34: “Dicimus igitur,
quod id quod est lucidum, est aliquid; corpus enim est et corpus transparens
sive pervium, quod Graeci diaphanum vocant; et hoc diaphanum est visibile,
quando est actu lucidum. Videmus enim lumen non secundum se, sed in aliquo subiecto, et hoc est diaphanum; diaphanum enim secundum se non est visibile,
eo quod nullum habeat colorem; et quia nullum habet, ideo omnes potest
recipere, et sic medium potest esse in visu.” See also Aquinas, Sent. 2. 13. 1.
3, ad 9, ed. Mandonnet 2:336: “[S]uccessio quae est in alteratione aliarum
218 Therese Scarpelli Cory
qualitatum, contingit ex hoc quod in patiente est qualitas contraria, quae
resistit actioni alterantis, quam oportet successive expelli. Sed cum lux non
habeat contrarium, sicut nec forma substantialis, diaphanum ad praesentiam
illuminantis statim lumen recipit”; De veritate 8. 6, ed. Leonina, 238.143–46:
“Nihil prohibit esse aliquid actu unum et in potentia alterum, sicut corpus
diaphanum est actu quidem corpus, sed potentia tantum coloratum.” 85 In De homine, addressing the question of “whether light, which descends
from luminous bodies, is a substance or an accident,” Albert recapitulates
five groups of theories, and allies himself with the fifth: “Sunt autem alii
iterum dicentes quod lumen sit accidens, innitentes verbo Philosophi, qui
dicit in secundo De anima capitulo de visu: ‘Lumen neque ignis est neque
omnino corpus neque defluxus corporis ullius; esset enim aliquod corpus,
et sic aut ignis aut alicuius huiusmodi praesentia in lucido. Neque enim duo
corpora possibile est esse in eodem. Videtur autem tenebrae contrarium esse;
est autem tenebra privatio huiusmodi habitus ex lucido’. Et super illud dicit
Averroes: ‘Ex hoc’ patet quod ‘lux est habitus diaphani,’ et ‘quod colores non
acquirunt habitum ex luce.’ Hoc etiam videntur dicere omnes philosophi
naturales” (ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 160.2–14). Subsequently, treating the
same problem in Commentarii in II Sententiarum 2. 13. C. 2, ed. Borgnet, 246,
Albert refers the reader with evident pride back to De homine (“our treatise
on the soul”—see the introduction of De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder),
where he had “labored greatly” to find a comprehensive reconciliation for
nearly everything that his authorities say about light. 86 In Albertus, De homine (ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 156.28–29), an argument
reads: “Item, Avicenna: ‘Lux est qualitas, quae est perfectio translucentis secundum quod est translucens’”; Aquinas, Sent. 2. 13. 1. 3, arg 2 s.c., ed. Mandonnet, 2:332: “Item, Avicenna dicit, quod lux est qualitas corporis lucidi
inquantum hujusmodi, et quod lumen est qualitas quam mutuatur corpus
diaphanum a corpore lucido.” Hasse, Avicenna’s De anima, 114–19 (see note
39 above), points out that is a common error among early Scholastic readers
of Avicenna, with the exception of Albert. (In reality, the phrase in Avicenna
Latinus is that light is a quality of opaque bodies; see the texts in note 37 above.
As Hasse argues, Avicenna’s term nuˉr [lumen] refers to the luminosity of a colored
object, not a quality in the air.) In examining the Albertist texts he cites, however, I am skeptical that Albert can be exonerated from this misinterpreting
trend; see De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 160.2–14, where Albert
even says that “all natural philosophers” agree with Aristotle and Averroes
on the status of light as a corporeal habit of the diaphanous. 87 Recall that a mistranslation has Aristotle saying that “color is per se visible.” 88 See, e.g., Aquinas, Sent. 4. 49. 2. 6 and Summa contra gentiles 3. 53. I thank
Katja Krause for pointing this out. 89 See, e.g, Aquinas, Summa theologiae 1a. 79. 3, ad 2, and for extensive presentation of his new position, Whidden, Christ the Light, 47–67. 90 Albertus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 161.57–63: “Et hoc patet ex
hoc quod solum coloratum existens vel positum in lumine proprio vel alieno, et
aëre medio tenebroso existente (praeterquam in loco contactus), similiter
et oculo existente in tenebris, accidit videre. Oculo vero existente in lumine
et aëre et colorato in tenebris posito non contingit videre.” See also arg. sed
contra 6 in the same article (158.5–10). 91 Albertus, De homine, ad 13–14, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 168.20–43:
“Quod autem obicit Averroes quod ‘color est per se visibile,’ ut dicit Aristoteles, et sic non est visibilis per actum lucidi, dicendum quod hoc non
sequitur. Cum enim dicit Aristoteles quod ‘color per se visibile est,’ intelligitur de colore secundum esse suum, quod habet ab illo activo, quod agit in
How Light Makes Color Visible 219
visum; hoc autem est lumen. Cuius demonstratio est quod si lumen separatum est ab esse huius visibilis, quod est color, tunc erunt duo visibilia, quae
non reducuntur in genus unum; et hoc est contra hoc quod dicit Aristoteles,
quod ‘omnis sensus est unius contrarietatis’ praeter tactum, quae contrarietas
est in uno genere. Si vero diceretur quod lumen non esset visibile, hoc est
contra sensum. Cum enim lumen sit qualitas sive forma rei lucentis, ut dicit
Philosophus, patet quod nos illam percipimus in tenebris. Si forte diceretur
quod utrumque quidem est visibile, sed unum per alterum, aut ergo lumen
videtur per colorem, aut color per lumen. Si primo modo, tunc color erit lumini causa visibilitatis, et sic nullum lucens videbitur nisi sibi adveniat color,
qui faciat lumen eius in actu, quod expresse falsum est et contra sensum.
Si vero secundo modo, tunc habebitur propositum, scilicet quod lumen est
colori causa visibilitatis, sicut dicunt Avempece et Avicenna et Alfarabius.”
(Confusingly, earlier in the same article Albert denies that light is visible
[160:39], but there he means the light in air or color.) Presumably, Averroes
could circumvent the objection, however, by claiming luminous bodies are
visible only in virtue of having a color, as he explicitly states in the case of
fire. See Averroes, LCDA 2. 74, ed. Crawford, 244.62–64: “Idest, et ignis
videtur in obscuro et luce ambobus quia congregatum est in eo utrunque,
scilicet quia facit medium diaffonum in actu secundum quod est lucidus, et
movet ipsum secundum quod est color in corpore.” 92 Aristotle, De anima 2. 7, 418a30–b1. 93 Iacobus Veneticus translator Aristotelis, De anima, ed. Decorte. 94 See the discussion in De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 166.54–63, and
the parsing of the grammar of De anima 418a30–b1 in note 97 below. 95 De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 161.50–52. 96 Equivalent to the technical sense of kat’ energeian in Aristotle’s original
Greek. 97 See De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 168:1–19: “(12) Ad id quod obicitur de Averroe super librum De anima dicente quod colores simpliciter sunt in tenebris, dicendum quod ipse erravit deceptus per fallaciam divisionis. Haec enim est duplex: ‘Color est motivum secundum actum lucidi,’ ex eo quod haec determinatio ‘secundum actum lucidi’ in toto potest esse determinatio eius quod dico ‘est motivum’; et sic vera est, et sic explanatur ab Avicenna et ab Avempece, et sic concordat cum sequenti verbo, quod dicit: ‘et hoc est ipsius natura,’ et corcordat cum diffinitione posita in libro De sensu et sensato, quae est quod ‘color est extremitas perspicui in corpore determinato’. Si autem determinatio dividatur in se, et dividatur etiam a verbo ‘est,’ quod praecedit, ut sit sensus: ‘Color est motivum secundum se et secundum actum lucidi,’ hoc est lucidi existentis secundum actum, ut scilicet hoc ipsum quod dico: ‘secundum actum’ determinatio sit eius quod dico ‘lucidi’ grati participii subintellecti, tunc est falsa. Et in hoc sensu explanatur ab Averroe.” In Albert’s formulation of Averroes’ imagined reading, “Color est motivum secundum se et secundum actum lucidi,” some manuscripts omit the et. This omission, I think, better reflects the preceding grammatical parsing. The formulation as it stands in the critical edition lends itself to treating secundum se and secundum actum lucidi as parallel prepositional phrases modifying the verb, as though identifying two causes of the motivity of color. In reality, Albert’s point is precisely that on Averroes’ reading, (1) secundum actum lucidi is not read as a single prepositional phrase modifying the verb—instead, it is “divided” internally so that the shorter phrase secundum actum is read as modifying lucidi—and (2) the verb is left unmodified, i.e., “divided” from the prepositional phrase. As far as I can tell, Albert additionally inserts secundum se to underscore that with the verb having no
220 Therese Scarpelli Cory
modifications, the implied meaning would be that color’s motivity is something it has from itself, as Averroes does, in fact hold. All this would be suitably captured by omitting the et and punctuating as follows: “Color est motivum (secundum se) secundum actum lucidi [=Color secundum se est motivum lucidi existens secundum actum].” Note that the text of Aristotle’s De anima in the Arabic-to-
Latin translation of Averroes’ Long Commentary
has a different formulation, placing “diaphanous” into the accusative and hence eliminating the ambiguity: “Omnis color est movens diaffonum in actu”
(lemma at LCDA 2. 67, ed. Crawford, 230.1–2). Incidentally, the Moerbeke nova translatio of De anima (late 1267) is likewise formulated in such a way as to suggest that the actual diaphanous is that of which color is motive: “Omnis enim color motiuus est eius quod secundum actum dyafani” (ed. Gauthier, 123). This divergence significantly affects the sense of the text, but there is no room here to evaluate any of the many reasons why Albert might have cited a different version. 98 Albertus, De anima 2. 3. 7, ed. Stroick, 109.46–47: “Nos autem quantum
intelligere possumus, utrosque secundum aliquam partem verum dicere
arbitramur.” 99 Ibid., ed. Stroick, 109.84–90: “Et ideo quando dicitur, ‘color esse motivus
visus secundum actum lucidi,’ et hoc esse substantiam eius, erit hoc intellectum de eo quod est vera substantia coloris secundum esse formale; et secundum hoc esse non est actu color nisi in lumine, et ideo etiam non videtur nisi
in lumine, sicut dictum est.” 100 Ibid., ed. Stroick, 110:1–18: “Quod autem dicitur de eo quod videtur color
medio tenebroso existente, videtur dicendum, quod si medium sit omnino
tenebrosum, tunc non videbitur color, sed oportet, quod sit illuminatum
iuxta colorem ad minus ad hoc quod generet intentionem suam in medio.
Et huius quidem causa est, quia color lumen est ligatum materiae, et ideo
movere non potest medium, nisi sit in actu illuminatum, quia per hoc magis ad coloris similitudinem recipiendam disponitur, et ideo proprium medium coloris est diaphanum illuminatum; et ideo actus lucidi in visu exigitur
propter medium, et color per suam substantiam movet. Per substantiam dico,
quae est in eo formalis et essentialis; secundum illam enim non est in tenebris
nisi in potentia tantum. Lucentia autem, quae habent lumen calcatum et non
obligatum materiae, movent diaphanum tenebrosum, et ideo videntur in
tenebra, sicut ignis et stellae et huiusmodi.” 101 See Albertus, De anima 2. 3. 14, ed. Stroick, 119.35–46: “Coloratum secundum tactum non agit in aliquid nisi actone physica, quae est per prinipia
materialia ipsius. Color autem non fit in visu per actionem physicam, sed
per actionem formalem et spiitualem, sicut diximus superius, et ideo indiget
corpore, in quo prius efficiatur spiritualis, antequam in oculo generetur; et
haec est necessitas, quare oportet medium esse in sensu visus. Oportet igitur,
quod color secundu actum moveat primo lucidum, quod actu lucidum est, et hoc
[. . .] movetur oculus.” In response to a worry about colored surfaces’ agency
on the eye, he adds (69–70), “lux abstrahit colores et facit eos fieri in lucido
secundum rectas lineas.” Interestingly, light’s abstractive role had been mentioned in De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 183.38–184.9. 102 Richard Rufus of Cornwall, Sententia 2. 6, q. 1, ed. Ottman et al.,
353.418–354.433. 103 For further discussion, see the introduction to Richard Rufus of Cornwall,
Sententia, 141–55. 104 Robert Grosseteste, De operationibus solis 6, in McEvoy, “The Sun as res and
signum,” 69.10–11: “Color sit lux incorporata, quae propter incorporationem
non movet se ad visum nisi cum lux superfunditur”; citing parallel passages
How Light Makes Color Visible 221
in De colore, Commentary on Posterior Analytics, and De veritate. See also Panti,
“I sensi nella luce dell’anima”; Panti, “L’incorporazione della luce.” 105 Krause, “Transforming Aristotelian Philosophy.” 106 When a passage does pose an unmistakable challenge to the expected picture—the Aristotelian dictum that “colors are per se visible,” ironically a
mistranslation—Albert addresses it head on. 107 Hasse, Avicenna’s De anima, 115; and see Ricklin, “Vue et vision,” esp. 28. 108 Wielgus, Quaestiones Nicolai Peripatetici, 136. 109 Robert Grosseteste, De colore, ed. Baur, 78: “Color est lux incorporate perspicuo.” On Grosseteste, see, e.g., Panti, “L’incorporazione della luce” and “I
sensi nella luce dell’anima”; Oliver, “Robert Grosseteste,” 155–63. The main
interest in the literature, though, lies with Grosseteste’s doctrine of light as
“first corporeal form”; see, for instance, McEvoy, “Metaphysics of Light”;
Speer, “‘Lux et prima forma corporalis’”; and Speer, “Licht und Raum.” 110 Similarities to formulations we have been discussing are abundantly evident
in Grosseteste’s Hexaëmeron, Commentary on the Posterior Analytics, De colore,
and De operationibus solis. See, e.g., McEvoy, “Sun as res and signum”; Panti,
“L’incorporazione della luce”; and Panti, “I sensi nella luce dell’ anima.”
Grosseteste’s own relation to Greco-Arabic sources of light-theory needs
further study. 111 Indeed, what we have seen of Albert’s preference for harmonizing Aristotle
with Avicenna and his dismissiveness of Averroes continue to confirm what
Hasse (“Early Albertus Magnus,” 249) has observed: that in the 1240s, Albert did not perceive Averroes “as a philosopher of the same rank as Aristotle
and Avicenna.” See also De Boer, Science of the Soul, 15–18. 112 As I have tried to argue in more detail in relation to Aquinas. Cory, “Rethinking Abstractionism”; Cory, “Knowing as Being?”
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albertus Magnus. Commentarii in II Sententiarum. Edited by Auguste Borgnet.
Paris: Vivès, 1894.
Albertus Magnus. De anima. Edited by Clemens Stroick. Editio Coloniensis 7/1.
Münster: Aschendorff, 1968.
Albertus Magnus. De homine. Edited by Henryk Anzulewicz and Joachim R.
Söder. Editio Coloniensis 27/2. Münster: Aschendorff, 2008.
Aristotle. De anima. Translated with an introduction and notes by R. D. Hicks.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1907.
Aristotle. De anima. Translated with an introduction and commentary by Christopher Shields. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2016.
Aristotle. De anima. Translated by J. A. Smith. In The Basic Works of Aristotle, edited by Richard McKeon, 535–603. New York: Random House, 1941.
Aristotle. De sensu et sensato. Translated by J. I. Beare. In The Complete Works of
Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation, edited by Jonathan Barnes, 1:693–713.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Aristotle. Iacobus Veneticus translator Aristotelis, De anima. Edited by J. Decorte,
revised by J. Brams (in preparation as vol. 12/1 of Aristoteles Latinus for Brepols;
online in the Aristoteles Latinus database).
Averroes. Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis De anima libros. Edited by F. Stuart
Crawford. Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy of America, 1953.
222 Therese Scarpelli Cory
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba. Long Commentary on the De anima of Aristotle.
Translated with an introduction and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with
Thérèse-Anne Druart. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ). Avicenna’s De anima (Arabic Text), Being the Psychological Part
of Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉ’. Edited by Fazlur Rahman. London: Oxford University Press,
1959.
Avicenna. Liber de anima seu sextus De naturalibus, é dition critique de la traduction latine
mé dié vale. Edited by Simone Van Riet. 3 vols. Louvain: Peeters, 1968–72.
Richard Rufus of Cornwall. Sententia cum quaestionibus in libros de anima Aristotelis.
Edited by Jennifer Ottman, Rega Wood, Neil Lewis, and Christopher J. Martin. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Robert Grosseteste. De colore. In Die philosophischen Werke des Robert Grosseteste,
Bischofs von Lincoln, edited by Ludwig Baur. Münster: Aschendorff, 1912.
Robert Grosseteste. De operationibus solis. In James McEvoy, “The Sun as res and
signum: Grosseteste’s Commentary on Ecclesiasticus ch. 43, vv. 1–5.” Recherches de théologie ancienne et médiévale 41 (1974): 38–91.
Thomas Aquinas. De veritate. Editio Leonina 22/1–3. Rome: Commissio Leonina, 1972–76.
Thomas Aquinas. Scriptum super libros Sententiarum. 4 vols. Edited by Pierre Mandonnet. Paris: Lethelleux, 1929–47.
William of Moerbeke. De anima. Edited by René-Antoine Gauthier. In Thomas
de Aquino, Sententia libri De anima. Editio Leonina 45/1. Rome: Commissio
Leonina, 1984.
Secondary Literature
Adamson, Peter. “Vision, Light and Color in al-Kindıˉ, Ptolemy and the Ancient
Commentators.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 16, no. 2 (2006): 207–36.
Burnyeat, Miles. “How Much Happens When Aristotle Sees Red and Hears
Middle C? Remarks on De anima 2.7–8.” In Essays on Aristotle’s De anima, edited by Martha C. Nussbaum and Amelie Oksenberg Rorty, 421–34. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1996.
Bynum, Terrell Ward. “A New Look at Aristotle’s Theory of Perception.” History of Philosophy Quarterly 4, no. 2 (1987): 163–78.
Cory, Therese Scarpelli. “Knowing as Being? A Metaphysical Reading of the
Identity of Intellect and Intelligibles in Aquinas.” American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 91, no. 3 (2017): 333–51.
Cory, Therese Scarpelli. “Rethinking Abstractionism: Aquinas’s Intellectual
Light and Some Arabic Sources.” Journal of the History of Philosophy 53, no. 4
(2015): 607–46.
De Boer, Sander W. The Science of the Soul: The Commentary Tradition of Aristotle’s
De anima, c. 1260–c. 1360. Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2013.
Gätje, Helmut. “Zur Farbenlehre in der muslimischen Philosophie.” Der Islam 43
(1967): 280–301.
Hasse, Dag Nikolaus. Avicenna’s De anima in the Latin West: The Formation of a
Peripatetic Philosophy of the Soul, 1160–1300. London: The Warburg Institute,
2000.
Hedwig, Klaus. Sphaera lucis: Studien zur Intelligibilität des Seienden im Kontext der
Mittelalterlichen Lichtspekulation. Münster: Aschendorff, 1980.
How Light Makes Color Visible 223
Ierodiakonou, Katerina. “Aristotle and Alexander of Aphrodisias on Colour.” In
The Parvia naturalia in Greek, Arabic and Latin Aristotelianism: Supplementing the
Science of the Soul, edited by Börje Bydén and Filip Radovic, 77–90. Cham:
Springer, 2018.
Kalderon, Mark Eli. “Aristotle on Transparency.” In Perceptual Ephemera, edited
by Thomas Crowther and Clare Mac Cumhaill, 219–37. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Kalderon, Mark Eli. Form without Matter: Empedocles and Aristotle on Color Perception.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Kelsey, Sean. “Color, Transparency, and Light in Aristotle.” Phronesis 63, no. 2
(2018): 209–10.
Kieninger, Josef. Das Sein als Licht in den Schriften des Hl. Thomas von Aquinas.
Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1992.
Krause, Katja. “Transforming Aristotelian Philosophy: Alexander of Aphrodisias in Aquinas’ Early Anthropology and Eschatology.” Przeglaˉd Tomistyczny 21
(2015): 175–217.
LaZella, Andrew T. “As Light Belongs to Air: Thomas Aquinas and Meister Eckhart on the Existential Rootlessness of Creatures.” American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 87, no. 4 (2013): 567–91.
Lindberg, David. Theories of Vision from al-Kindi to Kepler. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1976.
Long, R. James, and Timothy B. Noone. “Fishacre and Rufus on the Metaphysics
of Light: Two Unedited Texts.” In Roma, magistra mundi. Itineraria culturae medievalis,
edited by Jaqueline Hamesse, 517–36. Turnhout: Brepols, 1998.
McEvoy, James. “Metaphysics of Light in the Middle Ages.” Philosophical Studies
26 (1978): 126–45.
McEvoy, James. “The Sun as res and signum: Grosseteste’s Commentary on Ecclesiasticus
ch. 43, vv. 1–5.” Recherches de théologie ancienne et médiévale 41 (1974):
38–91.
McGinnis, Jon. Avicenna. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
McGinnis, Jon. “New Light on Avicenna: Optics and Its Role in Avicenna’s Theories of Vision, Cognition and Emanation.” In Philosophical Psychology in Arabic Thought and the Latin Aristotelianism of the 13th Century, edited by Luis Xavier
López-Farjeat and Jörg Alejandro Tellkamp, 41–58. Paris: Vrin, 2013.
Modrak, Deborah. Aristotle: The Power of Perception. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 1987.
Oliver, Simon. “Robert Grosseteste on Light, Truth, and Experimentum.” Vivarium
42, no. 2 (2004): 151–80.
Panti, Cecilia. “L’incorporazione della luce secondo Roberto Grossatesta.” Medioevo e Renascimento 13, n.s. 10 (1999): 45–102.
Panti, Cecilia. “I sensi nella luce dell’anima: evoluzione di una dottrina agostiniana nel secolo XIII.” Micrologus 10 (2002): 177–98.
Polansky, Roland. Aristotle’s De anima. New York: Cambridge University Press,
2007.
Ricklin, Thomas. “Vue et vision chez Guillaume de Conches et Guillaume de
Saint-Thierry: Le récit d’une controverse.” Micrologus 5 (1997): 19–41.
Shields, Christopher. “Commentary.” In Aristotle, De anima, translated with an
introduction and commentary by Christopher Shields, 79–379. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2016.
224 Therese Scarpelli Cory
Silverman, Allan. “Color and Color-Perception in Aristotle’s De anima.” Ancient
Philosophy 9, no. 2 (1989): 271–92.
Smith, A. Mark. From Sight to Light: The Passage from Ancient to Modern Optics.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015.
Sorabji, Richard. “Aristotle on Colour, Light, and Imperceptibles.” Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies 47, no. 1 (2004): 129–40.
Speer, Andreas. “Licht und Raum: Robert Grossetestes spekulative Grundlegung
einer scientia naturalis.” In Raum und Raumvorstellungen im Mittelalter, edited by
Jan A. Aertsen and Andreas Speer, 77–100. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1998.
Speer, Andreas. “‘Lux et prima forma corporalis’: Lichtphysik oder Lichtmetaphysik bei Robert Grosseteste?” Medioevo 22 (1994): 51–76.
Tachau, Katherine. Vision and Certitude in the Age of Ockham: Optics, Epistemology,
and the Foundation of Semantics, 1250–1345. Leiden: Brill, 1988.
Vasiliu, A. Du diaphane: Image, milieu, lumière dans la pensée antique et mediévale.
Paris: Vrin, 1997.
Whidden, David L. Christ the Light: The Theology of Light and Illumination in
Thomas Aquinas. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2014.
Wielgus, Stanislaw. “Quaestiones Nicolai Peripatetici.” Mediaevalia Philosophica Polonorum 17 (1973): 57–155.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-12
In 1979, Richard C. Taylor published a seminal article on Thomas Aquinas as a reader of the Liber de causis.1 He focused on proposition 8[9] of
this short theological text,2 which was erroneously attributed to Aristotle
from its production in ninth-century Baghdad until Thomas’ discovery
of its true origin as an Arabic compilation of lemmata based on Proclus’
Elements of Theology.3
In his 1979 article, Taylor convincingly argues that Thomas’ argument
exceeds the explicit text of the passage,4 where the enigmatic word hyliatim
(or variants),5 i.e., the Latin transliteration of the Arabic term h․
ilya left untranslated by Gerard of Cremona,6 creates a false friend with the Greek
hyleˉ.7 As this passage states that everything apart from the First Cause possesses hyliatim, the Liber de causis translation prima facie endorses universal
hylomorphism for its Latin readers, meaning that even the separate substances are endowed with matter, even if only a “spiritual” one (a doctrine
that Thomas repeatedly criticizes).8 In reality, h․
ilya has nothing to do with
matter, and means almost the contrary: form, with special emphasis on the
“quality, or the aggregate of the attributes, or qualities,” as Lane’s Arabic-English lexicon suggests.9 An analysis of the meaning of h․
ilya in the Liber
de causis and of Thomas’ commentary on it leads Taylor to conclude:
Nowhere in the Arabic text of the De causis is there any indication
that the separate substances are composed of matter and form. In fact
the author makes it quite clear that the intelligences are eternal beings existing above time, not subject to generation or corruption or
motion. Thus, for the author of the De causis separate substances are not hylomorphically composed. What then of St. Thomas’ interpretation? While St. Thomas was clearly wrong in believing that yliatim
is derived from the Greek ὕλη, he was quite correct in maintaining
that in the De causis the intelligences do not have matter. St. Thomas
here demonstrated the practiced dexterity of a skillful interpreter: he
was not deceived by a unique passage which at first reading appears
to be totally at odds with the rest of the treatise. He refused to take
at face value an ambiguous text which would appear to render the
doctrines expressed in the De causis contradictory. [. . .] [I]t is clear
9 Anniyya faqat․
Again
Reading Liber de causis 8[9]
with Richard C. Taylor
Cristina D’Ancona
226 Cristina D’Ancona
that he imposed his own teachings on act and potency and existence
and essence onto the metaphysics of the De causis in his interpretation.
However, on the question of the hylomorphic composition of separate substances and, as well, on the question of the nature of the First
Cause, St. Thomas correctly perceives that he and the author of the
De causis are in agreement: there is no hylomorphic composition in
separate substances and the First Cause alone is Pure Being and “only
Being” (esse tantum, annıˉyah faqat․), devoid of limiting form.10
As the end of this excerpt shows, Thomas argues that one need not attribute some sort of matter to everything in the cosmos in order to isolate
the First Cause in its transcendence, as “Avicebron” (that is, Ibn Gabirol)
had done and Bonaventure was doing in Thomas’ time.11 What makes the
First Cause unique, according to Thomas, is that everything other than
it is composed of form (hyliatim) and being, while it alone is pure Being:
anniyya faqat․
/esse tantum. The following contribution, dedicated to Richard C. Taylor, comprises a rereading of proposition 8[9] of the Liber de
causis, where this doctrine is expounded, adding some new developments
to Taylor’s 1979 article.
Anniyya faqat․
in Context
Prop. 8[9] of the Liber de causis starts from a thesis introduced in an earlier
lemma, namely, prop. 5[6], whose main topic is negative theology.12 Even though the transcendence of the First Cause prevents any description of it,
there is a way to get an indication of its nature: by looking at its first effect,
the Intellect. This is stated in the final sentence of prop. 5[6]:
عى باسم معلولها الأول بنو مّما تس نّة الثانية وهي العقل. وإ لّ عليها من الع لُّستد ا يُ منّ وإ
بيّنا ه بنوع أرفع وأفضل وأكرم، كما نّا إلا أ يضً ة أ لّ الذي للمعلول هو للع نّأرفع وأفضل، لأ
Et ipsa quidem non significatur nisi ex causa secunda quae est intelligentia et non nominatur per modum causati sui primi nisi per modum
altiorem et meliorem, quoniam quod est causati est causae iterum,
verumtamen per modum sublimiorem et meliorem et nobiliorem, sicut ostendimus.13
The First Cause is signified only from a second cause, which is an intelligence and is referred to by the name of its first effect, but only in a higher and better way because the effect has, further, what belongs to the cause, but in a more sublime, better and nobler way, as we have shown.14
The main text of this proposition is taken from Proclus’ prop. 123,15 but the conclusion, the passage quoted above, is distinct from and inconsistent
Anniyya faqat․ Again 227
with Proclus’ Elements of Theology, specifically the idea that Intellect follows immediately upon the One, to which Proclus would hardly have
subscribed.16 Unknowable in itself, the First Cause can be conceptualized
in human minds only by taking into account the nature of the Intellect.
In this context, “Intellect” does not reference a faculty in the human
soul, but rather, a separate substance. Intellect, denoted here with a capital “I,” is the forerunner of Avicenna’s First Intelligence, described in an
earlier proposition of the Liber de causis as the first and highest of God’s
creatures.17 Above eternity, God—the First Cause—creates, first and
foremost, a level of reality commensurate with eternity:18 the Intellect,
which coincides with intelligible being in its changeless perfection.19 To
conceptualize any approximation of First, the author of the Liber de causis
claims that one must look, instead, to Intellect; more precisely, one must
look at Intellect’s immobile perfection. This echoes both the Timaeus, in
which soul and time revolve around an unmoved intellectual god, and
Book Λ of the Metaphysics, in which the divine Intellect exists as eternal
self-intellection.
With this in mind, readers of the Liber de causis who adopt the via eminentiae
propounded in the passage above can acquire an idea of that principle which is located beyond even Intellect, in the absolute isolation of
its hyper-perfection. Indeed, perfection is the landmark of the intelligible
realm. Hence, the principle from which intelligibility arises should be
placed even above perfection. This claim points to the status of the One-
Good, out of which the intelligible Forms spring, according to the Liber de
causis as well as in its Neoplatonic sources. Perfection does not delimit the
One-Good. Operating as the source of perfection, this principle cannot
be said to be “perfect,” insofar as it is the logico-ontological cause of the
perfection that characterizes intelligible reality, which itself provides the
criterion for each participant in Form to instantiate said Form. The One-
Good has to be placed beyond, or above, perfection itself. The author of
the Liber de causis proves to be at ease with this typically Neoplatonic model
and states that the unknowable First Cause is “indicated” (yustadallu, sig-
nificatur) through the derivative principle of Intellect, suggesting to the
reader that this indication does not entail an adequate description of what
the First Cause is in its reality.
The final sentence of prop. 5[6], quoted above, opens a section in the
Liber de causis that begins to describe the nature and activity of the Intellect. Through the via eminentiae, the Liber de causis states in the two propositions subsequent to 5[6] that: (i) the Intellect is a simple, self-subsistent,
and unchangeable substance;20 and (ii) every separate intellectual substance knows what is above it and what is below it.21 Read in the light of
the via eminentiae, this paves the way for the claim that the First Cause is
simple (a feature that rules out any anthropomorphic description of God)
and is knowing (a feature that, on the contrary, allows it to reward human
228 Cristina D’Ancona
deeds), but per modum altiorem et sublimiorem with respect to the simplicity
and intellectual activity of the separate substances. As will be seen below,
this is stated at the end of prop. 8[9]. To account for the preeminence of
God’s mode of being and knowing, the Liber de causis isolates the First
Cause by means of the notion of “pure Being.” The First Cause is a simple,
separate substance—not, however, like the separate substances that move
the heavens, but rather per modum altiorem et sublimiorem. It is true that the
First Cause knows that which is below it, given that, by definition, it
cannot know anything “above” it. But it does not know as other knowing
substances know, rather per modum altiorem et sublimiorem. The author of the
Liber de causis then provides the rationale for the via eminentiae through a
distinction between the absolute purity of the anniyya of the First Cause
and every other degree of reality. The First Cause alone is purely and
solely Being, anniyya faqat․
/esse tantum; everything else is anniyya but endowed with a specific h․
ilya. This point is made at the conclusion of a passage about the hierarchy of causes and the universal mediation of Intellect,
the main topic of prop. 8[9].
Prop. 8[9] is, as Taylor has noted, the only proposition in the Liber de
causis that does not depend upon any proposition of Proclus’ Elements of
Theology.22 Rather, it is based essentially on the Arabic Plotinus. In a nutshell, it assesses the universal mediation of the Intellect as the first and most
excellent offspring of the First Cause. Created without any mediation, the
Intellect is the channel which conveys God’s causative power to the lower
levels of reality. The immediate derivation of the Intellect from the First
Cause is expressed in the lemma of prop. 8[9] by the formula that its hypostatic subsistence—t habaˉt wa-qiwaˉm, fixio et essentia—depends only upon
the First Cause itself.
ىة الأول لّما ثباته وقوامه بالخير المحض، وهي الع نّ عقل إ لّك
Omnis intelligentiae fixio et essentia est per bonitatem puram quae
est causa prima.23
The persistence and subsistence of every intellect is through the Pure
Good, which is the First Cause.24
At variance with Intellect, whose subsistence depends only upon the First
Cause, the subsistence of every other level of being depends upon the
One-Good indirectly, through the mediation of Intellect. The philosophical import of this tenet will not escape anyone familiar with the Neoplatonic doctrine of causality: “to be” means “to be something,” that is,
to participate in an intelligible Form that allows an individual to be what
it is. Thus, if anything is, it participates in one of these Forms that have
their seat in the divine Intellect, a doctrine developed from a multisecular
Anniyya faqat․ Again 229
process of exegesis of Plato’s dialogues in combination with doctrines from
other schools. But to be this kind of cause, a Form requires a principle of
unity “above” it: nothing can participate in Form without possessing a
unity and self-consistency which is prerequisite for being “this” or “that.”
Such a prerequisite is, in itself, a property required of every participant
thing; no participant thing, in fact, possesses “unity” on its own. A fundamental rule for Platonic causality is that what a thing possesses as a property comes from something that is the given property. Hence, unity—the
most universal prerequisite for being—comes from that principle that is
“unity” in and by itself. Expounding upon Platonic causality, generations
of thinkers influenced by Plato and his successors combined this notion
with ideas from other philosophical allegiances (chiefly Aristotelian, but
also Stoic), and eventually postulated the principle that the more universal a property, the higher its cause. Thus, the One must be beyond and
above Being, i.e., the intelligible realm. This foundational principle for
the causal role of the One resonates even in Arabic adaptations of Proclus
and Plotinus. The causality of the One reaches everything that is “one” via
the causality of the intelligible Forms, because everything that “is,” “is”
insofar as it participates in a rational structure which renders it, such that
it is what it is. This principle for the causal role of the intelligible realm
remains throughout Arabic adaptations of Proclus and Plotinus, in the
form of the doctrine of the creation mediante intelligentia (bi-tawassut․ al-ʿaql).
The following passage, which comes immediately after the lemma just
quoted, shows how two distinct sources—the Arabic Plotinus and the Arabic Proclus—combine in prop. 8[9] of the Liber de causis:
رما صا نّها لا تنال معرفته. وإ نّ وحدانية من الأشياء الثواني التي بعده لأ دّة العقل أش وّ وق
ع لجمي بّرٌ العقل مد نّما تحته. والدليل على ذلك ما نحن ذاكرون أ لّة لِ ه ع نّ كذلك لأ
لّة ه بها كان ع نّة الإلهية التي فيه، وبها يمسك الأشياء لأ وّ الأشياء التي تحته بالق
ء للأشيا لاً ما كان أو لّ ك نّ الأشياء. وهو يمسك الأشياء التي تحته ويحيط بها، وذلك أ
.ته العالية وّر لها ولا يفوته منها شيء من أجل ق بّة لها فهو ماسك لتلك الأشياء ومد لّ وع
بّر الطبيعة تد نّرها، كما أ بّ رئيس جميع الأشياء التي تحته وممسكها ومد اًفالعقل إذ
؛ر الأشياء التي تحتها بالقوة العقل بّة النفس، كذلك النفس تد وّ الأشياء التي تحتها بق
هما صار العقل يمسك الأشياء التي بعد نّة الإلهية. وإ وّر الطبيعة بالق بّ وكذلك العقل يد
تها ليس نّها قوة عقلية ليست بقوة نفسانية ولا طبيعية لا نّته عليها لأ وّر لها وتعلو ق بّ ويد
انة والعقل يحيط بالأكو وّة لها بق لّه ع نّة القوى الجوهرية لأ وّ جوهرية له، بل هي ق
طبيعة ها فوق ال نّوالطبيعية وأفق الطبيعة.أعني النفس فإ
Et virtus quidem intelligentiae est vehementioris unitatis quam res secundae quae sunt post eam, quoniam ipsae non accipiunt cognitionem eius, et non est facta ita nisi quia causa est ei quod est sub ea. Et significatio illius est id cuius rememoramur: intelligentia est regens omnes res quae sunt sub ea per virtutem divinam quae est in ea et per eam retinet res, quoniam per eam est causa rerum, et ipsa retinet omnes res quae
230 Cristina D’Ancona
sunt sub ea et comprehendit eas. Quod est quoniam omne quod est primum rebus et causa eis est retinens illas res et regens eas et non evadit ab eo ex ipsis aliquid propter virtutem suam altam. Ergo intelligentia est princeps rerum quae sunt sub ea et retinens eas et regens eas, sicut natura regit res quae sunt sub ea per virtutem intelligentiae, et similiter intelligentia regit naturam per virtutem divinam. Et intelligentia quidem non facta est retinens res quae sunt post eam et regens eas et suspendens virtutem suam super eas nisi quoniam ipsae non sunt virtus substantialis ei, immo ipsa est virtus virtutum substantialium quoniam est causa eis. Et intelligentia quidem comprehendit generata et naturam et horizontem naturae, scilicet animam, nam ipsa est supra naturam.25
The power of the intellect has stronger unity than the secondary
things which are after it, because they do not attain to its knowledge.
This has come to be so only because it is cause of what is below it. The
proof of that is what we state: the intellect exercises providence over
all the things below it through the divine power which is present in it.
And by [that power] it keeps hold on the things because through [that
power] it is the cause of the things, and it keeps hold on and contains
all the things below it. For everything which is first for the things and
a cause of them keeps hold on those things and exercises providence
over them and none of them eludes it owing to its exalted power.
The intellect, then, is the ruler of all the things below it, keeping
hold on them and exercising providence over them, just as nature
exercises providence over the things which are below it through the
power of the intellect. And likewise the intellect exercises providence
over nature through divine power. The intellect came to keep hold on
the things after it and to exercise providence over them and to exalt
its power over them only because they are not a substantial power for
it, but rather it is the power of substantial powers because it is cause
of them.
The intellect contains comings-into-beings and nature and the
horizon of nature, namely soul, for it is above nature.26
The offspring of the One, namely the Intellect, “rules” the lower levels of
being. The three Plotinian principles, One, Intellect, and Soul, a hierarchy
of rulers, are included one under the other, with (1) the Intellect acting as
the mudabbir/regens of all of reality because of the power received directly
from the First Cause; (2) the universal soul ruling over nature through
power received from the First Cause through Intellect; and (3) nature,
ruling over sublunar things with the power received from all the principles
above it.
This hierarchy provides a link between the Plotinian triad, as found in Ennead 5.1,27 and Aristotle’s Unmoved Mover, featured in both Book Λ of the Metaphysics and in Alexander of Aphrodisias’ cosmological writings.28 All these texts, translated into Arabic by the circle
Anniyya faqat․ Again 231
of al-Kindıˉ,29 are adapted so as to propound one and the same view of the cosmos, its origins, and its structure. Comprised under the universal causality of the One-Good—the unique Creator—two further universal principles are at work: the Intellect and the cosmic soul. The fact that in prop. 8[9] of the Liber de causis, the cosmic soul is described as the ufuq/horizon between the realm of eternal intelligible being and that of changeable beings shows that this passage from the Liber de causis
depends upon the Arabic Plotinus, where one finds the description of the soul as located “on the boundary” between the intelligible and the visible worlds.30
If the ultimate model posits a hierarchy of causes in succession, with the
sublunar world ruled by nature, nature by Soul, and Soul by the Intellect
(with the Intellect “containing” the entire cosmic system), then the author of the Liber de causis must also specify that the Intellect does not act
independently:
قل وذلك أن الطبيعة تحيط بالكون والنفس تحيط بالطبيعة، والعقل يحيط بالنفس، فالع
وة الأولى التي تعل لّما صار العقل كذلك من أجل الع نّ يحيط بجميع الأشياء، وإ اً إذ
ءة العقل والنفس والطبيعة وسائر الأشيا علّ ها نّها لأ كلّ الأشياء
Quod est quia natura continet generationem et anima continet naturam et intelligentia continet animam. Ergo intelligentia continet
omnes res, et non est facta intelligentia ita nisi propter causam primam
quae supereminet omnibus rebus, quoniam est causa intelligentiae et
animae et naturae et reliquis rebus.31
For nature contains coming-into-being and soul contains nature and
intellect contains soul. The intellect, therefore, contains all things.
And the intellect has come to be so only owing to the First Cause
which is exalted over all things because It is the cause of intellect, soul,
nature and all other things.32
The second clause in the Arabic sentence contains a carefully worded
caveat. The claim that al-ʿaql yuh․
ıˉt․u bi-jamıˉʿ al-ashyaˉʾ (intelligentia continet omnes res) suggests competition between the Intellect and the First Cause,
a dangerous claim in the context of both monotheism and arguments
searching for the First Cause. Both seem to be appropriately labeled as
the universal principle, and the more one stresses that the Intellect is the
ruler (mudabbir) or the prince (raˉʾis) of the entire cosmos (ergo intelligentia est
princeps rerum quae sunt sub ea et retinens eas et regens eas), the more one risks
incurring a sort of duplication at the peak of the cosmic hierarchy. This
risk, deeply rooted in the main project of combining the Unmoved Mover
of Metaphysics Λ and the Neoplatonic One, is made evident at the beginning of the pseudo-Theology of Aristotle, where “Aristotle” himself, after
having claimed to be the author both of the Metaphysics and the Theology,
credits the One with the features of the divine Intellect of Λ, namely, the
232 Cristina D’Ancona
Unmoved Mover that, as he says, generates the movement of everything as
the object of “longing and desire.”33 In order to avoid such an unwelcome
diarchy, the author of the Liber de causis hastens to specify that the Intellect
is entitled to perform its universal causality only because of the power
received from the transcendent First Cause.34 Through this caveat, he
ensures that only the First Cause inherits the function of the One-Good
from the Neoplatonic tradition. As a result, the First Cause is cast as the
principle that allows the intelligible Forms to be principles of the visible
things. If this analysis is correct, this serves as the philosophical core for
creation through Intellect (mediante intelligentia):
ةة الأولى ليست بعقل ولا نفس ولا طبيعة، بل هي فوق العقل والنفس والطبيع لّ والع
طبيعة ط، ومبدعة للنفس وال سُّها مبدعة للعقل بلا تو نّ أ لاّها مبدعة لجميع الأشياء، إ نّلأ
ل وسائر الأشياء بتوسط العقل. والعلم الإلهي ليس كالعلم العقلي ولا كعلم النفس، ب
ةة عقلي وّ ق لّة الإلهية فوق ك وّ العلوم. والق عُه مبد نّ هو فوق علم العقل وعلم النفس، لأ
سية وصورة، وكذلك النف نّه أ نّة؛ والعقل ذو حلية لأ وّ ق لّة لك لّها ع نّ ونفسانية وطبيعية لأ
ل لا ية فقط، فإن قال قائ نّها أ نّة الأولى حلية، لأ لّ ذات حلية والطبيعة ذات حلية وليس للع
يض من أن تكون لها حلية، قلنا حليتها لا نهاية لها، وشخصها الخير المحض المف بدّ
لط العق سُّعلى العقل جميع الخيرات، وعلى سائر الأشياء بتو
Et causa quidem prima non est intelligentia neque anima neque natura, immo est supra intelligentiam et animam et naturam, quoniam
est creans omnes res. Verumtamen est creans intelligentiam absque
medio et creans animam et naturam et reliquas res mediante intelligentia. Et scientia quidem divina non est sicut scientia intellectibilis
neque sicut scientia animalis, immo est supra scientiam intelligentiae
et scientiam animae quoniam est creans scientias. Et virtus quidem
divina est supra omnem virtutem intellectibilem et animalem et naturalem quoniam est causa omni virtuti. Et intelligentia est habens
yliathim quoniam est esse et forma, et similiter anima est habens
yliathim et natura est habens yliathim. Et causae quidem primae non
est yliathim quoniam ipsa est esse tantum. Quod si dixerit aliquis:
necesse est ut sit ei yliathim, dicemus: yliathim suum est infinitum
et individuum suum est bonitas pura, influens super intelligentiam
omnes bonitates et super reliquas res mediante intelligentia.35
The First Cause [, however,] is not intellect nor soul nor nature, but rather It is above intellect, soul and nature because It is creator of all things. However, It is creator of intellect without mediation and creator of soul, nature and the all other things through the mediation of intellect. [Moreover,] Divine Knowledge is not like intellectual knowledge nor like the knowledge of the soul, but rather it is above the knowledge of intellect and the knowledge of soul because it is creator of all types of knowledge. And Divine Power is above every intellectual, psychic and natural power because It is the cause of every power.
Anniyya faqat․ Again 233
The intellect possesses shape [h․ilya] because it is being [annîyah]
and form [s․
ûrah], and likewise soul possesses shape and nature possesses shape. But for the First Cause, there is no shape because It is only being [annîyah faqat․
]. Thus, if someone says: it is necessary that It have shape, we say: Its shape is infinite and Its Essential Nature [shakhs․
] is the Pure Good which pours forth all goods upon the intellect and upon all other things through the mediation of the intellect.36
As a consequence, an ontological gap—one that cannot be bridged—has
to be posited between the First Cause and its derivatives, even the highest
among them. In order to formulate this unbridgeable gap, the Liber de causis
relies once again upon a Platonic principle of causality, auto kath’ auto,
which undergirds prop. 8[9]. The First Cause is the auto kath’ auto of Being; its form (h․
ilya) and individual nature (shakhs․
), which cannot be shared
with anything else, consist in its being the sole principle that is not defined
by any specific h․
ilya. A fictive respondent might object to the claim that
the First Cause has no h․
ilya. Prima facie this is absurd: How on earth is
it possible that the First Principle lacks a specific nature distinguishing it
from the other things? The response to this rhetorical question ( fa-in qaˉla
qaˉʾilun/quod si dixerit aliquis) consists in establishing that what makes the
First Cause unique is exactly this. At variance with all the other things,
whose being always consists in a given h․
ilya and a given shakhs․, the being
of the First Cause is the auto kath’ auto of Being and nothing more. For this
reason, it is not-finite (l aˉ nih․aˉya lahaˉ).37
The final clause of prop. 8[9] shows that interpreting anniyya as “existence,” for example, the way the term is used by Avicenna, does not
completely match the initial notion in the Liber de causis. What the Intellect is, namely its anniyya, expresses itself in terms of its h․
ilya, namely, its
form, which is different from the h․
ilya of the soul and of the other degrees
of being. To this h․
ilya corresponds a specific kind of science (the scientia intelligentiae) and a specific kind of causal power (the virtus intellectibilis). The
same is true in the case of soul: its anniyya expresses itself as a specific h․
ilya,
to which corresponds a specific kind of science (the scientia animalis) and a
specific kind of power (the virtus animalis). All these are khayraˉt /bonitates. In
other words, they are formal perfections whose transcendent cause is not
in itself a formal perfection, rather, it is the auto kath’ auto of the power to
be a formal perfection: al-khayr al-mah․
d․/bonitas pura.
Within the history of the multifarious transformations of the basic Platonic principle recalled above, there is room for a version in which this function or power is labeled not only as “the One,” but also as “pure Being,” or “Being itself.” It would go beyond the limits of this paper to discuss this topic as it deserves.38 But one point is particularly relevant to my purposes here: in the Liber de causis, “pure
Being” is established as being on equal footing with the “pure Good”
234 Cristina D’Ancona
and that “good” (and thus “being”) means formal perfection in this context.
To confirm this point, the author of the Liber de causis adds that each formal perfection whose transcendent principle is the First Cause is poured forth upon successive levels through the mediation of Intellect. Once again, he follows in the footsteps of Neoplatonic doctrines concerning the causal role of the One, whose power gives rise to the many and operates via the “origination” of the intelligible Forms (irrespective of whether this happens directly, as in Plotinus, or indirectly, as in Proclus). In the Greek and its medieval Arabic adaptations, the Neoplatonic interpretation of Platonic causality entails that the unique, transcendent principle of every formal perfection lies beyond all of them. This is the Plotinian reading of the Good epekeina ousias in the Republic. By way of consequence, the One-Good is not-limited: what makes it unique (its shakhs․
/individuum) is that it is the auto kath’ auto of the criterion that rules intelligible causality, a criterion that is not restricted to this or that kind, but allows each and every Form to be the “one” for its participants, namely the principle by virtue of which they are what they are, and their “good,” namely the axiological principle of their different capacities to instantiate the Form.
Anniyya faqat․
: The Source
Whereas the Liber de causis endorses the Neoplatonic theory of causality
faithfully, a substantial modification occurs in its description of the First
Cause. As we have just seen, the First Cause of the Liber de causis operates exactly like the Neoplatonic One, granting causal power to intelligible
principles while at the same time transcending them. However, unlike
the Neoplatonic One beyond Being, the First Cause of the Liber de causis
is described as pure Being. This change does not originate in the Liber de
causis. On the contrary, the Arabic Plotinus features this evident modification in several passages. The two most evident examples come from
one of the three Arabic adaptations of Enneads 4–6, specifically the series
of extracts attributed to the “Greek Sage” in a cento of Greek and Arabic
philosophical doctrines that its editor Elvira Wakelnig entitles The Philosophy Reader.39
In order to ascertain the literal dependence on Plotinus, the modification imparted to the Plotinian passage, and the close relationship with
prop. 8[9] of the Liber de causis, let us first read Plotinus. In the treatise, On
the Three Hypostases That Are Principles, 5.1[10], he accounts for the derivation of the intelligible forms from the First Principle above being and
intelligibility as follows:
ταύτῃ γὰρ πάντα ἐξ ἐκείνου, ὅτι μή τινι μορφῇ κατείχετο ἐκεῖνος·
μόνον γὰρ ἓν ἐκεῖνο. (Enn. 5.1[10], 7.19–20)
Anniyya faqat․ Again 235
[F]or this is how all things come from him, because he is not confined
by any shape; that One is one alone.40
The Arabic rendering of this passage is especially interesting on two counts. First, it provides the source for both the topic and terminology of the transcendence of the First Cause with respect to h․ilya. Second, it contains an explanation for why the Arabic Neoplatonica typically diverges from its Greek sources, whether Plotinus or Proclus: according to the “Greek Sage,” the First Cause is pure Being. Instead of saying, as Plotinus actually does, that all Forms proceed from the One while the One has no morpheˉ whatsoever, a tenet which suggests the transcendence of the One with respect to Being,41 the Arabic cento claims that the First Creator has no h․ilya because it is pure Being, anniyya faqat․
:
امنّ مبدعه ليس كشيء من الأشياء وإ نّها لأ لّما صار هو الأشياء ك نّ العقل إ نّ وقال إ
لاه لا حلية له و نّها منه ولأ لّ الأشياء ك نّ صار المبدع الأول لا يشبه شيئا من الأشياء لأ
اية فقط ليس له نّه أ نّ صورة له خاصة لازمة وذلك أن المبدع الأول واحد وحده أعني أ
نها ها منبثة م كلّ الصفات نّصفة تليق بها لأ
He says that the intellect only became all things, because its creator is
not like any of them. The First Creator never comes to resemble any
of them, because all things are from Him and because He has neither
shape nor form specific and inherent to Him. For the First Creator
is One alone, that is, He is only Being [and this being] has no fitting
attribute, because all attributes spread from it.42
Another excerpt from the “Greek Sage” is even more important for understanding the background of prop. 8[9] of the Liber de causis. In the treatise
On the One, or the Good, 6.6[9], Plotinus says:
Μέγιστον μὲν ἁπάντων οὐ μεγέθει, ἀλλὰ δυνάμει, ὥστε καὶ τὸ
ἀμέγεθες δυνάμει· ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ μετ’ αὐτὸ ὄντα ταῖς δυνάμεσιν
ἀμέριστα καὶ ἀμερῆ οὐ τοῖς ὄγκοις. λεπτέον δὲ καὶ ἄπειρον αὐτὸν οὐ
τῷ ἀδιεξιτήτῳ ἢ τοῦ μεγέθους ἢ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ, ἀλλὰ τῷ ἀπεριλήπτῳ
τῆς δυνάμεως. ὅταν γὰρ αὐτὸν νοήσῃς οἷον ἢ νοῦν ἢ θεόν, πλεόν ἐστί·
καὶ αὖ ὅταν αὐτὸν ἑνίσῃς τῇ διανοίᾳ, καὶ ἐνταῦθα πλέον ἐστιν ἢ ὅσον
ἂν αὐτὸν ἐφαντάσθης εἰς τὸ ἑνικώτερον τῆς σῆς νοήσεως εἶναι· ἐφ’
ἑαυτοῦ γάρ ἐστιν οὐδενὸς αὐτῷ συμβεβηκότος.
(Enn. 6.9[9], 6.7–16)
[F]or it is the greatest of all things, not in size but in power, so that its sizelessness also is a matter of power; since the things after it also are indivisible and undivided in their powers, not in their bulks. And it must be understood as infinite not because its size
236 Cristina D’Ancona
and number cannot be measured or counted but because its power cannot be comprehended. For when you think of him as Intellect or God, he is more; and when you unify him in your thought, here also the degree of unity by which he transcends your thought is more than you imagined to be; for he is by himself without any incidental attributes. (Trans. Armstrong)43
This passage features in the Arabic Philosophy Reader as follows:
هه لا نهاية ل نّه واحد عظيم أعظم الأشياء لا بالجثة لكن بالقوة وكذلك إذا قلنا إ نّ ويقول إ
نّه ه لا يحيط بقوته شيء وذلك أ نّه جثة أو عدد لكنا نعني أ نّ لا يعني أنه لا نهاية له بأ
ن فوق وهم المتوهم ثابت قائم بذاته ليس فيه شيء من الصفات وهو خير ليس لذاته لأ
ر ذاته هي الخير المحض الحق لكنه خير لسائر الأشياء التي تقوى على قبول الخي
هه قبل الحركة وقبل الفكرة وقبل العلم وليس في نّ الذي يفيضه عليها وليس له حركة لأ
ر شيء يريد أن يعلمه كما يعلم العالم بل هو العلم الذي لا يحتاج إلى أن يعلم بعلم آخ
م علم وعلة العلو لّه هو العلم المحض الأقصى المحيط بك نّلأ
He says that He is one, great, the greatest of things, not in mass, but in power. Thus whenever we say that He is infinite, it does not mean that He is infinite in mass or in number, but we mean that nothing encompasses His power. That He is above imagination of anyone who imagines, lasting, self-subsisting and not having any attribute in Him. He is good not for Himself, as His essence is the pure, true good, but He is the good for all other things which are able to receive the good which he pours over them. He has no motion, as He is prior to motion, prior to thinking and prior to knowledge. In Him there is nothing he wants to know in the way in which a knower knows. Rather He is the knowledge which does not need to be known by another knowledge. For He is the pure, ultimate knowledge comprising every knowledge and the cause of all [branches of] knowledge.44
The transcendence of the First Cause with respect to all attributes (s․i faˉt )
here, as in the Liber de causis, is clearly reminiscent of the theological debates typical of the milieu where all these texts originated: the Baghdad
circles at the time of the rise of the Muʿtazilites, who typically denied that
divine attributes (s․i faˉt ) are distinct from the pure unity of God’s essence.
Adding anything more to the scholarship on this issue here would be
redundant;45 still, I would like to pause a moment on the issue of divine
knowledge.
It is clearly evident that the passage from the “Greek Sage,” quoted
above, is germane to prop. 8[9] of the Liber de causis. One may even infer
that the “Greek Sage,” or rather the source of the passage, is the source of
Anniyya faqat․ Again 237
prop. 8[9], given the Liber de causis seems to rely upon the Arabic Plotinus,
whereas there are no clear indications of the reverse occurring.
The issue of God’s knowledge is especially interesting, not only from
the viewpoint of the relationship between the coeval theological and philosophical discussions of the s․i faˉt of God, but also with respect to the standard view of the Arabic “Aristotle” that such adaptations are meant to
propound. Any attempt at presenting Greek falsafa as a consistent whole
would have been doomed to failure without a consistent account of the
First Principle, and the philosopher or philosophers at work on such an attempt did not miss the obvious fact that the One transcending knowledge
would hardly have been in harmony with the divine Intellect of Metaphysics
Λ. The adaptations of Plotinus and Proclus that aim to credit the One
with a form of knowledge, transcendent of and incomparable to our kind
of knowledge as it may be, are too repeated and too clever to have been
randomly generated by the context of the Plotinian or Proclean passages
at hand. In this respect, one may confidently say that al-Faˉraˉbıˉ is only
following the lead of the texts issued from the circle of al-Kindıˉ when he
credits the First Cause with all the features of the Neoplatonic One, plus
knowledge.46 As Taylor has it:
In general the Plotiniana Arabica texts can be characterized as texts
foundational for a large part of Islamic philosophy, as well as important for mystical and religious thought in Islam. They function as a
kind of doxastic source of a philosophical character of considerable
authority for nearly all Islamic philosophical thinkers. Of the major
philosophical thinkers, we can say with certainty that al-Kindi was familiar with some, perhaps even all, of these materials as was al-Farabi
who drew on the Theology of Aristotle explicitly in his book on the
Harmony of the Opinions of the Two Sages. Also, al-Farabi’s fundamental theory of emanation of all beings from the First Being is clearly
dependent on the inspiration of the Plotiniana Arabica texts. The chief
inspiration for the notion of the First Cause as pure being and of the
theory of emanation in the thought of Avicenna is certainly the work
of al-Farabi. Moreover, we know that Avicenna read the Theology of
Aristotle itself, for he has left glosses on the Theology. In view of this it is
not difficult to see that the doctrine of the First as the Necessary Being
in the thought of Avicenna had as an important source the Theology
of Aristotle.47
Combining the features of the Neoplatonic One with those of the divine
Intellect of the Metaphysics was the key for the success of this naturalization
of Late Antique philosophy in the Arabic Middle Ages. The understanding of this momentous phase in the history of the philosophical ideas owes
much to Richard C. Taylor, to whom this note is gratefully presented.
238 Cristina D’Ancona
Acknowledgments
My deepest thanks go to Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, Katja Krause, and
Nicholas Oschman for reading a first draft of this paper and suggesting
many valuable corrections to it.
Notes 1 Taylor, “St. Thomas.” 2 The double number of the proposition is due to the fact that many manuscripts of the Latin version split the long Proposition 4 into two, thus creating
a different numbering with respect to the Arabic original. While the latter
is subdivided into thirty-one propositions, the majority of the Latin manuscripts contain thirty-two propositions. For easy reference, when dealing
with the Latin version of the De causis the propositions after the fourth are
indicated by the double number. For more details, see D’Ancona and Taylor,
“Liber de causis,” 606. 3 Cf. Thomas Aquinas, Super Librum de causis expositio, ed. Saffrey, 3.1–10:“Invenitur igitur quaedam de primis principiis conscripta, per diversas propositiones distincta, quasi per modum sigillatim considerantium aliquas veritates. Et
in graeco quidem invenitur sic traditus liber Procli Platonici, continens ccxi
propositiones, qui intitulatur Elementatio theologica; in arabico vero invenitur
hic liber qui apud latinos De causis dicitur, quem constat de arabico esse translatum et in graeco penitus non haberi; unde videtur ab aliquo philosophorum
arabum ex praedicto libro Procli excerptus, praesertim quia omnia quae in
hoc libro continentur, multo plenius et diffusius continentur in illo.”
The English translation runs:“Thus we find a collection of writings on first
principles that are divided into different propositions, in a way similar to the
procedure of those examining certain truths one at time. And in Greek we
find handed down a book of this type by the Platonist Proclus, which contains
211 propositions and is entitled The Elements of Theology. And in Arabic we
find the present book which is called On Causes among Latin readers, [a work]
known to have been translated from Arabic and not [known] to be extant at
all in Greek. Thus, it seems that one of the Arab philosophers excerpted it
from this book by Proclus, especially since everything in it is contained much
more fully and more diffusely in that of Proclus.” Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on the Book of Causes, trans. Guagliardo, Hess, and Taylor, 4. 4 Bardenhewer, in Pseudo-Aristotle, Die pseudo-aristotelische Schrift, 78.8, and
Badawıˉ, in al-Aflaˉt․
uˉniyya al-muh․dat․a, 12.14, read here kulliyya (universality or
totality) instead of h․
ilya, whereas the Latin version reads correctly yliatim (or yliathim, helyatim, heilatin, etc.). See Liber de causis, ed. Pattin, 157.98. 5 Taylor, “St. Thomas,” 510–11 n. 21–22, provides a lexical analysis of the term
h․
ilya and lists its Latin renderings; he also accounts for the variant reading
kulliyya for h․
ilya in the Arabic text. 6 On Gerard of Cremona and his translation of the Liber de causis, see the studies
listed in D’Ancona and Taylor, “Liber de causis,” 610–17. Further editions of
and studies on Gerard’s translations published after 2003 include Lo Bello,
Commentary of al-Nayrizi; D’Ancona, “Nota sulla traduzione latina”; Burnett,
“Arabo-Latin Aristotle.” 7 As remarked by Taylor, “St. Thomas,” 508 n. 10, Aquinas wrongly derived
yliatim from ὕλη, as follows: “Nam intelligentia habet yliatim, idest aliquid materiale vel ad modum materiae se habens; dicitur enim yliatim ab yle, quod est
materia.” See Thomas Aquinas, Super Librum de causis expositio, ed. Saffrey,
64.6–8.
Anniyya faqat․ Again 239 8 Thomas discusses the issue in questions 75–89 of the 1a Pars of the Summa theologiae and in the coeval De spiritualibus creaturis, both dating from his teaching in Rome (1265–68), as well as in the De substantiis separatis, which dates
from his second and last stay in Paris (1268–72), as detailed by Jean-Baptiste
Brenet in his introduction to the French translation of Aquinas’ De spiritualibus creaturis, Les créatures spirituelles.
9 The definition given in Edward W. Lane’s classic dictionary is quoted by Taylor, “St. Thomas,” 511 n. 24; he also adds the reference to the relevant entry in
the Lisaˉn al-ʿArab by the lexicographer Ibn Manz․uˉr (d. ca. 1312), who explains
h․
ilya by means of the two terms s․
ıˉfa (description, attribute) and s․
uˉra (form). See
note 4 above. 10 Taylor, “St. Thomas,” 512–13. 11 Ibn Gabirol, Fons vitae 4. 1, ed. Baeumker, 212.2–8:“substantiae spirituales
communes sunt in materia, sed diversae in forma, hoc est, quia, postquam
effectus earum diversi sunt, nulli dubium est quin formae earum diversae sint;
et non est ei possibile quod materiae harum substantiarum sint diversae, eo
quod omnes simplices sunt et spirituales, et diversitas non est nisi ex forma,
et materia simplex non habet in se formam”; Bonaventure, In quatuor Sententiarum
2. 17. 1, q. 2 concl., ed. Quaracchi, 2:414b–415a: “Anima rationalis,
non autem brutalis, habet materiam, quae vocatur spiritualis. Respondeo: Ad
praedictorum intelligentiam est notandum, quod circa hoc diversi opinati
sunt. Quidam enim dixerunt, nullam animam, nec rationalem nec brutalem,
habere materiam, quia spiritus sunt simplices; animam tamen rationalem
dixerunt habere compositionem ex quo est et quod est, quia ipsa est hoc
aliquid et nata est per se et in se subsistere. — Sed cum planum sit, animam
rationalem posse pati et agere et mutari ab una proprietate in aliam et in se
ipsa subsistere; non videtur quod illud sufficiat dicere, quod in ea sit tantum
compositio ex quo est et quod est, nisi addatur esse in ea compositio materiae
et formae. Ideo fuerunt et alii, qui dixerunt, non solum animam rationalem,
sed etiam brutalem ex materia et forma compositam esse, cum utraque sit
motor corporis sufficiens. — Sed quia anima brutalis propriam operationem
non habet nec est nata per se subsistere, non videtur, quod habeat materiam
intra se. Et ideo est tertius modus dicendi, tenens medium inter utrumque,
scilicet quod anima rationalis, cum sit hoc aliquid et per se nata subsistere et
agere et pati, movere et moveri, quod habet intra se fundamentum suae existentiae et principium materiale, a quo habet existere, et formale, a quo habet
esse. De brutali autem non oportet illud dicere, cum ipsa fundetur in corpore.
Cum igitur principium, a quo est fixa existentia creaturae in se, sit principium
materiale; concedendum est, animam humanam materiam habere. Illa autem
materia sublevata est supra esse extensionis, et supra esse privationis et corruptionis, et ideo dicitur materia spiritualis. — Et propterea illi qui locuti sunt de
materiali principio quantum ad esse extensionis, et prout habet esse sub privatione, dixerunt, animam rationalem non habere materiam, non intendentes
de materia in sua generalitate, sed prout ad eam stat resolutio physica, sicut
dictum est de simplicitate angeli.” 12 The lemma is ةة الأولى أعلى من الصف لّ الع نّإ. Liber de causis, prop. 5[6], ed. Bardenhewer, 69.8 = ed. Badawıˉ, 8.11; “Causa prima superior est omni narratione,”
ed. Pattin, 147.22. 13 Liber de causis, prop. 5[6], ed. Bardenhewer, 71.7–9 = ed. Badawıˉ, 9.12–14;
Latin text ed. Pattin, 149.59–64. 14 The English translation of the Liber de causis is taken from Thomas Aquinas,
Commentary on the Book of Causes, trans. Guagliardo, Hess, and Taylor, 46. 15 Proclus, Elements of Theology, ed. Dodds, 108.25–28. The lemma of prop.
123 runs: Πᾶν τὸ θεῖον αὐτὸ μὲν διὰ τὴν ὑπερούσιον ἕνωσιν ἄρρητόν ἐστι
καὶ ἄγνωστον πᾶσι τοῖς δευτέροις, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν μετεχόντων ληπτόν ἐστι καὶ
240 Cristina D’Ancona
γνωστόν· διὸ μόνον τὸ πρῶτον παντελῶς ἄγνωστον, ἅτε ἀμέθεκτον ὄν. “All
that is divine is itself ineffable and unknowable by any secondary being because of its supra-existential unity, but it may be apprehended and known
from the existents which participate in it: wherefore only the First Principle
is completely unknowable, as being unparticipated,” trans. Dodds, ibid., 109. 16 For Proclus, the first derivative level after the One consists of a number of
metaphysical entities named Henads (“unities”), followed by other derivative
levels that include the intelligible world (in its turn articulated into hierarchical levels) until one reaches the level of the intellectual principles, with the
hypostatic Intellect at its peak. Examining the point in detail would go beyond the scope of this chapter; for a discussion of the difference between the
Liber de causis and Proclus’ Elements of Theology on this count, see D’Ancona,
“La doctrine de la création.” 17 The lemma is كلّها قلٌ ية المبتدعة الأولى ع نّوالأ , Liber de causis, prop. 4, ed. Bardenhewer, 66.5 = ed. Badawıˉ, 7.1; “Et esse quidem creatum primum est intelligentia totum,” ed. Pattin, 143.64–65. 18 Liber de causis, prop. 2, ed. Bardenhewer, 61.10–63.3 = ed. Badawıˉ, 4.16–5.8 =
ed. Pattin,138.71–139.97. See, in part, ed. Bardenhewer, 62.1–2 = ed. Badawıˉ,
5.1–2: قل ة التي مع الدهر فهي الع نيّ ا الأ مّوأ ; ed. Pattin, 138.76: “Sed esse quod est
cum aeternitate est intelligentia.” 19 Here is the beginning of prop. 4 of the Liber de causis, in the translation of
Guagliardo, Hess, and Taylor: “The first of created things is being, and there
is nothing else created before it. This is because being is above sense, above
soul, and above intelligence, and after the first cause there is no effect more
extensive or prior to it. As a result, then, it came to be higher than all [other]
created things and to be more powerfully united. It came to be so only because of its nearness to the pure being and the true one, in which there is no
multiplicity of any sort. Although created being is one, nevertheless it comes
to be multiple because it receives multiplicity.” Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on the Book of Causes, trans. Guagliardo, Hess, and Taylor, 28. 20 زّأ جتالعقل جوهر لا ي Liber de causis, prop. 6[7], ed. Bardenhewer, 72.1 = ed. Bad-
awıˉ, 9.16; “Intelligentia est substantia quae non dividitur,” ed. Pattin, 149.65.
The source is prop. 171 of Proclus, Elements of Theology, ed. Dodds, 150.1–14,
whose lemma runs: Πᾶς νοῦς ἀμέριστός ἐστιν οὐσία (“Every intelligence is
an indivisible existence,” trans. Dodds, 151). 21 Namely, the first Intellect as well as all the other separate intellects: the existence of other separate intellects is stated in the first part of prop. 4 of the Liber
de causis (see note 19 above) and the second part, circulating as prop. “5” in
the Latin version (see note 2 above), elaborates more on the hierarchy among
intelligences. The lemma is ته عقل يعلم ما فوقه وما تح كلّ Liber de causis, prop. 7[8],
ed. Bardenhewer, 74.1 = ed. Badawıˉ, 10.15; “Omnis intelligentia scit quod
est supra se et quod est sub se,” ed. Pattin, 152.6–7. The source is prop. 173 of
Proclus, Elements of Theology, ed. Dodds, 150.22–152.7, whose lemma begins:
Πᾶς νοῦς νοερῶς ἐστι καὶ τὰ πρὸ αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰ μετ’ αὐτόν (“Every intelligence is intellectually identical both with its priors and with its consequents,”
trans. Dodds, 151). 22 Taylor, “Kalaˉm fıˉ mah․
d․ al-khair,” 39. 23 Liber de causis, prop. 8[9], ed. Bardenhewer, 76.2 = ed. Badawıˉ, 11.14; ed.
Pattin, 154.47–48. 24 Translated in Taylor, “Aquinas,” 231. 25 Liber de causis, prop. 8[9], ed. Bardenhewer, 76.3–77.7 = ed. Badawıˉ, 11.14–
12.7; ed. Pattin, 154.49–156.76. 26 Translated in Taylor, “Aquinas,” 231, slightly modified.
Anniyya faqat․ Again 241 27 Plotinus’ doctrine of the three principles One, Intellect, and Soul is stated
chiefly in treatise 5. 1[10], translated almost in its entirety in Arabic and transmitted in the pseudo-Theology of Aristotle. For an overview of this text, see
D’Ancona, “Theology Attributed to Aristotle.” 28 The topic of the divine government (tadbıˉr) occurs both in texts of Neoplatonic allegiance such as the ps.-Theology of Aristotle and in the adaptations
of Alexander of Aphrodisias issuing from the “circle of al-Kindıˉ” (see next
note) such as the Arabic version of Q. 2. 19. For instances of tadbıˉr in the ps.-
Theology of Aristotle as a rendering of πρόνοια, ἐπίνοια, or of the verb κοσμεῖν,
see Afluˉt․ıˉ n ʿind al- ʿArab, ed. Badawıˉ, 66.11, 91.11, 120.5, 127.15; for instances
of mudabbir, see 66.9, 67.3.5, 105.3, 120.6. For the same topic and terminology
in the Arabic version of Alexander’s Q. 2. 19, see Wiesner, “Cosmology of
al-Kindıˉ,” 65–66; Fazzo and Wiesner, “Alexander of Aphrodisias.” On the
interactions of the two traditions of thought in the circle of al-Kindıˉ, see also
Zimmermann, “Proclus Arabus.” 29 See Proclus Arabus, ed. Endress; Endress, “Circle of al-Kindıˉ.” 30 On the Plotinian sources of the topic of the soul in horizonte aeternitatis et
temporis, see D’Ancona, “Esse quod est supra eternitatem.” The topic and terminology of the “horizon,” ufuq, feature twice in the Liber de causis: first in
prop. 2, ed. Bardenhewer, 62.4 = ed. Badawıˉ, 5.3, and then here in prop.
8[9], provided that one follows the Latin, which I deem to convey the right
reading. Both ed. Bardenhewer, 77.7, and ed. Badawıˉ, 12.6, read here قوما فو
طبيعة ال , but the Latin has et horizontem nature, ed. Pattin, 156.75. Since the text
goes on to explain why it is so, and says nam ipsa est supra naturam, if one reads
with Bardenhewer and Badawıˉ one has the blatant redundancy “the soul is
above nature because it is above nature.” Thus, the Arabic text of the extant
manuscripts reproduced in both editions should be emended here طبيعة ال وأفق
on the basis of the Latin attestation, allowing us to reconstruct the reading of
the Arabic manuscript available to Gerard of Cremona. 31 Liber de causis, prop. 8[9], ed. Bardenhewer, 77.8–78.2 = ed. Badawıˉ, 12.7–10;
ed. Pattin, 156.76–84. 32 Translated in Taylor, “Aquinas,” 231. 33 “Now our aim in this book is the discourse on the Divine Sovereignty, and
the explanation of it, and how it is the first cause, eternity and time being beneath it, and that it is the cause and originator of causes, in a certain way, and
how the luminous force steals from it over mind and, through the medium of
mind, over the universal celestial soul, and from mind, through the medium
of soul, over nature, and from soul, through the medium of nature, over
the things that come to be and pass away. This action arises from it without
motion; the motion of all things comes from it and is caused by it, and things
move towards it by a kind of longing and desire.” In Plotiniana Arabica, trans.
Lewis, 487, corresponding to Afluˉt․ıˉ n ʿind al-ʿarab, ed. Badawıˉ, 6.7–12. 34 Cf. Taylor, “Primary Causality,” esp. 131:“If we are to allow this notion of
i bdaˉʿ (creatio)—up to this point called ‘origination’ in this article—to be called
creation, let us call it for the present creation2 as emanative origination and
let it be specified that it entails the negation of will, choice, the necessity of
nature characteristic of things having nature or form (which is necessity2),
and also external compulsion (which is necessity3). The act that follows immediately upon the being of the First is the emanation of all reality from it
as the Good. This emanative causality founded on the First as the Good is
common to Plotinus, Proclus, the PA, the LDC, al-Farabi, and Avicenna. For
each of these it involves the causing by the primary cause of the existence of
something after nothing as well as a continuous ontological activity of causing
242 Cristina D’Ancona
upon which all reality after itself depends.” (In this quotation, PA stands for
the whole of the various texts of the Arabic Plotinus). 35 Liber de causis, prop. 8[9], ed. Bardenhewer, 78.2–79.4 = ed. Badawıˉ, 12.10–
17; ed. Pattin, 156.85–158.7. 36 Translated in Taylor, “Aquinas,” 232. 37 Taylor, “Primary Causality,” 130 n. 36, describes this formula as “oxymoronic and intentionally so.” 38 Suffice it to think of The Divine Names of Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagite,
where we read in 5. 4: “Ἐπειδὴ καὶ περὶ τούτων εἴπομεν, φέρε, τἀγαθὸν
ὡς ὄντως ὂν καὶ τῶν ὄντων ἁπάντων οὐσιοποιὸν ἀνυμνήσωμεν. ὁ ὢν ὅλου
τοῦ εἶναι κατὰ δύναμιν ὑπερούσιός ἐστιν ὑποστάτις αἰτία καὶ δημιουργὸς
ὄντος, ὑπάρξεως, ὑποστάσεως, οὐσίας, φύσεως, ἀρχὴ καὶ μέτρον αἰώνων
καὶ χρόνων, ὀντότης καὶ αἰὼν τῶν ὄντων, χρόνος τῶν γιγνομένων, τὸ εἶναι
τοῖς ὁπωσοῦν οὖσι, γένεσις τῶν ὁπωσοῦν γιγνομένοις. ἐκ τοῦ ὄντος αἰὼν
καὶ οὐσία καὶ ὂν καὶ χρόνος καὶ γένεσις καὶ γινόμενον, τὰ ἐν τοῖς οὖσιν
ὄντα καὶ τὰ ὁπωσοῦν ὑπάρχοντα καὶ ὑφεστῶτα. καὶ γὰρ ὁ θεὸς οὐ πώς ἐστιν
ὤν, ἀλλ’ ἁπλῶς καὶ ἀπεριορίστως ὅλον ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὸ εἶναι συνειληφὼς καὶ
προειληφώς”(ed. Suchla, 182.17–183.5). See Pseudo-Dionysius, The Divine
Names, trans. Jones, 164–65: “Since we are discussing these matters, let us celebrate the good as really being, and as producing being for all beings together.
In a power beyond being the being of the whole being is support, cause and
creator of being, constitution, being, and nature, source and measure of what
is eternal and temporal, beingness and eternity of what is, time of what comes
to be, the being of whatsoever is, genesis of whatsoever comes to be. From out
of being: eternity, being, be-ing, time, genesis, becoming, what is in beings,
whatsoever is constituted and subsisting. God is not somehow being, but simply and unlimited being, comprehending and anticipating the whole being in
itself” (translation slightly modified). 39 In her introduction to the Philosophy Reader, ed. Wakelnig, 1–3, the editor
presents the context and purpose of the anonymous author as follows: “The
text is a compilation of philosophical material taken from various Greek and
Arabic authorities quoted either by name or anonymously. The exact sources
are indicated only in a few cases. The subjects dealt with are metaphysics,
psychology, natural sciences in the guise of physiology, ethics and politics, in
other words most of the Late Antique branches of philosophy. Thus the compilation may be described as a philosophy reader and this description provides
an appropriate term with which to refer to the text from now on, namely as
Philosophy Reader (PR). However, what purpose the PR served for its readers
is hard to tell with any certainty. It may have been used as a manual or textbook for studies or as an anthology of the common philosophical knowledge
of its time. [. . .] It is highly plausible that the compiler of PR was part of
Miskawayh’s circle, and maybe his student or a student of one of his students.” 40 Plotinus, Enneads, trans. Armstrong, 5:37. 41 Unless otherwise specified by expressions pointing to the world of coming-to-
be and passing away, “being” stands for “intelligible being” in all the
metaphysical texts of Neoplatonic allegiance. 42 Philosophy Reader, ed. and trans. Wakelnig, 94.17–96.2 (Arabic), 95 (Wakelnig’s English translation). 43 Plotinus, Enneads, trans. Armstrong, 7:323. 44 Philosophy Reader, ed. and trans. Wakelnig, 98.7–14 (Arabic), 99 (Wakelnig’s
English translation). 45 The starting point of the classical scholarship on this crucial topic of early
Islamic theology is typified by Pretzl, “Die frühislamische Attributenlehre”;
Wolfson, “Muslim Attributes”; Wolfson, “Philosophical Implications,” 73–80;
Anniyya faqat․ Again 243
Allard, Le problème des attributs divins; Frank, “Divine Attributes”; Frank, Beings and Their Attributes; Frank, “Attribute, Attribution, and Being”; and van
Ess, Theologie und Gesellschaft, 4:431–78. More recent studies include D’Ancona,
“Causa prima superior est omni narratione”; Adamson, “Al-Kindıˉ and the
Muʿtazila”; Schöck, “Jahm b. S․afwaˉn”; and Bennett, “Muʿtazilite Movement.” 46 Al -Faˉraˉbıˉ, Mabaˉdi ʾ aˉraˉ’ ahl al-madıˉna al-faˉd․ila, 70.1–76.8 (Arabic), 71–77
(Wakelnig’s English translation); see also Martini Bonadeo, “‘Abd al-Lat․
ıˉf.” 47 Taylor, “Aquinas,” 227–28.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Abuˉ Nas․
r. Mabaˉdiʾ aˉraˉʾ ahl al-madıˉna al-faˉd․ila. A revised text with introduction, translation, and commentary by Richard Walzer. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1985.
Bonaventure. Commentaria in quatuor libros sententiarum. Edited by Collegium
Sancti Bonaventurae. Claras Aquas (Quaracchi): Ex Typographia Collegii S.
Bonaventurae, 1882–89.
Ibn Gabirol. Avencebrolis (Ibn Gebirol) Fons Vitae, ex Arabico in Latinum translatus ab
Iohanne Hispano et Dominico Gundissalino. Edited by Clemens Baeumker. Münster: Aschendorff, 1995.
Plotinus. Afluˉt․
ıˉ n ʿind al- ʿArab = Plotinus apud Arabes: Theologia Aristotelis. Edited by
ʿAbd al-Rahman Badawıˉ. Cairo: Maktabat al-Nahd․a al-mis․
riyya, 1955.
Plotinus. Enneades IV–V. Plotiniana Arabica. Edited by Paul Henry and Hans-Rudolf Schwyzer, translated by Geoffrey Lewis. Paris: Desclée de Brouwer,
1959.
Plotinus. Enneads. Translated by Arthur H. Armstrong. 7 vols. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1984.
Proclus. Al-Aflaˉt․
uˉniyya al-muh․datha ʿind al-ʿarab. Edited by Abdurrah․maˉn Badawıˉ.
Cairo: Maktabat al-Nahd․
a al-mis․
riyya, 1955.
Proclus. The Elements of Theology: A Revised Text. 2nd edition. Translated, with introduction and commentary by Eric R. Dodds. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963.
Proclus. Proclus Arabus: Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio Theologica in arabischer
Übersetzung. Edited by Gerhard Endress. Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1973.
Pseudo-Aristotle. Die pseudo-aristotelische Schrift Ueber das reine Gute bekannt unter
dem Namen Liber de causis. Edited by Bertram O. Bardenhewer. Freiburg im
Breisgau: Herder’sche Verlagshandlung, 1882.
Pseudo-Aristotle. “Le Liber de Causis: Édition établie à l’aide de 90 manuscrits
avec introduction et notes.” Edited by Adriaan Pattin. Tijdschrift voor Filosofie
28 (1966): 90–203.
Pseudo-Dioysius. The Divine Names and The Mystical Theology. Translated with an
introductory study by John D. Jones. Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University
Press, 1980.
Thomas Aquinas. Commentary on the Book of Causes. Translated by Vincent A.
Guagliardo, Charles R. Hess, and Richard C. Taylor. Washington, DC: The
Catholic University of America Press, 1996.
Thomas Aquinas. Les créatures spirituelles: Texte latin en vis-à-vis. Translated with
introduction and notes by Jean-Baptiste Brenet. Paris: Vrin, 2010.
244 Cristina D’Ancona
Thomas Aquinas. Super Librum de causis expositio. Edited by Henri D. Saffrey.
Paris: Vrin, 2002.
Wakelnig, Elvira, ed. and trans. A Philosophy Reader from the Circle of Miskawayh.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Secondary Literature
Adamson, Peter. “Al-Kindıˉ and the Muʿtazila: Divine Attributes, Creation and
Freedom.” Arabic Sciences & Philosophy 13, no. 1 (2003): 45–77.
Allard, Michel. Le problème des attributs divins dans la doctrine d’al-Aš‘arıˉ et de ses
premiers grands disciples. Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1965.
Bennett, David. “The Muʿtazilite Movement (II): The Early Muʿtazilites.” In The
Oxford Handbook of Islamic Theology, edited by Khaled El-Rouayheb and Sabine
Schmidtke, 142–80. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016.
Burnett, Charles. “The Arabo-Latin Aristotle.” In The Letter Before the Spirit: The
Importance of Text Editions for the Study of the Reception of Aristotle, edited by Aafke
M. I. van Oppenraay and Resianne Fontaine, 95–107. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
https://brill.com/view/book/edcoll/9789004235083/B9789004235083_
006.xml
D’Ancona, Cristina. “La doctrine de la création mediante intelligentia dans le Liber
de causis et dans ses sources.” Revue des sciences philosophiques et théologiques 76, no. 2 (1992): 209–33.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “Nota sulla traduzione latina del libro di Aristotele sull’esposizione del Bene Puro e sul titolo Liber de causis.” In Scientia, Fides, Theologia: Studi di filosofia medievale in onore di Gianfranco Fioravanti, edited by Stefano Perfetti, 89–101. Pisa: ETS, 2011.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “The Theology Attributed to Aristotle: Sources, Structure,
Influence.” In The Oxford Handbook of Islamic Philosophy, edited by Khaled
El-Rouayheb and Sabine Schmidtke, 8–29. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2017.
D’Ancona Costa, Cristina. “Causa prima superior est omni narratione: Il tema delle
s․
ifaˉt Allaˉh nel primo neoplatonismo arabo.” Oriente moderno 80, no. 3 (2000):
519–55.
D’Ancona Costa, Cristina. “Esse quod est supra eternitatem: La Cause première,
l’être et l’éternité dans le Liber de causis et dans ses sources.” Archives d’histoire doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Âge 59 (1992): 41–62.
D’Ancona, Cristina, and Richard C. Taylor. “Le Liber de causis.” In Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques: Supplément, edited by Richard Goulet, 599–647. Paris:
Éditions du CNRS, 2003.
Endress, Gerhard. “The Circle of al-Kindıˉ: Early Arabic Translations from the
Greek and the Rise of Islamic Philosophy.” In The Ancient Tradition in Christian and Islamic Hellenism, edited by Gerhard Endress and Remke Kruk, 43–76.
Leiden: Research School CNWS, 1997.
Fazzo, Silvia, and Hillary S. Wiesner. “Alexander of Aphrodisias in the Kindıˉ
Circle and in al-Kindıˉ’s Cosmology.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 3, no. 1
(1993): 119–53.
Frank, Richard M. “Attribute, Attribution, and Being: Three Islamic Views.”
In Philosophies of Existence Ancient and Medieval, edited by Parviz Morewedge,
258–78. New York: Fordham University Press, 1982.
Anniyya faqat․ Again 245
Frank, Richard M. Beings and Their Attributes: The Teaching of the Basrian School of
the Muʿtazila in the Classical Period. Albany: SUNY Press, 1978.
Frank, Richard M. “The Divine Attributes According to the Teaching of Abuˉ
l-Hudhayl al-‘Allaˉ f.” Le Muséon 82 (1969): 451–506.
Lo Bello, Anthony. The Commentary of al-Nayrizi on Books II–IV of Euclid’s Elements of Geometry: With a Translation of That Portion of Book I Missing from MS
Leiden, Or. 399.1, but Present in the Newly Discovered Manuscript Edited by Rüdiger
Arnzen. Boston, MA: Brill, 2009.
Martini Bonadeo, Cecilia. “‘Abd al-Lat․
ıˉf al-Bag . daˉdıˉ’s Book on the Science of
Metaphysics: The First ‘Proclean’ Section (Chapter 20). Is the Pure Good of
the Mah․
d․ al-h․
ayr Aristotle’s First Principle, Intellect in Actuality?” Oriens 45 (2017): 259–305.
Pretzl, Otto. “Die frühislamische Attributenlehre: Ihre weltanschaulichen
Grundlagen und Wirkungen.” In Sitzungsberichte der Bayerischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften: Philosophisch-historische Abteilung, Heft 4. Munich: Verlag der
Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1940.
Schöck, Cornelia. “Jahm b. S․afwaˉn (d. 178/745–6) and the ‘Jahmiyya’ and Diraˉr
b. ‘Amr (d. 200/815).” In The Oxford Handbook of Islamic Theology, edited by
Khaled El-Rouayheb and Sabine Schmidtke, 55–80. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016.
Taylor, Richard C. “Aquinas, the Plotiniana Arabica, and the Metaphysics of Being
and Actuality.” Journal of the History of Ideas 59, no. 2 (1998): 217–39.
Taylor, Richard C. “The Kalaˉm fıˉ mah․
d․ al-khair (Liber de causis) in the Islamic
Philosophical Milieu.” In Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages: The “Theology”
and Other Texts, edited by Jill Kraye, William F. Ryan, and Charles-Bernhard
Schmitt, 37–51. London: The Warburg Institute, 1986.
Taylor, Richard C. “Primary Causality and ibdaˉ‘ (creare) in the Liber de causis.”
In Wahrheit und Geschichte: Die gebrochene Tradition metaphysischen Denkens, edited by Günther Mensching and Alia Mensching-Estakhr, 115–36. Würzburg:
Königshausen & Neumann, 2012.
Taylor, Richard C. “St. Thomas and the Liber de causis on the Hylomorphic Composition of Separate Substances.” Mediaeval Studies 41 (1979): 506–13.
van Ess, Josef. Theologie und Gesellschaft im. 2. und 3. Jahrhundert Hidschra: Eine
Geschichte des religiösen Denkens im frühen Islam. 6 vols. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1997.
Wiesner, Hillary S. “The Cosmology of al-Kindıˉ.” PhD diss., Harvard University, 1993.
Wolfson, Harry A. “The Muslim Attributes and the Christian Trinity.” The Harvard Theological Review 49, no. 1 (1956): 1–18.
Wolfson, Harry A. “Philosophical Implications of the Problem of Divine
Attributes in the Kalam.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 79, no. 2 (1959):
73–80.
Zimmermann, Fritz W. “Proclus Arabus Rides Again.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
4, no. 1 (1994): 9–51.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-13
The investigation of the truth is in one way hard, in another easy. [. . .]
Perhaps, too, as difficulties are of two kinds, the cause of the present difficulty is not in the facts but in us. For as the eyes of bats are to the blaze
of day, so is the reason in our soul to the things which are by nature most
evident of all. [. . .] It is right also that philosophy should be called knowledge of the truth. For the end of theoretical knowledge is truth, while
that of practical knowledge is action (for even if they consider how things
are, practical men do not study the eternal, but what is relative and in
the present). Now we do not know a truth without its cause; and a thing
has a quality in a higher degree than other things if in virtue of it the
similar quality belongs to the other things as well [. . .] so that that causes
derivative truths to be true is most true. Hence the principles of eternal
things must be always most true (for they are not merely sometimes true,
nor is there any cause of their being, but they themselves are the cause of
the being of other things), so that as each thing is in respect of being, so is it in
respect of truth.
(Aristotle, Metaphysics A 1, 993a30–993b30, trans. W. D. Ross, emphasis added)
In this contribution, I intend to dwell on Avicenna’s definition of truth or, more precisely, on some aspects of it that are related to the issue of analysis (or resolutio).1 Avicenna tends to rework elements from both of the traditions that constitute the history of analysis (and more generally the alphabet of Arabic philosophy)—namely, in a very broad sense, the Aristotelian and Neoplatonic traditions. The doctrine of truth, in which logic and metaphysics are closely intertwined, clearly demonstrates this.
The Issue of Truth
A good starting point, if not the most obvious, for an examination of
Avicenna’s conception of truth is the definition of truth (al-h․
aqq) that Avicenna himself proposes in his Metaphysics of the Book of the Healing (or, according to another possible translation in English, of the Cure) in the
10 Ontology and Logic in
Avicenna’s Concept of
Truth
A Commentary on Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1.8
Olga L. Lizzini
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 247
eighth section—or chapter—of the first treatise (the Ilaˉhiyyaˉt min Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ 1.8).2
In a very general sense, the aim of the first treatise is to establish the
foundations of metaphysical inquiry. Consequently, Avicenna’s main concern here is to discover the basis of the incontrovertibility of philosophy.
Following Aristotle’s Metaphysics Γ,3 he therefore shows the necessity of
the principle of non-contradiction (expressed here in terms of the excluded middle4) and explodes the (pseudo-)arguments of both skeptics and
sophists.5 Yet it is by degrees that Avicenna works his way up to the subject
of the truth of philosophy,6 and the very first step of his development is to
define truth itself (al-h․
aqq) and its relationship with the truth of discourse:
truthfulness (al-s․idq). In fact, Avicenna indicates two senses of al-h․
aqq:
As regards truth [al-h․
aqq], one understands by it existence in individuals
absolutely [mut ․laqan] and one understands by it permanent existence
[al-daˉʾim], and one understands by it the state of the verbal statement
or the link [or the combination] indicating the state of the external
thing, if it corresponds with it, such that we would say, “This is a true
statement” and “This is a true belief.”7
Avicenna’s own starting point is terminology, and it is, first of all, terminologically that truth is presented as both reality and truthfulness. In
fact, in these first lines of the chapter, Avicenna pinpoints an ontological
sense of the true (one might call it veritas essendi), separating it from the
logical sense (both veritas cognoscendi and veritas dicendi), but he does so by
identifying the different meanings contained in one Arabic term: al-h․
aqq,
which applies to both “true” and “real” and refers to the same root from
which are derived words like “right” (or “merit”: istih․
qaˉq, sometimes even
h․
aqq)—and “reality” (al-h․
aqq, al-h․
aqıˉqa).8
In the ontological sense of the word (al-h․aqq as “real”), Avicenna then
indicates an absolute or indeterminate mode (mut ․laqan) of being real and a
more specific or substantial one. The first covers existence in an absolute
sense, and hence being or existence in general and therefore (also) the
existence of individuals9—the term h․
aqıˉqa, which indicates the “reality”
of the thing, is often used as a synonym of maˉhiyya especially in concrete
things;10 the second corresponds specifically to eternal or permanent or
continuous (daˉʾim) existence. It is on the basis of this ontological distinction between truth in an indeterminate sense, which corresponds to simple existence, and a truth that is really true because it always is as it is—a
distinction which is already Aristotelian but also heavily indebted to the
Platonic and Neoplatonic interpretation of reality—that Avicenna then
presents the logical-linguistic sense of truth, i.e., truthfulness, according
to which al-h․
aqq is defined in relationship to the proposition (al-qawl) and
to logical predication, which establishes a link (ʿaqd) between things and is
expressed by the proposition itself.11 In his De interpretatione, too, Avicenna
248 Olga L. Lizzini
defines truth in terms of the correspondence to existence: “truth [al-h․
aqq]
is what corresponds to existence [al-wujuˉd].”12
Avicenna then defines both the ontological truth and the logical sense
of truth. He insists on the two concepts of permanence and primacy: the
Necessary Principle, which is first in the order of being, is always; the
principle of non-contradiction, introduced (in terms of the excluded middle) as the fundamental principle that can be predicated of all that exists
(of any “thing”), is the principle which is always truthful (al-s․aˉdiq) and its
truthfulness is primary:
As regards truth [al-h․aqq], one understands by it existence in individuals absolutely [mut ․laqan], and one understands by it permanent existence [al-daˉʾim], and one understands by it the state of the verbal statement or the link [or the combination]13 indicating the state of the external thing, if it corresponds with it, such that we would say, “This is a true statement” and “This is a true belief.” The Necessary
Existent is thus permanently true in itself, while the possible existent is true through another and false in itself. Hence, all things other than the One Necessary Existent are, in themselves, false. As for the truth by way of correspondence, it is similar to the truthful [al-s․aˉdiq], except that, as I reckon, it is “truthful” when considered in terms of its relation to the fact and “true” when the relation to the fact to it is considered.
The statements most deserving of being [called] true are those
whose truth is permanent; and, of these, the most deserving are those
whose truth is primary, requiring no cause. And the most primary of all
true statements, to which everything in analysis [al-tah․l ıˉl ] reduces (so
that it is predicated either potentially or actually of all things demonstrated or made evident through it), is—as we have shown in the Book
of Demonstration [i.e., Posterior Analytics]14—[as follows]: “There is no
intermediary between affirmation and negation.” This property is not
an occurrence to one [particular] thing but is one of the occurrences
to the existent inasmuch as it exists, because of its pervasiveness in all
existing [things].15
Avicenna therefore defines ontological truth as existence in individuals absolutely
(mut ․laqan) and as permanent existence (al-daˉʾim), whereas logical
truth is reality or the correspondence to existence, i.e., “the state of the
verbal statement or the link which indicates the state of the external thing,
if it corresponds with it” (and this can be on a linguistic, propositional
level—“This is a true statement”—or merely on a logical, conceptual level—“This is a true belief”). What is first both on the ontological and
on the logical-linguistic level is what is permanent, primary, requiring no
cause. First on the ontological level is therefore the First Principle, Necessary Existent, while the first truth as correspondence (which corresponds to the
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 249
truthful, al-s․aˉdiq, when considered in terms of its relation to the fact) is the
statement which expresses existent inasmuch as it exists: this is the principle predicated either potentially or actually of all things, i.e., that to which
everything in analysis (al-tah․l ıˉl ) reduces and the fundamental rule of predication: “There is no intermediary between affirmation and negation.”
I shall first examine truth in the sense of logic (which refers primarily to
the role of discursive reasoning and therefore dianoia) and then analyze the
ontological or metaphysical sense of truth. If, at least in a sense, the latter
(which might be said to correspond to the act of the intellect as ʿaql/nous)
is simple, in another sense—as we shall see—it is also compound or, more
precisely, interrelated to other simple elements and therefore complex.16
Two Premises
However, before going into detail, two premises seem to be necessary.
The first premise concerns the so-called first intentions or primary notions. In fact, one must point out that Avicenna does not ascribe absolute
primacy or priority only to the rule of predication. If in Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1.8, the
final result of the analysis (al-tah․l ıˉl ) is the principle of non-contradiction
(but only the excluded middle is cited), a famous passage of the first book
of the Metaphysics (Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1.5) poses—along with the primacy or absolute
priority of the principles—the primacy of the first conceptual representations (tas․a wwuraˉt ).17 These are not the rules of thought, but, so to speak,
their formal, fundamental elements. Moreover, as primary, transcategorial
and necessary, the first conceptual representations—which are, essentially,
the existent (or existence),18 the thing,19 the necessary,20 and the one21—
can be approached, as we know, as the medieval idea of transcendentals.22
Avicenna in fact refers to the principles of representations at the end of
the section (1.8), insisting that the principles are the necessary conditions
of analysis: “the investigation [al-bah․
t] of the principles of conception and
definition is not itself a definition or a conception; nor is the investigation
of the principles of demonstration itself a demonstration.”23 Any (analytical) demonstration is ultimately based on something which cannot be
analyzed in its turn.
There are therefore two levels of primacy, at once irreducible to one
another and inseparable from each other: one is that of intentionality or
conceivability, the other that of the rule of predication.
The second premise concerns precisely this first level of primacy, that
of the so-called first intentions. In fact, if we put aside the question of the
different shades of meaning that one should attribute to each of the primary notions presented by Avicenna (Robert Wisnovsky, Thérèse-Anne
Druart, and Amos Bertolacci insist on different connotations of “existent”
and “thing,” depending on the extension or intension attributed to the
two notions24), it should be noted that on the ontological level (which is
in a sense also logical), we are obliged to consider a further distinction,
250 Olga L. Lizzini
which is fundamental to the articulation of the whole Avicennian system:
on the one hand, one has existence (oneness) and necessity (developing
this theory, Avicenna adds to these “the established existence” or the existence which establishes the thing as such: al-wujuˉd al-ithbaˉtıˉ); on the other,
there is the “thing”: with its “thingness” (al-shayʾiyya), its proper existence
(al-wujuˉ d al-khaˉs․
s․
), its “reality” (al-h․
aqıˉqa).25 The thing, by virtue of its
thingness, refers to quiddity and can therefore, in the specific sense in
which Avicenna constructs his metaphysics, refer to possibility.26
What constitutes both the world and our knowledge of it is Existence,
Being, as exemplified by both the existent and the principle of non-contradiction. However, in it, one must include an inevitable distinction: everything that exists (everything that is an existent thing, and is
not the First Principle) implies a composition of a possible determination
(the quiddity, which to a certain extent corresponds to the “reality” of
the thing) and an actual or realized existence.27 Nonetheless, although essence and existence are to be understood as “distinct”—so that they might
be said to introduce compositeness in existent things—they prove to be
inseparable from each other and hence resistant to any attempt to consider
them independent.28 And, as one must notice, the duality and distinction/
composition we find in the essence-existence distinction is reflected in the
dual or double primacy of the logical principles. This cannot be dissolved
either in favor of the principle of non-contradiction, which can be predicated of any existent thing, or in favor of the intentions, as each concept
implicitly but immediately refers to a judgment.
Truth of the Discourse
Now, in what respect can one recognize this articulation in the definition
of the logical truth (truthfulness, more precisely)? In other words, what
does it mean to tell the truth in respect to this distinction?
The definition of truth in a logical sense necessarily implies the articulation of thought in “conception” (concept) or “conceptual representation”
and “assent.” This is a very well-known aspect of Avicenna’s logic. A concept is the representation or “vision” that one constructs of things (tas․
awwur
means, properly, to receive or elaborate a form, s․
uˉra); assent expresses
the psychological (and, in a sense, finally the subjective) fact that we are
convinced of this vision and that we believe in it (tas․
dıˉq means that we give
consent to judgments that affect our conceptions; the operation of denying consent is fundamentally the same and is called takdhıˉb).29 The form
of knowledge which is reached by virtue of conceptual representation—
analogous to the Aristotelian idea of signification—concerns a represented
thing and implies mental existence (it answers the question about the nature, essence, or quiddity of a thing: maˉ huwa? quid sit—“what is it?”). The
knowledge realized by assent depends on the links that the quiddity establishes with other things and can therefore inform about external reality;
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 251
it can inform us of the existence of the thing (and therefore answers the
question hal huwa? an sit—“is there?”). A representation corresponds to the
meaning (maʿnaˉ) of the word or sentence that expresses it; it is transmitted
by a definition (h․
add) and is in fact an intention (maʿnaˉ). Assent, instead,
is a verification of the existence of a thing (and the modes or states that
are proper to it); as such, it implies existence as something external to the
quiddity or essence and verifiable by judgment (eminently on the basis
of external reality). While it is not the composition itself, assent does not
exist without the composition: it is the act by which the soul recognizes
the composition of predication as true, i.e., as corresponding to reality and
existence.30
In other words, the two terms of this distinction constitute knowledge
(and determine the ways of truth or, conversely, of error), as they represent
reality and the possibility of thinking of reality and existence in their complementarity: on the one hand, the individual elements (reflected by representation, in the estimative faculty or in the intellect; sometimes, more
generally, Avicenna speaks of the mind31); on the other, the links that
these very same elements establish between themselves (and with external reality) and which are recognized by assent. The distinction between
representation and assent, which one is tempted to reduce to that between
nous and dianoia, reflects the distinction between quiddity and existence
(and existence is also in the mind32).
Now, although it is in terms of distinction—if not opposition—that Avicenna presents the two elements of conceptual representation and assent
or verification,33 they clearly cannot be conceived as two fundamentals on
the same level: conceptions form judgment and provide the elements that
constitute the matter of assent; at the same time, they are not parts of it, for
judgment is in fact not the sum of the representations that form it, but the
result of the relations that conceptual representations establish with each
other.34 Considered in themselves, conceptual representations are unitary
(and seem to reflect a noetic act); nevertheless, placed within the judgment
that leads to assent, they make possible the dianoetic operation that consists in actualizing or bringing to light the relations that representations
themselves imply. In other words, no matter how unitary they may be,
representations always involve relations, and relations relate to the conceivability of existent reality. The concept of “animal” is itself unitary, but
when subjected to analysis, it involves relations with other representations
(and entities: body, life, soul, etc.). These relations can be explained only
on the basis of other concepts, such as the subject, the predicate, the universal, etc., that is, on the basis of those intelligible intentions that belong
to the quiddity of a thing (or to the quiddity as it is conceived), but also
on the basis of those intentions that establish its existence (and that are in
a sense always causal relations).35
This is the sense of hierarchy between representations and assent (or
verification) that the analysis (in fact, in a quite aporetical way) states:
252 Olga L. Lizzini
representations are anterior or prior to judgment because they are the extremes of the relations that form a judgment, but this, in turn, always gives
rise to a representation.36
One might therefore affirm that a unitary (and in that sense noetic)
act of the intellect can grasp reality, but in order to describe or narrate
it as such, dianoia is necessary. Dianoia recognizes the articulations that
belong to reality. Dianoia knows and expresses the predicative composition that refers to reality, or, more precisely, to the intellection of reality.
The unitary character of representations (the nous) does not—at least not necessarily—refer to the intellection derived from reality, but to intellection itself,37 which is why, incidentally, God’s thought can be only noetic.
An image in the Kitaˉb al-Taʿlıˉqaˉt , referring to the knowledge of the Principle, can be taken as an illustration of this point:
And the image that illustrates it [al-mithaˉl] is this: you read a book and
someone asks you a question about what you know of its contents.
“Do you know”—he asks—“what is in the book?” You’ll certainly
say “Yes,” because you’re sure you know it and you’re sure you’ll be
able to report its [content] in detail. The simple intelligence is that
which has representation in this way [al-ʿaql al-basıˉt․
huwa al-mus․
awwir
bi-haˉdhihi l-s․
uˉra]. Among the human intellects there is no intellect of
this kind [ʿalaˉ haˉdhaˉ al-mithaˉl ], [no intellect] which is able to have representation of the forms of the intelligibles in one set and immediately
[. . .]. The First has intellection of things and forms in the sense that
It is the principle of [these] forms [which are] existent and intellected,
and in the sense that they flow from It [anna-haˉ faˉʾid․a ʿan-hu], abstract,
at the purest level of abstraction: [and] in It there is no differentiation
of different forms, as ordered in ranks. Indeed, It has intellection [of
them] in a simple way and at the same time [It has intellection] of the
differentiation in [their] order and It has not intellection of them from
the outside.38
Now, as is known, if conceptions refer to intellection, instead of or prior to
(external, existent) reality, conceptions have been granted a fundamental
autonomy from existent reality itself (and from the opposition between
truth and falsehood that is derived from it).
This can be seen in terms of language. If judgment is a proposition,
which is, as such, necessarily subject to the alternatives of truth and falsity
(i.e., assent or denial: “man is existent,” “the horse races,” “the horse is
white”), conceptual representations can instead be traced back to words,
which are in themselves neutral as regards truth (“horse,” “man,” “white,”
“unicorn”), or to propositions which are not connected to truth value
(“do this!”),39 or, finally, to propositions which are not subject to the alternative of truth and falsity (propositions to which one cannot give any
assent, such as “there will be a sea battle tomorrow,” as is already to be
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 253
found in Aristotle’s De interpretatione40), and which correspond to things
that are possible (as in the case of essences considered in themselves but
in relation to existence; cf. Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 5.1). For this reason, that is, precisely
because representations as such do not imply either truth or falsity, they
make it possible to conceive of the (relative) non-existent, provide an insight of possibilities, and refer to judgment as a necessary complement to
the activity of conception.
On the one hand, judgment makes it possible to verify concepts, establishing whether the relation between the quiddity expressed by a concept
and its existence takes place only in the mental sphere (as is the case with
the void, the chimera, and the unicorn) or in the realm of external reality. On the other, since judgment itself gives rise to a representation (and
the inference derived from a syllogism is a representation as well), each
conception is always open, so to speak, to verification and then to assent,
thus making it possible to generate knowledge as a causal chain that corresponds perfectly to what reality is. Indeed, acquiring knowledge reflects
the hierarchy expressed by emanation, but by retracing its path in reverse:
every conceptual representation ends with an assent and leads to another
representation. In analogy with emanation, every gnoseological process
needs both a starting point and a final cause which is also an end.41
So assent, which is defined according to relations, establishes a clear
relationship with existence and therefore with truth (and, conversely, with
falsehood), while conceptions, since they do not exhibit existential relations, do not seem to establish any relationship with truth (in themselves
they are neither true nor false42).
The neutrality or indifference of conceptions with respect to existence
might appear to be a problem, but—as we have emphasized—it allows us
to proceed from the known to the unknown and hence is functional from
a logical point of view; moreover, it guarantees creativity. In fact, precisely
because they can relate to things that are (relatively) not existent (or to
things whose existence one does not take into account, since one ignores
it), conceptual representations allow knowledge to proceed. In Avicenna’s
interpretation of the Meno paradox, for example, research is a process by
means of which one seeks to learn the truth of a predicate that concerns a
conceptual representation, and thus the validity of assent—which, before
the cognitive process is concluded, is still, in a sense, “non-existent” or
“not true.”43
Knowledge—which is itself conceived as a relation44—is hence developed on the basis of relations, just as existence itself develops on the basis of relations. Relations constitute judgment (subject and predicate are in relation to each other), and truth is defined in relational terms. Avicenna—we can look once again at the definition of truth from which we started—refers, as regards language, to propositions (he specifically mentions the statement or what is said: al-qawl), and, as regards thought, to the conceptual link (al-ʿaqd) that it expresses. The idea of truth as
254 Olga L. Lizzini
correspondence regards, in fact, not simply what one thinks, but what one thinks (and expresses) as related by a logical link to something else (“man is an animal,” “a man is sitting”), even if that something else is existence (“man is existent”). Relations build existence (and external reality).
Hence, we can better understand the meaning of the passage in which
Avicenna defines truth (truthfulness). The “conceptual link” or “combination” Avicenna discusses indicates the logical concatenation which is
recognized as true in the assent; the term that Avicenna uses here—ʿaqd,
a term occasionally rendered as “belief”—refers to assent; it is derived
from the same root as iʿtiqaˉd, “belief,” which is sometimes used by Avicenna in place of the technical terminology of assent.45 Certainly, the
relations that thought and language establish with existence are not identical: thought has an immediate, although not exclusive, relation with the
external world, while the relation of language to the external world and
to reality in general is always mediated by thought.46 Nevertheless, both
relate to the truth only to the extent that they imply a combination and
therefore provide for a relation.
In short, what Avicenna expresses here through the notions of the link
(ʿaqd) and the statement (qawl) is that truth concerns only reason (thought,
speech) as far as it composes and divides—establishing relations—and not
the intellect as such.47 For Avicenna, truth is not established by the simplicity of the intellect, but by its articulation or connecting ability (which
is reason). As we have already seen, Avicenna does not defend the idea
(which was impossible for Aristotle as well) of truth as a correspondence
between what is thought and reality (intellectus et rei), but instead promotes
the notions of truth as a correspondence between what one thinks (and
expresses) as related by a logical link to something else and of reality as the
guarantee of this link.
Thus, if truth is propositional, this is precisely because existence is relational or, more exactly, because what can be grasped about existent reality is relational: “all that exists has a relation or a link with the other existing [things].”48 In other words, relations—which point to reality but lie only in intellection (as we read in both Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 3.10 and the Categories)—allow us to think of things in respect to both their quiddity and their existence.49
Conceiving a thing as existent—either in the mind or in external reality—always means thinking of it in relation to other existent “things.”
For this reason, although conceptual representations (which are in the
soul) always correspond to an entity (in the soul or even in external reality), it is only the combination of representations that provides knowledge
of reality and expresses conceived things within the framework of truth
and falsehood. In other words, the true intellection of the world never
comprises things considered “atomically” (in their quiddity). Logical truth
is syntactic: it always concerns things recognized as part of a whole; it
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 255
always concerns the relationships that things establish among themselves
(regardless of whether they are related to the quiddity of the thing, to
mental existence, or to external existence).
In brief, then: as for Aristotle, so also for Avicenna, existence (being) is a
guarantee of the truth that is always expressed only propositionally. However, when Aristotle speaks of truth as a possible predicate of a proposition,
the basis of what he says is an analysis of being that envisages substance
(i.e., the individually existing substance, the to de ti, al-mushaˉr ilay-hi) and
its predication. When Avicenna speaks of truth (or truthfulness) in the
sense of correspondence, his background is totally different: the foundation of Avicenna’s ontology is no longer to be found in the substance and
unity of being, but instead in its internal and inescapable division and the
consequent composition which recognizes in things an essence or quiddity and an existence. It is in this sense that the ontological background of
Avicenna’s theory of truth lies in relations, logical and ontological.
Truth as Reality: The Principle (Truth as Permanent
and Primary)
Thus, we understand how Avicenna considers the traditional predicative
conception of (discursive) truth: truth is nothing but the correspondence
with existence—both external and mental—and its relations. But how
should one then define the truth that corresponds to the being of the First
Principle?
In the case of the Necessarily Existent, the distinction between quiddity and existence, which substantiates representation and assent, fades,
so that the conceptual representation (which theoretically corresponds to
the essence) implies (or should imply) assent and existence. In the case
of the Necessarily Existent, truth is, in fact, expressed through what resembles a tautology or what one might define (in anachronistic terms) as
an analytical proposition: the first attribute of the Necessarily Existent,
is—Avicenna declares—that It is and that It exists.50 In the case of the
Necessarily Existent, affirmation of existence is not added to, but included
in the conceptual representation of It.
Therefore, in the case of the Necessarily Existent, and only in Its case, truth is expressed as what it really is: an ontological independence, an absolute primacy, not derived from any other (exactly as in the case of the principle of non-contradiction), and therefore a stability, a permanence (and consequently, a pre-eternity). For this reason, as Avicenna states in conclusion—making use, in fact, of a locution which goes back to al-
Kindıˉ and even before him to the Arabic Plotinus (the pseudo-Theology of
Aristotle)—the Necessarily Existent is exactly al-awwal al-h․
aqq, the First
Reality, or that which is in Itself the First Truth: reality itself.51 When
truth is exactly what it is (eternal existence that is not dependent on anything52), the distinction between the two spheres of logic and ontology
256 Olga L. Lizzini
fades: to be true or real means conceiving the Necessarily Existent as existing beyond any relation.53 Therefore, the First Necessary Principle leads to resolving the distinction that the two levels (that of essence and that of existence, which may correspond to the noetic and the dianoetic) suggest. In the case of the Principle, in fact, the affirmation of truth is no longer possible only by virtue of relations: the Necessarily Existent Principle has no quiddity as distinct from existence;54 our very thought in
itself of the Principle, in Its necessity, is not indifferent to truth, no longer neutral as regards truth.
And clearly, once the Necessarily Existent is Itself defined as true (or
real)55—in the Risaˉla fıˉ aqsaˉm al-ʿuluˉm al-ʿaqliyya (Epistle on the Divisions of the Rational Sciences), one of the divisions of Metaphysics (the third) demonstrates the existence (ithbaˉt ) of the First Reality (or Truth:
al-h․
aqq) and Its attributes56—anything that is not the Necessarily Existent
must unavoidably be defined in itself as false (or vain or inconsistent or
non-existent).
In terms of the logical truth, this analysis leads to isolating a realm—existence—that is necessary (in itself or by virtue of another) and therefore
true, and a realm or sphere—that of the possibility of an essence (the possible)—of which, as such, truth cannot be predicated (this realm is neutral
as regards truth). On the level of ontological truth, though, things are
different and there is no symmetry: if the realm of existence and necessity
is also the realm of reality (absolutely, i.e., indefinitely, as it applies to everything that is, but properly and truly as it is said of what is continuous or
eternal and independent), possibility is no longer neutral as regards reality,
but vain or false (baˉt․il) or unreal and untrue.
The Aristotelian correspondence between non-being and being false
(Metaphysics Δ 7; E 2, 4; Θ 10; cf. Γ)—which, at the logical level, functions only as regards assent—is thus reacquired on the ontological level:
representations are neither true nor false, but “essences” (or “quiddities”
or “realities”) are, so to speak, either true, as in the case of the Necessary
Existent, or false, as in the case of everything else (or, if we assume that
the Necessary Existent has no quiddity, quiddities are always false). In
several passages, in fact, Avicenna asserts a clear correspondence between
the possible and non-being.57 Certainly, one might say, there is also a
way of understanding the possible, and therefore the quiddity, as neutral
concerning both existence and non-existence; and yet precisely because
of this neutrality, the possible cannot exist and is therefore ontologically
“false.”58 The equation between Being and Being true, non-Being, and Being
false is restored and is applied to being together with a modal determination: existence is always necessary (by itself or by virtue of some other),
and the Necessarily Existent is eternally and permanently true; conversely,
the world of possible existent entities is false (baˉt․il) (for necessity may be
necessary either by virtue of a relation with some other or independently
of any relation: this is ultimately the meaning of the formulas of the possibly and the necessarily existent).
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 257
The modal determination is also what explains why—even on the
propositional level—the Necessary Principle is always true: the Necessarily Existent possesses in Itself the conditions of the truth of the proposition that asserts Its existence, whereas the conditions that account for
the truth of the propositions that affirm the existence of possibly existing
things always depend on one another and ultimately on the Necessarily
Existent Itself.59 The necessary is indeed, as Avicenna says in Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1.5, “assuredness of existence” (which is what also explains why the necessary
is one of the primary notions).60
Moreover, if what is in itself possible does not exist as such (and is not
true), clearly, once it is considered as existing (i.e., as something which is
necessary by virtue of the relation nisba, ʿalaˉqa to its cause), it must be less
true than what is always and unconditionally true.61
In terms of ontology, truth (reality) is, in fact, primarily attributed to
the Necessarily Existent. This is clearly seen in the context of the discussion of the divine attributes. In a passage of Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 8.6, the terms truthfulness or veracity are evoked with reference to assent (or verification);
here, too, Avicenna uses the term that indicates the conviction or belief
(iʿtiqaˉd), which can be seen as a substitute for tas․
dıˉq (so we read in Ilaˉhiyyaˉt
8.662), and truth is ascribed primarily to the Necessarily Existent (which is
the Truth and the Reality).63
As noted, the attribution of the eminent sense of truth to the Necessarily Existent also allows us to regain the split between Being as it is
expressed by essence (neither true nor false), and Being as it is expressed by
existence (either true or false). Yet, again, it is crucial to point out that this
splitting applies only to the extent that the distinction between representation and assent is under consideration: the essence that is conceived in itself
is neither true nor false (see also Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 5.1); it is false (because it can exist
and then be non-existent) only in relation to assent (i.e., in relation to the
affirmation of the existence of the thing, which cannot be affirmed beyond
a relation to the cause of the thing). Moreover, if truth is independence
and primacy, quiddities, which exist in the things by virtue of their cause
(and are neither independent nor primary as regards existence), are false.
Truth as Reality: The Essences
Nevertheless, from another point of view, quiddities are true and real. In
fact, Avicenna ascribes an ontological sense of truth even to essence: in
the fifth section of the first book—the same section we already referred to
when evoking the conception of the first intelligible notions—Avicenna
indicates the “what is” of the thing as its reality (al-h․
aqıˉqa) and equates it
to quiddity (and to “proper existence,” which must be distinguished from
the established or affirmed existence):
The thing, or its equivalent, may be used in all languages to indicate
some other meaning. For, to everything there is a reality by virtue
258 Olga L. Lizzini
of which it is what it is. Thus, the triangle has a reality in that it is a
triangle, and whiteness has a reality in that it is whiteness. It is that
which we should perhaps call “proper existence,” not intending by
this the meaning given to affirmative [or established] existence; for
the expression “existence” is also used to denote many meanings, one
of which is the reality a thing happens to have. Thus, [the reality] a
thing happens to have is, as it were, its proper existence. To resume,
we say: it is evident that each thing has a reality proper to it—namely
its quiddity. It is known that the reality proper to each thing is something other than the existence that corresponds to what is affirmed [or
established].64
Avicenna offers two examples: the triangle and whiteness. The triangle
has a reality in that it is a triangle, and whiteness also has a reality in that it
is whiteness.65 In Metaphysics Θ 10, 1052a5ff., Aristotle gives the example
of the triangle, which does not change (it is immutable, it is one of the akineta)
in so far as it (always) has angles which are equal to two right angles.66
Thus Avicenna adds to the ontological sense of truth that is expressed by
existence, an ontological sense of truth that is expressed by quiddity (and
remains at the level of quiddity and of proper existence). If, in terms of
logic, quiddity corresponds to a conception and is therefore indifferent regarding truth, and if on the ontological level, which is related to existence
(which reflects the existential link between things), quiddity is neither
existent nor non-existent and is therefore non-existent and false, at the
ontological quidditative level, quiddity is instead an instantiation of truth
or reality: quiddity itself is reality (al-h․
aqıˉqa) or the reality of a thing.67
This obviously plays a role from a gnoseological perspective as well. In
discussing the meaning of correspondence (mut ․aˉbaqa), Avicenna also introduces the concept of form. The quidditative reality (al-h․
aqıˉqa) of the thing
must be found in the form, which ultimately corresponds to (perceived)
reality itself.68 The reference to Aristotle clearly illustrates the meaning of
the distinction in Avicenna: quiddity is reality because, to the extent that
it is quiddity, it is always and necessarily as it is (as Aristotle pointed out in
Metaphysics Θ 1069). In other words, in the case of quiddity, too, Avicenna
bases the concept of truth/reality on what we have already mentioned:
independence, ontological primacy, and permanence. The essence of a
thing, as such, is always first, identical to itself, indivisible, eternal, necessary, and therefore true. It is only in respect to existence that essence is
either possible (false) or necessary (true).
Concluding Remarks
Clearly, in Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1.8, Avicenna reminds us of the three areas (and therefore the three senses) of the term al-h․
aqq: first, that of reality, second, that of divine reality (al-h․
aqq is one of the names of God70), and last, that of
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 259
truthfulness or veracity. The first consequence, on the ontological level, of this triple meaning or intention (maʿnaˉ) of what is true is the affirmation of eternal or continuous and primary, independent truth with regard to the Necessarily Existent Principle: to exist independently and eternally—that is, to be always as one is—is one of the meanings of “being true,” and it is indeed the first of them, since only that which is continuously, regardless of the relationships it has with other things, is properly true. Here Avicenna is very close to the sense of truth one finds in Aristotle’s Metaphysics α, 1 as to the meaning of truth to be found in al-Kindıˉ and in the Arabic Plotinus: the real truth—what is really true—is that which exists always.71 This first meaning of truth reveals a sort of remnant of Platonism: eternal being (the eternal being of eternal forms, which properly are) is here opposed to the pseudo-being (not entirely true) of all “created” entities, which become (or in Avicenna’s terms, which pass from possibility to necessity).
It is on the basis of the same Platonic or Neoplatonic principles that Avicenna ascribes reality to quiddity. Truth is quidditative because quiddity
in itself is necessary, first and eternal; it is only in relation to existence,
not in itself, that quiddity is always indeterminate and therefore neither
true nor false (and hence ultimately false): considered as such, the h․
aqıˉqa
of vacuum is as “real” as that of man or angel. However, once the relations
that it implies are expressed, quiddity always refers to a kind of existence,
because—as Avicenna declares in the famous and difficult passage that discusses universality—quiddity, if it exists (see the sense of existence which
lies in relations), is always either mental (and universal) or concrete and
individual.72
This brings us to the other side of ontological truth: the truth of existence, which always (except in the case of the Principle) depends on a relation. It is in relation that a quiddity finds its necessity (as regards existence,
by virtue of some other), and it is in relation that truth and truthfulness
lie. Only the Necessarily Existent is independent of analysis, of relation,
and of the distinction between existence and quiddity; the Necessarily
Existent is the only entity in which the existentially true, the truthful, and
(so to speak) the “quidditative” reality appear in the first and same way.
Thus, the last element of the analysis of existence is what Avicenna defines existence not at the condition of.73 This is Being in a universal or common sense: the existence of which we speak when we consider everything
that exists, the subject matter of Metaphysics, which is subjected to analysis
and hence divided into possibility and necessity, or, more precisely, divided into necessity by itself and necessity by virtue of some other thing.
This existence is the expression of the incontrovertibility of the principle
of non-contradiction (being is because the negation of it would be absolute non-being, which is not). This existence corresponds to the first sense
of truth: the indeterminate or absolute sense of existence Avicenna refers
to in Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1.8. Nevertheless, the First Necessary Principle, which is
said at the condition of non, in that It is absolutely non-composite, is also
260 Olga L. Lizzini
(although in a different sense) the guarantee of the analysis.74 Since the
Principle is something to which analysis cannot be applied, Its existence
is actually analytical:75 the Principle is the truth in an absolute sense and
the very source of every truth at both the existential and the quidditative
levels.76
One might therefore sum up the fundamental elements of Avicenna’s
doctrine of truth as follows: (1) as a foundation, truth is the truth of being,
and it coincides with reality and, more precisely, with the reality that cannot be further analyzed. On this level, the being which is true in the first
sense: (1a) is a reality (the Necessarily Existent), which is the foundation
of existence (and ultimately of knowledge, which is constructed as a chain
exactly as reality is); (1b) the proposition that expresses the existence of
necessity; this is also absolutely true, i.e., outside of any relation (insofar
as it is not reducible to any other proposition, this statement is a tautology); the being that is true at this level is also: (1c) a truth (the principle of
non-contradiction) that is the foundation of all truths; (1d) the quiddity as
such. (2) Everything else is true because it derives from some other thing,
and thus it is demonstrated to be true (truthful) but in itself it is false (it
corresponds to the possible), and it is true only in virtue of its relation
with some other thing. This last statement is valid both (2a) at the level
of truth or truthfulness (every statement is true with regard to the fundamental principle of truth) and (2b) at the level of existent reality (things
that exist, and are therefore true in an absolute sense—which also means
before analysis—are in themselves false and acquire truth or reality only
by virtue of their relation to some other thing; every proposition is true
only if it is viewed in relation to the proposition that affirms the existence
of the Necessary Principle).
In short, if being true at the ontological level means—in a Parmenidean sense—being eternal and independent, we must ascribe truth to
(1) the principle of non-contradiction and therefore: (2) being as such, and
the so-called primary notions, which are, in fact, necessarily true; (3) the
reality (the quiddity) of a thing in an indeterminate sense; (4) the Necessarily Existent. All these elements cannot be demonstrated by a proper
demonstration but are grasped by virtue of an immediate, noetic act of
intellection (Avicenna proposes a demonstration of the existence of the
Necessarily Existent, but every argument intended as an explanation of Its
existence uses either relations or tautologies77). In fact, all existent things
(which are existent and therefore true only by virtue of their relation to
their cause) are true in a derivative sense; so are all the propositions that
refer to them: they are supported by assent and ultimately demonstrated
by the Necessarily Existent.
In other words, there is an original (authentic or “true”) truth, which is reality, and a derivative truth (or reality). The former consists of analytical elements (on which analysis is based); the latter belongs to the world of synthesis, the world of individuals and propositions (which are
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 261
necessary by virtue of other). The differences they reveal depend on the different modulations of the two logico-ontological elements that constitute Avicenna’s ontology: essence and existence. What remains at the dianoetic level is the logical truth, which concerns the derived propositions of everything that constitutes the world of the things that are not the Necessary Existent Principle (and therefore the relations between existent things which are necessary by virtue of other, not in themselves).
Acknowledgments
A first draft of this paper was presented at various conferences and workshops in Amsterdam, Utrecht, Paris, and Geneva. I wish to thank all the
participants for their questions and remarks. I am also grateful to Karen
Christenfeld and Kate Sturge for revising the English and to Damien
Janos, who discussed some specific topics with me.
Notes 1 On analysis, see Beaney, “Analysis”; for a historical approach, Chase, “Quod
est primum in compositione,” and Chase’s bibliography. A very general overview,
especially as regards modern and contemporary thought, is given by Engfer
and Essler, “Analyse”; a thorough study in Hintikka and Remes, Method of
Analysis; a critical and historical approach (on mental, existential, and semantic analysis) in Emanuele, Il mito dell’analisi. For analysis as regards the mathematics in Avicenna, see Rashed, “Avicenne.”
2 Avicenna, Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ: Al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1. 8, ed. Anawati and Zaˉyid (hereafter
Ilaˉh.), 48.5–16. See Avicenna, Metaphysics, trans. Marmura, Metaphysics of “The Healing,” 38–39. For the revision of the text, see the two recent
Italian translations: Avicenna, Metafisica, trans. Lizzini; Avicenna, Libro della
guarigione, trans. Bertolacci (see also the project for the new edition: www.avicennaproject.eu/#/project/intro). For the edition of the Latin text, see
Avicenna, Liber de philosophia, ed. Van Riet. 3 See Aristotle, Metaphysics: Books Γ, Δ, and E, trans. Kirwan; Cassin and Narcy,
La décision du sens; Aristote, Métaphysique livre IV, trans. Cachia; Wedin,
“Scope of Non-Contradiction.” A partial analysis of the use of the principle
in medieval philosophy is to be found in Goris, “Foundation of the Principle.” Avicenna’s quotations from Metaphysics Γ are listed and contextualized
in Bertolacci, “La ricezione del libro G”; see also Bertolacci, Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics. 4 See Aristotle, Metaph. I 7, 1057a33, Γ 3–4, 7. Avicenna clearly uses the principle as equivalent to that of non-contradiction. On this, see Houser, “Place of the First Principle”; Houser, “Let Them Suffer.” The use of the principle
of the excluded middle might be related to the kalaˉm discussion on the meaning of the “thing,” which according to the Muʾtazilite is both existent and
non-existent. I do not intend to discuss this topic in depth here; for some
references, see Jolivet, “Aux origines de l’ontologie”; Wisnovsky, Avicenna’s Metaphysics, 150–52; Druart, “Shayʾ or res”; Lizzini, “Il nulla (al-ʿadam).” See
also Benevich, “Reality of the Non-Existent Object.” 5 See Houser, “Let Them Suffer.”
262 Olga L. Lizzini 6 In some cases one finds a general, indeterminate sense of truth-reality; see,
e.g., Ilaˉh. 2. 4, 82.16; 3.6, 128.8; tah․qıˉq in 3. 1, 93.10 on the reality of accidents; in 3. 7, 137.2 tah․qıˉq is the passage to reality of the essence (cf. 5. 9,
252.9); for truth as authenticity, see, e.g., 3. 2, 98.14. Among the senses of
what is continuous, there is one which is real; see 3. 2, 99.11: bi-l-h․
aqıˉqa; 7.
3, 322.8 on the reality of things and essences, which is also an Aristotelian
topic, see below. On these occurrences and their meanings, see also De Haan,
“Avicenna’s Healing.” De Haan’s thorough analysis of the text intends to show
the epistemological, ontological, aetiological, and theological dimensions of
Avicenna’s doctrine of truth. 7 Il aˉh. 1. 8, 48.5–7, trans. Marmura, Metaphysics of “The Healing,” 38 (slightly modified; cf. Bertolacci’s translation in the project for the new edition: www.
avicennaproject.eu/#/edition/ibn-sina-ilahiyyat_02_tr1/text); Avicenna, Liber de philosophia, ed. Van Riet, 3:55.59–61: “veritas [. . .] intelligitur dispositio dictionis vel intellectus qui significat dispositionem in re exteriore
cum est ei aequalis. Dicimus enim: ‘haec dictio est vera’ et ‘haec sententia est
vera.’” 8 For a first terminological survey, see Goichon, Lexique. Jolivet already highlighted the importance of the term: Jolivet, L’intellect selon Kindi, 90, note:
“h․
aqıˉqa, état réel d’une chose; h․
aqq, vérité en un sens universel, jusqu’au point
ou coïncident la réalité et la vérité la plus universelle, c’est-à-dire jusqu’à la
source de la vérité et de la réalité, Dieu [. . .]; h․
aqq, dans le Coran, est un nom
divin.” 9 For the locution fıˉ lʾaʾyaˉn, see Goichon, Lexique, 257–58. Avicenna seems to
refer here to external or concrete existence in opposition to mental existence.
The question of mental existence is crucial: for Avicenna existence can be
either concrete (fıˉ lʾaʾyaˉn) or mental (ʿaqlıˉ or dihnıˉ ).
10 See Goichon, Lexique, 82–84. The meanings according to Goichon’s presentation are: (1) h․
aqıˉqa as being as it is proper to something (khus․uˉs․i yya wujuˉd: cf.
Ilaˉh. 8. 6, 356.10 et seq.: “the reality of each thing is the proper being that is
established for it”; cf. al-wujuˉd al-khaˉs․
s․
in 1. 5); (2) as essence or quiddity or
the meaning of the definition of a given thing; (3) as the exact conception or
representation of a given thing (see below as regards the essence). For “reality”
in relation to the inquiry about the subject matter of metaphysics, see Ilaˉh. 1.
1, 5.5 (h․
aqq); the reality of a subject matter (maʿnaˉ muh․aqqaq) also in 1. 2, 12.14;
for the reality of the thing (tah․aqquq), see 1. 2, 16.4; in relation to definition
(taʿrıˉf wa-tah․qıˉq), see 2. 1, 61.6 and 62.9 (tah․aqquq); reality as a synonymous of
nature, see 3. 1, 95.14; establishing the reality of something: 2. 1, 66.15, 7. 3,
322.8; for reality as essence or reality or form, see 2. 1, 68.6 et seq.; in 2. 3 the
notion of “reality” (h․
aqıˉqa) is associated to that of “subsistence” (qiwaˉm); for
reality as quiddity, see 3. 8, 141.8 and 11; 3. 10, 156.6; see also 3. 3, 104–10:
the whole section is about the “reality of the one and the multiple”; as the
reality (h․
aqıˉqa) of potency and act, i.e., as the meaning of potency and act,
see 4. 2. 184.2 et seq.; as the reality of existence (h․
aqıˉqat al-wujuˉd), i.e. as the
meaning of existence, see 4. 3. 188.5; as meaning and quiddity (h․
aqıˉqa), see 5.
1. 2, 202.2 et seq.; as the reality of the form, see 5. 4, 224.7; as the quiddity
or reality or nature of the soul (h․
aqıˉqa), see 5. 7, 237.3; as reality as opposed
to consequents, see 3. 5, 122.8; 5. 7, 237.16; as reality in the sense of entity
or thing, see 5. 7, 241.16; individual as the reality of species, see 5. 8, 247.1;
as realization and mental realization, see 5. 9, 252.14 et seq.; as nature (and
existence of the essence), see 6. 1, 259.17; as essence (h․
aqıˉqa) in correlation to
existence, 6. 3, 268.14–15 and 278.5 et seq.; as related to quiddity, definition
and “whatness” (or quiddity: maˉhiyya) or “thingness” (shayʾiyya), see 6. 5,
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 263
292.5 et seq.; cf. 7. 2, 315. 3 et seq., 8, 348.17 et seq., 9. 4, 409.6 et seq.; 9. 7,
424.2 et seq.; as a nature and existent nature or existence corresponding to an
intention or mental existence, see 8. 4, 345.6 et seq.; as nature and existent
nature in relation to the First principle, see 8. 5, 349.11 et seq.; cf. 8. 5, 350.10
et seq.; in this respect, see 8. 6, 356.10 et seq.; cf. Ilaˉh. 1. 5 and 8. 7, 363.1 et
seq.; cf. 10. 2, 442.19; as truth or reality in general (al-h․
aqq), see 2. 4, 82.16, 3.
6, 128.8, 9. 7, 424.4 and 429.3; cf. 10. 1, 439.1, 10. 2, 443.8 (al-h․
aqq); or as the
real meaning of a given position (3. 6, 128.1); in opposition to falsity or vanity,
9. 3, 396.3; the intelligible reality, see Ilaˉh. 9. 4, 403.9. 11 On truth in general, see Berti, La ricerca della verità, which offers a general investigation. See also Austin, “Truth”; Kaluza, “Veritas”; Brague, O’Meara, and Schüssler, “Vérité”; Aenishanslin et al., La verité. On Aristotle and Ancient philosophy, see Crivelli, Aristotle on Truth, which analyzes in depth Aristotle’s conception of truth on the basis of the main texts, namely, the Categories (4, 5, 10, and 12), De interpretatione (1–9), Sophistici Elenchi (25), De anima (3.6), and the Metaphysics (Γ 7, Δ 7, Δ 29, E 4, Θ 10). Other references include Galluzzo, “Il tema della verità”; Enders and Szaif, “Geschichte des Wahrheitsbegriffs”; Wolen´ski, “Aletheia in Greek Thought.” On the conception of truth in the Middle Ages, Aertsen, “Fröhliche Wissenschaft”; Aertsen, “Truth in the Middle Ages”; Kann, “Wahrheit als adaequatio”; Kobusch, “Adaequatio rei et intellectus”; in general, see Cesalli and Goubier, “La notion de vé rité .” The questions of knowledge and certitude are implicit here; see Black, “Certitude”;
Strobino, “Avicenna on Knowledge”; Strobino, “Per se.” On Avicenna, see De Haan, “Avicenna’s Healing”; Kalbarczyk, Predication and Ontology. 12 Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, Kitaˉb al-ʿIbaˉra, ed. El-Khodeira, 72.15–16 and compare the whole
passage. Existence is both mental and concrete. 13 See Ilaˉh. 1. 8, 48.6–7, also 5–9. 14 See Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, Kitaˉb al-Burhaˉn 1. 5, ed. Afıˉfıˉ, 69.14–17. 15 Il aˉh. 1. 8, 48.5–16. On the Posterior Analytics, see Strobino, “Avicenna’s Use
of the Arabic Translations”; Strobino, “Avicenna on the Indemonstrability”
(with an appendix containing the English translation of Avicenna’s Book of
Demonstration 4. 2). 16 In a very general sense, the corresponding terms for nous and dianoia are ʿaql
and fikr (e.g., Goichon, Lexique); ʿaql can also—occasionally—refer to the activity of dianoia.
17 Il aˉh. 1. 5, 29.5–8, 30.3–5, 31.2–9, 36.4–6. 18 The edited Arabic text has both mawjuˉd and wujuˉd, but wujuˉd is suggested as
the correct reading in more than one case by Bertolacci, “Distinction.” 19 For the literature, see the contributions cited in note 24 below. 20 See Bertolacci, “‘Necessary’ as Primary Concept.” Avicenna uses both d․a ruˉrıˉ
and waˉjib (see Ilaˉh. 1. 5, 29.5 and 35.7 for the first; 35.3 and 36.4 for the second). The first term normally appears with “obligatory,” although that adjective often indicates an ethical sense, and the second, which some interpreters
read in fact as “that is necessary in existence,” is more frequent and enters in
the metaphysical terminology to indicate the Necessarily Existent Principle:
al-waˉjib al-wujuˉd. For waˉjib in theology, see Gardet, Dieu et la destinée, 83–84;
d․a ruˉrıˉ should mean “obligatory” and therefore “inevitable” but the translation
given here is the usual one: waˉjib is “nécessaire” also for Goichon and Anawati.
Inati distinguishes the two terms as “necessary in existence” and “necessary”
(Avicenna, Remarks and Admonitions, 91 n. 4). On the distinction between the
two, see also Avicenna, La logique du fils de Sina (see the “remarques” at 52.20);
the distinction is highlighted also by Michot in his edition of Avicenna, Livre de la genèse, 5–6 n. 8.
264 Olga L. Lizzini 21 Cf. Il aˉh. 1. 5, 30.4: “The ideas [maʿaˉnıˉ = meanings, intentions, notions] of
the ‘existent’ [or: ‘existence’], the ‘thing,’ and the ‘necessary’ are impressed in
the soul in a primary way [. . .]. The things that have the highest claim to be
conceived in themselves are those common to all matters—as, for example,
‘the existent’ (existence) the ‘one,’ the ‘thing’” (trans. Marmura, Metaphysics of
“The Healing,” 22–23, modified). 22 Cf. Ilaˉh. 1. 5, 30.4; on the one, see Ilaˉh. 3. 2, 3. 3, 3. 6. On primary notions
and the subject of transcendentals, see Aertsen, “Avicenna’s Doctrine”; de
Libera, “D’Avicenne à Averroès”; Koutzarova, Das Transzendentale. On the
Latin tradition, see Aertsen, “Gibt es eine mittelalterliche Philosophie?”;
Aertsen, Medieval Philosophy; Goris, Transzendentale Einheit.
23 Il aˉh. 1. 8, 54.16–17; trans. Marmura, Metaphysics of “The Healing,” 44 (slightly
modified). 24 Wisnovsky, Avicenna’s Metaphysics; Wisnovsky, “Notes on Avicenna’s Concept of Thingness”; Druart, “Shayʾ or res”; Bertolacci, “Distinction,” which also offers a survey of the various interpretations, 260–61 and footnotes. According to the dominant reading, “thing” and “existent” have the same extension but not the same intension; some interpreters, however, refer to the different extension of the terms (for some of the occurrences, see Wisnovsky, Avicenna’s Metaphysics, 158–60). God is not a thing (a thing is in fact always what exists, as it has an essence or quiddity). The issue is also discussed in Janos, Avicenna. For another reading, see De Haan, “Avicenna’s Healing.”
25 Reality means here literally what refers to the res aspect of a thing; in Avicenna’s terms it implies possibility, it is related to quiddity (and “proper existence”; see Ilaˉh. 1. 5, 31.2–9) and can refer to mental existence; in that sense
“reality” is opposed to “established existence” or—as Marmura translates
it—“affirmative existence.” Sometimes itbaˉt is taken as a synonym of “reality,”
but in order to avoid confusion, I prefer to speak about established existence,
“existent reality,” or “realized existence.” 26 Il aˉh. 1. 5, 31.1–32.5; but see Ilaˉh. 8. 5, 349.17, where one finds the h․
aqıˉqat waˉjib al-wujuˉd and cf. 350.3; therefore h․
aqıˉqa seems to be not a simple synonym of
quiddity (maˉhiyya): the quiddity of the First Principle coincides with Its existence, which clearly is not synonymous with general or absolute existence;
nonetheless, the First has a reality and is even the most real of all realities (see
below). This element comes up also in al-Ghazaˉlıˉ; see Tahaˉfut al-falaˉsifa, the
Eighth discussion. A thoughtful analysis of this issue (together with a revolutionary interpretation of quiddity) is provided by Janos, Avicenna, for example
in his analysis of Text 29. 27 This same conclusion is drawn from the division (inqisaˉm) of the concept
of existence—according to its relationship to necessity—on which Avicenna
focuses in the sixth section of the first book of his Metaphysics, Ilaˉh. 1. 6,
37.6–10: “The things that enter existence bear a [possible] twofold division
in the intellect: there will be that whose existence, when considered in itself,
would be not necessary: it is clear that its existence would also not be impossible, since otherwise it would not enter existence. This thing is within the
bounds of possibility. There will also be among them that whose existence,
when considered in itself, would be necessary” (trans. Marmura, Metaphysics
of “The Healing,” 29–30, slightly modified). This brings up the question of
the nuanced univocacy that rules both Avicenna’s ontology and his theology;
I have provided some references in Lizzini, “Ibn Sina’s Metaphysics.” 28 See also de Libera, L’art des généralités, 598. A question remains, and is that of
the sense of the distinction between essence and existence: is it logical or real?
On this, see Janos, Avicenna, and among others, Bertolacci, “Distinction”; De
Haan, “Mereological Construal”; Lizzini, “Wugˇuˉd-Mawgˇuˉd.”
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 265 29 Another possible translation for the term tas․
dıˉ q is “verification” (see, e.g.,
McGinnis, Avicenna). On the concept, see Madkour, L’Organon d’Aristote,
53–56; Wolfson, “Terms tas․
awwur and tas․
dıˉq”; van Ess, Die Erkenntnislehre,
95–113, esp. 101; Jadaane, L’influence du stoicisme (see Rosenthal, Review of
Jadaane, L’influence); Sabra, “Avicenna”; Black, Logic, 75–76; Maróth, “Tas․
awwur
and Tas․
dıˉq”; Lameer, Conception and Belief, esp. 3–35. 30 In this sense, predication and assent concern what exists in the soul and accidentally what is in external reality; see Ilaˉh. 1. 5, 34.8–9. The conception
of something seems therefore to be based on the possibility of the link with
external reality. This is clearly explained by the conception of mental existence: what is possible exists in the mind and has a possible link to reality; see
Ilaˉh. 1. 5, 33.12–15: “We say only that we have knowledge of the nonexistent,
because when the meaning occurs only in the soul and no reference to [what
is] external to the soul is made by it, then what is known would be only that
very thing in the soul. The assent, occurring in terms of the two parts of what
is conceived, consists in [affirming] that it is possible that, in the nature of
the thing known, an intellectually apprehended relation to what is external
should occur (there being no [such] relation, however, at the present time.
Nothing other than this is known” (trans. Marmura, Metaphysics of “The Healing,” 26). For the relation between predication and truth, see De interpretatione
1. 1, 16a9–19; De anima 3. 6, 430a26–28 and 3. 8, 432a10–14; Anal. Post. 1.
1, 71a1–2, 11–13. The logos apophantikos is the only one that can be true or
false; De int. 4, 17a1–8; cf. De anima 430a26–28, 432a14; Metaph. Γ and Θ 10. Calogero, I fondamenti della logica aristotelica, is still interesting. 31 See Lizzini, “Intellectus, intelligentia, mens”; see also Lizzini, “Human Knowledge and Separate Intellect.”
32 Here the difficulty clearly appears: on the one hand, the conception of the
thing corresponds to mental existence; on the other, existence (and also mental existence) depends on the judgment. 33 Kitaˉb al-Madhal [= Isagoge] 1. 3, ed. Baˉshaˉ et al., 17.7–17:“Something is scientifically understood [yuʿlamu: known] in two respects: one of them is that it is conceptualized only, such that if it has a name and [the name] is uttered, then what [the name] means is exemplified in the mind [dihn], and this despite the fact that there is here neither truth [s․
idq] nor falsehood [kadb], such as when ‘man’ or ‘do such and such’ is said, for when you attend to the meaning of that which you are discussing, then you have conceptualized it. The second is verification [assent: tas․
dıˉq] together with the conceptualization, and so, for example, when you are told that ‘all white is an accident,’ then from this not
only do you conceptualize the meaning [maʿnaˉ] of this statement, but also you verify that it is such. As for when you have doubts whether or not it is such, you still have conceptualized what is said (for you do not have doubts about what you have neither conceptualized nor understood); however, you have not verified it yet. All verification [assent], then, is together with a conceptualization, but not conversely. In the case of what this [statement] means, the conceptualization informs you that [both] the form of this composite [statement] and that from which it is composed (like ‘white’ and ‘accident’) occur in the mind, whereas [in] verification, this form’s relation to the things themselves occurs in the mind, that is, [the form in the mind] maps unto (mut ․aˉbiqa)
[the things themselves].” Trans. McGinnis (slightly modified and emphasis added), Avicenna, 29. 34 In this sense, they are not analytical parts of the whole (the judgment): nevertheless, analysis should lead to the component parts of the whole. See Chase,
“Quod est primum in compositione.”
35 Each conception, which in itself is simple and therefore implies the act of
noesis, is both the result and the origin of an assent (tas․
dıˉq) to a judgment,
266 Olga L. Lizzini
and refers to a dianoetic act. I elaborate this point in Lizzini, “Pleasure of
Knowledge.”
36 And these relations, those that give rise to a judgment, take place only in
intellection and are based on what Avicenna calls “second intelligible intentions,” namely, on those intentions that, since they refer not to reality but to
the concepts that were derived from it, are the subject-matter of logic. See,
among others, Sabra, “Avicenna.” 37 And this should confirm the fact that intellectual knowledge is primarily the
result of the donation/reception of intellectual forms from the Giver of the
intellect. 38 Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, Kitaˉb al-Taʿlıˉqaˉt , ed. Badawıˉ, 120.28–121.10. See Adamson,
“Non-Discursive Thought.” 39 Concepts are unitary but not simple: “horse” is in fact a species belonging
to the genus “animal” and thus might be expressed by a definition, i.e., a
composite; other concepts are the propositions that modern philosophy calls
performative (“Do this!” or “Shall we go?”). This last kind of proposition
(orders and invitations, etc.) is also part of the language of Revelation. 40 An analysis of the sea battle and the related questions in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ is provided
by Adamson, “Arabic Sea Battle.” 41 See Lizzini, “Pleasure of Knowledge.” 42 In De interpretatione (16a16), Aristotle refers to the non-existent animal in
order to confirm the idea, which is already in Plato’s Sophist, that the single
name in itself has no truth value. 43 Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, Kitaˉb al-Burhaˉn, 72–77; cf. Marmura, “Avicenna on Meno’s Paradox.”
Autonomy from external reality also means that, as regards conceptions, the soul remains within itself, so to speak: it can conceive or even
simply imagine objects that might (also) exist in external reality, but that exist
first of all in the soul and are so considered. In this sense, it could be said that
it is only in assent that the soul comes out, so to speak, of itself and encounters external reality. However, one must keep in mind that for Avicenna,
reality or existence does not indicate only external existence, but also simple
mental existence: even sentences like “man (i.e., a human being) is rational”
or “the chimera is an imaginary animal” require assent, despite the fact that
their significance as a whole is—one might say—enclosed within the limits of
thought (and quiddity; quiddity and universality do not coincide according
to Avicenna; see, e.g., Ilaˉh. 5. 1–2). Thus a sentence like “the chimera is an
imaginary animal” establishes the mental existence of an intelligible—the
chimera—and does so by means of the possibility of a link or an implicit comparison with external reality; see note 31. Imagination and the question of
“vain intelligible forms” are related to this; see Michot, “Avicenna’s ‘Letter’”;
Sebti, “L’imagination”; Sebti, “Le statut ontologique de l’image.” 44 See Ilaˉh. 3. 10; Maquˉlaˉt 4. 3. 45 See the passage in Ilaˉh. 1. 8; cf. 1. 1, 4: in defining both the theoretical and
the practical sciences, Avicenna uses “vision” and “belief” in place of “representation” and “assent.” 46 See Ibaˉra 1. 1, 2.15–3.5. 47 One should, incidentally, also note that this passage from the Latin version of
Avicenna’s text has been partially misunderstood. The text of Avicenna, Liber
de philosophia prima sive Scientia divina, contains intellectus, probably because
instead of the term ʿaqd, the Latin translator read or thought he was reading
the term ʿaql “intellect” (which looks, in Arabic script, very similar to ʿaqd).
The Latin translation of Avicenna’s Metaphysics—as generally indicated by
studies—can therefore be considered the source, or one of the sources, of the
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 267
Scholastic doctrine of truth as adaequatio intellectus et rei or adaequatio intellectus ad rem. Avicenna, Liber de philosophia, ed. Van Riet, 1:55.59–61: “veritas [. . .]
intelligitur dispositio dictionis vel intellectus qui significat dispositionem in
re exteriore cum est ei aequalis. Dicimus enim: ‘haec dictio est vera’ et ‘haec
sententia est vera.’” On truth as adaequatio, see Pöltner, “Veritas”; Aertsen,
Medieval Reflections on Truth; Wippel, “Truth in Thomas Aquinas”; Aertsen,
“Truth and Transcendentals”; Schulz, Veritas; Wolen´ski, “Contributions.” 48 Il aˉh. 8. 4, 343.16–344.5: “in the case of every existent, certain modes of existence, varied and multiple, are negated of it. And every existent has a species of
relation and reference toward [the other] existents [or: all that exists has some sort
of relation to (id․aˉfa) and connection with (nisba) the other existing things]”; the
passage concerns the First Principle: “and especially the one from which flows
every existence. But [what] we mean by our statement that It is one in essence
and does not become multiple is that It is as such in Itself [Marmura: ‘in His
essence’]. If, thereafter, many positive and negative relations become attendant on It, these are necessary concomitants of the essence that are caused by
the essence; they exist after the existence of the essence, do not render the
essence subsistent, and are not parts of it” (trans. Marmura, Metaphysics of “The
Healing,” 273, slightly modified and emphasis added). In his theory of relation,
Avicenna identifies both relations that depend on the quiddity or suchness of
a thing (which are relations in the proper sense), and relations that depend on
existence. On Avicenna’s conception of relation, see Zghal, “La relation chez
Avicenne”; Marmura, “Avicenna’s Chapter on the Relative.” I devoted some
remarks to this question in Lizzini, “Causality as Relation.” 49 Even the idea of what is possible in itself, which is necessary by virtue of
some other thing, can be explained by relation. See Avicenna, Kitaˉb al-Najaˉt ,
547–48. 50 Il aˉh. 8. 7, 367.12–15 and 368.11–12: “If [further] ascertained, [it would be
shown that] the primary attribute of the Necessary Existent consists in His
being a that [It is] and It exists. Then [respecting] the other attributes, some will
include the meaning of this existence with a relation, [and] some [will include
the meaning] of this existence with a negation. Not one of [the attributes]
necessitates at all either multiplicity or difference in It [Marmura: ‘in His
essence’: fıˉ dhaˉti-hi ]. [. . .] If the attributes of the First, the Real [the Truth,
the True one], are apprehended intellectually in this manner, nothing will be
found in them that would necessitate parts or multiplicity for It [Marmura :
‘for His essence’: li-dhaˉtihi ] in any manner whatsoever.” (Trans. Marmura,
Metaphysics of “The Healing,” 296–97, slightly modified and emphasis added). 51 Permanence leads to truth or is truth: if something is permanent, it is always true to say that it is. In that sense, the relationship between the ontological and the logical sense of truth is very strong (see, e.g., in Parmenides); Ilaˉh. 8. 4, 343.16–344.5; Ilaˉh. 8. 6, 356.8–15. The locution is found in al-Kindıˉ, al-Falsafa
al -uˉl ˉa 41.3–45.15; 45.16–53.5; cf. Abuˉ Rıˉd․
a, Rasaˉʾil al-Kindıˉ al-falsafiyya; Ivry, Al-Kindıˉ’s Metaphysics; see Adamson, “Al Kindıˉ,” 38; Bertolacci, “‘Necessary’ as Primary Concept,” 34. For the ps.-Theology of Aristotle, see, e.g., Afluˉtıˉn ʿinda al-ʿArab, ed. Badawıˉ, 27.5–6, where one finds the First real [true] being (al-anniyya al-uˉlaˉ al-h․
aqq); for “the real one,” see also the Arabic Proclus. 52 Avicenna’s idea of eternal creation (directly inspired by Proclus) does not allow eternity to be conceived as the same as non-createdness. But here Avicenna deals with what is per se eternal or permanent, while the separate substances are eternal (or permanent and existent) because of something else. On the identity between truth and eternity in Neoplatonism (and in Greco-Arabic Neoplatonism), see D’Ancona, “Platonic and Neoplatonic Terminology.”
268 Olga L. Lizzini
Avicenna uses daˉʾim, which is literally “continuous,” “constant”; for al-Kindıˉ, the world is not eternal but daˉʾim; on the term, see again Goichon, Lexique.
53 Once it is subjected to our knowledge of it, the Principle shows Itself as a
cause; at the same time, relations depend on the fact that the Principle is conceived; relations are additions, consequents, and effects of the Principle Itself
(Ilaˉh. 8. 4, 343.16–344.5). 54 See the famous passage Ilaˉh. 8. 4, 347.10, and Macierowski, “Does God have
a Quiddity?” Nevertheless, Avicenna explicitly speaks about reality (h․
aqıˉqa),
essence (dhaˉt ), and, in a sense, even about “thing” (see above and Ilaˉh. 8. 6,
356.8–15). On God as a quiddity, see Janos, Avicenna, 415 ff. 55 Il aˉh. 8. 6, 356.8–15; cf. 8. 4, 343.17. 56 Aqsaˉm, 112.17–113.9. On divine attributes, cf. Ilaˉh. 8. 6–7. 57 See, e.g., Ilaˉh. 8. 3, 342.8–14; cf. Taʿlıˉqaˉt , 83.8. 58 See remarks on this point in Lizzini, Fluxus (fayd), 116–38. 59 See Street, “An Outline of Avicenna’s Syllogistic,” esp. 132; also McGinnis,
Avicenna, 44–47. 60 Il aˉh. 1. 5, 36; cf. Bertolacci, “‘Necessary’ as Primary Concept.” Bertolacci
provides tables to indicate the correspondence between existence and necessity (necessity is intensionally dependent on existence but logically prior
to possibility and impossibility); on the relationship between existence and
necessity see also Lizzini, Fluxus (fayd), esp. 121–24. 61 See, e.g., Ilaˉh. 6. 3, 277.7–278.8. The cause that is necessary is more worthy
of existence and therefore of reality than the existence of the effect, that is,
than the existence of the possible; this is precisely because the essence of the
cause is necessary not in relation to the effect, while the essence of the effect
is necessary only in relation to the cause. Existence as such has no gradation,
but has modes or status. See Ilaˉh. 6. 3, 276.12–14. 62 Il aˉh. 8. 6, 356.8–15. 63 See the passages quoted above: Ilaˉh. 8. 6, 356.8–15; cf. 8. 4, 343.17; cf. Ilaˉh. 9.
7, 423.12, and Kitaˉb al-Ishaˉraˉt 4. 9–15. Beauty and splendor always consist in
the fact that a given thing is exactly what it should be: the Principle is Reality
or Truth and Beauty and Splendor (Ilaˉh. 8. 4–7). 64 The existence that corresponds to what is affirmed clearly refers to the assent.
For the text, see Ilaˉh. 1. 5, 31.2–9 and 36.4–6; cf. 29.5–8, 30.3–5. Trans. Marmura,
Metaphysics of “The Healing,” 24; and see the translation by Bertolacci in
the project for the new edition (Bertolacci uses both “reality” and “essential
truth”): www.avicennaproject.eu/#/edition/ibn-sina-ilahiyyat_02_tr1/text. 65 Il aˉh. 1. 5, 29.5–8, 30.3–5, 31.2–9, 36.4–6. 66 On this, see also Benevich, “Die ‘göttliche Existenz.’” Benevich notes that
Avicenna adds the accident “whiteness” to the substance “triangle” as regards
quiddity. Nonetheless, Aristotle too establishes a clear connection between
whiteness and truth: in De anima 3. 3 one reads that sight “is not mistaken that
there is whiteness” (428b2). See also Aristotle, Anal. Post. 1. 1, 4–5. 67 But see notes 27 and 54: every quiddity is a reality, but is every reality a quiddity? Avicenna seems to reject the idea of the quiddity of the Principle, yet he
ascribes a reality to It (or at least, the quiddity of the Principle is not like the
other quiddities because it coincides with existence). 68 Il aˉh. 5. 2, 210.8–10. 69 See Crivelli, Aristotle on Truth.
70 On the names of God, see Gimaret, Les noms divins en Islam, 138–42 (141 on
Avicenna); among the divine names that refer to the same conceptual area, see
mawjuˉd, dhaˉt , shayʾ.
71 On Metaph. α, see Bertolacci, “Doctrine”; Bertolacci, Reception of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics.
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 269 72 See Il aˉh. 5. 1–2. 73 On the theoretical problem of distinguishing between being in general and
the being of the Principle (this is the meaning of not at a condition and of at
the condition of not), see Ilaˉh. 1. 1, 2.10–13; cf. Ilaˉh. 8. 4, 347.10 et seq.; see
Porro, “Immateriality and Separation”; Bertolacci, “‘Necessary’ as Primary
Concept.” The distinction is applied also to the quiddity; see Ilaˉh. 5. 1–2 (and
therefore not to existence): quiddities as such have no relations to other. 74 Here the question of the relationship between metaphysics and theology
arises. Metaphysics is a theology insofar as the object of research is concerned:
Ilaˉh. 1. 1, 5.13–7; 2. 9.6–10; 3. 19.5–8, 21.1–8, 23.1–9. 75 The principle of non-contradiction also demonstrates the necessity of the
Necessary Existent: the negation of the existence of the Principle is (also)
the negation of Its necessity and is therefore impossible. The first principle of
logic is the first truth in the logical sense, while the First Principle is the first
truth in the ontological sense. Both senses indicate an ascent: the path towards
existence in general is abstraction (to what is more primary, as logic is a primary science, not a servant); the path towards the Necessary Existent is a real
ascent to what is primary in a strongly ontological sense (since metaphysics
too is a primary science, not a servant). 76 In a sense even quiddities as such find their guarantee in the Necessary Principle, because the First is the ultimate cause of everything. Avicenna is well
aware of the aporia that an essence existing independently of existence represents: essences “before” creation should not exist (but see Janos, Avicenna,
and, for a sort of ethical necessity of the essences, Lizzini, “A Mysterious
Object”). 77 See the section on divine attributes in Ilaˉh. 8.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Kindıˉ. Al-Falsafa al-uˉlaˉ, Rasaˉʾil al-Kindıˉ al-falsafiyya. Edited by M. ʿA. al-Hadi.
2 vols. Cairo: Daˉr al-fikr al-ʿArabıˉ, 1950–53.
Al-Kindıˉ. Al-Kindıˉ ’s Metaphysics: A Translation of Yaʿqub ibn Ish․
aˉq al-Kindıˉ ’s Treatise
On First Philosophy (Fıˉ l-falsafa al-uˉlaˉ). Translated by Alfred L. Ivry. Albany:
SUNY Press, 1974.
Aristotle. La décision du sens: Le livre Gamma de la Métaphysique d’Aristote. Edited
and translated with an introduction and commentary by Barbara Cassin and
Michel Narcy. Paris: Vrin, 1989.
Aristotle. Metaphysics. Translated by W. D. Ross. Vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1924.
Aristotle. Metaphysics, Books Γ, Δ, and E. Translated with notes by Christopher
Kirwan. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971.
Aristotle. Métaphysique livre IV: Les fondements de la science. Translated with notes
by Jean Cachia. Paris: Ellipses, 1999.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ (Avicenna). Kitaˉb al-Burhaˉn. Edited by A. E. Afıˉfıˉ. Cairo: al-Mat․
baʿa
al-amıˉriyya, 1956.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Kitaˉb al-ʿIbaˉra. Edited by M. El-Khodeiri. Cairo: Daˉr al-Kitaˉb al-ʿArabıˉ,
1970.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Kitaˉb al-mabdaʾ wa-l-maʿaˉd: Livre de la genèse et du retour. Edited and translated by Yahya J. Michot. Oxford: Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies, 2002.
270 Olga L. Lizzini
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Kitaˉb al-Madhal [= Isagoge]. Edited by H. Baˉshaˉ, I. Madkuˉr, G. C.
Qanawaˉtıˉ [Anawati], and M. Al-Hud․ayrıˉ [al-Khudayri]. Cairo: al-Mat․
baʿa
al-amıˉriyya, 1953.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Kitaˉb al-Maquˉlaˉt . Edited by Ibraˉhıˉm Madkuˉr, Juˉ rj Sh. Qanawaˉtıˉ,
Mah․muˉd M. Al-Hud․ayrıˉ, Ah․mad F. Al-Ahwaˉnıˉ, and Saʿıˉd Zaˉyid. Cairo: al-
Hayʾa al-ʿaˉmma li-shuʾuˉ n al-mat․
aˉ bi ʿ al-amıˉriyya, 1959.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Kitaˉb al-Najaˉt min al-gharaq fıˉ bah․
r al-d․a laˉlaˉt. Edited with an introduction
by M. Daˉnishpazuˉh. Tehran: Daˉnishgah, 1985.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ: Al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt , vol. 1, treatises I–V. Edited by Georges C. Anawati and Saʿıˉd Zaˉyid, revision and introduction by I. Madkour; vol. 2, treatises VI–X, edited by M. Y. Mousa, Saʿıˉd Dunya, and S. Zayed, revision and introduction by I. Madkour. Cairo: Ministère de la culture et de l’orientation, 1960.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Kitaˉb al-Taʿlıˉ qaˉt . Edited by ʿAbd-ar-Rahmaˉn Badawıˉ. Cairo: al-Hayʾa
al-mis․
riyya al-ʿaˉmma li-l-kitaˉb, 1973.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Liber de philosophia prima sive Scientia divina. Edited and translated by
Simone Van Riet. 3 vols. Leiden: Brill, 1977–83.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Libro della guarigione: Le cose divine. Edited and translated by Amos Bertolacci. Turin: Utet, 2007.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. La logique du fils de Sina. Translated by Pierre Vattier. Paris: Chez l’auteur, 1658.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Metafisica: La scienza delle cose divine dal Libro della guarigione (Kitaˉb
al-Šifaˉʾ). Translated with introduction and notes by Olga Lizzini, preface by
Pasquale Porro, 2nd edition. Milan: Bompiani, 2006.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ (Avicenna). The Metaphysics of “The Healing.” Translated with introduction and notes by Michael E. Marmura. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University
Press, 2005.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Remarks and Admonitions: Part One: Logic. Translated by Shams C. Inati.
Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1984.
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ. Risaˉla fıˉ aqsaˉm al-ʿuluˉm al-ʿaqliyya. In TisʿRasaˉʾil fıˉ l-h․
ikma wa l-t․
abıˉ ʿi yyaˉt ,
104–17. [Cairo]: Mat․
baʿa hindiyya, 1908.
[Plotinus]. Afluˉt․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿArab (Plotinus apud Arabes: Theologia Aristotelis et fragmenta quae supersunt). Edited by ʿAbd-ar-Rahmaˉn Badawıˉ. Cairo: Daˉr al-Nahda
al-ʿArabiyya, 1966.
Secondary Literature
Adamson, Peter. “Al Kindıˉ and the Reception of Greek Philosophy.” In The
Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, edited by Peter Adamson and Richard C. Taylor, 32–51. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Adamson, Peter. “The Arabic Sea Battle: al-Farabi on the Problem of Future
Contingents.” Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie 88, no. 2 (2006): 163–88.
Adamson, Peter. “Non-Discursive Thought in Avicenna’s Commentary on the
Theology of Aristotle.” In Interpreting Avicenna: Proceedings of the Second Conference of the Avicenna Study Group, edited by Jon McGinnis, with David Reisman,
87–111. Leiden: Brill, 2004.
Aenishanslin, Jean-François, Dominic O’Meara, and Ingeborg Schüssler, eds. La
vérité: Antiquité—modernité. Lausanne: Payot, 2004.
Aertsen, Jan A. “Avicenna’s Doctrine of the Primary Notions and Its Impact on
Medieval Philosophy.” In Islamic Thought in the Middle Ages, edited by Anna
Akasoy and Wim Raven, 21–42. Leiden: Brill, 2008.
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 271
Aertsen, Jan A. “Fröhliche Wissenschaft: Wahrheit im Mittelalter.” In Ende und Vollendung: Eschatologische Perspektiven im Mittelalter, edited by Jan A. Aertsen and
Martin Pickavé, 48–65. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2001.
Aertsen, Jan A. “Gibt es eine mittelalterliche Philosophie?” Philosophisches Jahrbuch
102, no. 1 (1995): 161–76.
Aertsen, Jan A. Medieval Philosophy and the Transcendentals: The Case of Thomas
Aquinas. Leiden: Brill, 1996.
Aertsen, Jan A. Medieval Reflections on Truth: Adaequatio rei et intellectus. Amsterdam: VU Boekhandel, 1984.
Aertsen, Jan A. “Truth in the Middle Ages: Its Essence and Power in Christian
Thought.” In Truth: Studies of a Robust Presence, edited by Kurt Pritzl, 127–46.
Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press, 2010.
Austin, John L. “Truth. I.” Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 24, no. 1
(1950): 111–29.
Aertsen, Jan A. “Truth and Transcendentals in Thomas Aquinas.” Topoi 11 (September 1992): 159–71.
Beaney, Michael. “Analysis.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2017 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
win2017/entries/analysis/
Benevich, Fedor. “Die ‘göttliche Existenz’: Zum ontologischen Status der Essenz
qua Essenz bei Avicenna.” Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 26
(2015): 103–28.
Benevich, Fedor. “The Reality of the Non-Existent Object of Thought: The
Possible, the Impossible and Mental Existence in Islamic Philosophy (Eleventh–
Thirteenth Centuries).” In Oxford Studies in Medieval Philosophy, vol. 6, edited
by Robert Pasnau, 31–61. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Berti, Enrico. La ricerca della verità in filosofia. Rome: Edizioni Studium, 2014.
Bertolacci, Amos. “The Distinction of Essence and Existence in Avicenna’s Metaphysics: The Text and Its Context.” In Islamic Philosophy, Science, and Religion:
Studies in Honor of Dimitri Gutas, edited by Felicitas Opwis and David Reisman,
257–88. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Bertolacci, Amos. “The Doctrine of Material and Formal Causality in the ‘Ilaˉhiyyaˉt’ of Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Šifaˉʾ.” Quaestio 2, no. 1 (2002): 125–54.
Bertolacci, Amos. “‘Necessary’ as Primary Concept in Avicenna’s Metaphysics.”
In Conoscenza e contingenza nella tradizione aristotelice medieval, edited by Stefano
Perfetti, 31–50. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2008.
Bertolacci, Amos. The Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Šif
aˉʾ: A Milestone of Western Metaphysical Thought. Leiden: Brill, 2006.
Bertolacci, Amos. “La ricezione del libro G della Metafisica nell’Ilahiyyat del Kitab
al-Sifa’ di Avicenna.” In Aristotele e i suoi esegeti neoplatonici: Logica e ontologia nelle
interpretazioni greche e arabe, edited by Vincenza Celluprica and Cristina D’Ancona, 175–210. Naples: Bibliopolis, 2004.
Black, Deborah. “Certitude, Justification, and the Principles of Knowledge in
Avicenna’s Epistemology.” In Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays, edited by Joseph Adamson, 120–42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Black, Deborah. Logic and Aristotle’s “Rhetoric” and “Poetics” in Medieval Arabic
Philosophy. Leiden: Brill, 1990.
Brague, Rémi, Barbara Cassin, Sandra Laugier, Alain de Libéra, and Irène
Rosier-Catach. “Vérité.” In Vocabulaire européen des philosophies: Dictionnaire des intraduisibles, edited by Barbara Cassin, 1342–64. Paris: Seuil, 2004.
272 Olga L. Lizzini
Calogero, Guido. I fondamenti della logica aristotelica. Edited by Gabriele Giannantoni and Giovanna Sillitti, 2nd edition. Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1968.
Cesalli, Laurent, and Frédéric Goubier. “La notion de vé rité dans la philosophie
mé dié vale.” In Figures de la vé rité, edited by François Rivenc, 33–57. London:
ISTE, 2019.
Chase, Michael. “Quod est primum in compositione, est ultimum in resolutione: Notes
on Analysis and Synthesis in Late Antiquity.” Anuario Filosófico 48, no. 1 (2015):
103–39.
Crivelli, Paolo. Aristotle on Truth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “Platonic and Neoplatonic Terminology for Being in Arabic
Translation.” Studia graeco-arabica 1 (2011): 23–45.
De Haan, Daniel D. “Avicenna’s Healing and the Metaphysics of Truth.” Journal of
the History of Philosophy 56, no. 1 (2018): 17–44.
De Haan, Daniel D. “A Mereological Construal of the Primary Notions Being
and Thing in Avicenna and Aquinas.” American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly
88, no. 2 (2014): 335–60.
de Libera, Alain. L’art des généralités: Théories de l’abstraction. Paris: Aubier, 1999.
de Libera, Alain. “D’Avicenne à Averroès, et retour: Sur les sources arabes de la
théorie scholastique de l’un transcendental.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 4, no.
1 (1994): 141–79.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne. “Shayʾ or res as Concomitant of Being in Avicenna.” Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 12 (2001): 125–42.
Emanuele, Pietro. Il mito dell’analisi da Aristotele a Rorty. Bari: Laterza, 1993.
Enders, Markus, and Jan Szaif. “Die Geschichte des Wahrheitsbegriffs in der klassischen Antike.” In Die Geschichte des philosophischen Begriffs der Wahrheit, edited
by Jan Szaif and Markus Enders, 1–32. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2006.
Engfer, Hans-Jürgen, and Wilhelm K. Essler. “Analyse.” In Handbuch philosophischer Grundbegriffe: Das Absolute-Denken, edited by Hermann Krings, 1:65–
78. Munich: Kösel, 1973.
Galluzzo, Gabriele. “Il tema della verità in Plotino: Fonti platoniche e presupposti
filosofici.” Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 10 (1999): 59–88.
Gardet, Louis. Dieu et la destinée de l’homme. Paris: Vrin, 1967.
Gimaret, Daniel. Les noms divins en Islam. Paris: Cerf, 1988.
Goichon, Amélie M. Lexique de la langue philosophique d’Ibn Sıˉnaˉ (Avicenne).
Frankfurt am Main: Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften, 1999.
Goris, Wouter. “The Foundation of the Principle of Non-Contradiction: Some
Remarks on the Medieval Transformation of Metaphysics.” Documenti e studi
sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 22 (2011): 527–57.
Goris, Wouter. Transzendentale Einheit. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
Hintikka, Jaakko, and Unto Remes. The Method of Analysis: Its Geometrical Origin
and Its General Significance. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1974.
Houser, Rollen E. “Let Them Suffer into the Truth: Avicenna’s Remedy for
Those Denying the Axioms of Thought.” American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly
73, no. 3 (1999): 107–33.
Houser, Rollen E. “The Place of the First Principle of Demonstration in Avicennian Metaphysics.” Proceedings of the Patristic, Medieval and Renaissance Conference
6 (1981): 117–34.
Jadaane, Fehmi. L’influence du stoicisme sur la pensée musulmane. Beirut: Dar El-Machreq, 1968.
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 273
Janos, Damien. Avicenna on the Ontology of the Pure Quiddity. Berlin: De Gruyter,
2019.
Jolivet, Jean. “Aux origines de l’ontologie d’Ibn Sıˉnaˉ.” In Études sur Avicenne,
edited by Jean Jolivet and Rushdi Rashed, 11–28. Paris: Les Belles
Lettres, 1984.
Jolivet, Jean. L’intellect selon Kindi. Leiden: Brill, 1971.
Kalbarczyk, Alexander. Predication and Ontology: Studies and Texts on Avicennian and Post-Avicennian Readings of Aristotle’s “Categories.” Berlin: De
Gruyter, 2018.
Kaluza, Zénon. “Veritas.” In Encyclopédie philosophique universelle: Les notions philosophiques. dictionnaire, edited by André Jacob and Sylvain Auroux, 2:2715–
17. Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1990.
Kann, Christoph “Wahrheit als adaequatio: Bedeutung, Deutung, Klassifikation.”
Recherches de théologie et philosophie médiévales 66, no. 2 (1999): 209–24.
Kobusch, Theo. “Adaequatio rei et intellectus: Die Erläuterung der Korrespondenztheorie der Wahrheit in der Zeit nach Thomas von Aquin.” In Die Geschichte
des philosophischen Begriffs der Wahrheit, edited by Markus Enders and Jan Szaif,
149–66. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2006.
Koutzarova, Tiana. Das Transzendentale bei Ibn Sıˉnaˉ: Zur Metaphysik als Wissenschaft erster Begriffs- und Urteilsprinzipien. Leiden: Brill, 2009.
Lameer, Joep. Conception and Belief in Sadr al-Dıˉ n Shiraˉzıˉ (ca. 1571–1635). Teheran:
Iranian Institute of Philosophy, 2006.
Lizzini, Olga. “Causality as Relation: Avicenna (and al-Ghazali).” Quaestio 13
(2013): 79–109.
Lizzini, Olga L. Fluxus (fayd): Indagine sui fondamenti della metafisica e della fisica di
Avicenna. Bari: Edizioni di Pagina, 2011.
Lizzini, Olga L. “Human Knowledge and Separate Intellect.” In The Routledge
Companion to Islamic Philosophy, edited by Luis Xavier López-Farjeat and Richard C. Taylor, 285–99. London: Routledge, 2015.
Lizzini, Olga L. “Ibn Sina’s Metaphysics.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2016 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2016/entries/ibn-sina-metaphysics/
Lizzini, Olga L. “Il nulla (al-ʿadam), l’inesistente (al-maʿduˉ m), la cosa (al-shayʾ):
Note intorno alla terminologia e alla dottrina della creazione dal nulla nel
pensiero islamico.” In Discussioni sul nulla tra medioevo ed età moderna, edited by
Massimiliano Lenzi and Alfonso Maierù, 63–103. Rome: Lessico Intellettuale
Europeo, 2009.
Lizzini, Olga L. “Intellectus, intelligentia, mens in Avicenna.” In Per una storia del concetto di mente, edited by Eugenio Canone, 123–65. Rome: L. S.
Olschki, 2005.
Lizzini, Olga L. “‘A Mysterious Order of Possibles’: Some Remarks on the Views
of Avicenna and Aquinas on Creation: al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt , the Quaestiones De potentia
and Beatrice Zedler’s interpretation.” American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly
88 (2014): 237–70.
Lizzini, Olga L. “The Pleasure of Knowledge and the Quietude of the Soul in
Avicenna (Ilaˉhiyyaˉt, VII, 7 and IX, 7).” Quaestio 15 (2015): 265–73.
Lizzini, Olga. L. “Wugˇ uˉd-Mawgˇ uˉ d”/ Existence-Existent in Avicenna: A Key Ontological Notion in Arabic Philosophy.” Quaestio 3 (2003): 111–38.
Macierowski, Edward M. “Does God Have a Quiddity According to Avicenna?”
The Thomist 52, no. 1 (1988): 79–87.
274 Olga L. Lizzini
Madkour, Ibrahim. L’Organon d’Aristote dans le monde arabe. 2nd edition. Paris:
Vrin, 1969.
Marmura, Michael E. “Avicenna on Meno’s Paradox: On ‘Apprehending’ Unknown Things Through Known Things.” Medieval Studies 71 (2009): 47–62.
Marmura, Michael E. “Avicenna’s Chapter on the Relative in the Metaphysics
of the Shifaˉʾ.” In Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science, edited by George F.
Hourani, 83–99. Albany: SUNY Press, 1975.
Maróth, Miklos. “Tas․
awwur and Tas․
dıˉq.” In Knowledge and the Sciences in Medieval Philosophy: Proceedings of the Eighth International Congress of Medieval Philosophy (S.I.E.P.M.), vol. 2, edited by Simo Knuuttila, Reijo Työrinoja, and Sten
Ebbesen, 265–74. Helsinki: Yliopistopaino, 1990.
McGinnis, Jon. Avicenna. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Michot, Yahya J. “Avicenna’s ‘Letter on the Disappearance of the Vain Intelligible Forms after Death’: Presentation and Translation.” Bulletin de philosophie médiévale 27 (1985): 98–103.
Pöltner, Günther. “Veritas est adaequatio intellectus et rei: Der Gesprächsbeitrag
des Thomas von Aquin zum Problem der Übereinstimmung.” Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung 37, no. 4 (1983): 563–76.
Porro, Pasquale. “Immateriality and Separation in Avicenna and Thomas Aquinas.” In The Arabic, Hebrew and Latin Reception of Avicenna’s Metaphysics, edited
by Amos Bertolacci and Dag N. Hasse, 275–308. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2011.
Rashed, Roshdi. “Avicenne, ‘philosophe analytique’ des mathématiques.” Les
études philosophiques 2 (2016): 283–306.
Rosenthal, Franz. Review of Fehmi Jadaane, L’influence du stoicisme sur la pensée
musulmane. Der Islam 46 (1970): 89–91.
Sabra, Abdelhamid I. “Avicenna on the Subject Matter of Logic.” Journal of Philosophy
77, no. 11 (1980): 746–64.
Schulz, Gudrun. Veritas est adaequatio intellectus et rei: Untersuchungen zur Wahrheitslehre des Thomas von Aquin und zur Kritik Kants an einem überlieferten
Wahrheitsbegriff. Leiden: Brill, 1992.
Sebti, Meryem. “L’imagination est-elle rationnelle selon Ibn Sıˉnaˉ?” In Journée d’études Avicenne, edited by Abdelali Elamrani-Jamal, 153–62. Marrakech:
Groupe d’études Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, 1999.
Sebti, Meryem. “Le statut ontologique de l’image dans la doctrine avicennienne
de la perception.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 15, no. 1 (2005): 109–40.
Street, Tony. “An Outline of Avicenna’s Syllogistic.” Archiv für Geschichte der
Philosophie 84, no. 2 (2002): 129–60.
Strobino, Riccardo. “Avicenna on Knowledge (ʿilm), Certainty (yaqıˉn), Cause
(ʿilla/sabab) and the Relative (mudaˉf ).” British Journal for the History of Philosophy
24, no. 3 (2016): 426–46.
Strobino, Riccardo. “Avicenna on the Indemonstrability of Definition.” Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 21 (2010): 113–63.
Strobino, Riccardo. “Avicenna’s Use of the Arabic Translations of the Posterior
Analytics and the Ancient Commentary Tradition.” Oriens 40, no. 2 (2012):
355–89.
Strobino, Riccardo. “Per se, Inseparability, Containment and Implication: Bridging the Gap Between Avicenna’s Theory of Demonstration and Logic of the
Predicables.” Oriens 44, no. 3–4 (2016): 181–266.
Ontology and Logic in Avicenna’s Concept of Truth 275
van Ess, Josef. Die Erkenntnislehre des ‘Aduddıˉn al-Icıˉ. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner,
1966.
Wedin, Michael V. “The Scope of Non-Contradiction: A Note on Aristotle’s
‘Elenctic’ Proof in Metaphysics Gamma 4.” Apeiron 32, no. 3 (1999): 231–42.
Wippel, John F. “Truth in Thomas Aquinas.” Review of Metaphysics 43, no. 2
(1989): 295–326.
Wisnovsky, Robert. Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2003.
Wisnovsky, Robert. “Notes on Avicenna’s Concept of Thingness.” Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy 10, no. 2 (2000): 181–221.
Wolen´ski, Jan. “Aletheia in Greek Thought until Aristotle.” Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic 127, no. 1–3 (2005): 339–60.
Wolen´ski, Jan. “Contributions to the History of the Classical Truth-Definition.”
In Essays in the History of Logic and Logical Philosophy, edited by Jan Wolen´ski,
139–49. Krakow: Jagiellonian University Press, 1999.
Wolfson, Harry A. “The Terms tas․
awwur and tas․
dıˉq in Arabic Philosophy and
Their Greek, Latin, and Hebrew Equivalents.” The Muslim World 33 (April
1943): 114–28.
Zghal, Hatem. “La relation chez Avicenne.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 16, no. 2 (2006): 237–86.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-14
Abuˉ Nas․r Muh․ammad ibn Muh․ammad ibn Tarkhaˉn ibn Awzalagh al-
Faˉraˉbıˉ, a ninth- to tenth-century CE Arabic philosopher (AH 256/870
CE–AH 339/950 CE), wrote a series of twelve logical treatises that have
been preserved in two manuscripts from the early seventeenth century,
MS Bratislava 231 TE 41 and MS Süleymaniye Kütüphanesi Hamidiye
812. In these twelve treatises, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ presents his account of the syllogistic arts and of their uses in all the sciences. He enumerates five syllogistic
arts: rhetoric, dialectic, sophistry, demonstration, and poetry. The introductory treatises to this collection not only introduce these five syllogistic
arts, but give an account of the starting points or beginnings for the selection of terms, for the composition of premises, and for the formulation of
syllogisms of the arts.
In examining these starting points, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ identifies the ways in
which we know the things that can be known. Pertaining to the things
that can be known, he says some are known by syllogistic art and demonstration and some are known without syllogistic art and demonstration—
that is, this second group of things known are known prior to the learning
and use of the syllogistic arts. According to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, knowledge that is
prior to the syllogistic arts exists and is known prior to human will, effort,
and intellection, whereas knowledge that is gained through the syllogistic arts requires human will, effort, and intellection. The syllogistic arts,
even the one possessing the highest degree of certainty, the art of demonstration, derive from this knowledge that is known prior to its use in the
syllogistic arts. To say that the arts “derive from” this knowledge does not
mean that this knowledge constitutes a permanently definable set of terms
and premises. It consists, rather, in starting points and beginnings that may
themselves need to be reformulated or refined in the course of an inquiry.
The purpose of this chapter is to show how al-Faˉraˉbıˉ introduces and distinguishes types of knowledge, what he calls maʿl uˉmaˉt , which are prior to
the syllogistic arts, and how these types of knowledge are used in at least
one of the syllogistic arts, the art of dialectic.
11 Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ on What Is Known
Prior to the Syllogistic Arts
in His Introductory Letter,
the Five Aphorisms, and the
Book of Dialectic
Terence J. Kleven
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 277
My inquiry entails a study of selected passages from three of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s logical treatises from this collection of twelve treatises. In the first treatise, the Letter with which the Book Begins, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ initially distinguishes the syllogistic arts from the manual or practical arts, whose actions and ends are the performance of a work, whereas for the logical arts, the end is exclusively the attainment of knowledge. Once he has made this distinction between the practical and the syllogistic arts and it is evident what the syllogistic arts are, he proceeds in the second introductory treatise, the Five Aphorisms, to identify the types of knowledge that are known prior to the learning of the syllogistic arts. Following a study of passages in these two introductory treatises, we will examine one passage in a later treatise in the collection, the Book of Dialectic, which provides an example of how the various types of presyllogistic or prescientific knowledge function in the inquiries pertinent to the syllogistic art of dialectic. The conclusions of our examination of the selected passages from these three treatises are necessarily protreptic because this study does not engage in an exposition of the entirety of the three treatises nor of the entire logical corpus of twelve books of which they are a part. Nonetheless, these passages introduce al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s account of knowledge—especially knowledge that exists and is known prior to art—in his understanding of logic, and these texts raise central questions for further inquiry regarding al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s account of philosophy.
The significance of the three treatises is best appreciated if we are aware
of their context in the collection to which they belong. This collection of
twelve of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s logical treatises is found together in two seventeenth-century manuscripts, MS Bratislava 231 TE 41 and MS Süleymaniye
Kütüphanesi Hamidiye 812.1 The treatises in these collections form a sequence and constitute one of his most extensive accounts of logic. The list
of the treatises is as follows: 1 Letter with which the Book Begins 2 Five Aphorisms 3 Book of the Eisagoge or The Introduction 4 Book of the Qaˉt․
aˉghuˉriyaˉs or The Categories 5 Book Concerning Irminias or The Interpretation 6 Book of Syllogism 7 Book of Resolution 8 Book of Sophistical Places 9 Book of Demonstration 10 Book of Dialectic 11 Book of Rhetoric 12 Book of Poetry
We recognize from the names of the treatises that many are commentaries on the books of Aristotle’s Organon. Yet they are not line-by-line nor
278 Terence J. Kleven
passage-by-passage commentaries. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ refers to Aristotle occasionally in his treatises, but seldom quotes him by introducing a passage with “he said” (qaˉla) or “he says” (yaquˉlu); also, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ often adds material that is absent from Aristotle’s treatises or passes over material that is present in them. The divergences of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ from Aristotle’s presentation of logic are also evident in that he adds other treatises to this sequence which have no obvious Aristotelian equivalent. For example, the two introductory treatises in the sequence, which we will examine here, have no parallels in Aristotle’s oeuvre, even if it is apparent that the content is gleaned from various treatises of Aristotle. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ includes the Book of
the Eisagoge, whose presence near the beginning of logic is not unusual in Syriac- and Arabic-speaking philosophy. But there are also other insertions and changes to Aristotle’s collection. Two books are inserted after the Book of Syllogism. The first, the Book of Resolution, has no immediate parallel to Aristotle’s treatises, and the second, the Book of Sophistical
Places, is a study of the subject of Aristotle’s Sophistical Refutations, but in contrast to Aristotle’s placement of the book after the Posterior Analytics,
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ inserts his treatise on it before his treatise the Book of Demonstration.
2 The reasons for these changes would require a lengthier account of the entire collection of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s logic than is possible here. Nonetheless, on the basis of this sketch, we can begin to explore his account of the syllogistic arts.3
Finally, the themes that emerge in the passages I examine here reveal
a ubiquitous emphasis on language in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ ’s logic. He is concerned
in particular with the opinions and judgments present in the common
language of a people. The logical arts, including demonstrative science,
will depend upon, and need to examine and refine, our sense of language.
They must investigate how words, expressions, and judgments shape the
arguments used in all of the arts.
The Letter on Logic
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ begins the first treatise by explaining that logic is an art.4 It
is, however, a particular kind of art—a syllogistic or rational one. There
are five species of such syllogistic arts: dialectic, sophistry, demonstration,
rhetoric, and poetry. They are characterized primarily by their use of syllogisms,
5 and they are distinguished from practical arts, such as medicine,
farming, or the construction of buildings, because as syllogistic arts their
action and end is exclusively the use of a syllogism rather than the performing of a particular action and work. The aim of medicine is health;
the aim of agriculture is the growth of crops; the aim of carpentry is
the construction of furniture or buildings. The practical arts may use the
syllogistic arts but, in contrast to the syllogistic arts, their purpose is not
solely the discovery and use of a syllogism.
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 279
In his delineation of the five logical arts, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ distinguishes them
by the types of syllogisms they use. Since these syllogisms are made with
language, he calls each of the arts by the term that is used for “rhetoric”
(mukhaˉt․aba), which he employs as a genus for the five species of arts. Philosophical rhetoric (al-mukhaˉt․
aba al-falsafiyya) seeks knowledge of what is
true about things that are certain. It is the standard and even an ideal for all
science, even if it is not achieved as often as supposed; its premises must be
certain if the syllogism is to produce certain knowledge. Dialectical rhetoric (al-mukhaˉt․
aba al-jadaliyya) seeks victory in argument through things
that are known and generally accepted (al-maʿr uˉfa al-mashhuˉra); its premises are taken from generally accepted opinion. Sophistical rhetoric (al-
mukhaˉt․aba al-suˉfist․
aˉʾiyya) seeks a supposed victory over the speaker through
things that are opined to be apparent and generally accepted (ghalabatan
maz․nuˉnatan bi-l-ʾashyaˉʾ allatıˉ yuz․annu bihaˉ fıˉ-l-z․aˉhir ʾannahaˉ mashhuˉra); this
art uses premises in syllogisms that are false but that might be supposed to
be true. Rhetorical rhetoric (al-mukhaˉt․
aba al-khit․
aˉbiyya) seeks to please the
listener with a particular type of pleasure even though the speaker does not
produce certainty in the listener; this art uses a premise or premises that
please the hearers but leaves out a premise that would not be pleasing even
if the premise may be necessary if a more certain conclusion is sought. Poetical rhetoric (al-mukhat․
aba al-shiʿriyya) uses the imagination to represent
things in speech; through the imagination, this art in fact uses things that
are false, but that illustrate through comparison the meaning of one thing
with the meaning of another.
In summary, according to these five arts, logic is the study of the terms—initially two terms, a subject and a predicate—which are combined to make a statement or judgment. Then a second statement is added and, provided it repeats one of the terms in the first statement, is called a middle term. It adds a third term. Then the combination of three terms in two statements or judgments makes it possible to discover knowledge. This dynamic will be present in any argument, whether this syllogistic form is recognized or not. In any given argument about a certain problem, logic identifies the types of syllogism present and through this identification is able to apprehend the measure of certainty or knowledge contained in the syllogism. The remaining eleven treatises in the collection focus on the rules of these five syllogistic arts. The aim of the group of treatises is to delineate both the common and specific rules of these arts.
Logic, for al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, is a study of the use of words and their meanings
as they are composed into judgments, which in turn have a connection
with other judgments, some of which lead to the discovery of knowledge. Despite the differences in the degree of certainty of knowledge of
the syllogisms, they are all syllogistic arts, and not one of them, not even
demonstration, is set off as independent from the others and capable of
280 Terence J. Kleven
functioning without the others. These five arts constitute five types of
argument, and with respect to any problem, it is necessary to determine
which art is most appropriate. In al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s first introduction of the five
arts, he says: “There are five syllogistic [arts]: philosophy, the art of dialectic, the art of sophistry, the art of rhetoric, and the art of poetry.” He individually calls each one of them an art, with the exception of philosophy,
falsafa. In this instance, the omission of the term “art” as the first member
of the construct state before the word “philosophy” ought to cause us to
wonder whether philosophy is an art like the other arts. Is it the only true
science, and, therefore, not an art?
Yet, although this omission may hint at just such a question, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ
does not continue to assert the distinction. Not only, as we have just noted,
does he show the continuity between the arts by indicating that all five of
them are species of “rhetoric”; several lines later, he also speaks of “the art
of philosophy” (s․i naˉʿa al-falsafa). The logical art, which is composed of five
species of arts, is the art necessary for all science—it is the scientific art,
manifested variously but always an art whose purpose and end is scientific
knowledge. In order for knowledge to be obtained and recognized, it will
be necessary to learn the rules of each of the syllogistic arts and to be able
to recognize different types of premises and syllogisms and the degree of
certainty belonging to each.
In al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s formulation, we do not find the widespread modern distinction between arts and sciences because all logic is an art leading to
scientia (ʿilm) or knowledge. Science is not possible without the logical arts.
“Art” rather constitutes all that needs to be learned through human will
and endeavor and that is not known prior to this endeavor. In the first
paragraph, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ states that logic directs the intellect toward what is
right only in the things in which it is possible to err, thus indicating that
there exists knowledge that is not subject to human will. Yet, in respect
to knowledge obtained from the arts, he says in this treatise that “logic”
is both a “standard” (ʿayaˉr ) and an “instrument” (ʾaˉla) for the discovery of
knowledge by the intellect. As such, logic is necessary for all knowledge in
any of the species of natural science. Knowledge is not obtained by learning only a particular art, or even several arts, but in learning to recognize
each kind of syllogistic art and the arguments each one produces and to
know which one is useful for what end.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ concludes this first treatise by explaining that the terms in
sentences are called by logicians “subjects” and “predicates.” There are
five types of such predicates—genus, differentia, species, property, and
accident—as each has a different relation to the thing in question. Three
of them, species, genus, and differentia, go into the making of a definition
of a thing; a definition is what entails a recognition of the resemblance of
one thing with another, and the same predicates can be attributed to the
two things. Two predicates, property and accident, can be said to be a description of a thing but do not contribute to the definition of it. These five
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 281
he calls the simple universal predicates. When they are combined, they
make statements or judgments.
In introducing these five arts in the Letter, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ presents the subject
of the rest of the logical treatises. What matters in these five arts are the
terms and their combinations, which will be used to make premises and,
in turn, will be combined with other premises to make syllogisms—some
useful in the discovery of knowledge, some not.
But who are the practitioners of art of logic, and what is al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s relation to his predecessors and to his contemporary practitioners of other arts,
such as the art of grammar? Although the treatise takes its starting point
for logic in the presentation of Aristotle’s notion of syllogism, Aristotle’s
name is not mentioned in this first treatise. At one point, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ refers
to “the people of the art of logic” (ʾahl s․i naˉʿa al-mant․
iq), among whom he
appears to include himself. At another point, he says “according to the ancients”
(ʿinda al-qudamaˉʾ). These “ancients,” he says, use the word “reason”
(nut ․q), from which “logic,” mant ․iq, is derived, according to three meanings: (1) the faculty by which man intellects the intelligibles, acquires the
arts and sciences, and distinguishes between good and bad in actions; (2)
the intelligibles in the soul, called “interior speech”; and (3) expressions in
language of what is in the mind, called “external speech.” He appears to
agree with the ancients, despite their antiquity, that these three senses are
all appropriate to “logic.”
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ refers twice in this treatise to the art of the grammarian (s․i naˉʿa
al-nah․
w), but asserts that grammar is for the language of a particular people and is not universal as logic is. He also regularly uses the first-person
plural verbal subject pronoun, “we,” and the first person plural possessive
pronoun, “our,” especially in the context of the examples of the uses of
the five predicates and their combinations. He says: “for example, our expression
[qawlnaˉ] ‘Zaid is a rational animal’ is a combination of genus and
difference”; and “our expression [qawlnaˉ] ‘a laughing animal and an animal
capable of buying and selling’ is a combination of genus and property.”
And so on. He also says: “we see” (raʾaynaˉ) and “we say” (qalnaˉ) and “we
perceive it” (nah․assahu), and so on, and also uses at least once the passive “it
is said” (qıˉl ). We are left to ask: Who are the subjects, or, in the case of the
passive verb, the hidden subject of these personal and possessive pronouns?
Is it a stylistic feature of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s rhetoric, a pluralis modestiae or maiestatis?
In fact, it appears that it is not al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s own judgment to which he is
referring, but rather the observation that in common usage the expressions
are shared by the people who use the language. Are the subjects the logicians, then? Perhaps, since these pronominal prefixes and suffixes occur
primarily in sections after he has introduced the phrase “the people of the
art of logic.” He does not insist on this connection, however, and at the
very least, these personal pronouns are ambiguous. The ambiguity suggests that it may not simply be “we logicians” who use language in certain
ways, but that logicians discover language already in use and seek to give
282 Terence J. Kleven
an account of distinctions already in existence in the language that they
share with others.
By introducing this ambiguity at this point, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ requires us to
consider alternate explanations, and we will need to continue our examination to see whether and when he resolves the ambiguity. As we read
through the treatises, we will need to keep asking who constitutes this
common group to which he refers. If we have not already wondered what
the starting points of these arts are—that is, where, for example, we obtain
the terms and the premises for syllogisms, especially those leading to certainty—we have hints already in this introductory treatise that, although
the arts require learning by human will and endeavor, we will have to
reflect further on whether all distinctions are created by the syllogistic
arts or whether at least some of the distinctions used in logic are already
present in the language shared among the community. At the very least,
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ makes us ponder where these distinctions come from; we do not
know exactly the answer to this inquiry from his exposition here, but he
does say “we” speak this way.
The learned art of logic will proceed to name the five universal predicates, use them to identify and distinguish predicates with precision, and
show their respective significance for the understanding of things. However, it is not at all definite that al-Faˉraˉbıˉ teaches that logic creates from
nothing these various relations of predicates to things. The arts, and the
sciences that are discovered from the predicates established in the arts, may
be not simply abstractions from the community but intrinsically linked to
it through language. We will need to see whether al-Faˉraˉbıˉ resolves this
impasse, what he has presented here as an aporia, in other treatises in the
collection.6
The Five Aphorisms
The title of the second treatise, Five Aphorisms, is rightly translated with
the term “aphorism” because of the density of its style.7 “Aphorism” is a
translation of fas․
l, which can also mean more generally “section” or “chapter” (similar to baˉb), but the chapters here are like aphorisms because of the
brevity of their discourse. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ introduces five subjects with minimal
reference to previous authors or treatises and without explicit mention of
the significance these subjects have to the remainder of the treatises. These
subjects are (1) the use of terms in the art of logic, some of which are in
common usage, others not; (2) the four ways in which we know things
prior to deliberation, thought, and demonstration; (3) when we can speak
of things as being either “in” or “of” a thing; (4) five meanings of the term
“prior”; and (5) the use of the terms “verb,” “noun,” and “instrument”
pertaining to logic. The first two aphorisms, in particular, continue the
themes that have already been introduced in the first treatise. Here, I will
focus on only the first two aphorisms.
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 283
The First Aphorism addresses the use of words in the arts, both the logical and practical arts, and their relation to the common usage by the public. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ says there are three ways in which utterances are used in the arts. First, the art may use words that are not generally known (mashhu
ˉr ˉat ) by the public. He uses an example of two words, al-ʾandhıˉdhaj,8
“record,” and al-ʾawaˉraj , “account-book,” which are used in the art of the clerk, probably in the context of accounting. Both are unusually formed Arabic words and are likely loan-words from Persian or one of the Altaic languages. They can be used by the practitioners of the art even though the public does not understand their meaning. Second, words can be used by the practitioners of an art in which the public uses one meaning of the term, and the artisans use another meaning. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ says the meanings that these terms have for the public are transferred to the art due to some connection or similarity of the generally known meaning to the meaning in the art. The example he uses is zimaˉm, “bridle,” which is used by the public for a horse or camel but by the scribe as indicating a type of restraint, specifically in the auditing of books. The recognition of a second usage leads to what is usually known as an “equivocal” term, although al-Faˉraˉbıˉ does not use that designation here. Third, words can be used in the same way in the art as they are commonly understood by the public.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ is particularly concerned with the second type of usage. He asserts that the practitioners of the art do not err in using the term in a way that is necessary for right understanding in the art. The art needs precision in its use of terms for it even to exist. If the only and correct usage were the one used by the public, there could be no art. Along with the use of zimaˉm in bookkeeping, he offers an example from grammar. The Arab grammarians (nah․awiyyuw al-ʿarab) use rafʿ, “raising,” to indicate the use of d․
amma for the nominative case, the term nas․
b, “elevation,”
to indicate the use of fath․
a for the accusative case, and the term khafd․, “depression,” to indicate the kasra for the genitive case. Although rafʿ, nas․
b,
and khafd․ are used by the public in a variety of ways, the grammarians are not mistaken to use them to describe aspects of grammar. The syllogistic arts, and all of the sciences derived from them, need to be aware of how the terms that are needed for the art both rely upon and distinguish themselves from meanings generally accepted by the public. As we saw in the first treatise, the relation of art to generally accepted meaning will be essential to the selection of terms in the premises of a syllogism; this aphorism is more precise in the exposition of the theme than the Letter
was. A confusion of meaning of the same term would prevent the use of the art to discover what is unknown. It is no happenstance that Aristotle placed the chapter on equivocal, univocal, and derivative terms as the first of his chapters in the Categories. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, too, places this topic as the first of the aphorisms in this treatise for the one who is beginning the study of logic.
284 Terence J. Kleven
The Second Aphorism addresses more directly the question of the starting points of the syllogistic arts.9 The aphorism begins as follows:
اة ولا بإستنباط، منها م يّعلم لا بإستدلال ولا بفكر ولا برو ا تُ علم منها م ي تُ تلّ الأشهاء ا
ة أربع لاًعلم أو توجد لا بفكر ولا بإستدلال أص ي تُ تلّة وإستنباط، وا يّعلم بفكر ورو يُ
وّل .أصناف: مقبولات، ومشورات، ومحسوسات، ومعقولات أ
Of the things that are known, some of them are known without argumentation or thought or deliberation or induction, and some of them
are known by thought and deliberation and induction. Of the things
which are known and exist without thought or argumentation in any
way, there are four types: received tradition, generally accepted opinions, perceptions, and first intelligibles.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ begins the first sentence of the aphorism by referring to “things”
and divides the knowledge we have of these things into two types. There
is knowledge that is prior to the intellectual arts and knowledge that results because of the intellectual arts. He does not say that the knowledge
prior to the intellectual arts is either superior or inferior to the intellectual
arts; he simply describes both these sources are causes of our knowledge.
In a phrase in a subsequent line, he reinforces the reality of these “things”
which are known prior to art by adding the verb “exist” (دتوج , tawjidu). In
the first treatise, the Letter with which the Book Begins, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ introduced
us to the arts; now he is introducing us to knowledge that exists prior to
the arts. This knowledge is necessary for our understanding of the rules
and practices of the arts.
In the rest of the aphorism, he explains each of these four types of
knowledge that exist and are known prior to the arts. The first type is
“received tradition” (تمقبولا , maqbuˉlaˉt ). Such knowledge is received from
one who is a murtad․ayan,10 “a delightful one,” or the word may refer to the
knowledge, that is, the tradition that confirms one who is a murtad․ayan.
The word murtad․ayan is from the verb rad․
iya, used here as a passive participle to make a substantive. This usage alludes to the Qurʾaˉn in 101:7, in
reference to one whose life is “delightful” or “pleasant” because his good
deeds are heavy on the scale.11 To be precise, in this Qurʾaˉnic passage there
is an active participle of the verb used, raˉd․iyatin, where we might expect a
passive participle as we have it in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s text. In regard to this active
participle in the Qurʾaˉn, Devin J. Stewart cites Michael Sells’ explanation
that in this suˉra, the active participle is chosen because of the rhyme and
rhythm of the suˉra even if the passive participle is more to be expected.12
The Qurʾaˉnic passage is a reference to the Prophet or to those who follow
closely in the Prophet’s tradition. In Qurʾaˉn 5:119 and 9:100, the perfect
form of the verb rad․
iya is used in the same way to affirm of the truthful that
“God delights in them and they delight in him” and that God “has prepared gardens under which rivers flow” for them to dwell in. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 285
reliance on the Qurʾaˉnic allusion links this type of knowledge to those
who are the blessed of God because of their right actions. Moreover, the
imperfect verb used here, taqirru,13 means “to determine a thing” or “to
install someone.” The term has a legal sense, which is used here.14 Thus, the translation of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s statement is: “The received tradition is what
is received from the delightful one or that which approves a delightful
one.” The phrase alludes to the Prophet, but also to those who follow in
the tradition of the Prophet and at once both confirm and are confirmed
by the tradition. The Prophet and the best followers of the Prophet are a
delight to God. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ presents this type of knowledge, “the received
opinions,” as real and commendable—and they are religious.
The second type of knowledge is “generally accepted opinions”
ت) مشهورا , mashhuˉraˉt ). They are the “widespread opinions” (al-ʾaˉraˉ ʾ al-
dhaˉʾiʿa) which are known, as al-Faˉraˉbıˉ says, by “all of the people or by
many of them or by the learned and intellectuals or most of them without
any of them, not even one of them, opposing them.” The manner of description is sufficiently similar to Aristotle’s that we know these opinions
are the endoxa of Aristotle’s Topics.15 The examples al-Faˉraˉbıˉ gives here are
that kindness to parents is a duty, that gratitude to a benefactor is good and
ingratitude an evil, and what is known (al-mashhuˉrıˉna) as skillful among
the practitioners of the arts or at least of those who are “generally accepted” (al-mashhuˉra) as skillful in them. These generally accepted opinions, forceful yet often unacknowledged, are used in the syllogisms of the
art of dialectic.
The third type of knowledge is that which is apprehended through
“sense perception” (تالمحسوسا , al-mah․s uˉsaˉt ), that is, the five senses. At this
point, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ simply gives two examples of this type of knowledge: we
apprehend through the senses that “Zaid is this one sitting and this time is
daylight.”
The fourth type of knowledge is the “first intelligibles” (وّل المعقولات الأ ,
al-maʿquˉlaˉt al- ʾawwalu). Of these, he says:
These are what we find ourselves created to be cognizant of from the
beginning and formed to be certain of, and to know that it may not
and cannot be otherwise than it is, and we do not know how they
came to us and from where they came.
The examples he gives are from mathematics: every three is an odd number and every four is an even number; a part is always smaller than a whole; and two quantities which are equal to a third are also equal to one another. He ends this aphorism by saying that apart from these four types of knowledge (تالمعلوما , al-maʿl uˉmaˉt ), what we know is by way of syllogism and induction, that is, by way of the intellectual arts. Thus, these four types of knowledge are prior to the arts. Although we will not examine the Fourth Aphorism here, in it al-Faˉraˉbıˉ identifies five meanings of
286 Terence J. Kleven
the word “prior”; the four types of knowledge are prior, perhaps in time or in rank or in excellence, to knowledge derived from syllogistic art. This Second Aphorism is therefore the introduction to the monumental question in philosophy of the origin of the first principles of all of the logical arts and the sciences. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ provides his first enumeration of them here, albeit aphoristically. It will not be his last reference to these types of knowledge.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ does not evaluate or rank the four types of knowledge in this
Second Aphorism, nor does he say that some types of knowledge are more
appropriate to some people than others. Moreover, it is possible that in
any problem which arises, knowledge from one of the four is more germane than knowledge from the others or that some combination may be
necessary and appropriate. As we will see in the examination of a passage
from the Book of Dialectic, perception is essential in the study of entities in
nature, but our perceptions may be shaped by generally accepted opinions
passed on to us by an authoritative person, perhaps the perception of a
renowned biologist, so that we see only what we have been formed to see.
An Example of the Use of Prior Knowledge in
the Art of Dialectic
These initial themes we have identified are necessary for the exposition
of the five syllogistic arts in the remaining logical treatises. A complete
inquiry would need to study those themes in all of the treatises, but for
now, let us look at only one example, from the Book of Dialectic, in which
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ gives an account of perception.16
ىكل فيها عل تّها غيرنا، وأشياء ن سّها نحن كما يح سّ في المحسوسات أشياء نح نّ وكما أ
ك نكون قد شاهدنا نحن ذل نّه غيرنا منها ونجتزئ بما أخبروا به من غير أ سّ ما أح
نه أ بِشك يُ ه ونشاهده نحن. كذل سّ وأحسسناه، فنستعملها على مثال ما نستعمل ما نح
ةق بها من جه دّ يكون في المعقولات أشياء نعلمها نحن بأنفسنا ونقبلها ببصائرنا ونص
اكل فيها على ما علمه غيرنا منها ورآه فيه تّ بأنفسنا، وأشياء ن [ظ 190 ب [ نا علم
لتي علمناها نحن، ونعم لّ ونجتزئ بذلك ونستعملها على مثال ما نستعمل الأشياء ا
اه رآه فيها وعلمه منها من غير أن نعلم منه نّ الحال فيها هو على ما أخبرنا أ نّ على أ
نما كان رأي إنسا بّكل عليه في المعقولات ر تّذي ن لّ أكثر من ذلك. والرأي ا اً نحن شيئ
يما كان رأي جميع الناس وهو الرأ بّ واحد فقط أو طائفة فقط وهو الرأي المقبول ور
يتلّتي هي مبادئ صناعة الجدل هي ا لّمات المشهورة ا دّ المق نّ المشهور. وبالجملة فإ
كها كذل نّد فيها أ قَعت يُل و بِّقا وتُ قّ بهِ ثوي كلّيّة يُ ة مهملة، وه لّيّ موضوعاتها معان ك
ك. علم منها شيء آخر أكثر من ذل ن يُ ل من غير أ مَستع وتُ
And similarly in regard to perceptions, there are things we ourselves
perceive in the same way as someone other than us perceives them,
and things we rely upon what someone other than us perceives of
them, and we are content with what others report of them without
ourselves having witnessed and sensed them; thus, we use them in
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 287
the manner in which we use what we ourselves perceive and witness.
Likewise, it is similar in regard to the intelligibles: there are things
that we know in ourselves, and receive by our own discernment, and
assent to in respect to our knowledge in ourselves, and things for
which we rely upon what someone other than us knows of them and
what he opines about them, and we are content with this; and we use
them in the same manner we use things which we ourselves know,
and we use them according to the condition of what he informs us
and what he opines about them and knows of them without ourselves
knowing them in any way other than this. And the opinion we rely on
regarding the intelligibles is perhaps the opinion of one person only
or a group only, and it is received opinion. Perhaps it is the opinion
of all the people, and it is generally accepted opinion. In general, the
generally accepted premises which are the principles of the art of dialectic are those whose subjects are universal, unspecified meanings;
and they are universals that are trusted and received and believed that
it is like this, and they are used without one’s knowing anything more
about them other than this.17
In this exposition, both perception and first intelligibles may be derived
from someone else even if we receive and assent to them as if we had
individually perceived or intellected them directly. Thus, the kinds of
knowledge that are prior to logical argumentation can be confused with
each other, and premises thought to be derived from one type of prior
knowledge may, in fact, be from another type. Nonetheless, we use this
knowledge as if we have perceived the premises directly or intellected
them in ourselves. Toward the end of the passage, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ calls these
types of knowledge “opinions” and says that these opinions will either be
“received opinion,” if it is received from an individual or one group only,
or “generally accepted opinion,” if it is the opinion of a whole people.
The fact that these are recognized or treated as opinions does not make
them wrong—they may be accurate perceptions or true beliefs or first
intelligibles. But he says “we assent” (نصدّق , nus․
addiqu) to them and do not
have knowledge, at least not full knowledge, of them. The word that he
does not use, but that is implied in the use of nus․
addiqu, is وّر تص , tas․
awwur,
“conception”; we do not have a conception of them.
Thus, one of the purposes of the logical arts is to identify the type of
prior knowledge that is being used for each particular problem, and from
this to discern what types of premises emerge from each of the types of
knowledge which are pertinent to that problem. It will be the particular
task of the syllogistic art of dialectic to evaluate universal, though indefinite, opinions that are, in the description near the end of the passage,
“trusted and received and believed.” A fuller study of all the five syllogistic
arts in all the twelve treatises of the collection would be needed in order
to determine the types of prior knowledge that are utilized in each term
288 Terence J. Kleven
and each premise that make up the argument of a syllogism. Yet we can
begin to apprehend the consequences of these types of knowledge and
how they will be important to the syllogistic arts. The art of dialectic
is what discovers and evaluates the knowledge that is known before the
syllogistic arts are used, and dialectic is needed to discover the terms used
in all syllogisms.
Finally, just as there are indications in the Letter and in the Five Aphorisms
that the study of language and rhetoric is essential to the exposition
of the rules for the five syllogistic arts, there is further evidence for that
account in this quotation from the Book of Dialectic. For example, the generally accepted opinions may be transmitted to us by a recognized authority or by reports about an authority or authorities, or we may consent to
these opinions even without necessarily knowing their initial source or
the type and degree of their certainty. We may have learned these opinions unawares through our learning of the language of a people, that is,
through the standards of judgment embedded in language. The terms and
premises in the syllogistic arts will be taken from language, even if the
logical arts will need to make distinctions between common usage and the
usage needed for the syllogisms of science.
Conclusions
The passages examined here provide an introduction to al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s account of the nature of logic and its five syllogistic species. Because these passages were selected from the contexts of longer treatises and from a collection of twelve treatises, our inquiry is necessarily protreptic and tentative (peirastikeˉ),18 and it will need to be supplemented by sustained study of all the treatises in relation to each other. We have already seen that the first two treatises introduce themes which are also present in another treatise, the Book of Dialectic. With an awareness of the essential question of the origin and nature of the starting points and beginnings of the syllogistic arts, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ identifies in the Five Aphorisms the four
types of knowledge that are prior to and necessary for the discovery of the terms and the formulation of the premises for each of the syllogisms to be used in each of the five arts. In doing so, he identifies the primary premises for each species of science.
Even in the passages from the treatises we have examined, it is apparent
that al-Faˉraˉbıˉ ’s account of philosophy avoids, on the one hand, the dogmatism of both conventionalism and skepticism inasmuch as he recognizes
types of knowledge that are prior to human will and art. On the other
hand, this account of philosophy also avoids the dogmatism of premature
certainty inasmuch as he recognizes that these types of knowledge do
not exist as once-for-all definitions. In the Second Aphorism of the Five Aphorisms, he gives examples of and allusions to this knowledge, but does
not provide definitions that require genera and species. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ ends the
passage from the Book of Dialectic with the statement that the subjects have
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 289
“universal” and “unspecified” (muhmala) meanings, and thus, when made
particular, each universal will not lead to a one, single definition. In this
way, he also avoids the dogmatism of a science that claims completeness,
certainty, and finality of definition where these do not exist, or at least do
not exist yet, and he allows true and certain knowledge to be a goal even
if he recognizes that we do not possess the perfected ideal. Nevertheless, as
knowledge prior to art, these types of knowledge provide starting points
either to knowledge we perceive or know in ourselves or to knowledge
gained from the generally accepted opinions we receive from political,
social, and religious life.
In the selected passage from the treatise on the art of dialectic, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ
explains how the four types of knowledge which are known prior to the
syllogistic arts can be used in that art. He elucidates how both perception
and intelligibles may be generally accepted opinions even if we assent to
them as if they are direct sources of knowledge of terms and premises
to be used in valid syllogisms. It is the task of the art of dialectic, as it
will be the task of each of the arts, to evaluate the origin and measure of
certainty in these four sources of knowledge in relation to each problem
being addressed. Science will always need to return to beginnings, to
starting points, and evaluate the measure of their certainty. Premature and
unfounded certainties are irrational, or at least only partially rational, and
true philosophic science needs to be able to identify, acknowledge,
and inquire into what it does not know. The example from the art of dialectic shows that in recognition of the link between the philosophic arts
and the community, especially the opinions from authoritative sources
embedded in and transmitted through the language of the community,
philosophy or science is not achieved simply and primarily through separation and abstraction from the human and the political things. The syllogistic arts need to recognize and evaluate prescientific kinds of knowledge
which are prior in some way—perhaps prior in time and perhaps prior in
excellence—to knowledge that is produced by the syllogistic arts.
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Richard C. Taylor for the numerous opportunities he has
provided for many of us to participate in the Aristotle and Aristotelianism
conferences at Marquette University and in the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’
International Working Group.” His publications and lively conference
conversations are continual reminders of the central philosophical topics
that ought to animate our study of science, religion, and politics. I also
wish to thank Katja Krause at the Max Planck Institute for the History of
Science in Berlin, who made it possible for me to work with colleagues on
this research and to utilize the Institute’s library resources. I am grateful
to my home institution, Central College, for a sabbatical year to continue
this research on the nature and place of science in the larger context of
humane studies.
290 Terence J. Kleven
Notes 1 MS Bratislava 231 TE 41 has a colophon on its final page (fol. 274r1–8) which
says that this copy was completed in Constantinople in AH 1116/1704
CE by a scribe named Afqar al-Urıˉ (his full name is illegible). MS Süleymaniye Kütüphanesi Hamidiye 812 has a colophon on its penultimate page
(fol. 123r20–27) which says that it was completed in Constantinople in AH
1133/1721 CE by a scribe named Muh․ammad bin Ah․mad al-Uskuˉbıˉ for his
teacher Asʿad ibn ʿAli ibn ʿUthmaˉn al-Yanyawıˉ. MS Bratislava appears to be
known to the scribe who copied Hamidiye 812, because the table of contents
on fol. 1r of Bratislava and all the marginalia throughout the manuscript seem
to be by the same scribe who copied Hamidiye 812, that is, by al-Uskuˉbıˉ.
Also, the names of the books in the table of contents of Bratislava and Hamidiye are sufficiently similar to confirm that they are written by the same
scribe even though the titles introducing each treatise in the manuscripts are
not identical to the titles in the tables of contents. The book titles in both
of al-Uskuˉbıˉ’s lists speak of eight treatises in the collection, besides the two
introductory treatises. The number eight is consistent with the number of
books typically understood to constitute Aristotle’s Organon in the Syriac and
Arabic traditions. I have taken the titles of the treatises from MSS Bratislava
and Hamidiye themselves rather than from the appended tables of contents. For research on the scribal school of Asʿad al-Yanyawıˉ and his student
Ah․mad al-Uskuˉbıˉ, see Di Vincenzo, “Reading Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Šifaˉ’ ”;
Aslan, “As’ad [sic] Afandi of Yanya”; Küçük, “Natural Philosophy”; Morel,
“As‘ad al-Yaˉnyawıˉ.” 2 On the consequences of these differences, see Mallet, “Le Kitaˉb al-Tah․l ıˉl d’Alfarabi.” 3 Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s influence on the delineation of the books needed for logic is attested
in later writers. See, for example, Ibn T․umluˉs, Le Livre de la Rhétorique. 4 Al -Faˉraˉbıˉ, “Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s Introductory Risaˉlah on Logic,” ed. Dunlop. In the
following analysis, I quote primarily from Dunlop’s edition and English
translation. 5 I say “primarily” because induction is included as a legitimate argument for
a syllogistic art, but induction alone is not adequate to make any of the arts
syllogistic. 6 See Sachs’ comments in Aristotle, Metaphysics, trans. Sachs, lv. 7 Apart from the copies of this treatise in MSS Bratislava and Hamidiye, there
is a copy of the Five Aphorisms in the Bibliotheqùe nationale de France, MS
Heb 1008. This manuscript is in Judeo-Arabic script and is a collection of Ibn
Rushd’s short treatises on logic as well as two of Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s logical treatises,
including the Five Aphorisms. For a description of the manuscript, see Butterworth, “Introduction,” 15–17. The manuscript is dated to AH 621/1356 CE,
which is earlier than the two eighteenth-century manuscripts from Istanbul.
The treatise was edited and translated by D. M. Dunlop as “Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s Introductory Sections on Logic.” Dunlop uses Hamidiye and MS Heb. 1008 but
makes no reference to MS Bratislava. He also uses the lemmata from Ibn Baˉjja’s
Comments (Taʿaˉlıˉq) on al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s logic, MS Derenbourg Escorial 612. 8 جيذ نذ الأ—thus the reading of MS Bratislava, MS Heb 1008, and the lemma in
MS Escorial 612, but MS Hamidiye has جالأفذيد .
9 See Kleven, “Alfarabi’s Introduction.” 10 MS Bratislava adds tanwıˉn to both participles used in the passage. 11 Lane, English-Arabic Lexicon. The first volume of Lane’s multivolume lexicon
was first published by Williams and Norgate in 1863. Ibid., 1099–1100. 12 Stewart, “Pit,” 103a–b.
Al-Faˉraˉbī on What Is Known Prior to the Syllogistic Arts 291 13 There is ambiguity in the manuscripts as to what letters are present: Bratislava
has رىف , without further marks, but probably it is رتق in parallel with بل تق . Hamidiye has رّيق , which is likely incorrect, and Heb 1008 has the unusual قد ب.
This reading in Heb 1008 is an indication that even though the manuscript
is older than Bratislava and Hamidiye, it does not necessarily preserve better
readings. I have chosen Bratislava’s reading because it makes sense and requires the least amount of alteration to the script. 14 See Mahdi, “Averroës on Divine Law,” esp. 130 n. 26; Averroes, Decisive Treatise & Epistle Dedicatory, trans. Butterworth, esp. xix. 15 Aristotle, Top. 100b22–24, trans. Forster. See also 101a11–16, 104a8–15. 16 Bratislava fols. 190r14–19–190v1–10 (see also Hamidiye fol. 85v19–28). The entire treatise has been published twice. The passage quoted here can be found
i n al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Al-Jadal, ed. Rafıˉq al-ʿAjam, 17–18, and al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Al-Jadal, ed.
Daˉnishpazuˉh, 362. 17 Hamidiye rightly corrects Bratislava in the first ير غ in the line because it is
not necessarily plural; the subject of the second verb is not “we.” Daˉnishpazuˉh makes five errors in the transcription of this passage. In each case MSS
Bratislava and Hamidiye agree with each other and I have preserved their
readings. Daˉnishpazuˉh transcribes the last word in the first line as يها ف instead
of نها م; he has ها به أخبرو for هأخبروا ب ; he omits ننح following نا شاهد ; and he has
هواحسسنأ for هوأحسسنا . There is also a printer’s error, with ئنجتز و فيها instead of
ئفيها ونجتز . My translation differs only slightly from the commendable recent
English translation of the Book of Dialectic by DiPasquale, Alfarabi’s Book of
Dialectic, 16–17. 18 Aristotle says dialectic is peirastikeˉ in Metaphysics 1004b 25, trans. Sachs, 56–
57. In Top. 101b 3, Aristotle also says dialectic is exetastikeˉ, “probative.”
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. “Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s Introductory Risaˉlah on Logic.” Edited, translated, and
with notes by D. M. Dunlop. Islamic Quarterly 3 (1957): 224–35.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. “Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s Introductory Sections on Logic.” Edited, translated, and
with notes by D. M. Dunlop. Islamic Quarterly 2 (1955): 264–82.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Al-Jadal. In Al-Mant․
iq ʿi nda al-Faˉraˉbıˉ , edited, introduced, and with
notes by Rafıˉq al-ʿAjam, vol. 3, 308–404. Beirut: Dar al-Mashreq, 1986.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Al-Jadal. In Al-Mant․i qiyyaˉt li-l-Faˉraˉbıˉ , vol. 1: Al-Nas․
us․ al-Mant․i qiyyaˉt ,
edited with notes by M. T. Daˉnishpazuˉh, 358–455. Qom: Bahman Publishers,
1987.
Aristotle. Metaphysics. Introduction, translation, and notes by Joe Sachs. Santa Fe,
NM: Green Lion Press, 2002.
Aristotle. Posterior Analytics. Topica. Translated by Hugh Tredennick and E. S.
Forster. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1960.
Averroës (Ibn Rushd). The Decisive Treatise and Epistle Dedicatory: Determining the
Connection Between Law and Wisdom. Translated with introduction and notes by
Charles E. Butterworth. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 2001.
DiPasquale, David M. Alfarabi’s Book of Dialectic (Kitaˉb al-Jadal): On the Starting
Point of Islamic Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019.
Ibn T․
umluˉs. Le Livre de la Rhétorique du philosophe et médicin Ibn t ․umluˉs (Alhagiag
bin Thalmus): Introduction générale, édition critique du texte arabe, traduction française
et tables par Maroun Aouad. Paris: Vrin, 2006.
292 Terence J. Kleven
Secondary Literature
Aslan, Adnan. “As’ad [sic] Afandi of Yanya (d. 1143/1730).” In The Bibliographical Encyclopaedia of Islamic Philosophy, vol. 1, A–I, edited by Oliver Leaman, 39–42.
London: Thoemmes Continuum, 2006.
Butterworth, Charles E. “Introduction.” In Averroës, Averroës’ Three Commentaries on Aristotle’s “Topics,” “Rhetoric,” and “Poetics,” edited and translated by
Charles E. Butterworth. Albany: SUNY Press, 1977.
Di Vincenzo, Silvia. “Reading Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Šifaˉ’ in the Ottoman World:
The Circulation of the Work Within the School of Asʽad al-Yaˉnyawıˉ.” Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph 67 (2017–18): 327–50.
Kleven, Terence J. “Alfarabi’s Introduction to the Five Rational Arts with Reference to the Five Aphorisms (al-Fus․
uˉl al-Khamsa) and Ibn Baˉjja’s Comments
(Taʽaˉl ıˉq).” Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph 65 (2013–14): 165–94.
Küçük, B. Harun. “Natural Philosophy and Politics in the Eighteenth Century:
Esad of Ioannina and Greek Aristotelianism at the Ottoman Court.” Osmanlı Aras¸tırmaları: The Journal of Ottoman Studies 41 (2013): 125–58.
Lane, E. W. English-Arabic Lexicon. 8 vols. Cambridge: The Islamic Text Society,
1984.
Mahdi, Muhsin. “Averroës on Divine Law and Human Wisdom.” In Ancients and Moderns: Essays on the Tradition of Political Philosophy in Honor of Leo Strauss,
edited by Joseph Cropsey, 114–31. New York: Basic Books, 1964.
Mallet, Dominique. “Le Kitaˉb al-Tah․
lıˉ l d’Alfarabi.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
4, no. 2 (1994): 317–36.
Morel, Teymour. “As‘ad al-Yaˉnyawıˉ et la tradition philosophique Arab-Islamique:
une étude sur le manuscrit Manisa Yazma eser Kütüphanesi 5842.” South-Eastern Europe and Eastern Mediterranean, edited by Ioana Feodorov, 138–56.
Bra˘ila, Romania: Editura Istros a Muzeului Bra˘ilei “Carol I”: 2020.
Stewart, Devin J. “Pit.” In Encyclopaedia of the Qur’aˉn, vol. 4, P–Sh, edited by Jane
Dammen McAuliffe. Leiden: Brill, 2004.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-15
The works of Dominicus Gundissalinus (or Gundisalvi; ca. 1115–post-
1190) form a turning point in the history of European medieval philosophy, marking a fundamental step toward the integration of Islamicate
philosophy into the Latin tradition. Gundissalinus was not a master in a
medieval university, nor was philosophizing his main occupation; he was
mostly a translator from Arabic to Latin and an archdeacon of the cathedral of Toledo. This does not, however, diminish the role or the scope of
Gundissalinus’ reflections on metaphysics, gnoseology, and psychology.
One of the characteristic traits of twelfth-century Iberia was the movement of an unprecedented number of people and books from the Islamic
south toward Castile and Aragon.1 Fleeing from the Almohad invasion of
al-Andalus, these refugees brought to the Christian north their cultural
heritage, both material and immaterial: books and people, skills and expertise. This flow fueled the famous “translation movement” that had started
in Iberia at the beginning of the twelfth century and whose main center
was by then Toledo. The pioneering translators of Toledo took up the
task of making available to Latin readers some of this dazzling collection
of new books, which promised to present novel solutions to long-debated
problems, theories and practices capable of advancing Latinate science, and
even new disciplines that Latin people had never yet heard of.2
To be correctly understood, Gundissalinus’ contribution to the history
of philosophy must be contextualized within that intellectual framework.
Aside from his ecclesiastical duties, Gundissalinus was primarily a translator, very often working with other translators (especially Abraham ibn
Daud and Johannes Hispanus).3 Gundissalinus’ philosophy is structurally bound to his work as translator: he appears to have felt compelled to
philosophize upon the works he translated, connecting their doctrines
to theories and problems debated in the Latin tradition. His reasons for
writing philosophy in this way are unknown. It might be that someone
requested Gundissalinus to write the works, or that he was teaching at the
cathedral school, like his colleague Gerard of Cremona.4 Or it might be
that Gundissalinus wrote in order to understand what he was translating,
or even that he did so simply out of a passionate interest in philosophical
matters. Almost nothing can be established in this regard, at least currently.
12 Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One
Nicola Polloni
294 Nicola Polloni
What we can say is that his appreciation of the substantive (albeit incomplete) compatibility between the Islamicate and the Latinate traditions
opened up opportunities to engage with abiding philosophical problems
from a groundbreaking new angle.
The story of his works’ circulation in the later Middle Ages is rather
intricate,5 and Gundissalinus’ influence is often underestimated as a result. Yet traces of his thinking can be found in many medieval authors,
including John Blund, Thomas of York, Bonaventure, Albert the Great,
Roger Bacon, John Peckham, Geoffrey of Aspall, and Thomas Aquinas.6
Gundissalinus also impacted the Jewish tradition thanks to Hebrew translations of his works in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, with Jewish authors such as Gerson ben Solomon and Hillel ben Samuel using his
material in their writing.7
As regards authorship, De unitate et uno presents a peculiar case. The
work circulated with a pseudo-epigraphical attribution for centuries, and
after Gundissalinus’ death, it was attributed to Boethius, of which more
later in this chapter. An examination of Gundissalinus’ philosophical oeuvre, of which De unitate et uno appears to be the first treatise, suggests that
he had increasing access to Arabic sources over the course of his career;
this was probably due to the translation projects he was pursuing in Toledo. The direct influence of the works that Gundissalinus was translating
serves as a valuable indicator in establishing a chronology of his original
writings, and the translation of Ibn Gabirol’s Fons vitae marks a new point
of departure for Gundissalinus. Translated by Gundissalinus and John
of Spain, Fons vitae provides Gundissalinus with the cornerstone of his
own speculation. This does not entail a mere adherence to Ibn Gabirol’s perspective—quite the contrary: Gundissalinus would progressively detach himself from some doctrinal aspects of Ibn Gabirol’s thought that
were no longer in line with his own scrutiny of reality. Avicenna takes up
the opposing pole of Gundissalinus’ bifurcated attraction.8
De unitate et uno is a crucial witness to Gundissalinus’ eager, and perhaps disingenuous, enthusiasm concerning the Fons vitae. Ibn Gabirol’s text is the main source for the short treatise. Its textual presence is pervasive, almost oppressive. Yet notwithstanding the textual and doctrinal closeness to Fons vitae, reducing Gundissalinus’ De unitate to a summary or a collection of themes from Ibn Gabirol’s Fons vitae would be rather
simplistic. Instead, Gundissalinus weaves a web of tacit references to assertions by Latinate authors with which Ibn Gabirol’s doctrines are compatible and by which they are justified. The golden thread of the treatise is a quotation from Boethius’ first Commentary on Isagoge: “quicquid est, ideo est, quia unum est” (“whatever exists, therefore, exists because it is one”).9 From the beginning, De unitate suggests a rather peculiar continuity with Boethius’ thought. Quite probably, the pseudo-epigraphical attribution of the treatise to Boethius originated from these redundant textual proximities.
Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 295
In its short span, De unitate et uno has a remarkably coherent and organic structure. It engages with a single problem. It has a unified focus. And it examines its main ontological, cosmological, and physical insight with almost no digression.10 In this respect, the text evidently has a precise aim grounded on one fundamental question: What does it mean to be “one”? A preliminary answer is given at the very beginning of the treatise: “Unity is that by which each thing is said to be one.”11
Yet this claim needs to be explained, refined, and applied to the world we see. A thing is said to be “one”—that is, a single and individual entity in its existence—only on account of unity. Therefore, unity has a principal ontological value, since every existing thing is “one” in itself. However, unity is not just a common predicable; it is a predicable only by relation to the crucial and fundamental function it performs ontologically. Unity, indeed, brings everything forth into existence, as stated by Boethius in his claim that “whatever exists, therefore, exists because it is one.”12
According to Gundissalinus, the ontological value of unity can be understood only in its structural relation to universal hylomorphism. God,
the Creator, is the true and absolute One, the simple and complete origin of existence. Following the Neoplatonic principle by which the effect
must be at the same time different and similar to its cause, the created universe cannot be simple nor one, but is made one by unity, the existential
power infused by God into the effect of His creation.13
Unity (unitas), though, is different from union (unitio), which is the kind
of unity that makes every single creature one and constitutes a union of
two different and opposite entities, matter and form.14 The hylomorphic duality is resolved through the unitio of matter and form, by which they
are made one thing. Things, single and particular in their existence, only
exist in “singularity” and “particularity.” This fact does not imply that
universals do not exist. Yet it follows the acknowledgment that unity and
being are correlatives by nature. Unitas and esse are characteristics of God
and are reflected in His creatures, which, nonetheless, cannot be except
through a specific form of causation, namely the union of their hylomorphic components.
Creatures are one while God is the One.15 Creatures are similar to God,
for the effect receives something of its cause. However, they are also fundamentally different. God’s oneness is utterly perfect and simple, whereas
creaturely oneness always has the trait of composition. It is a composed one, made of the addition of two entities. Indeed, creatures always result from
a union of matter and form. As a consequence, being and unity are inseparable partners by nature and, for this same reason, every existing thing
desires unity. In fact, existence can be received only by unity.16
This metaphysical notion of unity allows Gundissalinus to find a balance
between, on the one hand, his strong interpretation of hylomorphism as
expressing an ontological duality and, on the other, the acknowledgment
296 Nicola Polloni
that a thing—a substance, in Aristotelian terms—is fundamentally “one”
in its individuality.
The bond between matter and form—their union—is the intrinsic cause
of the existence of any thing under consideration. When they are made
“one” by unity, the thing is brought into existence. But as soon as the
unifying bond is removed, the thing disappears; that is to say, the form
is separated from matter, and corruption occurs.17 In fact, matter tends
toward multiplicity and dispersion: “Matter [. . .] is contrary to unity. It
is so because matter, by itself, flows away and its own nature is to be multiplied, divided, and dispersed, whereas unity holds, unites, and keeps it
together.”18 Accordingly, unity’s function is to hold together matter and
form, and consequently the hylomorphic compound, countering the tendency of matter toward dispersion.
Unity and matter are opposite entities: the former unifies, the latter multiplies. Their powers must be balanced. However, perfect equality is achieved only in the highest creatures, such as the celestial bodies. The lowest degree of existence lacks balance, which is why multiplicity and corruption occur. Although the causative power of unity does not weaken, the effect of its causation does so because of the substrate upon which it acts. As matter becomes thicker in the lower levels of the hypostatic universe, the efficacy of unity also becomes feebler. As a consequence, composite beings become susceptible to generation and corruption.19 This dynamic is explained by the difference between unity and union, the former being the cause of the latter. That which changes is not unity, but union. Different unions are given by the only admissible variable of this equation, which is matter. It is because the matter is progressively thicker, denser, and more bodily that union is not perfectly realized everywhere and that, consequently, the being of lower things is less complete.
Gundissalinus offers four fascinating examples of this dynamic. The
first compares the flowing of matter to a river whose water is clear at the
source, but dark when it flows into marshes, on account of the earth and
mud accompanying it through its course.20 In a similar fashion, matter
has, in itself, some aspect of brightness (such as spiritual matter) and some
aspect of darkness (such as corporeal matter), a differentiation that, following Ibn Gabirol, is brought about by the form of quantity joining the last
layer of matter.
In other examples, Gundissalinus associates unity and light. The flowing of unity from God is like the radiation of sunlight. Our perception of
the light changes when it meets brighter or darker air. This difference is
due not to different lights, but to different states of the medium. The same
dynamic can also be understood by analogy with a thin white cloth. Worn
by a black body, that cloth would be perceived as less white than if worn
by a white body. Its transparency reveals some blackness (or whiteness) of
what is below. In both cases, though, the cloth remains the same.
Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 297
The third example is the most intriguing. Almost certainly relying on
a third source, Gundissalinus describes a sort of experiment with glass and
light. When three or more glass windows are positioned perpendicular to
the sunlight, the first window receives more light than the second, and the
second more than the third, and so on, in a progressive weakening of the
light. This is not a characteristic intrinsic to light, but characterizes light
conditioned by passing through layers of glass. Likewise, unity becomes
weaker and weaker while descending through each of the different layers
of matter, down to the final layer. In this progression, unity itself, like the
unconditioned light, remains unaltered, whereas the refracted light and
the composed union, together with the receiving glass and matter, will
differ in their effect.21 In both cases, unity and sunlight are not affected in
themselves, but their effects change because of their different substrates.
According to Gundissalinus, unity is a constant factor. It flows from
God and brings everything into existence. Matter, to the contrary, is the
variable of the ontological equation—paradoxically so, if Gundissalinus
were adhering to the Aristotelian perspective that would mark philosophical speculation just a few decades after his death. In its progressive detachment from the Creator, matter changes and becomes gradually thicker and
denser, until corporeity arises in the last layer of this hypostatic universe.
As a consequence of this intrinsic differentiation of matter, different species of creatures come into existence. Each one of them is characterized by
a different ontological status as determined by the proper union appropriate to each species.
Like his ontology, Gundissalinus’ hypostatic cosmology, too, is based
on Ibn Gabirol’s Fons vitae. The first entity created by God is the Intellect,
whose unity is simple and whose matter is purer than that which is in any
other degree of existence.22 Following its descent, matter is informed by
the forms of the Rational, Sensible, and Vegetative Souls, respectively;
then, below them, by the form of Nature; and finally by the corporeal
forms.23 This last degree of existence corresponds to the substance to
which the nine categories inhere.24 In this cosmological progression, every
layer is different from the others. If unity is considered, that difference can
only be caused by the process of multiplication of matter, which intrinsically differentiates matter. However, it is evident that this process would
be much more complicated if we were to provide a complete ontological
description of each hypostasis, each having its proper form. In De unitate
et uno, Gundissalinus does not engage in such an analysis, as he would
in his later De processione mundi.25 Even there, he would avoid discussing
further crucial problems arising from the cosmological process, and one
in particular: How can matter differentiate itself without interacting with
a form? In this case, too, Gundissalinus’ framework seems to be far away
from thirteenth-century Aristotelianism and its refined hylomorphism,
although some aspects of his consideration of matter would resonate in, for
instance, Roger Bacon’s thought.26
298 Nicola Polloni
Finally, De unitate et uno discusses two central corollaries of Gundissalinus’ theory. Metaphysical unity is the primary meaning of the term
“unity.” However, there are other kinds of unity to which the term can refer, all of them grounded on the metaphysical meaning of unity.27 Beings
can be said to be one by essence (God), one by hylomorphic composition
(angels and souls), one by continuity (a tree or a rock), one by composition
(the planks making one ark), one by aggregation (a people or a flock), and
one by analogy (the helmsman and the governor holding one office).28
Other things are said to be one by sharing an accidental characteristic
(snow and swan in their whiteness), one by number, one by a common
possession (intellect, thing, and its word), one by a sacrament (spirit, water, and blood), one by nature (species), one by nation (tribe), and one by
agreement concerning virtue or vice.29
Having clarified the richness of senses in which unity can be said, Gundissalinus turns to one final problem: How are continuous and discrete
quantities related to the metaphysical priority of unity? Curiously, Gundissalinus reduces continuity to discrete quantity. He claims that every
continuous quantity is composed of discrete unities that, scattered, are said
to be discrete and, gathered, are said to be continuous. Unities, therefore,
are the basic constituents of quantity and, through this, of physical corporeality. Accordingly, these unities are the “root” (radix) of both discrete
and continuous quantities.
This doctrine, which appears akin to atomism, is presented only briefly,
and Gundissalinus does not address (or even seem aware of) the ramifications of his position—or if he is, he does not seem concerned about them.
The unities composing physical substances function as his main explanation of the differences in weight, density, and mass of substances, since
the more connected and compacted the parts of a body are, the thicker
and more “quantum” that body will be, such as in the case of a stone.
Whereas to the opposite, the more dispersed and scattered the parts of
a body are, the subtler, lighter, and less “quantum” it will be, such as
in the case of the air.30
Consistently, Gundissalinus summarizes his position by claiming that
“continuous quantity comes into substance only on account of unity joining and flowing in it.”31
From its first hypostasis to the very structure of corporeal reality, oneness, union, and unity are the main traits through which God structured
his creation, making it similar to Himself and yet intrinsically and necessarily “other.”
The success of Gundissalinus’ De unitate was largely due to its pseudo-epigraphical attribution to Boethius. Such attribution is probably a consequence of the opening quotation from Boethius’ commentary on Isagoge
and the expositional nature of the text in relation to Boethius’ assertion.
Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 299
From a doctrinal point of view, however, attributing the treatise to Boethius was anything but straightforward. While De unitate’s themes of creaturely dependence upon God fit neatly with the Neoplatonic themes of
Boethius’ De consolatione philosophiae and his De hebdomadibus, Boethius’
ontology is grounded on a limited hylomorphism and entirely privileges
the preeminence of form over matter. Boethius and Gundissalinus thus
contradict one another in their ontological doctrines. Consequently, the
works authored by Boethius, including the misascribed De unitate et uno,
exhibited a consistency problem within his thought.
The scholarship agrees that Thomas Aquinas was the first Latin thinker
to realize that the treatise could not have been authored by Boethius:
Aquinas dismissed Boethius’ authorship of De unitate at least twice in his
philosophical production.32 But even as an anonymous work, De unitate
et uno continued to be read and used by Latin and Renaissance thinkers, including Nicholas of Cusa. The text was translated into Hebrew (as
“Boethian”) by Judah ben Moshe Romano in the first half of the fourteenth century.33 Around the same time, Conrad of Prussia wrote a commentary on it.34
The actual authorship of the treatise was finally recognized and acknowledged by the first critical editor of De unitate, Paul Correns.35 After
his 1891 edition, De unitate et uno was critically edited again in 1956 by
Manuel Alonso Alonso,36 and a new critical edition of the work was completed by María Jesús Soto-Bruna and Concepción Alonso del Real in
2015, the most reliable version yet of this important text. I have used this
edition for the following English translation of Gundissalinus’ De unitate
et uno.
*****
On Unity and the One by Dominicus Gundissalinus
Translated by Nicola Polloni
Unity is that by which each thing is said to be one. Whether it is simple
or composite, spiritual or corporeal, a thing is one by unity. It can be one
only by unity, just as it can be white only by whiteness, or be so much only
by quantity. Besides, [a thing] is not only one by unity, but as long as it is
something, it is what it is as long as unity is in it. And when it ceases to be
one, it ceases to be what it is. For this reason, it has been said that “whatever exists, therefore, exists because it is one,” which is demonstrated as
follows.
Undoubtedly, in created things, all existence comes from the form.
However, existence comes from the form only when the form is made one
with matter. In fact, there is existence only by the joining together of the
300 Nicola Polloni
form with matter. For this reason, the philosophers describe [matter] by
saying that “existence is the presence of form in matter.”
However, when the form is made one with matter, something which is
“one” necessarily comes to be from their joining together. And that thing,
in its coming to be, only persists as long as unity holds the form together
with matter. As a consequence, the destruction of a thing is nothing else
but the separation of [its] form from matter. Separation and union are contraries, though. Therefore, if something is destroyed by the separation [of
form and matter], that thing is surely preserved in its existence by [their]
union.
Union [unitio], however, only exists by unity [unitas]. When unity is
separated from something united, its union, by which that thing was one,
is dissolved. And when the union is dissolved, the essence of that thing—
which stemmed from the union [of matter and form]—is destroyed, because it becomes something which is not one. For this reason, not only is
a thing brought to existence by unity but existence is also maintained in
that thing by unity. Therefore, existence and one inseparably accompany
each other and appear to exist together in nature.
Since the Creator is the true One, the things he established—each of
them—received [its] existence one as a gift from Him. As a consequence,
anything which receives its existence from Him is one. Accordingly, every
substance moves toward and through the One, and none of the existing
things desires to be many. To the contrary, desiring to exist, all of them
desire to be one, since everything desires by nature to exist, and it can
exist only by being one. Therefore, everything tends to [be] one. Unity,
indeed, is what makes everything one and holds everything together, for
it is diffused into every existing thing.
On this account, considering that matter has existence only by the union with its form and that only unity can keep the form united to matter, matter requires unity in order to become one in itself and acquire existence. Matter, indeed, is contrary to unity. It is so because matter, by itself, flows away and its own nature is to be multiplied, divided, and dispersed, whereas unity holds, unites, and keeps it together. For this reason, matter must be held together by unity in order not to divide or disperse itself. In fact, anything requiring something else to become one cannot become one by itself. Nonetheless, what cannot become one by itself certainly is dispersed by itself. Indeed, anything that is able to make something contrary to a [considered] agent makes it contrary to what [that agent] has made. In fact, contraries are the effects of what is contrary. Since unity causes [something to be] one; therefore, matter will cause division. Accordingly, unity by itself holds matter together. And whatever holds [something] together by itself cannot be the cause of [its] separation. Therefore, the form existing in matter, which completes and holds together the essence of everything, is the unity descending from the first Unity that created it.
Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 301
In fact, the first and true Unity, which is in itself Unity, created another unity, which lies below it. Yet since every created thing must be
completely different from what has created it, the created unity must be
completely different from and almost opposite to the creating Unity. Because the creating Unity has neither beginning nor end, neither change
nor diversity; therefore, multiplicity, diversity, and mutability accrue to
the created unity. In some matter, then, [unity] has a beginning and an
end, while in another [matter] it has a beginning, but not an end, because
in some it is subject to change and corruption. And in others, [unity is
subject to] change, but not to corruption. In those things [in which] matter is subtle, simple, far from contrariety and separation, unity is indeed
proportionate to it, and [is] made one with it in such a way that both become [something which is] one, indivisible in act. This is the case for the
celestial bodies, in which unity is inseparable from matter. Accordingly,
they have no end, for they are perpetual. However, in those things [in
which] matter is thick [and] weak, unity cannot be proportionate to it.
Indeed, its unifying power and [its capacity to] hold their essence together
is weakened. As a consequence, their essence is dissolved because they are
not held together by unity. This is the case of generated things, which
have a beginning and an end. For the closer any unity is to the first and
true Unity, the more one and the simpler will be the matter it informs.
And to the opposite, the further unity is from the first Unity, the more
multiplied and composed [its matter will be].
Accordingly, the unity that brings the matter of the Intellect to existence is more “one” and simpler, not multiplied or divisible by essence.
And if it is divisible, it will be so by accident. This unity is more “one” and
simpler than any other unity that brings the other substances to existence,
for it is joined without mediation to the first Unity that created it.
However, since the unity subsisting in the matter of the Intellect is the
unity of simplicity, the unity subsisting in the matter of the Soul, which
is below it, necessarily grows and multiplies [itself]. As a consequence,
change and diversity happen to it. Unity, then, is expanded and multiplied little by little while descending from what is superior through every
degree of the inferior matter, until it reaches the substance which bears
quantity, that is, the substance of this world. Being furthest from the first
Unity, [this matter] is thick, bodily, and compact, and due to its thickness
and largeness, it is opposed to the superior substance, which is subtle and
simple. In fact, the latter is the subject of the onset and the beginning of
unity, while the former is the subject of the end and the extremity of unity.
The end, however, is very far from the beginning, since it is only called
“end” insofar as it is a failure of power and a limit. The degradation of
simplicity and the diminution of its power happen through the descent of
the unity from the higher to the lower. This is similar to the water that
is subtle and clear in its source but, flowing down little by little, becomes
thick and dark in marshes and ponds. In a similar fashion, unity varies
302 Nicola Polloni
little by little through the varieties of the matter bearing it. In fact, since
something of matter is spiritual while something else is corporeal, [in it]
something is pure and bright, while something else is thick and dark. And
this happens because of quantity, whose parts are more dispersed in some
things, such as the air, and more compact in other things, such as a stone.
Following the degrees of its distance from the first Unity at the origin,
each and every part of matter receives unity, which is nobler [than matter]
in reason of its property. Accordingly, we see the parts of fire as “one” in
every way, simple and equal, so that its shape appears to be one, having
no diversity in itself. To the contrary, we find the parts of air and water
to be more diverse and separate, so that it is possible to distinguish among
their parts and unities. In hard and thick things, however, diversity and
darkness are already greater [than that].
In the highest things, matter is informed by the form of the Intellect,
and further on, by the form of the Rational Soul, while afterward by the
form of the Sensible Soul. Then, below that, [it is informed] by the form of
the Vegetative Soul, and after that, by the form of Nature. And finally, in
the lowest things, [matter is joined] to the form of the body. All this does
not happen because of the diversity of the power of the agent, but because
of the property of the matter receiving it.
Form, indeed, is like light. For just as a thing is seen on account of light,
so too cognition and knowledge of things are provided by form, and not
by matter. This light, however, is brighter in some things and darker in
others, depending on whether the matter in which it is infused comes to
be brighter or darker. The more sublime matter is, the subtler it will be,
and completely permeated by light. Consequently, that substance will be
wiser and more perfect, such as the Intelligence and the Rational Soul.
And on the contrary, the lower matter is, the thicker and darker it will
be, not completely permeated by light. As has been said already, the more
matter descends, [the more] it is made compact, thick, and bodily, and its
middle parts block the last ones from being perfectly permeated by light.
In fact, it is impossible for light to permeate the second part as much as [it
does] the first, nor does as much light reach the third part as reaches the
second part, and so on, little by little, down to the lowest part, in which
the light is weakened. For it is furthest away from the source of light.
Nonetheless, as it has been said, this does not happen on account of
the light in itself, but on account of the great density and obscurity of
matter in itself. Similarly, when the sunlight is mixed with the dark air, it
lacks the power [that it has] when is mixed with bright air. And similarly,
the whiteness of a very thin white cloth is occluded by the abundance
of blackness when it is worn by a black body. And similarly, if three or
more glass windows are set up in order one after another perpendicularly
to the sunlight, it is surely ascertained that the second [window] receives
less light than the first, and the third less than the second. And up to the
last one, there is a diminution of light which is due not to the light itself,
Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 303
but to the distance of the glass windows from the light. In the same way,
the light of the form of unity which is infused into matter becomes weak
and dark while descending, as [when] the light which passes through the
first of these [windows] is different from [that passing through] the second
one, and [that passing through] the second [is different] from [that passing
through] the last one.
Because of this difference in the form of unity, something is said to be
one by unity, not in one, but in many ways. For there is something that is
[said to be] one by the simplicity of essence, namely God. And another is
[said to be] one by the conjunction of simples, namely, angels and souls,
each of which is one by the conjunction of matter and form. And another
is [said to be] one by continuity, such as a tree or a rock. And another is
[said to be] one by composition, as one ark [is made] of many planks or a
house of many spaces. And other things are said to be one by aggregation,
such as a people or a flock, a jumble of stones, or a heap of wheat. Others
are said [to be] one by analogy, such as when the helmsman of a ship and
the governor of a town are said [to be] one by the similarity of their office.
Other things are said to be one by accident, as different subjects of the
same quality are said [to be] one in that [quality], such as that the snow
and the swan are one in their whiteness. Others are said [to be] one by
number, as different accidents inhering in the same subject are said to be
one by number—that is, by counting, such as [when we say that] this [is]
sweet and this [is] cerulean, or this [is] long and this [is] wide. Other things
are said [to be] one by reason, but [they are] so in two ways: by reason
of a common possession, as the intellect, the [intellected] thing, and [its]
word are one in genus; and by reason of one sacrament, as spirit, water,
and blood are said [to be] one. Other things are said to be one by nature,
as many humans are one by their participation in the species. Others are
said [to be] one in virtue of [their] nation or language, as many humans are
said [to be] one people or one tribe. Other things are said [to be] one by
habit, yet in two ways. Indeed, [many humans are so] by the agreement of
virtue and love, as [when it has been said that] “the multitude of believers
was one heart and one soul.” However, many humans are said [to be] one
[also] by assent to the same vices, as [when it has been said that] “who joins
a prostitute becomes one [in the] body.”
In this way, everything desires unity, and it is also said that what is multiple wants to be one. In fact, whatever exists is what it is either because it strives to be a real unity or because, at least, it strives for that by imitating [it].
Every existing thing is one or many. Nonetheless, plurality only exists by the aggregation of unities, which become a multitude when they
are dispersed and a magnitude when they are continuous in matter. As
a consequence, there is no difference between the unities [composing] a
discrete quantity and those [composing] a continuous quantity subsisting in matter, except that the former are dispersed while the latter are
304 Nicola Polloni
continuous. Therefore, what is continuous comes forth only from what is
dispersed, since the meaning of continuity in what is continuous is just the
continuation of the dispersed [unities]. Accordingly, continuous quantity
necessarily comes forth into substances only through unities.
Whatever part of quantity one might choose must necessarily be one or
many. As it has been said, however, every plurality derives from unities.
Whence it is clearly understandable that discrete and continuous quantities have one root, since they are composed from one thing and are
resolved into one [thing]. And [it is clear], too, that the more connected
and compacted the parts of a body are, the thicker and more “quantum”
[magis quantum] that body will be, such as in the case of a stone. Whereas
to the opposite, the more dispersed and scattered the parts of a body are,
the subtler, lighter, and less “quantum” [minus quantum] it will be, such as
in the case of the air. As a consequence, it is true that continuous quantity
comes into substance only on account of unity joining and flowing in it.
Unity, therefore, is that by which each thing is one, and [that by which
that thing] is what it is.
*****
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Therese and David Cory, as well as Nicholas Oschman, for their help with this chapter.
Notes 1 See Burnett, “Coherence.” 2 This is the case of alchemy, for instance: a discipline that was completely new
to the Latin audience at the time. See Mantas-España, “Interpreting the New
Sciences.” 3 See Polloni, Twelfth-Century Renewal of Latin Metaphysics, 1–19. On the problem of anonymously transmitted translations and possible solutions to this
impasse, see Hasse and Bü ttner, “Notes on Anonymous Twelfth-Century
Translations.” 4 See Burnett, “Communities of Learning.” 5 The number of works written by Gundissalinus is still a matter of debate in the literature. For some works, his authorship is commonly acknowledged: these are De divisione philosophiae, De unitate et uno, De anima, and De processione
mundi. The attribution of others is more controversial, and in most cases little can be said to either demonstrate or refute Gundissalinus’ authorship. This is particularly true for the De immortalitate animae, whose authorship tends to be ascribed to William of Auvergne. See Polloni, Twelfth-Century Renewal of Latin Metaphysics, 21–24; also Polloni and Burnett, “Peregrinations of the Soul.” 6 See Polloni, Twelfth-Century Renewal of Latin Metaphysics, 266–69. 7 See Schwartz, “Medieval Hebrew Translations”; Hasse, Avicenna’s De anima
in the Latin West, 18. 8 See Polloni, Twelfth-Century Renewal of Latin Metaphysics, 190–209.
Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 305
9 Boethius, In Porphyrium 1, PL 64, 83B. 10 To better appreciate Gundissalinus’ change of angle and continuity of doctrinal features, see Polloni, Twelfth-Century Renewal of Latin Metaphysics, 30–37,
where I discuss De unitate et uno’s theories, and 54–76, expanding on Gundissalinus’
De processione mundi.
11 Gundissalinus, De unitate et uno, ed. Soto-Bruna and Alonso del Real, 104. 12 Ibid.
13 Ibid., 116. See also Soto-Bruna, “La lux intelligentiae agentis”; Soto-Bruna, “La
‘causalidad del uno’ en Domingo Gundisalvo.” 14 See Gundissalinus, De unitate et uno, 108. 15 See ibid., 110. 16 See ibid., 108 and 140–42. 17 See ibid., 106. 18 Ibid., 112: “Materia [. . .] contraria est unitati, eo quod materia per se diffluit
et de natura sua habet multiplicari, diuidi et spargi; unitas uero retinet, unit
et colligit.” 19 See ibid., 118. 20 See ibid., 122–24. 21 See ibid., 132–34. 22 See ibid., 122. 23 See ibid., 126. 24 See ibid., 122. 25 See Polloni, Twelfth-Century Renewal of Latin Metaphysics, 54–76. 26 See Polloni, “Roger Bacon.” 27 See Gundissalinus, De unitate et uno, 136. 28 See ibid. 29 See ibid., 138–40. 30 Ibid., 146: “quo magis fuerint sibi coniunctae et constrictae, ipsum corpus erit
spissius et magis quantum, ut lapis, et e contrario, quo magis fuerint partes
corporis dissolutae et rarae, ipsum erit subtilius et leuius et minus quantum,
ut aer.” 31 Ibid., 146: “continua quantitas non uenit in substantiam nisi ex coniunctione
et constrictione unitatum in illa.” 32 Aquinas, Quaestiones de quolibet 9, q. 4, a. 1, ed. Leonina, 144–48: “Ad secundum dicendum quod liber ille non est Boetii, unde non oportet quod in
auctoritate recipiatur. Sustinendo tamen librum, potest dici quod formam
et materiam large accipit pro actu et potencia, ut dictum est”; Aquinas, De
spiritualibus creaturis, a. 1, 21, ed. Leonina, 19.630–32: “Ad vicesimum primum
dicendum quod liber De unitate et uno non est Boetii, ut ipse stilus indicat.” 33 See Schwartz, “Medieval Hebrew Translations.” The Hebrew text has been
critically edited by Schwartz, “Gundissalinus, Maamar ha-ehad ve-ha-ahdut.”
34 Conrad of Prussia, Commentary on the De unitate et uno; see Fidora, “Una
nota sobre Conrado de Prusia.” 35 Correns, Die dem Boethius fälschlich zugeschriebene Abhandlung, 3–11. 36 Alonso Alonso, “El ‘Liber de unitate et uno.’”
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Alonso Alonso, Manuel. “El ‘Liber de unitate et uno.’” Pensamiento 12 (1956):
65–78.
Boethius. In Porphyrium. Patrologia Latina 64. Turnhout: Brepols, 1997.
306 Nicola Polloni
Conrad of Prussia. The Commentary of Conrad of Prussia on the De unitate et uno
of Dominicus Gundissalinus. Translated by Joseph Bobik and James A. Corbett.
Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen, 1989.
Correns, Paul. Die dem Boethius fälschlich zugeschriebene Abhandlung des Dominicus
Gundisalvi De unitate. Münster: Aschendorff, 1891.
Gundissalinus. De unitate et uno. Edited by María Jesús Soto-Bruna and Concepción Alonso del Real. Pamplona: EUNSA, 2015.
Schwartz, Yossef. “Dominicus Gundissalinus (Wrongly Attributed to Boethius),
Maamar ha-ehad ve-ha-ahdut (De unitate et uno).” In Latin-into-Hebrew: Texts and
Studies, vol. 2: Texts in Contexts, edited by Alexander Fidora, Harvey J. Hames,
and Yossef Schwartz, 281–87. Leiden: Brill, 2013.
Thomas Aquinas. De spiritualibus creaturis. Editio Leonina 24/2. Rome: Commissio Leonina, 2000.
Thomas Aquinas. Quaestiones de quolibet. Editio Leonina 25/1–2. Rome: Commissio Leonina, 1996.
Secondary Literature
Burnett, Charles. “The Coherence of the Arabic-Latin Translation Program in
Toledo in the Twelfth Century.” Science in Context 14 (2001): 249–88.
Burnett, Charles. “Communities of Learning in the Twelfth-Century Toledo.”
In Communities of Learning: Networks and the Shaping of Intellectual Identity in
Europe, 1110–1500, edited by Constant Mews and John N. Crossley, 9–18.
Turnhout: Brepols, 2011.
Fidora, Alexander. “Una nota sobre Conrado de Prusia, comentador del De unitate
de Gundisalvo.” In Lo uno y lo múltiple: homenaje a Félix del Valle y Díaz, 145–50.
Toledo: Real Academia de Bellas Artes y Ciencias Históricas de Toledo, 2009.
Hasse, Dag N. Avicenna’s De anima in the Latin West: The Formation of a Peripatetic
Philosophy of the Soul, 1160–1300. London: The Warburg Institute, 2000.
Hasse, Dag N., and Andreas Bü ttner. “Notes on Anonymous Twelfth-Century
Translations of Philosophical Texts from Arabic into Latin on the Iberian
Peninsula.” In The Arabic, Hebrew, and Latin Reception of Avicenna’s Physics and
Cosmology, edited by Dag N. Hasse and Amos Bertolacci, 313–69. Berlin: De
Gruyter, 2018.
Mantas-España, Pedro. “Interpreting the New Sciences: Beyond the Completion of the Traditional Liberal Arts Curriculum.” In Appropriation, Interpretation and Criticism: Philosophical and Theological Exchanges Between the Arabic, Hebrew
and Latin Intellectual Traditions, edited by Alexander Fidora and Nicola Polloni,
51–91. Barcelona: FIDEM, 2017.
Polloni, Nicola. “Roger Bacon on the Conceivability Matter.” In The Philosophy
and Science of Roger Bacon: Studies in Honour of Jeremiah Hackett, edited by Nicola
Polloni and Yael Kedar, 76–97. London: Routledge, 2021.
Polloni, Nicola. “Toledan Ontologies: Gundissalinus, Ibn Daud, and the Problems of Gabirolian Hylomorphism.” In Appropriation, Interpretation and Criticism: Philosophical and Theological Exchanges Between the Arabic, Hebrew and Latin
Intellectual Traditions, edited by Alexander Fidora and Nicola Polloni, 19–49.
Barcelona: FIDEM, 2017.
Polloni, Nicola. The Twelfth-Century Renewal of Latin Metaphysics: Gundissalinus’s
Ontology of Matter and Form. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies,
2020.
Dominicus Gundissalinus’ On Unity and the One 307
Polloni, Nicola, and Charles Burnett. “The Peregrinations of the Soul in the
Afterlife: A Work from Late 12th-Century Iberia. Introduction, Edition, and
Translation.” In Mark of Toledo: Intellectual Context and Debates between Christians
and Muslims in Early Thirteenth Century Iberia, edited by Charles Burnett and
Pedro Mantas-España, 155–95. Cordoba: UCOPress, 2022.
Schwartz, Yossef. “The Medieval Hebrew Translations of Dominicus Gundissalinus.” In Latin-into-Hebrew: Texts and Studies, vol. 2: Texts in Contexts, edited
by Alexander Fidora, Harvey J. Hames, and Yossef Schwartz, 19–46. Leiden:
Brill, 2013.
Soto-Bruna, María Jesús. “La ‘causalidad del uno’ en Domingo Gundisalvo.” Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval 21 (2014): 53–68.
Soto-Bruna, María Jesús. “La lux intelligentiae agentis en el pensamiento de Domingo Gundisalvo.” Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval 10 (2003): 335–43.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-16
In an article of 1951, Hyacinthe Dondaine, following H.-D. Simonin and Gilles Meersseman, discussed the development of Thomas Aquinas’ theory of the causality of the sacraments.1 Dondaine suggested that Aquinas “dropped the Avicennian conception of causality to adopt the position of Aristotle and Averroes.” In his Commentary on the Sentences,
Thomas still embraced “the frame and the limits of the received theory at his time, namely dispositive causality,” but progressively dropped it and, in his Summa theologiae, proposed his own conception of instrumental causality.2 In his article, Dondaine does not refer to Albert the Great, but quotes Roland of Cremona, Guerric of Saint-Quentin, and William of Meliton instead as representatives of the dispositive causality. However, one could legitimately invoke Albert the Great’s position, since he uses this expression in both his Commentary on the Sentences and his De sacramentis.3 Based on Avicenna’s distinction between physical and metaphysical causality, dispositive causality accounts for the efficacious aspect of the sacraments that cannot be considered as sole signs of salvation.4 Such a study is still relevant for a better understanding of sacramentality today, since most contemporary theologians regard dispositive causality as belonging to instrumental causality, as it appears to unite the First Cause (God) with the secondary causes, the sacraments, in the act of salvation. Such categorization can, however, be challenged,5 especially in the case of Albert the Great.
In this chapter, I question this interpretation of Albert the Great’s dispositive causality, and qualify the reliance on Avicenna.6 My aim is to
show that the notion of “disposition,” which characterizes the causal action of the sacraments in Albert the Great’s sacramental theology, cannot
be understood without considering Hugh of St. Victor’s notion of “institution.” In the following, I thus consider Albert’s definition of the sacrament and establish the importance of the Victorine in this elaboration.
I then draw the consequences from it for the dispositive causality of the
sacraments and point to the role played by Avicenna’s notion of causality
in Albert’s theory of sacramental grace.
13 Institution and Causality
in Albert the Great’s
Sacramental Theology
Isabelle Moulin
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 309
Albert the Great’s Definition of Sacrament
Albert’s general definition of sacrament is found in two major texts, his
De sacramentis and the fourth book of his Commentary on the Sentences. The
De sacramentis belongs to the first period of Albert’s writing, and was probably composed in Paris in 1241, with some possible corrections in 1249;
he wrote the fourth book of the Sentences in Cologne, where he laid the
foundations of the Dominican studium generale in Germany.7
In both texts, Albert provides four definitions of the sacrament:8
(1) Augustine: “a sacrament is the sign of a sacred thing”;9 (2) Peter Lombard: “a sacrament is the visible form of an invisible grace, which represents it and which exists insofar as it is its cause”;10 (3) Augustine again:
“a sacrament is the thing in which the divine power specifically operates
salvation under the appearances of visible things”;11 and (4) Hugh of St.
Victor: “a sacrament is a corporeal or material element, put extrinsically
to the eyes, which represents by similarity, signifies by institution, and
confers the invisible grace by sanctification.”12 In his Commentary on the Sentences, Albert states that the first Augustinian definition concerns the
sacrament in a general sense. Indeed, this definition of the sacrament in
terms of signification possesses only too a broad meaning, since it can be
applied to both the sacraments strictly speaking and the sacramentals.
On a theological level, the notion of “sign,” as fundamental as it might
be, is too generic to account for sacraments, and only the three remaining
definitions address the sacraments of the New Law in a sufficiently specific
manner. For if the first definition accounts for the relationship between
two terms—here, the signifier (the ritual as matter and form of the sacrament) and the signified (divine grace)—it fails on two ends. On the one
hand, it does not specify the origin of the relationship (similitude); on the
other, it does not provide an interpretive clue about the relation between
signifier and signified.
Instead, Albert the Great suggests that three elements are necessary for
defining a sacrament: “the property which signifies, the thing of which
it is the property, and the sanctification produced by the form of the sacrament.”
13 Albert corroborates this idea in reliance on Peter Lombard’s
definition and suggests that a sacrament must make reference to three
dimensions: the sacramentum tantum, the thing that signifies; the res tantum,
the thing that is signified; and the res et sacramentum, the sanctification,
which comes as a result of the sacramental form. The first Augustinian
definition only provides the first element.14 It can therefore be applied to
both the sacraments of the Old and New Covenant, but cannot be considered as a full and total definition of the sacraments of the Church.
Albert also saw a difficulty with Peter Lombard’s second definition. Even if he takes into account the notion of invisible grace, the Lombard defines sacrament as a “visible form” and not directly as a sign.15
In his Commentary on the Sentences, Albert points out that the Lombard’s
310 Isabelle Moulin definition aims essentially at the operative efficacy of a sacrament.16 Form
in Peter Lombard’s definition designates a form “that remains as from outside” and that is neither exemplary nor intrinsic.17 Such a “form,” according to Albert’s reading, must amount to a relation of similitude between the extrinsic action and its intrinsic action in the sacrament.18
Yet this relation of similitude remained unclear. Peter Lombard’s definition can thus be considered to represent a significant contribution to the development of sacramental theology. It highlights the notion of sacramental causality, though the relation between sign and causality remains underdeveloped.19
The second Augustinian definition of sacrament does not fare much
better in Albert’s evaluation: he provides no explanation in his Commentary on the Sentences, and is quite allusive in his De sacramentis. He simply
indicates that such a definition is given “in comparison with the origin of
the [divine] power of the sacraments.”20
As a result, Albert favors the fourth definition of sacrament, that of
Hugh of St. Victor, as he takes it to perfectly account for “all the things
that materially and formally exist in a sacrament.”21 It takes into account
the three requisites for a perfect definition: a sacrament “justifies ex opere
operato; it signifies because of its institution; it confers the invisible grace
through the sanctification of the words.”22 The Hugonian definition sustains the notion of representation by way of similitude, which explains
the correlation between the material element and the effect of grace in
the soul. The properties of water, for instance, such as the refreshment
and the ablution for the body, are representative signs, “metaphorically”
speaking,23 of the grace that operates in the soul. Moreover, the sign is not
chosen at random. It was instituted and was therefore given a true causality. Institution is the main element that was clearly lacking in Augustine’s
definition. It is also missing in Peter Lombard’s definition, at least in the
terms Albert chooses to present it.24
In sum, in this typology, the different definitions are not mutually exclusive. They are all essential for a theology of the sacraments, as they
reveal different possibilities of naming the nature and the action of the
sacraments. They can even be reduced to unity.25 Nonetheless, Albert favors Hugh of St. Victor’s definition, as it is the only one which perfectly
unites signification and institution.
Dispositive Causality and Institution
In his own definition of sacrament, Albert the Great insists on the dimension of the signification and the causal efficacy, since sacrament “realizes
what it signifies.”26 But the question remains how a sign can be considered
causally efficient. This is particularly important to understand, since God
is traditionally considered the sole cause of grace: “gratia non est nisi a solo
Deo,” reason Augustine and Bernard of Clairvaux, for instance.27 If God
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 311
is the sole cause of grace, why should one need the sacraments at all? Albert’s De sacramentis consequently opens with the question of the existence
of the sacrament and its legitimacy.
The principal argument for its existence, suggests Albert, cannot rely
on its signification, since, according to the objector, any signification is
subordinate to causal action. Therefore, if the sacrament is not a cause,
it cannot signify and thus has no existence. Albert’s answer distinguishes
God’s power operating in two ways and proposes that it either operates by
itself or in created things. By itself, God is the immediate efficient cause
of the sacrament. But this does not prevent the sacraments from possessing
causality by themselves. They act as a “disposition” for the abolition of sin,
which is a privation of grace. If one were to object that this understanding
still allows too much of a substantial causal power (it would be in capacity
of expelling sin), Albert underlines that in any sacrament, one has to distinguish between what is solely sign (signum tantum) and what is sign and
thing (signum et res). The causality of the sacrament is found in the latter,
and therefore it “disposes toward the abolition” of sin, “as in the natural
things, nature does not prevent at all the existence of the substantial form,
but disposes to its destruction.”28
Nonetheless, if there is a true causality attached to the sacrament, even
if it amounts merely to the causality of a disposition, does it not follow
that God is bound to His sacrament, since disposition is either necessary
to grace or precedes it? According to Albert, it is true that the disposition
is necessary, as in the case of natural things. But such a necessity does not
imply that God could operate salvation without the sacraments. For such a
necessity comes from divine institution.29 Sacraments only dispose for salvation, and they do so in a way in which grace does not come from them
(ex illis), but resides in them (in illis), as Hugh of St. Victor stated.
The whole point then is to evaluate the meaning of such a “being-in,”
from which grace emanates. Is it purely material? As I said earlier, Albert
valued Hugh’s definition over Peter Lombard’s because it showed the res
in a better way and centered the notion of signification of the sacraments
on institution. Taking up a passage of the De sacramentis Christianae fidei of
Hugh of St. Victor, Albert points out that the sacraments do not dispose
to salvation by anything that would come from them, whether efficient
or formal, according to a property that they possess in them.30 Indeed,
according to Hugh,
if, therefore, vases are the sacraments of spiritual grace, they do not
heal from their own [ex suo], since vases do not cure the sick but medicine does. Therefore, sacraments were not instituted for this, that
from them should be that which was in them [ut ex eis esset quod in eis
esset], but that the physician might show his skill he prepared in that a
remedy from which the sick man learned the occasion of his sickness.
For since man by desiring visible things was corrupted, to be restored
312 Isabelle Moulin fittingly he had to receive an occasion of salvation in these same visible
things, so that he might rise again through the same things through
which he had fallen.31
It should be noted that the notion of “vase” used in this definition cannot be
reduced to its material aspect alone. Its capacity is not a heterogeneous element, but it implies a relation, according to the Aristotelian and the Neoplatonic traditions.32 There is an ontogenic dynamics of the “being-in”
that derives from institution.33 Thomas Aquinas, though insisting upon
the notion of efficiency, notes that the vase is not only a container but also
an instrument.34 The institution proceeds from the Covenant that characterizes the relationship between God and humans. The Covenant is not
an oath with contractual purpose, nor does institution imply a pact in the
sacrament. On this specific issue, the sacramentality of grace in Albert the
Great is fundamentally different from the so-called “occasional” causality,
despite the common feature that results from the interpretation of the
requirement that “God is the sole originator of grace.” Institution allows
the sacrament to dispose the soul toward receiving grace,35 but the latter
is ineffective without the former.36 Again institution there grants the possibility of a relationship between the material and the spiritual realms. If
one follows Hugh of St. Victor, of the three terms which define the sacrament, it is the institution which establishes the link between justification,
signification, and sanctifying cause.
The sacrament is neither the efficient nor the formal cause of salvation. It is no more a final cause, since sacraments have been instituted for salvation and not reversely. When Albert the Great returns to this question in his Commentary on the Sentences, he declares that the non-efficient causality of sacraments shows that God is not bound to His sacraments. Dispositive causality belongs to material causality: “and if one wonders to which type of causality such a disposition should be reduced, I answer material causality.”37 The efficiency that operates in the sacraments belongs solely to the divine power (divina virtus),38 and the material disposition together with the constitutive elements of matter constitute the suppositum of the form.39
Albert provides a telling example to clarify this point:40 In order to
produce a golden shield, one needs to whiten the wood before covering
it with gold. It is well known that any craftsman who undertakes to paint
some piece of furniture in raw wood previously needs to cover it with a
primer coating. The material disposition is this primer coating, along with
all the material elements needed. Similarly, the sacrament is the disposition, which, associated with the material element, allows grace to be effective. The material causality of this disposition does not have to be solely
considered as the natural capacity of matter. It is true that water possesses
a natural capacity to represent baptism, since it cleans, purifies, etc. But
such a capacity is not a causal “disposition.” It becomes a disposition when
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 313
the baptism formula is pronounced because, ultimately, it has been instituted to be effective in this way. As a matter of fact, representation exceeds
signification, as in the human realm of activity, representing exceeds the
natural capacity of a thing to signify, since the action of the craftsman is
added to the sign.41 But God’s action oversteps craftsmanship because of
institution. The conclusion drawn from this passage is that any consideration about the causality of the sacrament for Albert the Great ultimately
goes back to the notion of institution, and with this understanding he
follows in the footsteps of Hugh of St. Victor.
Such institution is solely divine. To those who argue that the apostles could have instituted the sacraments through the authority and the
will of God, being inspired by Him, Albert answers again that only God
can institute the sacraments.42 Any efficiency belongs to God, either for
the question of causality or of institution.43 Sign and causality are closely
united in the unity of the institution by Christ; the first reveals his wisdom, the second his power:
Just as there are two things in the Son of God, power and wisdom,
whence any sacrament derives its power [virtus], likewise there need to
be two things in the sacrament that pertain to them, namely cause and
sign. For the sign, which is in the service of intelligence, is ordered
to wisdom, whereas the cause, which draws attention to the action, is
ordered to power.44
Causality and signification are closely united in the nature and action of
Christ. But institution needs to be befittingly understood. Institution allows the analogical link between the visible world and the invisible presence of God, as Christ has made himself visible through his Incarnation.
Sacramentality derives from the presence of Christ, head of the Church,45
through the action of the Holy Spirit. Thanks to institution, the sacrament
is related not only to the act of creation but also to the deed of restoration;
not only to the Creator but also to the Redeemer. The natural aptitude
of the sign to signify, derived from the act of creation, is supplemented by
the spiritual signification, provided by the institution and originated in the
acta and passa of Christ. This institution does not only affect the material
or formal element of the sacrament but also expresses itself in the sacramental action in the soul of the believer.46 Accordingly, to signify extends
the limits of representation, or, we should say, to represent must be taken
in its maximal extension.47 If representation reveals the natural ability of
the corporal element to signify, signification manifests the authority of
institution.48 In Hugh’s definition and its resumption by Albert, representation and institution are thus closely connected.
Hugh of St. Victor’s definition, according to Albert, holds together representation, signification, and efficacy of the sign, thanks to institution,
without forgetting its material dimension.
314 Isabelle Moulin To conclude this point, it should be noted first that Albert’s dispositive
causality cannot be reduced to the presentation of dispositive causality by
Thomas Aquinas in his Commentary on the Sentences.49 It is then fundamental to study Albert’s causality within the Albertinian framework. And Albert’s specificity resides in his use of Hugh of St. Victor. The “disposition”
in Albert the Great is certainly more similar to the notion of “preparation”
(praepare) of Hugh of St. Victor than any of his contemporaries. The efficacious action of the sacrament is to “prepare” (“dispose”) the soul to
receive grace.
Albert’s Disposition of the Sacraments and Avicenna’s
Dispositive Causality
If one agrees with my interpretation of the fundamental influence of Hugh
of St. Victor on the Albertinian treatment of the sacramental theory, the
place left to Avicenna in this theological construction is particularly narrowed. Against the background of the disposition of matter to receive
grace, the dispositive causality belongs entirely to the natural capacity of
things to receive a definite form, coming from creation; for instance, wa-
ter possesses a natural disposition to clean and purify. It is true that Avicenna’s “material disposition,” which amounts to a preparation of matter,
plays a role, to some extent, in Albert’s theory of the inchoation of form.50
But such a theory of secondary causality appears to belong as much as Avicenna’s disposition as Augustine’s theory of seminal reasons.51 Moreover, such a disposition already belongs to institution (the first divine institution
resulting from the creative act). Lastly, a sacrament is the deed of both
Restoration and Creation. It has not only a visible element,52 since for instance, it is by the “second” divine institution that the baptismal water
cleans the soul.53 Against the background of the notion of efficiency, Avicenna distinguishes between an agent cause (cause of motion or physical
cause) and a cause of being (metaphysical cause).54 But is such a distinction
at all relevant to understand the dispositive causality of the sacraments in
Albert the Great?
If the power of the sacraments emanates from the institution of Christ
understood not only as a precise event coming from his Passion but also
as the continuing flowing of grace which is diffused from Christ as head
of the Church, then a sacrament itself cannot have a true efficiency in the
diffusion of grace. But the question of the effect of the dispositive causality
remains. For, as I have stated earlier, the vase of grace does not signify a
purely heterogeneous container of the content; or, to return to the example of the shield, the material layout is not the wooden rafter that allowed
the shield to be built, but the whitening that prepares the final layer of
gold. This whitening is not only necessary but also effective, and results
from an act of the craftsman. A sacrament is thus not merely a passive
receptacle of grace. Like whitening, the sacraments create the necessary
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 315
conditions for the reception of grace. For Albert, however, these are not
positive conditions, but purely negative ones. They act to expel the form
that cannot coexist with grace, sin, which is privation of grace. Again, it
only amounts to a disposition, since the sacraments do not expel sin by
themselves (ex illis). There is therefore a similar action with the dispositive
causality in the natural things “which do not expel the substantial form,
but which dispose to its destruction.”55 Under this set of conditions, there
are some elements of Avicenna’s physical causality in Albert’s sacramental
theory, provided that such causality is understood in a negative and not in
a positive way, and without efficiency—which removes most of the features of Avicenna’s physical causality. It can then be agreed that sacraments
possess a certain efficiency since they alone are in capacity to substantially
cure the sickness of sin, “by soothing pain like an ointment” (ut leniendo
dolorem quasi ugendo) and “by hatching the nature of the soul” ( fovendo naturam animae).56
If there are some elements that could be attributed to Avicenna’s dispositive causality in the sacramental theory of Albert the Great, they are
scarce and could be derived from different influences as well. If the Avicennian disposition is partly found in the ontogenic dimension of the
vase, it is more surely present in the Hugonian praeparatio. Moreover, such
“disposition” is always a negative action. Preparation leads to the positive
reception of grace only by creating the conditions for the expulsion of sin.
At the most, its positive soothing action lies in the warm maintenance of
the soul. Finally, it must be remembered that Avicenna is never mentioned
in these pages,57 and that the purely philosophical elements are rather
scarce and scattered. In contrast, the part allotted to Hugh of St. Victor
and his theory of institution and vase of grace is omnipresent.
Some Controversial Texts Implying
Efficient Causality?
In his sacramental theory, Albert has clearly rejected any other causality
than material. Of course, if there is no efficient causality of the sacrament
for providing grace,58 this does not mean that it has no effect, since it prepares the soul to receive grace. But effect does not imply efficient causality.
Now I intend to discuss two passages in Albert the Great’s works that raise
some questions, since they seem to imply efficient and/or instrumental
causality.
There are some rudiments that would induce the reader to think that
Albert tends toward some physical instrumental causality. At the very
beginning of the fourth book of his Commentary on the Sentences, Albert
accounts for an objection showing the uselessness of the sacraments for
those who already have faith. If God heals sickness through faith alone,
why would he also use the sacraments? The terms of the objector precisely
belong to instrumentality. Would not the action of a craftsman be poorly
316 Isabelle Moulin executed if, although he can achieve it with the aid of a single instrument
(uno instrumento) at a given time, he uses two of them at another time?59 In
his answer, Albert does not use the term instrumentality, but he does not
contradict it either, since his answer is only directed to the action of God
and does not question the notion of instrumentality. The fact that Albert
does not question the notion of instrument, which would imply that he
admits it, is not decisive since the context is a case of an objection.
In the De sacramentis, when studying the sacrament of marriage, Albert
uses the notion of efficient causality that he finds in the consent of the
spouses, in the form of the words spoken before the minister.60 He also
recalls the order of anteriority and posteriority that belongs to Aristotelian
efficient causality and uses it to categorize the different effects of the sacraments of marriage. In reliance on a medical example, this time one that
considers the finality of health, the physician, walking, remedy, and medical instruments (organa medicalis) are all taken to be efficient causes, yet the
latter three receive the name of efficient cause in relation to the physician,
who is the true and foremost efficient cause.61 This instrumental scheme is
well known from Aristotle’s Physics.62 Is there here a first impulse toward a
causality of the sacraments in terms of instrumentality? Though the question needs to be raised, a true positive answer is doubtful. First, marriage
always represents a specific case in the septenary. Second, the comparison
is based on an ordering of effects, and not causes. Third, the term used is
organum (as in the Aristotelian text), and not instrumentum. Nevertheless,
the vocabulary used clearly points to efficient causality.
There are, then, some narrowly limited expressions of a certain efficient
causality in Albert’s theory of the sacraments in both the Commentary on the Sentences and the De sacramentis, but they are sparse and always related
to institution.
Conclusion
Contrary to the ideas found in Albert the Great’s contemporaries, the causality of the sacraments is hardly discussed in Albert’s writings. Dispositive
causality is never clearly understood as efficient, but rather conceived of
as material. If the sacrament is always truly effective and its effect clearly
stated, it is always invoked with the “local” dimension of the being-in,
understood as the Hugonian vessel of grace. The sacrament’s causal action
is considered in its negative dimension of expelling sin, and it is always first
related to institution, which is also the case of the notion of representation,
in its larger extension or signification. It is therefore a theological causality
whose efficiency is strictly considered in relation to the Passion of Christ.
From a philosophical viewpoint, the notion of causality in Albert’s early
works as discussed in this chapter does not have the degree of sophistication found in his later writings, especially in his Metaphysica or his De causis
et processus universitatis a prima causa. The influence of the Liber de causis is
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 317
moderate,63 and the same could be said about Avicenna and the Peripatetic
tradition, not least because in matters of faith, Albert explicitly favors Augustine over Aristotle.64
In answer to the question raised at the beginning of this chapter, it is
clear that Avicenna’s dispositive causality influenced Albert’s sacramental
theology to only a limited extent. Albert’s understanding of a disposition
depends far more on Hugh of St. Victor’s notion of preparation than on
Avicenna’s idea of physical causality. This point is particularly noteworthy,
keeping in mind the subsequent character of Albert’s writings. For Albert,
the effective ontogenic quality of a vase ultimately owes its action to the
founding and continuous action of the Christ-head. Effective causality
for Albert is part of a larger system, based on a parallelism between the
power and wisdom of Christ, who is the fountainhead of all sacramentality. Cause and sign are on the same level, since they both flow from the
same Christological source.65 Such parallelism commands also the double
possible ordering of the septenary which eventually finds its unity in the
institution.
However, this parallelism is not strictly divided. The institution is ultimately related to the ratio of the sign, as it is in Hugh of St. Victor. Representation signifies by reason of similitude, as a material element, but
signification derives its capacity to signify through the institution. Albert’s
attention is then primarily focused on the sacramental sign and not its
cause. This wider theological context explains the absence of a detailed
analysis on the proper causality of the sacraments. Signification allows the
understanding of the relation between the bodily and the spiritual dimensions, between the visible and material quality of the sacrament and its
participation to the invisible and immaterial grace. The Hugonian definition follows the same vein as the theses of the Dionysian corpus, on which
Albert will comment precisely at the time he is writing his Commentary on the Sentences.66 Even though some commentators have underrated the
influence of Dionysian theology on the De sacramentis Christianae fidei of
Hugh of St. Victor,67 the joint reading of these texts allows Albert to
construct his own sacramental theology in accordance with both works,
which unites the visible theophany of the invisible within the realm of the
sign, both founded and vivified by the presence of Christ. It is therefore
the synthesis of Augustine, Dionysius, and Hugh of St. Victor that helps us
to understand Albert’s position and explains his focus on the notion of the
sign rather than causality. Such a dependence also explains why Albert’s
causality of the sacrament is associated with the medicinal scheme.68
The sacramental theology of Albert the Great has thus left open different possible options on the question of causality that could be useful for
modern theologians: a “dispositive causality” of reception, originating in
the works of Dionysius; a causality based on “representation and signification,” related to the institution of Christ according to Hugh of St. Victor,
that clearly harmonizes with the Dionysian virtus recipiendi; some “physical
318 Isabelle Moulin dispositive causality,” which resumed, if only to a certain extent, some
elements of the philosophy of Avicenna; and some aspects of “moral causality” based on the merits of Christ.69 Though Albert’s choice is clearly
expressed, he is evidently one of the theologians who helped to open up
these options regarding the causality of sacraments.
Acknowledgments
This contribution is a development of a paper devoted to the definition of
the sacraments in Albert the Great, presented at a joint colloquium of the
Institute of Medieval Studies of the Catholic University of Paris and the
“Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group” (AAIWG), May
30, 2012, on the theme “Peter Lombard in His Traditions.”
Notes 1 Dondaine, “À propos d’Avicenne”; Simonin and Meersseman, De sacramentorum efficacia, vii–ix. See also Van Meegeren, De causalitate instrumentali humanitatis Christi.
2 Dondaine, “À propos d’Avicenne,” 441. 3 Albertus Magnus, Commentarii in IV Sententiarum dist.1, B, art. 6, ed. Borgnet
(hereafter: In IV Sent.), 17: “Ad aliud dicendum quod causa est sacramentum
ut disponens in subjecto, et est dispositio quae est necessitas quantum est de se”;
Albertus Magnus, De sacramentis q. 1, ad. 2, ed. Ohlmeyer (hereafter: DS),
2.37–39: “sed disponit ad abolendum eius [peccatum], sicut etiam in naturis
dispositio non tollit formam substantialem, sed disponit ad destructionem eius”;
ibid., q. 2, ad. 5, 4.41–42: “dico, quod est dispositio similis illi quae in naturis
dicitur necessitas”; ibid., ad. 6, 4.51–52: “[sacramenta] dispositionem ponant
respectu salutis.” 4 Marcia L. Colish quotes Dondaine in her study on the influence of this Avicennian distinction in Thomas Aquinas. Colish, “Avicenna’s Theory of Efficient Causation.” 5 See Pourrat, La théologie sacramentaire, who uses the term “causalité instrumentale dispositive,” 150; R. P. Hugon underlines that there is something of
a material causality in the dispositive causality, since it prepares for “receiving
the definitive form” (Hugon and Richard, “La causalité instrumentale,” 262;
a position challenged by Richard at 266–67); more recently, Revel, Traité des
sacrements, 1/2:90–97. 6 In, for instance, Revel, Traité des sacrements.
7 For a different dating, see McGonigle, “Significance.” See also Ohlmeyer,
“Der gedruckte Sentenzenkommentar,” and especially Rigo, “Zur
Redaktionsfrage.” On the global dating of the Commentary on the Sentences,
see Burger, “Prolegomena,” xxv. I think that the text of the DS may have
undergone some modifications in Cologne, when Albert composed Book 4
of his Commentary.
8 The order is slightly different in the Commentary, since the definition of Hugh
of St. Victor comes last, contrary to the De sacramentis, in which Albert quotes
first Augustine’s second definition. The objections and answers to these four
definitions differ from one text to another. For a fine study of these definitions, see Rosier-Catach, La parole efficace, 35–98. See also Van den Eynde, Les
définitions des sacrements; Van den Eynde, “Theory of the Composition of the
Sacraments.”
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 319 9 Augustine, De civitate Dei 10. 5, ed. Hoffmann, 452.18–19. It is Berengar of
Tours who first introduced the Augustinian definitions in the field of the sacramental theory, and especially those from De civitate Dei. Berengar, Rescriptum contra Lanfrannum, ed. Huygens, 44. In his answer to Berengar, Lanfranc
not only adopts it as the basis of his own argumentation, but also grants it
all its extent as a definition. See, for instance, Lanfranc, De corpore et sanguine
Domini 12, PL 150, 422. 10 Peter Lombard, Sent. 4, d. 1, c. 4, ed. Quaracchi, 223. 11 Isidore, Etymologies 6, 19, 40, PL 82, 255C. 12 Hugh of St. Victor, De sacramentis Christianae fidei 1. 9. 2, PL 176 (hereafter
DSCF), col. 317D. 13 “Cum enim in sacramento tria sint, scilicet proprietas significans et res, cuius
est proprietas illa, et sanctificatio causans ex forma sacramenti,” DS q. 2, ad.
13, 5.23–26. 14 “Prima accipit primum tantum et ideo convenit omnibus sacramentis veteris
et novae legis,” ibid., 5.26–28. 15 The core of Albert’s critique resides in the fact that, in the text of the Lombard, the word “sign” has been replaced by the notion of “form.” The notion
of “form,” which one can already find in Berengar, is fully used by Abelard,
one of Peter Lombard’s major sources. See Van den Eynde, Les définitions,
27–28. 16 “Secunda autem considerat efficienter operans in omni sacramento,” In IV
Sent. 1, B, art. 5, sol., 15–16. 17 DS: “forma quasi foris manens”; In IV Sent.: “forma foris manens.” 18 “Per similitudinis convenientiam configuratur actio exterior actioni interiori
in sacramento,” In IV Sent., dist. 1, B, art. 5, ad diff. 2, 16. 19 Irène Rosier notes: “plusieurs théologiens remarquent que, si le sacrement
est signe, il ne devrait pas pouvoir être cause de ce dont il est signe.” Rosier-Catach,
La parole efficace, 75. 20 “Quarta autem datur in comparatione ad id a quo sacramenta trahunt virtutem,” DS tr. 1, q. 2, 5.31–33. 21 In IV Sent. dist. 1, B, art. 5, sol., 16. 22 In IV Sent. dist. 1, A, art. 2, ad 11, 10. 23 The meaning of the word “metaphor” is stronger in Albert the Great than in
our modern terminology: it implies a true relation of proportional analogy. 24 Though it clearly appears in the definition of Chapter 4 of Peter Lombard’s
Sentences quoted above. 25 “Non omnes diffinitiones illae sunt essentiales, sed primae tres essentiales sunt
et reducuntur ad unam,” DS, 5.21–23. 26 “Sacramentum id efficit quod figurat.” See Hugh of St. Victor, Dialogus, PL
176, col. 35; DSCF 1. 9. 2, col. 318 (“efficax”); Summa sententiarum (Anonymous: Ps-Hugh of St. Victor), PL 176, col. 117. 27 Augustine, Enarr. in Ps. 118 18. 3, v. 73, CCSL 40, 1725.39–42. On a global
scale, see, for instance, Augustine, Retractationes 1. 23. 1, PL 32, col. 621.
On the relevance of such a formula and its consequences for the Albertinian causality, see Nocke, Sakrament und personaler Vollzug, 24 ff.; Bernard of
Clairvaux, “In coena Domini,” PL 183, col. 272D; Bernard, De gratia et libero
arbitrio 1. 2, SC 393, 166–67: “Deus auctor est salutis, liberum arbitrium tantum capax; nec dare illam, nisi Deus, nec capere valet nisi liberum arbitrium.
Quod ergo a solo Deo et soli datur libero arbitrio, tam absque consensu esse
non potest accipientis, quam absque gratia dantis.” 28 DS 1. 1, 1.17–34 for the first two objections, 2.23–39 for the two answers. 29 DS 1. 2, 4.43–47: “necessitatem salutis sacramentum non habet nisi ex institutione divina, et quia deus sine sacramentis salutem operari, ideo dicitur
sacramentis suam potentiam non alligasse.”
320 Isabelle Moulin 30 I gloss DS 1. 2, 4.48–52: “salus proprie non est ex aliquo nisi ex illo ex quo est
efficienter vel formaliter, sicut ex deo vel ex gratia, et ideo proprie non est nisi
in sacramentis et non ex ipsis, licet dispositionem ponant respectu salutis.” 31 Hugh of St. Victor, DSCF 1. 9. 4, col. 323C; trans. Deferrari, On the Sacraments,
160. 32 Trouillard, L’un et l’âme selon Proclos, 98, who quotes “l’immanence de l’autoconstituant dans son principe,” according to Proclus’ Elementatio theologica, 35. 33 Moulin, Sacrement et sacramentalité, 167–68. In such a conception, being is
not conceived as purely static. In a static conception of being, the vase could
contain either wine or oil without being modified, nor will the container be
modified by its content. But in a dynamic conception of being (ontogenic),
container’s being and content’s being are closely related to each other and the
“being-in” (or the inhabitation) induces a modification to both parts. 34 Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae 3. 62. 3, sol. 1: “Grace is said to be in a
sacrament not as in its subject; nor as in a vessel considered as a place, but
understood as the instrument of some work to be done [instrumentum alicujus operis faciendi].” Aquinas refers to Ezek. 9:1 (“weapon of destruction”); see also
Ps. 7:14. 35 DS 1. 1, ad 1, 2.28–29. 36 In IV Sent. dist. 1, A, art. 1, ad 3, 5. 37 In IV Sent. dist. 1, B, art. 5, ad diff. 2, ad 3, 17. Such is Albert’s interpretation;
see his note following his second quotation of “Master Hugh”: “sed non ex
illis ut causa efficiente” (emphasis added). 38 In IV Sent. dist. 1, B, art. 5, ad diff. 3, ad 2, 17. This aspect has been well noted
by Weisweiler, “Die Wirkursächlichkeit,” 405: “Albert leugnet sogar mit ausdrücklichen Worten die Zugehörigkeit des Sakramentes zur causa efficiens.”
39 Albert adopts the hylomorphic structure of the sacrament inherited from Aristotle. See Jorissen, “Materie und Form der Sakramente,” though Jorissen
tends to give too much credit to such a structure (279, for instance) and does
not clarify the relation of matter and form of the sacrament with the causative
disposition considering that efficiency comes solely from God. 40 In IV Sent. dist. 1, B, art. 5, ad diff. 2, ad 3. 41 In IV Sent. dist. 1, B, art. 5, ad diff. 4. See also dist. 1, B, art. 6, ad 2, 18: “signum a Deo et praecipue sacramentale, formam accipit ab institutione, licet
aptitudinem habeat a natura.” 42 In IV Sent. dist. 23, B, art. 13, sol., 20. 43 On the importance of institution in Albert’s sacramental theory, see Perrin,
L’institution des sacrements, 30. 44 DS 1, q. 2, ad 3, 4.15–20: “cum duo sint in filio dei, scilicet virtus et sapientia,
a quo omne sacramentum trahit virtutem, oportuit duo esse in sacramento
respondentia his, scilicet causam et signum. Signum enim, quod deservit cogitationi, ordinatur ad sapientiam; causa vero, quae respicit opus, ordinatur
ad virtutem.” 45 In IV Sent. dist. 1, A, art. 2, sol., 9: “nunc autem dabimus divisionem secundum quod sacramentum configurat nos capiti Christo.” Albert reorganizes all
the sacraments upon the basis of the institution of the sign. He is surely not
its founder, but such reorganization belongs to his own interpretation of the
relation between sign and institution (“Divisio autem sacramenti multipliciter
accipitur a Magistris [. . .]. Sed mihi videtur hic, quod oporteret eam sumi penes multiplicationem eorum quae substantialia sunt sacramento: haec autem
sunt causa, et signum,” ibid., 7). 46 See Moulin, Sacrement et sacramentalité, 96–97. 47 This statement does not contradict what has been said above. The relation
between the two concepts depends on the extent granted to each of them.
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 321 48 DS 1. 2, ad 9, 4.80–84. Representation proceeds directly from institution:
“quod autem haec repraesentatio actualiter ducat in gratiam, habet ex institutione divina,” In IV Sent dist. 1, B, art. 5, sol., 16. It explains why the bronze
serpent of the Old Covenant, though possessing a value of sign, has not been
instituted to signify grace. Ibid., ad 1, 16. 49 Considering the theses at stake, Revel’s diagram fits the first Thomas Aquinas, but it is inadequate for Albert. Revel, Traité des sacrements, 1/2:87. We still
lack an extended study on the different variations of the dispositive causality
at the beginning of the thirteenth century. To my knowledge, if one excepts
Hugh of St. Cher, but only in a certain way, Albert the Great is the only one
who insists so much on the relationship between disposition and institution,
following Hugh of St. Victor and thus using this tradition in a quite original
manner. 50 For instance, Nardi, “La dottrina d’Alberto Magno”; de Libera, Métaphysique
et noétique, 163–77; Lizzini, “Flusso.” 51 See Moulin, “Création et causalité”; also Moulin, “Albert the Great,” 15–16. 52 In IV Sent. dist. 1, A, art. 1, ad 4, 5. 53 It is fundamental to avoid the dissociation of the “two” institutions, since they are profoundly united in the Trinitarian God; it is precisely their union which prevents an erroneous interpretation of the “second” one as an act of authoritative “promulgation” that would be the origin of a sacramental theory understood as a “contract.” See Hugh of St. Victor, DSCF 1. 9. 2, col. 318: “Ipsa similitudo ex creatione est; ipsa institutio ex dispensatione; ipsa sanctificatio ex benedictione. Prima indita per Creatorem; secunda adjuncta per Salvatorem, tertia ministrata per Dispensatorem.” On the influence of the canonists in the twelfth century, see Ghellinck, Le mouvement théologique du XIIe siècle.
54 See Marmura, “Metaphysics of Efficient Causality”; also Marmura, “Avicenna
on Causal Priority.” A precise and detailed study of the question is Jolivet, “La
répartition des causes”; see also Wisnovsky, “Towards a History of Avicenna’s
Distinction”; more recently, Trego, “La métaphysique de la cause.” 55 DS 1, q. 1, 2.36–39: “Nihilomnimus tamen concedimus, quod sacramentum
non tollit peccatum, sed disponit ad abolitionem eius, sicut etiam in naturis
dispositio non tollit formam substantialem, sed disponit ad destructionem
eius.” 56 In IV Sent. dist. 1, A, art. 1, ad 1, 5. The term “to hatch” ( foveo) shows quite
adequately the ontogenic action of the sacramental vase, which characterizes
the action of the “being-in.” 57 Avicenna is never referred to in the questions that deal with the sacraments
in general. Concerning Order, and the specific question at stake in this paper,
one can find a mention of Avicenna about the power (potestas) which defines
the character, not only as a distinctive quality but also as a place (ubi), where a
spiritual power is granted: the character is the res et signum that grants a spiritual power (DS 8, q. 2, a. 1, 136.1–13). It is noticeable, however, that the local
dimension (ubi) is put forward. 58 Weisweiler, “Die Wirkursächlichkeit,” 406: “Freilich handelt es sich hier um
eine ganze eigene Ursächlichkeit, die nur im Terminus a quo handeln kann,
da der Terminus ad quem ihr nicht erreichbar ist.” Albert grants them a “causality of dispensation” (“potestas dispensandi sacramenta,” DS 1. 5, 11.84–85).
The first move in direction of efficiency appears to originate in Roland of
Cremona; see Dondaine, “À propos d’Avicenne,” 444, who quotes dist. 1 of
his Commentary on the Sentences (“Ergo proprie attribuitur sacramento justificare tanquam causae materiali adaptanti, quae reducitur ad causam efficientiem”). It is taken again, though differently, by Hugh of St. Cher, who
considers a double virtue of the sacraments and who consequently appears
322 Isabelle Moulin to be closer to the Avicennian causality than Albert (Dondaine, “À propos
d’Avicenne,” 445). His writings are, however, prior to those of Albert; see
Van den Eynde, “Stephen Langton and Hugh of St. Cher.” 59 In IV Sent. dist. 1, A, art. 1, ad 3, 4. 60 DS 9, a. 5, 157–58. 61 DS 9, a. 5, ad 4, 158.44–50. 62 See Aristotle, Phys. 2. 3, 194b35–195a2. 63 Even if one could be tempted to give too much credit to the exemplar formal
causality of the Liber de causis (esse, vita, sensus), one has to admit that Albert,
though sustaining it, since it is grounded on the priority of simplicity, does
not hesitate to qualify and amend it with an analysis of Aristotelian temporality, which eventually accounts for the primacy of baptism in the septenary
(DS 1. 5, 12.52–67 and 13.30–46). But even when the Liber appears in these
considerations about sacramental theory, its causality is purely considered
from the formal point of view, without any reference to efficiency nor formal
causality. 64 “Concerning the questions related to faith and ethics, it is better to rely on
Augustine more than the philosophers if they differ,” In II Sent. dist. 13, a. 2,
ad 5, ed. Borgnet, 247. He adds: “Sed si de medicina loqueretur, plus ego crederem Galeno, vel Hipocrati: et si de naturis rerum loquatur, credo Aristoteli
plus vel alii experto in rerum naturis” (“As for medicine, I would rather trust
Galen or Hippocrates. But for matters regarding natural philosophy, I trust
Aristotle more than any other experts in the natural sciences”). 65 Albert often insists on the unique crucifixion as the source of repeated immolation. See Garrigou-Lagrange, “De sacrificio missae.” 66 Albert undoubtedly composed his fourth book of the Sentences at the same
time that he undertook the task of commenting on Dionysius in Cologne. 67 Rorem, Hugh of Saint Victor, 170–72; see also the reservations of Coolman,
Theology of Hugh of St. Victor. For a critical discussion, see Moulin, Sacrement
et sacramentalité, 132–59. See also Anzulewicz, “Systematic Theology,” 56. 68 The remedies are classified according to the order of the sicknesses; consequently, the classification of the sacraments must follow that order (DS 1. 6,
sol., 13.2–4). The division of the septenary according to causality is wholly constructed according to a classification of the spiritual “sicknesses” (In IV Sent.
1, A, art. 2, 7–8). For a study of Christ as “physician,” see Arbesmann, “Concept of ‘Christus Medicus,’” and more recently, Mulard, La pensée symbolique,
295–378. 69 “Et solutio alia est per virtutem Passionis Christi, sine qua nullum meritum
nostrum aliquid valet,” In IV Sent. dist. 1, A, art. 1, ad 3, 5.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albertus Magnus. Commentarii in IV Sententiarum. Edited by Auguste Borgnet.
Paris: Vivès, 1894.
Albertus Magnus. De sacramentis. Edited by Albert Ohlmeyer. Editio Coloniensis
26. Münster: Aschendorff, 1958.
Augustine. De civitate Dei. Edited by Emanuel Hoffmann. CSEL 40/1. Vienna:
Tempsky, 1899.
Augustine. Enarrationes in Psalmos CI–CL. Edited by Eligius Dekkers and J. Fraipont. CCSL 40. Turnhout: Brepols, 1956.
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 323
Augustine. Retractationes. Patrologia Latina 32. Paris: Migne, 1877.
Berengar of Tours. Rescriptum contra Lanfrannum. Edited by R. B. C. Huygens.
Turnhout: Brepols, 1988.
Bernard of Clairvaux. L’amour de Dieu: La Grâce et le libre arbitre. Sources chrétiennes 393. Paris: Cerf, 2010.
Bernard of Clairvaux. “In coena Domini.” In Sermones de Tempore et de Sanctis.
Patrologia Latina 183. Paris: Migne, 1879.
Hugh of St. Victor. De sacramentis Christianae fidei. Patrologia Latina 176. Paris:
Migne, 1880.
Hugh of St. Victor. Dialogus. Patrologia Latina 176. Paris: Migne, 1880.
Hugh of St. Victor. Hugh of Saint Victor on the Sacraments of the Christian Faith (De
sacramentis). Translated by Roy J. Deferrari. Eugene, OR: Wipf&Stock, 2007.
[Pseudo-Hugh of St. Victor]. Summa sententiarum. Patrologia Latina 176. Paris:
Migne, 1880.
Isidore. Etymologies. Patrologia Latina 82. Paris: Migne, 1830.
Lanfranc of Bec. De corpore et sanguine Domini. Patrologia Latina 150. Paris: Migne, 1854.
Peter Lombard. Libri IV Sententiarum. Ad Claras Aquas: Collegii S. Bonaventurae,
1916.
Secondary Literature
Anzulewicz, Henryk. “The Systematic Theology of Albert the Great.” In A Companion to Albert the Great: Theology, Philosophy, and the Sciences, edited by Irven
M. Resnick, 15–67. Leiden: Brill, 2013.
Arbesmann, Rudolph. “The Concept of ‘Christus Medicus’ in St. Augustine.”
Traditio 10 (1954): 1–28.
Burger, Maria. “Prolegomena.” In Albertus Magnus, Super I Librum Sententiarum,
distinctiones 1–3, edited by Maria Burger. Editio Coloniensis 29/1. Münster,
Aschendorff, 2015.
Colish, Marcia L. “Avicenna’s Theory of Efficient Causation and Its Influence on
St. Thomas Aquinas.” In Tommaso d’Aquino nella Storia del Pensiero. I. Le fonti del
pensiero di S. Tommaso, 296–306. Naples: Edizioni Domenicane Italiane, 1975.
Coolman, Boyd Taylor. The Theology of Hugh of St. Victor. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
de Libera, Alain. Métaphysique et noétique: Albert le Grand. Paris: Vrin, 2005.
Dondaine, H.-D. “À propos d’Avicenne et de Saint Thomas: De la causalité dispositive à la causalité instrumentale.” Revue thomiste 51 (1951): 441–53.
Garrigou-Lagrange, R. “De sacrificio missae secundum sanctum Albertum Magnum.”
Angelicum 9, no. 2–3 (1932): 213–44.
Ghellinck, Joseph de. Le mouvement théologique du XIIe siècle: Sa préparation lointaine
avant et autour de Pierre Lombard, ses rapports avec les initiatives des canonistes. Bruges: De Tempel, 1948.
Hugon, R. P. Édouard, and P. Richard. “La causalité instrumentale.” Revue
néo-scolastique 16, no. 62 (1909): 260–69.
Jolivet, Jean. “La répartition des causes chez Aristote et Avicenne.” In Perspectives médiévales et arabes, 239–305. Paris, Vrin, 2006.
Jorissen, Hans. “Materie und Form der Sakramente in Verständnis Alberts des
Grossen.” Zeitschrift für katholische Theologie 80, no. 2 (1958): 267–315.
324 Isabelle Moulin Lizzini, Olga. “Flusso, preparazione appropriata e inchoatio formae: brevi osservazioni su Avicenna e Alberto Magno.” In Medioevo e filosofia: Per Alfonso Maierú,
edited by Massimiliano Lenzi, Cesare A. Musatti, and Luisa Valente, 129–50.
Collana: Viella, 2013.
Marmura, Michael E. “Avicenna on Causal Priority.” In Islamic Philosophy and
Mysticism, edited by Parviz Morewedge, 65–83. Delmar, NY: Caravan Books,
1981.
Marmura, Michael E. “The Metaphysics of Efficient Causality in Avicenna (Ibn
Sina).” In Islamic Theology and Philosophy: Studies in Honor of George F. Hourani,
edited by Michael E. Marmura, 172–87. Albany: SUNY Press, 1984.
McGonigle, Thomas D. “The Significance of Albert the Great’s View of Sacrament within Medieval Sacramental Theology.” The Thomist 44, no. 4 (1980):
560–83.
Moulin, Isabelle. “Albert the Great.” In The Oxford Guide to the Historical Reception
of Augustine, edited by Karla Pollmann and Willemien Otten, 14–17. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2013.
Moulin, Isabelle. “Création et causalité chez Albert le Grand et Thomas d’Aquin.”
Revue roumaine de philosophie 55 (2011): 361–80.
Moulin, Isabelle. Sacrement et sacramentalité dans l’économie de la grâce chez Hugues de
Saint-Victor. Paris: Parole et Silence, 2015.
Mulard, Christelle. La pensée symbolique de Romanos le Mélode. Turnhout: Brepols,
2016.
Nardi, Bruno. “La dottrina d’Alberto Magno sull’inchoatio formae.” In Studi di
filosofia medievale, 69–101. Rome: Storia e Letteratura, 1979.
Nocke, Franz-Josef. Sakrament und personaler Vollzug bei Albertus Magnus. Münster,
Aschendorff, 1967.
Ohlmeyer, D. Albert. “Der gedruckte Sentenzenkommentar Alberts des Grossen:
Wie verhält sich das vierte Buch zu den drei ersten Büchern?” Recherches de théologie ancienne et médiévale 6 ( January 1934): 42–54.
Perrin, Bertrand-Marie. L’institution des sacrements. Paris: Parole et Silence, 2008.
Pourrat, Pierre. La théologie sacramentaire: Étude de théologie positive. Paris: Gabalda,
1907.
Revel, Jean-Philippe. Traité des sacrements: I. Baptême et sacramentalité. 2. Don et
réception de la grâce baptismale. Paris: Cerf, 2004–5.
Rigo, Caterina. “Zur Redaktionsfrage der Frühschriften des Albertus Magnus.”
In Albertus Magnus und die Anfänge der Aristoteles-Rezeption im lateinischen Mittelalter,
edited by Ludger Honnefelder, Rega Wood, Mechthild Dreyer, and
Marc-Aeilko Aris, 325–74. Münster, Aschendorff, 2005.
Rorem, Paul. Hugh of Saint Victor. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Rosier-Catach, Irène. La parole efficace: Signe, rituel, sacré. Paris: Seuil, 2004.
Simonin, H.-D., and Gilles Gérard Meersseman. De sacramentorum efficientia apud
theologos ord. Praed. Rome: Pont. Institutum Internationale Angelicum,1936.
Trego, Kristell. “La métaphysique de la cause: Note sur la cause agente et la
(re)naissance de la cause efficiente.” Chôra: Revue d’études anciennes et médiévales
12 (2014): 145–69.
Trouillard, Jean. L’un et l’âme selon Proclos. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1972.
Van den Eynde, Damien. Les définitions des sacrements pendant la première période de
la théologie scolastique (1050–1240). Rome: Antonianum, 1950.
Albert the Great’s Sacramental Theology 325
Van den Eynde, Damian. “Stephen Langton and Hugh of St. Cher on the Causality of the Sacraments.” Franciscan Studies 11, no. 3–4 (1951): 141–55.
Van den Eynde, Damian. “The Theory of the Composition of the Sacraments in
Early Scholasticism (1125–1240).” Franciscan Studies 11, no. 1 (1951): 1–20; no.
2 (1951): 117–44; 12, no. 1 (1952): 1–26.
Van Meegeren, D. De causalitate instrumentali humanitatis Christi juxta D. Thomae
doctrinam. Venlo: Nieuwe Venlosche Courant, 1939.
Weisweiler, Heinrich. “Die Wirkursächlichkeit der Sakramente nach dem Sentenzenkommentar Alberts des Grossen.” In Studia Albertina: Festschrift für Bernhard Geyer zum 70. Geburtstage, edited by Heinrich Ostlender, 400–19. Münster,
Aschendorff, 1952.
Wisnovsky, Robert. “Towards a History of Avicenna’s Distinction between Immanent and Transcendent Causes.” In Before and After Avicenna: Proceedings of
the First Conference of the Avicenna Study Group, edited by David C. Reisman and
Ahmed H. al-Rahim, 49–68. Leiden: Brill, 2003.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-17
A prominent feature of Averroes’ most widely read work, the Decisive Treatise
(Fas․l al-maqaˉl , hereafter simply Treatise),1 is its distinction between three
types of discourse: demonstrative, dialectical, and rhetorical.2 This classification is, of course, based on Aristotle’s logical works and corresponds
to the sorts of argument discussed in the Posterior Analytics, Topics, and
Rhetoric, respectively. Averroes introduces it in order to show the harmony
between religious revelation and philosophy. Both present their audience
with truth, but philosophy does so by giving demonstrations that can be
appreciated only by experts, whereas religion does so with dialectical and
rhetorical proofs (see, e.g., Treatise 109). The fact that we can choose between these methods is a manifestation of divine providence. People are
divided into three classes corresponding to the three kinds of discourse,
and God has ensured that all three classes have access to the truths that
everyone needs to accept.
It seems natural to ask which sort of discourse is being employed in the
Treatise itself. Averroes gives no explicit indication toward an answer, but it
would be rather disappointing if a work that is so conscious about registers
of argument entirely lacked self-consciousness about its own argument.
We can immediately exclude the possibility that the Treatise is demonstrative in character. Nowhere in its pages does Averroes offer a syllogism
that would come close to satisfying the stringent requirements laid out in
the Posterior Analytics. That leaves us with two options: the Treatise may be dialectical or rhetorical. In what follows, I am going to argue that it is
a dialectical work, and quite deliberately so. Dialectic is the appropriate
style of discourse for the occasion, namely the settling of a “problem” in
the sense recognized in Aristotle’s Topics. A “problem” (Gk.: problema, Ar.:
mat․l uˉb) is a question to be answered by appealing to premises acceptable to
the other side of a debate. Of course, the “problem” here is whether or not
Islam requires the practice of philosophy, and, of course, Averroes answers
this question in the affirmative.
This interpretation may seem unappealing, because in the Decisive Treatise itself, Averroes seems to have a rather negative attitude toward dialectic ( jadal). He associates it with the rationalist theologians of Islam, the mutakallimuˉn, and takes pride in distinguishing philosophy as a 14 Averroes’ Decisive Treatise
(Fas․l al-maqaˉl ) and
Exposition (Kashf ) as
Dialectical Works
Peter Adamson
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Exposition as Dialectical Works 327
demonstrative and not dialectical enterprise. But, as will emerge from an examination of the Decisive Treatise and a closely related work, the Exposition of the Methods Used in Arguments Concerning Religious Doctrines (hereafter simply Exposition), Averroes’ critique of kalaˉm is not simply that it is dialectical. Rather, he complains that the theologians make two mistakes: first, they offer dialectical arguments in the false belief that these arguments are demonstrative; second, and less obviously, they offer arguments that do not even rise to the level of successful dialectic. The theologians are “dialecticians” only in the sense that dialectic is the best we can hope from them, not in the sense that they are genuinely effective practitioners of the dialectical art. By contrast Averroes is, in his own estimation, an accomplished user of the tools described in Aristotle’s theory of dialectical discourse.
The Usefulness of Dialectic
Readers of the Arabic Aristotelian tradition could be forgiven for supposing that “dialectic” is a term of abuse. In the works of figures like al-Faˉraˉbıˉ
and Avicenna, “dialectical” tends to mean “merely dialectical.” It refers
to arguments that are suspect because they fall short of demonstration.
But we should remember that Aristotle himself recognizes dialectic as an
important and useful discipline. It is a familiar observation that Aristotle’s own works look more like examples of dialectic than demonstrative
science.3 Later, Aristotelians also wrote self-consciously dialectical works
on philosophical topics.4 What then did Averroes think about dialectic?
Fortunately, we are in a good position to know, because we have the two
exegetical works that he devoted to Aristotle’s Topics, the treatise of the
Aristotelian organon dedicated to this art. These are a so-called “short
commentary,” or better “epitome,” and a so-called “middle commentary,”
or better “paraphrase” (hereafter Ep. Top. and Paraph. Top.).5 It emerges
from these two works that Averroes has a good understanding of Aristotelian dialectic and an appreciation of its usefulness, including its usefulness
for doing philosophy.
Fundamentally, dialectic is about debate. It presupposes a context in
which a questioner is trying to refute an opponent. Dialectic is the “aptitude”
(malaka) to produce such refutations (or, for the answerer, avoiding
refutation), but without engaging in sophistry.6 Dialectical arguments are
not invalid, but they may be unsound. Dialectical arguments are sometimes made from false premises, and, even when they are true, this is
merely accidental to their applicability in dialectic (Ep. Top. §4). Rather
than truth, the characteristic of the dialectical premise is that it is “accepted” (mashhuˉr , cf. Gk.: endoxon) (see, e.g., Paraph. Top. §1.3). This does
not, at least in the first instance, mean that it is broadly accepted by people in general, but that the opponent in the debate is bound to accept it.
He may indeed do so because the premise is widely acknowledged. As
328 Peter Adamson
Averroes says, such a premise is “evident to all people or most of them, for
there is no doubt [shakk] concerning it.”
But there are other kinds of dialectical premises:
Paraph. Top. §1.9 (cf. Ep. Top. §13): The dialectical premise is an accepted statement [qawl mashhuˉr ] to which the questioner solicits agreement, in order to set up part of a syllogism. It has various types: first,
those that are accepted by all, for instance that God exists, or accepted
by most people without being rejected by the rest, or accepted by the
scholars [ʿulamaˉ ʾ] and the philosophers [ falaˉsifa] without being rejected
by the masses, for instance what the sages think about the immortality
of the soul, or accepted by most of the scholars without being rejected
by the rest [of the scholars], or accepted by those possessed of insight
and renown among experts [ahl al-ʿilm], without being an implausible
opinion, that is, rejected by opinion of the masses.
The concept of doubt (shakk) is very important here. As the dialectical
premise is distinguished by the opponent’s tendency not to doubt it, so
the dialectical problem is one that is subject to doubt: “It is that whose
truth is not known by itself in accordance with what is accepted [maˉ lam
yakun maʿl uˉman s․idquhu bi-nafsihi bi-h․
asab al-mashhuˉr]; instead, some doubt
attaches to it as concerns what is accepted” (Paraph. Top. §1.10). If one tries
to solve a dialectical problem by appealing to doubtful premises instead
of acceptable ones, one has thus tried to solve a doubt by appealing to
something doubtful. This is worse than pointless; it is sophistical, at least
if one does so under the guise of presenting a proper dialectical argument:
“Demonstrative syllogisms are from true premises, dialectical ones from
accepted premises, and sophistical ones from premises which seem to be
accepted but are not, or seem to be true but are not” (Paraph. Top. §1.11). A sophist may get away with this if his audience is not paying attention.
But the skilled dialectician knows it is better not even to try. Doubtful
premises tend to provoke “opposition” (ʿi naˉd), a problem that also befalls
attempts to persuade through poetical and rhetorical devices (Paraph. Top.
§1.2). And as soon as opposition is raised against a premise, it ceases to be
dialectically useful (Ep. Top. §2).
Following the lead of Aristotle at Topics §1.2 (101a), Averroes identifies
three contexts in which dialectic may be of use: “as practice [riyaˉd․a], in
disputation with the many [munaˉz․ara al-jumhuˉr], and for the theoretical
sciences” (Paraph. Top. §1.2). Of particular importance to us is the second
sort of application. It is obvious why dialectical arguments are useful for
dealing with “the many” (I translate al-jumhuˉr this way because the underlying Greek in Aristotle is hoi polloi). A whole class of dialectical premises
becomes “acceptable” because they are believed by all or most people.
Lack of opposition, though not endorsement, from the masses is also used
by Averroes to justify the inclusion of expert opinions among acceptable
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Exposition as Dialectical Works 329
premises (see the end of the longer quote just given above). You may wonder why a philosopher, at least one with the profoundly elitist attitudes
expressed in Averroes’ Treatise, would bother to dispute with the many.
The answer is that there are some things that the many need to accept, including beliefs conducive to virtue and theoretical beliefs that have social
or political importance (Paraph. Top. §1.2). Since the premises on which
the dialectician draws may not even be true, the resulting cognitive state
is mere “conviction” (z․ann), in contrast to the “certainty” (yaqıˉn) that is
the hallmark of demonstrative arguments. But, for many purposes, this
may be enough. In any case, it is often the best one can hope for, since,
as we know from the Treatise, “the many” are not capable of appreciating
demonstrative proofs.
Dialectical Argumentation in the Decisive Treatise
But the audience of the Treatise is not “the many.” Indeed, one might wonder whether any written text from this period could have had the j umhuˉr as
its intended audience, literacy rates being what they were.7 Rather, this is
a juridical text, written “from the standpoint of the study of the religious
law” (ʿalaˉ jihat al-naz․ar al-sharʿıˉ ) (85). Averroes is writing for other jurists.
This means that, if it is right to suppose that the Treatise operates at a dialectical level, we should expect it to argue from premises that would be
“acceptable” to jurists, in the sense that they are bound to be endorsed by
such readers. And this is exactly what we find. Take, for instance, Averroes’ contention that philosophy has at least as good a claim to legitimacy
as the study of the law:
Treatise 89: For, just as the jurist [ faqıˉh] deduces, from [God’s] command to engage in legal reasoning about judgments, the obligation to
know the various sorts of juridical arguments, which of them constitute a [valid] argument [qiyaˉs] and which do not, so in the same way
the person of understanding [al-ʿaˉrif ] must deduce, from the command
to engage in reflection [naz․ar] about existing things, the obligation to
know the various sorts of intellectual argument. Or rather, this applies
to him even more [bal huwa ah․r aˉ bi-dhaˉlik]. For, when the jurist deduces from His statement, may He be exalted, “reflect, you who have
vision” (Q. 59:2), the obligation to know juridical argument, how
much more worthy and appropriate is it for someone who understands
God to deduce from this [verse] the obligation to know intellectual
argument!
This kind of a fortiori argument appears repeatedly in the Treatise: whatever
a jurist may say in his own defense will be at least as good a defense of philosophy. The judge who gets things wrong is still rewarded, and “which
judge [h․
aˉkim] is greater than the one who makes a judgment that being
330 Peter Adamson
[wujuˉd] is a certain way, or not? These judges are the scholars [ʿulamaˉ ʾ]
God has entrusted with [allegorical] interpretation” (107). Or, closely
thereafter (108), if the jurist needs to be qualified in order to exercise
discretionary judgment (ijtihaˉd), how much more would the “person who
makes judgments about existing things” (al-h․
aˉkim ʿalaˉ l-mawjuˉdaˉt ) need to
be qualified by understanding intellectual principles?
Similarly, aspersions cast on the legitimacy of philosophy are not so
much refuted as shown to apply equally to jurisprudence. For instance,
philosophy is accused of being an “innovation” (bidʿa), on the basis that
it was not practiced by the earliest Muslims. Instead of arguing that the
accusation is misleading or irrelevant, Averroes counters with the observation that the early Muslims did not engage in jurisprudence either, yet we
do not admit that it is an innovation (89). Likewise, while it is potentially
true that the study of philosophy could corrupt some people, many jurists
have also been corrupted by the study of the law (95). And again, one cannot complain of the philosophers’ resorting to allegorical interpretation,
since the jurists do so as well (98). Loosely, one might describe all these
arguments as ad hominem: Averroes is talking to fellow jurists and showing that Islamic law has no better claim to legitimacy than philosophy, or
perhaps it has an even worse claim in light of the a fortiori arguments just
considered.
More strictly, though, the arguments apply techniques described in Aristotle’s treatment of dialectic. Averroes is arguing “from the similar” (min
al-shabıˉh), a strategy discussed in Aristotle’s Topics (Paraph. Top. §2.10).
This means appealing to a similarity between two subjects to justify the transfer of a predicate from one of the two subjects to the other. An example given by Averroes in his Paraphrase is that since the king relates to the city as the navigator does to the ship, the king should not get drunk, since neither should the navigator. This is, of course, the pattern used in the arguments just mentioned from the Treatise. For instance, if the study of jurisprudence is licit despite sometimes corrupting the would-be jurist, then the same goes for the study of philosophy. Meanwhile, the a fortiori
arguments about jurists and philosophers exemplify the next argumentative pattern or topos mentioned by Aristotle, the so-called “argument from more and less” (min al-aqall wa-l-akthar). Averroes says in his explanation of this topos:
If we find that a predicate applies to a subject, we may determine that
what is all the more that subject has the predicate all the more, for
instance, if pleasure is good, then what is more pleasant is more good.
(Paraph. Top. §2.10; Aristotle gives the same example)
Compare the argument given in the Treatise: if jurisprudence is legitimate
because it fulfills the Qurʾaˉnic command to engage in reflection (a premise
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Exposition as Dialectical Works 331
any jurist is bound to grant), then philosophy, which is an even deeper sort
of reflection, is even more legitimate.
Though these examples show Averroes appealing to assumptions that
are acceptable to jurists, in particular, he does also make use of premises
that are liable to be granted by everyone. When defending allegorical
interpretation of the Qurʾaˉn, he mentions a general agreement that allegorical interpretation (taʾwıˉl ) can be applied to the apparent meaning
(al-z․aˉhir ) of Scripture. His phrasing here is significant: he says that “this is
a determination that no Muslim doubts, and no believer questions” (98).
The exclusion of doubt (shakk) is, as we saw, what makes such a premise
dialectically acceptable. Here and in what follows, Averroes refers repeatedly to the idea of a consensus (ijmaˉʿ) concerning the use of allegory and
to other matters of religion. Thus, he says that consensus is not certainly
established with regard to theoretical questions, as it has been for some
practical matters (99).
This may give rise to an objection to my reading of the Treatise, namely
that I am confusing characteristically legal concepts and strategies with
concepts and strategies that are at home in Aristotelian dialectic. It is quite
clear in the passage just mentioned that Averroes is thinking of ijmaˉʿ as it
was applied in Islamic law, since he discusses the problem of verifying the
views of the ʿulamaˉ ʾ and even alludes to the possibility that their teachings may have been passed down by authoritative transmission (t awaˉtur ).
Likewise, the strategy I described above as “argument from the similar” is
highly reminiscent of the legal argument from analogy (qiyaˉs), the classic
example being that if a certain kind of wine (khamr) is forbidden because it
intoxicates, then so too are other alcoholic beverages.8 And there are other
arguments in the Treatise that look straightforwardly jurisprudential. The
best example is perhaps Averroes’ argument that it is acceptable to make
use of the teachings of non-Muslims (like Aristotle) on analogy to the use
of an instrument owned by a non-Muslim in a sacrifice (91).
To this, I would reply that we cannot draw a strict contrast between dialectical and legal argumentation. The question of how jurisprudential reasoning fits into the framework of the Aristotelian organon is a complex one. On the face of it, it seems plausible to say that juridical arguments are typically rhetorical. Aristotle after all considers courtroom argument to be a kind of rhetoric, and Averroes follows him in this and has a good deal to say about law in his Paraphrase of the Rhetoric.9 However, this has to do, in the first instance, with arguments given before a qaˉd․ıˉ or judge, with the aim to convince that judge (Paraph. Rhet. §1.3.1). In the Treatise, by contrast, Averroes is the judge who is passing down his decision on the status of philosophy. His role is not that of a legal advocate, but that of an interpreter of the religious law—hence the aforementioned remark at the start of the Treatise that it is written ʿalaˉ jihat al-naz․ar al-sharʿıˉ (85). Later in the Treatise,
we learn that for Averroes this sort of interpretation may be dialectical:
332 Peter Adamson
Treatise 117: In general, everything that is conveyed by these [Scriptural statements] is an interpretation that is grasped only through demonstration. So this interpretation is the duty of the experts [al-khawaˉs․
s․
] in [demonstration]. The duty of the many is to take them in their apparent sense, and in two respects, namely in conception and in assent. For it is not in their nature to go further. Those who reflect on the Scripture [al-sharıˉʿa] may come upon interpretations because one of the common methods that yield assent predominates over the others. That is, if the indication [dalıˉl ] offered by the interpretation is more fully convincing than the indication offered by the apparent meaning. These sorts of interpretation are appropriate to the many [j umhuˉrıˉ ], and it may be that they are a duty for those whose powers of reflection extend only to a capacity for dialectic [al-quwwa
al-jadaliyya].
In what immediately follows, Averroes associates this kind of interpretation with the Ashʿarites and Muʿtazilites, so one may suppose that his
condescending final remark applies only to kalaˉm. But he has already said
numerous times that Islamic jurisprudence involves offering allegorical
interpretation of the Scripture. This would explain why the Treatise adopts
a dialectical, and not rhetorical, method.10
Kalaˉm as Failed Dialectic
Averroes’ allusion to the kalaˉm schools in this passage does, however, return us to a worry mentioned at the outset of this chapter. How can we believe that Averroes would deliberately choose to write dialectically, when
he excoriates the theologians for doing precisely this? Part of the answer is
that Averroes is willing to meet the theologians on their own ground: they
argue from merely dialectical premises, and he responds in kind. This is
how we may take the famous passage in which Averroes complains about
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s unwise decision to air matters appropriate for scholars in front
of a wider audience. It was the resulting “notoriety” (shuhra: from the
same root as mashhuˉr ) that prompted Averroes’ composition of the Treatise,
which seeks to undo the damage done by al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s dialectic (114). But
this already points us toward another and more interesting reason why
Averroes would choose to write dialectically. He does so because kalaˉm is
not merely dialectical, but often engages in unsuccessful or incompetent
dialectic. Averroes, by contrast, plays by the rules.
To understand this, we need to turn to the Exposition, which explicitly describes itself as a kind of sequel to the Treatise, and also describes itself
as being motivated by the need to respond to al-Ghazaˉlıˉ (Exposition 185–
86).11 The Exposition confirms that kalaˉm is an example of dialectic. At one
point, Averroes seems to treat the two as near synonyms, saying that in
between the many and the true scholars are people who are in a defective
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Exposition as Dialectical Works 333
state, namely “the adherents of dialectic and kalaˉm” (ahl al-jadal wa-l-kalaˉm)
(181; cf. 159, which just calls the mutakallimuˉn the “dialecticians”). Earlier, he has gone so far as to lump the theologians in with the many, because
they do not deal in demonstrative proofs. Yet, even here, they are singled
out as dialecticians:
Exposition 168: By “the many” [al-jumhuˉr], I mean all those who do
not devote themselves to the demonstrative arts, whether or not they
have achieved the art of kalaˉm. For it is not within the power of the
art of kalaˉm to arrive at this degree of knowledge, since the most
adequate rank of the art of kalaˉm is dialectical, not demonstrative,
wisdom [h․
ikma].
He also mentions that, in what the Ashʿarites and Muʿtazilites say, “there
is a true part and a false part” (165). We can take this as a reminiscence of
an observation, made in his epitome of Aristotle’s Topics, that dialectical
premises are a mix of the false and the true (Ep. Top. §4, cited above).
But, as this reminds us, a dialectician may quite legitimately make use
of false premises, so long as the premises are “accepted.” It is really on
the latter point that kalaˉm fails. It seems that the Ashʿarites may have tried
to use commonly acceptable premises, given that they “take their start
from prima facie opinion [min baˉdiʾ al-raʾy], namely beliefs that people
have when they first start to consider something” (204). But all too often, the premises used in the Ashʿarites’ standard arguments are subject to
“doubt” (shakk), which as we saw is exactly the criterion that disqualifies
a premise from being suitable for a dialectical syllogism. This criticism of
being “doubtful” is applied, for instance, to the claim that there are atoms
(139), and to al-Juwaynıˉ’s assumption that the features of the world could
be different and thus must be contingent (145). Another locution used to
make the same point is that a premise is “not evident” (ghayr bayyan), as
for instance the Ashʿarite claim that anything willed must be temporally
originated (148).
The result of this is not merely that a skilled philosopher like Averroes
can see through the theologians’ arguments, diagnosing them as non-demonstrative. It is also that the arguments are ineffective for convincing
normal people:
Exposition 138: The methods that these people use in [proving] the
createdness of the world combine two features: namely that the many
are incapable of receiving [qubuˉl] them, and at the same time, that they
are not demonstrative. So they are befitting neither for the scholars
nor for the many.
Again, regarding the Ashʿarite assumption that an infinite series of events
is impossible:
334 Peter Adamson
Exposition 144–45: The things certain people have supposed to be
demonstrations about these topics are not in fact demonstrations, nor
are they statements appropriate for the many.
And again, regarding an Ashʿarite argument for the uniqueness of God:
Exposition 158: Its not working in accordance with nature is because
what they say about this is not a demonstration, and its not working in
accordance with religion is because the many cannot understand what
they are saying, never mind their being convinced by it!
In technical terms, he means that the kalaˉm arguments are not apt to elicit
“assent” (tas․
dıˉq). In this respect, the theologians’ claims are less effective
than the surface meaning of religious texts (al-z․awaˉhir al-sharʿiyya) which
do produce assent (174). This may be why Averroes hints, at one point,
that the theologians would have done better to stick with merely rhetorical
arguments. At least these would be persuasive! This suggestion comes
in his discussion of al-Juwaynıˉ’s aforementioned claim that God could
have made the world differently. Averroes allows that this might qualify
as a good rhetorical premise, since it would convince the many. Even this
grudging concession is revoked immediately, though. Averroes adds that
the premise undermines God’s perfection as designer of the universe, for
which reason it shouldn’t be put before the many (146).
As with the comments about kalaˉm in the Treatise, this hardly looks
like an advertisement for dialectic. One might suppose, especially given
Averroes’ harsh words about al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, that he would disapprove of any
use of dialectical argumentation concerning religious beliefs, whether or
not the dialectic is carried out competently. In fact, though, a closer look
at the Exposition shows that Averroes himself makes use of self-consciously
dialectical argumentation. In a sign that the intended audience of the Exposition
may be wider than that of the audience envisioned for the Treatise,
he sometimes says that his own premises are bound to be accepted by
all people, and not just one group (like the jurists addressed in the Treatise). There is a particularly striking example early in the Exposition, which
mentions that “all Arabs acknowledge the existence of the Creator” (136),
striking because it is an accepted belief we also saw being cited in Averroes’ paraphrase of the Topics (§1.9). On the other hand, the remark comes
within a summary of the views of the h․
ashwiyya rather than of Averroes’
own position, so it doesn’t really prove that Averroes wants to base himself
on accepted beliefs.
There is, however, ample evidence of this in other passages, where
Averroes is indeed presenting his own views. In the midst of his treatment
of the question whether God can be said to have a “spatial direction”
( jiha), he says, “all the philosophers [h․
ukamaˉʾ] agree that God and the angels are in heaven, just as all religions agree to this” (177). In the terms
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Exposition as Dialectical Works 335
of his paraphrase of the Topics, this would be a thesis accepted both by
“the scholars” and by “the many.” Though it may raise an eyebrow to see
Averroes ascribing this particular notion to the philosophers, he actually
has good grounds for doing so. In a rather puzzling passage at the end of
Physics book 8 (267b), Aristotle says that the Prime Mover is “in the circle”
(en kukloˉi), usually taken to mean “at the circumference of the celestial
sphere.”12
One of Averroes’ favorite ways of describing such accepted premises in
the Exposition is to say that they are rooted in human “instinct” or “inborn disposition,” in Arabic fit ․ra. This is an idea familiar from the Islamic
tradition, most famously in the h․
adıˉth that states, “every newborn is born
according to fit ․ra, but his parents turn him into a Jew, a Christian, or a
Zoroastrian.”13 Averroes applies this to the premises invoked by his own
favored proofs for God’s existence, namely that the universe is designed
with the welfare of humans in mind, and shows other signs of providence,
as for instance the cunningly designed organs of animals. Unlike the kal
aˉm arguments for the same conclusion, these arguments can be generated
from premises accepted by all. Thus, the second argument is built on “two
principles that are potentially available [mawjuˉd] in all human instincts
[ fit ․ar]” (152). That Averroes understands this in terms of the dialectical
theory from the Topics is proven by a passage at Exposition 155, which again
mentions fit․a r al-naˉs and then explains that his methods of proof are appropriate to both the “elite” (khawaˉs․
s․
) and “the many” (j umhuˉr ), with the elite
simply understanding them in fuller detail (tafs․ıˉl ).14
Another locution favored by Averroes when emphasizing the “acceptability” of his premises, so sorely lacking in the assumptions made by
the theologians, is “known in itself” (maʿruˉf bi-nafsihi). Truths said to be
“known in themselves” include the impossibility of a single city being
ruled harmoniously by two rulers (156), that the earth was made to give
humans a place to live (197), that justice is good and injustice bad (235),
and that it is better to have a greater good and less evil than no good at all
(238). At first glance, it might seem that Averroes wants more than dialectical acceptability in such passages. Isn’t a premise that is “known in itself”
suitable for use even in proper demonstrations?
Not necessarily. We have already seen him use the phrase “known by
itself in accordance with what is accepted” (maˉ maʿluˉm [. . .] bi-nafsihi bi-
h․
asab al-mashhuˉr) in his paraphrase of the Topics (Paraph. Top. §1.10, cited
above). Here in the Exposition, too, something that is “known by itself” is
apparently the same as that which is “accepted.”15 Consider the following passage, which concerns the existence of prophets:
Exposition 216: The existence of those who are called messengers and
prophets is known by itself [maʿruˉf bi-nafsihi] [. . .]. For their existence
is denied only by those who deny the existence of things depending
on testimony, for instance the existence of other kinds of things we
336 Peter Adamson
have not witnessed, or people famous for their wisdom, etc. For the
philosophers and all people [al-falaˉsifa wa-jamıˉʿ al-naˉs], except for those
whose claims are insignificant, namely the dahriyya, agree that there
are individuals who have been given revelation.
Here again, we have the appeal to both scholarly and popular opinion, and
even the exclusion of skeptics about testimony and materialists or eternalists
(dahriyya), groups that fall outside the pale because of their paradoxical
teachings. I use “paradoxical” in the sense used in the Topics: these groups
explicitly reject what is endoxon, that is, generally acceptable. The premise
Averroes is asserting here—that there do exist people who have received a
revelation—is then joined to another premise, namely that whoever brings
a religious law is such a prophet. This second premise is something “about
which there is no doubt in human instinct” (ghayr mashkuˉk fıˉ l-fit․
ar al-ins
aˉniyya). On this one page of the Exposition, Averroes uses nearly all the
terminology that flags dialectically acceptable premises.
Let us now repeat a remark made by Averroes when paraphrasing the
Topics: “dialectical arguments are from accepted premises, and sophistical
ones from premises which seem to be accepted but are not, or seem to be
true but are not” (Paraph. Top. §1.11). Applying this to what we have seen
in the Exposition, we can say that, strictly speaking, it is Averroes who
argues as a dialectician. The theologians are really arguing like sophists,
because they fail to base themselves on premises that are accepted. Why
then does Averroes label the theologians as dialecticians? The answer may
lie in another remark we have already quoted above: “the most adequate
rank [aghnaˉ l-maraˉtib] of the art of kalaˉm is dialectical, not demonstrative,
wisdom” (Exposition 168). I take this to suggest that the theologians may
in principle aspire to do dialectic according to the rules, and may manage
to do this much of the time despite the criticisms made in the Treatise and
Exposition. When, for example, Averroes lambastes al-Ghazaˉlıˉ for arguing
“dialectically” in the Incoherence, he may well mean that his arguments really are dialectically sound—that is, based on premises that are accepted, if
not necessarily true. Whether a given kalaˉm argument meets this standard,
or instead falls into sophistry, will have to be decided on a case-by-case
basis.
Averroes the Dialectician and Philosopher
The general point in any case is that dialectic is the best we can hope for
from the mutakallimuˉn, and it is in light of this highest attainment that they
are labeled as dialecticians. The same reasoning can of course be used to
explain why Averroes is not eager to style himself as a dialectician, even if
he is well aware that the arguments he offers in the Treatise and Exposition
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Exposition as Dialectical Works 337
are dialectical in character. Averroes can do dialectic and do it right, but
he can do better still if the context is appropriate. He is a philosopher and
would be able to offer demonstrative arguments for the things he here
establishes non-demonstratively. This is what lies behind the somewhat
enigmatic remark in the Exposition that “the elite” understand providential
design in greater depth than “the many,” even though both can use these
proofs to show the existence of God (155). The philosophers are able to
produce versions of these same proofs that go back to genuinely apodeictic
premises, rather than premises that are merely accepted, on the basis of
their detailed understanding of nature. For instance, the philosopher could
explain exactly how a certain organ is well-designed to promote well-being in a given animal species, on the basis of the species’ essential features.
Here, of course, Averroes will be thinking of Aristotle’s Parts of Animals,
but also Galen’s On the Usefulness of the Parts and its lengthy paean to the
providence of nature.
If this is right, then the arguments found in these two works may be dialectical, but they need not be “merely” dialectical. Much as the philosopher is in a position to separate true interpretations of Scripture from false ones, he would be able to choose dialectically effective arguments that have true premises and conclusions. As Averroes says in the epitome of the Topics, truth is “accidental” to premises insofar as they are dialectical (§4). But then it is also accidental to a syllogism, insofar as it is dialectical, that it is being given by a philosopher. Whether Averroes has always been careful to select true premises in the Treatise
and Exposition is something we could decide only through a close comparison of these premises to the views set forth in the properly scientific works, that is, the commentaries on Aristotle. But we should be careful not to leap to the assumption that Averroes is hiding his true convictions, simply because he is arguing dialectically.16 To the contrary, he is presumably doing what he describes when summarizing the Topics:
using dialectic to refute opponents who teach falsehoods and to argue for true beliefs that are useful for everyone to accept, such as the existence of God and the compatibility of philosophy with Islam, all in a way appropriate for a broad, non-philosophical audience. Insofar as the conclusions and perhaps even the premises of his arguments are true, there will be no clash between the teachings of these dialectical works and the deliverances of Aristotelian science. After all, truth does not contradict truth.
Acknowledgments
My thanks to audiences at the University of Erlangen and LMU Munich
for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this chapter.
338 Peter Adamson
Notes 1 I cite by page number from the following Arabic edition: Averroes, Fas․
l
al -maqaˉl , ed. Jaˉbirıˉ. There are numerous English translations: e.g., Averroes,
On the Harmony, ed. Hourani; Averroes, Decisive Treatise, trans. Butterworth.
All translations from the Treatise and other texts are my own. 2 One could hardly choose a more appropriate topic for this tribute to Richard
C. Taylor, since he has contributed some of the most insightful studies of the
Decisive Treatise and the issues it raises for his philosophical stance as a whole.
See, for instance, Taylor, “Truth Does Not Contradict Truth”; Taylor, “Ibn
Rushd/Averroes”; Taylor, “Averroes on the Sharıˉ ʿah.”
3 On this question see, e.g., Barnes, “Aristotle and the Methods of Ethics”;
Irwin, Aristotle’s First Principles; Smith, “Aristotle on the Uses of Dialectic.” 4 See Adamson, “Dialectical Method.” 5 For the terminology concerning these types of exegetical work, see Gutas,
“Aspects of Literary Form.” For an Arabic edition and English translation of
Ep. Top., see Averroes, Averroes’ Three Short Commentaries, ed. Butterworth; for the Arabic of Paraph. Top. I have used Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ mant ․iq Arist ․uˉ , ed.
Jihaˉmıˉ, both cited by section number. 6 The term malaka is used at both Ep. Top. §21 and Paraph. Top. §1.1. 7 Having said this, Averroes seems to worry that literary productions can reach
the many, given his criticism of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ for airing controversial questions
and corrupting his readers in a misguided attempt to make them “knowledgeable people” (ahl al-ʿilm) (113). See further below on the Treatise as a
response to al-Ghazaˉlıˉ. 8 On the question of how the legal sense of qiyaˉs (“analogy”) relates to the
logical sense of qiyaˉs (“syllogism”), see Bou Akl, “Averroes on Juridical
Reasoning.” 9 See Averroes, Averroès (Ibn Rushd): Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad. My thanks
to Rotraud Hansberger for discussion of the following point. 10 At one point, Averroes explicitly reflects on the sort of discourse he himself is
using in the Treatise. Having given a comparison between the legislator and a
doctor, Averroes comments that the analogy (tamthıˉl ) might seem to be “poetic” but is in fact “certain” (yaqıˉn), because it accurately portrays two kinds
of relation: that of the doctor to the body and that of the legislator to the soul
(Treatise, 121). 11 References are to Averroes, al-Kashf, ed. Qaˉsim. English version in Averroes,
Faith and Reason, ed. Najjar. 12 On the history of this exegetical problem, see Adamson and Wisnovsky,
“Yah․yaˉ Ibn ʿAdıˉ.” 13 For this and further references, see Griffel, “Al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s Use.” 14 Again, one might wonder whether it is really fair to ascribe these arguments
to the philosophers. But the idea of design in nature, and anthropocentric
design in particular, can be plausibly ascribed to Aristotle. See Sedley, “Aristotle’s Teleology.” 15 In addition to the example that follows, this is shown by a passage at Exposition
172, which discourages non-scholars from inquiring into God’s corporeality,
since the issue is “not even close to being self-evident” (laysa huwa qarıˉban min
al-maʿruˉf ni-nafsihi). In other words, it is a matter concerning that for which
we have no access to accepted premises, such as those which are useful for
arguing with the many. 16 Indeed, he says in Paraph. Rhet. (§1.1.18–19) that even though both dialectic
and rhetoric can be used to argue on either side of an issue, arguments based
on true premises are superior.
Averroes’ Decisive Treatise and Exposition as Dialectical Works 339
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Averroes (Ibn Rushd). Al-Kashf ʿan manaˉhij-l-adilla fıˉ ʿaqaˉʾid al-milla. Edited by
Mah․muˉ d Qaˉ sim. Cairo: Maktabat al-Anjiluˉ al-Mis․
riyya, 1964.
Averroes. Averroès (Ibn Rushd): Commentaire moyen à la Rhétorique d’Aristote. Edited and translated by Maroun Aouad. Paris: Vrin, 2002.
Averroes. Averroes’ Three Short Commentaries on Aristotle’s Topics, Rhetoric, and Poetic.
Edited and translated by Charles E. Butterworth. Albany: SUNY Press,
1977.
Averroes. Decisive Treatise and Epistle Dedicatory. Translated with introduction and
notes by Charles E. Butterworth. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press,
2001.
Averroes. Faith and Reason in Islam: Averroes’ Exposition of Religious Arguments. Edited and translated by Ibrahim Y. Najjar. Oxford: Oneworld, 2001.
Averroes. Fas․
l al-maqaˉl fıˉ taqrıˉr maˉ bayna l-sharıˉ ʿa wa-l-h․
ikma min al-ittis․
aˉl.
Edited by MuhammadʿAbıˉd Jaˉbirıˉ. Beirut: Markaz Diraˉsat al-Wahda
alʿArabıˉyya, 1997.
Averroes. On the Harmony of Religion and Philosophy. Translated with an introduction and notes by George F. Hourani. London: Luzac, 1976.
Averroes. Talkhıˉs․
mant ․iq Arist ․uˉ: Kitaˉb al-jadal wa-l-mughaˉlat ․a. Edited by Jıˉraˉ r
Jiha
ˉmıˉ. Beirut: Daˉr al-Fikr al-Lubnaˉnıˉ, 1992.
Secondary Literature
Adamson, Peter. “Dialectical Method in Alexander of Aphrodisias’ Treatises on Fate and Providence.” Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 54 (2018):
279–308.
Adamson, Peter, and Robert Wisnovsky. “Yah․yaˉ Ibn ʿAdıˉ on the Location of
God.” Oxford Studies in Medieval Philosophy 1 (2013): 205–28.
Barnes, Jonathan. “Aristotle and the Methods of Ethics.” Revue internationale de
philosophie 34, no. 133–134 (1980): 490–511.
Bou Akl, Ziad. “Averroes on Juridical Reasoning.” In Interpreting Averroes: Critical
Essays, edited by Peter Adamson and Matteo Di Giovanni, 45–63. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2019.
Griffel, Frank. “Al-Ghazaˉ lıˉ’s Use of ‘Original Human Disposition’ (Fit ․ra) and its
Background in the Teachings of al-Faˉ raˉ bıˉ and Avicenna.” Muslim World 102, no. 1 (2011): 1–32.
Gutas, Dimitri. “Aspects of Literary Form and Genre in Arabic Logical Works.”
In Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts: The Syriac, Arabic and
Medieval Latin Traditions, edited by Charles Burnett, 29–76. London: The Warburg Institute, 1993.
Irwin, Terence. Aristotle’s First Principles. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.
Sedley, David. “Is Aristotle’s Teleology Anthropocentric?” Phronesis 36, no. 2
(1991): 179–96.
Smith, Robin. “Aristotle on the Uses of Dialectic.” Synthese 96, no. 3 (1993):
335–58.
Taylor, Richard C. “Averroes on the Sharıˉ ʿah of the Philosophers.” In The Muslim, Christian, and Jewish Heritage: Philosophical and Theological Perspectives in the
340 Peter Adamson
Abrahamic Traditions, edited by Richard C. Taylor and Irfan A. Omar, 283–304.
Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press, 2012.
Taylor, Richard C. “Ibn Rushd/Averroes and ‘Islamic’ Rationalism.” Medieval Encounters 15, no. 2–4 (2009): 225–35.
Taylor, Richard C. “Truth Does Not Contradict Truth: Averroes and the Unity
of Truth.” Topoi 19, no. 1 (2000): 3–16.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-18
Although it is widely recognized that the faculty of imagination is central to the philosophical psychology of Averroes (Ibn Rushd), his account
of its nature as a cognitive power in its own right is comparatively neglected. Yet pinpointing Averroes’ views on the imaginative faculty is not
a straightforward task. A major obstacle is the equivocity of the very term
“imagination” (al-takhayyul and cognates), which serves both as an umbrella term covering a cluster of sensory faculties and as the proper name
for one of those senses.1 This ambiguity is, in turn, rooted in the Aristotelian and quasi-Aristotelian texts that provide the foundations for Averroes’
theory of the imagination. In the De anima, especially Book 3, chapter 3,
Aristotle puts forward what seems to be his official account of imagination
(phantasia), assigning it a wide variety of operations loosely united by their
link to sensory images or phantasmata. Yet in the various texts of the Parva naturalia—and even more markedly in the version available in Arabic—
these same functions are parceled out to several distinct faculties that are
not mentioned at all, or only obliquely, in the De anima. On the basis of
the version of the Parva naturalia available to him, Averroes had reason to
believe that Aristotle himself upheld a fourfold scheme of sensory faculties,
of which imagination is only one.2 Averroes thus adopts this view as his
own, and he continues to endorse it as an authoritative Aristotelian doctrine in his mature Long Commentary on the De anima, where he identifies
four “individual discerning powers” (virtutes distinctivas individuales): the
common sense, the imaginative,3 the cogitative, and the memorative powers.
4 Of these four powers, the cogitative and memorative are unique to
humans, whereas the common sense and imagination are found in most, if
not all, animals, including humans.
In what follows, I trace the specific operations assigned to the imagination in Averroes’ various commentaries on the De anima and Parva naturalia
in an attempt to isolate its contributions from those of the other sensory
powers. While it is possible to pick out some operations that can definitively be assigned to the imagination alone, certain ambiguities remain
intransigent. Many of these reflect the simple conflation of the generic
and specific uses of takhayyul and cognate terms. But in other cases, the
confusion stems from Averroes’ understandable tendency to focus on the
15 Averroes on Imagination
(takhayyul) as a Cognitive
Power
Deborah L. Black
342 Deborah L. Black
distinctively human cognitive functions of the imagination, a focus that
makes it difficult to discern whether the operations in question belong to
the imagination itself or to the human imagination insofar as it falls under
the influence of the cogitative power and the intellect.5
Imagination in the Epitome of the Parva naturalia
In his Epitome of the Parva naturalia, Averroes discusses the role of the imaginative faculty in the various cognitive operations addressed in the different books of the Parva naturalia as he knew it: in the basic act of sense
perception (the De sensu), in memory and related activities (the De memoria), and in sleep and dreams (the De somno and De insomniis).6
Imagination and Sense Perception: Through the Looking Glass
The faculty of imagination is evoked in Averroes’ account of sense perception, understood as the spiritual reception of a sensible form (s․
uˉrah)
which undergoes a process of gradual dematerialization as it is transmitted
through the medium and the sense organs and received into the common
sense. Averroes identifies three stages in this process: the form’s corporeal
existence in the external world; its first grade of spiritual existence in the
common-sense power; and a final, more spiritual (akthar ruˉh․aˉnıˉyah) level of
existence in the imaginative faculty. As an indicator of its greater degree
of spirituality, Averroes notes that the imagination is able to make a form
present for its consideration even in the absence of an extramental object,
which shows the imagination’s independence from any physical contact
with a material particular to perform its operation.7
Averroes employs a rather curious analogy to illustrate the relations between the external senses, the common sense, and the imagination and
their relative degrees of spirituality. He asks us to imagine someone (person 1) looking into a translucent, two-sided mirror which is then placed
in front of a body of water, so that her reflection passes through the mirror
and is reflected a second time onto the water. From there, her image is
reflected again onto the reverse side of the mirror, which a second person
(person 2) is facing, and in which she sees the first person’s image. Person 1
corresponds to the external sensible object; the mirror and the water represent the air and the eye, respectively. The common sense is represented
by the reflection of person 1’s image off the water and onto the second side
of the mirror. The imagination, finally, is like person 2, who is gazing on
the image reflected onto the second side of the mirror from the water. In
order to capture the idea that the imagination can contemplate its object
even when no physical thing is present, Averroes stipulates, rather fancifully, that the image on the second side of the mirror will remain behind,
even after person 1 has turned away, so that person 2 can continue to behold her after her departure.8
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 343
The improbability of this model notwithstanding, it highlights two
important features of how Averroes envisages the relation between the
imagination and the common sense, on the one hand, and its link to the
external sensible object, on the other. First, while Averroes goes to great
lengths to incorporate the ability of the imagination to perceive an object
after it has withdrawn from the perceiver’s sensory range, the imagination
remains dependent on the common sense—the reflection off the water—
to provide it with an object in the absence of any external body. This close
link between the imagination and the objects lingering in the common
sense becomes a standard feature of Averroes’ various accounts of the production of acts of imagining. Second, the imagination is depicted here as
perceiving an object which has reached it through multiple levels of reflection and mediation. Yet Averroes does not seem worried that this might
affect the veridicality of imagination. Instead, he takes this mediation as a
yet another mark of the superiority of imagination, since its greater spirituality is directly tied to the distance that separates it from actual contact
with the material particulars outside the soul.
At the end of the De sensu chapter, Averroes also introduces another
metaphor which becomes a staple in his various accounts of the imagination. This metaphor breaks down the perceptual object into two components, which are analogous to the core (l ubaˉb) of a fruit, on the one
hand, and its rinds or shell (al-qishr), on the other. The core symbolizes
“the differences of things and their proper intentions” ( fus․uˉl al-ashyaˉʾi wa-
maʿaˉnıˉ-haˉ al-khaˉs․
s․
ah), whereas the rinds correspond to their external features
(al-umuˉr allatıˉ min khaˉrijin).9 Averroes explains the ramifications of
this metaphor most fully in the next section of the Epitome of the Parva
naturalia, which corresponds to Aristotle’s De memoria.
The Elephant in the Room: Memory and Creative Imagination
Averroes builds his account of the nature of memory and related cognitive
phenomena around two operations, sensory analysis or abstraction (tah․l ıˉl )
and composition or synthesis (tartıˉb). He is careful to parcel out the various
components of these operations to one of the three powers of imagination,
cogitation ( fikr/mufakkirah),10 and memory (dhikr), and he again clarifies
that the latter two powers are found only in humans. The process of analysis is the basic act of sensory abstraction, in which the cogitative faculty
separates out the intention (maʿnaˉ) of the perceived object from its “image” (khayaˉl ) or “imagined form” (al-s․uˉrah al-mutakhayyalah) and transmits
the intention to the memorative faculty.11 Averroes again likens the image to the rind or shell which covers the intentional core. Here Averroes
adds a helpful example to illustrate what each of these objects represents:
when a painter (al-raˉsim) is painting the portrait of some individual, Zayd,
the physical features by which Zayd’s outward appearance is described
would be analogous to the image, whereas the intention corresponds to
344 Deborah L. Black
the individual who is the subject of the painting, “this denotable Zayd.”12
The imaginative or formative faculty is thus the power whose objects
describe the external physical appearances of individual particular objects.
This serves to differentiate the imagination from the higher, distinctively
human powers of cogitation and memory, which have exclusive access to
the individual core or intention buried within the image.13
The fairly circumscribed role assigned to imagination in the process of
sensory analysis is also reflected in one of the most intriguing parts of the
De memoria section of the Epitome of the Parva naturalia, that is, Averroes’
account of the reverse process of synthesis as it is found in acts of creative
imagination.14 Averroes explains how the same three faculties are able to
cooperate in order to produce a new image of an individual that the perceiver has never experienced before. Here and elsewhere, Averroes uses
the example of someone forming an accurate picture of an elephant simply
from hearing its physical description. In this case, the cogitative faculty
takes the images and intentions that it once separated and then recombines
them, so as to create a new image not previously encountered:
In some people the forms of sensible things may be made present
from the joint operation [itijmaˉʿ] [of these three faculties] without their
having been sensed before, when only their attributes [s․i faˉtu-haˉ] were
transmitted to them. This is as Aristotle relates of some of the ancients, that they formed images of things conveyed to them through
hearing, without having observed them, and when these forms were
examined, they were found to be in accordance with what was observed of them. And it is possible in this way for someone to form an
image of elephant who had never sensed one.15
While I have referred to this process as one of “creative imagination,”
the role of the imaginative faculty here is fairly limited. Averroes is quite
explicit that the faculty responsible for both acts of recollection and the
composition of novel images is the cogitative faculty, and he appeals to the
principle that “the composer is also the divider” to support his view.16 All
that imagination does here is provide the cogitative faculty with images
of previously sensed “attributes” which fit the reports of those who are
describing the unknown creature. Its role seems entirely passive, so the
process is probably better dubbed “creative cogitation” rather than creative
imagination.
Imagination and Imitation: Even Better than the Real Thing
In the chapter on dreams in the Epitome of the Parva naturalia, Averroes identifies two characteristics of dreaming that point to the imagination as
its principal cause: (1) it involves the perception of physical objects even
when no sensibles are present externally; and (2) it generally takes place
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 345
when all the other sensory faculties—cogitation and memory, as well as
the common sense—are inactive, especially during sleep.17 Averroes also
appeals to a third property of the imaginative faculty that has not yet
emerged in other texts—the imaginative faculty is by its nature incessantly
active and thus the sole faculty that is never dormant: “For this faculty is
always in motion and continual activity in forming images and making
likenesses, and in transferring from image to image [min al-tas․
awwiri wa-
al-tamthıˉli wa-al-intiqaˉli min khayaˉlin ʿalaˉ khayaˉlin].”18 Averroes calls this
imaginative activity a form of imitation, and, as such, it seems to require
the imagination to have access not only to images but also to the intentions stored in the memorative faculty:
For sometimes it does this from the intentions in the memorative faculty, and sometimes it does it from the traces which are in the common
sense. Sometimes it encounters the intention of this thing of which it
formed an image from an external principle, as we will explain. This
occurs in one of two ways: either it encounters this intention itself,
or it encounters in place of it something that imitates it [maˉ yuh․
aˉkıˉ-hu badala-hu]. It is clear from all of this that dreams are primarily related
only to the imaginative faculty among the powers of the soul, whether
they are true or false.19
One might worry that, in this description of how dreams are produced,
the imagination seems to be usurping the role that Averroes elsewhere
assigns to the cogitative faculty, as the composer of new images. One way
to allay this concern would be to assign to the cogitative power only those
acts of composing images that are the products of conscious effort, while
the random acts of conjuring images that occur in dreams or hallucinations are the work of the unbridled imagination in isolation. Yet this leaves
unexplained how the imagination would have access to the intentions
stored in memory, since Averroes’ accounts of sensory abstraction suggest
the imagination cannot perceive them. Perhaps Averroes thinks of the
imagination as having a kind of blind access to intentions that involves no
recognition of the individuals represented by them, though this does not
seem adequate to account for how we experience images in dreams.
Averroes’ identification of imagination as imitative requires some further elaboration. This was also a defining characteristic of the imagination
for Averroes’ predecessor, al-Faˉraˉbıˉ.20 For al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, the nature of imaginative imitation involves depicting an object using the sensible appearance
proper to some other thing. Thus, an imitation of x is a cluster of sensible
forms that evoke some property of x by describing the physical characteristics of some other object, y, with whom x shares that property. For
example, if I am dreaming about some person of whom I’m very afraid,
I may imagine him as a towering vampire with fangs, rather than envisaging his actual appearance.21
346 Deborah L. Black
Yet this Faˉraˉbıˉan understanding does not seem to be what Averroes
means by imitation. This becomes clear from Averroes’ account of imaginative prophecy, in which the “imaginative soul” (al-nafs al-khayaˉlıˉy) is
said to receive a universal nature (al-t ․abıˉ ʿah al-kullıˉyah) from the Agent
Intellect as a particular ( juzʾıˉ yan). Averroes differentiates cases in which
the imagination receives the image of an actual individual from those
in which it receives “what imitates it” (maˉ yuh․
aˉkıˉ-hu), and he claims that
in dreams and prophecy the imagination usually receives “the imitative
intention” (al-maʿnaˉ al-muh․
aˉkıˉy la-hu) rather than that of the real individual “falling under the universal.”22 If Averroes were following al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s
account of imitation, we might read this as an appeal to the symbolic
character of dreams and prophecies, as in my example above, in which
the universal “dangerous person” is imitated by the image of a vampire.
By contrast, the imagination would receive the universal “feline” as a
real individual when it imagines a real cat, such as my cat, Fuscus. Yet
this traditional understanding of imitation does not fit the account that
Averroes himself provides. Instead, Averroes hearkens back to his earlier
explanation of hallucinations and apparitions, in which our images are accompanied by actual sensory experiences, like seeing a ghost.23 Averroes proposes, as the basic mechanism for such apparitions, a process of what
we might call “inverse causality,” according to which the imagination
triggers a contrary motion in the common sense, contrary, that is, to the
one that originally produced the image, which, in turn, arouses the organs
of the external senses, causing actual episodes of seeing, hearing, smelling,
and so on.
Averroes has in mind these sorts of apparitions when he speaks of the
reception of a “real” individual in dreams. When we actually experience
the object with our senses, we receive “the form itself and not what imitates it” (al-s․uˉrah nafs-haˉ, laˉ maˉ yuh․
aˉkıˉ-haˉ). By contrast, to imitate that same
object is just to imagine it without any corresponding sensory experience.
Averroes says that such images count as imitations, because they are more
spiritual than actual sensations. Thus, they do not produce any corporeal
effects in the dreamer. In this context, then, an imitation is not being
taken as an inferior copy, but as a perception that is even better than the
real thing:
This is because the sensible thing has two forms [li-l-shayʾi mah․s uˉsi suˉratayn]: one of them is spiritual [r uˉh․aˉnıˉy], which is the form that is imitative of it [wa-hiya al-s․
uˉrah al-muh․
aˉkıˉyah li-haˉ], and the other is corporeal
[jismaˉnıˉy], which is the form of the sensible thing itself, not the form
imitative of it. And the imitative form is more spiritual only because
it is closer to the universal nature than the form of the real thing.24
The imitative capacities of the imagination for Averroes are thus understood very differently from the way al-Faˉraˉbıˉ understands them, as the
representation of an object by an image that is not isomorphic with it. For
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 347
Averroes, images are imitative in virtue of their basic capacity to stand in
for the external corporeal object and grant it a higher grade of spiritual
reality in the soul that approximates the universal.
Imagination in Averroes’ Epitome of the De anima
While all of Averroes’ De anima commentaries contain some allusion to
the hierarchy of the “four grades” of sensory powers elaborated in the
Parva naturalia, Averroes’ discussions of the imagination in these commentaries take their cue from the Aristotelian text, in which only the imagination and the common sense are treated thematically.25 As a result, it
becomes more difficult to ascertain when Averroes is using “imagination”
as a generic, umbrella term for all these powers but the common sense and
when he is describing its nature as a specific power. In the Epitome, the
two main activities that seem to be proper to the special faculty of imagination are ones that have also emerged in the Epitome of the Parva naturalia:
its ability to perceive the traces of sensation in the absence of any actual
object and its random act of incessantly scanning the images that those
same traces comprise.
Spontaneous Necessity
One of the most striking features of Averroes’ account of imagination in
the Epitome of the De anima is that he attributes two opposed characteristics to its operations, namely, that they are both voluntary or “up to us”
(la-naˉ) and “one of the things incumbent on us.” Following Aristotle, the
voluntary character of imagination is evoked to show that imagination
is neither sensation nor opinion.26 In particular, Averroes appeals to our
ability to fashion images of fictional beings such as goat-stags and ghouls
to show its voluntary character, although he admits that this activity is
“proper to humans” (khas․
s․
an li-l-insaˉn). By contrast, sensation is “necessary
for us” (d․aruˉrıˉyah la-naˉ); for example, we cannot avoid smelling someone’s
perfume or hearing loud music if the sensible objects are within the range
of the relevant senses. Opinion, too, is necessary for us, though for different reasons: opinions by their very nature are accompanied by an act
of assent (maʿa tas․
dıˉq), and for me to assent to p entails that I must believe
that whatever p asserts actually obtains in the external world. By contrast,
when I conjure up fictional images of things like goat-stags and ghouls, I
am under no compulsion to believe that there really are such things.
By contrast, Averroes later asserts, in opposition to his earlier declaration, that the activities of the imagination are not in fact voluntary, but
incumbent upon us just as much as is sensation:
Moreover, it is not possible for us to imagine whenever we wish,
but rather, we are in a state of continual imagination [ fıˉ takhayyulin daˉʾimin]. And in general, the imagination is one of the necessary things
348 Deborah L. Black
for us [la-naˉ min al-umuˉr al-d․a ruˉrıˉyah], as is the case with the sensibles.
And since this is so, there is thus no cause for our imagining one time
after another time, except that whenever we wish to, we consider by
means of this power the traces remaining in the common sense. And
for this reason the activity of this power is improved with rest.27
According to this passage, then, imagination is “necessary,” because it is
continually engaged in randomly surveying its contents and combining
images with one another.28 As in the Epitome of the Parva naturalia, Averroes seems to see this as the default mode for the imagination: we cannot
turn it off, just as we cannot fail to sense something that is placed within
the range of our sense organs. But Averroes also claims that this feature of
imagination can be brought under our voluntary control. Such a process
requires taking the continual and necessary aspect of imagination in which
“we imagine many things simultaneously” and imposing an order on it by
deliberately turning our attention to individual images successively.
It seems, then, that we can reconcile the apparent contradictions in
Averroes’ statements regarding the necessity of imagination by acknowledging that only its underlying activity of flitting around among images is
truly necessary and inescapable. On the basis of this core activity, Averroes
seems to recognize two distinct forms of imagining that are under our
voluntary control: (1) the concocting of fictional images such as goat-stags
and ghouls; and (2) the ordered, sequential surveying of the traces of perception in the common sense.29 However, it is unclear whether the faculty
of takhayyul, as such, can be responsible for these voluntary activities. It
remains difficult to see how one and the same faculty can be continually
producing haphazard, uncontrolled motions and yet possess an intrinsic capacity to harness and control these very same motions. Moreover,
Averroes himself has acknowledged that at least some of these voluntary
exercises of the imagination—namely, its production of fictional images—
are uniquely human. This suggests that, in both these cases, the ultimate
source of voluntary control over the imagination is the cogitative faculty,
since, as we have seen in the Epitome of the Parva naturalia, Averroes views
it as the faculty which is responsible for both sensory abstraction and the
combination of new images like that of the unseen elephant. The apparent
contradiction in the Epitome of the De anima, then, is ultimately reducible
to the generic use of takhayyul to cover voluntary exercises of imagination
in which the operations of all three internal powers of imagination, cogi-
tation, and memory are implicated.
Traces of Sensation: Imagination and the Common Sense
A major concern of Averroes’ treatment of the imagination in the Epitome of the De anima is the relationship between the imagination and the common sense. For Averroes, the common sense is first and foremost the mover
of the imagination, since the affections of the imagination (infiʿaˉl-haˉ) are
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 349
produced by “the traces arising from the sensibles in the sensitive power.”
Since these traces in the common sense, and not the extramental things
themselves, are its mover, the imagination “holds fast to them only after
they are absent” (tatamassaku bi-haˉ baʿda ghaybati-haˉ faqat․
).30 Nonetheless, the imagination is not primarily a retentive faculty for the preservation
of sensory information. Rather, Averroes treats both the imagination and
the common sense as having retentive capacities: “And in general, there is
in the common sense the power to hold fast to the traces of the sensibles
and retain them” (ʿalaˉ al-tamassuki bi-aˉthaˉri al-mah․s uˉsaˉti wa-h․ifz․i -haˉ).31 The common sense, then, is not simply the mover of the imagination; rather,
the traces of the sensibles in the common sense are also the objects of the
imagination, where they now exist in a spiritual mode of being:
But whenever we posit that the imagination itself consists only in
the existence of these traces remaining in the common sense after
the passage of the sensibles—not in the sense that these traces are the
mover of the power of imagination—so that they have in the matter
of the imagination an existence more spiritual than they have in the
common sense, it follows that we will imagine simultaneously many
things, the extent of their number being the same as the extent of the
number of things which we have sensed.32
Averroes consistently speaks of the imagination considering the traces that
remain in (fıˉ ) the common sense, as he does in this passage. He even
uses the same expression when describing the activity of the imagination
during sleep, when it is moved, not by present sensibles, but “by the remaining traces of the sensibles in [the common sense].”33 Such locutions indicate that Averroes does not think of the imagination as containing an
entirely distinct set of internal objects from the traces of the sensibles that
are in the common sense itself.
Such a view comports well with the model presented in the De sensu
chapter of the Epitome of the Parva naturalia, in which the imagination gazes
on an image that is the product of a series of reflections in mirrors and
off the water.34 More generally, this model of the relation between the
common sense and the imagination seems to be the sensory counterpart
to what ultimately becomes the theory of the double subject (duo subiecta)
of cognition in the Long Commentary on the De anima.35 According to this
theory, each level of cognition involves a continuing relation to the object
in the cognitive power immediately below it that is also its mover—the
“subject in virtue of which it is true” (subiectum per quod sensus fit verus) in
the parlance of the Long Commentary. The double subject model takes it as
a structural feature of cognition that one and the same object will possess
different modes of being in each successive cognitive power, which, in
turn, functions as the “subject in virtue of which it is an existing form”
(subiectum per quod sensus est forma existens).36 If we view the relations between the imagination and the common sense in the light of this later
350 Deborah L. Black
model, the traces in the common sense would constitute the subject in virtue of which images are true, and images would continue to depend upon
these traces, even though they have a new, superior mode of being in the
“matter of the imagination.” Thus, the traces in the common sense are not
simply the movers of the imagination but the images themselves in their
new mode of being. By the same token, just as it is a truism for Averroes
(and Aristotle) to speak of the soul thinking intelligibles in images, so too
it is natural for Averroes to speak of the imagination perceiving the traces
in the common sense.37
While the theory of the double subject in this way provides a useful
framework for understanding Averroes’ account of the causal relations between the common sense and the imagination, there is one important
anomaly in the case of the imagination that should give us pause. Averroes
has constructed his account of the spirituality of the imagination on its
ability to perceive sensory objects in their absence. By contrast, the double
subject model depends upon the continued presence of the object in the
lower faculty to provide one of the two subjects of cognition.38 Though the inchoate retentive capacities of the common sense, of course, will go
some way to resolving this problem, Averroes seems to owe us a fuller
account of how the imagination can view the traces in the common sense
even when the images represent sensibles whose original perception was in
the remote past. For these are cases which one assumes exceed the limited
retentive capacities of the common sense itself.
The Long Commentary and Middle Commentary on the De anima
While Averroes occasionally rehearses the full threefold scheme of internal sensory powers in the Long Commentary on the De anima, he remains
silent in both the middle and long commentaries on how these powers are
to be fitted into the general account of imagination that Aristotle puts forward in De anima 3, chapter 3.39 For example, there is no clear indication
in his expositions of De anima 3.3 whether Averroes takes Aristotle to be
making general points that pertain to all three of these faculties or whether
he sees all or part of this account as focused on the faculty of imagination
to the exclusion of cogitation and memory. Despite this ambiguity, there
does not seem to be any substantial evolution in Averroes’ accounts of the
imaginative faculty in these later commentaries, save for two subtle shifts
in emphasis whose ultimate significance is unclear. Both points arise from
Averroes’ understanding of what is entailed by identifying imagination as
a power for grasping sensibles in their absence.
Virtual Reality
One of Aristotle’s arguments against the identification of imagination
with opinion turns on the difference between believing that something
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 351
terrifying or inspiring is imminent and imagining that same event. Aristotle claims that, in the opinion case, we are immediately affected by
the appropriate emotion, whereas, in the case of imagination, we react as
mere spectators dispassionately viewing a painting. Averroes offers a subtle
modification to Aristotle on this point, one which effectively undermines
this mere spectator view of imagination.40
The key move that Averroes makes in his interpretation of Aristotle’s
text is to transform the opinions at issue from beliefs about something
happening right now into beliefs about future possibilities that might come
to pass.41 Averroes then argues that, while we will obviously be affected
in some measure by the anticipation of a possible future harm, such anticipation will never be as frightening as when we are actually confronting
a clear and present danger. By contrast, since imagination is a capacity
whereby we are able to consider absent sensibles as if they were present,
Averroes argues that entertaining an image has more or less the same emotional impact as the present object would. That is, instead of being mere
spectators looking at a scene which we know to be unreal, we become
participants immersed in a present virtual reality:
For when we form the opinion that something fearful is going to occur
[aliquod timorosum futurum], we are affected in some way, but not
by the [same] affection as if that fearful object were present. Similarly,
when we form the opinion that something inspiring courage is going
to occur, immediately [statim] we are affected by it, but not with the
sort of affection as there would be if that source of inspiring courage were existing at present. When, however, we have imagined that
fearful thing, immediately we are affected as if it were present [statim patiemur quasi essent presens].42
Averroes’ understanding of imagination as emotionally charged seems far
truer to experience than Aristotle’s mere spectator view. When we read
a suspense novel or watch a horror film, we do get frightened, even as
mere spectators of an imagined reality, and Aristotle’s account here does
not seem to do justice to such reactions. Moreover, in cases where the
imagination does not produce an emotional impact, it does not seem to be
because we are simply imagining something horrific, but rather, because
we believe we are merely imagining it. Such dispassionate responses seem
to be a function, not of the imagination itself, but rather, of a higher-order
act of assent that recognizes that some particular act of imagining is merely
fictional. This picture complements Averroes’ understanding of the imagination in the Epitome of the Parva naturalia as an essentially imitative faculty
that offers us something even better than the real thing available to the
senses.43 As the ability to perceive an absent object as if it were present,
imagination brings with it the whole range of emotional responses that
accrued to the original experience. Nothing is lost when we “merely”
imagine it.
352 Deborah L. Black
So Far Away: Imagination and Absence Reconsidered
One recurrent thread that runs throughout Averroes’ various accounts of
the nature of imagination is its ability to perceive in the absence of any extramental object. The Middle Commentary and Long Commentary follow this same pattern, and, indeed, in these texts Averroes seems to put even more
emphasis on the absence of the object as essential to the act of imagining.
This is most striking in Averroes’ account of the degrees of error that can
be found in the imagination. Whereas Aristotle himself makes the veridicality of images a function of the simultaneous perception of the object by
the external senses, Averroes invokes the alternative criterion of whether
the imaginer has had any prior sensory experience of the object.44 The images of the proper sensibles are true, according to Averroes, “when they
are present, that is, when their actual sensation precedes the imagination.”45
The same pattern holds in Averroes’ account of the images corresponding
to common and incidental sensibles: where Aristotle attributes the errors that plague the imagination to the spatial distance that separates the
perceiver from the object during a concurrent act of sensation, Averroes
focuses on the temporal gap that separates the original sensing of the object from its imaginative recall. Imagination will again be false “although
sensation is present and has sensed them before imagination, and especially
when the time of the sensible apprehension is distant from the sensation.”46
On Averroes’ understanding, my image of a particular flavor, for example,
is more likely to be accurate if I have actually tasted the food in question
than if I am trying to imagine what a new cuisine will taste like based on a
comparison to more familiar foods. And if I have seen an elephant before,
my image of it will likely be more accurate than that of someone who is
imagining it on the basis of someone else’s report alone.
It might seem, then, that the Long Commentary offers decisive evidence
that the ability to perceive an absent object is the essential, defining capacity of the imaginative faculty. Unfortunately, this suspicion is complicated
by two passages in which Averroes explicitly extends the absence principle
to cogitation and memory as well as imagination. The first of these occurs as part of Averroes’ explanation of how the intellect is incidentally
impeded in its operations “due to the change belonging to the powers of
imagination, and especially the cogitative power”:47
But the imaginative, cogitative, and memorative powers are only in
place of the sensible power, and for this reason there is no need for them
except in the absence of the sensible [power]. They all cooperate to present
an image of the sensible thing so that the separate rational power may
behold it and extract the universal intention and after that receive it,
that is, apprehend it.48
Averroes makes the same point later in the text when commenting on
Aristotle’s example of a soldier seeing a beacon and recognizing it as the
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 353
sign of an approaching enemy. He observes that when someone needs to
consider “possible things” on the basis of his occurrent sensory information, his cogitative faculty will search for “some individual thing which he
will not have sensed before, although he will have sensed its like, not the
very same thing.”49 Averroes argues again that the cogitative faculty, like
the imagination, is a power whose utility consists in nothing but its ability
to present an absent object as if it were present:
The meaning of cogitation is nothing but this, namely, that the cogitative power presents a thing absent from sense as if it were a sensed
thing. [. . .] For cogitation is only for discerning individual instances
among those intelligibles and presenting them in act as if they were
present in sensation [quasi essent apud sensum]. For this reason when
they are present in sensation, then cogitation will cease and the activity of intellect in regard to them will remain.50
These two passages have troubling ramifications, not so much for Averroes’ understanding of the imagination, but for the role that he assigns to
the cogitative faculty. On the picture presented here, Averroes seems to
allow that as soon as some actual sensible is present to the perceiver, the
cogitative faculty becomes superfluous. Averroes implies that, under these
circumstances, the senses themselves can perceive the individual intention
directly. If I am looking at Zayd, for example, it seems that my visual
power itself is able to identify him as “this man Zayd,” without any further
input from the more spiritual cognitive faculties.
Yet such a picture clearly undermines the division of labor among the
faculties of imagination, cogitation, and memory in the process of sensory abstraction that Averroes has so carefully laid out in the Epitome of
the Parva naturalia.51 On that account, as we have seen, Averroes appeals
to the metaphor of the “core” and the “rinds” to differentiate the objects
of the cogitative and memorative faculties, on the one hand, from those of
the imagination, on the other. The core is not cognitively accessible to
the imagination but must be extracted by the cogitative faculty. A reasonable inference to draw from such an account is that the senses too
will lack awareness of the intentional core, unless the cogitative faculty
supplements their operations. This seems to follow all the more, given
Averroes’ insistence on the limitations of sensation in animals, to whom he
explicitly denies the power of perceiving the core of the sensible object.52
The common thread that runs throughout all these texts is that, absent the
cogitative faculty, neither the imagination nor the senses would be able
to reach the intention. And that would seem to be the case whether the
sensible object is actually present or not.
While it is possible to offer a reading of each of these passages that limits their ramifications to the specific issues under consideration in their
respective contexts, a fully satisfactory solution—especially as far as the
role of the cogitative faculty is concerned—remains elusive. In the case
354 Deborah L. Black
of the first passage, Averroes seems to be assuming that when the sensible
object is actually present, the intellect can, at least in principle, grasp its
essential features directly, so that it no longer needs access to the individual
intention that exemplifies the nature. For all practical purposes, however,
the intellect is unable to abstract the universal from a single act of perception. For this, it relies on the cogitative faculty to extract the individual
intention after multiple encounters with the object, and this, in turn, will
depend on its ability to operate in the absence of the object. Yet even if
this is what Averroes has in mind, it remains unclear why one would need
the cogitative faculty in addition to the imagination. Any information accessible to the senses would seem to be equally accessible from the image
of the sensible. Unless the cogitative faculty has its own proper object and
operation, even in the presence of sensation, the rationale for positing it as
a distinct power seems rather tenuous.
The case presented in the second passage seems easier to resolve, since
it deals with a practical judgment regarding a future contingent particular
whose existence is inferred from some present sign, like the beacon. Here,
if the particular object—the approaching enemy—is actually subject to
sensory observation, the intellect will have no need for recourse to an
image that signifies it in its absence—a beacon—in order to predict its
imminent arrival. Yet here again, while this reading may explain why the
imagination is not needed in such circumstances, it fails to address the extension of this reasoning to the cogitative faculty. If the cogitative faculty
is uniquely able to recognize individual intentions, how will the senses,
or even the intellect, be able to recognize some cluster of sensible forms
as this beacon, a recognition that seems to be indispensable to its ability to
function as a sign of some impending future event?
Conclusion
From the foregoing tour of Averroes’ psychological works from throughout his life, two features emerge as exclusive to takhayyul in contradistinction to the other internal sensory powers: (1) its ability to grasp the traces
of the external qualities or “rinds” of physical objects that remain in the
common sense in the absence of those objects; and (2) its continual perusal
of those traces, which, while random in its own right, may also be brought
under some sort of order and control by some other sensory or intellectual
faculty.
The most pervasive characterization of Averroist imagination, however,
is its identification as the power by which we are able to perceive the sensibles in their absence. The absence principle serves to establish the grade
of spirituality proper to the imagination in contrast with the senses, and
it seems to become more prominent in the later commentaries, where
Averroes is more inclined to minimize the possibility of concurrent acts
of sensation and imagination. Yet the absence principle also emerges as the
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 355
source of many of the tensions within Averroes’ account of the imagination. It is hard to reconcile with Averroes’ account of the imagination as a
power that considers the traces of perception in the common sense, unless
some activity of the common sense always accompanies the imagination.
For, despite its inchoate retentive capacities, the common sense itself remains inextricably tied to occurrent sensations, which depend upon some
physical link to a present object. But the most intractable problem raised
for the absence principle is its transformation in the Long Commentary on
the De anima into a generic property that applies equally to cogitation and
memory as well as imagination, all three of which have apparently been
demoted to mere understudies for the senses. Ultimately, this fits uneasily
with Averroes’ persistent identification of absence as a mark of the superiority of the imagination over the senses, and it is not entirely clear whether
this tension admits of any satisfactory resolution.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
Notes 1 This equivocity is also found in Avicenna, who explicitly remarks on it. See
Avicenna, “Al-Taʿlıˉqaˉt ʿalaˉ h․awaˉshıˉ Kitaˉb al-Nafs,” 97, commenting on De
anima 3. 3, 428b11ff. 2 For the character of the Arabic Parva naturalia, see Pines, “Arabic Recension”; Daiber, “Salient Trends”; and most recently the numerous contributions of Rotraud Hansberger: Hansberger, “How Aristotle Came to Believe”;
Hansberger, “Kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-l-mah․s uˉs ”; Hansberger, “Arabic Adaptation”;
and Hansberger, “Representation.” In “Averroes and the ‘Internal Senses,’”
Hansberger argues that the label “internal senses” is not really appropriate
for Averroes, but I will occasionally use it as a convenient moniker for the
faculties of imagination, cogitation, and memory—as a synonym for “imagination” used generically. 3 Averroes, like Avicenna before him, also uses the label “formative faculty”
(al-mus․
awwarah) as a synonym for al-mutakhayyalah. See especially Averroes,
Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , ed. Blumberg, 30: al-mus․
awwar, wa huwa
al-quwwah al-mutakhayyalah.
4 Averroes, Commentarium magnum, book 3, comm. 6, ed. Crawford (hereafter
Commentarium), 415–16; book 3, comm. 20, 449–50 (omitting common
sense); translated in Averroes, Long Commentary, trans. Taylor, 331–32 and
359. 5 For a detailed consideration of the cogitative faculty in the Long Commentary on the De anima, see Taylor, “Cogitatio” and, especially, Taylor, “Remarks on
Cogitatio,” which discusses the evidence for the presence of this notion in the
Arabic De anima.
6 My discussion follows the generally accepted chronology of Averroes’ commentaries on Aristotelian psychology, according to which the epitomes are
his earliest works, followed by the middle and long commentaries. As Blum-
berg notes in his introduction to Averroes, Epitome of Parva naturalia, xii, the
356 Deborah L. Black
colophons of two manuscripts of the Epitome of the Parva naturalia date it to
January 1170 CE. Though Averroes also revised both of his earlier commentaries on the De anima, the revisions in question are limited to his discussions
of the material intellect in Book 3 of the De anima. 7 See Blaustein, “Averroes,” 32–122; also Black, “Memory, Individuals, and
the Past,” and Black, “Averroes on Spirituality” for Averroes on sensation and
abstraction. 8 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 30–32; trans. in Averroes, Epitome
of Parva naturalia, 19–20. Averroes attributes the analogy to Aristotle, which
suggests it derives from the Arabic Parva naturalia, the De sensu portion of
which has largely not survived (see Hansberger, “Arabic Adaption,” 301–3). 9 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 33; trans. in Averroes, Epitome of
Parva naturalia, 20. Other references to this metaphor occur in the De somno
section of the text (Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 55; Averroes,
Epitome of Parva naturalia, 34) and in the fragments of the Arabic original of
the Long Commentary on the De anima (see Taylor’s n. 155 in Averroes, Long
Commentary, 176). Hansberger, “Averroes and the ‘Internal Senses,’” 148–49,
indicates that this image originates in the Arabic Parva naturalia itself. 10 Averroes often uses the alternative label “discriminative” faculty (mumayyizah)
for the cogitative power in this chapter; here Blumberg’s translation
(Averroes, Epitome of Parva naturalia) must be used with extra caution, since he
renders this term as “estimative faculty,” despite Averroes’ disavowal of this
Avicennian label. On this, see also Taylor, “Remarks on Cogitatio,” 220 n.15. 11 Averroes occasionally talks as if the imagination or formative faculty is also an
abstractive power, which “extracts [yanziʿu] the intention of the form from its
image [mithaˉl-haˉ]” (Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 31); or it “purifies
[yus․
affıˉ ] the description [rasm] of the thing so that the cogitative faculty
can perceive its maʿnaˉ.”
12 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 40–43. For the role of these faculties in accounting for memory, see Gätje, “Gedächtnis und Erinnerung”; Di
Martino, “Memory and Recollection”; Black, “Memory, Individuals, and the
Past”; and Black, “Memory in Avicenna and Averroes.” 13 In Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 40, Averroes argues that the faculties of memory and imagination (al-mus․
awwarah) are distinct in both quiddity and subject (maˉhiyyah/mawd․uˉʿ) because their respective cognitive objects,
the maʿnaˉ and khayaˉl , can be grasped independently of one another. 14 Synthesis is also the mechanism behind recollection, which is why it is included in the chapter on memory. See ibid., 43–46. 15 Ibid., 45. The examples of an elephant and a camel are found in Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s
Book of Letters. See al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, Kitaˉb al-h․u ruˉf , §169, ed. Mahdıˉ, 169–70. (Thanks
to David Wirmer for the al-Faˉraˉbıˉ reference.) 16 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 44: al-murakkib huwa al-mufas․
s․
il.
For further discussion, see Black, “Memory, Individuals, and the Past,” 175–
79; Black, “Memory in Avicenna and Averroes,” 456–57. 17 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 68–69; Averroes, Epitome of Parva
naturalia, 40–41. 18 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 69; cf. Averroes, Epitome of Parva naturalia,
41. The restlessness of imagination is also emphasized by Avicenna, although he differentiates this form of imagination from imagination as the retention of sensible forms. See Avicenna, Avicenna’s De anima 4. 2, ed. Rahman, 174–75. 19 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 69. 20 Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ has a parsimonious account of the internal senses, recognizing only
the common sense and the imaginative faculty (al-mutakhayyalah). See al-
Faˉraˉbıˉ, Alfarabi on the Perfect State 4. 10, ed. Walzer, 165–75.
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 357 21 Cf. ibid. 4. 14, §4, 214–15. 22 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 79. 23 Ibid., 69–70: “How it happens in sleep from this faculty that a person sees as
if he were sensing through the five senses without there being any sensory
objects [mah․s uˉsaˉt ] outside the soul.” 24 Ibid., 81–82. Of course, since the object isn’t actually there, sensing it is illusory and by that fact alone one would think it inferior. But it is telling that
Averroes does not appeal to the non-veridical character of these hallucinatory
episodes in his evaluation. 25 See Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-nafs, ed. Ahwaˉnıˉ, 61, and 101 for references to
the other internal senses. 26 De anima 3. 3, 427b17–22. 27 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-nafs, 64. In the De memoria chapter of the Epitome
of the Parva naturalia, Averroes seems to contradict this passage inasmuch as
he says that we can retain (nah․faz․u) many things simultaneously, although
we cannot imagine them all together (Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-
mah․s uˉs , 40). 28 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-nafs, 64: “But composition and division of these
traces belong also to this power, and for this reason, it is active in one respect,
but passive in another.” 29 This reading is supported by the later middle and long commentaries, where
Averroes cites these two activities as evidence that the imagination is voluntary. See Averroes, Commentarium, book 2, comm. 153, 363; trans. in Averroes,
Long Commentary, 278: “For when we wish to imagine things sensed
previously and placed in the preserving power we can do so [. . .]. That is,
through this power we can also fashion imaginary forms, individual instances
of which we have never sensed”; Averroes, Middle Commentary, §265, ed. Ivry,
102–3: “When we wish to imagine things of which our sensation has passed,
we can; and with this faculty we create, whenever we want, likenesses and
images [mithaˉlaˉt wa-khayaˉlaˉt ] of things we have not sensed before and which
cannot be sensed.” 30 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-nafs, 62; cf. 63 and 65. In the later commentaries, “traces” (aˉthaˉr ) is replaced by “intentions” (maʿaˉnıˉ/intentiones): Averroes,
Middle Commentary, 106; and Averroes, Commentarium, book 2, comm. 160,
372–73. 31 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-nafs, 63–64. Averroes cites as evidence the fact
that our senses are temporarily impeded by intense sensibles, as when we
are blinded by a bright light. The idea seems to be that the impediment is
caused by the strength of the trace remaining in the common sense blocking
any subsequent sensation. Avicenna has a similar view of the common sense,
illustrated by how we perceive a falling raindrop tracing a line and a circle
on some surface. See Avicenna, Avicenna’s De anima 1. 5, 44–45; Di Martino,
“Memory and Recollection,” 21–22; and Black, “Memory in Avicenna and
Averroes,” 450. 32 That the simultaneous actualization of contraries indicates a greater degree
of spirituality is a principle that Averroes evokes in his early accounts of sense
perception, though later he seems to reject it. On this, see Black, “Averroes
on Spirituality.” Avicenna, Avicenna’s De anima 4. 3, 192–94, strongly rejects
this principle. 33 Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-nafs, 64. This locution is also used in Averroes,
Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 69 (min al-aˉthaˉr fıˉ allatıˉ fıˉ al-h․
iss al-mushtarak).
It continues to be used in the Long Commentary as well. See Averroes, Commentarium,
book 2, comm. 161, 375 (illa signa remanentia ex eo in sensu communi).
34 See note 8 above.
358 Deborah L. Black 35 There is a precursor in Averroes’ account of the relativity of the intelligible in the Epitome of the De anima, according to which intelligibles and images are to be understood as correlates, “so that whenever one of them exists the other exists, and whenever one of them is destroyed the other is destroyed” (Averroes,
Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-nafs, 80). On the relation between the double subject and Averroes’ earlier views on cognition, see Blaustein, “Averroes,” 58–67, 164–65, 174–77. There are numerous discussions of the double subject theory in Averroes’ theory of the intellect, e.g., Bazán, “Intellectum speculativum”;
Black, “Consciousness and Self-Knowledge”; and Taylor, “Introduction,” lix–lxi. 36 Averroes, Commentarium, book 3, comm. 4, 400; trans. in Averroes, Long
Commentary, 316. 37 In the Long Commentary, Averroes is explicit that the subject in virtue of
which cognition is true is also “a mover in some way” (quod est motus illius
quoquo modo); Averroes, Commentarium, book 3, comm. 4, 400. 38 In the Long Commentary, Averroes explicitly applies the double subject thesis
to sensation as well as intellection; he does not, however, apply it to the imagination, nor to cogitation or memory. In one of his treatises on conjunction
with the Agent Intellect, he does speak of the common sense and imagination
as mutually perfecting one another. See Averroes, Epistle on the Possibility of
Conjunction, ed. Bland, 27–29; Blaustein, “Averroes,” 58–67, takes this as a
precursor to the double subject theory of the Long Commentary. 39 See especially Averroes, Commentarium, book 2, comm. 63, 224–26, and book
3, comm. 6, 415–16, in addition to the texts cited at notes 48 and 49 below. 40 This seems to be a case of Averroes trying to make sense out of the text he
has. In the Greek text, it is clear that Aristotle is talking about our ability to
look upon a painting of a horrific scene dispassionately; the lemma in the
Long Commentary, however, suggests what Aristotle has in mind is a comparison between imagining something and actually seeing it. See De anima 3. 3,
427b22–25; Averroes, Commentarium, book 2, text 154, 364; and Averroes,
Long Commentary, 278. 41 Averroes, Middle Commentary, §265, 103. 42 Averroes, Commentarium, book 2, comm. 154, 364; trans. in Averroes, Long
Commentary, 278, slightly modified. 43 See above, at note 24. 44 Aristotle, De anima 3. 3, 428b26–30. 45 Averroes, Commentarium, book 2, comm. 160, 374–75; cf. Averroes, Middle Commentary, §275, 107: i dhaˉ kaˉna al-h․iss qad adraka-haˉ qablu. 46 Averroes, Commentarium, book 2, comm. 160, 375. 47 Note the plural here (virtutum ymaginationis), suggesting this is a generic use of
ymaginatio. 48 Averroes, Commentarium, book 3, comm. 7, 419; trans. in Averroes, Long
Commentary, 334, slightly modified; emphasis added. 49 Averroes, Commentarium, book 3, comm. 33, 475–76; trans. in Averroes, Long
Commentary, 378. Averroes refers to this as a “true image” (ymago vera), i.e., an
accurate representation of a future possibility. 50 Averroes, Commentarium, book 3, comm. 33, 476; trans. in Averroes, Long
Commentary, 379. 51 Averroes refers the reader to the Parva naturalia for a fuller account of this process: “This is evident from the things said in Sense and Sensibilia” (Averroes,
Commentarium, book 3, comm. 33, 476; trans. in Averroes, Long Commentary,
379). 52 See especially Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․s uˉs , 33:“This is because
in humans [the five senses] perceive the differences of things and their proper
intentions, and these are what hold the rank in the sensed thing of the core of
Averroes on Imagination as a Cognitive Power 359
the fruit; whereas in the case of animals, they only perceive the things which
are external, namely, that whose relation to the things is the relation of the
rinds to the core of the fruit.”
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Averroes (Ibn Rushd). Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis De anima libros. Edited
by F. Stuart Crawford. Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy of America,
1953.
Averroes. The “Epistle on the Possibility of Conjunction with the Active Intellect” by Ibn
Rushd with the Commentary of Moses Narboni. Edited and translated by Kalman P.
Bland. New York: The Jewish Theological Seminary of America, 1982.
Averroes. Epitome of Parva naturalia. Edited and translated by Harry Blumberg.
Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy of America, 1961.
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba. Long Commentary on the De anima of Aristotle.
Translated with an introduction and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with
Thérèse-Anne Druart. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Averroes. Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s “De anima.” Edited and translated by
Alfred L. Ivry. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 2002.
Averroes. Talkhıˉs․
kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-al-mah․
suˉ s. Edited by Harry Blumberg. Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy of America, 1972.
Averroes. Talkhıˉs․
kitaˉb al-nafs [= Epitome of the De anima]. Edited by Ahmad F.
Al-Ahwaˉnıˉ. Cairo: Maktabat al-Nahdah al-Misriyah, 1950.
Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ). “Al-Taʿlıˉqaˉt ʿalaˉ h․a waˉshıˉ Kitaˉb al-Nafs” [Marginal Glosses
on the De anima]. In Arist ․uˉ ʿinda al-ʿArab, edited by ʿAbd ar-Rah․maˉn Badawıˉ,
2nd edition, 75–116. Kuwait: Wakaˉlat al-Matbuʿat, 1978.
Avicenna. Avicenna’s De anima: Being the Psychological Part of Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ. Edited
by Fazular Rahman. London: Oxford University Press, 1959.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Alfarabi on the Perfect State (Mabaˉdi’ aˉraˉ’ ahl al-madıˉ nah al-faˉd․ilah). Edited
and translated by Richard Walzer. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985.
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Kitaˉb al-h․
uruˉ f: Alfarabi’s Book of Letters. Edited by Muhsin Mahdıˉ. Beirut: Dar el-Machreq, 1969.
Secondary Literature
Bazán, Bernardo C. “Intellectum speculativum: Averroes, Thomas Aquinas, and
Siger of Brabant on the Intelligible Object.” Journal of the History of Philosophy
19, no. 4 (1981): 425–46.
Black, Deborah. “Averroes on Spirituality and Intentionality in Sense Perception.” In In the Age of Averroes: Arabic Thought in the Sixth/Twelfth Century, edited
by Peter Adamson, 159–74. London: The Warburg Institute, 2011.
Black, Deborah. “Consciousness and Self-Knowledge in Aquinas’s Critique of
Averroes’s Psychology.” Journal of the History of Philosophy 31, no. 3 (1993):
349–85.
Black, Deborah. “Memory in Avicenna and Averroes.” In The Routledge Handbook
of Philosophy of Memory, edited by Sven Bernecker and Kourken Michaelian,
448–60. London: Routledge, 2017.
Black, Deborah. “Memory, Individuals, and the Past in Averroes’s Psychology.”
Medieval Philosophy and Theology 5, no. 2 (1996): 161–87.
360 Deborah L. Black
Blaustein, Michael. “Averroes on the Imagination and the Intellect.” PhD diss.,
Harvard University, 1984.
Daiber, Hans. “Salient Trends of the Arabic Aristotle.” In The Ancient Tradition
in Christian and Islamic Hellenism, edited by Gerhard Endress and Remke Kruk,
29–41. Leiden: Research School CNWS, 1997.
Di Martino, Carla. “Memory and Recollection in Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s and Ibn Rushd’s
Philosophical Texts Translated into Latin in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries: A Perspective on the Doctrine of the Internal Senses in Arabic Psychological Science.” In Forming the Mind: Essays on the Internal Senses and the Mind/
Body Problem from Avicenna to the Medical Enlightenment, edited by Henrik Lagerlund, 17–26. Dordrecht: Springer, 2007.
Gätje, Helmut. “Gedächtnis und Erinnerung bei Avicenna und Averroes.” Acta
Orientalia 49 (1988): 7–36.
Hansberger, Rotraud. “The Arabic Adaptation of the Parva naturalia (Kitaˉb al-h․
iss
wa-l-mah․
suˉ s).” Studia graeco-arabica 4 (2014): 301–14.
Hansberger, Rotraud. “Averroes and the ‘Internal Senses.’” In Interpreting Averroes,
edited by Peter Adamson, 138–57. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2019.
Hansberger, Rotraud. “How Aristotle Came to Believe in God-Given Dreams:
The Arabic Version of De divinatione per somnum.” In Dreaming Across Boundaries:
The Interpretation of Dreams in Islamic Lands, edited by Mohsen Ashtiany, 50–77.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008.
Hansberger, Rotraud. “Kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-l-mah․
suˉ s: Aristotle’s Parva naturalia in Arabic Guise.” In Les Parva naturalia d’Aristote: Fortune antique et médiévale, edited by
Christophe Grellard and Pierre-Marie Morel, 143–62. Paris: Sorbonne, 2010.
Hansberger, Rotraud. “Representation of Which Reality? ‘Spiritual Forms’ and
‘Maʿaˉnıˉ ’ in the Arabic Adaptation of Aristotle’s Parva naturalia.” In The Parva
naturalia in Greek, Arabic and Latin Aristotelianism: Supplementing the Science of the
Soul, edited by Börje Bydén and Filip Radovic, 99–132. Dordrecht: Springer,
2018.
Pines, Shlomo. “The Arabic Recension of Parva naturalia and the Philosophical Doctrine Concerning Veridical Dreams.” Israel Oriental Studies 4 (1974):
104–53.
Taylor, Richard C. “Cogitatio, Cogitativus, and Cogitare: Remarks on the Cogitative Power in Averroes.” In L’élaboration du vocabulaire philosophique au Moyen
Âge, edited by Jacqueline Hamesse and Carlos G. Steel, 111–45. Turnhout:
Brepols, 2000.
Taylor, Richard C. “Introduction.” In Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba, Long
Commentary on the De anima of Aristotle, translated and with an introduction
and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with Thérèse-Anne Druart, xv–cx. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Taylor, Richard C. “Remarks on Cogitatio in Averroes’ Commentarium Magnum in Aristotelis De anima libros.” In Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition, edited by Jan
A. Aertsen and Gerhard Endress, 217–55. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
Part III
Forging New Traditions

DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-20
Examining the development of Albertus Magnus’ doctrine of intellect—
from its beginning in his early theological works to its mature form, found
in the two books of the philosophical treatise De intellectu et intelligibili—
one notices two significant features. The first is the doctrine’s unique position in Albert’s oeuvre as an original creation. De intellectu et intelligibili was
not a work of commentary, as most of Albert’s philosophical works were,
nor was it written for a specific occasion. Furthermore, it is distinctive in
the importance that it attributes to human beings as human beings. As Albert understood it, this meant man as intellect alone (homo solus intellectus);1
the perfection of this intellectual nature; and the subjective and objective
conditions, modes, scope, and end of that perfection. In fact, these topics
are central in Albert’s work, and they characterize his whole intellectual
endeavor, already forming a cohesive epistemological teaching in his early
anthropological treatise De homine.
The second striking feature of Albert’s doctrine of intellect is its holistic
approach, which becomes evident in its formal, factual, and systematic
continuity. Albert strives to develop a complete, Peripatetically informed
theory of intellect that is congruent with a belief in the immortality of the
soul as well as being philosophically consistent in itself, and one that also
conforms to Christian biblical anthropology. The theory’s point of departure and ultimate goal are two conceptual anchors that in reality form one
self-identical center: in Neoplatonic terms, the First (primum), the necessary being (necesse esse), the cause of all (omnium causa), and simultaneously
the end of all (principium ut finis).2
Unlike most of his contemporaries, Albert is convinced that Aristotelian psychology and its doctrine of intellect (discovered in the Latin
Middle Ages), along with its continuations through the Late Antique
Greeks and more recent Arabic-Islamic Peripatetics, set up fundamentally new scientific standards. He considers it his task to critically examine
the Augustinian-Platonic doctrines of the soul, knowledge, and intellect
still dominant in the Latin tradition at the time, and to bring them into
alignment with these new standards. Combined with an open but critical
reception and assimilation of the corpus Aristotelicum and its accompanying
Peripatetic sources, this examination led Albert to depart from what he
16 The Emergence of a
Science of Intellect
Albert the Great’s De intellectu et intelligibili
Henryk Anzulewicz
364 Henryk Anzulewicz
regarded as failed Platonic doctrines about intellect.3 His efforts to achieve
objective coherence, systematic consistency, and the philosophical plausibility of a continuity of human knowledge in this life and after death, as
well as knowledge’s perfection in the final beatitude of the anima separata,
help to explain developments and innovations in his theory as a whole.4
Albert’s teaching on the intellect and the intelligible in his early work De
homine, in which a prototype of the later treatise De intellectu et intelligibili
takes shape, offers important insights, but cannot be discussed in more
detail here.5
What stands out in both Albert’s De homine and his De intellectu et intelligibili
is, as I will show, that Albert did not develop his Aristotelian-Peripatetic doctrine of the intellect and its object, the intelligible,
exclusively in immediate connection with the littera of the Philosopher
or, more precisely, with De anima 3.4–5. The Aristotelian origin of the
fundamental distinctions and concepts in Albert’s work is unmistakable,6
but Aristotle is not the most prominent source here. Instead, it is his Greek
commentator Alexander of Aphrodisias and, as Albert continues to develop his teachings, the Islamic-Arabic Peripatetics Alkindi, Avicenna,
Algazel, and Averroes.7 The influence of the Arabic sources proliferates in
Albert’s De intellectu et intelligibili not least due to his assimilation of Alfarabi’s work De intellectu et intellecto and an increasing reliance on the Liber de
causis in his epistemological discourse.
Equally striking is that Albert is not content with the doctrine of intellect as an integral part of the Aristotelian psychology found in the De
anima. He regards it as an autonomous discipline within the corpus of natural philosophy, and develops it as the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili in
line with Aristotle’s understanding of a natural science. Albert’s approach
here shows not only the importance that he attributes to the intellect,
its nature, and its gradual perfection but also the reasons for his attitude.
These include the lack of a common, settled theory of intellect in the
philosophical tradition in the Latin West, the assimilation of the Arabic
sources that accompanied the progressive reception of Aristotle, and the
subsequent problems associated with “Averroism,” especially the differing
interpretations of the agent intellect (intellectus agens).8
Albert’s efforts were devoted to developing a scientia de intellectu et intelligibili
in the Peripatetic sense, which had hitherto been lacking in the
Latin-speaking world, and to establishing it as a natural-philosophical discipline that was metaphysically sound. Against that backdrop, and as a
first step, this chapter presents a rereading of the prologue to Albert’s De
intellectu et intelligibili, in order to provide a textual, systematic, and developmental overview of his doctrine of intellect in its mature expression. As
a second step, I explore one aspect of this teaching inspired by the Peripatetics, by critically examining the Peripatetic sources, focusing on a central
debate among the Islamic-Arabic thinkers with whom Albert engaged.
That debate was on whether the intellect is of a general nature, common
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 365
to all men, or of a particular, individuated nature—a question that Albert
discusses in the first book of De intellectu et intelligibili, part 1, chapter 7.9 I
will show the reasons for the shift in Albert’s interpretation of the teaching of Averroes, and discuss how he advanced his own unique teaching in
reliance on particular insights that he takes from Averroes.
Developing His Own Natural Philosophy of the
Intellect and Intelligible
Albert appears to have been the first and only medieval thinker in the
Latin West to see the theory of intellect as a discipline in natural philosophy and establish it as a self-standing scientia in his system of the sciences of
the philosophy of nature. He presents his overall approach to scientia naturalis
in the preface to his commentary on Aristotle’s Physica, with which he
inaugurated his project of interpreting Aristotle. In this preface, he assigns
the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili to the branch of natural philosophy that
deals with living beings and, more precisely, to the field that looks at the
soul and its faculties and explores the capacities of the soul in the body.
Within the series of the disciplines of natural philosophy that deal with
living beings, in the Physica commentary Albert places the doctrine of
intellect after the science of breathing, last in the list except for botany and
zoology. He altered that placement for didactic reasons when he began to
comment on the Parva naturalia, but his view of the object of the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili—as “the work of the soul in accord with its intellectual part”—did not change.10 Aristotle devotes several smaller treatises to
the area, which can be subsumed under the concept of psychophysiology
and in which Albert situated the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili in his treatise of the same name. These smaller treatises, however, do not address the
intellect as an ontological principle of the constitution of human nature, as
a human cognitive faculty, or as a human form of knowing.11
The unique position of Albert’s notion of the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili
in the Latin Middle Ages becomes clear against the background
of prior, contemporary, and later scientific and systematic reflections. In
scientific classifications such as those by Isidore of Seville (Etymologiae), Alfarabi (De scientiis), Hugh of St. Victor (Didascalicon), Dominicus Gundissalinus (De divisione philosophiae), and Robert Kilwardby (De ortu scientiarum),
as well as in the surviving thirteenth-century introductions to philosophy,
the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili does not appear either as an independent discipline or as a part of metaphysics or natural philosophy.12 Not even Thomas Aquinas follows his teacher with regard to the systematic
scientific classification of the theory of intellect as a discipline of natural
philosophy. In his commentary on Aristotle’s De sensu et sensato, Aquinas
obviously borrows from the first chapter of Albert’s De intellectu et intelligibili,
though without mentioning Albert or his work, and agrees with
Albert at least by asserting that Aristotle did not write a work with the
366 Henryk Anzulewicz
title De intellectu et intelligibili. But he quite evidently opposes his teacher’s
opinion when he affirms that even if Aristotle had written such a work, it
would have been properly categorized not as part of natural science, but
rather as metaphysics. For, Aquinas argues, the intellect is completely separated from the body, both in its highest concretion as a part of the human
soul and in its most extreme separation from the body as substantia separata,
and this makes it an object of metaphysics:
The intellect is not an act of any of the parts of the body, as is proven
in the third book of De anima; because of this it cannot be considered
through concretion, or a connection to the body or any organ of the
body: for its greatest concretion is in the soul, and its highest abstraction is in the separated substances, and this is why, apart from the De
anima, Aristotle did not write a book on the intellect and the intelligible (or, if he had written such a book it would pertain not to natural
science but to metaphysics, which considers separated substances).13
Individual authors in the Middle Ages and early Renaissance who were
inspired by Albert’s De intellectu et intelligibili and wrote treatises on the
topic, such as Dietrich of Freiberg and Agostino Nifo, appear to have
regarded the theory of intellect as an independent area of philosophical
thinking.14 However, as far as I can see, they do not consider the question
of where it should be placed within the system of the sciences.
Dietrich of Freiberg, along with Albert, can be counted among the
fathers of a medieval “philosophy of mind” in the Latin West. With his
treatise, also entitled De intellectu et intelligibili, Dietrich affiliates himself
in doctrinal and literary terms with the traditional Peripatetic doctrine of
intellect, reinvigorated by Albert, and carries it further. Certainly, Dietrich’s treatise closely approximates—structurally, substantively, and in its
sources—the teaching about intellect in Albert’s De homine, but Dietrich’s
true interest is generally directed only to the intellectus possibilis and the
intellectus agens.15 He is much less concerned with the natural intellectual
perfection of man in the sense of a coniunctio formalis, the levels of perfection of the intellect, the return to the real being of man through intellectual understanding, or the human soul’s return to the divine mode
of being.16 Neither does he discuss the position of the theory of intellect
within the larger system of the sciences, but it may be understood through
his distinction between ens reale and ens conceptionale, which does not presuppose any dependence of the mental being upon its extramental reality
and is regarded not exclusively but inclusively.17
Such a unification of the discourses of natural philosophy and metaphysics goes back to Albert, who declared it his methodological principle as a way of making his teaching more complete and easier to understand.18 The principle became the hermeneutical principle of his view of nature, taken up and developed much later by Nicolai Hartmann among many others,19
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 367
according to which an intelligent causality underlies all processes of nature.
20 With the work of Dietrich of Freiberg, the placement of the philosophy of intellect within a systematic order of the sciences seems to be already decided, even for the non-hardcore realists—or, at least, it no longer plays a central role. This marginality can be observed in the Mainz City Library Codex I 610, where the anonymous author of Conclusiones de intellectu et intelligibili,
despite borrowing from Albert’s writings, excludes the introductory questions regarding method and the organization of science.21
What was it that prompted Albert to classify the doctrine of intellect
as part of natural philosophy? When he proposes the order of the natural sciences in his commentary on the Physica, can we regard his laconic
statement—that the operations of the soul in the body with respect to its
intellectual part are the subject of psychology as a discipline in natural
philosophy—as a sufficient answer to our question? Does it follow from
Albert’s principles and guidelines for the exploration of nature, and from
his view of man,22 that we can achieve a more complete and profound understanding of the intellectuality and intelligibility of man if we consider
him as animal on the one hand and as solus intellectus on the other, within
the metaphysically grounded philosophy of nature?
First of all, Aristotle’s position on this matter is ambivalent: in his writings, the doctrine of the soul appears to be a hybrid science. Aristotle
provides reasons why the doctrine of the soul might belong to natural
philosophy, but he also implies that metaphysics might have jurisdiction
on the soul that is fully separated from the body, yet still capable of being
influenced by its affections and complexions.23 The reasons for Albert’s
decision to view the scientia de intellectu as a discipline in natural philosophy
do not, however, lie only in Aristotle. It is also based on the fact that Albert sees the intellect first and foremost as the natural constitutional principle of man as man (natura dans esse) and his cognitive faculty (potentia per
quam est operatio intelligendi), and not merely as a formal, acquired content
( forma acquisita ex multis intelligibilibus).
Albert expresses this opinion for the first time in his early work De IV
coaequaevis. There, following Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (De caelesti hierarchia, cap. 15), he explains that the intellectuality appertaining to
man’s soul, together with the qualities of the body and the combination of
the body and the soul, is the principle that constitutes the nature of man
as man.24 He clarifies the concept of intellect in his commentary on the
De anima, where he restricts it to intellectus agens, and does the same in De
intellectu et intelligibili.25 This view prompts Albert to supplement the Aristotelian psychology and psychophysiology, as summarized in Aristotle’s
De anima and Parva naturalia, with a separate treatise on the intellect. He
decides to place it after the work De respiratione et inspiratione and before the
work De vegetabilibus, at the end of his commentaries on the Parva naturalia.
As mentioned at the start of this chapter, in De intellectu et intelligibili
Albert does not retain the ordo et divisio librorum physicae that he had set
368 Henryk Anzulewicz
out in his commentary on the Physica. De intellectu et intelligibili Book 1
is inserted between the commentaries on the Parva naturalia of Aristotle,
after the commentaries written about De nutrimento et nutribili, De sensu et
sensato, and De memoria et reminiscentia. This shows, as can be gathered from
Albert’s later explanation, that he subordinates his work on the intellect
to the order of reason (ordo rationis) and not the order of the dignity of the
subject (ordo dignitatis objecti).26 The preference for the ordo rationis over the ordo dignitatis objecti does not, however, ignore the didactic aspect of
the presentation of the theory of intellect. Albert privileges the communicability and comprehensibility of teaching over adherence to the natural
order:
As we have often explained, we pay attention primarily to the ease
of teaching. On this account, when we are dealing with the books of
natural philosophy, we prefer the principle by which it is easier for the
student to be taught, than the natural order of things. For this reason,
when discussing these books we do not observe the order which we
presented earlier in our introductions, where we presented the division of the books of natural philosophy.27
The didactic aspect becomes especially apparent when the ordo doctrinae is
implemented in the individual writings about psychophysiology, including the doctrine of intellect. The ordo, as one can infer from Albert’s approach, begins with considerations about the fundamental powers of the
soul and then moves on to the higher powers. For this reason, the nutritive
function of the vegetative powers of the soul is considered first, followed
by discussions of the sense function of the powers of the sensible soul,
and culminating in the cognitive ability of the rational soul. Because the
sense function’s activity does not rely on the intellective part of the human
soul, separate from the body, but uses the outer and inner sensory powers
as its tools, it becomes clear why Albert follows up his explanation of the
psychophysiology of the sense powers with a specific investigation of the
intellect, to which the sense powers of the sensible soul are ordered and by
which its functions will be perfected.28
How Albert implements his different priorities in the practice of teaching within the individual areas becomes perhaps most clearly evident in
the fact that he begins his theory of intellect by investigating the intellect
itself, and not with the object of the intellect, the intelligible. According to
nature and substance, he argues, the intellect is prior to the intelligible, because it generates the intelligible as its formal content. Teaching therefore
begins with intellect as such, and then turns to the intelligible as the product of the intellect, closing with the question of the unity and difference
between the intellect and the intelligible. The methodology of the investigation, applied to such a complex field that is driven by its own internal
dynamics, is what can secure a complete scientia de intellectu et intelligibili—a
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 369
body of knowledge that is not, as Albert notes in the introductory chapter
of his work, supplied by Aristotle’s De anima.
However, at the beginning of his work on the intellect and the intelligible, Albert also indicates that he has not lost sight of his original concept of
scientia naturalis, presented in his commentary on the Physica, with regard
to its classification into individual disciplines and their arrangement. He
cites the didactic rationale and reasons immanent to the subject matter
to explain why he has revised the order of the treatises following the De
anima on matters “common to the human soul and body,” adjusting the
sequence he originally established in the Physica. Albert tells us that moving the work about the intellect and the intelligible forward, before De
somno et vigilia—after the commentaries on De nutrimento et nutribili, De
sensu et sensato, and De memoria et reminiscentia were already written—was
done intentionally and is justified. After all, certain knowledge regarding
the interpretation of dreams and the nature of dreams can only be communicated and understood once knowledge about the intellect and the
intelligible can be presumed. Albert affirms that rational cognition, the
characteristic of man, is in fact a characteristic of the human soul, not of
the body, but he does not view this characteristic as a hindrance to revising
the original sequence of the series to be written, which had been defined
according to substantive criteria. As he puts it:
And these things [i.e., the qualities and activities that are common to
the human soul and body] we have already discussed in part, in our
usual way, in the books “On Nutrition and the Nutritious” and “On
Sense and the Sensed.” There remain also the books “On Sleeping and
Waking,” “On Youth and Old Age,” “On Breathing In and Out,” and
“On Motions Called Animalistic,” as well as “On Life and Death.”
All these books concern themselves with operations that are common
to the soul and the body. But because the interpretation of dreams
and their nature can only be adequately determined if we have prior
knowledge of the intellect and the intelligible, therefore we must interpose here the science of the intelligible and the intellect, although
intellection [as such] is proper for the human soul without the body.29
In terms of genre, content, and the systematic context of his oeuvre, Albert’s approach can be summarized as follows: Inspired by the writings of Aristotle about psychology and psychophysiology, and by the Peripatetic doctrine of intellect, he follows these traditions insofar as he initially designs his theory of intellect in the anthropological synthesis De homine
and, more than a decade later, elaborates and applies it in the interpretation of Aristotle’s De anima, especially in “explanatory digressions” (digressiones).30 Subsequently, he turns toward the Philosopher’s shorter writings on natural philosophy,31 and, in a different way than he had originally planned, composes the first book of De intellectu et intelligibili
370 Henryk Anzulewicz
after having commented on De nutrimento et nutribili, De sensu et sensato,
and De memoria et reminiscentia. After writing the first book of De intellectu et intelligibili, he picks up his commentary or reconstruction of the remaining Parva naturalia again. Presumably during or just after the composition of De animalibus, Book 16, Albert supplemented his project with a second book of De intellectu et intelligibili. This second book, in which he sets out his teaching about the natural intellectual perfection of man, is the high point of his theory of intellect. In terms of content and chronology, the two books of the De intellectu et intelligibili, the De animalibus,
the Liber de natura et origine animae, and Albert’s commentary on the Metaphysica are closely related, as is evident from the reciprocal references within them.32 This overview of his work clearly shows that, and how, the doctrine of intellect, natural philosophy, and metaphysics are closely linked in Albert’s writings.
These close ties also had far-reaching practical implications for Albert’s
scientific work. First and foremost, because he had almost completed work
on his program of natural philosophy—represented by his teaching about
the soul (De anima), psychophysiology (Parva naturalia and De intellectu et
intelligibili 1), and the as yet incomplete zoology (De animalibus)—Albert personally experienced his own intellectual development and formation
of intellect as a course perfected through the acquisition of all the sciences.
He learned this from his sources, upon which he had already begun to
elaborate in his own previous theoretical works (especially De homine) and
which he developed to the fullest extent in, especially, the second book
of De intellectu et intelligibili.33 Albert then addresses the perfection of the
soul when it is separated from the body after death, in the subsequent
work Liber de natura et origine animae, and defends the idea of a continuity
between our knowledge in this life and in the next.34 In doing so, Albert
establishes a complete and holistic path from De anima, through the Parva naturalia and De intellectu et intelligibili 1, through to De intellectu et intelligibili
2 and the Liber De natura et origine animae, that was capable of demonstrating humans to be both ontologically and developmentally solus intellectus
in both theory and practice.35
The interpretation here proposed with regard to the passage of time between the composition of Book 1 and Book 2 of the De intellectu et intelligibili,
and also with regard to the different significance in content between
the two books, can be illustrated by the history of transmission. Book 1
(considered separately) is transmitted almost exclusively in fourteen early
manuscripts and Book 2 (considered separately) in eight manuscripts.36
Both books appear in a catalogue of works by Dominican authors from the
fifteenth century separately and with their own titles. Louis de Valladolid,
the author of the catalogue, lists Book 1 in his Tabulae as De intellectu et
intelligibili librum unum and Book 2 as De naturali perfectione intellectus librum
unum.37 In the fourteenth century, however, the vast majority of the manuscripts transmit both books together.38
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 371
These historical data also help us to understand the reasons for Albert’s composition and arrangement of De intellectu et intelligibili close to
his commentaries on the Parva naturalia of Aristotle, even though the De
intellectu is not part of the commentaries to the Parva naturalia, as Albert tells us in the very first lines of the introductory chapter. He writes that from the outset “of this work,”39 he made it very clear that the insights regarding the soul found in the De anima do not yield a complete psychological science. It is necessary to augment those insights with knowledge about the objects that are the causes of the proper affections of the parts of the soul. In the works that follow the De anima, it will therefore be necessary to explore which of these objects are proper only to the soul and which are proper to the soul and body together. In other words, Albert is concerned with a more thorough exploration of mental states, feelings, affections, and passions, which are caused by endogenous and exogenous factors—endogenous factors being those that are rooted in the soul and can be produced by the soul itself, exogenous factors those that can come to be through the joint activity of soul and body and to which the soul has reference by means of the body.
Albert tells us now that, whereas states caused by exogenous factors are
naturally instantiated by the vegetative and sensible soul, the endogenous
mental states and forces must have their principle in the rational soul separated from the body:
Just as we have said since the beginning of this work, one does not
have a sufficiently complete knowledge of the soul by means of what
is established about it in the book De anima. For one ought to know,
in addition, about the objects that produce proper passions in the parts
of the soul. Some of these objects, which produce proper effects in the
parts or powers of the soul, produce proper passions in the soul, while
others [produce passions] common to body and soul. For the common
[passions] produce everything of the kind for which the operating
soul uses a bodily instrument, as in the case of whatever takes place in
the vegetative and sensible soul. Because of this, the old Peripatetics
described the sciences of such things as sciences of operations that are
common to the soul and body.40
Let me sum up. Following on from Aristotelian psychology and psychophysiology, Albert established a science of the intellect and the intelligible and wrote an independent work about it. The name of the science
that Albert introduced is identical with its object. Although the nominal
bifurcation of the object in Albert’s version might have suggested an abolition of that unity—because humans as humans are understood with
regard to their natural principle of constitution, which is the intellect, and
because that intellect determines the formal content of knowledge (i.e.,
the intelligible object)—Albert defines his science as single in its object.
372 Henryk Anzulewicz
Determining the specific character and unity of the object in the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili does not only determine its own principles, methods,
and goals; it also explains, in addition to its status as a natural science of
living beings, its clear precedence vis-à-vis the botanical and zoological
sciences. The object acquires the status of a hinge that connects metaphysics with the scientia de intellectu et intelligibili.
For Albert, the aim of efforts to acquire knowledge about the human
intellect is not solely to supplement Aristotelian psychological knowledge.
They are also reflexive and subject-perfecting, and thus represent an existential value for humans as humans. This consists of man’s self-knowledge,
insofar as he can come to understand what he is: intellect alone (solus
intellectus). On the one hand, Albert agrees with the Peripatetics that this
self-knowledge is the prerequisite for recognizing the principle underlying
the happiness of man.41 On the other, he ties to this the insight into the
nature of the human intellect, its universal and particular character. Albert
secures that knowledge for his science of the intellect and the intelligible
through a critical questioning of his Peripatetic sources.
Appropriating Sources and Critiquing Averroes
When Albert began to write his De intellectu et intelligibili, he had at his
disposal many works of Greek and Islamic-Arabic Peripatetic authors as
sources and examples, most of which he had already used in his lessons
on the theory of intellect in De homine. Among these sources were the
writings of a Greek commentator on Aristotle, Alexander of Aphrodisias
(second/third century CE), then Eustratius of Nicaea’s (eleventh/twelfth
century) commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, the treatises on
the intellect by the Islamic-Arabic thinkers Alkindi (ninth century) and
Alfarabi (ninth/tenth century), the Liber de causis, attributed by Albert to
the Aristotelian tradition (ninth century), and, finally, the Liber de anima of
Avicenna (d. 1037) and the Long Commentary on the De anima by Averroes
(d. 1198). Albert also draws on theological sources, among them the writings of Augustine and Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, whose influence
on his theory of intellect—especially in its early phase of development, but
also in the De intellectu et intelligibili—must not be underestimated.
These sources, alongside the Aristotelian foundation, primarily the
third book of De anima, formed Albert’s inspiration as he employed concepts of Aristotle’s doctrine of intellect to form his own theory. It is to
them that Albert owed his knowledge of the opinions of some “older”
Greek and “more recent” Arabic Peripatetics to whose writings he did not
have direct access. That these authors and sources might be grouped under
his designation “older Peripatetics” is not clear from his statement here,42
but one can see in his later writings that he is referring to Aristotle and
his interpreters, known only indirectly through Averroes, Theophrastus,
Alexander of Aphrodisias, Porphyry, Themistius, and the Liber de causis.
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 373
Albert counts the Arabic thinkers Alfarabi, Avicenna, Algazel, and Averroes among the more recent Peripatetics.43
Despite this diversity of sources, it was especially the hermeneutic
coordinates and those of systematic philosophy—on the one hand, the
authority of the Peripatetics with Aristotle as their leader; on the other,
rationality and provability—that made it possible for Albert to integrate
interpretations of varying provenance, including Plato and the Neoplatonists, into his doctrine of intellect:
In the exposition of the teaching concerning the intellect and the
intelligible, we will presuppose all that was accurately established in
the third book of our work De anima. All things here, however, which
it seems must be investigated, we will deal with insofar as we are
able to explore these things by means of proof and rational argument,
thereby following in the footsteps of our master [princeps], whose book
concerning this science we have not seen. We have, nonetheless, examined many books and letters, well written too, from his disciples
on this matter. Occasionally, we will also recollect those [opinions] of
Plato, insofar as he does not contradict the opinions of the Peripatetics
in any way.44
On the very first page, the reader of Albert’s De intellectu et intelligibili is
confronted with a Neoplatonic, emanationist interpretation of the origin
of intellect and its cognitive possibilities, as well as with all the levels in
the hierarchical scheme of being (Being, Life, Perception, and Knowledge). With this teaching, whose hermeneutic potential and essential features Albert had already outlined in his commentary on the Sentences,
he touches on a serious question as to how all created beings arise from
God.45 Albert refers back to his own commentary on the De anima and
to the “most reliable” (probatissimi) Peripatetics, by which he very clearly
means Aristotle (to whose name he attaches the Epistula de universitatis principio and the Liber de causis), Avicenna, and Eustratius.46 As he promised at the beginning of the text, he repeatedly refers to Plato (Timaeus),
and interprets Plato’s position in harmony with his theory of emanation,
which is drawn from the Liber de causis and from Pseudo-Dionysius the
Areopagite. Albert takes the formal emanation of substantial being from
the First Cause to be mediated—with the sole exception of the intellect—
by secondary causes, and he interprets these such as to regard them as
an opinion universally corroborated by the authorities he cites.47 When Albert adds that the secondary causes are named intelligentiae caelestes by
the philosophers, it is evident that he is referring primarily to the Liber de
causis, the Islamic-Arabic philosophers, and Isaac Israeli. He had forcefully
rejected the Avicennian interpretation of emanation in his commentary
on the Sentences, and in his commentary on the Physica (8.1.15), he indicated that, despite some reservations, the doctrine of emanation generally
374 Henryk Anzulewicz
offers an epistemically useful model.48 So it is not surprising to find him
adapting just that model epistemologically at the beginning of De intellectu
et intelligibili and his commentary on the Metaphysica, and ontologically at
the end of De intellectu et intelligibili.
The influence of the Liber de causis, often cited by Albert with the name
“Aristotle” as a placeholder, is unmistakable at the beginning of De intellectu et intelligibili (Book 1, tr. 1). However, Albert takes a critical view of
the opinion advocated by Avicenna and some other Arabic philosophers
that the emanation of the anima cognitiva comes from the lowest superlunary intelligence, as well as the view that living things and their souls
are caused and controlled by the heavenly bodies. He also rejects, here
and elsewhere, the view that the cognitive power is caused by the intelligence in the lowest sphere of the heavens, and the implication that our
knowledge and passions depend on such a cause or, more precisely, on
the movements of the heavenly bodies. Albert claims the backing of all
the Peripatetics and Ptolemy for his opinion that the soul is not limited in
its cognitive and affective operations by the movements of the heavenly
bodies—but it would be wrong to take this literally, because the astral
determinism that he rejects is a doctrine typical of the Islamic-Arabic
philosophers.49
Albert’s emanationist interpretation of the production of the forms of
being, life, sense, and knowing is based upon a model that secures the
reduction of causality to the First Cause and the denial of the univocal
causality of secondary causes. The causa univoca of emanation, according
to this theory, is the First Cause, while the secondary causes are, so to
speak, instruments of the First Cause, which unfold its benefactions and
introduce them into matter through the motions of the heaven. In contrast
to Avicenna, Albert sees emanation as a natural process of hierarchical
causality, in the sense found in the Liber de causis. The creative work of
the First Cause is delivered to the very lowest effects by means of secondary causes; the ontological dependence of the lowest causes on the First
Cause comes about through the middle causes. This ontological relation
is expressed in the way that “everything that is, yearns for some goodness
of the First Cause, and because of this desire, it has whatsoever effects it
has.”50
Albert claims that the source of this causality, which he reads as a kind
of emanation, lies in Plato’s Timaeus. Such causality, he posits, is a descent
of an identical series of forms into matter, brought about by cosmic intelligences. Once enmattered, the forms are determined in different ways. He
points out that in the Neoplatonic interpretation of this idea, the soul is
the instrument of intelligence (instrumentum intelligentiae), like the basis of
their illumination (ut subiectum illuminationibus):
In all intelligences, there is an order of creative forms [ formae practicae],
which descends through these intelligences into the matter of things
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 375
that are generated. And the forms are the same with all of them [i.e.,
all intelligences], but as they descend into the lower things they are
made more and more determinate, just as the form of light in the sun,
in air, in the clouds, and in a limited body is the same, although the
light, insofar as it descends farther from the sun, is more and more
contracted and determined to the nature of color. For as later philosophers said that souls are caused and poured out by means of the intelligences, they understood the aforementioned manner of flux. And for
this reason, they also adopted the opinion that the soul is imprinted by
the intelligence and that the soul is the instrument of the intelligence,
and as it were is the subject of its illuminations in this matter, speaking
entirely truly.51
Contradicting Avicenna, Albert insists that “the first and whole source of
the soul and of nature” is the outpouring from the First Cause, whereas
the secondary causes have only an instrumental function, in that they
come into play to determine and incline the emanated natures to matter
organically. With his modified emanationism, in which the rational soul
is produced directly by the First Cause, Albert draws on the Platonic-Neoplatonic tradition, referring to his reappraisal of that tradition in his
commentaries on De caelo and De anima, as well as this text from the Liber
de motu cordis by Alfred of Sarashel:
It is clear enough, through what has been said, how the movers of the
lower spheres pour forth and how they do not. For the first and total
emanation of the soul and the whole nature is from the First Cause,
whereas the lower circular orbits operate by determining and turning
the natures toward matter. For this reason, Plato says that the soul
receives something in each orbit: memory in the orbit of Saturn, and
other things in different [orbits], as we determined in the first book of
On the Soul. And in this way the essence of the soul is from the First
Cause alone, whereas its attachment to the body and its determination
to the body happen through others that serve the First Cause instrumentally. And regarding this ruling in illuminations and this moving
through the motions in the bodies, it is subject to the intelligences of
other orbits.52
If the most important exponents of the tradition that Albert here reviews
are the Liber de causis and Plato, as my survey of the sources has shown, it is
also apparent that he corrects Avicenna’s doctrine of emanation in relation
to the intellect (and more generally). In contrast, Averroes’ psychology
and doctrine of intellect, with which Albert tells us in his commentary on
the De anima that he largely agrees (except on the question of a superindividual intellectus agens common to all men),53 at first seems to remain in
the background. This initial finding, however, is not characteristic of the
376 Henryk Anzulewicz
whole of the De intellectu et intelligibili, as becomes clear when Albert takes
up Averroes’ opinion on the unity of the superindividual active intellect.54
Albert first explicitly mentions Averroes in the seventh chapter of the
first tract of Book 1 of his De intellectu et intelligibili, in a discussion of
whether an intellectual nature in reality is general or particular. Averroes
is introduced here, together with Ibn Baˉjja (Avempace, Abubacher) and
other unnamed Islamic-Arabic thinkers, as the defender of the opinion
that there is a superindividual, general intellect that can only be accessed
by means of imagination and sense perception.55 This argumentative
demonstration indicates how Albert presents the position of Averroes, and
how that presentation relates to his earlier interpretation of the problem in
his commentary on the De anima and in De homine.
According to Albert, this opinion that the intellect is an immortal, general, and superindividual nature is a position shared by Avempace, Averroes, and other Islamic-Arabic Peripatetics, and one that is in many ways
justified. Of the many arguments imputed to this group, Albert chooses
three, apparently because of their logical rigor and the truth of their premises. He describes these arguments as the most excellent methods of proof
and presents them briefly. Albert is not interested in the authority of these
sources; what concerns him is the strength of their arguments—the rational bases and conditions he set out in the introductory chapter of his
work as the guiding principles of his scientific investigation.56 The conclusion he draws from the premises of the first proof is that the intellect,
according to its very nature, is necessarily one universal intellect for all,
because it naturally thinks universally and because the proper place of the
universal intelligible is in the intellect.57 The second proof is based on the
separateness of the intellect, which is contrasted with matter as a principle
of individuation.58 The third and final proof, which he says is the most
important, aims to show that the intellect has no “proper matter” that
would individuate it.59
The center of Albert’s account in this passage, then, is the question
whether the intellect is universal (universalis) according to its very nature,
or whether it is determinate, particular, and individuated.60 His concise discussion in the De intellectu et intelligibili lacks neither objectivity nor
vigor. It must be seen against the backdrop of the controversy in which
Albert was participating publicly at the time regarding the numerical and
specific unity of a separate intellect common to all men.61 A more detailed
examination of the erroneous opinion of Averroes would be redundant,
Albert says, because he has already dealt with this in his commentary on
the De anima.62 Nonetheless, he takes a stand on “the view and error” of
Averroes that is similar in its clarity and sophistication to his treatment in
the commentary on the De anima:
If it is said that the universal intellect is essentially identical in all souls,
many absurd things follow from this, as we noted in the book “On the
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 377
Soul.” Therefore, it seems to us that an intellectual nature in its genus
belongs to the genus of bodies just as the sun does. For we know that
the sun is numerically individual, and that its light can be considered
in two ways. If one considers [light] as it is in the sun, then numerically it is one form of the sun. If one takes it however as it shines forth
from the sun, it is general in that it illuminates all transparent things,
both the continuous [transparent], which it makes luminous in act,
and the non-continuous [transparent], which it makes colored, just as
we stated in the first book of “On Sense and the Sensed,” and light,
considered in this way, causes and produces many things.63
Using the sun analogy, Albert here employs the hermeneutic formula by
means of which he prefers to explain the intellect’s universality and at the
same time its particularity. This formula indicates the unique character of
the sun in the visible world, and the twofold aspect of the ontological and
operative definitions of its light—on the one hand, as the numerically one
form of the sun and, on the other, as an outflowing manifold of illumination. Conceiving the intellect as light, which is an Aristotelian image,
makes it possible for Albert to regard the intellect both as belonging to the
nature of the soul and individuated, insofar as it is the form of the human
being as such, and as universal, according to its cognitive capacity, insofar
as it abstracts forms and is the place of universals.64
Moving on from the metaphor of the sun, Albert clarifies that the universal in the intellect is received not as a form in matter or an accident in
a subject, but rather as a universal intention of a thing (intentio rei).65 By using the likeness of the sun in relation to the intellect, he is able to nuance his threefold notion of the intellect, which he first formulated in his
commentary on the De anima following Alexander of Aphrodisias. There,
he interpreted the intellect according to the varying levels of its actualization: according as it is in a condition of its original potency (in potentia), in
the process of being actualized (in profectione potentiae ad actum), and in the
act of self-attainment (in adeptione). In a parallel way, this time with regard
to the intellectus agens and its actualizing effect on the intellectus possibilis,
Albert distinguishes between the intellect “as an ability and power of the
soul” (ut potentia et virtus quaedam animae), as an “active principle” (ut efficiens), and “as form” (ut forma).66
This threefold modal division of the intellect is interpreted in De intellectu et intelligibili with reference to the universality and uniqueness of the
intellect common to all men, a question associated with the Averroes and
one that was hotly debated by Albert’s contemporaries. In this context, Albert understands the intellect, first, as the constitutive principle of human
nature, and therefore individual, as is suitable for each individual person.67
Second, he sees it functionally as a cognitive capacity, which is united to
the person as a universal power. Finally, he interprets it as the acquired
form that is extracted from many intelligibles. This intellect as form means
378 Henryk Anzulewicz
not only the union of the intellectus agens with the one contemplating as
principle of activity (agens tantum) but also the proper happiness (beatitudo)
of the one contemplating. The intellect can be distinct as capacity and also
as form among human beings to varying degrees and can gradually be
differently acquired. Albert does not exclude the possibility that some men
lack intellectual capacity and the form of intellect entirely, as measured by
their intelligence and wisdom.68
Propounding this view of intellect as capacity and as form, Albert seems
to accommodate the aspect of Averroes’ opinion that posits a universal
capacity of a numerically single intellect, common to all men. Ultimately,
however, as becomes clear in this context, he cannot and does not want
to reconcile Averroes’ positing of an ontologically single intellect for all
men with his own theory of the individuation of the intellect. On the
contrary, Albert shows himself once again to be a very sophisticated and
knowledgeable reader of Averroes and at the same time a discriminating
user of Averroes’ doctrine of intellect, such that he can make use of it in
his own teaching.
Further Thoughts and Concluding Remarks
Albert’s relationship to Averroes’ doctrine of intellect in the chapter of
De intellectu et intelligibili discussed here proves to be more complex than it
seems at first glance. Understanding it requires familiarity with Albert’s
earlier statements about Averroes’ doctrine of the intellect, since the place
where Albert undertakes a thorough analysis, critique, and evaluation of
the Commentator Arabus is not his De intellectu et intelligibili but his commentary on the De anima. If we include Albert’s writings De homine and Liber de
natura et origine animae in this survey of his relationship with Averroes, then
developments, shifts in emphasis, and differentiations appear that can be
explained, at least partially, by his deepening insight into the psychology
and the doctrine of intellect of the Peripatetics in general and of Averroes
in particular. Nonetheless, some questions of detail remain unanswered,
of which I have only been able to address a few. These include the reason
why Albert reinterprets Averroes’ view of the intellectus agens (and the intellectus possibilis sive materialis) in De homine, and why he attributes Averroes’
epitome of Aristotle’s Parva naturalia to Alfarabi. Did the reasons lie in his
insufficient early knowledge of the teachings of the Arabic commentator
on Aristotle, or were they designed to avoid the dangers of the bans on
Averroes’ work?
One cannot fully rule out the possibility that the view Albert imputed
to Averroes in his De homine and then later retracted in the De anima
commentary—that of an individual intellectus agens for each particular person—was a precautionary measure, taken due to theological concerns
and to his interest in the Commentator’s interpretation of Aristotle.69
But it would be equally conceivable that when Albert was writing his
De homine, a canonical reading of Averroes’ long commentary was not
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 379
yet established in the Latin West. With regard to earlier readings, and to
Richard Rufus’ work on the De anima, written at almost the same time,
this would certainly be possible.
Because a clear distinction between insufficient knowledge on Albert’s
part and common readings of Averroes circulating in Albert’s day can
hardly be drawn, it is at the very least problematic to cling to the view that
Albert’s initial knowledge of Averroes’ theory of intellect and his writings
about psychophysiology were inadequate. Certainly, the discrepant portrayals of Averroes’ opinions and the false attribution of Averroes’ writings
in Albert’s early work, as well as their correction in his later works, seem
to support that view. Yet they could just as well be due to an environment
in which Albert relied on the readily available Latin interpretations of
Averroes surrounding him, and read Averroes under their influence. One
thing is certain: in his treatise De intellectu et intelligibili, Albert reiterates
with slight qualifications the status quo of his own interpretation, presented
in his commentary on the De anima. In the context of his commentaries
on the whole corpus Aristotelicum, he was able to reinforce and nuance that
interpretation, which should be understood as part of his genuinely independent theory of the human intellect.70
As we have seen, Albert constructed this, and all his other interpretations in De intellectu et intelligibili, on rigorous rational standards selectively derived from Aristotle, as the methodological and substantive criteria needed to develop a scientia de intellectu et intelligibili. He overcame the Platonic-Augustinian view of the intellect that previously held sway in the Latin West by opposing to that view his own vision of the human intellect, which was based on arguments and aimed to give an integral account. In that account, he constantly emphasized the continuity of the intellect’s opportunities for growth. Thus, he was also able to unite strict philosophical consistency, in method and content, with a biblical anthropology. At the same time, the Peripatetic and Christian sources he used reinforced the development of his independent doctrine, both systematically and substantively. Yet as soon as these sources deviated from the essential principles of the holistic unity and continuity of the human intellect, Albert interpreted them antagonistically—as I have shown using the example of Averroes’ teaching, rejected by Albert in his De intellectu et intelligibili, on the intellect as common to all human beings. Albert’s natural philosophical teaching on the human intellect, as we see it in his work De intellectu et intelligibili,
emerges in diverse ways (most of which remain to be shown in detail) from his Peripatetic sources, from his own previous writings, and from his overall historical context, but it is in no way reducible to any of these.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks are due to Katja Krause for her input at various stages of this
chapter, and to Daniel O’Connell for his translation—as well, of course,
to the volume editors and the editorial assistant, Kate Sturge, for their
380 Henryk Anzulewicz
support. An earlier version in German was published as Henryk Anzulewicz, “De intellectu et intelligibili des Albertus Magnus: Eine Relektüre der
Schrift im Licht ihrer peripatetischen Quellen,” Przegla˛d Tomistyczny 25
(2019): 71–106. My thanks to Przegla˛d Tomistyczny for permission to publish the revised English version here.
Notes 1 See Anzulewicz, “Anthropology.” 2 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 2. 12, ed. Borgnet, 521a–b: “Per
istum [sc. librum] enim scitur, qualiter anima substantiatur ad vitam aeternam
et reducitur. Et cum reducitur ad primum, quod est necesse esse et omnium
causa, ita penetratur lumine eius mirabili et causali quod nihil amplius novit
requirere, sed stans in seipsa manet in illo” (I correct the text of the non-critical edition by Auguste Borgnet here and in the rest of this chapter according to the unpublished critical edition currently being prepared by Silvia
Donati); Albertus Magnus, De causis et processu universitatis a prima causa 1. 1. 11, ed. Fauser, 24.58–60: “Primum ergo principium principium omnium
dicitur ut finis, et hoc est in ordine, quo se omnia habent ad ipsum”; ibid.
24.91–25.8: “Secundum exitum ergo rerum in esse primum erit principium
ut artifex, secundum autem reductionem rerum ad perfectum primum erit
principium ut finis. Propter quod a quibusdam theologis non inconvenienter
ut principium et finis laudatur. Omnia enim ab ipso sunt et propter ipsum
et ad ipsum. Ab ipso enim non propter aliud sunt quam propter seipsum, eo
quod extra seipsum nihil habet, quod consequi intendat vel consequi intendere possit per opus.” See Rom. 11:36 (Vulgate): “quoniam ex ipso et per
ipsum et in ipso omnia.” 3 See Tracey, “Revisiting Albert the Great’s Abhorrence.” 4 Regarding the continuity thesis, see Krause and Anzulewicz, “Albert der
Große.” 5 See Albertus Magnus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 396–442:
De intellectu; 443–454: De differentia intelligibilis. See also Anzulewicz,
“Entwicklung und Stellung der Intellekttheorie,” esp. 182–87. 6 See Anzulewicz, “Vermögenspsychologische Grundlagen.” 7 See Albertus Magnus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 396–99; Hasse,
“Das Lehrstück.” 8 See Miller, “Aspect of Averroes’ Influence”; Zimmermann, “Albertus Magnus und der lateinische Averroismus”; Davidson, Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes,
213–14; Bazán, “Was There Ever a ‘First Averroism’?”; Hasse, “Early
Albertus Magnus”; Taylor “Averroes,” 190–95; Taylor, “East and West,” 728;
Wirmer, “Einleitung,” 9–11, 16–26, and “Nachwort,” 325–409. 9 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 487b: “Utrum
natura intellectualis sit universalis vel particularis.” 10 Albertus Magnus, Physica 1. 1. 4, ed. Hossfeld, 7.8–64, esp. 7.56–58: “Opus
autem animae secundum partem intellectualem tractatur in scientia subtili de
intellectu et intelligibili.” 11 Albert commented on all the natural philosophy opuscula of Aristotle available
to him in Latin translations. Those that were not available, but whose existence was testified to in references by Aristotle or Averroes, he reconstructed
with the relevant source texts. The following writings are such reconstructions:
De nutrimento et nutrito, De spiritu et respiratione, De motibus animalium, and
De iuventute et senectute. See Donati, “Alberts des Großen Konzept der scientiae naturales,” 360, 364–65, 367–69 and notes at 524–38; see note 31 below.
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 381 12 See Lafleur, Quatre introductions; Gauthier, “Notes sur Siger de Brabant.” 13 Thomas Aquinas, Sentencia libri de sensu et sensato, prooem., ed. Leonina, 5.68–
79: “intellectus quidem nullius partis corporis actus est, ut probatur in III
De anima; unde non potest considerari per concretionem uel applicationem
ad corpus uel ad aliquod organum corporeum: maxima enim eius concretio
est in anima, summa autem eius abstractio est in substanciis separatis; et ideo
preter librum De anima Aristotiles non fecit librum de intellectu et intelligibili (uel, si fecisset, non pertineret ad scienciam naturalem, set magis ad
methaphisicam, cuius est considerare de substanciis separatis).” See Donati,
“Alberts des Großen Konzept der scientiae naturales,” 371; Winkler, “Albert
der Große,” 72. 14 See Mojsisch, Die Theorie des Intellekts, 44–45; Mahoney, “Albert the Great,”
esp. 551–54; Mahoney, “Sense, Intellect, and Imagination.” 15 This treatise is available in the critical edition of Tractatus de intellectu et intelligibili,
ed. Mojsisch, 125–210. The textual similarities between Dietrich and
Albert concerning the doctrine of intellect have not yet been investigated.
Some “historically significant” aspects are pointed out by Mojsisch, Die The-
orie des Intellekts, 71 n. 113. Quero-Sánchez, Über das Dasein, 260 and 262,
makes reference to the Averroist opinion of the formal conjunction of the
intellectus agens with the intellectus possibilis in Dietrich, which is common to
both Dietrich and Albert. In this regard, see also Mojsisch, Die Theorie des
Intellekts, 86ff. (without reference to the commonality with Albert). 16 See Anzulewicz and Rigo, “Reductio ad esse divinum.”
17 See Magistri Theodorici Tractatus de visione beatifica, ed. Mojsisch, 96ff.; Führer,
“Introduction,” 11–22. 18 Albertus Magnus, Liber de natura et origine animae 2. 17, ed. Geyer, 44.15–20:
“De his tamen omnibus primi philosophi determinare est opus. Sed in eis
quae hic diximus, cum naturalibus metaphysica composuimus, ut perfectior
sit doctrina et facilius intelligantur ea quae dicta sunt; haec enim est consuetudo nostra in toto hoc physico negotio.” 19 Hartmann, Philosophie der Natur.
20 See Weisheipl, “Axiom ‘Opus naturae est opus intelligentiae’”; Hödl,
“‘Opus naturae est opus intelligentiae’”; Wéber, “Les emprunts majeurs à
Averroès,” 153. 21 Mojsisch and Stammkötter, “Conclusiones de intellectu et intelligibili.”
22 See Zimmermann, “Gedanken Alberts des Großen”; Anzulewicz
“Anthropology.” 23 Aristotle justifies the placement of the doctrine about the soul in natural
philosophy in De anima 1. 1, 403a3–28; he gives the reason for the opinion that the soul is an object of metaphysics at De anima 3. 4, 429a10–b10.
See Albertus Magnus, De anima 1. 1. 6, ed. Stroick, 11.56–13.61; ibid. 3. 2.
1–15, 177.7–199.69, 177.73–77 (Arist. text); De sensu et sensato 1. 1, ed. Donati,
19.8–20.61, 19.23–34 (Arist. text); Metaphysica 1. 1. 5, ed. Geyer, 8.4–31; ibid.,
2. 2, 93.81–90. 24 Albertus Magnus, De IV coaequaevis 4. 61. 4, ed. Borgnet, 655b: “Id autem
quod constituit naturam, est triplex. Quoddam enim inest homini gratia corporis [. . .]. Quoddam autem inest homini gratia animae, ut intellectuale.
Quoddam autem gratia conjuncti inest, sicut secundum naturam principale et
regale.” See also Köhler, Homo animal nobilissimum, 169–232. 25 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 488b–489a:
“Nos enim in libro De anima diximus quod tripliciter homini unitur intellectus, uno videlicet modo ut natura dans esse, et sic est individuus; alio modo
ut potentia per quam est operatio intelligendi, et sic est virtus universalis; et
tertio modo ut forma acquisita ex multis intellectibus, sicut explanavimus,
ubi tractatum est de intellectu agente, qui non unitur contemplativis ut agens
382 Henryk Anzulewicz
tantum, sed ut beatitudo eorum est, quando perveniunt ad hoc quod inest eis
ut forma.” See Albertus Magnus, De anima 3. 3. 11, ed. Stroick, 222.15–28:
“intellectus agens tribus modis coniungitur nobis, licet in se et secundum
essentiam suam sit separatus. A natura enim coniungitur ut potentia et virtus
quaedam animae, sed faciendo intellecta speculativa coniungitur ut efficiens,
et ex his duabus coniunctionibus non est homo perfectus, ut operatur opus
divinum. Coniungitur tandem ut forma, et causa coniunctionis illius est intellectus speculativus; et ideo oportet esse speculativum ante adeptum. Et
tunc homo perfectus et divinus effectus est ad suum opus, inquantum homo
et non animal est, perficiendum; et sunt gradus in intellectu speculativo, quibus quasi ascenditur ad intellectum adeptum, sicut per se patet cuilibet.” 26 Albert considers this approach to natural philosophy to be reasonable, as he
writes in De anima 1. 1. 2, ed. Stroick, 4.42–47: “Licet autem sic in prioritate
dignitatis animae scientiam ponamus, tamen in ordine doctrinae inter scientias naturales non ponimus eam primam, quia ordo doctrine non sequitur
prioritatem dignitatis, sed potius ordinem rationis tenet, in quo de communioribus prior est speculatio [. . .]”; see ibid. 1. 1. 1, 3.6–13: “Cum autem iam
certum sit nobis de anima esse scientiam, et quod haec scientia est pars naturalis scientiae, facile advertere possumus ordinem illius inter libros scientiae
naturalis. Cum enim a communibus omnis incipiat speculatio et communius
sit mixtum tantum quam mixtum et animatum, scimus, quod animati notitia
est tradenda post notitiam mixtorum in specie consideratorum.” 27 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 1, ed. Borgnet, 478a: “Attendimus enim, sicut saepe protestati sumus, principaliter facilitatem doctrinae;
propter quod magis sequimur in tractatione librorum naturalium ordinem
quo facilius docetur auditor quam ordinem rerum naturalium. Et hac de causa
etiam non tenuimus in exsequendo libros naturales ordinem, quem praelibavimus in prooemiis nostris, ubi divisionem librorum naturalium posuimus.” See Albertus Magnus, De sensu et sensato 1. 1, ed. Donati, 20.7–10:
“Primum autem de primis est dicendum secundum ordinem scientiae naturalis,
in qua communia sunt prius nota quoad nos quam particularia, et ideo ab illis
debet incipere speculatio.” (Italics here show individual words and groups of
words that Albert takes over without alteration from the original.) 28 See Albertus Magnus, Metaphysica 1. 1. 4, ed. Geyer, 6.25–52; Tellkamp,
“Albert the Great.” 29 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 1, ed. Borgnet, 477b–478a:“Et
de his in parte iam pro modulo nostro expediti sumus in libris De nutrimento
et nutribili et De sensu et sensato. Restant autem adhuc libri De somno et vigilia,
De iuventute et senectute, De inspiratione et respiratione, De motibus qui dicuntur
animales, De vita et morte, qui omnes sunt de operibus communibus animae
et corporis. Sed quia nequaquam interpretatio somnii et natura eius bene
determinabilis est nisi prius scito de intellectu et intelligibili, ideo oportet nos
hic interponere scientiam de intelligibili et intellectu, licet intelligere animae
humanae sit proprium praeter corpus.” 30 In the commentary on the De anima, Book 3, Albert includes twenty-five
chapters of digressions, and twenty of these deal with the doctrine of intellect.
In them, he discusses questions that in various ways are connected with his
original documents, which Aristotle either did not sufficiently explain or did
not discuss at all, but which were treated by the Late Antique commentators
or the more recent Arabic Peripatetics, Avicenna, Algazel, and Averroes, Albert’s most important intermediaries when it came to Late Antique psychology, the doctrine of intellect, and the theories of knowledge. See, among
others, Schneider, Die Psychologie Alberts des Großen, 1:190–95; Craemer-Ruegenberg, “Die Seele als Form”; de Libera, Albert le Grand, 215–66; Pluta,
“Averroes als Vermittler.”
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 383 31 The following nine opuscula belong to the group of writings included in the
Parva naturalia, as it was shaped by the Greek commentators on Aristotle and
his interpreters in the Latin Middle Ages and in the Renaissance: De sensu
et sensibilibus, De memoria et reminiscentia, De somno et vigilia, De insomniis, De
divinatione per somnum, De longitudine et brevitate vitae, De iuventute et senectute,
De respiratione, De morte et vita. See Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, Psychologie d’Aristote;
De Leemans, “Secundum viam naturae et doctrinae.”
32 While Albert was writing Book 2 of De intellectu et intelligibili, his commentary on the Metaphysica—or at least on Book 5—was not yet complete. See Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 2. 10, ed. Borgnet, 518b: “hoc autem in Prima philosophia erit demonstratum [. . .] de quo in prima philosophia probabimus.” The Liber de natura et origine animae follows after the two books of De intellectu
et intelligibili. See Liber de natura et origine animae, Indices (Auctores ab Alberto ipso allegati), ed. Geyer, 322. For the references to De intellectu et intelligibili
in the commentary on the Metaphysica (from Book 5), see Albertus Magnus, Metaphysica, Indices (Auctores ab Alberto ipso allegati), ed. Geyer, 601. 33 See Krause and Anzulewicz, “Albert the Great’s Interpretatio.”
34 Albertus Magnus, Liber De natura et origine animae, tr. 2, ed. Geyer, 18–44. See
Anzulewicz and Krause, “Albert der Große.” 35 On epigenesis in Albert, see Krause, “Albert the Great.” A reason why the
Liber de natura et origine animae was written and later detached from the De
animalibus as an independent work can perhaps be found in Albert’s composition of the second book of the De intellectu et intelligibili, in that he was able by
doing so to expand on a continuity and integrity of the existential execution
and development of man as man, by means of stand-alone works. 36 Fauser, Die Werke des Albertus Magnus, 108–10; Fauser, “Albertus-Magnus-
Handschriften: 2,” 106; Fauser, “Albertus-Magnus-Handschriften: 3,” 135;
Fauser, “Albertus-Magnus-Handschriften: 4,” 134. 37 Scheeben, “Die Tabulae Ludwigs von Valladolid,” 247. 38 Fauser, Die Werke des Albertus Magnus, 105–8. 39 By “this work,” Albert means the explication of the Parva naturalia of Aristotle
that he had already begun, and his treatises De nutrimento et nutribili, De sensu
et sensato, and De memoria et reminiscentia, which were already complete at this
point. 40 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 1, ed. Borgnet, 477a–b: “Sicut
a principio istius operis diximus, scientia de anima non satis complete habetur
ex hoc quod de anima secundum seipsam in libro De anima determinatum
est. Oportet enim scire cum hoc de obiectis, quae proprias animae partibus inferunt passiones. Horum autem obiectorum quorum propria passiva
pro partibus sive potentiis habet anima, quaedam proprias passiones inferunt
animae, quaedam autem communes animae et corpori. Communes enim
inferunt passiones quaecumque sunt talia, circa quae operans anima instrumento utitur corporeo, ut quaecumque sunt circa vegetabilem et sensibilem
animam. Propter quod etiam Peripatetici veteres scientias de talibus scientias
de operibus communibus animae et corporis vocaverunt.” 41 Ibid. 1. 1. 1, 478a–b: “Cum autem secundum probabiliores Philosophos intellectus faciat intelligibile in forma intelligibilitatis, oportet nos prius loqui
de natura intellectus secundum quod est intellectus, et deinde de intelligibili
secundum quod est intelligibile, et demum de unitate et diversitate intellectus
secundum intelligibilia: quia his cognitis perfecte satis habetur scientia de
intellectu et intelligibili. Operae pretium autem est hujusmodi investigare,
quia his scitis et homo scit, quid proprie est, cum sit solus intellectus, ut dicit
Aristoteles in decimo Ethicorum, et scit insuper praecipuum inter ea quae faciunt in ipso felicitatem contemplativam. Incipientes igitur investigare naturam
intellectus in primis ponemus, quae secundum naturam sunt priora.”
384 Henryk Anzulewicz 42 Ibid. 1. 1. 1, 477b: “Peripatetici veteres.” 43 See ibid. 1. 1. 4, 482a (Theophrastus, Dionysius et alii Philosophi); ibid. 1. 2.
2, 492b “(Peripatetici fere omnes, Avicenna videlicet, et Algazel, et Averroes,
et Abubacher [i.e., Ibn Baˉjja, alias Avempace] et alii quamplures)”; De causis
et processu universitatis a prima causa 1. 2. 7, ed. Fauser, 32.54–55; ibid. 1. 4. 7,
53.3–5. Albert did not have direct access to the writings of Themistius and
Avempace or to John Philoponus; he owed his knowledge of their positions
to Averroes. On the extent of the influence on Albert that came from the
opinions about intellect of older and more recent Peripatetics (especially the
Arabic Peripatetics), see Bach, Des Albertus Magnus Verhältnis; Hasse, “Das
Lehrstück”; Hasse, “Early Albertus Magnus”; Müller, “Der Einfluss der arabischen Intellektspekulation.” 44 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 1, ed. Borgnet, 478a: “Determinantes autem de intellectu et intelligibili supponemus quaecumque in
tertio libro nostro de Anima convenienter determinata sunt. Quaecumque
vero hic inquirenda esse videntur, quantum per demonstrationem et rationem
investigare poterimus, tractabimus, sequentes principis nostri vestigia, cuius
licet librum de hac scientia non viderimus, tamen discipulorum eius de hac
materia plurimos et bene tractatos perspeximus libros et epistulas. Interdum
et Platonis recordabimur in his in quibus Peripateticorum sententiis in nullo
contradicit.” 45 See Albertus Magnus, Commentarii in II Sententiarum 2. 1. 12, ed. Borgnet,
32a: “Gravis autem quaestio incidit circa primum, de fluxu omnium creatorum a Deo, et tenet haec quaestio fructus totius scientiae istius, si posset bene
investigari.” 46 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 1–3, ed. Borgnet, 478a, 479b,
480b. 47 Ibid. 1. 1 .2–3, 478b–481a. Albert clarifies his opinion regarding the transcendental source of the human intellect in Liber de natura et origine animae 1. 5, ed. Geyer, 12.70–14.43. 48 Albertus Magnus, Physica 8. 1. 15, ed. Hossfeld, 580.45–70. 49 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 4, ed. Borgnet, 481b: “Quod
autem anima praecipue humana sub motibus astrorum sic restringatur contra
omnes est Peripateticos et contra Ptolemaeum. Ipsa enim et superiora sphaeris
apprehendit et ab his ad quae motus astrorum inclinat, libere avertitur, et alia
avertit per sapientiam et intellectum, sicut testatur Ptolemaeus.” See Anzulewicz, “Alberts des Grossen Stellungnahme.” 50 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 4, ed. Borgnet, 482a: “Amplius non ideo est ordo primi ad media et mediorum ad ultima quod aliquid
causetur in ultimis a mediis, quod a prima causa non sit perfectum. Et dico
de his causatis, quae nomine suo aliquam dicunt nobilitatem; aliter enim ex
ultimis per media non fieret recursus ad primum. Et hoc esse non potest, cum
omne quod est, aliquam bonitatem primae causae desideret et propter illam
agat quicquid agit.” 51 Ibid. 1. 1. 4, 482b: “Est enim in omnibus intelligentiis ordo formarum practicarum, qui per ipsas in materiam generabilium descendit, et sunt formae in
omnibus eaedem, sed in inferioribus magis et magis determinatae, sicut forma
lucis eadem in sole et aëre et nube et corpore terminato, licet lumen secundum quod magis descendit a sole magis et magis coartetur et determinetur ad
naturam coloris. [. . .] Quotquot autem posteriorum philosophorum animas
ab intelligentiis causatas et profluxas esse tradiderunt, hunc modum fluxus,
qui dictus est, intellexerunt. Et hac de causa etiam animam imprimi ab intelligentia posuerunt et esse eam instrumentum intelligentiae, ut subiectum
illuminationibus eius, in hoc verum utique dicentes.”
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 385 52 Ibid. 1. 1. 4, 483a: “Per ista etiam quae dicta sunt, satis patet, qualiter motores
inferiorum sphaerarum fundant, et qualiter non. Prima enim et tota fusio
animae et omnis naturae est a prima causa. Inferiores autem orbes operantur organice determinando et inclinando naturas ad materiam. Propter quod
Plato dixit, quod in quolibet orbe anima aliquid accipit, memoriam quidem
in orbe Saturni, et alia in aliis, sicut in primo De anima determinavimus. Et
secundum hunc modum essentia animae est a prima causa tota et sola, applicatio autem et determinatio ad corpus est ab aliis instrumentaliter primae
causae deservientibus, et quoad hoc regenda in illuminationibus et movenda
motibus corporalibus, subicitur intelligentiis aliorum orbium.” See Albertus
Magnus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 18.12–14 (with references):
“In libro vero De motu cordis sic diffinitur: ‘Anima est substantia incorporea,
illuminationum quae sunt a primo secunda relatione perceptibilis’”; Albertus
Magnus, De caelo et mundo 2. 2. 6, ed. Hossfeld, 138.40–139.7; De anima 1. 2.
7, ed. Stroick, 34.29–38. 53 Albertus Magnus, De anima 3. 3. 11, ed. Stroick, 221.9–14 and 70–72: “Nos
autem in paucis dissentimus ab Averroe, qui inducit istam quaestionem in
Commento super librum De anima. Convenit tamen Averroes cum omnibus aliis
fere philosophis in hoc, quod dicit intellectum agentem esse separatum et
non coniunctum animae. [. . .] In causa autem [sc. coniunctionis], quam inducemus, et modo convenimus cum Averroe in toto et cum Avempeche et in
parte cum Alfarabio”; ibid. 3. 2. 12, 194.78–79: “Et in hac sententia convenit
nobiscum Averroes in Commento de anima”; ibid. 3. 2. 7, 186.57–58: “Et in
veritate in ista solutione bene satisfacit et verum dicit Averroes.” 54 It is not a mistake to assume that Albert includes Averroes on a case-by-case
basis when he mentions omnes Peripatetici, probabiliores philosophi, or philosophi.
See note 43 above and Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 4–6,
ed. Borgnet, 481b, 483b, 486b. 55 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 488a:
“Abubacher et Averroes et multi alii intellectum universalem esse naturam
posuerunt, nec appropriabilem nobis nisi per imaginationem et sensum, sicut
diximus in libro De anima.” On Ibn Baˉjja, i.e., Abuˉ Bakr Muh․ammad Ibn
al-S․aˉʾigh Ibn Baˉjja—Albert cites him as “Abubacher” or “Avempace”—see
Crawford, “Prolegomena,” xii, and index 575, 577; López-Farjeat, “Avempace en el De anima,” 194 n. 44; Taylor and Druart, “Introduction,” lxxxix n.
163; López-Farjeat, “Albert the Great,” 99 n. 12; and see note 43 above. 56 See note 44 above. 57 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 487b: “omne
quod suscipit aliquid, suscipit illud secundum suae propriae naturae potestatem; intellectus autem recipit in se universale, neque est universale secundum quod hujusmodi nisi in intellectu; oportet igitur quod natura intellectus
sit universalis, quia si esset individua, individuaretur omne id quod est in ipso.
Omnis enim forma individuatur per individuitatem sui subiecti in quo est.” 58 Ibid. 1. 1. 7, 488a: “natura intellectualis est substantia separata a materia;
omnis autem individuitas est per materiam, et ideo intellectum dixerunt esse
universalem.” 59 Ibid.: “si esset individuus, non esset individuus nisi ad materiam propriam,
et tunc sicut visus, qui coniunctus est cuidam materiae propriae, non recipit
nisi proportionata illi materiae et non alia, ita intellectus non reciperet nisi
quaedam materiae suae proportionata et non reciperet omnia. Hoc autem
falsum est; igitur ipse intellectus non est individuus.” 60 On this question, Thomas Aquinas apparently distinguishes himself from his
teacher, insofar as he does not see the three attributes (determination, partic-
ularity, and individuation) as interwoven in this way, nor does he understand
386 Henryk Anzulewicz
individuation as particularity. See note 13 above; Taylor, “Aquinas and ‘the
Arabs’”; Speer, “Yliathin quod est principium individuandi,” 282–85. 61 On Albert’s participation in the public debate on this question at the papal
court in Anagni in 1256 (or 1257) and regarding its written account, De unitate intellectus, see Simon, “Prolegomena.” 62 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 487b–488b;
see Albertus Magnus, De anima 3. 2. 3 (“Et est digressio declarans dubia, quae
sequuntur ex dictis de intellectu possibili”), ed. Stroick, 180.45–181.90; ibid.
3. 2. 7 (“Et est digressio declarans opinionem Averrois et errorem eiusdem”),
186.1–188.6. 63 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 488a–b: “Si
autem intellectus universalis esse dicatur et in omnibus animabus essentialiter
idem, sequuntur multa absurda, de quibus in libro De anima fecimus mentionem. Et ideo nobis videtur, quod intellectualis natura sit in genere suo sicut
sol in genere corporum. Scimus enim solem esse unum numero individuum,
et lucem quae in eo est, esse dupliciter consideratam. Si enim consideretur
prout in eo est, est forma solis una numero. Si autem accipiatur prout ab eo
est emanans, sic est universaliter illuminativa diaphanorum, tam perviorum,
quae facit esse lucida secundum actum, quam non perviorum, quae facit colorata, sicut in primo libro De sensu et sensato determinavimus, et hoc modo
considerata multa agit et facit.” See Albertus Magnus, De sensu et sensato 2. 1,
ed. Donati, 56.11–58.69. 64 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 488b: “Cum
autem dicat Philosophus intellectum esse sicut lucem, videtur intellectus
prout est aliquid naturae animae, esse individuus, et tamen prout emittit actiones intelligendi, esse in virtute universali. Et hoc modo universalia sunt
in ipso, quia sic est abstractivus et denudativus formarum sicut lux corporalis
colorum; licet ergo individuus ponatur secundum quod est forma hominis,
tamen secundum suam potestatem, in quantum est potentia lucis spiritualis,
universalis est.” 65 Ibid. 1. 1. 7, 488b: “intentio rei non specificatur neque individuatur per hoc
quod est in luce incorporea intellectuali, sed manet universalis. Et in hoc est
cognitio secundum congruentiam intellectus et facultatem.” Regarding Albert’s understanding of intentio rei, see Albertus Magnus, De anima 1. 3. 4, ed.
Stroick, 102.58–52. 66 Albertus Magnus, De anima 3. 3. 12, ed. Stroick, 224.90–225.5: “Est enim, sicut supra diximus, triplex status nostri intellectus, scilicet in potentia et in profectione potentiae ad actum et in adeptione. In potentia autem existens nullo modo attingit agentem sicut formam, sed dum proficit, tunc movetur ad coniunctionem cum adepto, et tunc, quantum habet de intellectis, tantum est coniunctus, et quantum caret eis, tantum est non coniunctus. Habitis autem omnibus intelligibilibus in toto est coniunctus et tunc vocatur adeptus. Et sic sunt differentiae intellectus nostri quattuor: Quorum primus est possibilis vocatus intellectus, secundus autem universaliter agens et tertius speculativus et quartus adeptus.” See ibid. 3. 3. 11, 222.15–37; ibid. 3. 3. 6, 215.35–64. 67 See note 41 above. 68 Albertus Magnus, De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, ed. Borgnet, 488b–489a:
“Nos enim in libro De anima diximus quod tripliciter homini unitur intellectus: uno videlicet modo ut natura dans esse, et sic est individuus; alio modo
ut potentia per quam est operatio intelligendi, et sic est virtus universalis; et
tertio modo ut forma acquisita ex multis intellectibus, sicut explanavimus,
ubi tractatum est de intellectu agente, qui non unitur contemplativis ut agens
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 387
tantum, sed ut beatitudo eorum est, quando perveniunt ad hoc quod inest
eis ut forma. Et secundo et tertio modo secundum prudentiam et sapientiam
dictus intellectus non inest aequaliter omnibus hominibus, sed alicui plus, et
alii minus, et alicui fortasse nihil inest de intellectu.” 69 See Albertus Magnus, De homine, ed. Anzulewicz and Söder, 412.69–76: “Sequentes enim Aristotelem et Averroem dicimus caelum non habere animam
praeter intelligentiam, ut supra in quaestione de caelo determinatum est. Et
similiter dicimus intellectum agentem humanum esse coniunctum animae
humanae, et esse simplicem et non habere intelligibilia, sed agere ipsa in intellectu possibili ex phantasmatibus, sicut expresse dicit Averroes in commento
libri de anima.” 70 As an example of certain divergences in Albert’s portrayal of Averroes’ theory of intellect, we can find his view, expressed in De homine, that Averroes thought that the human intellectus agens is part of the soul of the human being (De homine, 412.72–76). Moreover, there is the opinion attributed to the Commentator, elsewhere in this same work, that the intellectus speculativus is one and
the same species for all human beings (De homine, 436.52–54). In the commentary on the De anima, Albert is of the opinion that Averroes taught the uniqueness and indivisibility of the intellectus possibilis common to all human beings (De anima 3. 2. 7, 187.18–45). In De intellectu et intelligibili, Albert affirms that Averroes, along with “Abubacher” and other Peripatetics, supposed that the intellect is general (universalis) and that human beings can only possess it by means of imagination and sensory perception (De intellectu et intelligibili 1. 1. 7, 488a). On Albert’s false attribution of the Epitome of Aristotle’s Parva naturalia
of Averroes to Alfarabi in his early writings, see de Vaux, “La première entreé d’Averroës,” 237–41; Gätje, “Der Liber de sensu et sensato.”
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Albertus Magnus. Commentarii in II Sententiarum. Edited by Auguste Borgnet.
Paris: Vivès, 1894.
Albertus Magnus. De anima. Edited by Clemens Stroick. Editio Coloniensis 7/1.
Münster: Aschendorff, 1968.
Albertus Magnus. De caelo et mundo. Edited by Paul Hossfeld. Editio Coloniensis
5/1. Münster: Aschendorff, 1971.
Albertus Magnus. De causis et processu universitatis a prima causa. Edited by Winfried
Fauser. Editio Coloniensis 17/2. Münster: Aschendorff, 1993.
Albertus Magnus. De homine. Edited by Henryk Anzulewicz and Joachim R.
Söder. Editio Coloniensis 27/2. Münster: Aschendorff, 2008.
Albertus Magnus. De intellectu et intelligibili. Edited by Auguste Borgnet. Paris:
Vivès, 1890.
Albertus Magnus. De IV coaequaevis (Summa de creaturis, pars I). Edited by Auguste
Borgnet. Paris: Vivès, 1895.
Albertus Magnus. De sensu et sensato. In De nutrimento et nutrito, De sensu et sensato,
De memoria et reminiscentia, edited by Silvia Donati, 1–112. Editio Coloniensis
7/2A. Münster: Aschendorff, 2017.
Albertus Magnus. Liber de natura et origine animae. In Liber de natura et origine animae. Liber de principiis motus processivi. Quaestiones super de animalibus, edited by
388 Henryk Anzulewicz
Bernhard Geyer and Ephrem Filthaut, 1–44. Editio Coloniensis 12. Münster:
Aschendorff, 1955.
Albertus Magnus. Metaphysica, I–V. Edited by Bernhard Geyer. Editio Coloniensis 16/1. Münster: Aschendorff, 1960.
Albertus Magnus. Physica, I–IV. Edited by Paul Hossfeld. Editio Coloniensis 4/1.
Münster: Aschendorff, 1987.
Albertus Magnus. Physica, V–VIII. Edited by Paul Hossfeld. Editio Coloniensis
4/2. Münster: Aschendorff, 1993.
[Theodoricus de Vriberch]. Magistri Theodorici Ordinis Fratrum Praedicatorum Tractatus de intellectu et intelligibili. In Dietrich von Freiberg, Schriften zur Intellekttheorie,
edited by Burkhard Mojsisch, 125–210. Hamburg: Meiner, 1977.
[Theodoricus de Vriberch]. Magistri Theodorici Tractatus de visione beatifica. In Dietrich von Freiberg, Schriften zur Intellekttheorie, edited by Burkhard Mojsisch,
1–124. Hamburg: Meiner, 1977.
Thomas Aquinus. Sentencia libri de sensu et sensato. Editio Leonina 45/2. Rome:
Commissio Leonina, 1985.
Secondary Literature
Anzulewicz, Henryk. “Alberts des Grossen Stellungnahme zur Frage nach Notwendigkeit, Schicksal und Vorsehung.” Disputatio philosophica 1 (2000):
141–52.
Anzulewicz, Henryk. “Anthropology: The Concept of Man in Albert the Great.”
In A Companion to Albert the Great: Theology, Philosophy, and the Sciences, edited
by Irven M. Resnick, 325–46. Leiden: Brill, 2013.
Anzulewicz, Henryk. “Entwicklung und Stellung der Intellekttheorie im System
des Albertus Magnus.” Archives d’histoire doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Âge 70
(2003): 165–218.
Anzulewicz, Henryk. “Vermögenspsychologische Grundlagen kognitiver Leistung des Intellektes nach Albertus Magnus.” Acta Mediaevalia 22 (2009):
95–116.
Anzulewicz, Henryk, and Katja Krause. “Albert der Große und sein holistisches
Konzept menschlicher Erkenntnis.” In Veritas et subtilitas: Truth and Subtlety in
the History of Philosophy, edited by Tengiz Iremadze and Udo Reinhold Jeck,
157–94. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2018.
Anzulewicz, Henryk, and Caterina Rigo. “Reductio ad esse divinum: Zur Vollendung des Menschen nach Albertus Magnus.” In Ende und Vollendung: Eschatologische Perspektiven im Mittelalter, edited by Jan A. Aertsen and Martin
Pickavé, 388–416. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2002.
Bach, Josef. Des Albertus Magnus Verhältnis zu der Erkenntnislehre der Griechen,
Lateiner, Araber und Juden: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Noetik. Vienna:
Braumüller, 1881.
Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, Jules. Psychologie d’Aristote: Opuscules (Parva naturalia).
Translated and annotated by Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire. Paris: Dumont, 1847.
Bazán, Carlos B. “Was There Ever a ‘First Averroism’?” In Geistesleben im 13.
Jahrhundert, edited by Jan A. Aertsen and Andreas Speer, 31–53. Berlin: De
Gruyter, 2000.
Craemer-Ruegenberg, Ingrid. “Die Seele als Form in einer Hierarchie von
Formen.” In Albertus Magnus Doctor universalis 1280/1980, edited by Gerbert
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 389
Meyer, Albert Zimmermann, and Paul-Bernd Lüttringhaus, 59–88. Mainz:
Matthias Grünewald, 1980.
Crawford, F. Stuart. “Prolegomena” and “Index nominum et rerum.” In Averroes,
Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis De anima libros, ed. F. Stuart Crawford,
xi–xxi and 575–92. Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy of America,
1953.
Davidson, Herbert A. Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, on Intellect. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
De Leemans, Pieter. “Secundum viam naturae et doctrinae: Lire le De motu animalium
et les Parva naturalia d’Aristote au Moyen Âge.” In Les Parva naturalia d’Aristote: Fortune antique et médiévale, edited by Christophe Grellard and Pierre-Marie
Morel, 197–220. Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne, 2010.
de Libera, Alain. Albert le Grand et la philosophie. Paris: Vrin, 1990.
Donati, Silvia. “Alberts des Großen Konzept der scientiae naturales: Zur Konstitution einer peripatetischen Enzyklopädie der Naturwissenschaften.” In Albertus Magnus und der Ursprung der Universitätsidee, edited by Ludger Honnefelder,
354–81. Berlin: Berlin University Press, 2011.
Fauser, Winfried. “Albertus-Magnus-Handschriften: 2. Fortsetzung.” Bulletin de Philosophie Médiévale 25 (1983): 100–20.
Fauser, Winfried. “Albertus-Magnus-Handschriften: 3. Fortsetzung.” Bulletin de Philosophie Médiévale 26 (1984) 127–51.
Fauser, Winfried. “Albertus-Magnus-Handschriften: 4. Fortsetzung.” Bulletin de Philosophie Médiévale 27 (1985): 110–51.
Fauser, Winfried. Die Werke des Albertus Magnus in ihrer handschriftlichen Überlieferung. Teil I, Die echten Werke. Münster: Aschendorff, 1982.
Führer, Markus L. “Introduction.” In Dietrich of Freiberg, Treatise on the Intellect
and the Intelligible. Translated with an introduction and notes by Markus L.
Führer, 1–33. Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press, 1992.
Gätje, Helmut. “Der Liber de sensu et sensato von al-Faˉraˉbıˉ bei Albertus Magnus.”
Oriens Christianus 48 (1964): 107–16.
Gauthier, René A. “Notes sur Siger de Brabant: II. Siger en 1272–1275, Aubry de
Reims et la scission des Normands.” Revue de Science philosophiques et théologiques
68 (1984): 3–49.
Hartmann, Nicolai. Philosophie der Natur: Abriss der speziellen Kategorienlehre. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1950.
Hasse, Dag N. “Das Lehrstück von den vier Intellekten in der Scholastik: Von
den arabischen Quellen bis zu Albertus Magnus.” Recherches de Théologie et
Philosophie médiévales 66 (1999): 21–77.
Hasse, Dag N. “The Early Albertus Magnus and His Arabic Sources on the Theory of the Soul.” Vivarium 46, no. 3 (2008): 232–52.
Hödl, Ludwig. “‘Opus naturae est opus intelligentiae’: Ein neuplatonisches Axiom im aristotelischen Verständnis des Albertus Magnus.” In Averroismus im
Mittelalter und in der Renaissance, edited by Friedrich Niewöhner and Loris
Sturlese, 132–48. Zurich: Spur, 1994.
Köhler, Theodor W. Homo animal nobilissimum: Konturen des spezifisch Menschlichen
in der naturphilosophischen Aristoteleskommentierung des dreizehnten Jahrhunderts.
Leiden: Brill, 2008.
Krause, Katja. “Albert the Great on Animal and Human Origin in His Early
Works.” Lo Sguardo 18 (2015): 205–32.
390 Henryk Anzulewicz
Krause, Katja, and Henryk Anzulewicz. “Albert the Great’s Interpretatio: Converting Libraries into a Scientific System.” In Premodern Translation: Comparative Approaches to Cross-Cultural Transformations, edited by Sonja Brentjes and Alexander
Fidora, 89–132. Turnhout: Brepols, 2021.
Lafleur, Claude. Quatre introductions à la Philosophie au XIIIe siècle: Textes critiques et
étude historique. Montreal: Institut d’études médiévales, 1988.
López-Farjeat, Luis Xavier. “Albert the Great between Avempace and Averroes on the Knowledge of Separate Forms.” Proceedings of the ACPA 86 (2013): 89–102.
López-Farjeat, Luis Xavier. “Avempace en el De anima de Alberto Magno: Algunas consideraciones sobre el intelecto agente y las formas separadas.” Tópicos 29
(2005): 171–201.
Mahoney, Edward P. “Albert the Great and the Studio Patavino in the Late Fifteenth and Early Sixteenth Centuries.” In Albertus Magnus and the Sciences:
Commemorative Essays, 1980, edited by James A. Weisheipl, 537–63. Toronto:
Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1980.
Mahoney, Edward P. “Sense, Intellect, and Imagination in Albert, Thomas, and
Siger.” In The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, edited by Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, Jan Pinborg, and Eleonore Stump, 602–22.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Miller, Robert. “An Aspect of Averroes’ Influence on St. Albert.” Mediaeval Studies
16 (1954): 57–71.
Mojsisch, Burkhard. Die Theorie des Intellekts bei Dietrich von Freiberg. Hamburg:
Meiner, 1977.
Mojsisch, Burkhard, and Franz-Bernhard Stammkötter. “Conclusiones de intellectu
et intelligibili: Ein Kompendium der Intellekttheorie Alberts des Großen (Stadtbibliothek Mainz, Ms. I 610, fol. 38v–45v).” Mediaevalia Philosophica Polonorum
31 (1992): 43–60.
Müller, Jörn. “Der Einfluss der arabischen Intellektspekulation auf die Ethik des
Albertus Magnus.” In Wissen über Grenzen: Arabisches Wissen und lateinisches
Mittelalter, edited by Andreas Speer and Lydia Wegener, 545–68. Berlin: De
Gruyter, 2006.
Pluta, Olaf. “Averroes als Vermittler der Gedanken des Alexander von Aphrodisias.” In Averroismus im Mittelalter und in der Renaissance, edited by Friedrich
Niewöhner and Loris Sturlese, 201–21. Zurich: Spur, 1994.
Quero-Sánchez, Andrés. Über das Dasein: Albertus Magnus und die Metaphysik des
Idealismus. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 2013.
Scheeben, Heribert Ch. “Die Tabulae Ludwigs von Valladolid im Chor der Predigerbrüder von St. Jakob in Paris.” Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 1 (1931):
223–63.
Schneider, Arthur. Die Psychologie Alberts des Großen, 2 vols. Münster: Aschendorff, 1903–6.
Simon, Paul. “Prolegomena: De unitate intellectus.” In Albertus Magnus, De
unitate intellectus, edited by Alfons Hufnagel, ix–xvi. Editio Coloniensis 17/1.
Münster: Aschendorff, 1975.
Speer, Andreas. “Yliathin quod est principium individuandi: Zur Diskussion im Anschluß an prop. 8[9] des Liber de causis bei Johannes de Nova Domo, Albertus
Albert the Great and the Science of Intellect 391
Magnus und Thomas von Aquin.” In Individuum und Individualität im Mittelalter,
edited by Jan A. Aertsen and Andreas Speer, 266–86. Berlin: De
Gruyter, 1996.
Taylor, Richard C. “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’: Aquinas’s First Critical Encounter
with the Doctrines of Avicenna and Averroes on the Intellect, In 2 Sent. D. 17,
Q. 2, A. 1.” In Philosophical Psychology in Arabic Thought and the Latin Aristotelianism of the 13th Century, edited by Luis Xavier López-Farjeat and Jörg Alejandro
Tellkamp, 141–83. Paris: Vrin, 2013.
Taylor, Richard C. “Averroes: Religious Dialectic and Aristotelian Philosophical
Thought.” In The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, edited by Peter
Adamson and Richard C. Taylor, 180–200. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2005.
Taylor, Richard C. “East and West: Islam in the Transmission of Knowledge East
to West.” In Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in the
Non-Western Cultures, edited by Helaine Selin, 721–30. Berlin: De Gruyter,
2008.
Taylor, Richard C., and Thérèse-Anne Druart. “Introduction.” In Averroes (Ibn
Rushd) of Cordoba, Long Commentary on the De Anima of Aristotle, translated
with an introduction and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with Thérèse-Anne
Druart, xv–cix. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Tellkamp, Jörg A. “Albert the Great on Structure and Function of the Inner
Senses.” In The Judeo-Christian-Islamic Heritage: Philosophical & Theological Perspectives,
edited by Richard C. Taylor and Irfan A. Omar, 305–24. Milwaukee,
WI: Marquette University Press, 2012.
Tracey, Martin J. “Revisiting Albert the Great’s Abhorrence for Latin Doctrine on Intellect.” In Intellect et imagination dans la philosophie médiévale, edited by Maria C. Pacheco and José F. Meirinhos, 1293–302. Turnhout:
Brepols, 2006.
Vaux, Roland de. “La première entreé d’Averroës chez les latins.” Revue des Sciences philosophiques et théologiques 22 (1933): 193–245.
Wéber, Edouard-Henri. “Les emprunts majeurs à Averroès chez Albert le
Grand et dans son école.” In Averroismus im Mittelalter und in der Renaissance,
edited by Friedrich Niewöhner and Loris Sturlese, 149–79. Zurich:
Stur, 1994.
Weisheipl, James A. “The Axiom ‘Opus naturae est opus intelligentiae’ and Its
Origins.” In Albertus Magnus Doctor universalis 1280/1980, edited by Gerbert
Meyer, Albert Zimmermann, and Paul-Bernd Lüttringhaus, 441–63. Mainz:
Matthias Grünewald, 1980.
Winkler, Norbert. “Albert der Große: De intellectu et intelligibili. Eine intellekttheoretische Wiederentdeckung aus dem 13. Jahrhundert.” Bochumer Philosophisches Jahrbuch für Antike und Mittelalter 15 (2012): 71–130.
Wirmer, David. “Einleitung” and “Nachwort.” In Averroes, Über den Intellekt:
Auszüge aus seinen drei Kommentaren zu Aristoteles’ De anima. Arabisch–Lateinisch–
Deutsch, translated, annotated and with an introduction by David Wirmer,
9–38 and 287–409. Freiburg: Herder, 2008.
Zimmermann, Albert. “Albertus Magnus und der lateinische Averroismus.”
In Albertus Magnus Doctor universalis 1280/1980, edited by Gerbert Meyer,
392 Henryk Anzulewicz
Albert Zimmermann, and Paul-Bernd Lüttringhaus, 465–93. Mainz: Matthias
Grünewald, 1980.
Zimmermann, Albert. “Gedanken Alberts des Großen zu den Zielen und
Leitlinien der Naturforschung.” In Dombau und Theologie im mittelalterlichen
Köln, edited by Ludger Honnefelder, Norbert Trippen, and Arnold Wolff,
429–37. Cologne: Verlag Kölner Dom, 1998.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-21
The question of the origins of the ensemble of works known as the Plotiniana Arabica (hereafter: PA) is still a matter of controversy, despite decades
of excellent work on the subject. The works known under this title are, of
course, paraphrastic translations, containing a large number of interpolations, of extracts from the last three of Plotinus’ Enneads, but that is where
agreement among modern interpreters ceases. In their interpolations, the
PA exhibit some notable divergences from the doctrines of Plotinus. Some
scholars hold that these divergences are due to the works’ editor al-Kindıˉ;
others that they are to be attributed to the translator Ibn Naˉ ʿima al-H․
ims․ıˉ. Among the latter, some, like Peter Adamson,1 insist on the importance
of situating the composition of the PA within the context of early ninth-century debates between the Muʿtazilites and their adversaries; others, like
Alexander Treiger,2 feel it is equally important to take into account the
background of al-H․
ims․
ıˉ, a Syrian Christian likely to have been influenced
by Origenistic tendencies. Although the PA were probably not transmitted
through a Syriac intermediary, the entire Syriac philosophical tradition,3
including such leading figures as Sergius of Reshʿaynaˉ, 4 is relevant for an
understanding of the background of these works, as is, for that matter, the
entire history of the translation movement of Greek and Syriac philosophical works into Arabic in the first two centuries of Islam.5
All these factors must be taken into account. However, in my opinion, the Greek Neoplatonist background to the particular constellation of
non-Plotinian ideas found in the Theology of Aristotle (henceforth: ThA) should not be neglected either. More specifically, I believe, following
many earlier scholars,6 that we should take seriously the title of the ThA
itself, which announces that the work is a “Commentary by Porphyry the
Syrian.” In what follows, I will adduce some considerations in favor of this
hypothesis.
The Prologue of the Theology of Aristotle
As is well known, the circle of translators around al-Kindıˉ manifested
a keen interest in Neoplatonic texts,7 unlike the slightly later circle of
Nestorian translators around H․
unayn ibn Ish․aˉq (d. 873 CE) and his son
17 Action by Being Alone in
the Plotiniana Arabica
Michael Chase
394 Michael Chase
Ish․aˉq ibn H․unain (d. ca. 910 CE), who concentrated on Galen and Aristotle. It was Kindıˉ’s circle that undertook the translation of excerpts from
Proclus’ Elements of Theology, leading to the composition of the Arabic
Book of the Pure Good. But what interests us here is the Arabic version of
a series of extracts from Plotinus, entitled Theology of Aristotle, which its
prologue describes as follows:
The first mıˉmar of the book of the philosopher Aristotle, that is called
in Greek “Theology.” It is the discourse on Divine Sovereignty, commentary
[tafsıˉr] by Porphyry of Tyre, translated into Arabic by ʿAbd
al-Masıˉh․ ibn ʿAbd Allah ibn Naˉ ʿima al-H․
ims․
ıˉ, corrected for Ah․mad
ibn al-Muʿtas․
im bi-llah by Abuˉ Yuˉsuf ibn Ish․aˉq al-Kindıˉ, may God
have mercy upon him.8
This prologue provides us with several precious pieces of information:
that the translator of the Theology was the Syrian Christian ibn Naˉ ʿima
al-H․
ims․
ıˉ,9 that al-Kindıˉ “corrected” or “edited” the work, and that he
did so for Ah․mad ibn al-Muʿtas․
im bi-llah, son of the caliph al-Muʿtas․
im.
This allows us to date the work between 833 and 842 CE. Yet the prologue raises as many questions as it answers. The title of the Theology of
Aristotle attributes the work to Aristotle: Was this an innocent mistake or a
deliberate forgery?10 While the PA consist of paraphrases of extracts from
Plotinus’ Enneads 4–6, they do not respect the order of Plotinus’ text, and
their present structure seems to be chaotic. One of the most influential
suggestions for explaining this state of affairs has it that an original complete Arabic translation of the Enneads suffered some material accident
in which the manuscript fell apart and was clumsily put back together,
pretty well any old way, by a subsequent editor;11 others, with whom I
am inclined to agree, reject this “Big Bang” hypothesis and claim to be
able to discern some order in the PA, although it is hard to perceive at first
glance.12 Above all, there is the question of authorship. Although the PA
are based on the Enneads of Plotinus, they actually consist in some passages
of more or less literal translation of Plotinus embedded within an explanatory paraphrase, sometimes including passages of commentary that contain doctrines that are not to be found in Plotinus, while some Plotinian
passages are omitted from the Arabic paraphrase. These differences from
the Greek original—divergence in the order of chapters, the inclusion of
material in the Arabic that is lacking in the Greek, the omission of some
Greek passages from the Arabic, and the addition of commentaries that
sometimes contain views at variance with those contained in the Greek
original—are remarkably similar to those found, for instance, in the Arabic “translation” of Aristotle’s Meteorology by Yah․yaˉ (or Yuˉh․annaˉ) ibn al-
Bit․
rıˉq, a prolific translator active at the Bayt al-H․
ikma and in the circle
of al-Kindıˉ in the first third of the ninth century.13 After remarking on
these differences from the original Greek text of Aristotle’s Meteorology,
Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 395
Paul Lettinck concludes that “it was not Aristotle’s original text that was
rendered into Arabic but a later Hellenistic paraphrase.”14 The Arabic version of the De anima, probably also due to ibn al-Bit․
rıˉq, is also more of a
Neoplatonic paraphrase than a translation. According to its editor Rüdiger
Arnzen, it goes back to a late sixth-century Greek paraphrase based largely
on John Philoponus’ commentary on the De anima.15
One may wonder whether the divergences between the PA and the
original Greek text of Plotinus do not warrant a similar conclusion: it
was not, or not only, the original text of Plotinus that was translated into
Arabic, but an intermediary Greek version (except, of course, that, in this
case, the text rendered into Arabic will have been not a Hellenistic, but a
Neoplatonic paraphrase posterior to Plotinus’ death in 270 CE).16
In the PA, in any case, these interpretive passages transform Plotinus
into a creationist monotheist, much more acceptable to an Islamic audience than the pagan Neoplatonist would have been. Who is responsible for
these modifications? To illustrate the complexity of the question, I’d like
to compare some Plotinian doctrines with the way the Adaptor interprets
them in the PA.
Some Doctrinal Elements of the Plotiniana Arabica
Designations of the First Principle
The PA contain several doctrinal elements that are absent from, or at least
not as prominent in, the extant Greek works of Plotinus himself. One is
the nature of God or the First Principle: he is referred to, among other
designations, as al-anniyya, al-huwiyya, or al-ann, terms which are used
elsewhere to render the Greek participle to on or the infinitive to einai,
“being.”17 As Richard C. Taylor pointed out in an important article of
1998, this differs from Plotinus, for whom the One or the First Principle is
beyond being, while being corresponds to the second hypostasis of the Nous,
or intellect.18 In contrast, Plotinus’ student Porphyry speaks, at least in his
Commentary on the Parmenides, of the First Principle as being (to einai). This
is one element that suggests a certain similarity between the metaphysics
of Porphyry and that of the PA.
Creation by Mere Being
Another point of similarity concerns the mode of activity of this First
Principle. In the PA, this Principle produces the world “by mere being” or
“by being alone” (Ar.: bi-anniyati faqat ․). According to this doctrine, God,
or the First Principle, creates by his or its very being: not by any particular
act of will or intention, not, in fact, by doing anything at all, but merely
by being what he/it is. Far from choosing between alternatives and then
making a choice before creating the world,19 God already possesses within
396 Michael Chase
himself what he creates. As the Theology of Aristotle states, in a passage that
is independent from Plotinus:
It is impossible for us to say that the Creator first reflected over how to
originate things and then after that originated them [. . .] he does not
need reflection in creating things because he is the things, by virtue
of being their cause.20
Similarly, a passage from the Sayings of the Greek Sage states that: The First Agent must be at rest and unmoved, since it is necessary [. . .]
that His action be without deliberation, motion and volition inclining
towards the effect [min-g˙ayri rawiyyati wa-laˉ h․a raka wa-laˉ iraˉda maˉʾila ilaˉ-l-mafʿuˉl ].21
This doctrine seems to have been originally designed to avoid a number
of conundrums, paradoxes, or objections that had been or might be raised
against the doctrine that God created the world at a specific moment in
time. Such questions included, but were not limited to: i What was God doing before he created? Was he idle? But if his essence
is to be good, and being good implies granting being or existence to
other things, as Plato taught in the Timaeus, then how could God exist
without creating? Was he jealous, miserly, impotent, or all three? ii Why did God create at a specific time, and not earlier or later? Did he
change his mind, altering from an eternal state of not willing to create
to a sudden state of willing to create?
The doctrine of creation by being alone (bi-anniyati faqat ․) fulfills several
functions. It obviates the need for reflection,22 will,23 and choice on the
Creator’s part, with the resulting damage to the thesis of his divine simplicity and immutability.24 Indeed, reflection, will, and choice can be
considered as intervening between God and his creation, interrupting the
immediacy of his relation to them. More importantly, it seems to me, they
all imply change and motion in God.
The Doctrine of Instantaneous Creation
In the PA, God or the First Principle creates all things instantaneously, by
his mere being:25
every science and every wisdom and every thing [. . .] were all originated at once [dafʿatan waˉh․idatan], without reflection or thought [l aˉ bi-rawiyyati wa-laˉ fikrin], because their originator was one and simple,
originating the simple things all at once [dafʿatan waˉh․idatan], by his
being alone [bi-annihi faqat ․].26
Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 397
This text introduces a link between several doctrines: creation by being
alone, creation without reflection or thought, and the doctrine of instantaneous creation. This doctrine holds that God creates all things all at once
(Ar.: dafʿatan waˉh․idatan = Gk.: athrooˉs) or instantaneously. As we read in
another fragment of the Sayings of the Greek Sage:
We say that the First Being performs all his action all at once [al-anniyya al-uˉlaˉ faʿalat fiʿlahaˉ kullahu dafʿatan waˉh․idatan].27
According to the Theology of Aristotle, this instantaneous mode of action
of the First Being contrasts with the way Intellect, the second hypostasis,
creates:
The intellect [. . .] is the maker of things, but it makes them one after
another in succession and order. As for the First Agent, he makes all
the things he makes without an intermediary [bi-ghayri tawassut․
in],
simultaneously [maʿaˉn], and all at once [fıˉ daf ʿati waˉh․idatin].28
The connection between these doctrines is further explained by another
text from the Sayings of the Greek Sage.29 For creation to take place, we read
here, the First Agent must transmit the intelligible forms to the intellect,
so that the latter can, with the help of soul, insert the forms into matter,
thereby bestowing form, shape, life, and perpetuity upon the universe.
But this process must happen all at once or instantaneously (dafʿatan waˉh․i-
datan). Otherwise, if we assume that the Intellect receives the forms from
the First Agent one by one (waˉh․idatan baʿda waˉh․idata), this would mean that
the First Agent would perform only a partial, fragmentary act ( fiʿlan mutajazzi
ʾan).30 If the First Agent carried out his acts one by one, unmanifested
acts would still remain within him. But if this were so, he would not make
things by being alone (lam tafʿal al-ashyaˉʾa bi-annihaˉ faqat․
) but by some kind
of deliberation and motion (bi-rawiyyati wa-h․
arakati maˉ), which is absurd
and repugnant.31 Indeed, the Greek Sage—who is probably Plotinus—has
previously emphasized that the First Cause “is at rest and unmoved by any
kind of motion”;32 he “has no motion, since he is prior to thinking and
prior to knowledge.”33
We see here a cluster of several interconnected ideas in the PA: instantaneous creation, creation by being alone, creation without motion, and
creation without reflection. Creation must be instantaneous. If it were not,
God’s action would be piecemeal, and there would always be some parts of
it that remains unrealized within him. This, however, would lead to the
unpalatable conclusion that God does not create by being alone, which,
in turn, would lead us to infer that God creates by reflection or deliberation. Yet if he does create by reflection or deliberation, this would imply
motion in him, which is to say, change. But to suppose that God moves
or changes is absurd, hence, he does not reflect or deliberate but creates
398 Michael Chase
by his being alone. Hence, he creates everything all at once. We see, then,
that the prime motivation behind the doctrine of creation by being alone
seems to have been the desire to avoid motion or change on the part of the
creative First Principle.
Some Greek Sources of These Concepts
All these notions are, I would argue, ultimately of Greek origin; more specifically, they derive from representatives of Greek Neoplatonic thought of
Late Antiquity. The link between motionlessness of the cause and action
by being alone was already a prominent feature in Greek philosophy, especially among such later Neoplatonists as Proclus and Pseudo-Dionysius.
In the fourth argument of his treatise On the Eternity of the World,34 extant only in the fragments preserved by John Philoponus, Proclus argues
that God cannot change. If he did, since change is motion, and motion,
according to Aristotle’s definition,35 is an incomplete actuality, then God
would change from an imperfect to a perfect state, but such a suggestion is
impious. In addition, all change takes place in time, but God is the creator
of time. Therefore, no change can take place in God prior to his creation
of time.
The doctrine of creation by being alone (Gk.: autoˉi toˉi einai ) was important in such later Neoplatonists as Hierocles and Proclus.36 Yet it was first
formulated, as far as I know, by Plotinus’ student Porphyry of Tyre (ca.
234–ca. 310 CE).37 According to Proclus, Porphyry wrote:
Fourth and next is the section of [Porphyry’s] arguments in which he
shows that the divine Intellect practices a mode of creation [deˉmiourgia]
by mere being [autoˉi toˉi einai ], and he establishes [this] by a number of
arguments. Even artisans, he says, need tools for their activity because
they do not have mastery over all their material [huleˉ]. They show
this themselves by using these tools to get their material ready for use
[euergos] by drilling, planing, or turning it, all of which operations do
not add form, but merely eliminate the unreadiness of what is to receive the form. The actual rational formula [logos], on the other hand,
supervenes upon [paraginesthai] the substrate timelessly [akhronoˉs] from
the art, once all obstacles have been removed. And if there were no
obstacle in the case of [artisans] either, they would add the form to the
matter instantaneously [athrooˉs ] and have absolutely no need of tools.38
In Porphyry’s argument, we can see the link between creation by being alone and instantaneous creation already established, although in this
case it is the Intellect, not the One, that acts in this manner. Proclus,
who transmits this fragment, reports Porphyry’s rationale for introducing
the doctrine of creation by being alone. Craftspeople, such as carpenters
or sculptors, need tools because they lack complete mastery over their
Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 399
material: If they had such mastery, they would need no tools and would
insert the form they have in their mind directly into the wood or stone
they are working on. This would happen instantaneously, since, as things
are now in the real world, the form in the artisan’s mind—his notion of
the chair he wants to create, for instance—also supervenes instantaneously
on matter as soon as all obstacles have been removed. But the divine Intellect has complete mastery over matter, hence, this Intellect creates, that is,
it inserts forms within matter, instantaneously.
We find an interesting parallel to this notion in the Theology of Aristotle:
when craftsmen wish to fashion a thing [. . .] when they work they
work with their hands and other instruments, whereas when the Creator wishes to make something [. . .] he does not need any instrument
in the origination of things [ fıˉ ibdaˉʿ-l-ashyaˉʾ] because he is the cause of
instruments, it being he that originated them.39
Augustine on Creation in Time
Let us return to the main questions raised by objectors against the idea of
creation in time: What was God doing before he created, and why did he
create at a specific time, not earlier or later?
Writing in the first quarter of the fifth century CE, hence about fifteen years before Proclus wrote his Commentary on the Timaeus, St. Augustine knows of people—probably the Platonists around Porphyry—who raised precisely these questions and came up with the solution of eternal creation:
But why did the eternal God decide to make heaven and earth at
that particular time and not before? [. . .] There are some who admit
that the world is created by God, but refuse to allow it a beginning
in time, only allowing it a beginning in the sense of its being created
[non tamen eum temporis volunt habere, sed suae creationis initium], so that
creation becomes an eternal process [semper sit factus]. There is force in
that contention, in that such people conceive themselves to be defending God against the notion of a kind of random, fortuitous act [velut a
fortuita temeritate defendere]; to prevent the supposition that the idea of
creating the world suddenly came into his mind, as an idea which had
never before occurred to him, that a new act of will happened to him
[et accidisse illi voluntatem novam], whereas in fact he is utterly insusceptible of change [cum in nullo sit omnino mutabilis].40
The people Augustine is referring to are almost certainly, I think, the
followers of Porphyry. As in the texts we have studied previously, the doctrine of eternal creation is here introduced in order to avoid the unseemly
suggestion that God changes.41
400 Michael Chase
To say that the world did not have a beginning of its time, but did have
a beginning of its creation is, I think, the same as what Augustine earlier
attributes to the Platonici:
However, Plato [Timaeus 28b7ff.; 41b2] openly says both of the world
and of what he writes as the gods in the world made by God, that they
began to exist and have a beginning [habere initium], but by the most
powerful will of the creator he testifies they will remain for eternity
[41b2]. Yet they [i.e., the Platonici] found a way to understand this,
i.e., that this is not a beginning of time, but of subsistence [non esse hoc
videlicet temporis, sed substitutionis initium]. “Just as,” they say, “if a foot
was in dust from eternity, a footprint would always be under it, yet no
one would doubt that the footprint was made by someone treading,
so,” they say, “both the world and the gods created within it always
existed, since He who made them always exists, and yet they were
made.”42
In this text, the Latin term substitutio takes the place of creatio in the previous passage; the term is likely to be a literal translation of the Greek
hypostasis, “existence” or “subsistence.” In both passages, what the Platonici
mean is that, despite the surface meaning of the text of Plato’s Timaeus, the
world did not have a temporal beginning (Gk.: arkheˉ khronikeˉ), but merely
a beginning or principle of its existence (arkheˉ hupostaseoˉs). This, in turn,
means that the world is created causally (Gk.: kat’aitian), not in time. This
is precisely the doctrine we find attributed to Porphyry in a fragment of
his Commentary on the Timaeus:
And Porphyry, having stated that it is primarily insofar as it is compound that the world is said to be generated [geneˉton], nevertheless,
a bit further on, says that [Plato says] that it is generated causally
[kat’aitian].43
The same Porphyrian doctrine features in a quotation preserved only in
Arabic:
And he [Porphyry] claimed that the statement attributed to Plato
concerning the world’s coming into being is not correct. He said in
his letter to Anebo: what separates Plato from you, viz. that he gives
the world a temporal beginning, is a mendacious assertion. This is because
Plato did not think that the world has a temporal origination, but an
origination with regard to a cause [anna Aflaˉt․uˉn laysa (yaraˉ) anna li-l-ʿaˉlam i btidaˉʾ zamaˉniyyan lakinna ibtidaˉʾ ʿalaˉ jihati al-ʿilla]; and he claimed that
the cause of its existence is its origination. He [Porphyry] was of the
opinion that whoever had the illusion that he [Plato] believed that the
world was created and that it had come into being ex nihilo, and that
Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 401
it had emerged from disorder into order—such a person has erred
and been deluded. That is because it is not always true that all non-existence precedes existence in that which has the cause of its existence in something else; nor is all lack of order prior to order. But by
saying that the creator revealed the world from non-existence into existence,
Plato merely meant that it does not exist by itself, but the cause of its existence
is from the creator.44
In turn, the doctrine of this text corresponds closely to what we find in a
passage from the Theology of Aristotle, at the end of a lengthy excursus that
does not correspond to anything in Plotinus:
How well and how appropriately does this philosopher [sc. Plato] describe the Creator when he says: “He created mind, soul, nature, and
all things else,” but whoever hears the philosopher’s words must not pay
attention to the letter of his words and imagine that he said that the Creator
created the creation in time. If anyone imagines that from his mode
of expression, he merely expressed the will to follow the custom of
the ancients. The ancients were compelled to mention time in connection with the beginning of creation [ fıˉ badʾi al-h
˘
alq] because they
wanted to describe the generation of things, and they were compelled
to introduce time into their description of becoming and into their
description of the creation—which was not in time at all—in order to
distinguish between the exalted first causes and the lower secondary
causes [. . .]. But this is not so: not every agent performs his action in
time, nor is every cause prior to its effect in time.45
The similarities between these texts from Porphyry and from the Theology
of Aristotle seem to me to be quite striking. In all three cases, it is argued
that Plato’s description of the creation of the world by the Demiurge in the
Timaeus is to be understood not as a temporal act, but as a causal dependency (Ar.: i btidaˉʾ ʿalaˉ jihati al-ʿilla = Gk.: kat’aitian).
For Porphyry, if God creates by his very being, none of the thorny questions we have mentioned above arise. This is, I believe, the same view we
have seen in the PA: for the First Principle, creation is coextensive with
its existence, and there never was a moment when he or it did not create.
Contrary to what one might assume from a superficial reading of Plato’s
Timaeus, God’s creative act did not take place in time.46 Nor did God first
reflect, calculate, and weigh alternatives before creating. Instead, his creation flows from him like heat from fire or light from the sun,47 or even as
a solid object casts its shadow.48
These doctrinal parallels, among many others that I cannot go into
here,49 have led me to take seriously the statement of the Prologue to the
Theology of Aristotle, which, as we saw, describes the work as a “commentary” (Ar.: tafsıˉr) by Porphyry.
402 Michael Chase
To make a long story short, I think what may have happened was the
following. We know from Porphyry’s own testimony that he wrote a
commentary or series of commentaries (Gk.: hupomneˉmata) on the Enneads
of Plotinus.50 These commentaries are likely to have taken the form of
glosses in the margin of a manuscript surrounding the text of Plotinus,
as was frequent in Late Antiquity.51 The translator Ibn Naˉ ʾima al-H․
ims․
ıˉ
then translated into Arabic both the text of Plotinus and the commentaries
of Porphyry—he may not always have been able to distinguish between
what belonged to Plotinus and what was due to Porphyry. But the resulting text of the PA is no word-for-word translation of Porphyry’s commentaries. The translator may have skipped passages he did not understand or
simply did not find interesting, for whatever reason. An editor, probably
al-Kindıˉ, later went over the translation, introducing transitional phrases
and modifying some doctrinal elements to accentuate the creationist and
monotheistic aspects of the text, so that it would be easier to reconcile
with Islam.52
So, there you have it. A text written in Greek by Plotinus, an Egyptian-born philosopher of the late third century, and commented upon by his
student Porphyry came to be partially translated into Arabic half a millennium later, where it played a fundamental role in shaping several different
trends in Islamic philosophical and theological thought. It has been argued
that Porphyry also played an important role in transmitting the thought
of Plotinus in the West: when Latin authors of the fifth century cite Plotinus, they may actually owe their knowledge not to a direct reading of
Plotinus, who seems never to have been translated into Latin, but to the
commentaries of Porphyry, some of whose works were indeed translated
by Marius Victorinus, the teacher of Augustine. Thus, through its possible
role in the elaboration of the PA, what we might call the “underground
Porphyry” may have had an importance in the Islamic East comparable to
his considerable influence on the Latin-speaking West.
Notes 1 Adamson, Arabic Plotinus.
2 Treiger, “Palestinian Origenism.” 3 See Hugonnard-Roche, La logique d’Aristote, and Watt, “The Syriac Aristotelian Tradition,” with references to previous publications. 4 See, in addition to the works cited in the previous note, Fiori, “Un intellectual alexandrin.” 5 The literature on this subject is too vast to be listed here. Fundamental studies are Gutas, Greek Thought; Endress, Proclus Arabus; Endress, “Die wissenschaftliche Literatur”; Endress, “Circle of al-Kindıˉ.” For a useful survey, see
D’Ancona, “Greek into Arabic.” 6 See Thillet, “Indices porphyriens”; Pinès, “Les textes arabes.” 7 Endress, “Circle of al-Kindıˉ.”
Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 403 8 Plotinus, Afluˉt․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿArab, ed. Badawıˉ (hereafter “ThA”), 1.6–9. Unless
otherwise indicated, all translations from the Greek, Latin, and Arabic are my
own. 9 Who may have been a Melkite, trained in Palestine, or a Maronite, trained in
Syria. See Treiger, “Palestinian Origenism.” At any rate, he was well versed
in philosophy and fluent in Greek, Arabic, and perhaps Syriac. 10 Zimmermann, “Origins,” and Adamson, Arabic Plotinus, think the misattribution was the result of an honest mistake; like D’Ancona (see Plotinus, La
dicesa, ed. D’Ancona, 85–87), I am pretty sure we have to do with a deliberate
forgery, committed by either H․ims․
ıˉ, Kindıˉ, or both, deliberately structured
and rephrased this collection of paraphrastic translations from Plotinus in order to give it the appearance of a work by Aristotle. 11 Zimmermann, “Origins.” 12 Such as D’Ancona (see Plotinus, La dicesa, ed. D’Ancona, 85–87). 13 Other works allegedly translated by Ibn al-Bit․rıˉq, who was said to have accompanied Salm, head of the bayt ․ al-h․
ikma, on his expedition to Byzantium
in search of Greek manuscripts (Endress, “Die wissenschaftliche Literatur,”
3:24), include Plato’s Timaeus, Aristotle’s De caelo, Generation and Parts of Animals,
and Prior Analytics (in a translation denounced as unsatisfactory by subsequent Arabic scholars, see Endress, “Die Bagdader Aristoteliker,” 293), and
perhaps the Secretum secretorum; see Endress, Proclus Arabus, 191–92; Endress,
Review of The Arabic Version of Aristotle’s Meteorology; Endress, “Building the
Library,” 345. It is not always easy to distinguish which translations are due
to Yah․yaˉ and which were carried out by his father al-Bit․rıˉq, who translated
the Tetrabiblos of Ptolemy and some works on medicine, and died ca. 815; see
Endress, “Die wissenschaftliche Literatur,” 2:421. 14 Lettinck, “Aristotle’s ‘Physical’ Works,” 107. 15 Arnzen, Aristoteles’ De Anima.
16 Another “translation” exhibiting similar features is the Book of the Senses and the Sensibles (Kitaˉb al-h․
iss wa-l-mah․s uˉs ). The Kitaˉb represents an extreme case of adaptation, with only about 30 percent of the work occupied by text corresponding to the Aristotelian original, and the rest representing exegetical developments or interpolations. The text’s future editor Rotraud Hansberger believes an initial, rather poor translation of Aristotle’s De sensu was subsequently adapted and interspersed with Neoplatonic-style interpolations written directly in Arabic; Hansberger, “Arabic Adaption.” We will have to wait for Hansberger’s upcoming critical edition to be able to evaluate the author’s conclusions, and see whether the existence of a late Greek intermediary paraphrase really is so improbable. 17 For annıˉya as equivalent to the Greek to on, see, for instance, ThA 8, ed. Badawıˉ, 111.12–17. Huwıˉya sometimes renders the Greek tautoteˉs; cf. ibid., 112.5,
9, 11. 18 Taylor, “Aquinas,” 217–39. 19 On Plotinus’ rejection of deliberation on the part of the Platonic demiurge,
see D’Ancona, “The Timaeus’ Model.” 20 ThA 10. 185–86, ed. Badawıˉ, 162.3–10 (comment on Enn. 5. 8. 7). 21 The Philosophy Reader, ed. Wakelnig (hereafter “GS”), 31, 94.7–9. In contrast,
Intellect, the second principle and first creation of the First, does act by motion (bi-h․
arakati, ThA 8, ed. Badawıˉ, 112.7–8), although it is a motion that
does not involve change from state to state. 22 ThA 5. 8.11–14, ed. Badawıˉ, 66–67. 23 Epistle of the Divine Science 105–9, in ThA, ed. Badawıˉ, 174; English in Plotinus,
Enneades, trans. Lewis, 321: “We say that between mind and its act there
404 Michael Chase
is volition [. . .] the action of the First Agent is not preceded by volition, because he acts solely by the fact of his being.” 24 This aspect is stressed by Adamson, Arabic Plotinus, 132, who writes that if
God willed, he’d be many. It should be noted, however, that the text does not
state this in so many words. 25 As D’Ancona, “The Timaeus’ Model,” 220–22, points out. 26 ThA 10. 159–60, ed. Badawıˉ, 160.9–12; trans. Lewis modified. 27 GS 38, 21a, ed. Wakelnig, 98. 28 ThA 8, ed. Badawıˉ, 98.12–13. 29 GS 37, ed. Wakelnig, 98.5–22 = ed. Badawıˉ, 187.4–10. 30 For the terminology, see ThA, ed. Badawıˉ, 38–39. 31 On the fact that the Creator creates without deliberation, see ThA, ed. Badawıˉ, 66.12–13. Similarly, the World Soul governs the universal body without
thought or deliberation; ThA, ed. Badawıˉ, 91.7–8. 32 GS 30, ed. Wakelnig, 92.15–16. Cf. GS 32, ed. Wakelnig, 94.7: “The First
Agent must be at rest and unmoved.” 33 GS 36, ed. Wakelnig, 98.11–12. 34 Proclus, On the Eternity of the World, quoted by Philoponus, De aeternitate
mundi, ed. Rabe, 55.22. On this argument and its interpretation, see Chase,
“Discussions,” 61–62. 35 Aristotle, Phys. 3. 2, 201b31–32; De anima 2. 2, 417a14–17. 36 Hierocles, On Providence, Book 2, ap. Photius, Library, cod. 251, 436b 30ff.
See also, for instance, Proclus, Elements of Theology, prop. 76. 37 And not by Syrianus, as claimed by D’Ancona, “La notion,” n. 49, and “L’influence,” 94. 38 Porphyry, Commentary on the Timaeus, fr. 51, ed. Sodano, 38.5ff. = Procl.,
In Tim., ed. Diehl, 1:395.10ff. 39 ThA 10. 190, ed. Badawıˉ, 163. 40 Augustinus, De civitate dei 11. 4, ed. Dombart and Kalb, 465.9–10. 41 On the notion of immutability in Augustine, see, for instance, O’Donnell,
Augustine, 394–95. Yet it seems rash to deny that the concept is Platonic simply because “A. claims stoutly that the doctrine was part of him before he ever
read the Platonists.” 42 Augustinus, De civitate dei 10. 31, ed. Dombart and Kalb, 453.26–27. 43 Porphyry, fr. 172, from Philoponus, De aeternitate mundi 6. 177, ed. Rabe,
172.4–7 = ed. Scholten, 3:682. For a French translation with commentary, see
Rashed, “Nouveaux fragments,” 276. 44 Porphyry, fr. 459 Smith, from al-Shahrastaˉnıˉ, Livre des religions et des sectes, ed.
Jolivet-Monnot, 2:357–58 (my emphasis). 45 ThA, 27.7ff. = ed. D’Ancona, 237; trans. Lewis in Plotinus, Enneades, 231 (my
emphasis). 46 ThA 1, ed. D’Ancona, 237.14: al-h․
alıˉfa, allatıˉ lam takun fıˉ zamaˉnin al-battata.
47 Cf. Philoponus, De aeternitate mundi 4, ed. Rabe, 13.12ff., who speaks of
those—including Porphyry?—who say that “The sun, [. . .] which is the cause
of light, creates the latter by its very being [autoˉi toˉi einai ], and neither is light
prior or posterior to the sun nor the sun to light. The bodies in light, moreover, are the cause of the shadow that is brought about from them and always
co-exists with them.” 48 Aeneas of Gaza, Theophrastus, ed. Colonna, 45.20–22. 49 Pinès, “Les textes arabes,” and Thillet, “Indices prophyriens,” enumerate
these as follows: a preference for describing the derivation of the various levels of the universe in causal terms; the idea that the First Principle produces
being, while the second principle produces Form; and the doctrine of learned
Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 405
ignorance. One could add a predilection for allegorical interpretation and
a concern to harmonize Plato and Aristotle. For more details, see Chase,
“Porphyry.” 50 Porphyry, Life of Plotinus, 26.28–37. 51 For evidence, see Chase, “Porphyry,” 175. 52 Overt references by Plotinus to polytheism, for instance, are eliminated or
explained away. When Plotinus states that his line of investigation will enquire into the memories of Zeus himself (kai epitolmeˉsei kai tou Dios autou tas
mneˉmas polupragmonein, Enn. 4. 4, 6.7–8), the Adaptor writes (ThA 8, ed.
Badawıˉ, 104.112–13): “Then we shall proceed to the enquiry into the soul of
Jupiter [al-mushtarıˉ, i.e., the planet]: does it remember anything?” Some signs
of Islamicization, however, will have been introduced by scribes: for instance,
the formulas ʿazza wa-jalla (“the mighty and sublime,” ThA, 84.18) and ʿazza shaʾnahu (“mighty is his nature,” ThA, 105.3), printed in Badawıˉ’s edition
after the mention of the Creator, are lacking in the best manuscript, Aya Sofia
2457.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aeneas of Gaza. Teofrasto. Edited by Maria E. Colonna. Naples: Iodice, 1958.
Al-Shahrastaˉnıˉ. Kitaˉb al-Milal wa-l-nih․
al. Edited by William Cureton. London:
Society for the Publication of Oriental Texts, 1842–46.
Al-Shahrastaˉnıˉ. Livre des religions et des sectes. Edited and translated by Daniel
Gimaret, Guy Monnot, and Jean Jolivet. 2 vols. Leuven: Peeters, 1986–93.
Augustinus. De civitate dei. Libri I–XIII. Edited by Bernhard Dombart and Alfons
Kalb. CCSL 47. Turnhout: Brepols, 1955.
Philoponus. De aeternitate mundi contra Proclum. Edited by Hugo Rabe. Leipzig:
Teubner, 1899.
Philoponus. De aeternitate mundi: Über die Ewigkeit der Welt. Edited by Clemens
Scholten. Turnhout: Brepols, 2011.
Plotinus. Afluˉt․ıˉ n ʿinda al-ʿArab = Plotinus apud arabes: Theologia Aristotelis. Edited by
ʿAbd al-Rahman Badawıˉ. Cairo: Maktaba al-Nahd․a al-mis․
riyya, 1955.
Plotinus. La dicesa dell’anima nei corpi (Enn. IV 8 [6]). Edited by Cristina D’Ancona.
Padua: Il Poligrafo, 2003.
Plotinus. Plotini opera, vol. 2: Enneades IV–V. Plotiniana Arabica. Edited by Paul
Henry and Hans-Rudolf Schwyzer, translated by Geoffrey Lewis. Paris: Desclée de Brouwer, 1959.
Porphyry. Porphyrii In Platonis Timaeum commentariorum fragmenta. Edited by Angelo Raffaele Sodano. Naples: Privately printed, 1964.
Wakelnig, Elvira, ed. and trans. A Philosophy Reader from the Circle of Miskawayh.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Secondary Literature
Adamson, Peter. The Arabic Plotinus: A Philosophical Study of the Theology of
Aristotle. London: Duckworth, 2002.
Arnzen, Rüdiger. Aristoteles’ De Anima: Eine verlorene spätantike Paraphrase in arabischer und persischer Überlieferung. Brill: Leiden, 1998.
406 Michael Chase
Chase, Michael. “Discussions on the Eternity of the World in Antiquity and
Contemporary Cosmology, I–II.” ΣΧΟΛΗ—Ancient Philosophy and the Classical
Tradition 7, no. 1 (2013): 19–68.
Chase, Michael. “Porphyry and the Theology of Aristotle.” In Reading Proclus and the
Book of Causes, vol. 2: Translations and Acculturations, edited by Dragos Calma,
157–81. Leiden: Brill, 2020.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “Greek into Arabic: Neoplatonism in Translation.” In The
Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, edited by Peter Adamson and Richard C. Taylor, 10–31. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “L’influence du vocabulaire arabe: ‘Causa prima est esse tantum.’” In L’élaboration du vocabulaire philosophique au Moyen Âge, edited by Jacqueline Hamesse and Carlos Steel, 51–97. Turnhout: Brepols, 2000.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “La notion de ‘Cause’ dans les textes néoplatoniciens arabes.” In Métaphysiques médiévales: Études en l’honneur d’André de Muralt, edited
by Curzio Chiesa and Léo Freuler, 48–66. Geneva: Revue de théologie et de
philosophie, 1999.
D’Ancona, Cristina. “The Timaeus’ Model for Creation and Providence: An Example of Continuity and Adaptation in Early Arabic Philosophical Literature.”
In Plato’s Timaeus as a Cultural Icon, edited by Gretchen J. Reydams-Schils,
206–37. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2003.
Endress, Gerhard. “Building the Library of Arabic Philosophy: Platonism and
Aristotelianism in the Sources of al-Kindıˉ.” In The Libraries of the Neoplatonists,
edited by Cristina D’Ancona, 319–50. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Endress, Gerhard. “Die Bagdader Aristoteliker.” In Philosophie in der islamischen Welt: 8.–10. Jahrhundert, edited by Ulrich Rudolph, 1:290–362. Basel: Schwabe,
2012.
Endress, Gerhard. “The Circle of al-Kindıˉ: Early Arabic Translations from the
Greek and the Rise of Islamic Philosophy.” In The Ancient Tradition in Christian
and Islamic Hellenism: Studies on the Transmission of Greek Philosophy and Sciences,
edited by Gerhard Endress and Remke Kruk, 43–76. Leiden: Research School
CNWS, 1997.
Endress, Gerhard. Proclus Arabus: Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio Theologica in
arabischer Übersetzung. Beirut: Orient-Institut der Deutschen Morgenlä ndischen
Gesellschaft, 1973.
Endress, Gerhard. Review of The Arabic Version of Aristotle’s Meteorology, by
C. Petraitis. Oriens 23–24, no. 1 (1971): 497–509.
Endress, Gerhard. “Die wissenschaftliche Literatur.” In Grundriß der arabischen
Philologie, vol. 2, edited by Helmut Gätje, 400–506. Wiesbaden: Reichert,
1987. Continued in Grundriß der arabischen Philologie, vol. 3 supplement, edited
by Wolf-Dieterich Fischer, 3–154. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 1992.
Fiori, Emiliano. “Un intellectuel alexandrin en Mésopotamie: Essai d’une interprétation d’ensemble de l’oeuvre de Sergius de Rešʿaynaˉ.” In De l’Antiquité
tardive au Moyen-âge: Etudes de logique aristotélicienne et de philosophie grecque, arabe,
syriaque et latine, edited by Elisa Coda and Cecilia Martini Bonadeo, 59–90.
Paris: Vrin, 2014.
Gutas, Dmitri. Greek Thought, Arabic Culture: The Graeco-Arabic Translation Movement in Baghdad and Early ‘Abbaˉsid Society. London: Routledge, 1998.
Hansberger, Rotraud. “The Arabic Adaptation of the Parva Naturalia (Kitaˉb al-h․
iss
wa-l-mah․
suˉ s).” Studia graeco-arabica 4 (2014): 301–14.
Action by Being Alone in the Plotiniana Arabica 407
Hugonnard-Roche, Henri. La logique d’Aristote du grec au syriaque: Études sur la
transmission des textes de l’Organon et leur interprétation philosophique. Paris: Vrin,
2004.
Lettinck, Paul. “Aristotle’s ‘Physical’ Works and the Arabic Tradition.” In Aristotle and the Arabic Tradition, edited by Ahmed Alwishah and Josh Hayes, 105–20.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
O’Donnell, James J. Augustine: Confessions II. Commentary on Books 1–7. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1992.
Pinès, Shlomo. “Les textes arabes dits plotiniens et le courant «porphyrien» dans
le néoplatonisme grec.” In Le Néoplatonisme: Actes du Colloque international du
CNRS, 303–13. Paris: Éditions du CNRS, 1971.
Rashed, Marwan. “Nouveaux fragments antiprocliens de Philopon en version
arabe et le problème des origines de la théorie de l’‘instauration’ (h․
uduˉ th).” Les
Études philosophiques 105 (2013): 261–92.
Taylor, Richard C. “Aquinas, the Plotiniana Arabica, and the Metaphysics of Being
and Actuality.” Journal of the History of Ideas 59 (1998): 217–39.
Thillet, Pierre. “Indices porphyriens dans la Théologie d’Aristote.” In Le Néoplatonisme:
Actes du Colloque international du CNRS, 292–302. Paris: Éditions du
CNRS, 1971.
Treiger, Alexander. “Palestinian Origenism and the Early History of the Maronites: In Search of the Origins of the Arabic ‘Theology of Aristotle.’” In Ideas
in Motion in Baghdad and Beyond: Philosophical and Theological Exchanges between
Christians and Muslims in the Third/Ninth and Fourth/Tenth Centuries, edited by
Damien Janos, 44–80. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
Watt, John W. “The Syriac Aristotelian Tradition and the Syro-Arabic Baghdad
Philosophers.” In Ideas in Motion in Baghdad and Beyond: Philosophical and Theological Exchanges between Christians and Muslims in the Third/Ninth and Fourth/
Tenth Centuries, edited by Damien Janos, 7–43. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
Zimmermann, Fritz. “The Origins of the So-Called Theology of Aristotle.”
In Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages: The Theology and Other Texts, edited by
Jill Kraye, William F. Ryan, and Charles B. Schmitt, 110–240. London: The
Warburg Institute, 1986.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-22
In a very dense passage of the Long Commentary on the De anima, translated
into English by Richard C. Taylor in his masterly annotated version of
the work, Averroes (Ibn Rushd, d. 1198 CE) gives us a glimpse of how
he sees the nature, aim, and impact of Avicenna’s (Ibn Sīnaˉ, d. 1037 CE)
philosophy.1 In this passage, Averroes critically engages with Avicenna,
as he often does elsewhere. However, unlike other passages in which he
criticizes Avicenna, Averroes here does not take issue with a particular
doctrine that he regards as false and untenable. Instead, he makes a more
general statement about the distinctive features of Avicenna’s philosophy
and its position in the history of philosophy. More specifically, Averroes
highlights what he considers to be the fundamental weakness of Avicenna’s thought, namely, its distance from the ideal philosophical standard
as established in Aristotle. Complementary motifs of dissent against Avicenna emerge in other commentaries: Averroes criticizes his affinity to
Platonism and Islamic revealed theology, on the one hand, and his methodological feebleness—his incapacity to reach a properly demonstrative
level of argumentation—on the other.
In the passage at issue here, Averroes’ attack on Avicenna’s general pretension to dispense with Aristotle is articulated in three points: (1) that Avicenna—as chief of the moderni—exerted a deleterious influence in Andalusia with effects reverberating on Ibn Baˉjja (the Latin Avempace, d. 1138 CE) and Averroes himself; (2) that logic is the most faithfully Aristotelian and, therefore, the strongest part of Avicenna’s philosophy, whereas other domains of Avicenna’s system, namely natural philosophy and metaphysics, are originally (and dangerously) Avicennian, with metaphysics displaying the greatest hiatus between Aristotle and Avicenna; and (3) that Avicenna’s philosophical project intends to begin natural philosophy and metaphysics anew, after and distinct from Aristotle, a project which clashes radically with Averroes’ own.
In other words, the passage in question is one of the most extensive, informative, and far-reaching discussions of Avicenna ever made by Averroes. The present chapter focuses on this passage, using the methodology that Taylor has so painstakingly applied for other crucial points of Averroes’ Long Commentary on the De anima—and, more generally, for 18 “Incepit quasi a se”
Averroes on Avicenna’s
Philosophy in the Long
Commentary on the De anima
Amos Bertolacci
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 409
the Commentator’s noetics and psychology—in pioneering essays that have substantially advanced the scholarship. Particularly inspiring for the present contribution is Taylor’s analysis of the loci paralleli in the various
writings of Averroes and his investigation of the textual and doctrinal sources of Averroes’ contentions. Specifically, this chapter has three interrelated aims: to clarify the details of the passage from Averroes that are still debated in scholarship, on the basis of similar passages in other Aristotelian commentaries and other works by Averroes; to emphasize the historical importance of this passage as a precious testimonium of the entrance of Avicenna’s philosophy in Andalusian falsafa and document that Averroes’ knowledge of Avicenna’s philosophy is probably based on a specific summa by Avicenna, the Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ (Book of the Cure, or of
the Healing), which he apparently knew firsthand; and finally, to call attention to the possibility that, concerning what he says about Avicenna in the passage under discussion, Averroes might have depended on the Introduction of the Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ, authored by Avicenna’s biographer and secretary al-Juˉzjaˉnī.
The Fundamental Text and the Problems of Its
Interpretation
Averroes’ Long Commentary on the De anima, to which the passage that
concerns us here (Text 1) belongs, dates from shortly before 1186 and is
almost completely lost in the Arabic original. Fortunately, it is preserved
in its Latin medieval translation, commonly ascribed to Michael Scot. The
passage reads:
Text 1: Averroes, Long Commentary on the De anima Γ.30 (Averroes
Latinus, Averrois Cordubensis commentarium magnum, ed. Crawford,
470.41–48):
[a] But what made that man [i.e., Ibn Baˉjja] err, and us too for a long
time [longo tempore],2 is that modern thinkers [moderni] set aside the
books of Aristotle and consider [only] the books of the commentators,
and chiefly in the case of the soul, since they believe that this book
[i.e., Aristotle’s De anima] is impossible to understand.
[b] This [i.e., the moderni’s neglect of Aristotle’s De anima and their
exclusive consideration of the commentators in psychology] is due to
Avicenna [et hoc est propter Avicennam], who followed Aristotle only
in logic [dialectica], but in the other [parts of philosophy] [in aliis] he
[did not follow Aristotle, and hence] erred, and chiefly in the case of
metaphysics. [c] This [happened] because [et hoc quia] [Avicenna] began [incepit]
[these other parts of philosophy] as if [he was drawing them] from
himself [quasi a se].3
410 Amos Bertolacci
This criticism complements a comment a little earlier in the same passage,
where Averroes accuses Ibn Baˉjja of misunderstanding Aristotle:
He [i.e., Aristotle] also expressly says that the relation of the intelligibles to images is just as the relation of color to the colored body, not as
the relation of color to the sense of sight, as Ibn Baˉjja thought.4
In section [a], Averroes stigmatizes the tendency of modern philosophers
to dispense with Aristotle’s books, especially in the case of cryptic works
like the De anima, in favor of the commentators’ interpretations. This new
trend is portrayed as very influential, since, according to our text, it determined how the “father” of philosophy in Andalusia, Ibn Baˉjja, approached
Aristotle and it exerted a lasting impact upon Averroes himself. The neglect of Aristotle’s De anima by the moderni and their preference for the
commentators’ views in psychological matters are said in section [b] to be
determined by Avicenna. In Averroes’ eyes, Avicenna imitates Aristotle
only in a single area of philosophy, namely logic (or one of its branches,
dialectic), whereas in the rest of philosophy, psychology included, he is
original, diverging from the First Master. According to Averroes, Avicenna’s independence from Aristotle reaches its climax in metaphysics. As
independence from Aristotle amounts, in Averroes’ view, to error, metaphysics is by implication the most flawed area of Avicenna’s philosophy.
The most obvious interpretation of the bulk of section [c] (incepit quasi a
se, lit.: “he began almost on his own”) is that Avicenna undertook the task
of beginning a large part of philosophy anew, almost independently from
Aristotle, establishing himself as new inceptor of the discipline.
There are several debatable elements of this text. First, the relationship
between the three classes of thinkers outlined in sections [a] and [b]—Ibn
Baˉjja and Averroes; the moderni; and Avicenna—is not totally clear. Even
if, for merely chronological reasons, Ibn Baˉjja and Averroes cannot but
be counted among the moderni, there is good reason to keep them distinct
from these, who are portrayed as the cause of the two men’s error. The relationship between Avicenna and the moderni is even more unclear. In section [b], Avicenna is adduced to explain the error of the moderni in section
[a]—their reliance upon the commentators rather than Aristotle—but this
is different from the error that is ascribed to Avicenna himself in section
[c], namely his independence from any previous authority in philosophy.
Second, the term dialectica in section [b] can be interpreted in either its
literal sense of “dialectic,” as a counterpart to the Arabic jadal, thus limiting the field of consensus between Avicenna and Aristotle to the fifth part
of the Organon, or as referring more broadly to logic (mant ․iq) in general.5
Third, the overall sense of section [c] depends on ambiguous language:
the reference of “This” (hoc) in the sentence “This [happened] because” (et
hoc quia), the object of “begun” (incepit) if read as a transitive verb, and the
precise meaning of “as if [. . .] from himself” (quasi a se) remain unclear.
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 411
Loci paralleli in Other Works by Averroes
Hints toward the resolution of these doubts can be found in other works
by Averroes. As to the first doubt, Avicenna is included among the moderni,
with relevant information given on both Avicenna and the moderni, in
one of Averroes’ Quaestiones in Logicam regarding the Prior Analytics, preserved in the Arabic original and dated to 1196, Maqaˉla fıˉ maʿnaˉ l-maquˉl
ʿalaˉ l-kull wa-ghayr dhaˉlika (Treatise on the Meaning of What is Predicated
Universally and Other Issues).6 The relevant passage (Text 2), never fully
translated before, also sheds further light on the doctrinal areas in which
Avicenna distances himself from Aristotle, as well as on the reasons why
Avicenna pursued independence from Aristotle. In comparison with Text
1, Text 2 displays a more openly critical attitude toward Avicenna (as well
as al-Faˉraˉbī), which might, in a work written about ten years after the Long
Commentary on the De anima, indicate a crescendo in Averroes’ polemic
against Avicenna.
Text 2: Averroes, Treatise on the Meaning of What is Predicated Universally
and Other Issues (Averroes, Maqaˉlaˉt fıˉ l-mant․iq wa-l-ʿilm al-t ․abıˉʿıˉ, ed.
Al-ʿAlawī, 175.1–8):
[i] From this, the goal of this man [i.e., Aristotle] has clearly appeared, and the doubts regarding him that have remained until this
our time have been solved. This was the habit of this man toward
those who doubted against him, namely [to believe that] time was the
guarantor of the solution of what had been doubted against him.
[ii] This [persistence of doubts against Aristotle] is due to [wa-dha
ˉlika li-] people who most weakly consider and least know his [i.e., Aristotle’s] worth in philosophy [qadrihıˉ fıˉ l-h․ikmati] among
those who have ventured to raise doubts against him and to refute his way of stating what became manifest to him, especially if [something similar] had not become manifest to his predecessors, as we find that Ibn Sīnaˉ is doing, so that all his books [kutubahuˉ kullahaˉ] are nothing else than doubts against this man, especially in important questions.
[iii] One of the worst things that a posterior [thinker] [mutaʾakhkhir]
can do is to wander far from his [i.e., Aristotle’s] teaching and to
follow another way different from his, as this happened to Abuˉ Nas․
r
[al-Faˉraˉbī] in his books on logic [al-mant ․iqiyya], and to Ibn Sīnaˉ in the
physical and theological [i.e., metaphysical] sciences.7
The second and third sections of Text 2 relate directly to Avicenna, with
a more cursory reference to al-Faˉraˉbī in the third section. As regards Avicenna, Text 1 and Text 2 have several points in common: both connect
Avicenna with a larger group of thinkers (Text 1 [a]; Text 2 [ii]); both say
that Avicenna’s attitude to Aristotle had lasting effects until Averroes’ time
412 Amos Bertolacci
(Text 1 [a]; Text 2 [i]); and both say that the originality of Avicenna with
regard to Aristotle concerns the areas of philosophy that lie outside logic
(Text 1 [b]; Text 2 [iii]).
In the context of this general similarity, Text 2, being less elliptical
than Text 1 and surviving in Arabic, brings clarity.8 As to the relationship
of Avicenna with the moderni, Text 2 [iii] informs us, first of all, of an
Arabic term (mutaʾakhkhir, “posterior [thinker],” pl. mutaʾakhkhiruˉna) that
is closely related to the one that lies behind Michael Scot’s recourse to
the adjective modernus in Text 1 [a] (arguably stemming from the root
h․
-d-th). Thus, Text 2 [iii] makes it clear that, for Averroes, Avicenna belongs to the class of the mutaʾakhkhiruˉna/moderni, along with al-Faˉraˉbī, and
that his negative impact on the moderni in Text 1 [a] should therefore be
taken as coming from one particularly influential member of the same
group, not from someone who is not a modernus.9
Most importantly, Text 2 [ii] helps to elucidate the relationship between
Avicenna and the moderni, problematically adumbrated in Text 1, in which
Avicenna is said to have influenced the moderni and, nonetheless, the mod-
erni are portrayed as relying on the commentators rather than on Aristotle,
whereas Avicenna is depicted as independent from all previous authorities.
On the one hand, the group, comparable to that of the moderni in Text 1
[a], in which Avicenna is inserted in Text 2 [ii] is formed by “those who
have ventured to raise doubts against him [i.e., Aristotle] and to refute his
way of stating what became manifest to him.” This description fits the
portrayal of the moderni in Text 1 [a] as scholars ready to dispense with
Aristotle’s books due to the difficulty of understanding how these books
formulate crucial tenets in pivotal areas of philosophy such as psychology.
On the other hand, Text 2 [ii] distinguishes within this larger group a
more restricted sub-group, formed by those with little consideration for
and insufficient knowledge of Aristotle’s value in philosophy. This feature,
presented as typical of certain “people” (naˉs) at the beginning of section
[ii], applies especially, if not exclusively, to Avicenna at its end. By implication, Avicenna appears as not only, along with the other members
of the larger group, dismissive toward Aristotle’s statements about given
doctrines or disciplines but also, as a prime representative of the smaller
sub-group, moved by personal lack of esteem for the Greek master and
hence systematically critical of him as a philosopher in globo (“all his [i.e.,
Avicenna’s] books are nothing else than doubts against this man [i.e., Aristotle], especially in important questions”). The constant animosity against
Aristotle ascribed to Avicenna here well explains what Text 1 [c] contends
about Avicenna’s decision to dispense with the Stagirite and to do philosophy on his own in some domains.10
As to the second doubt, the exact meaning of dialectica in Text 1 [b], Text 2 sheds clarifying light. In fact, Text 2 [iii] offers good reasons to understand it as “logic.” In this section, Avicenna is said to part company with Aristotle only in natural philosophy and metaphysics, to the
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 413
exclusion of logic, an area of philosophy in which distance from Aristotle is imputed only to al-Faˉraˉbī. Thus, if we take dialectica to mean “logic” in Text 1, we obtain a precise correspondence between Texts 1 and 2 as to the areas of distance between Aristotle and Avicenna. These areas would include all of philosophy other than logic, with particular regard to metaphysics, in Text 1; natural philosophy and metaphysics, logic excluded, in Text 2.11
Furthermore, the literal, narrower, interpretation of the term dialectica
in Text 1 as “dialectic” ( jadal) is hardly tenable in light of Averroes’ quotation of the epilogue of the section on sophistry (safsat․
a) of Avicenna’s
Shifaˉʾ, in which Avicenna pays tribute to Aristotle as an unmatched model
of this branch of logic and, possibly, of logic in general. The quotation
appears in Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Sophistici Elenchi.12 Averroes therefore knows firsthand a text by Avicenna in which Avicenna claims
to be following Aristotle in the art of sophistry as well—that is, outside
the narrow boundaries of dialectic. Since Averroes does not rebuke Avicenna for a similar contention in the Middle Commentary on the Sophistici Elenchi or elsewhere, he probably agrees with the statement. Moreover,
the looser interpretation of dialectica in Text 1 as meaning logic in general
is corroborated by the vocabulary of some Arabic–Latin translations and
by specific passages of the Arabic–Latin translations of Averroes made by
Michael Scot (in all likelihood the translator of the Long Commentary on
the De anima), in which dialectica corresponds to “logic” (mant ․iq).13 Thus, although the narrower meaning of dialectica as “dialectic” might fit with
other motifs of Averroes’ anti-Avicennian polemic,14 the broader understanding of it as “logic” is decidedly preferable in the context of Text 1.
Concerning the third doubt, the “This” (hoc) occurring at the very
beginning of Text 1 [c] might refer either to Avicenna’s independence
from Aristotle’s natural philosophy and metaphysics in general or to his
independence from Aristotle’s metaphysics in particular, both expressed in
the previous section 1 [b].15 As to what exactly Avicenna began (incepit)—
whether it was studying natural philosophy and metaphysics, or writing
works of natural philosophy and metaphysics, or proposing a new trend
in natural philosophy and metaphysics—we can only speculate. The exact
meaning of the closing quasi a se (“as if [. . .] from himself”) is equally
elusive.
Since the same pronoun “This” (hoc) in the sentence “This is due to
Avicenna” (Et hoc est propter Avicennam) at the beginning of Text 1 [b] refers to the part of the previous sentence delimited by “chiefly” (maxime),
namely the case of the science of the soul, one would be tempted to assume
that the pronoun “This” (hoc) in Text 1 [c] also refers to the part of the
previous sentence delimited by “chiefly” (maxime), i.e., the case of metaphysics. However, Text 2 [iii] suggests a broader interpretation: an application of the point not only to metaphysics, but also to natural philosophy,
as other statements in Averroes’ works confirm.16
414 Amos Bertolacci
The following passages of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Sophistici Elenchi and of his Epitome of the Metaphysics clarify, respectively, the meanings
of incepit and of a se:
Text 3: Averroes, Middle Commentary on the Sophistici Elenchi (Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ mant ․iq Arist ․uˉ , ed. Jihaˉmī, 2:729.16–17):
Because the one who undertakes to understand his [i.e., Aristotle’s]
statements without anyone else who precedes him in that, is similar to
the one who begins [yabtadiʾu] the art.17
Text 4: Averroes, Epitome of the Metaphysics (Averroes, Compendio de
Metafísica, ed. Quirós Rodríguez, 14.10–11; English translation in
Menn, “Faˉraˉbī,” 74, emphasis added):
All this [i.e., the falsity of Avicenna’s position] is clear on the slightest reflection, but that is the nature of this man [i.e., Avicenna] in
much of what he brought forth out of himself [min ʿinda nafsihıˉ].18
In Text 3, which is part of the colophon of the commentary, Averroes applies to himself this role of new initiator of the “art” (or discipline) of sophistry, because of the lack of previous satisfactory commentaries on Aristotle’s Sophistici Elenchi and the ensuing need for direct recourse to Aristotle’s doctrine. In Text 4, many metaphysical theories of Avicenna are declared by Averroes to be false insofar as they result from Avicenna’s own point of view rather than from the scrutiny of previous authorities. If applied to the case of Text 1, the content of these passages shows that, for Averroes, Avicenna is initiating anew the disciplines of natural philosophy and metaphysics much more radically than Averroes does in the case of the sophistic art, because Avicenna performs this new beginning not only autonomously from Aristotle’s commentators, like Averroes, but also—quite audaciously—from Aristotle himself, relying almost exclusively on his personal talents and substituting himself for Aristotle, which makes him almost totally independent from any previous source.
The adverb quasi that one finds in Text 1 [c] is very frequent in Averroes’ Long Commentary on the De anima, as it is in his Long Commentary on
the Metaphysics. In the latter, it very often translates the Arabic ka-anna
(“as if,” “as though”),19 as is probably the case in Text 1.20 This correspondence, if confirmed, would indicate that quasi in Text 1 [c] does not
convey primarily an approximation in mode (“as it were”) or in quantity
(“almost”), thus qualifying the following a se, but expresses the way in
which Avicenna is acting, according to Averroes. In Averroes’ eyes, Avicenna performs natural philosophy and metaphysics as if he were drawing
these disciplines from himself, rather than from their real and authoritative
source, which in Averroes’ opinion is Aristotle.
The idea that Avicenna intended to be the new initiator of natural philosophy and metaphysics after Aristotle, contrary to his faithfulness to the
Stagirite in logic, occurs in a particular passage of Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 415
which might be the source of Averroes’ contention. This passage has no
correspondence in the other summae by Avicenna, since it is not written by
Avicenna himself, but by a member of his school. Before focusing on this
passage later in my chapter, I wish to argue in the following section that
Averroes resorted to the Shifaˉʾ as his main source of knowledge of Avicenna’s philosophy, not only in the case of Text 1, but more generally in his
many references to Avicenna throughout his commentaries on Aristotle,
as well as elsewhere.
Averroes as a Reader of Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉ ʾ
The exact date, the number of texts, and the precise channels for the
introduction of Avicenna’s philosophy into Andalusia still require assessment. The first documented familiarity with Avicenna’s thought in Andalusia dates approximately to the first decades of the twelfth century
CE,21 largely before the famous H․
ayy ibn Yaqz․aˉn (composed between 1177
and 1182) by Ibn T․
ufayl (d. 1185), which has been traditionally taken as
the starting point of Andalusian Avicennism.22 Whatever the exact terminus post quem of the introduction of Avicenna’s works in Andalusia may
be, Averroes’ early works, especially his epitomes, composed in the 1160s
(after 1158) and containing extensive explicit quotations of Avicenna,
provide an indisputable terminus ante quem.23 The chronology of the beginning of the translation activity regarding Avicenna in Andalusia (before
1166),24 and the recourse to Avicenna in the work al-ʿAqıˉda al-rafıˉʿa (The Exalted Faith), composed around 1160 by the promoter of the Andalusian
translations of Avicenna, Abraham ibn Daud (ca. 1110–1180),25 confirm this approximate date. Whether Ibn Baˉjja had access to Avicenna’s texts
is disputed. On the one hand, in specific doctrinal areas of his writings,
one can detect traces of Avicenna’s influence.26 On the other, the fact that
Ibn Baˉjja never explicitly quotes Avicenna, even when discussing topics of
shared interest, can be taken as a sign that he lacked knowledge of Avicenna’s works.27 It should also be recalled that Averroes himself—doubtlessly
a connoisseur of Andalusian philosophy—highlights in Text 1 [a] a pervasive and profound, albeit negative, influence of Avicenna’s philosophy
on Ibn Baˉjja (“But what made that man [i.e., Ibn Baˉjja] err”). Averroes’
testimony should not be overlooked in any future, more comprehensive,
considerations of the issue.
As to the works of Avicenna known in Muslim Spain at the time of Averroes, one can surely point to the Shifaˉʾ, since parts of this summa were translated into Latin in Toledo during Averroes’ lifetime in the second half of the century.28 Several manuscripts of this work were apparently at the translators’ disposal.29 The diffusion of the Shifaˉʾ at that time in Andalusia is confirmed by its noticeable presence among the sources of the al-ʿAqıˉda al-rafıˉʿa written by the initiator of the Latin translation, Ibn Daud, in Toledo around 1160.30 Information about other works by Avicenna that may have
416 Amos Bertolacci
spread throughout Andalusia is less certain.31 The route by which the Shifaˉʾ
(and other Avicennian works) were transmitted to the Muslim West remains undetermined, although the diffusion was surely rapid. One can explain this rapidity by recalling that Baghdad, the capital of the Muslim empire, was the city in which the Shifaˉʾ was repeatedly copied at the very beginning of the twelfth century CE (its metaphysical section was copied in 1110 and 1115).32
This being the case, it comes as no surprise that Averroes’ knowledge of Avicenna’s philosophy appears to depend primarily on the Shifaˉʾ. First of all, Averroes mentions the title of this work on several occasions.33 Although he points to a variety of works by Avicenna with which he was acquainted,34
the evidence of his knowledge of other ones than the Shifaˉʾ is much less extensive.
35 In light of these numerous explicit references, the writing by Avicenna that Averroes simply mentions as “Avicenna’s book” (suo libro) without further qualification can hardly be anything other than the Shifaˉʾ.36 In fact, many quotations attributed to Avicenna by Averroes concern doctrines that can be found in the logic,37 natural philosophy,38 and metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ.39 The same applies to the tacit quotations of doctrines of Avicenna that can be detected here and there in Averroes’ writings.40 The technique of Averroes’ quotations of Avicenna has been described as “condensed paraphrase,” on account of the liberty that Averroes takes in reporting Avicenna’s text.41 The abridged character of these accounts, however, cannot hide a very significant fact: several doctrines of Avicenna that Averroes quotes, either explicitly or tacitly, occur only in Avicenna’s Shifaˉʾ.42
The frequency and comprehensiveness of Averroes’ explicit critical
references to Avicenna’s philosophy suggest a wide-ranging familiarity
with the Shifaˉʾ, although it is difficult to determine the limits of his acquaintance with this work, i.e., whether it was exhaustive or not. Despite
the existence of indirect sources of information about the Shifaˉʾ (such as
al-Ghazaˉl ī’s Tahaˉfut al-falaˉsifa, Incoherence of the Philosophers, which
Averroes famously refuted in his Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut, Incoherence of the
Incoherence),43 Averroes’ access to the work appears to have been mainly
firsthand.44 Sometimes he refers to doctrines of the Shifaˉʾ as if he were
quoting the passages in which they are expressed,45 while also providing
information on the mode through which the work was transmitted to the
Islamic West.46 Likewise, he mentions doctrines of Avicenna that he is
unable to understand, as if he were struggling with Avicenna’s formulations.
47 Finally, he discards the authorship of doctrines wrongly ascribed
to Avicenna, referencing their discordance with Avicenna’s original texts
(the “evidence of his statements,” al-z․aˉhir min kalaˉmihıˉ).48
Did Averroes Read al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction
to the Shifaˉ ʾ?
From the evidence presented in the previous section, one can conclude
that Averroes was most probably acquainted with Avicenna’s Shifaˉʾ, that
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 417
the Shifaˉʾ was his privileged way of accessing Avicenna’s philosophy, and
that he knew this work extensively, if not exhaustively.
If the interpretation of Text 1 that I presented earlier in this chapter is correct, the text may further determine Averroes’ familiarity with the Shifaˉʾ, by providing evidence that he knew of one special part of Avicenna’s work, a part that, though traditionally transmitted with the rest of the work, was penned not by Avicenna himself, but by his eleventh-century secretary and biographer Abuˉ ʿUbayd ʿAbd al-Waˉh․id
ibn Muḥammad al-Juˉzjaˉnī, namely the Introduction. Al-Ju
ˉ zjaˉnī’s Introduction to the Shifaˉʾ was surely one of the parts of the work available in Andalusia in Averroes’ time, since it is among the portions translated from Arabic into Latin in Toledo in the second half of the twelfth century.
In the Introduction to the Shifaˉʾ (whose relevant parts are gathered in Text 5), al-Juˉzjaˉnī contends the following: that Avicenna intended to compose the Shifaˉʾ in an original way; that he fully implemented this plan in the sections of the work concerning natural philosophy and metaphysics, writing most of the former and all the latter without the help of any book; and that he reverted to a more traditional way of composition, and consequently to a more faithful attitude to the transmitted corpus of philosophy, in logic and in the remaining portion of natural philosophy. In all this, al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction strikingly mirrors Text 1 (as clarified in Texts 2–4). There, Averroes assesses the main parts of Avicenna’s system in terms of their comparative fidelity to the writings of Aristotle. In Averroes’ estimation, for example, Avicenna’s logic is dependent on Aristotle, whereas the other parts of his philosophy, especially metaphysics, are not. Averroes also suggests that the parts of Avicenna’s system less faithful to Aristotle were originally produced by Avicenna himself. This is precisely what al-Juˉzjaˉnī, in a different form, maintains in the Introduction. On the basis of this resemblance, one should not overlook the possibility that Averroes’ main points in Text 1 might reflect motifs of al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction.
Text 5: Abuˉ ʿUbayd ʿAbd al-Waˉh․id ibn Muḥammad al-Juˉzjaˉnī (fifth/
eleventh century), Introduction to Avicenna’s Shifaˉʾ (Avicenna, Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․
iq, al-Madkhal, ed. Qanawatī, al-Khud․ayrī, and
al-Ahwaˉnī, 2.11–13, 2.19–3.2, 3.10–11, 4.1–5; ed. Di Vincenzo, 4.21–
6.23, 6.27–29, 8.36–38, 8.41–10.44)
[a] I [i.e., Avicenna] have neither the time nor the inclination to
occupy myself with close textual analysis and commentary. But if you
[pl.] would be content with whatever I have readily in mind [which I
have thought] on my own [bi-maˉ yatayassaru lıˉ min ʿindıˉ ], then I could
write for you [pl.] a comprehensive work arranged in the order that
will occur to me [lıˉ ]. We readily offered our consent to this and urged
him to start with Physics. He began with that [. . .].
418 Amos Bertolacci
[b] He [i.e., Avicenna] voluntarily applied himself with great earnestness to its [i.e., the Shifaˉʾ’s] composition, and in a period of twenty
days he finished Metaphysics and Physics (except for the two books on
Zoology and Botany) without having available any book to consult,
but by relying solely upon his natural talents [t․
abʿahuˉ fa-qat ․t․
] [. . .].
[c] There [in Hamadhaˉn] he worked on the Logic [of the Shifaˉʾ].
He had access to the books [of Aristotle and the commentators], and
it consequently happened that he followed a course parallel to them,
proceeding according to the order followed by people [in the Aristotelian tradition] and discussing their statements of which he disapproved [. . .]. He composed also the Zoology and Botany.
[d] My [i.e., al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s] purpose in recounting these stories is to tell
the reason why [. . .] there is a disparity between his [i.e., Avicenna’s]
organization of the Logic and that of the Physics and Metaphysics, and
also to provoke wonder for his ability to compose the Physics and the
Metaphysics in a period of twenty days without having access to books
but by taking dictation only from his heart [wa-innamaˉ yumlıˉ ʿalayhi qalbuhuˉ . . . fa-qat․
t․
] which was preoccupied with the afflictions [then]
besetting it.49
Text 5 matches Text 1 in several aspects. First, it explains that “from himself” in Text 1 [c]—corresponding to “on my own,” “relying solely upon
his natural talents,” and “taking dictation only from his heart” in Text 5
[a], [b], and [d]—means “without having available any book to consult”
(Text 5 [b]), where “book” refers in all likelihood to the works of Aristotle and the Aristotelian commentators (Text 5 [c]).50 Second, it confirms
that the logic of the Shifaˉʾ in its entirety (not only the dialectic) is the part
of Avicenna’s system most similar to Aristotle’s counterpart, the Organon,
which Avicenna imitated (“he followed a course parallel to them [i.e.,
Aristotle’s and the commentators’ books]”) and of which he adopted the
traditional order for the exposition of topics (Text 5 [c]). Third, it also
provides some clues for understanding the expression “chiefly in the case
of metaphysics” in Text 1 [b], insofar as it asserts that most of the natural
philosophy of the Shifaˉʾ was original with respect to Aristotle, but also
that the two sections of natural philosophy on botany and zoology were
written by Avicenna according to a more traditional style (Text 5 [b]–[c]):
in this way, the partial originality of the natural philosophy of the Shifaˉʾ
with respect to Aristotle’s natural philosophy turns out to be lower than
the full originality of the metaphysics.
One can therefore suppose that Averroes had in mind Text 5 when he
was writing Text 1, and that he fairly reported in Text 1 the amount of
originality (or lack thereof) of the actual content of the Shifaˉʾ with respect
to Aristotle not only because he personally evaluated sources and formats
of the various sections of Avicenna’s summa, but possibly also because he
relied on the information on this point offered by al-Juˉzjaˉnī in Text 5.51 If
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 419
the parallels between Text 1 and Text 5 detected here should be confirmed
and corroborated by further research, we would be entitled to add al-Ju
ˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction to the Shifaˉʾ to the parts of Avicenna’s work known
to Averroes and to extend to this section his acquaintance with Avicenna’s
masterpiece.
Conclusion
Three points lie in the background of what we have observed in the preceding pages. First, independence from Aristotle not only inspires Avicenna’s own self-perception and self-description in famous texts well-known
to Avicennian scholars,52 but also governs the concrete praxis of his way of
doing philosophy, even in works avowedly lenient toward the Peripatetic
tradition such as the Shifaˉʾ. One can grasp this tendency with particular
clarity in the metaphysics of this summa, in which several veiled criticisms
of Aristotle can be detected.53 Whereas the former level may shed light
on the question of the “self-marketing” promoted by Avicenna as a conscious innovator of the praxis of philosophy, the latter level is far more
complex, and cannot be answered in the frame of a single paper. What is
important for the present purposes is that in their remarks on the varying
degree of Avicenna’s faithfulness (or better, unfaithfulness) to Aristotle,
both Averroes and al-Juˉzjaˉnī capture a real and pivotal aspect of Avicenna’s
philosophy.
Second, independence from Aristotle is fundamental not only in Avicenna’s own understanding of the development and implementation of the
philosophical heritage, but also in Averroes’ animosity against his Eastern
predecessor. In this perspective, the texts of Averroes analyzed here show
that the quintessence of the Commentator’s philosophy lies in a twofold
relation with the previous philosophical tradition: positive in the case of
Aristotle, and negative in the case of Avicenna. If Avicenna’s way of doing
philosophy follows the path of novelty (not only in programs, but also in
practice), whereas Averroes’ philosophical agenda consists in loyally following Aristotle on the basis of an almost “reactionary” assent to the idea
of school tradition, Avicenna and Averroes turn out to propose different
values and norms of what it means to do philosophy.54 In fact, using a
terminology commonly adopted in the history of science, we can speak of
two different and opposed “paradigms” of the praxis of philosophy. The
repercussions of these two paradigms on the fate of Aristotelian philosophy in the Latin West until the Renaissance, as assuring its continuity
(Averroes) but also allowing its final dismissal (Avicenna), are worthy of
attentive consideration.55
A third element may be relevant to the present discussion in connection
with al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s insistence on the “disparity between his [i.e., Avicenna’s]
organization of the Logic and that of the Physics and Metaphysics” (Text 5
[d], emphasis added). If it is true, as Dimitri Gutas has proposed, that this
420 Amos Bertolacci
insistence is “an attempt to answer Avicenna’s Peripatetic critics (actual
or potential) who would have expected him to follow [. . .] the order and
the contents of the Aristotelian canon of writings,” and that “the tenor
of Juˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction is apologetic [. . .] and [. . .] its main thrust is to
defend Avicenna’s Peripatetic orthodoxy,”56 these advocates of Peripateticism are not necessarily to be sought only outside Avicenna’s circle, but
might well be among the members of his own school. In fact, al-Juˉzjaˉnī
himself could be one of them. The same “apologetic” attitude is reflected
in the transmission history of the metaphysics of this summa, a process to
which al-Juˉzjaˉnī surely contributed in his capacity as Avicenna’s secretary.
In this part of the work, a more originally Avicennian way of arranging
the doctrine of the universals in treatise 5 (attested, at least in part, by the
Latin translation and some Arabic manuscripts) is transformed into a much
more traditional way of expounding the doctrine. This less innovative and
more customary account is the one transmitted by the Arabic versio vulgata
of the work—that is, by the majority of its extant Arabic manuscripts.57
By the same token, al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s “bibliographical” explanation of why
the natural philosophy and metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ (dictated by Avicenna’s individual heart) are much more original than its logic (grounded in
the solid textual support of a previous millenary tradition) may not be
designed only to increase the appeal of the work for an external audience
expecting a more uniform and traditional manner of exposition in the
various parts of the summa. Merchandising strategies apart, his explanation
may have also served to silence the Peripatetic orthodoxy internal to Avicenna’s school, which could not help noticing the unbridgeable difference
within the Shifaˉʾ between the logic, on the one hand, and the natural
philosophy and the metaphysics, on the other, in terms of closeness to
Aristotle and his commentators. That orthodoxy arguably preferred the
logic over the natural philosophy and metaphysics precisely because of its
traditional character. One may surmise that al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s own philosophical tastes went in the same direction. After all, the Shifaˉʾ was Avicenna’s
response to al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s request for a work replicating Avicenna’s previous
commentaries on the philosophical corpus in a quite traditional format.
In the Introduction, citing Avicenna’s reluctance to engage in such an
endeavor as the reason why the Shifaˉʾ did not take the shape of a commentary, and invoking external circumstances such as the availability or
unavailability of books to explain why Avicenna’s masterpiece turned out
uneven in style and content, were also ways to downplay the failure of
al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s solicitations and the shortcomings of his promotional activity,
in a sort of self-apology.
If this line of interpretation is correct, and if the tentative conclusions
reached in the present chapter are tenable, we would then be confronted
with an interesting similarity between the closest disciple of Avicenna
in the East, al-Juˉzjaˉnī, and his archenemy in the West, Averroes, concerning Avicenna’s attitude to Aristotle. Being equally unable to manage
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 421
Avicenna’s extreme originality with respect to Aristotle in natural philosophy and metaphysics, Averroes would have resorted to overtly criticizing
and rejecting it, whereas al-Juˉzjaˉnī would have obliquely attempted to
justify its presence and minimize its outcomes.
Acknowledgments
I am deeply grateful to Katja Krause, Luis Xavier López-Farjeat, Nick
Oschmann, and Kate Sturge for their invaluable comments on the style
and content.
Notes 1 Averroes, Long Commentary, 374–75. The passage in question is further discussed by Taylor, “Introduction,” xcv. 2 The expression longo tempore in section [a] has been interpreted either as “for
a long time,” as in the above translation, or as “a long time ago”: Averroes,
L’intelligence, 139 (“il y a longtemps”); Janssens, “Ibn Rushd,” 405, modifies
the French translation as “longtemps,” although he acknowledges the fundamental ambiguity of the expression longo tempore, since Averroes continued to hold “admiration pour les ‘Commentateurs’” for a long time (ibid., n.
1). Although the two competing interpretations are not mutually exclusive
(Averroes might be talking about a state of affairs that happened a long time
ago and continued for a long time, with reference to the time period covering the composition of his epitomes, which lasted about a decade), it seems
difficult to totally exclude the first interpretation, since the more natural way
to understand the expression longo tempore is that it designates duration, and
one wonders why Michael Scot did not translate the Arabic text that he had
in front of him with olim or quondam, rather than with longo tempore, if he understood it solely as “a long time ago.” It is important to stress in this context
that the wrong attitude of which Averroes accuses the moderni in section [a] is
not simply reliance on the commentators, but reliance on the commentators
without recourse to Aristotle’s text. 3 “Sed illud quod fecit illum hominem errare, et nos etiam longo tempore, est
quia Moderni dimittunt libros Aristotelis et considerant libros expositorum,
et maxime in anima, credendo quod iste liber impossibile est ut intelligatur.
Et hoc est propter Avicennam, qui non imitatus est Aristotelem nisi in Dialectica, sed in aliis erravit, et maxime in Metaphysica; et hoc quia incepit
quasi a se.” English translation by Taylor in Averroes, Long Commentary, 374–
75; slightly modified (Taylor translates dialectica as “dialectics,” in aliis as “in
other things,” and quasi a se as “as it were, [doing philosophy] from his own
perspective”); insertions are mine. The French translation in Averroes, L’intelligence,
139 (“Mais ce qui a fait errer cet homme [Avempace], et nous aussi
il y a longtemps, c’est que les Modernes laissent de côté les livres d’Aristote
et examinent [plutôt] ceux des commentateurs—principalement pour L’Âme,
car il pensent que ce livre est impossible à comprendre. Et tout cela est la
faute d’Avicenne, qui n’a imité Aristote que dans sa Dialectique, mai qui a erré
pour tout le reste, particulièrement dans la Métaphysique; car il a, pour ainsi
dire, [re]commencé [à partir de lui-même]”), is reproduced, slightly modified,
in Janssens, “Ibn Rushd,” 405. The importance of section [a] of this text is
stressed by Endress, “Le projet d’Averroès,” 13.
422 Amos Bertolacci 4 Averroes Latinus, Averrois Cordubensis commentarium magnum, 469.27–31; Averroes,
Long Commentary, 374 and n. 219. 5 The interpretation of dialectica as “logic” is upheld by Janssens, “Ibn Rushd,”
405, in an integration (“à notre avis, il s’agit de toute la logique, et pas
seulement du livre de ce titre”) of the French translation in Averroes, L’intelligence,
139. The French translation opts for “Dialectique” (although “Dialectique” is then paraphrased as “Logique,” 335 n. 638). 6 Averroes, Maqaˉlaˉt fıˉ l-mant․iq wa-l-ʿilm al-t ․abıˉ ʿıˉ , 175.1–8. The work is recorded
under no. 3.7 in Endress, “Averrois Opera,” 368. 7 Section [iii] of this text (Averroes, Maqaˉlaˉt fıˉ l-mant․iq wa-l-ʿilm al-t ․abıˉ ʿıˉ ,
175.6–8) is translated as follows by Elamrani-Jamal in “Ibn Rušd et les Premiers Analytiques,” 52: “ce que l’auteur postérieur à Aristote peut fair de pire
est de s’écarter de son enseignement et de suivre une autre voie que la sienne,
comme celà est arrivé à Abuˉ Nas․r [al-Faˉraˉbī] dans ses livres de logique et à Ibn
Sīnaˉ dans le sciences physiques et théologiques.” 8 The causal clause at the beginning of Text 2 [ii] (“This is due to,” wa-dhaˉlika li-) even suggests the Arabic equivalent of the sentences “This is due to Avicenna” (et hoc est propter Avicennam) and “This [happened] because” (et hoc quia)
in Text 1 [b]–[c] (arguably, wa-dhaˉlika li-bni Sıˉnaˉ and wa-dhaˉlika li-annahuˉ,
respectively). This parallelism supports keeping the reading Et hoc est propter
Avicennam in Text 1 [b], contrary to the alternative reading Et hoc est proprie
Avicennae proposed by Janssens, “Ibn Rushd,” 406–7. 9 Since Text 1 belongs to a commentary on natural philosophy (De anima),
al-Faˉraˉbī is understandably not mentioned there: in Text 2 [iii], al-Faˉraˉbī is
depicted by Averroes in an equally negative light, but only with regard to the
province of logic. 10 Since Averroes speaks generically of “all his [i.e., Avicenna’s] books,” in Averroes’ understanding Avicenna’s critical attitude to Aristotle appears in natural
philosophy and metaphysics, but it also surfaces in logic, and should be taken
as the motivating force of Avicenna’s choice to follow an independent course
from Aristotle in natural philosophy and metaphysics. 11 If we take dialectica to mean logic, as Text 2 suggests, we also obtain a more
balanced contrast between logic and metaphysics in Text 1 [b]. In this case,
two entire parts of philosophy would be contrasted, rather than a section of a
part, i.e., dialectic, and an entire part, i.e., metaphysics. 12 See the passage of the colophon of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Elenchi Sophistici (Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ mant ․iq Arist ․uˉ , 2:729.9–730.3) translated into
French in Averroès, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad, 1:31–32. The pericope of
Avicenna’s Shifaˉʾ quoted by Averroes in this passage is translated into English
in Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition, 28. See, in particular, Avicenna’s statement: “we [. . .] found no method for [the study of] sophistical
matters other than the one Aristotle gave”; the expression “this art” in the
sentence “And did there appear after him anybody who added anything at all
to this art beyond what Aristotle said?” might refer to logic in general (cf. the
French translation in Averroès, Commentaire moyen, 1:32 n. 3). 13 For dialectica as a translation of “logic” (mant ․iq) rather than “dialectic” ( jadal),
see, for instance, Al-Faˉraˉbī, Über die Wissenschaften, 22–62. The same correspondence mant ․iq–dialectica can be noticed in passages of the Latin translations
of Averroes’ commentaries: for instance, the expression ʿalaˉ sabīli l-mant․
iqi in
Aristoteles Arabus, Al-t․
abıˉ ʿa, 908.3 (= λογικῶς, Phys. Θ. 8, 264a8), is translated as secundum dialecticam in Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Physics (book
Θ, c. 70, Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 4:414B);
the same correspondence with mant ․iq and related expressions applies to dialectica
and sermones dialectici in Averroes’ explanation of Aristotle’s passage,
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 423
Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 4:414G–K. For a
more straightforward translation of mant ․iq as logica in the Long Commentary on
the Physics, see, e.g., the expression naz․aran mant․
iqiyyan, 227.4, corresponding
to λογικῶς in Phys. Γ. 5, 204b4, translated as consideratione logica in book Γ,
c. 40, of Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 4:103A
(I thank Matteo Di Giovanni for this information). 14 Significantly, the Topics are the only part of logic commenting on which,
in his so-called Middle Commentaries, Averroes quotes Avicenna without
explicitly refuting him (see Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ Kitaˉb al-Jadal). Moreover, the
emphasis on dialectic as the exclusive area of similarity between Avicenna
and Aristotle might aim to underscore the dialectical character of Avicenna’s
method and his failure to attain a properly demonstrative approach—a critical
remark that Averroes frequently makes (see, for instance, the passage of Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Physics, book A, c. 83 (Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 4:47F–K), quoted in Bertolacci, “Avicenna
and Averroes on the Proof of God’s Existence,” 86–87; see also the text of the
same commentary cited in note 36 below). 15 The absence of any specification might even suggest a wider application to
philosophy tout court, as current translations seem to imply. See Averroes, Long
Commentary, 374–75: “This is because he began [incepit], as it were, [doing
philosophy] from his own perspective.” In Averroes, L’intelligence, Text 1 [c] is
translated as “car il a, pour ainsi dire, [re]commencé [à partir de lui-même]”
(139) and paraphrased as “parce qu’il a commencé comme s’il était le premier,” “parce qu’il a voulu tout tirer de son propre fonds” (335 n. 638, emphasis added). However, neither the content of Text 1 [b], in which Avicenna is
said to follow Aristotle in dialectica/logic, nor the testimony of Text 2 [iii], in
which the distance from Aristotle’s logic is ascribed to al-Faˉraˉbī rather than to
Avicenna, lend themselves to this interpretation. 16 A broader interpretation is supported by the following remark about natural
philosophy at the end of a lengthy criticism of Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De caelo (book Γ, c. 67, Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 5:227D–F; Averroes Latinus, Averrois Cordubensis commentum
magnum super libro De celo, 635.115–39): “The insufficient training of this man
in natural philosophy, and his excessive confidence in his own intelligence [bona
confidentia in proprio ingenio], lead him to these errors” (emphasis added; on this
criticism of Avicenna by Averroes, see Eichner, Averroes’ Mittlerer Kommentar,
142–45). See also the following passage of Tahaˉfut al-Tahaˉfut regarding a particular aspect of Avicenna’s psychology, a part of natural philosophy (Averroes,
Tahafot at-tahafot, 500.12–3; English translation in Averroes, Averroes’
Tahafut al-Tahafut, 305): “As to the theory he [i.e., Avicenna] gives here about
the cause of revelation and dreams, this is the theory of Avicenna alone, and the
opinions of the ancient philosophers differ from his.” 17 عة نا صفإن من يتعاطي فهم كلامه من غير أن يسبقه فيه غيره هو شبيه بمن يبتدئ ال . French
translation in Averroes, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad, 1:31.33: “Car celui qui
se préoccupe de comprendre ses [i.e., Aristotle’s] propos sans que quelqu’un
d’autre le précède en cela est pareil à celui qui commence un art.” 18 سه فن وهذا كله بين بأيسر تأمل ولكن هذا شأن هذا الرجل في كثير مما يأتي به من عند . Averroes,
On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics,” 29–30: “All this becomes clear upon a moment in reflection, but this is the case with many things presented by this man
as being [original inventions] by himself.” 19 See, for instance, Averroes, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd at․
-t ․abıˉ ʿat, 6.1, 7.6, 18.2, 37.2, 55.5,
56.2, 70.14, 79.11, 80.11, 81.5, 82.5, 84.5, 116.10, 138.17, etc. No passage
containing quasi is among those taken into account in Averroes, “Grand
Commentaire.”
424 Amos Bertolacci 20 The Arabic behind Text 1 [c] might therefore be: سه وذلك لأنه ابتدأ كأن من عند نف
wa-dhaˉlika li-annahuˉ btadaʾa ka-anna min ʿinda nafsihıˉ.
21 The most recent scholarship tends to posit the first entrance of Avicenna’s
philosophy in Andalusia around the beginning of the twelfth century, if not
before, as already argued by Badawī, “Avicenne en Espagne,” 12, according to
whom it is difficult to maintain that Avicenna’s philosophy had not yet arrived
in Andalusia in the first decades of the twelfth century, due to its traces in the
works of disciples of Ibn Baˉjja (d. 1138) and on account of the introduction of
Avicenna’s Canon of Medicine in Andalusia around 1095–1125. Harvey, “Avicenna’s Influence,” 328, contends that Avicenna’s philosophy entered in Spain
in the late 1130s (the date of the completion of the Kuzari of Judah Halevi,
ca. 1075–1141, where Avicenna is quoted and criticized) or even earlier, due
to the recourse to Avicenna in the anonymous Kitaˉb maʿaˉnıˉ al-nafs, datable
between the mid-eleventh and the mid-twelfth century (ibid., 331 and n. 15). 22 The widespread opinion according to which Ibn T․ufayl (d. 1185) was the
first Andalusian author to be acquainted with Avicenna’s philosophy (see, for
example, Cruz Hernandez, “Islamic Thought,” 789) is no longer tenable. See
the critical remarks in Harvey, “Avicenna’s Influence,” 329–30. 23 The frequent quotations of Avicenna in Averroes’ epitomes, and the references to the contemporary investigators or followers of Avicenna’s philosophy elsewhere (e.g., Long Commentary on the Physics, book Θ, c. 78; Averroes
Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 4:424L), seem to imply a
wide previous diffusion of Avicenna’s thought in Andalusia. In the treatise De
separatione primi principii, the author, supposedly Averroes, states: “Et quando
pervenerunt ad nos libri Abolay ben Cine” (Averroes Latinus, “De separatione primi principii,” 96). If taken literally, this statement would imply that
Averroes came into contact with Avicenna’s works at a certain point of his
lifetime, being unaware of them before. It remains unclear, however, which
city or geographical area of Averroes’ biography (Cordoba, Marrakesh, Seville, etc.) may be referred to in this statement. 24 See Avicenna Latinus, Logica, 11. 25 See Fontaine, “‘Happy Is He Whose Children Are Boys’”; Fontaine, “Avicennian Sources.” Ibn Daud (Lat.: Avendeuth) was a Jew from Cordoba who
moved to Toledo around the middle of the twelfth century. 26 For example, the divergence of opinions on the role of logic in philosophy
(instrument vs. part) that Ibn Baˉjja reports in his glosses on al-Faˉraˉbī’s commentary on the Isagoge (trans. in Forcada, “Ibn Baˉjja and the Classification,”
300; see Di Giovanni, “Motifs of Andalusian Philosophy”) has definite Avicennian overtones. Other doctrinal similarities between Ibn Baˉjja and Avicenna are underscored by Puig Montada, “Philosophy in Andalusia.” 27 Akasoy, “Ibn Sīnaˉ in the Arab West,” 288. 28 The project of translating three of the four sections of the Shifaˉʾ (logic, natural
philosophy, metaphysics) from Arabic into Latin in Toledo in the second half
of the twelfth century, although not performed comprehensively (only some
sections of these parts were in fact translated; see Bertolacci, “Community of
Translators”; Bertolacci, “Translator’s Cut”), seems to attest the circulation
of an overall, if not complete, version of this work in Andalusia in Averroes’
times. 29 The main promoter of the Latin translation of the Shifaˉʾ, Ibn Daud, had at his
disposal several manuscripts of the Shifaˉʾ, since in the foreword to the Latin
translation of the initial part of the work he contends that “in most manuscripts” (in plerisque codicibus) al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction precedes Avicenna’s
Prologue (see the text in Birkenmajer, “Avicennas Vorrede,” 314.7–8; now in
Avicenna Latinus, Logica; Bertolacci, “Community of Translators,” 53).
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 425 30 See Fontaine, “‘Happy Is He Whose Children Are Boys’”; Fontaine, “Avicennian Sources.” 31 Ibn T․
ufayl’s H․
ayy ibn Yaqz․aˉn documents acquaintance with Avicenna’s Shifaˉʾ,
Ishaˉraˉt , H․
ayy ibn Yaqz․aˉn, and/or Risaˉlat al-qadar (see Gutas, “Ibn T․ufayl,” 229).
The diffusion of Avicenna’s H․
ayy ibn Yaqz․aˉn in twelfth-century Andalusia
is confirmed by the Hebrew translation/adaptation by Abraham ibn ʿEzraʾ
(1089–1167) (see Harvey, “Avicenna’s Influence,” 329; Szpiech, “In Search,”
201; Fontaine, “Avicennian Sources,” 244). Gutas’ contention that Avicenna’s
H․
ikma mashriqiyya was not known in Andalusia (Gutas, “Ibn T․ufayl,” 228–29)
has been partially revised in Gutas, “Avicenna’s Eastern Philosophy,” 171–72.
The dependence of Jehudah Halevi’s (d. 1141) Kuzari on Avicenna’s Risaˉla fıˉ l-nafs was documented by Landauer in 1876 (see Harvey, “Avicenna’s Influence,” 330 n. 9; Fontaine, “Avicennian Sources,” 244). On the works of
Avicenna other than the Shifaˉʾ known to Averroes, see note 35 below. 32 See Bertolacci, “Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ,” 277–79. Puig Montada, “Transmission and Reception of Arabic Philosophy,” 7–8, remarks that during the
reign of the caliph al-H․
akam II (961–973) “a library containing most of the
books available in the East was established” in Cordova, and that “Falsafah
arrived materially in the books gathered by al-H․
akam II,” although “its intellectual reception is much later.” One might assume that the circulation of
falsafa from East to West continued afterward and that Avicenna’s philosophy
was part of the transmitted material. 33 Explicit mentions of the Shifaˉʾ can be found in the colophon of Averroes’
Middle Commentary on the Elenchi Sophistici (Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ mant ․iq Arist ․uˉ ,
2:729.12–14: “We have found no commentary on it [i.e., of Aristotle’s Elenchi
Sophistici] by any of the commentators, either ad litteram or ad sensum, except
what little there is of that in the Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ by Abuˉ ʿAlī ibn Sīnaˉ”; English translation in Gutas, “Aspects of Literary Form,” 33, slightly modified;
compare the French translation in Averroès, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad,
1:31–32), and in his Middle Commentary on the Metaphysics (Averroes Hebraicus,
Il commento medio, 343.21–22: “ed è questa la via nella quale [Avicenna]
procede nel suo libro chiamato al-Shifa’”—I am indebted to the late M. Zonta
for having kindly shared with me his Italian translation of the passage; see also
Davidson, Proofs for Eternity, 334 n. 133). A joint mention of the Shifaˉʾ and the
Najaˉt occurs in Al-Qawl fıˉ l-muqaddima al-wujuˉdiyya aw al-mut․
laqa (Averroes, “Al-Qawl,” 33.1–2; Latin translation in Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum
Averrois commentariis, 1.2b:80B–C; English translation in Averroes, “Averroes’
Quaesitum,” 103–4: “That is what he says in the Kitaˉb al-shifaˉʾ. As to [what
he says] in the Kitaˉb al-najaˉt ”). The Shifaˉʾ is mentioned in the title of one of
the works of Averroes recorded by Ibn Abī Us․aybiʿa (Kitaˉb fıˉ l-fah․
s․
ʿan masaˉʾil
waqaʿat fıˉ l-ʿilm al-ilaˉhıˉ fıˉ Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ li-bn Sıˉnaˉ; see Anawati, Bibliographie d’Averroès, 31, no. 37). 34 See the expression “all his [i.e., Avicenna’s] books” (kutubahuˉ kullahaˉ) in Averroes’ “Treatise on the Meaning of What is Predicated Universally and Other
Issues” (above, Text 2 [ii]). 35 The only other summa of Avicenna that Averroes explicitly quotes is the Naj
aˉt , mentioned together with the Shifaˉʾ, in Averroes’ Al-Qawl fıˉ l-muqaddima al-wujuˉdiyya aw al-mut․
laqa (see the passage quoted in note 33 above). For the
rest, the evidence is uncertain and speculative: a passage of Averroes’ Tahaˉfut al-Tahaˉfut on the alleged superiority of Avicenna’s proof of God’s existence,
based on the analysis of being qua being, with respect to the Ancients’ proof,
based on motion and time (Averroes, Tahafot at-tahafot, 419.10–14; English
translation in Averroes, Averroes’ Tahafut al-Tahafut, 253), might echo another
summa by Avicenna, the Ins․
aˉf (Avicenna, Commentaire sur le livre Lambda,
426 Amos Bertolacci
49.47–51; cf. Avicenna, “Sharh․ h․arf al-Laˉm li-Ibn Sīnaˉ,” 23.21–24.1; English
translation in Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition, 299). Gutas, “Ibn
T․
ufayl,” 228–29, on the other hand, contends that Avicenna’s Ins․
aˉf was not
known in Andalusia. As regards the shorter treatises by Avicenna, according
to Francesca Lucchetta, Averroes’ Fas․l al-maqaˉl depends directly on Avicenna’s Risaˉla ad․
h․
awiyya fıˉ amr al-maʿaˉd (Averroes, L’accordo, 6.20). On whether
Averroes might have been acquainted with Avicenna’s Risaˉla ʿarshiyya, see
Adouhane, “Al-Miklaˉtī,” 188. 36 Averroes, Long Commentary on the Physics, book Θ, c. 3 (Averroes Latinus,
Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis, 4:340E–F): “Et quod existimavit Avicenna, quod divinus debet monstrare primum principium esse, est falsum, et
via eius, quam finxit ipsum invenisse eam, qua usus est in suo libro et similiter
Algazel sequens eum, est via tenuis et non est demonstrativa aliquo modo.
Nos autem de hoc fecimus tractatum singularem super hoc. Et qui voluerit
accipere quaestiones accidentes in ea, videat hoc ex libro Algazelis: plures
enim, quas induxit contra alios, verae sunt” (emphasis added). Cf. book A, c.
83 (4:47F–K): “On this issue, in his [i.e., Avicenna’s] book on divine science
[in suo libro de scientia divina].” 37 See the quotations (with explicit mentions of Avicenna) of: (1) chapter 2. 3
of the section of the Shifaˉʾ corresponding to the De interpretatione in Qawl
fıˉ l-mah․muˉlaˉt al-mufrada wa-l-murakkaba wa-naqd mawqif Ibn Sıˉnaˉ (Avicenna, Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․
iq, al-ʿIbaˉra, 96–111; see Benmakhlouf and Diebler, Commentaire moyen sur le De interpretatione, 152–55; Averroes, Maqaˉlaˉt fıˉ l-mant․iq
wa-l-ʿilm al-t ․abıˉ ʿıˉ , 87–94; French translation in Averroès, Commentaire moyen,
ed. Aouad, 157–63); (2) chapter 1. 7 of the section of the Shifaˉʾ corresponding to the Prior Analytics in the Middle Commentary on the Prior Analytics (Avicenna, Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․i q, al-Qiyaˉs, 66.7–15, 67.14–70.9; Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ Kitaˉb
al-Qiyaˉs, 197.13–15 (#174); see Aouad and Rashed, “Commentateurs,” 102;
and Averroès, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad, 1:33; (3) chapters 2. 4 and 4. 3 of
the section of the Shifaˉʾ corresponding to the Topics in the Middle Commentary on the Topics (Avicenna, Jadal, 139.5, 227.9–14; Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ Kitaˉb al-Jadal,
87.12–13 (#85), 156.4–5 (#214); see Aouad and Rashed, “Commentateurs,”
102; Averroès, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad, 1:33); and (4) chapter 2. 6 of
the section of the Shifaˉʾ corresponding to the Elenchi Sophistici in the Middle Commentary on the Elenchi Sophistici (Avicenna, Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․
iq, al-Safsat ․a,
114.1–10; English translation in Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition,
28; French translation in Aouad and Rashed, “Commentateurs,” 101 n. 56;
Averroès, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad, 1:32 n. 3; Averroes, Talkhıˉs․ mant ․iq
Arist ․uˉ , 2:729.25–730.3, French translation in Averroès, Commentaire moyen,
ed. Aouad, 1:32). 38 For the criticisms of Avicenna contained in Averroes’ Long Commentary on the
Physics, see Bertolacci, “Averroes ubique Avicennam persequitur”; for those
contained in Averroes’ various commentaries on Physics, De caelo, and Meteorologica,
see Cerami, “Map of Averroes’ Criticism.” About the criticism of
Avicenna contained in Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Physics, 66G–67A,
Belo, Chance and Determinism, 147–48, observes: “one is led to believe that
Averroes was in some way familiar with the passage of the Physics of the Shifaˉʾ
that paraphrases the Aristotelian passage in question (Physics 195b31–200b8).” 39 For the criticisms of Avicenna contained in Averroes’ Long Commentary on the
Metaphysics, see Bertolacci, “Averroes against Avicenna on Human Spontaneous Generation”; Bertolacci, “From Athens to Buh˘
aˉraˉ”; Bertolacci, “Avicenna’s and Averroes’ Interpretations.” For those contained in Averroes’
Epitome of the Metaphysics, see the notes to the English translation in Averroes,
On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics”; Menn, “Faˉraˉbī.”
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 427 40 See the implicit quotations of the section of the Shifaˉʾ corresponding to the
Rhetoric in Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Rhetoric (Aouad and Rashed,
“Commentateurs,” 98–124; Averroès, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad, 1:31–
50). Eichner’s critical edition Averroes’ Mittlerer Kommentar documents similarities and differences between Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the De generatione
et corruptione and the corresponding part of the Shifaˉʾ. See also Menn, “Faˉraˉbī,”
74: “As usual, Averroes mentions Avicenna by name only a few times [in Epit-
ome I.34–43 and III.34–48], but in such a way as to make clear that Avicenna
is on his mind throughout,” and 73: “Averroes has presumably been thinking
mainly of Avicenna throughout I.21.” 41 The expression paraphrase condensée occurs in Averroes, Commentaire moyen sur le De interpretatione, 154 n. 1. 42 A passage of Averroes’ Epitome of the Meteorologica (Averroes, Risaˉlat al-aˉthaˉr
al-ʿulwiyya, 84.21–85.2, 85.21–22) is a quotation (with explicit mention of
Avicenna) of a passage of the fifth section of the Shifaˉʾ (2. 3): “Ibn Sīnaˉ rebuked them [i.e., the commentators] on this issue by saying: ‘Our brothers Peripatetics have contributed nothing to [clarifying] the arrangement of
colors [in the rainbow].’ This is so because he believed that the green does
not differ from the reddish and the purple only in terms of excess and defect, since, on the contrary, this difference applies exclusively to the reddish
and the purple. On this issue this man does not say anything [on his own],
but only casts doubts against them. No doubt, this rebuke would apply most
properly to Aristotle, since he was the chief of the Peripatetics. [. . .] In either case [i.e., regardless whether or not the commentators have rightly reported Aristotle’s thought on the colors of the rainbow], Ibn Sīnaˉ should
have excluded Aristotle from the group of the Peripatetics, and should have
not spoken in absolute terms [of all of them together].” Averroes probably
here refers to Avicenna, Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-t ․abıˉ ʿiyyaˉt, al-Maʿaˉdin wa-l-aˉthaˉr al-ʿulwiya,
50.10–11, 50.14–15, paraphrasing Avicenna’s contention: “I am not satisfied
with what our companions Peripatetics say about it [i.e., the rainbow] [. .
.]. As to the colors, their status has not resulted verily to me, and I have not
grasped their cause; I am not satisfied with what they say, since it is all falsity
and nonsense.” Likewise, several quotations of Avicenna’s metaphysical doctrines have a counterpart only in the Shifaˉʾ. For instance, Avicenna’s statement
according to which only metaphysics provides the proof of God’s existence,
criticized in several of Averroes’ commentaries (see Bertolacci, “Avicenna
and Averroes on the Proof of God’s Existence,” Texts 6–7, 9), occurs only
in the metaphysical section of the Shifaˉʾ (Ilaˉhiyyaˉt ) 1. 1 (see ibid., Texts 3–4),
being absent in the other metaphysical writings of Avicenna. More specifically, the “universal method” (al-t ․arıˉq al-kullıˉ) by means of which Avicenna
aims to prove God’s existence in metaphysics, mentioned in Averroes’ Long
Commentary on the Posterior Analytics, book A, c. 70 (Averroes, Sharh․ al-burhaˉn
li-Arist ․uˉ wa-talkhıˉs․ al-burhaˉn, 298.16–9; Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum
Averrois commentariis, 1.2a:154F) probably echoes the expression “the method
of universal and intelligible premises” (t․
arıˉq muqaddimaˉt kulliyya ʿaqliyya) in
Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1. 3, Avicenna, Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt , 1:21.4; Avicenna Latinus, Liber
de Philosophia, 23.33–34 (see Bertolacci, “Avicenna and Averroes on the Proof
of God’s Existence,” 94 n. 66). Some other doctrines of Avicenna criticized in
the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics (such as the theory according to which
mice can be generated from earth) come exclusively from the Shifaˉʾ (in the
case at stake, from the Maʿaˉdin wa-aˉthaˉr ʿulwiyya, the fifth section of the part
on natural philosophy; see Bertolacci, “Averroes against Avicenna on Human
Spontaneous Generation”). The same happens in the Epitome of the Metaphysics:
Averroes asserts that the consideration of a sensible thing simply as
428 Amos Bertolacci
existent is tantamount to its consideration as immaterial (Averroes, Compendio de Metafísica, 6.21–7.2; Averroes, On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics,” 22–23), which
probably refers (non-critically) to Avicenna’s doctrine in Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1. 2, Avicenna,
Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt , 1:15.13–16; Avicenna Latinus, Liber de Philosophia,
16.95–99, according to which “existent qua existent” is, in principle,
immaterial, since it applies not only to material, but also to immaterial realities (see Bertolacci, Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 126); likewise, when
Averroes states, “What has become manifest in the natural science about the
existence of separate principles is not superfluous in this science, as Avicenna
says, but rather necessary” (Averroes, Compendio de Metafísica, 8.19–20; Averroes,
On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics,” 24), he refers to Ilaˉhiyyaˉt 1. 1, Avicenna,
Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt , 1:7.3–4, Avicenna Latinus, Liber de Philosophia, 5.91–93: “What appeared to you about this [topic] in [the science of] natural things
was extraneous to [the science of] natural things; of it [i.e., of this topic] it was
used in it [i.e., in the science of natural things] what was not part of it [i.e., of
the science of natural things].” See also the “argument that Avicenna makes
in Shifaˉʾ Metaphysics I.5, 10–11” and the “fairly accurate summary of some of
Avicenna’s arguments in Shifaˉʾ Metaphysics III” that Averroes submits to criticism in the Epitome of the Metaphysics, as discussed by Menn, “Faˉraˉbī,” 73, 79. 43 Averroes also knew al-Ghazaˉlī’s Maqaˉs․id al-Falaˉsifa, Intentions of the Philosophers, a work which is much less dependent on the Shifaˉʾ than the Tahaˉfut al-falaˉsifa. See Averroes, Epitome of the Physics, Prologue (Averroes, Al-Jawaˉmi ʿ
fıˉ l-falsafa, 8.1–7): “We have endeavored to transmit this [i.e., Aristotle’s] opinion among those of the ancients, because it has already appeared evident to
all [of them] that it [i.e., Aristotle’s opinion] was the most convincing and
well-grounded of all. What prompted us to [do] this is the fact that many
people undertake the rebuttal of Aristotle’s doctrine without considering its
truth; this is why the consideration of the truth, or of its contrary, that can
be found in it [i.e., in Aristotle’s doctrine] is performed secretly. Abuˉ H․aˉmid [al-Ghazaˉl ī] has pursued this [same] aspiration in his book known as Intentions of the Philosophers, but he has not attained in them [i.e., in the Intentions of the
Philosophers] what he aimed for. Therefore, we have esteemed convenient to
strive for his [same] intent, because in this way we hope to bring to the people
of our time the [same] benefit that he hoped, for the [same] reason that he
mentioned.” On this text, see Griffel, “Relationship between Averroes and
al-Ghazaˉl ī,” 54; Stroumsa, “Philosophes almohades?,” 1147 n. 40. 44 Davidson’s claim that Averroes “must have relied on derivative accounts of
Avicenna’s philosophy, such as Ghazali’s account, in addition to whatever
incomplete copies of Avicenna’s works might have reached him in Spain”
(Davidson, Proofs for Eternity, 334), appears questionable: the unavailability
of Muʿtazilite works that Averroes laments (ibid., n. 133) might be due to
theological restrictions not affecting the circulation of philosophical works.
Likewise, the quotation of Avicenna in Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the
Metaphysics (see note 33 above), according to which in the Shifaˉʾ Avicenna would have advocated a proof of God’s existence based on the concepts of
“necessarily existent” and “possibly existent,” does not necessarily indicate
a derivative or incomplete acquaintance with the work, since the presence
or lack of such a proof in the Shifaˉʾ is debated in Avicennian scholarship. See
Bertolacci, “Avicenna and Averroes on the Proof of God’s Existence,” 78. 45 For instance, in the first criticism of Avicenna occurring in the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics (book α, c. 15), about a doctrine expounded only in the
Shifaˉʾ, one reads: “Thus, we find [najidu] that Avicenna [. . .] says [yaquˉlu]” (see
Averroes, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd at․
-t ․abıˉ ʿat, 46.19–47.1; Bertolacci, “Averroes against
Avicenna on Human Spontaneous Generation,” 41).
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 429 46 The aforementioned quotation of the Shifaˉʾ in the colophon of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Elenchi Sophistici (note 12 above) contains the following remark: “L’écrit [al-kitaˉb] qui nous est pervenu de cela [i.e., of the Shifaˉʾ, or of its section on sophistics] se presente dans un désordre maximum [ghaˉyat al-ikhtilaˉl ]” (Averroès, Commentaire moyen, ed. Aouad, 1:31). The term ikhtilaˉl in this passage might also mean “defectiveness,” which would amount to an attestation of the possible incomplete circulation of the Shifaˉʾ
in Andalusia. 47 Averroes, Epitome of the Physics (Averroes, Al-Jawaˉmiʿ fıˉ l-falsafa, 56.11–14):
“I do not understand Ibn Sīnaˉ’s contention that circular motion is not in
space at all, but only in place. Most likely, by [saying] this he meant that
[the object having circular motion] passes from a place to another without
changing space in its entirety. If that is what he meant, it is correct. If, on the
other hand, he meant that its motion is in the very place that is the category
[of place], that [contention] is not correct.” For Avicenna’s exposition of this
doctrine in the Shifaˉʾ, see Hasnaoui, “Le statut catégorial.” 48 Averroes, Long Commentary on the Metaphysics, book α, c. 15, Averroes, Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd at․
-t ․abıˉ ʿat, 47.5–13 (Averroes Latinus, Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis,
8:35D–E; Averroes Latinus, In Aristotelis librum II, 77.30–78.38): “As
to his [Aristotle’s] statement ‘It occurs to some people to search for the witness
of poets’ (Metaph. α. 3, 995a7–8), this also occurs to them by nature. These
persons are those whose imaginative faculty overcomes the intellectual faculty. Hence, we find that they do not assent to demonstrative things [i.e., facts
proved by demonstration] if imagination does not accompany them. Therefore, they are unable to assent to the fact that there is no plenum, no void and
no time outside the world, and to the fact that there are existents which are
not bodies, and do not exist in space and time. This occurred to many investigators of Avicenna’s philosophy [kathıˉr mimman naz․ara fıˉ falsafat Ibn Sıˉnaˉ],
who ascribed this doctrine to him. But the evidence of his statements [al-z․aˉhir min kalaˉmihıˉ] [attests] that the ascription of this doctrine to him is false. This
occurs because of habitude, and because of lack of instruction in the science
of logic” (emphasis added). 49 English translation in Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition, 31–34
(slightly modified). Compare the translation by Di Vincenzo in Avicenna, The
Healing, Logic, 7–11. 50 The sentence “We readily offered our consent to this and urged him to start
[an yaqaʿa minhu l-btidaˉʾ] with Physics” might be related to the incepit of Text 1
[c]: but in al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction the noun i btidaˉʾ—though stemming from
the same root b-d-ʾ of yabtadiʾu in Text 3—appears to have a mere chronological connotation, without involving any idea of the new foundation of a
discipline. 51 In the Autobiography, Avicenna reports that his first studies of natural philosophy and metaphysics were no longer supervised by a master, contrary to
what had happened in the previous phase of his education when he learned
logic under the supervision of the master al-Naˉtilī (Avicenna, Life of Ibn Sina,
24.6–7; on this passage, see Bertolacci, Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 39–43). But even assuming access to Avicenna’s Autobiography (not attested
in Andalusia), the point Averroes wants to make in Text 1 [c] is different,
since in this text what is at stake is not Avicenna’s debt toward his immediate
teachers (as in the Autobiography), but his attitude toward Aristotle as First
Teacher (as in al-Juˉzjaˉnī’s Introduction). 52 See Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition, 325–26. 53 See Bertolacci, Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 319–20; Bertolacci, “Different Attitudes to Aristotle’s Authority,” 159–60.
430 Amos Bertolacci 54 I comprehensively discussed this topic in a paper presented at the SIEPM
conference Averroès, l’averroïsme, l’antiaverroïsme, Geneva, October 4–6, 2006,
“The ‘Andalusian Revolt Against Avicennian Metaphysics’: Averroes’ Criticism of Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics.” See also the
publications mentioned in notes 38 and 39 above. 55 See Hasse, Success and Suppression.
56 Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition, 111–12. 57 Bertolacci, “Latin Translation,” 505 and n. 41.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. Über die Wissenschaften (De scientiis): Nach der lateinischen Übersetzung
Gerhards von Cremona. Edited by Franz Schupp. Hamburg: Meiner, 2005.
Aristoteles Arabus. Al-t․
abıˉ ʿa: Tarjamat Ish․
aˉq ibn H․ unayn. Edited by ʿAbd-ar-Rah․
maˉn
Badawī. 2 vols. Cairo: al-Hayʾa al-mis․
riyya al-ʿaˉmma li-l-kitaˉb, 1964–65.
Averroes (Ibn Rushd). L’accordo della Legge divina con la filosofia. Translated by Francesca Lucchetta. Genova: Marietti, 1994.
Averroes. Al-Jawaˉmiʿ fıˉ l-falsafa: Kitaˉb al-Samaˉʿ al-t ․abıˉ ʿıˉ. Edited by Josep Puig
Montada. Madrid: Istituto Hispano-Arabe de Cultura, 1983.
Averroes. Al-Qawl fıˉ l-muqaddima al-wujuˉdiyya aw al-mut․
laqa. In Douglas M. Dunlop, “Averroes (Ibn Rushd) on the Modality of Propositions.” Islamic Studies 1, no. 1 (1962): 23–34.
Averroes. “Averroes’ Quaesitum on Assertoric (Absolute) Propositions.” Translated by Nicholas Rescher. Reprinted in Rescher, Studies in the History of Arabic
Logic, 91–105. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1963.
Averroes. Averroes’ Tahafut al-Tahafut (The Incoherence of the Incoherence). Translated
by Simon Van den Bergh. Cambridge: E. J. W. Memorial Trust, 1954.
Averroes. Commentaire moyen à la Rhétorique d’Aristote. Critical edition and
French translation by Maroun Aouad. 3 vols. Paris: Vrin, 2002.
Averroes. Commentaire moyen sur le De interpretatione. Translated with an introduction and notes by Ali Benmakhlouf and Stéphane Diebler. Paris: Vrin, 2000.
Averroes. Compendio de Metafísica. Edited and translated by Carlos Quirós Rodríguez. Madrid: Imprenta de Estanislao Maestre, 1919.
Averroes. “Grand commentaire.” In Colette Sirat and Marc Geoffroy, L’original arabe du Grand commentaire d’Averroès au De anima d’Aristote: Prémices de l’édition.
Paris: Vrin, 2005.
Averroes. L’intelligence et la pensée: Grand commentaire du De anima, Livre III
(429a10–435b25). Translated by Alain de Libera. Paris: Flammarion, 1998.
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba. Long Commentary on the De anima of Aristotle.
Translated with an introduction and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with
Thérèse-Anne Druart. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Averroes. Maqaˉlaˉt fıˉ l-mant․iq wa-l-ʿilm al-t ․abıˉ ʿıˉ . Edited by Jamaˉl-ad-Dīn al-ʿAlawī.
Casablanca: Daˉr al-Nashr al-Maghribiyya, 1983.
Averroes. On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics”: An Annotated Translation of the So-called
“Epitome.” Edited by Rüdiger Arnzen. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2010.
Averroes. Risaˉlat al-aˉthaˉr al-ʿulwiyya. Edited by Jıˉraˉr Jihaˉmıˉ. Beirut: Daˉr al-Fikr
al-Lubnaˉnıˉ, 1994.
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 431
Averroes. Sharh․
al-burhaˉn li-Arist․
uˉ wa-talkhıˉs․ al-burhaˉn. Edited by ʿAbd-ar-
Rah․maˉn Badawıˉ. Kuwait: al-Majlis al-wat․
anıˉ li-l-thaqaˉ fa wa-l-funuˉn wa-l-
aˉdaˉb, 1984.
Averroes. Tafsıˉr maˉ baʿd at․
-t․
abıˉ ʿat. Edited by Maurice Bouyges. Beirut: Imprimerie
Catholique, 1938–48.
Averroes. Tahafot at-tahafot. Edited by Maurice Bouyges. Beirut: Imprimerie
Catholique, 1930.
Averroes. Talkhıˉs․ Kitaˉb al-Jadal. Edited by Charles E. Butterworth. Cairo: al-
Hayʾa al-Mis․
riyya al-ʿAˉ mma li-l-Kitaˉb, 1979.
Averroes. Talkhıˉs․ Kitaˉb al-Qiyaˉs. Edited by Mahmuˉd Qaˉsim, Charles E. Butterworth, and Ah․mad ʿA. Harīdī. Cairo: al-Hayʾa al-Mis․
riyya al-ʿAˉ mma li-l-Kita
ˉb, 1983.
Averroes. Talkhıˉs․ mant․
iq Arist․
uˉ . Edited by Jıˉraˉr Jihaˉmıˉ. 2 vols. Beirut: al-Maktaba
al-sharqiyya, 1982.
Averroes Hebraicus. Il commento medio di Averroè alla metafisica di Aristotele nella
tradizione ebraica: Edizione delle versioni ebraiche medievali di Zerahyah Hen e di Qalonymos ben Qalonymos con introduzione storica e filologica. Edited by Mauro Zonta,
2 vols. Pavia: Pavia University Press, 2011.
Averroes Latinus. Aristotelis opera cum Averrois commentariis. 12 vols. Venice: apud
Iuntas, 1562–74 (reprint Frankfurt am Main: Minerva, 1962).
Averroes Latinus. Averrois Cordubensis commentarium magnum in Aristotelis De anima
libros. Edited by F. Stuart Crawford. Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy
of America, 1953.
Averroes Latinus. Averrois Cordubensis commentum magnum super libro De celo et
mundo Aristotelis. Edited by Francis James Carmody and Rüdiger Arnzen. 2
vols. Leuven: Peeters, 2003.
Averroes Latinus. “De separatione primi principii.” In Carlos Steel and Guy
Guldentops, “An Unknown Treatise of Averroes against the Avicennians on
the First Cause: Edition and Translation.” Recherches de Théologie et Philosophie Médiévales 64, no. 1 (1997): 86–135.
Averroes Latinus. In Aristotelis librum II (a) Metaphysicorum Commentarius. Edited by
Gion Darms. Fribourg: Paulusverlag, 1966.
Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ). Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt, vol. 1, edited by Juˉ rj Sh. Qanawatıˉ and
Saʿıˉd Zaˉyid; Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Ilaˉhiyyaˉt, vol. 2, edited by M. Y. Muˉ saˉ, Saʿıˉd Dunyaˉ,
and S. Zaˉyid. Cairo: al-Hayʾa al-ʿaˉmma li-shuʾuˉn al-mat․
aˉ biʿ al-amıˉriyya, 1960.
Avicenna. Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․
iq, al-ʿIbaˉra. Edited by Mah․muˉd M. Al-Khud․ayrıˉ. Cairo: al-Hayʾa al-mis․
riyya al-ʿaˉmma li-l-taʾlıˉf wa-l-nashr, 1970.
Avicenna. Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․
iq, al-Madkhal. Edited by Juˉrj Sh. Qanawatıˉ, Mah․muˉd Al-Khud․ayrıˉ, and Ah․mad F. Al-Ahwaˉnıˉ. Cairo: al-Mat․
baʿa al-amıˉriyya,
1952.
Avicenna. Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․
iq, al-Qiyaˉs. Edited by Saʿıˉd Zaˉyid. Cairo: al-Hayʾa
al-ʿaˉmma li-shuʾuˉ n al-mat․
aˉ biʿ al-amıˉriyya, 1964.
Avicenna. Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-Mant․
iq, al-Safsat․
a. Edited by Ah․mad F. Al-Ahwaˉnıˉ. Cairo:
al-Hayʾa al-ʿaˉmma li-shuʾuˉ n al-mat․
aˉ biʿ al-amıˉriyya, 1958.
Avicenna. Al-Shifaˉʾ, al-t․
abıˉ ʿiyyaˉt, al-Maʿaˉdin wa-l-aˉthaˉr al-ʿulwiya. Edited by ʿAbd-
al-H․alıˉm Muntas․
ir, Saʿıˉd Zaˉyid, and ʿAbd-Allaˉh Ismaˉʿıˉl. Cairo: al-Hayʾa
al-ʿaˉmma li-shuʾuˉ n al-mat․
aˉ biʿ al-amıˉriyya, 1965.
432 Amos Bertolacci
Avicenna. Avicenna, The Healing, Logic: Isagoge. A New Edition, English Translation
and Commentary of the Kitaˉb al-Madh․
al of Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Šifaˉʾ, edited and
translated by Silvia Di Vincenzo. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2021.
Avicenna. Commentaire sur le livre Lambda de la Métaphysique d’Aristote. Edited by
Marc Geoffroy, Jules Janssens, and Meryem Sebti. Paris: Vrin, 2014.
Avicenna. The Life of Ibn Sina: A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation. Edited
and translated by William E. Gohlman. Albany: SUNY Press, 1974.
Avicenna. “Sharh․ h․arf al-Laˉm li-Ibn Sīnaˉ.” In Arist ․uˉ ʿinda l-ʿArab, edited by ʿAbd-
ar-Rah․maˉn Badawī, 22–33. Cairo: Maktabat al-nahd․a al-mis․
riyya, 1947.
Avicenna Latinus. Liber de Philosophia prima sive Scientia divina: Partes I–IV. Edited
by Simone Van Riet. Introduction by Gérard Verbeke. Leuven: Peeters, 1977.
Avicenna Latinus. Logica (Logique du Shifâʾ). Edited and translated by Françoise
Hudry. Introduction by Alain de Libera. Paris: Vrin, 2018.
Secondary Literature
Adouhane, Yamina. “Al-Miklaˉtī, a Twelfth Century Ašʿarite Reader of Averroes.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 22, no.2 (2012): 155–97.
Akasoy, Anna. “Ibn Sīnaˉ in the Arab West: The Testimony of an Andalusian
Sufi.” Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 21 (2010): 287–312.
Anawati, George C. Bibliographie d’Averroès (Ibn Rushd). Alger: Organisation Arabe pour l’Éducation et la Culture et les Sciences, 1978.
Aouad, Maroun, and Marwan Rashed. “Commentateurs ‘satisfaisants’ et ‘non
satisfaisants’ de la Rhétorique selon Averroès.” In Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources, Constitution and Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn Rushd
(1126–1198), edited by Gerhard Endress and Jan A. Aertsen with Klaus Braun,
83–124. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
Badawī, ʿAbd-ar-Rah․maˉn. “Avicenne en Espagne musulmane: pénétration et
polémique.” In Milenario de Avicena: actas del coloquio internacional celebrado en Madrid en marzo de 1980, edited by ʿAbd-ar-Rah․maˉn Badawī et al., 9–25. Madrid:
Instituto Hispano-Arabe de Cultura, 1981.
Belo, Catarina. Chance and Determinism in Avicenna and Averroes. Leiden: Brill,
2007.
Bertolacci, Amos. “Averroes against Avicenna on Human Spontaneous Generation: The Starting-Point of a Lasting Debate.” In Renaissance Averroism and Its
Aftermath: Arabic Philosophy in Early Modern Europe, edited by Anna Akasoy and
Guido Giglioni, 37–54. Dordrecht: Springer, 2013.
Bertolacci, Amos. “Averroes ubique Avicennam persequitur: Albert the Great’s
Approach to the Physics of the Šifaˉʾ in the Light of Averroes’ Criticisms.” In
The Arabic, Hebrew and Latin Reception of Avicenna’s Physics and Cosmology, edited
by Dag N. Hasse and Amos Bertolacci, 397–431. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2018.
Bertolacci, Amos. “Avicenna’s and Averroes’ Interpretations and Their Influence
in Albert the Great.” In A Companion to the Latin Medieval Commentaries on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, edited by Fabrizio Amerini and Gabriele Galluzzo, 95–135.
Leiden: Brill, 2014.
Bertolacci, Amos. “Avicenna and Averroes on the Proof of God’s Existence and
the Subject-Matter of Metaphysics.” Medioevo 32 (2007): 61–97.
Bertolacci, Amos. “Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Šifaˉʾ (Book of the Cure/Healing): The Manuscripts Preserved in Turkey and Their Significance.” Mélanges de l’Université
Saint-Joseph 67 (2017–18): 265–304.
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 433
Bertolacci, Amos. “A Community of Translators: The Latin Medieval Versions
of Avicenna’s Book of the Cure.” In Communities of Learning: Networks and the
Shaping of Intellectual Identity in Europe 1100–1500, edited by Constant J. Mews
and John. N. Crossley, 37–54. Turnhout: Brepols, 2011.
Bertolacci, Amos. “Different Attitudes to Aristotle’s Authority in the Arabic
Medieval Commentaries on the Metaphysics.” Antiquorum Philosophia 3 (2009):
145–63.
Bertolacci, Amos. “From Athens to Buh˘
aˉ raˉ, to Cordoba, to Cologne: On the
Transmission of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in the Arab and Latin Worlds during
the Middle Ages.” In Circulation des savoirs autour de la Méditerranée: philosophie
et sciences (IXe –XVIIe siècle), edited by Graziella Federici Vescovini and Ahmad
Hasnawi, 217–33. Florence: Cadmo, 2013.
Bertolacci, Amos. “The Latin Translation and the Original Version of the Ilaˉhiyya
ˉt (Science of Divine Things) of Avicenna’s Kitaˉb al-Šifaˉʾ.” Documenti e studi sulla
tradizione filosofica medievale 28 (2017): 481–514.
Bertolacci, Amos. The Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in Avicenna’s Kitaˉ b al-Šifa
ˉʾ: A Milestone of Western Metaphysical Thought. Leiden: Brill, 2006.
Bertolacci, Amos. “The Translator’s Cut: Cultural Experience and Philosophical
Narration in the Early Latin Translations of Avicenna.” In Premodern Experience of the Natural World in Translation, edited by Katja Krause, Maria Auxent, and
Dror Weil, 303–24. New York: Routledge, 2022.
Birkenmajer, Aleksander. “Avicennas Vorrede zum Liber Sufficientiae und Roger
Bacon.” Revue Néoscolastique de Philosophie 36, no. 41 (1934): 308–20.
Cerami, Cristina. “A Map of Averroes’ Criticism against Avicenna: Physics, De
caelo, De generatione et corruptione and Meteorology.” In The Arabic, Hebrew and
Latin Reception of Avicenna’s Physics and Cosmology, edited by Dag N. Hasse and
Amos Bertolacci, 163–240. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2018.
Cruz Hernandez, Miguel. “Islamic Thought in the Iberian Peninsula.” In The
Legacy of Muslim Spain, edited by Salma K. Jayyusi and Manuela Marin, 777–
803. Leiden: Brill, 1992.
Davidson, Herbert A. Proofs for Eternity, Creation and the Existence of God in Medieval Islamic and Jewish Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Di Giovanni, Matteo. “Motifs of Andalusian Philosophy in the Pre-Almohad
Age.” Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 22 (2011): 209–34.
Eichner, Heidrun. Averroes’ Mittlerer Kommentar zu Aristoteles’ De generatione et
corruptione, edited with an introduction and notes by Heidrun Eichner. Paderborn: Schöningh, 2005.
Elamrani-Jamal, Abdelali. “Ibn Rušd et les Premiers Analytiques d’Aristote: Aperçu
sur un problème de syllogistique modale.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 5, no. 1
(1995): 51–74.
Endress, Gerhard. “Averrois Opera: A Bibliography of Editions and Contributions to the Text.” In Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources, Constitution and Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–1198), edited by
Gerhard Endress and Jan A. Aertsen with Klaus Braun, 339–81. Leiden:
Brill, 1999.
Endress, Gerhard. “Le projet d’Averroès: Constitution, réception et édition du
corpus des oeuvres d’Ibn Rušd.” In Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources,
Constitution and Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–1198), edited by
Gerhard Endress and Jan A. Aertsen with Klaus Braun, 3–31. Leiden: Brill,
1999.
434 Amos Bertolacci
Fontaine, Resianne. “Avicennian Sources in Abraham in Daud’s Natural Philosophy?” In The Arabic, Hebrew and Latin Reception of Avicenna’s Physics and
Cosmology, edited by Dag N. Hasse and Amos Bertolacci, 241–67. Berlin: De
Gruyter, 2018.
Fontaine, Resianne. “‘Happy Is He Whose Children Are Boys’: Abraham Ibn
Daud and Avicenna on Evil.” In The Arabic, Hebrew and Latin Reception of Avicenna’s Metaphysics, edited by Dag N. Hasse and Amos Bertolacci, 159–75. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2012.
Forcada, Miquel. “Ibn Baˉ jja and the Classification of the Sciences in Al-Andalus.”
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 16, no. 2 (2006): 287–307.
Griffel, Frank. “The Relationship between Averroes and al-Ghazaˉ lī: As It Presents Itself in Averroes’ Early Writings, Especially in His Commentary on
al-Ghazaˉ lī’s al-Mustas․
faˉ.” In Medieval Philosophy and the Classical Tradition in Islam, Judaism and Christianity, edited by John Inglis, 51–63. London: Routledge,
2002.
Gutas, Dimitri. “Aspects of Literary Form and Genre in Arabic Logical Works.”
In Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts: The Syriac, Arabic and
Medieval Latin Traditions, edited by Charles Burnett, 29–76. London: The Warburg Institute, 1993.
Gutas, Dimitri. Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to Reading Avicenna’s Philosophical Works. 2nd, revised edition. Leiden: Brill, 2014.
Gutas, Dimitri. “Avicenna’s Eastern (‘Oriental’) Philosophy: Nature, Contents,
Transmission.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 10, no. 2 (2000): 159–80.
Gutas, Dimitri. “Ibn T․ufayl on Ibn Sīnaˉ’s Eastern Philosophy.” Oriens 34, no. 1
(1994): 222–41.
Harvey, Steven. “Avicenna’s Influence on Jewish Thought: Some Reflections.”
In Avicenna and His Legacy: A Golden Age of Science and Philosophy, edited by
Yitzhak T. Langermann, 327–40. Turnhout: Brepols, 2009.
Hasnaoui, Ahmad. “Le statut catégorial du mouvement chez Avicenne.” In De
Zénon d’Elée à Poincarè: Recueil d’études en homage à Roshdi Rashed, edited by
Régis Morelon and Ahmad Hasnawi, 607–22. Leuven: Peeters, 2004.
Hasse, Dag N. Success and Suppression: Arabic Sciences and Philosophy in the Renaissance.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016.
Janssens, Jules. “Ibn Rushd et sa critique d’Ibn Baˉ jja (dans le Grand commentaire
sur le De anima).” In La lumière de l’intellect: La pensée scientifique et philosophique
d’Averroès dans son temps, edited by Ahmad Hasnawi, 405–18. Leuven: Peeters,
2011.
Menn, Stephen. “Faˉraˉbī in the Reception of Avicenna’s Metaphysics: Averroes
against Avicenna on Being and Unity.” In The Arabic, Hebrew and Latin Reception of Avicenna’s Metaphysics, edited by Dag N. Hasse and Amos Bertolacci,
51–96. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2012.
Puig Montada, Josep. “Philosophy in Andalusia: Ibn Baˉjja and Ibn T․ufayl.” In The
Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, edited by Peter Adamson and Richard Taylor, 155–79. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Puig Montada, Josep. “The Transmission and Reception of Arabic Philosophy
in Christian Spain (until 1200).” In The Introduction of Arabic Philosophy into
Europe, edited by Charles E. Butterworth and Blake A. Kessel, 7–30. Leiden:
Brill, 1994.
Averroes on Avicenna in the Long Commentary on the De anima 435
Stroumsa, Sarah. “Philosophes almohades? Averroès, Maïmonide et l’idéologie
almohade.” In Los almohades: Problemas y perspectives, edited by Patrice Cressier,
Maribel Fierro, and Luis Molina, 2:1137–62. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 2005.
Szpiech, Ryan. “In Search of Ibn Sīnaˉ’s ‘Oriental Philosophy’ in Medieval Castile.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 20, no. 2 (2010): 185–207.
Taylor, Richard C. “Introduction.” In Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba, Long
Commentary on the De anima of Aristotle, translated and with an introduction
and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with Thérèse-Anne Druart, xv–cx. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-23
When Marsilius Mainardini, better known as Marsilius of Padua, completed his opus magnum, the Defensor pacis, in 1324, he should have known
that Pope John XXII would condemn it, which is what happened in the
bull Quia iuxta doctrinam of April 1327.1 The main thrust of Marsilius’
arguments was in fact designed to show that the papal claims of plenitudo potestatis in temporal and spiritual matters had to be rejected on account
of his own special brand of Aristotelian political theory.2 In particular,
his peculiar understanding of the Aristotelian model of demonstration allowed Marsilius to establish a philosophical method to determine what is
relevant for political theory and what is not.
In recent years, the political philosophy of Marsilius of Padua has drawn
increasing scholarly attention, underscoring his significance for a full and
proper understanding of the history of political thought.3 The historical circumstances of his time shaped his way of thinking about political issues,
yet at the same time his ideas seem strikingly modern. His conception of
active political participation, which highlights the valentior pars, springs to
mind, as does his acrimonious critique of papal power, which some see
as pioneering modern secularism.4 Marsilius’ theory of law, for instance,
strikes a chord with those familiar with the classics of modern political
thought in that it emphasizes the rule of law. There can be little doubt that
Marsilius is as pivotal as he was controversial, as is shown, for example,
by Francisco Suárez’ sharp dismissal of his theory of the Church, almost
three hundred years after the Defensor pacis first entered the public scene.5
These historical considerations aside, most scholars agree that Marsilius set forth several stringent arguments by means of which he arrived at novel, if not radical, conclusions; the rejection of papal plenitudo potestatis in spiritualibus
and in temporalibus is just one example.6 Although one might be tempted to highlight the polemical character of the Defensor pacis as a “call to action,”
7 it is equally obvious that he is meticulous about theoretical decisions regarding the proper structure of his political thought. His main point of reference in that respect is Aristotle’s Politics,8 which he read in William of Moerbeke’s translation, although he also acknowledges that there are specific issues of his time that “Aristotle could not perceive and neither has anyone else after him,” such as the aforementioned strife with the Papal curia.9
19 Averroist by Contagion? Marsilius of Padua on
civilis scientia
Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp
Marsilius of Padua on civilis scientia 437
In this chapter, I will focus on the philosophical method in the Defensor pacis, a topic that, despite the increasing number of publications on Marsilius, has not received the attention it deserves. I look most closely at the
opening chapters of Dictio 1 of the Defensor pacis, and accordingly divide
my study into three parts. In the first, I examine how Marsilius establishes
the foundations of his political thought. I point out that his language mirrors the Posterior Analytics, in which only evident propositions and demonstration allow one to reach necessary conclusions. Here, I address what can
rightly be described as evident propositions in the political realm; whether
Marsilius had a solid grasp of Aristotle’s theory of demonstration will be
mentioned only in passing. In the second part, I show how Marsilius’ idea
of demonstration plays out in one specific case of his political theory, the
role of priesthood, which he sees not as constituting a separate spiritual
power, but as playing a political role in the civitas. Finally, I discuss why
Marsilius, while not a “Political Averroist”—a claim which has already
been thoroughly discredited—formulates a point of view that is compatible with some of Averroes’ tenets.
Marsilius’ Philosophical Method
In chapter 1 of the first Dictio, Marsilius establishes the approach he will pursue to establish a theory which allows him to hold that the peace (pax)
and tranquility (tranquilitas) of the city (civitas) are its proper and natural goals. A particularly striking feature is Marsilius’ emphasis that the bases for a political theory are justified in terms of self-evident (per se nota) propositions and that those propositions, in turn, allow for a set of demonstrations. In the secondary literature, at least that of which I am aware, Marsilius’ appeal to self-evident propositions and the language of demonstration has largely been overlooked. Presently, there are two main questions that must be addressed: Does Marsilius have a cogent theory of demonstration underpinning his general political theory? And what is the function of demonstration for articulating specific political ideas (such as law or citizenship)?
The first question is more challenging than the second, mostly because,
apart from his explicit reference to the terms demonstratio and per se notum,
little can be said as to whether Marsilius was thoroughly acquainted with
the Posterior Analytics. There are no direct references to it in the text, yet
his terminology indicates that he must have had at least a rudimentary
understanding of it. Some basic assumptions in the Defensor pacis are congruent with Posterior Analytics, in that what constitutes the framework for
living in society must be incontrovertibly true. In this sense, quoting Aristotle, political theory is, insofar as it is science, an “understanding [that]
requires knowledge of the explanation, and is of what cannot be otherwise; hence demonstrative understanding proceeds from principles which
are true, primitive, and immediate, and prior to, more familiar than, and
explanatory of the conclusions.”10
438 Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp
The principles of demonstration are self-evident. They cannot be proven, yet they serve as premises that allow one to syllogistically reach a conclusion that must be true. This much must have been clear to Marsilius; however, it is uncertain to what extent he was acquainted with the details of the long medieval discussion of the nature of demonstration.11
All the same, it is very likely that Marsilius knew a Latin translation of Posterior Analytics (although it is not clear which one, and, judging from the way he uses the language of demonstration—for example, he sometimes talks of quasi demonstrando—the thrust of his arguments seems to have been more dialectical). His lack of a structured understanding of Aristotle’s theory of demonstration, at least from what can be gathered from the Defensor pacis, may also be due to the fact that he could not rely on additional aids, such as Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Posterior Analytics, to which he most probably lacked access. Translated into Latin by William de Luna in the thirteenth century, only one manuscript of the Middle Commentary is known to be extant, which strongly suggests that copies of this translation were not abundant in the fourteenth century.12
In any case, it is sufficient to state here that any explicit or implicit reference to Posterior Analytics stresses the stringency and necessity of the demonstrative arguments advanced. That is to say: whenever a conclusion is reached via demonstration, scientific knowledge is obtained. It seems, then, that this is what Marsilius has in mind when he thinks that Aristotle’s philosophy allows one to formulate a science of civil life (civilis scientia), that is, political theory as one branch of scientific knowledge.13
The Defensor pacis contains enough evidence that Marsilius was a keen
reader of Aristotle. Obviously, references to Politica are frequent and, apart
from Posterior Analytics, he recurs to the Physics and Metaphysics. The general tone of his philosophical argumentation relies largely on Aristotelian
vocabulary—this becomes evident on multiple occasions, such as his idea
of the civitas, the teleology of communal life, and hence the idea of the
common good.
Demonstration
Outside the context set forth by the Politica, in Dictio 1 Marsilius’ arguments are frequently framed in the language of demonstration, for example, in the following:
But on the subject of living and living well or the good life in its
first mode, sc. the worldly, and those things that are necessary for
it, the glorious philosophers grasped almost the entire matter by
demonstration.14
Marsilius of Padua on civilis scientia 439
From the outset, Marsilius is intent on setting the right perspective for his
analysis. In describing the methodology of Dictio 1, he states:
I shall demonstrate what I intend by sure methods discovered by human ingenuity, consisting of propositions that are self-evident [per se notis]
to any mind not corrupted by nature, custom, or perverse affection.15
This remark shows his commitment to the language of demonstration
as the foundation of political theory, based on self-evident propositions
which are accessible to natural reason (humano ingenio). The idea contains
a striking commitment within his political theory: no arguments are acceptable that are not compatible with that method. Marsilius takes it that
propositions that refer to the spiritual life and salvation of the soul pertain
not to demonstration, but to revelation. In explaining the proper mode
of the institution of the monarchy, he highlights this point by saying that
Moses’ political power was the consequence not of social and historical
processes, but of divine institution, something that, again, is only to be
believed without demonstration. Hence:
On the subject of this cause and its free action [i.e., God designating
Moses], to explain or say why it acts or has acted in this way or that
way and not the other—we can say nothing of this through demonstration, but hold it by simple belief without reasoning.16
Instead of accepting what has been transmitted by Scripture as truth, Marsilius intends to show that there are true propositions, accessible by natural reason. The most fundamental of those per se true propositions is the
following: “For the city is established for the purpose of living and living
well.”17 To further explicate this affirmation, deeply rooted in an Aristotelian teleological worldview, he adds:
For this is, as we have said, that for the sake of which the city was
established, as well as the necessary condition of all those things that
take place and are brought about by human communication within it.
Let us then lay this down as the fundamental principle of everything
that we must demonstrate, a principle naturally held and believed and
freely conceded by all: sc. that all men not deficient or otherwise impeded naturally desire a sufficient life, and by the same token shun and
avoid those things that are harmful to them. Indeed, this principle is
not only granted for man, but also for every kind of animal.18
In other words, if political theory is to make sense, one must examine why
humans live with other people. Since no one naturally seeks companionship in order to become miserable, the opposite must be evidently true,
440 Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp
namely, that everyone lives in society so as to achieve the goal for which
he or she lives—happiness. Living in peace, as opposed to living in turmoil
and despair, explains the natural sociability of humans who desire to live
in a perfect community, the civitas:
The fruits of peace and tranquility, then, are the best, as we said, while
those of its contrary, strife, are unendurable harm. For this reason we
must desire peace, seek to acquire it when we do not have it, keep
it once acquired, and fight off its opposite, strife, with every effort.
Individuals who are brothers to each other, and all the more so collective bodies and communities, are moreover bound to help each other
towards these goals, from feelings of heavenly charity as much as the
bond or right of human society.19
What is important here is to see how Marsilius relates the purpose of living in society with the overarching desire to live well, vivere et bene vivere.20
For brevity’s sake, I will only discuss what is compatible with the demonstrative method previously described, as opposed to other methods which
pretend to account for the existence of society, such as the predominant
interpretation of the Church that the proper end of societal life is found
in the spiritual realm. The juxtaposition of the temporal with the spiritual
domain and the exclusive political relevance of the former is at the heart
of Marsilius’ argument:
There are two modes, however, of this same living and living well
that is appropriate for man: one temporal or worldly, but also another,
which is customarily called eternal or heavenly. And it being that
philosophers as a whole could not convincingly demonstrate the second mode, sc. the sempiternal, nor was it among things that are self-evident, therefore they did not trouble themselves to pass on whatever
might be in order to it. But on the subject of living and living well or
the good life in its first mode, sc. the worldly, and those things that
are necessary for it, the glorious philosophers grasped almost the entire matter by demonstration. From this they concluded the necessity,
for securing it, of the civil community, without which this sufficient
living cannot be obtained.21
This corroborates what has already been suggested, namely that whatever
is politically relevant has to be cognitively accessible in virtue of being true
by means of demonstration. One might take this to imply that whatever
cannot be demonstrated is eo ipso not politically relevant, in the sense of
complying with the basic and per se evident meaning of that for which
societies exist. The teachings of the Church (such as those put forward by
Boniface VIII or John XXII) demand the possession of both the temporal
and the spiritual sword, thus implying plenitudo potestatis in temporalibus;
Marsilius of Padua on civilis scientia 441
Marsilius considers this position untenable because it can only be held
based on a precarious interpretation of Scripture, leaving no room for debate based upon rational certainties.
Priesthood
All of this has significant implications not only for understanding what
should count as relevant in the civitas but also for the role of the Church
and the priesthood. Despite secularist interpretations of Marsilius, he is
not keen to dispense with the role of priests in communal life, in part because Aristotle himself recommended priests as a part of the civitas:
We shall say, then, that the parts or offices of the city are of six kinds,
as Aristotle said in Politics VII, chapter 7: agriculture, manufacture, the
military, the financial, the priesthood and the judicial or councillor.
Three of these, viz. the priesthood, the military and the judicial, are
parts of the city in an unqualified sense, and in civil communities they
are usually called the notables.22
Priesthood is not only a requirement for people’s livelihood; it is also an
essential part of the city which empowers its citizens to live well. There
seems, however, to be a contradiction in what Marsilius says about the
political relevance of spiritual life (or rather its absence) and its agents, the
priests. On the one hand, nothing of what they say as priests about eternal life can be interpreted in a way that would imply a political directive,
because, as we have seen, neither the contents of revelation nor those of
Scripture can be demonstrated. On the other, priests are essential for a
structured community whose aim in hac vita is civil happiness and peace.
Marsilius was obviously too much of a philosopher to contradict himself
so naively. So what are the reasons for attributing a political role to priesthood? The answer to this question consists of a string of arguments, which
I now discuss in general terms.
Marsilius is generally fond of exploring the meaning of the terms he introduces, and true to form, he asks what the meaning of “priest” (sacerdos)
encompasses. Analogously to soldiers or artisans, whose profession is fundamentally described in terms of function, so too the priesthood is defined
functionally. Speaking of function entails a kind of teleological language,
a final cause. Hence Marsilius states:
What remains for this discussion is to say something of the final cause
for the sake of which the true priesthood was instituted in communities of the faithful. For this cause is the tempering of those human acts
that result from an imperative of cognition or desire, both immanent
and transitive, inasmuch as it is on the basis of them that the human
race is ordered towards the best life of the world to come.23
442 Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp
Priests essentially fulfill their task when they administer the sacraments and when they preach the Gospel, which cannot be done unless faithful people are present. This seems to mean that one part of the priest’s function is social and communicative, and the message transmitted refers to how “to attain eternal salvation and avoid eternal misery.”24
The promises of eternal salvation or its opposite belong to the realm of revelation and Scripture, the content of which cannot be demonstrated; however, the psychological makeup of the faithful and the social relations they engage in can be grounded in demonstrative argumentation. That is to say, emotions, reasonings, and actions are per se social and political in nature, and the priest, by addressing issues pertaining to revelation, is at the same time able to attenuate and shape desires. In other words, that eternal life awaits us is not a certainty, but the call on the faithful to behave themselves in order to increase the probability of obtaining salvation has immediate consequences for how people relate to each other.
For instance, obeying the commandment “Thou shalt not steal,” which
has a divine origin, may or may not give us access to eternal life, but it
cannot be disputed that people, being generally keen to keep their belongings, think that not stealing has a political function in that it helps keep the
peace and ensure social unity. Priests have, then, a very important role to
play in the civitas, because by transmitting divine messages, they “temper
those human acts (both immanent and transitive) which result from desire
and cognition, and by which man becomes well-disposed in his soul for
the status of this present world as well as of that to come.”25
Marsilius’ Milieu and “Political Averroism”
So far, I have tried to reach two conclusions: that the method of Marsilius’ political philosophy is broadly based on the Aristotelian method of demonstration, and that this method excludes spiritual concerns from playing a substantial role in politics. From this perspective, inasmuch as priests administer sacraments and preach, Marsilius even admits that priesthood plays a social and political role in society. He contends that his philosophical method is not only consistent with this conclusion but demonstratively necessary. As a corollary, Marsilius is convinced that religious devotion has an important function in the fourteenth-century Western European society about which he theorizes. Therefore, the claim of laicism, such as that made by Georges de Lagarde in La naissance de l’esprit laïque, rests strictly speaking on the wrong premises, leading Lagarde to dismiss the social weight that, according to Marsilius, priests should have.
Marsilius’ subordination of religion to demonstration in the political
sphere has rarely received the recognition it deserves. Rather, the predominant approach of discussions about Marsilius has been to highlight
Marsilius of Padua on civilis scientia 443
his similarity to and even dependence upon Averroes, who—for instance,
in the Decisive Treatise—advances a theory similar to what we read in Marsilius. In fact, Averroes says:
since this religion is true and summons to the study which leads to
knowledge of the Truth, we the Muslim community know definitely
that demonstrative study does not lead to [conclusions] conflicting
with what Scripture has given us; for truth does not oppose truth but
accords with it and bears witness to it.26
The truth of religious belief, however, is not something that concerns
Marsilius, because it does not pertain to a demonstrative model, which
must rely on established facts and true propositions. Religious language is
not grounded in this way, and Marsilius therefore dismisses it as irrelevant,
at least for the purpose of articulating political theory.
That said, in the past many scholars were fascinated by the apparent resemblance between Averroes and Marsilius, which prompted them to coin
the term “Political Averroism.” Étienne Gilson even boldly states that “the
Defensor pacis is an example of Political Averroism as perfect as one might
wish.”27 More recently, Charles Butterworth, arguing against Gregorio
Piaia’s contention that Political Averroism is nothing more than a historiographical myth,28 tried to connect Marsilius’ idea of the ultimate end
of political life as attainable in hac vita with Averroes’ teachings regarding
the first practical principles, found in his Commentary on Plato’s Republic.29
Butterworth also refers to the Decisive Treatise and The Incoherence of the
Incoherence as possible sources for Marsilius. But for the one certain source,
the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics, Butterworth fails to show how it
could have shaped Marsilius’ political philosophy. In fact, I will argue that
metaphysical discussions do not eo ipso lead into political theories or that
they afford the framework for such theories. Despite the shortcomings of
Butterworth’s account, however, we should not exclude the possibility
that the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics might, after all, have played
a key role in developing Marsilius’ methodological approach—as regards
what principles are at stake, what conclusions to draw from them, how to
relate certain phenomena to those principles, and so on.
Without having the space to discuss every single exposition on the merits
of the Political Averroism hypothesis in Marsilius, an article by Wolfgang
Hübener stands out, not only because he dismisses—correctly—Lagarde’s
thesis of a kind of political individualism in Marsilius, but because he recognizes the long commentaries on the Metaphysics and De anima, which are
theoretical writings, as the foundation for Averroism. From here, Hübener
takes the leap to declaring that metaphysical and psychological Averroism
was in fact politicized.30
The thesis regarding Marsilius’ alleged Political Averroism rests on two
assumptions. The first is that some writings by Averroes discuss practical
444 Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp
principles as well as the relation between philosophy and religion (Butterworth). The second is that Averroes’ metaphysical and psychological
thought, which was widely known and intensely discussed in the Latin
West, is almost automatically translated into political theory (Hübener
and Butterworth). I think that both assumptions are false, but that they are
not trivially false, because there are similarities between what we know of
Averroes and Marsilius that are too striking to be dismissed out of hand. In
order to establish whether Marsilius owed essential aspects of his thought
to Averroes, we should ask whether the Defensor pacis could be coherently read and understood without having to presuppose a direct influence
by the Andalusian philosopher. The answer to that question is Yes, even
though Marsilius does in fact reach conclusions that are deceptively similar
to those of Averroes.
As for the question of a direct influence of Averroes’ political and ethical
writings, it is clear that, excepting the commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics, none of them was translated into Latin before the fifteenth century.
In fact, Marsilius could not have known the content of the Decisive Treatise,
nor could any other Latin author in the early decades of the fourteenth
century.31 If there ever was a “Political Averroism” in Averroes, Marsilius
would not have known that it existed.32 This clearly puts the weight of
the argument on the writings that he knew, mostly the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics, and with it on the hypothesis of a politicizing role for
Averroes’ metaphysics. To prove this hypothesis true is a tall order, and I
think it can be dismissed intuitively. Imagine that out of all of Immanuel
Kant’s works, posterity had access to only the Critique of Pure Reason, and
not to his ethical or political writings. Would it be reasonable to assume
that his political theory becomes deductively evident once you read his
metaphysics? Probably not.
Again, Averroes developed his own political theory in his writings,
but it did not have a direct impact on the relevant discussions in the Latin
West, mainly because his political writings were not translated into Latin
in the thirteenth or early fourteenth century. This is the reason why direct
references to Averroes are virtually absent in Marsilius’ writings. The only
exception in the Defensor pacis is a direct quotation from the Long Commentary on the Metaphysics, which Marsilius uses to show that the process of
formulating laws is a collaborative and historical effort, analogous to the
way that the arts evolve through time.33 I quote it in full, because it shows
that he uses it only to corroborate his stance and not to endorse Averroes’
thought as such:
In this way, by men’s mutual aid and by adding together things discovered later and things discovered earlier, all the arts and disciplines
have been brought to completion. Aristotle makes this plain in figurative language as well, when he said (in the same place) on the subject
of the discovery of music: “If there had been no Timotheus, we would
Marsilius of Padua on civilis scientia 445
lack much melody: but if there had been no Phrynes, there would
have been no Timotheus,” sc. so accomplished in melodies, if he had
not been in possession of discoveries by Phrynes. Averroes, explaining
these words in his Commentary, Book II, says this: “And what he”
sc. Aristotle “says in this chapter is plain. For no one by himself can
discover the productive and reflective” (i.e., theoretical) “arts in their
greater part, because they are not brought to completion except by the
aid given by a forerunner to a successor.”34
If, then, Marsilius is to be seen as following Averroes, or as developing his
theory according to the general lines of Averroes’ philosophy, it is odd that
he is mentioned only once. In contrast, Marsilius quite frequently refers
to Cicero and, of course, to Aristotle, and this should indicate that his
thought is Aristotelian cum Ciceronian, but not Averroist.
Conclusion
In order to reassess Marsilius’ political philosophy, we should keep in mind
that it emerged within the historical context of radical Aristotelianism,
mostly in Paris—think of Marsilius’ proximity to Jean of Jandun. During
and after his short tenure as rector of the University of Paris, Marsilius
was immersed in an academic climate that thought highly of Averroes
as a valuable vehicle for interpreting Aristotle’s Metaphysics and De anima.
I have tried to show that Marsilius might have been familiar with those
sources, but that they could not reasonably have influenced his political
thought directly. In the absence of Latin translations of texts such as the
Decisive Treatise or the Commentary on Plato’s Republic, is there a way of being a political Averroist without Averroes?
Marsilius was, first and foremost, a very good reader of Aristotle’s Poli-
tics, which, as we know, had been around in Latin for approximately fifty
years but which Averroes did not know. By medieval standards it was still a
fresh text, which had not seen as many commentaries as other Aristotelian
writings; this allowed Marsilius to use it in a way he thought was in accordance with the general tenets of Aristotle’s philosophy. In this respect,
using—even if rather loosely—the theory of demonstration derived from
Posterior Analytics allows for an approach accommodating Aristotelian political naturalism with the need to curtail papal claims of plenitudo potestatis,
of which, by the way, neither Aristotle nor for that matter Averroes could
have been aware.
It seems that an independent and powerful thinker like Marsilius chose
to read the Politica as a text which provided his conceptual foundations,
such as the organic structure of the civitas, the teleological impetus toward
civil happiness, and the importance of limiting the scope of the discussion
to what can be shown as evident to reason. Aristotle himself provided the
basic framework and Marsilius managed to combine political theory with
446 Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp
the theory of demonstration, thus showing the value of philosophy as an
autonomous discipline that did not require religious guidance but could
stand on its own.
Notes 1 Godthardt, “Life of Marsilius of Padua,” 22–25. 2 Saying this is not uncontroversial, for some authors have held that Marsilius relies more heavily on Ciceronian and other non-Aristotelian sources.
See, for instance, Syros, Rezeption, 63–65; Nederman, “Nature, Justice, and
Duty.” As will be shown, the foundation of Marsilius’ theory would not make
sense if not seen from an Aristotelian perspective. 3 See Koch, Zur Dis-/Kontinuität. 4 See Lagarde, La naissance de l’esprit laïque. The Defensor pacis had even been
translated into English by 1535, thus serving the political purpose of attacking the Roman curia and helping to present a sort of ideological basis for the
Henrician reform; see Stout, “Marsilius of Padua.” On Marsilius’ influence,
mostly on medieval and early modern authors, see Izbicki, “Reception of
Marsilius.” 5 For instance, in Francisco Suárez, Defensio fidei 3. 6, 3, ed. Berton, 231: “In
hac ergo quaestione fuit haeresis Marsilii Paduani, qui fore ante quingentos
annos inter alias haereses dixit, Christum nullam jurisdictionem Ecclesiae
suae, aut Episcopis, vel Romano Pontifici dedisse.” 6 Others, such as Ockham or Dante, criticized it as well, but they fell short
of such a profound reassessment of papal power as the one put forward by
Marsilius. 7 Godthardt, “Life of Marsilius of Padua,” 19–20. 8 See Nederman, Community and Consent, 144. In fact, Marsilius dedicates the
book to Emperor Ludwig, whom he considers the antidote to “singularem
hanc litis causam” (Marsilius of Padua, Defensor pacis 1. 1, § 7, ed. Scholz, 8),
the cause of which is Pope John XXII. 9 Marsilius of Padua, Defensor pacis 1. 1, § 7, ed. Scholz, 8: “Huius vero quam
nec Aristoteles conspicere potuit, nec post ipsum qui potuerit.” The English
translations in the present article are taken from Annabel Brett’s illuminating
rendering of Marsilius’ text: Marsilius of Padua, Defender of the Peace, trans.
Brett (here 9). 10 Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, trans. Barnes, 75. Even though Marsilius spent
considerable time in Paris until 1326, it is not clear whether he received his
master’s degree in Paris or in Padua. See Godthardt, “Life of Marsilius of
Padua,” 14–15. 11 Serene, “Demonstrative Science.” 12 See Dod, “Aristoteles Latinus,” 75. 13 Marsilius, Defensor pacis 1. 1, § 3, ed. Scholz, 5. 14 Ibid. 1. 4, § 3, 17 (trans. Brett, 19). 15 Ibid. 1. 1, § 8, 9: “In prima quarum demonstrabo intenta viis certis humano
ingenio adinventis, constantibus ex proposicionibus per se notis cuilibet menti
non corrupte natura, consuetudine vel affeccione perversa” (trans. Brett, 9). 16 Ibid. 1. 9, § 2, 40: “De qua a siquidem causa et ipsius accione libera tradere seu
dicere, cur sic aut aliter nec sic esse aut fuisse factum, per demonstracionem
nec quicquam dicere possumus, sed simplici credulitate absque racione tenemus” (trans. Brett, 44). 17 Ibid. 1. 5, § 8, 24: “Est enim civitas vivendi et bene vivendi gracia constituta”
(trans. Brett, 27).
Marsilius of Padua on civilis scientia 447 18 Ibid. 1. 4, § 2, 16: “Est enim, ut diximus, cuius gracia civitas instituta est
et necessitas omnium que sunt et fiunt per hominum communicacionem in
ea. Hoc ergo statuamus tamquam demonstrandorum omnium principium
naturaliter habitum, creditum et ab omnibus sponte cona cessum: omnes
scilicet a homines non orbatos aut aliter impeditos naturaliter sufficientem
vitam appetere, huic quoque nociva refugere et declinare; quod eciam nec
solum de homine confessum est, verum de omni animalium genere” (trans.
Brett, 18). 19 Ibid. 1. 1, § 4, 5: “Sunt igitur, ut diximus, pacis seu tranquillitatis fructus optimi, opposite vero Litis importabilia nocumenta: propter quod pacem optare,
non habentes querere, quesitam servare, litemque oppositam omni conamine
repellere debemus. Ad ea quoque singuli fratres, eoque magis collegia et communitates se invicem iuvare tenentur, tam superne caritatis affectu, quam
vinculo sive iure societatis humane” (trans. Brett, 6). 20 Ibid. 1. 4, § 1, 16: “Quod autem dixit Aristoteles: vivendi gracia facta, existens
autem gracia bene vivendi, significat causam finalem ipsius perfectam, quoniam viventes civiliter non solum vivunt quomodo faciunt bestie aut servi,
sed bene vivunt, vacantes scilicet operibus liberalibus, qualia sunt virtutum
tam practice, quam speculative anime” (trans. Brett, 6). 21 Ibid. 1. 4, § 3, 17: “Vivere autem ipsum et bene vivere conveniens hominibus est in duplici modo, quoddam temporale sive mundanum, aliud verom
eternum sive celeste vocari solitum. Quodque istud secundum vivere, sempiternum scilicet, non potuit philosophorum universitas per demonstracionem
convincere, nec fuit de rebus manifestis per se, idcirco de tradicione ipsorum
que propter ipsum sint, non fueruntr solliciti. De vivere autem et bene vivere
seu bona vita secundum primum modum, mundanum scilicet, ac de hiis,
que propter ipsum necessaria sunt, comprehenderunt per demonstracionem
philosophi gloriosi rem quasi completam. Unde propter ipsum consequendum concluserunt ipsi necessitatem civilis communitatis, sine qua vivere hoc
sufficiens obtineri non potest” (trans. Brett, 19). 22 Ibid. 1. 5, § 1, 20: “Partes seu officia civitatis sunt sex generum, ut dixit Aristoteles 7° Politice, capitulo 6°: agricultura, artificium, militaris, pecuniativa,
sacerdocium et iudicialis seu consiliativa. Quorum tria, videlicet sacerdocium, propugnativa et iudicialis, simpliciter sunt partes civitatis, quas eciam
in communitatibus civilibus honorabilitatem dicere solent” (trans. Brett, 22). 23 Ibid. 1. 6, § 1, 28–29: “Dicere de causa finali propter quam fuit verum sacerdocium in communitatibus fidelium institutum. Est enim hec moderacio
humanorum actuum imperatorum per cognicionem et appetitum, tam immanencium quam transeuncium, secundum quod ex illis ordinatur genus humanum ad optimum vivere venturi seculi” (trans. Brett, 31). 24 Ibid. 1. 6, § 3, 31 (trans. Brett, 35). 25 Ibid. 1. 6, § 8–9, 32–33: “Sacerdotalis igitur finis est hominum disciplina et
erudicio de hiis que secundum evangelicam legem necessarium est credere,
agere vel omittere propter eternam salutem consequendam et miseriam fugiendam. In hoc autem officium convenienter veniunt omnes discipline humano ingenio adinvente, tam speculative quam active, humanorum actuum
moderative tam immanencium quam transeuncium, ab appetitu et cognicione proveniencium, quibus bene disponitur homo secundum animam pro
statu tam presentis seculi, quam venturi” (trans. Brett, 35). 26 Averroes, On the Harmony, trans. Hourani, 50. As this work is usually referred
to as the Decisive Treatise, I will do so as well. 27 Gilson, La philosophie, 691–92, quoted in Piaia, “Averroïsme politique,” 298. 28 Piaia, “Averroïsme politique.” 29 Butterworth, “What Is Political Averroism,” 243.
448 Joerg Alejandro Tellkamp 30 Hübener, “Unvorgreifliche Überlegungen,” 226: “Strukturell bleibt sie [die
politische Philosophie des Marsilius] jedoch dem Averroismus verpflichtet
und könnte daher ebensogut als Politisierung des metaphysichen Averroismus
angesehen werden.” 31 For a list of the texts by Averroes translated into Latin and their respective
dates, see Daiber, “Lateinische Übersetzungen arabischer Texte.” 32 The case of the Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics, translated by Hermannus Alemannus in the early thirteenth century, could pose a problem to my
interpretation, but there is no indication in the Defensor pacis that Marsilius knew it. 33 Scholz identifies two indirect references in chapters 15, § 5 and 17, § 9; see
Scholz, “Einleitung,” lxii. Those references are, however, hard to corroborate. 34 Marsilius, Defensor pacis 1. 11, § 3, ed. Scholz, 56: “Sic ergo per auxilium
hominum invicem et addicionem posterius inventorum ad inventa prius receperunt omnes artes et discipline complementum. Quod figuraliter eciam
declarat ibidem Aristoteles circa musice invencionem, cum dixit: Si Timotheus
non fuisset, multam melodiam non haberemus; si autem Phrynis, Timotheus non fuisset,
ita perfectus scilicet in melodiis, nisi habuisset prius inventa per Phrynem.
Que verba exponens Averroys 2º Commento, sic ait: Et quod dicit in hoc capitulo,
Aristoteles scilicet, manifestum est. Nullus enim potest invenire per se artes
operativas aut considerativas, id est speculativas, in maiori parte, quia non complentur,
nisi per iuvamentum prioris ad sequentem” (trans. Brett, 59–60).
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Aristotle. Posterior Analytics. Translated with a commentary by Jonathan Barnes.
2nd, revised edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993.
Averroes (Ibn Rushd). On the Harmony of Religion and Philosophy. Translated with
introduction and notes by George F. Hourani. London: Luzac, 1967.
Marsilius of Padua. Defensor pacis. Edited by Richard Scholz. Hanover: Hahn,
1932–33.
Marsilius of Padua. The Defender of the Peace. Edited and translated by Annabel
Brett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Suárez, Francisco. Defensio fidei. Edited by Charles Berton. Paris: Vivès, 1859.
Secondary Literature
Butterworth, Charles E. “What Is Political Averroism?” In Averroismus im Mittelalter und in der Renaissance, edited by Friedrich Niewöhner and Loris Sturlese,
239–50. Zurich: Spur, 1994.
Daiber, Hans. “Lateinische Übersetzungen arabischer Texte zur Philosophie und
ihre Bedeutung für die Scholastik des Mittelalters.” In Recontres de cultures dans
la philosophie medievale: Traductions et traducteurs de l’antiquité tardive au XIVe siècle,
edited by Jacqueline Hamesse and Marta Fattori, 203–50. Louvain-la-Neuve:
Institut d’Études Médiévales de l’Université Catholique, 1990.
Dod, Bernard. “Aristoteles Latinus.” In The Cambridge History of Later Medieval
Philosophy, edited by Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg,
43–79. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Gilson, Étienne. La philosophie au Moyen Âge. Paris: Payot, 1962.
Marsilius of Padua on civilis scientia 449
Godthardt, Frank. “The Life of Marsilius of Padua.” In A Companion to Marsilius of Padua, edited by Gerson Moreno-Riaño and Cary J. Nederman, 13–55.
Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Hübener, Wolfgang. “Unvorgreifliche Überlegungen zum möglichen Sinn des
Topos ‘politischer Averroismus.’” In Averroismus im Mittelalter und in der Renaissance,
edited by Friedrich Niewöhner and Loris Sturlese, 222–38. Zurich:
Spur, 1994.
Izbicki, Thomas M. “The Reception of Marsilius.” In A Companion to Marsilius
of Padua, edited by Gerson Moreno-Riaño and Cary J. Nederman, 305–33.
Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Koch, Bettina. Zur Dis-/Kontinuität mittelalterlichen politischen Denkens in der neuzeitlichen politischen Theorie: Marsilius von Padua, Johannes Althusius und Thomas
Hobbes im Vergleich. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 2005.
Lagarde, Georges de. La naissance de l’esprit laïque au déclin du Moyen Âge: III. Le
Defensor Pacis. Leuven: Nauwelaerts, 1971. Nederman, Cary J. Community and Consent: The Secular Political Theory of Marsiglio
of Padua’s Defensor pacis. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1995.
Nederman, Cary J. “Nature, Justice, and Duty in the Defensor Pacis: Marsiglio of
Padua’s Ciceronian Impulse.” Political Theory 18, no. 4 (1990): 615–37.
Piaia, Gregorio. “‘Averroïsme politique’: Anatomie d’un mythe historiographique.” In Orientalische Kultur und europäisches Mittelalter, edited by Albert
Zimmermann and Ingrid Craemer-Ruegenberg, 288–300. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1985.
Scholz, Richard. “Einleitung.” In Defensor pacis, edited by Richard Scholz, v–lxx.
Hanover: Hahn, 1932–33.
Serene, Eileen. “Demonstrative Science.” In The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, edited by Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg, 496–517. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Stout, Harry S. “Marsilius of Padua and the Henrician Reform.” Church History
43 (1974): 308–18.
Syros, Vasileios. Die Rezeption der aristotelischen politischen Philosophie bei Marsilius
von Padua: Eine Untersuchung zur ersten Diktion des Defensor Pacis. Leiden: Brill,
2007.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-24
When it comes to the issue of the world’s age, Nas․
ıˉr al-Dıˉn al-T․uˉsıˉ (1201–1274 CE) is less an innovator and more a defender and amender. He defends the world’s eternity, or at least its temporal infinitude, primarily against the philosophically engaged Ashʿarite theologian Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ (1150–1210) and does so by amending the thought of the theologically sensitive philosopher Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, or Avicenna (980–1037). While al-T․uˉsıˉ’s defense and emendations are intended to be in the spirit of Avicenna, one cannot help but feel, at times, that they equally would have perplexed and even pained the Sheikh rather than always pleased him. To bear out the thesis that there is a stark difference between the philosophies of Avicenna and al-T․
uˉsıˉ, in this chapter, I consider the theory of action that al-T․
uˉsıˉ develops in critiquing al-Raˉzıˉ. Particularly, I consider the action theory that emerges in response to the position that the very being of the Necessary Existent in Itself, that is, the deity, necessitates the eternal existence of the world. A standard objection to this position, which is identified as that of the philosophers and particularly that of Avicenna, is that creation becomes little more than an act of nature rather than a volitional act issuing from divine free will.1 The
historical Avicenna had anticipated the objection and had a compatibilist response: an action can be necessary and still volitional.2 In contrast, al-T․uˉsıˉ’s Avicenna is a free-will libertarian—an action is free only if the agent could have acted otherwise.
In the hope of providing a relatively well-rounded account of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s action theory, I look both at one of his philosophical texts, his commentary on Avicenna’s al-Ishaˉraˉt wa-l-tanbıˉhaˉt (Pointers and Reminders), and
at one of his theological texts, his commentary on al-Raˉzıˉ’s Muh․as․s․
al
afkaˉr al-mutaqaddimıˉn wa-l-mutaʾakhkhirıˉn min al-h․
ukamaˉʾ wa-l-mutakallimıˉn
(A Summary of the Thought of Ancient and Modern Philosophers and
Theologians), the relevant passages of which I have translated and include as an appendix at the end of this chapter. In the first section of this
study, I begin with how al-Raˉzıˉ frames the issue of the world’s age in
the Muh․as․s․
al in terms of different modes of causation, whether material,
formal, efficient, or final. I focus on the arguments based upon efficient
and final causality and al-Raˉzıˉ’s charge that the philosophers’ position
20 Some Choice Words
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s Reconceptualization of
the Issue of the World’s Age
Jon McGinnis
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 451
makes God act of necessity and thus strips the deity of free will. While
al-T․uˉsıˉ’s immediate responses to al-Raˉzıˉ are brief and seemingly weak,
he significantly develops his thoughts later in the Muh․as․s․
al commentary,
as well as in his Ishaˉraˉt commentary. I consider these developments in the
second section. Specifically, al-T․
uˉsıˉ clarifies the necessity of God’s creation of the world and argues that the theologians are likewise committed
to a similar form of necessitation. He thereafter clarifies the notions of a
sufficient reason (murajjih․
) and a choosing agent (mukhtaˉr) and argues that
it is only the philosophers’ position that makes God’s action one of free
choice rather than a mindlessly random act. I then return to al-Raˉzıˉ’s
critique of the philosophers’ position concerning the age of the world and
al-T․uˉsıˉ’s rejoinders in the third section, now in light of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s developed action theory. Therein, I argue that al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s seemingly weak arguments
are, in fact, quite strong. The final section looks at al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s libertarian theory of divine action in light of certain arguments that Avicenna presented, which suggest that a choosing agent is always a composite and so
cannot be the absolute one and simple deity required both by Avicenna
and al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s philosophical theology and by traditional interpretations of
monotheism more generally. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ, I maintain, does have the philosophical wherewithal to sidestep Avicenna’s argument. The result is that
al-T․uˉsıˉ reconciles two seemingly incompatible positions, namely God is
absolutely simple and yet chooses to create—although, admittedly, his position requires one to accept a principled agnosticism about God’s reason
for creating. In the end, what emerges is a theory of action that, while
Avicennian in its beginnings, is uniquely Nas․
irean, that is, al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s own,
in its end. Moreover, it is this new Nas․
irean position that reshapes the way
the issue of the world’s age is treated in the Islamic East thereafter. Indeed,
it is a position still worth considering today.
Al-Raˉzıˉ against the Philosophers on
the Age of the World
Al-Raˉzıˉ’s Muh․as․s․
al is a summary of the thoughts of both ancient and contemporary philosophers and theologians. In it, al-Raˉzıˉ introduces and
critiques the philosophers’ arguments for the temporal infinitude of the
world within the context of discussing the constitutive features (muqawwima
ˉt) of body, that is, the causes of a body’s existing.3 The philosophers’ general strategy, according to al-Raˉzıˉ, is to note that whatever is temporally generated (muh․dath) requires four distinct causes, and, regardless of
how one construes those causes, the world must be eternal, or so claim the
philosophers. The four causes are just those of Aristotle: matter and form,
as well as the agent who produces the action and the end for the sake of
which the agent acts. Additionally, al-Raˉzıˉ, following the philosophers,
defines an action as temporally generated, just in case it comes to be at
some moment prior to which it did not exist.
452 Jon McGinnis
While al-Raˉzıˉ presents and rejects the philosophers’ arguments from all
four forms of causation, I focus here exclusively on the arguments drawn
from the agent and end of a purportedly temporally generated world.
Al-Raˉzıˉ sets up the philosophers’ arguments from these two forms of
causation as a dichotomy: either the agent who creates the world is one
who acts by choice (mukhtaˉr), and so acts for some end, or it does not act
by choice, but by the necessity of what it is (muˉjib li-dhaˉtihi). Al-Raˉzıˉ then
asserts that the philosophers take the following premise as a simple given:
whatever acts by choice must necessarily have some preponderant cause or
sufficient reason (murajjih․
) for choosing to act at the moment that it does
and not earlier or later. Call this premise the Principle of Sufficient Reason.
4 The philosophers then simply deny that, in the case of God, there
could ever be any sufficient reason for the deity’s choosing to go from not
creating to creating. For, either this sufficient reason perfects something in
God, and so God was deficient in some respect (obviously heresy) or that
sufficient reason is some distinctive feature existing in a nonexistent moment, which is absurd. Thus, the deity must act from the necessity of what
God is, given the initial dichotomy. Since God is eternal, God then must
act eternally, and so must bring about an eternal effect, namely, a cosmos
that has no first moment before which it did not exist.
Al-Raˉzıˉ’s own position is that God is an agent who acts by choice,
and he uses two arguments found already in al-Ghazaˉlıˉ (ca. 1058–1111)
to undermine the philosophers’ argument here.5 The first is an ad hominem
argument against the philosophers. The philosophers cannot gainsay
that heavenly bodies are situated in the celestial spheres in positions that
seemingly could have been different, notes al-Raˉzıˉ. Moreover, he continues, neither can they deny that the celestial spheres rotate in certain
directions that, again, seemingly could have been different from what they
are.6 For example, there could have been different constellations of stars
than there in fact are, or the heaven’s apparent diurnal rotation could have
been eastwardly rather than westwardly. The criticism now continues: the
divinity either had a sufficient reason for specifying these seemingly arbitrary features of the cosmos or it did not. If God did not have a sufficient
reason, then the Principle of Sufficient Reason is not necessary, and the
philosophers’ argument does not succeed. As I explain later, God, in this
case, would not act volitionally but randomly. If the divinity did have a
sufficient reason, then it acts by choice. In that case, God need not act by
the necessity of what he is, and so again the philosophers’ argument does
not succeed.
Al-Raˉzıˉ’s second response to the philosophers’ argument—the one that
he considers the real response (al-jawaˉb al-h․
aqıˉqıˉ)—is that God’s will (iraˉda)
is associated with temporally generating the world at the precise moment
that the deity generates it. The very nature of the will is such that it can
choose without a sufficient reason acting as its final end, or so claims al-
Raˉzıˉ. In the words of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, whom, again, al-Raˉzıˉ is echoing here:
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 453
“The world temporally came to be through an eternal will [iraˉda qadıˉma]
that decreed its existence at that moment at which it came to exist.”7 As for
the nature of will, which both al-Ghazaˉlıˉ and al-Raˉzıˉ adopt, the words of
the former are again insightful: the will is “an attribute whose character is
to distinguish/specify [tamyıˉz/takhs․
ıˉs․] something from its like” and “pure
will and choice is something that does away with purpose,” that is, it does
away with a reason or end (mujarrad al-iraˉda wa-l-ikhtiyaˉr al-munfakk ʿan
al-gharad․
).8 For both Ashʿarite theologians, an agent does not always need
a sufficient reason, that is, something that gives greater weight (murajjih․
)
to a decision, in order to act. Some actions are just the result of sheer will.
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s immediate responses to these two objections, at least on the
face of it, seem weak as well as irrelevant to the issue of agency and choice,
which underwrites al-Raˉzıˉ’s comments. Thus, against the first objection,
namely that the specification of the placement of the various heavenly
bodies and their motions appears random and so without some sufficient
reason, al-T․
uˉsıˉ merely says, “[the objection] is useless because in the case
of existing things one can say that the sufficient reason exists but is unknown, whereas in the case of nonexistent things that is impossible.”9
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s response seems little more than a bold assertion that, on the one
hand, a sufficient reason must exist in the one case despite the absolute lack
of evidence for what that reason might be, while, on the other hand, it is
impossible that such a reason exists for an apparently structurally identical
case. Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s comments certainly feel like special pleading.
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s response to al-Raˉzıˉ’s second objection seems to fare no better. Again, al-Raˉzıˉ’s claim is that the nature of the will is such that it can
choose among indiscernible things, in this case among indiscernible possible moments at which to temporally create the world. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ objects that
the response is “a pretension for lack of argument.”10 The remainder of
al-T․uˉsıˉ’s comments, then, focuses exclusively upon the ontological status
of nonexistent moments. It now would seem that al-T․
uˉsıˉ has just missed
al-Raˉzıˉ’s point that the divine will can choose among various possible,
and so nonexistent, indiscernible moments at which to create, since for
al-Raˉzıˉ, following al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, the will, by its very nature, purportedly is
something that can choose among indiscernibles without having any end,
purpose, or reason in sight for choosing.
Despite the ostensible weaknesses of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s two responses, I argue
that they are in fact much stronger than they first appear. Their strength
is apparent, however, only once one sees them against the background of
al-T․uˉsıˉ’s own rather novel theory of action. To get into that theory, we
must now turn to al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s commentary on Avicenna’s Ishaˉraˉt.
Al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s Theory of Action
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s H․
all Mushkilaˉt Kitaˉb al-Ishaˉraˉt wa-l-Tanbıˉhaˉt (The Solution of the
Problems of the Book of Pointers and Reminders) is as much (if not more
454 Jon McGinnis
so) a response to al-Raˉzıˉ’s commentary on Avicenna’s Ishaˉraˉt as it is a commentary on the Sheikh’s own work. In al-Raˉzıˉ’s commentary on namat ․
5.3 of the Ishaˉraˉt, when discussing the created order’s causal dependence
upon God, The Eminent Commentator (al-faˉd․il al-shaˉrih․), that is, Fakhr al-
Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ, distinguishes between the philosophers and the theologians.
His distinction is that the theologians believe that God acts by choice ( faˉʿil
mukhtaˉr), whereas the philosophers believe that God acts out of necessity
(ʿalaˉ wujuˉb), namely through the necessity of what God is, and so without
choice.11 Al-Raˉzıˉ is responding to Avicenna’s claim that creation continuously depends upon God, because the world is merely possible in itself.
As such, it is continuously in need of a cause for any necessity or actuality
it has. In contrast, al-Raˉzıˉ maintains that the world’s dependency is due
to its being temporally generated. Still, maintains al-Raˉzıˉ, this difference
is merely verbal ( fıˉ lafz․ıˉ), since both agree that the world’s existence is
dependent upon God.12 The real difference between the philosophers and
theologians, according to al-Raˉzıˉ, is that the philosophers all agree that
the efficient cause of the world does not act by choice but instead acts out
of necessity, whereas the theologians make God act by choice and so ensure God’s free will. Add to this substantive difference the closely aligned
one that the philosophers held that creation is necessarily eternal, whereas
the theologians held that creation is necessarily temporal, and the positions
of the philosophers and theologians seem all but diametrically opposed.
Thus, it comes as no little surprise that al-T․
uˉsıˉ argues that the philosophers’ and theologians’ positions are fundamentally the same, albeit
differing in one (significant) detail. The theologians, according to al-T․
uˉsıˉ, hold, on the one hand, that if God chooses to create, then of necessity God creates temporally given the purported impossibility of an infinite regress. The
philosophers, on the other hand, hold that if God chooses to create, then of
necessity God creates eternally given the nature of divine unity and simplicity. In both cases, on al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s analysis, God chooses whether to create or
not to create—so there is choice—and in both cases, the choice to create
imposes a necessity on the mode of creation, whether necessarily temporal or necessarily eternal—and so there is necessity. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s observation
about al-Raˉzıˉ’s distinction between the theologians and the philosophers
is novel and, I believe, marks a major reorientation of the issue of God’s
agency with respect to the world. Let us, then, consider it more deeply.
If al-T․uˉsıˉ’s claim is correct, then al-T․
uˉsıˉ has undermined one of the
theologians’ key rhetorical objections to an eternal creation. The objection I have in mind is none other than that the philosophers’ position
seemingly renders God as little different from a natural force, like gravity,
that acts without volition. Additionally, if this analysis is correct, it suggests that al-T․
uˉsıˉ has an action theory very distinct from Avicenna’s (or at
least the traditional reading of Avicenna).13
In his Metaphysics, Avicenna distinguishes among actions that are intentional (ʿalaˉ sabıˉl al-qas․
d, by which I take him to mean actions by choice),
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 455
actions that are by nature (ʿalaˉ sabıˉl al-t ․abʿ), and finally acts of the will
(iraˉda), that is, volitional actions.14 The hallmarks of volitional action for
Avicenna are: (1) that the agent is an intellectual being (ʿaql), (2) that the
agent knows that the action proceeds from it (dhaˉt yaʿlamu maˉ yas․
duru ʿanhi),
and (3) that the agent consents (rid․á) to the action. Volitional actions, thus,
are intended to stand between intentional actions—that is, actions that are
not necessary but involve a choice among possible options—and actions
of nature—that is, actions that are necessary but do not involve a rational
agent and consent. In short, Avicenna has a compatibilist theory of action
in that God freely wills the creation of the world, even though the deity
cannot choose otherwise.
In contrast, al-T․
uˉsıˉ maintains that God could choose to do otherwise. God
could choose not to create at all. Consequently, for al-T․
uˉsıˉ God is an
agent who acts by choice, even if God has no choice as to the mode of that action, that is, the action must be eternal, if the deity so chooses to act. In effect, al-T․
uˉsıˉ concedes to the theologians that free will requires options, and thus he has a libertarian theory of action that contrasts with Avicenna’s compatibilist theory. Let me set aside the issue of whether al-T․uˉsıˉ’s reading is a faithful interpretation of the historical Avicenna and instead consider al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s arguments on their own merit. The question is whether al-T․
uˉsıˉ can make sense of a libertarian theory of divine action within the general Avicennian framework that he adopts. I believe that he can and indeed does so. His strategy involves three steps: first, motivate a Principle of Sufficient Reason; second, criticize the theologians’ theory of the will; and third, provide an analysis of the proper object of choice.
As for the first step, namely to motivate the Principle of Sufficient Reason, al-T․uˉsıˉ notes the following in his comments on namat ․ 5.10 of the
Ishaˉraˉt:
That which is temporally generated is not something necessary and thus it is something possible. In order for one of two extremes—
namely, the existence or nonexistence of what is possible—to carry greater weight [tarajjuh․
] than the other, it needs a cause that gives greater weight [ʿilla murajjih․
a] to that extreme. This is a primitive judgment [h․
ukm awwalıˉ] even if at times the intellect can lose sight of it.15
If the Principle of Sufficient Reason is a first principle, as al-T․
uˉsıˉ claims,
then in principle it need not nor even can be demonstrated. That is because one of the requirements of a first principle is that it is immediate.
That is, there is no middle term that links the subject and the predicate
of the principle such that it could be the conclusion of a demonstration.
Al-T․uˉsıˉ notes, nonetheless, that there are non-demonstrative ways of motivating the Principle of Sufficient Reason. In the Ishaˉraˉt commentary, he
456 Jon McGinnis
mentions proofs by examples, although he feels no need to provide such
examples, either there or in his Muh․as․s․
al commentary. Still, in his commentary on the Muh․as․s․
al, he suggests one non-demonstrative proof for the
Principle of Sufficient Reason. To deny the Principle, he says, simply leads
to absurdity (mah․
aˉl).16
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s observation occurs within the context of commenting the following claim from al-Raˉzıˉ’s Muh․as․s․
al. Al-Raˉzıˉ writes:
Of the one who acts by choice, it turns out true that there is the giving
of greater weight to one of two possibilities over the other without
something giving greater weight [al-mukhtaˉr yas․
ih․h․
u minhu tarjıˉh․
ah․ad
al-jaˉʾizayni ʿalaˉ l-aˉkhar laˉ li-murajjih․
].17
Al-Raˉzıˉ’s general idea is that the will alone can choose among options
without having a reason for choosing the option that it does. The position
is again close to that of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s account of will. For both theologians,
an agent does not always need a sufficient reason, that is, something that
gives greater weight (murajjih․
), in order to act. Some actions are just the
result of sheer will, and, indeed, it is the very nature of the will simply to
choose with or without a reason.
Al-T․uˉsıˉ complains that such a claim simply cannot be conceded without
absurdity. What is the absurdity? Al-Ghazaˉlıˉ and al-Raˉzıˉ assert as true
that there can be a tarjıˉh․ without a murajjih․
. I believe that one can get a
sense of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s concern if one translates these terms into the language
of sufficient reason. Al-Ghazaˉlıˉ and al-Raˉzıˉ’s claim, then, would be that
there is a giving of a sufficient reason without there being a sufficient reason.
Such a claim is tantamount to asserting simultaneously both that there is
a sufficient reason for doing x and that there is not a sufficient reason for
doing x. The claim is absurd, because it implicitly involves a contradiction.
If al-T․uˉsıˉ is correct, this argument explains why the Principle of Sufficient
Reason, namely that for every action proceeding from a choice there must
be a reason for that action, is a first principle.
The second step in al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s strategy to show that God chooses necessarily to create from eternity is to undermine the theologians’ theory of the
nature of the will. He provides his critique in the same place that we have
been considering. Now he writes:
The one that acts by choice [mukhtaˉr] is the one whose action follows
owing to its will and reason [daˉʿi], not that the action occurs from it by
chance. The reason is enough to give the greater weight.18
Choosing requires two things for al-T․
uˉsıˉ, both a will to act and the reason
for acting. In the Ishaˉraˉt commentary, al-T․
uˉsıˉ insists that the reason for
acting must be other than the will itself, since the will might or might
not have a reason to act.19 Thus, if the will were identical with the reason,
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 457
as the theologians seemingly imply, the will might be and not be itself,
which is clearly absurd. Thus, for the theologians to maintain that the will
can choose independent of a reason is to fail to understand the nature of
the will (or at least the nature of the will as al-T․
uˉsıˉ understands it). For al-
T․
uˉsıˉ, then, there is no willing without a reason, for the reason is precisely
what gives one of the possibilities the greater weight such that it is chosen
rather than another, in accordance with the Principle of Sufficient Reason.
Both al-Ghazaˉlıˉ and al-Raˉzıˉ had denied just this claim based upon
a thought experiment, which supposedly shows that even humans can
choose among indiscernibles without having a sufficient reason. The
thought experiment is well known. A hungry man is presented with two
indiscernible pieces of food, palm dates in al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s text and rounds
of bread in al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s, and al-Raˉzıˉ mentions a thirsty man presented with
indiscernible cups of water.20 Whatever the setup, the presumption is that
the man chooses one of the indiscernible objects without having a reason
for choosing it over the other. The purpose of the thought experiment is to
show that it belongs to the very nature of the will to choose in the absence
of a sufficient reason. One simply can will an action based upon the very
power of the will itself.
Al-T․uˉsıˉ again knows this thought experiment, mentioning it in both
his commentary on the Ishaˉraˉt and on the Muh․as․s․
al, and wants to resist
the conclusion of the theologians concerning what it purportedly tells us
about the nature of the will.21 He does so by distinguishing between giving
greater weight (tarjıˉh․) and carrying greater weight (tarajjuh․
). The distinction, as
I understand it, is that carrying greater weight refers to some feature of the
object chosen itself, while giving greater weight refers to the reason that the
agent has for choosing. The reason might refer to some choice-worthy
feature of one of the objects, but it equally might refer to something about
the choosing agent. In other words, giving greater weight simply states without qualification that there is a reason for choosing the object without
specifying where that reason lies, whereas carrying greater weight introduces
the qualification that it is something about the object itself that specifies
why it is chosen.
The theologians’ thought experiment gets its purchase, because one
does not know which object carries the greater weight; however, not knowing which object carries the greater weight does not prove that what gives the greater weight does not exist. Indeed, al-T․
uˉsıˉ asserts that if the hungry
man’s action is truly volitional, then one necessarily knows that a sufficient
reason exists, based upon the Principle of Sufficient Reason. The thought
experiment is perplexing, says al-T․
uˉsıˉ, precisely because, based upon the
Principle of Sufficient Reason, one knows necessarily that some reason
gives greater weight for choosing one piece of food over another, and yet
what it is about the chosen object that carries the greater weight, if anything, is unknown. In other words, one knows that a willful, choosing
agent must have some reason for choosing one object over the other, but
458 Jon McGinnis
there is nothing about the object that the agent ultimately chooses that
appears to be a reason for choosing it. In the case of the hungry man,
al-T․uˉsıˉ continues, should he take one piece of food without any reason
giving greater weight, the action would be wholly by chance (bi-l-ittifaˉq).
In his commentary on the Ishaˉraˉt, he similarly asserts that such an action is
mindlessly random (juzaˉ f ) rather than a volitional choice.22
In short, for al-T․
uˉsıˉ the following three notions are all distinct things: (1) an agent’s having no reason for choosing one object over another (and so acting by chance), (2) an agent’s having a reason for choosing a given object (and so giving greater weight to that object), and (3) the object’s providing that reason (and so carrying greater weight). Consequently, one can know that (2) is true, namely the agent has a reason to act, while not knowing whether (3) is true, namely that there is something about the object that is the reason for choosing it, for the agent may have a reason for choosing the object, independent of some good-making feature about the object itself. Indeed, in principle one might even know that (3) is false, while knowing that (2) is true. Call this second step of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s action theory the distinction between carrying greater weight and giving
greater weight.
Providing an analysis of the object of choice is the third step in developing al-T․uˉsıˉ’s libertarian theory of action. Admittedly, al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s comments
on this point are sketchy and have to be abstracted from his criticisms of
al-Raˉzıˉ’s responses to the argument for the eternity of the world based
upon efficient and final causality.23 Consequently, I shall be conservative
in what I ascribe to al-T․
uˉsıˉ here. Still, as a minimum, al-T․uˉsıˉ thinks that
in order to be an object of choice, that object must exist in some way. As
far as I know, al-T․
uˉsıˉ provides no argument for this thesis nor even states it
as boldly as I just have; nonetheless, he vehemently criticizes al-Raˉzıˉ and
the theologians’ response to the philosophers precisely on the grounds that
they make the objects of God’s choice nonexistent.
Despite his lack of argument for this principle, I believe that one can
motivate it by considering the theologians’ own example. The theologians’ thought experiment of the hungry man is only compelling because
one is asked to imagine that the man is presented with two indiscernible,
but existent, pieces of food. Now imagine a slightly different scenario in
which the hungry man is asked which of two nonexistent pieces of food he
would choose. The question seems perverse. If the hungry man made any
choice at all in this latter scenario, it would be precisely because he imagines two pieces of food, in which case the imagined pieces of food, at the
very least, exist in the mind (or more precisely in the estimative faculty for
those like al-T․
uˉsıˉ who are working within an Avicennian psychological
framework).24 There simply cannot be a choice unless there is something
to choose, where I take “there is” to indicate an existential quantification.
There exists something to choose. Again, al-T․
uˉsıˉ does not make this final
point about the existential status of objects of choice explicitly, although it
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 459
is implicit in his criticism of al-Raˉzıˉ’s response to the philosophers on the
world eternity. Call this third step of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s action theory the Existential
Principle.
Al-T․
uˉs ıˉ’s Response to al-Raˉzıˉ
One is now in a position to return to al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s seemingly weak responses
to al-Raˉzıˉ, which initiated this study. His responses actually have some
bite, when considered within the context of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s theory of action just
presented. Al-Raˉzıˉ’s first objection to the philosophers’ argument for the
eternity of the world from divine agency noted that God’s choosing the
placement of the heavenly bodies and the direction of their motions appears just as random as the choice of the specific moment at which God
purportedly chose to create. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s response is that there is a sufficient
reason for choosing the celestial configuration that is chosen, even if we
do not know what that reason is, whereas this choice is impossible in the
case of nonexistent moments at which to create.
Let us unpack this response. First, there are principled differences between the two cases. In the case of the specification of the heavenly bodies, the various possible objects of choice are discernible based upon real
differences inherent in the configurations themselves, whether it be the
placement of the planet or the direction of motion, etc. In contrast, moments considered just as moments are essentially alike; there is nothing
inherently different about them. Any difference that might exist between
moments is owing to something extrinsic to the particular moment qua
moment. For instance, the difference might be owing to a given moment’s
relation to some other moment, e.g., one moment’s being before or after
another moment. Alternatively, the difference might be on account of the
accidental content of the differing moments, that is, what happens to be
going on during the moment, as, for example, this moment is different
from that moment because in the former moment I am eating breakfast
while in the latter moment I am eating lunch.
Returning to the principled differences between the configuration of
the heavens and the purported moment of creation, different possible configurations of the heavens can be viewed as distinct intrinsic properties of the
various imagined cosmoses. In other words, the heavenly bodies’ having a
given configuration is like my having the property of standing or sitting. I
need never have existed, but given that I do exist, my being in an erect position as opposed to a bent position is a property intrinsic to me, inasmuch
as it can be explained solely in terms of the relation of my constitutive
parts. In contrast, the cosmos’ having the property of coming-to-exist-at
some moment to the exclusion of some other moment(s) seems to be an
extrinsic property. That is, because the cosmos would have the property of
coming-to-be-at tx rather than at tx-n, apparently because it has a certain
relation to the specific moment, tx. Now just as I cannot come-to-be-at
460 Jon McGinnis
some location, lx, without there being a space with a series of locations,
which is extrinsic to me, so likewise something cannot come-to-be-at tx
without there being a series of moments, that is, time, that is extrinsic to
what comes-to-be-at tx.
We are now in a position to appreciate al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s first response to al-
Raˉzıˉ. Again al-Raˉzıˉ had claimed that the choice of one moment to create over another is analogous to the choice of one configuration over another possible one. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ responded, “with respect to existing things one can say in that case [that is, the configuration of the heavens], the sufficient reason is something that exists but is not known, whereas with respect to nonexistent things, that is impossible.”25 According to al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s Principle of Sufficient Reason, assuming that the actual configuration that exists right now is the result of a volitional act of choosing, then there must be some reason that gives greater weight to this configuration rather than any other imagined configuration. Nonetheless, al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s distinction between giving and carrying greater weight states that just because one configuration is given greater weight than the other, there needs to be no intrinsic good-making feature belonging to that configuration that itself carries greater weight so as to necessitate its being chosen. The reason for choosing the one configuration might lie with the agent. Thus, while one knows with certainty that one celestial configuration was given greater weight, since it exists right now, one may find nothing about it that carries greater weight such that it is itself the reason for choosing it. As al-T․uˉsıˉ says, “the sufficient reason is something that exists but is not known.”26
In contrast, in the case of choosing a moment at which to create, the
moments, by the theologians’ own concession, are nonexistent. Moreover,
the cosmos’ coming-to-be-at some specific moment is an extrinsic property, which itself exists only inasmuch as the series to which that property is related exists. Thus, no moment or property exists to carry greater
weight nor to be given greater weight, but according to al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s Existential
Principle, a nonexistent can never be the object of choice. It would be
like asking the hungry man to choose between two nonexistent and even
non-imagined pieces of food. As al-T․
uˉsıˉ says, “with respect to nonexistent things, that is impossible.”27 In short, al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s terse single-sentence
response, I contend, actually carries one hell of a wallop, since it points to
an essential disanalogy between the two cases.
One might want to object to al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s final point, claiming that the
theologians’ moments do exist in some way, namely in the mind of God.
Thus, God’s specifying a particular moment to create is not subject to al-
T․
uˉsıˉ’s existential criticism. Such a suggestion leads one to al-Raˉzıˉ’s “real
response” and al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s rejoinder. Al-Raˉzıˉ’s real response again runs thusly:
That specification has an association [taʿalluq] of God’s will (may He
be exalted) to His temporally generating at that moment, where that
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 461
association, in our opinion, is necessary and so does not need something to give it greater weight.28
In other words, for al-Raˉzıˉ the sole explanation for God’s creating at one
specific moment rather than another is that the divinity wills to create at
that moment.
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s response again is that there simply is no argument here, which
he then follows up with a discussion of the ontological status of moments.
The reason that there is no argument here is that, according to al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s action theory, a will alone is not sufficient for volitional action. The will
must also have a reason to act. In the case of moments that do not exist
concretely, there simply can be nothing about one moment that differentiates it from another. One might give greater weight to one thing over
another, but that is only because there are two things between which the
agent chooses. In the present case, there simply is nothing to which the
agent can give a greater weight so as to choose it. As al-T․
uˉsıˉ notes, and
mentioned when discussing extrinsic properties, what allows us to differentiate moments, so that there are two or more things, is their different
content, that is, the various and different things that are going on in the
world at those different moments. In the case where the world purportedly
does not exist, different moments cannot exist. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ writes: The correct answer to it is to say that the moments in which one seeks
the sufficient reason are nonexistent, and so there is no distinction
among them except in the estimative faculty. Judgments of the estimative faculty concerning things like that are unacceptable. The existence of time begins only with the initial existence of the cosmos and
the rest of the existents’ beginning to occur simply cannot be before
the beginning of time’s existence.29
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s point is twofold. First, there simply cannot be the extrinsic property, coming-to-exist-at tx, unless time already exists, and yet the theologians themselves deny that time exists in any ontologically robust sense
“prior” to creation. Second, the existence that the theologians are ascribing to moments is nothing more than their imagined existence in the
estimative faculty. Presumably, one is imagining moments laid out as on a
number line, a swath of temporal vacua, as it were, and then God chooses
one from among them. Setting aside the obvious fact that God does not
have images in his “head,” al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s response is that there simply cannot be
a sufficient reason to choose one imagined nonexistent moment at which
to act over another imagined nonexistent moment. Again, it is analogous
to asking our hungry man actually to eat one of the imagined rounds of
bread in the scenario presented above.
Here, it is interesting to note that nothing about al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s critique absolutely precludes God’s creating at some first moment in the finite past, if
462 Jon McGinnis
such an action is at all possible. I suspect that al-T․
uˉsıˉ thinks that it is impossible. Still, even allowing that it is possible, al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s analysis shows that
such an act could not be a volitional action, that is, an act of the will. That
is because for al-T․
uˉsıˉ the will only acts for reasons, and the theologians
have all but conceded that there is no reason for God’s action. Thus, if al-
T․
uˉsıˉ’s theory of action is correct, the act of choosing among nonexistent
moments could only result from some chance and mindlessly random action. Al-T․uˉsıˉ has effectively turned one of the theologians’ most damning
criticisms against the philosophers—namely that the philosophers’ God
does not willfully create—against the theologians. It is now the theologians’ God, acting by chance and randomly, who is not a willful agent.
Al-T․
uˉs ıˉ and Avicenna on Divine Choice
Al-T․uˉsıˉ’s response to the theologians is complete. The theologians complained against the philosophers that the latter’s deity acts no differently from a force of nature and is hardly worthy of adoration. While Avicenna developed a compatibilist theory of action as a preemptive response to this objection, his unwillingness to give choice a role in his account (or at least not give it an explicit place in his theory of action) left that response unsatisfactory to many. In contrast, al-T․
uˉsıˉ does give choice an explicit role in his theory of divine action. Moreover, as he carefully analyzes and develops his action theory, with its account of the nature of the will and the place of the Principle of the Sufficient Reason, al-T․
uˉsıˉ argues that it is the theologians’ conception of God that is unworthy of adoration, since God would act mindlessly. Still, the proverbial elephant in the room is whether al-T․
uˉsıˉ can make sense of a divine eternal choice in light of Avicenna’s initial concern that choice would entail multiplicity in the deity, jeopardizing God’s simplicity, a point that neither Avicenna nor al-T․
uˉsıˉ would concede.
My comments at this point are more programmatic than systematic,
but I think that a case can be made in al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s favor. Avicenna’s original
argument and criticism of divine choosing involve actions that are intentional (ʿalaˉ sabıˉl al-qas․
d).30 The rubbing point for Avicenna is that in an
intentional action there is (1) the reason to act, which is some good in the
intended object, (2) the action of acquiring that good for the agent’s own
self, and, finally, (3) the good acquired by the agent. Since these three
things are different, they would require that the agent has three different
facets, which is impossible for an agent who is absolutely simple in the way
that Avicenna and al-T․
uˉsıˉ supposed the Necessary Existent in Itself to be.
The most important thing to note about Avicenna’s argument is that the
reason the intending agent chooses what it does is because that object is
good. Presumably, it is the good of the object that carries the weight and
so ultimately gives greater weight to choosing it rather than not choosing
it. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ, as we have seen, distinguishes between giving greater weight
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 463
and carrying greater weight. Thus, while it is true for al-T․
uˉsıˉ that God has
a reason for choosing to create over not creating, that reason needs not
refer to anything about the created object itself, let alone about some good
in creation. The reason that gives greater weight, then, is traced back to
God rather than the object, albeit one does not know what that reason is.
On al-T․uˉsıˉ’s account, then, God’s choosing to create does not involve (1)
some desired good in the object of choice, nor (2) the act of acquiring that
good, nor, finally, (3) the good acquired. Thus, none of the three facets
Avicenna identified in an intentional action appears in the divine act of
choice as al-T․
uˉsıˉ understands it.
One might ask, then, “What is God’s reason for creating?” Al-T․
uˉsıˉ, as we have seen, admits that although a choosing agent always acts for a reason, frequently we cannot identify the reason for that choice. Be that as it may, he continues, one cannot infer from our ignorance of what the reason for an action is to the assertion that the reason for the action does not exist, for that is an illicit inference from an epistemic fact to an ontological one. It is simply bad logic to argue from x is not known to x
does not exist. Still, al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s claim is not a mere appeal to ignorance either, for not knowing what-x-is is different from knowing that-x-is (or that-x-
exists). His Principle of Sufficient Reason guarantees our knowledge that some reason exists.
An objector might complain that the concern about divine simplicity
still looms large. That is because al-T․
uˉsıˉ affirmed against the theologians
that the will and the reason that initiates a will are distinct things. Thus, it
certainly appears that al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s action theory commits him to God’s having
a will that is distinct from the divine reason to create. In that case, God
is not absolutely simple but a composite of a sufficient reason and a will.
While I am not immediately aware of any passage where al-T․
uˉsıˉ addresses this concern in either his commentary on Avicenna’s Ishaˉraˉt or his summary of al-Raˉzıˉ’s Muh․as․s․
al, he does suggest a response to it in Rawd․a-yi
taslıˉm (Paradise of Submission).31 The immediate context is whether one
or many can be said to issue from God. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ notes that no matter how
we consider this issue, we either deny divine simplicity or deny that God
is the creator of all and knows all, all of which is heresy. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s own
position is that while one simply cannot ignore this issue without being
unmindful of the deity, anything that a creature thinks or says will fall
short of the divine reality.32 This claim, however, is not merely a retreat
into mysticism; rather, it is based upon a firm epistemic or psychological principle: whatever is known is known according to the mode of the
knower. Thus, al-T․
uˉsıˉ writes:
Every creature speaks about [God], the Exalted, according to the existential rank that it has received from His exalted command, and
in proportion to the existential traces of [God] which [the creature]
witnesses in itself.33
464 Jon McGinnis
He then continues that, because we humans have a composite nature, we
can only ever see things in terms of multiplicity. This limit of our cognitive abilities, unsurprisingly, means no one can demonstrate a reason
for God’s creating that does not appear to give rise to multiplicity in the
divinity.
Whatever one might think of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s analysis, it was certainly not a
flash in the pan. Indeed, al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s position came to be identified positively
with that of the S․uˉfıˉs’ position in contrast with the positions of either the
theologians or the philosophers. For example, the fifteenth-century S․uˉfıˉ scholar and poet ʿAbd al-Rah․maˉn al-Jaˉmıˉ (1414–1492) writes about the
debate over the age of the world and the divine creative act in his popular
work al-Durra l-fakhira (The Precious Pearl) thus:
As for the S․uˉfıˉs, may God sanctify their souls, they allowed the dependence of an eternal effect to a choosing agent and combined an affirmation of choice with the belief in the existence of an eternal effect.34
Arguably a more significant effect of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s analysis is that in the
post-classical period, the issue of the age of the world, which had so animated discussions of creation and the divine nature, became less and less
heated. Philosophers and theologians alike began to take a more agnostic
stance toward the once thorny question of whether God created the world
temporally or eternally.35 Perhaps in this respect, al-Raˉzıˉ’s observation
was spot on: the real issue between the theologians and the philosophers
was less about the age of the universe and more about whether God acts of
necessity or by choice. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ, thus, provided an account where one no
longer had to choose.
Let me end on this observation: the result of al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s argument on the
later eastern Islamic world was not wholly unlike the effect of Thomas
Aquinas’ meta-argument on Latin Christendom.36 By “Aquinas’ meta-argument” I mean his proof that one could not demonstrate whether God
necessarily creates eternally or necessarily creates temporally. For Thomas,
and al-T․
uˉsıˉ would concur, the only action God necessarily undertakes is
the willing of His own being; all other actions are a matter of God’s choice
to will or not to will it.
Appendix
Translations of Relevant Passages from al-Raˉzıˉ’s
Muh․as․s․
al and al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s Talkhıˉs Muh․as․s․
al
(The pagination for al-Raˉzıˉ’s base text is given in curly brackets, {}, while
the page numbers for al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s text are given in angle brackets, <>.)
{Raˉzıˉ, ed. Atay, 299}/<T․
uˉsıˉ, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 205>
“The Philosophers’ proof concerning the impossibility of the cosmos’
temporal generation”
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 465
[Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ] said: The philosophers have said [that] everything that is temporally generated inevitably results from four causes
{300}: the agent, the matter, the form, and the end. They said, “From
these viewpoints we prove the impossibility of the cosmos’ temporal coming to be.”
From the perspective of the agent, it is because [even] if the cosmos were
something that temporally comes to be, its producer would be eternal
[literally, it would have an eternal producer]. In that case, the specification
of the moment at which it temporally generates [the cosmos] either has a
sufficient reason [murajjih․
, literally, something that give greater weight] or
it does not. The first is dismissed as a matter of sheer denial, the distinction
being just unintelligible with respect to [an eternal producer]. The second
is dismissed owing to what [was said] previously, [namely] that it is absurd
that the preference of one of two possible options over the other is without
some sufficient reason. [. . .]
From the perspective of the end, it is that if what brings about the existence of the cosmos is something that chooses, then it inevitably has some
end for bringing about the existence. In that case, it would be perfected
by bringing about the existence, and so would have been essentially deficient. If it is not something that chooses, then it necessitates [the existence
of the cosmos] essentially, and so from its eternity follows the eternity of
the effect.
The answer to the first [namely from the perspective of the agent] is
what we mentioned concerning the specification <of the cosmos’ temporal coming to be at its particular moment like the specification> of the
heavenly body by the particular position on the celestial sphere despite its
being simple,37 and the specification of one of the two portions of what is
completed [mutammam]38 by the specified thickness and the other portion
by the thinness. <206>/{302}.
Furthermore, the real answer is that what is required for that specification is the association of the Most High’s divine will to its temporal generation at that moment, and that association in our opinion is necessary and
so is in no need of a sufficient reason. It is not said that the specification of
the temporal generation at the particular moment demands distinguishing
that moment from the rest of the moments, where this requires the moments’ being existents before that temporal coming to be. Because we say
that just as one moment may be distinguished from another, even if the
one moment does not have another moment, so why is it not permitted
that nonexistence is distinguished from existence without the existence of
the moment? [. . .]
[The answer] to the fourth [namely the proof from the end] is that
we shall prove that the Most High agent is one that chooses <if God all
mighty wills>.39
I [i.e., Nas․
ıˉr al-Dıˉn al-T․uˉsıˉ] say: the first skeptical remark is that the
temporal generation of the cosmos at one moment to the exclusion of
466 Jon McGinnis
another would require one of two equal things’ carrying a sufficient reason [tarajjuh․
] over the other without something giving a sufficient reason.
The answer is that it is like the specification of the heavenly body by one
location on the celestial sphere to the exclusion of another location and
the specification of the thickness of what is completed by one portion to
the exclusion of another. [This response] is useless because with respect to
existing things one can say in that case, the sufficient reason is something
that exists but is unknown, whereas with respect to nonexistent things
that is impossible.
His claim in the real answer—namely that the Most High’s divine will
<207> is associated with one of two moments necessarily without needing a sufficient reason—is a pretension for lack of argument. The objection
to it is to claim that providing a sufficient reason demands that moments
truly do exist. The response—namely that just as the distinction here does
not require that the one moment have another moment, likewise in distinguishing nonexistence from existence does not require that they both
have some moment—is not a response to it. It has passed right over the
discussion that while two moments are two things not needing another
moment, nonexistence and existence do need a moment other than them.
The correct answer to it is to say that the moments in which one seeks
the sufficient reason are nonexistent, and so there is no distinction among
them except in the estimative faculty. Judgments of the estimative faculty
concerning things like that are unacceptable. The existence of time begins
only with the initial existence of the cosmos and the rest of the existents’
beginning to occur simply cannot be before the beginning of time’s existence. [. . .]
The fourth skeptical remark is that the action of one that chooses has
some end by which the agent is perfected, and that <208> is absurd with
respect to the reality of God [h․
aqq Allah]. Nothing was needed against it
but to say, “we will prove that the agent is one that chooses.” The correct
response to the opinion of some of the mutakallimıˉn is that the end here is
the perfection of the action not the agent, while to the opinion of others
of them it is that there is no end here. In the opinion of the philosophers,
the end in this case is the agent itself because the Most High acts only for
the sake of Himself and because He is above perfection.
This then is what the author mentioned in this chapter and the discussion about and against it.
*****
<251> [Fakhr al-Dıˉn al-Raˉzıˉ] says in response to that [i.e., the philosophers’ proof for the eternity of the world based upon the final cause], “we
already proved that the one who produces the effect is an eternal craftsman
acting by choice and that the one who acts by choice turns out to give
greater weight to one of two possible things over another without having
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 467
a sufficient reason.” A note about [al-Raˉzıˉ’s response]: for indeed up to
now he has not proven that the one who produces an effect acts by choice,
and will prove it later only based upon the temporal coming to be of the
cosmos. Thus, if the cosmos’ temporal coming to be is based upon [the
effector’s] acting by choice, then a circle follows.
Moreover, the pretension that “the one who acts by choice turns out
to give greater weight to one of two possible things over another without
having a sufficient reason” is not conceded. For the one who acts by choice
is the one whose action follows his will and his reason for acting [li-l-iraˉdihi wa-l-daˉʿıˉhi], not that the action occurs from him by chance. The reason
to act is enough to give greater weight [to one of two possibilities]. The
claim of the ancients, [namely] that one who is hungry chooses one of two
equal rounds of bread without one of the two’s carrying greater weight
over the other, is rejected; for the ultimate goal of their discussion is that
giving greater weight in an instance like that is unexplained [ghayr maʿl uˉm],
and that does not prove that it does not exist. What is indeed perplexing,
then, is that one of his reasons for acting did not carry greater weight than
the remaining ones. The perplexity exists decidedly among many of those
who act by choice despite its being self-evident that they judge that to
carry greater weight without a sufficient reason is absurd. [. . .]
*****
Notes 1 See al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Tahaˉfut , ed. Marmura, disc. 3; al-Raˉzıˉ, Sharh․ al-Ishaˉraˉt , namat ․
5. 3, ed. Najafʾzaˉdah, 394–95; Aquinas, Quaestiones disputatae de potentia Dei
3. 4. More recently, see Zedler, “Saint Thomas and Avicenna”; Gilson, History of Christian Philosophy, 213; Leaman, Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy,
44; Kafrawi, “What Makes the Efficient Cause Efficient?” See Druart, “Al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s Conception of Agent,” for an excellent account of al-Ghazaˉlıˉ’s formulation of this problem and his own theory of agency. For a view that denies
that Avicenna’s God creates of natural necessity, see Acar, Talking about God,
ch. 3. A more recent discussion of this issue can be found in Kalin, “Will,
Necessity and Creation”; although Kalin’s focus is primarily on the creation
account of Mullaˉ S․adraˉ, in his section “Volition versus Necessity” he suggests
that what he terms the necessitarian and libertarian views have more in common than previously has been appreciated. Finally, see Ruffus and McGinnis,
“Willful Understanding,” for a presentation of Avicenna’s action theory in
light of this issue. 2 See Avicenna, Metaphysics, ed. Marmura, 9. 4 [2–4]; numbers in brackets refer
to Marmura’s paragraph divisions. 3 Al-Raˉzıˉ, Muh․as․s․
al, ed. Atay, 299–302. 4 Richardson, “Avicenna,” has established that Avicenna (and so by extension
one can assume al-Raˉzıˉ and al-T․
uˉsıˉ too) had a well-developed theory of the
Principle of Sufficient Reason. 5 Cf. al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Tahaˉfut , ed. Marmura, disc. 1 [48–64]. 6 For an examination of this classic kalaˉm argument, see Davidson, “Arguments.” Thanks to Nick Oschman for this reference.
468 Jon McGinnis 7 Al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Tahaˉfut , ed. Marmura, disc. 1 [13]. 8 Ibid., disc. 1 [45–46]. 9 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 206. 10 Ibid., 207. 11 Al-Raˉzıˉ, Sharh․ al-Ishaˉraˉt , namat 5. 3, ed. Najafʾzaˉdah, 394–95; cf. al-T․
uˉsıˉ, H․
all,
ed. Aˉmulıˉ, 646; Ibn Sıˉnaˉ, al-Ishaˉraˉt , ed. Dunyaˉ, 3:69. 12 Al-Raˉzıˉ, Sharh․ al-Ishaˉraˉt , ed. Najafʾzaˉdah, 394. Al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s text reads li-lafz․ıˉ .
13 For a discussion of Avicenna’s theory of action, with a gesture to al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s action theory as well, see Ruffus and McGinnis, “Willful Understanding.” 14 Avicenna, Metaphysics, ed. Marmura, 9. 4 [2–4]. 15 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, H․
all, ed. Aˉmulıˉ, 681; ed. Dunyaˉ, 3:96. 16 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 251. 17 Al-Raˉzıˉ, Muh․as․s․
al, ed. Atay, 352; al-T․
uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 251. 18 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 251. 19 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, H․
all, namat ․ 5. 8, ed. Aˉmulıˉ, 676; ed. Dunyaˉ, 3:92. 20 Al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, Tahaˉfut , ed. Marmura, disc. 1 [46]; al-Raˉzıˉ, Sharh․ al-Ishaˉraˉt ,
namat ․ 5. 12, ed. Najafʾzaˉdah, 426–27; al-T․
uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed.
Nuˉrˉanıˉ, 251.
21 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, H․
all, namat ․ 5. 12, ed. Aˉmulıˉ, 694; ed. Dunyaˉ, 3:107–8; al-T․
uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․
al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 251. 22 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, H․
all, namat ․ 5. 12, ed. Aˉmulıˉ, 697; ed. Dunyaˉ, 3:110. 23 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 206–8; Al-T․
uˉsıˉ, H․
all, namat ․ 5. 12,
ed. Aˉmulıˉ, 695–99; ed. Dunyaˉ, 3:108–12. 24 For a discussion of the role of the estimative faculty in Avicennian psychology, see Black’s now classic “Estimation (wahm) in Avicenna,” and for the use
of the estimative faculty specifically in thought experiments and a discussion
of the “starving man” thought experiment, see McGinnis, “Experimental
Thoughts.” 25 Al-T․
uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 206. 26 Ibid.
27 Ibid.
28 Al-Raˉzıˉ, Muh․as․s․
al, ed. Atay, 302; al-T․
uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs Muh․as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 206. 29 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, Talkhıˉs Muh․as․s․
al, ed. Nuˉraˉnıˉ, 207. 30 Avicenna, Metaphysics, ed. Marmura, 9. 4 [2]. For a discussion of Avicenna’s
argument, see Ruffus and McGinnis, “Willful Understanding,” §3. 31 Al-T․uˉsıˉ, Paradise of Submission, tas․
awwur 3.
32 Ibid., tas․
awwur 3, §33. 33 Ibid., tas․
awwur 3, §34, trans. Badakhchani, slightly modified. 34 Jaˉmıˉ, Precious Pearl, 57, §55, trans. Heer, slightly modified. 35 At present, I offer this claim more as a thesis to be tested than a conclusion
that has been proven. Still, this view seemed to be the consensus of most of
the participants at the Yale Workshop on the Eternity of the World (March
31–April 1, 2017), who presented on post-Nas․
ıˉrean philosophy and theology. 36 For a collection of studies on Aquinas’ meta-argument and its reception in the
Latin West, see Wissink, Eternity of the World.
37 The edited al-Raˉzıˉ text reads, “The answer to the first is what you all [presumably, the philosophers] mentioned undermining the specification of the
heavenly body by the particular position on the celestial sphere despite its
being simple.” 38 It is not clear to what mutammam refers. Apparently, al-Raˉzıˉ mentions it in
his earlier discussion, as al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s “we mentioned” suggests. Unfortunately, I
could not find the earlier reference and al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s subsequent commentary does
not elucidate the reference. 39 Added in al-T․
uˉsıˉ’s text.
Al-T․uˉs ī’s Reconceptualization of the Issue of the World’s Age 469
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Al-Ghazaˉ lıˉ. The Incoherence of the Philosophers (Tahaˉ fut al Falaˉsifah): A Parallel English-Arabic Text. Edited and translated by Michael E. Marmura. Provo, UT:
Brigham Young University Press, 2000.
Al-Raˉzıˉ, Fakhr al-Dıˉn. Muh․as․s․
al afkaˉr al-mutaqaddimıˉn wa-l-mutaʾakhkhirıˉn min
al-h․
ukamaˉʾ wa-l-mutakallimıˉn. Edited by H․
üseyin Atay. Qom: Intishaˉraˉt al-
Sharıˉf al-Rad․ıˉ, 1999.
Al-Raˉzıˉ, Fakhr al-Dıˉn. Sharh․
al-Ishaˉraˉt wa-l-tanbıˉhaˉt. Edited by ʿAlıˉ R. Najaf
ʾzaˉdah. Tehran: Anjuman-i aˉthaˉr va Mafaˉkhir-i Farhangıˉ, 2005.
Al-T․uˉsıˉ, Nas․ıˉr al-Dıˉn. H․
all Mushkilaˉt Kitaˉb al-Ishaˉraˉt wa-l-tanbıˉhaˉt (= Sharh․ al-
Ishaˉraˉt wa-l-tanbıˉhaˉt). Edited by H․asan H․. Aˉmulıˉ. Qom: Buˉstaˉn-i Kitaˉb, 2007.
Al-T․
uˉs ıˉ, Nas․
ıˉr al-Dıˉn. Paradise of Submission: A Medieval Treatise on Ismaili Thought.
A New Persian Edition and English Translation of T․
uˉs ıˉ ’s Rawd․a-yi taslıˉm. Edited
and translated by Sayyed J. Badakhchani. London: I. B. Tauris, 2005.
Al-T․
uˉs ıˉ, Nas․
ıˉr al-Dıˉn. Talkhıˉs․ al-Muh․
as․
s․
al. Edited by ‘Abd Allaˉ h Nuˉraˉnıˉ. Tehran:
Intishaˉ raˉt-i Muʾassasahʾ-i Mut․
aˉ laʿaˉt-i Islaˉmıˉ, Daˉnishgaˉh-i Mıˉkgıˉl, Shuʿbahʾ-i
Tihraˉn, 1980.
Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ). Kitaˉb al-Ishaˉraˉt wa-l-tanbıˉhaˉt, li-bn Sıˉnaˉ, maʿa sharh․
Nas․
ıˉ r
al-Dıˉn al-T․
uˉ sıˉ. Edited by Sulaymaˉn Dunyaˉ. 4 vols. Cairo: Daˉr al-Maʿaˉrif, 1957–1960.
Avicenna. The Metaphysics of The Healing. Translated with introduction and notes
by Michael E. Marmura. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 2005.
Jaˉmıˉ, ʿAbd al-Rah․maˉn. The Precious Pearl: al-Jaˉmıˉ ’s al-Durrah al-Faˉkhirah. Translated by Nicholas L. Heer. Albany: SUNY Press, 1979.
Thomas Aquinas. Quaestiones disputatae de potentia Dei. Edited by Paolo M. Pession. Turin: Marietti, 1965.
Secondary Literature
Acar, Rahim. Talking about God and Talking about Creation: Avicenna’s and Thomas
Aquinas’ Positions. Leiden: Brill, 2005.
Black, Deborah. “Estimation (wahm) in Avicenna: The Logical and Psychological
Dimensions.” Dialogue 32, no. 2 (1993): 219–58.
Davidson, Herbert. “Arguments from the Concept of Particularization in Arabic
Philosophy.” Philosophy East and West 18, no. 4 (1968): 299–314.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne. “Al-Ghazaˉ lıˉ’s Conception of the Agent in the Tahaˉfut and
the Iqtis․
aˉd: Are People Really Agents?” In Arabic Theology, Arabic Philosophy:
From the Many to the One, edited by James E. Montgomery, 425–40. Leuven:
Peeters, 2006.
Gilson, Étienne. History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages. London: Sheed
and Ward, 1955.
Kafrawi, Shalahudin. “What Makes the Efficient Cause Efficient? The Notion
of Will in Ibn Sıˉnaˉ’s Emanative Scheme.” Proceedings of the American Catholic
Philosophical Association 81 (2007): 179–91.
Kalin, Ibrahim. “Will, Necessity and Creation as Monistic Theophany in the
Islamic Philosophical Tradition.” In Creation and the God of Abraham, edited
by David B. Burrell, 107–32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
470 Jon McGinnis
Leaman, Oliver. A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy. Cambridge: Polity Press,
1999.
McGinnis, Jon. “Experimental Thoughts on Thought Experiments in Medieval
Islam.” In The Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments, edited by Michael
T. Stuart, Yiftach Fehige, and James R. Brown, 77–91. London: Routledge,
2018.
Richardson, Kara. “Avicenna and the Principle of Sufficient Reason.” Review of
Metaphysics 67, no. 4 (2014): 743–68.
Ruffus, Anthony, and Jon McGinnis. “Willful Understanding: Avicenna’s Philosophy of Action and Theory of the Will.” Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie
97, no. 2 (2015): 160–95.
Wissink, Jozef. The Eternity of the World in the Thought of Thomas Aquinas and His
Contemporaries. Leiden: Brill, 1990.
Zedler, Beatrice H. “Saint Thomas and Avicenna in the ‘De potentia Dei.’” Traditio
6 (1948): 105–59.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-25
The time has come for a full reassessment of the differences among Averroes’ three kinds of commentaries on Aristotle and a renewed study of the
chronology in which he wrote his commentaries. I am very much aware
of the fact that there have already been numerous attempts to generalize
about the differences among Averroes’ three commentaries and to build
a chronology, particularly among Spanish scholars over the past half century.
1 What I mean is that the time is ripe for more precise studies because
we now have Arabic editions of all thirty-one of the thirty-six Averroean commentaries on Aristotle extant in Arabic, an increasing number
of modern Latin editions or working editions of these commentaries,2
and many editions or partial editions of the Hebrew translations of the
commentaries. In addition, the past few decades have seen the appearance
of impressive new annotated translations of Averroes’ commentaries, the
most anticipated, appreciated, and helpful of which is, without question,
that of Averroes’ Long Commentary on On the Soul by Richard C. Taylor,
the scholar to whom this volume is dedicated.3 For the progress on the
scholarly editions of Averroes’ commentaries, much gratitude must go to
Gerhard Endress, the leading authority on Averroes today and the general
editor of the Averrois Opera, for his inspiration and encouragement to all
scholars working on Averroes’ commentaries. It may be recalled that when
Harry A. Wolfson submitted his original “Plan for the Publication of a
Corpus commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem,” more than ninety years ago
in 1931,4 the only Averroean commentaries on Aristotle in print in the
original Arabic were of the Short Commentary on the Metaphysics and the
Middle Commentary on the Poetics. The need for editions of Averroes’ commentaries was desperate. Some thirty years later, when the revised plan
was published in Speculum, Wolfson could add to his barren list nine more
commentaries. Today, with relatively easy access to editions of all of Averroes’ Aristotelian commentaries extant in the original Arabic, together
with editions of the Latin and/or Hebrew translations of most of them, it
is now possible to make an informed assessment of the differences among
the three kinds of Averroean commentaries.5 The time has come for this
assessment, but it has not yet been done.
21 Unfounded Assumptions
Reassessing the Differences
among Averroes’ Three Kinds
of Aristotelian Commentaries
Steven Harvey
472 Steven Harvey
Now it is quite possible that some readers may not know what I am
talking about. “What is the problem?” they may be thinking. “Every beginning student of Islamic philosophy knows the differences among Averroes’ three kinds of commentaries.” Indeed, they are spelled out—and
have been for many decades—in virtually all histories of Islamic philosophy and repeated in numerous studies on Averroes and in introductions
to editions and translations of his commentaries. Many readers have explained them to their students in brief or at length. The problem is that
most of these accounts do not apply for all the commentaries and some
are misleading, if not simply mistaken. The problem has to do with unfounded assumptions.
Unfounded Assumptions
The most widespread and misleading assumption is that it is possible to distinguish among Averroes’ three kinds of commentaries without considering that his methods and aims in a given kind of commentary may vary from book to book. This means that as carefully as one may have studied Averroes’ Short Commentary on On the Soul, one would be misguided—
on the sole basis of this commentary—to attempt to generalize about the method and intentions of all short commentaries, or, for example, about those of the Short Commentary on the Physics; or that as carefully as one may have studied Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics, one would be misguided—on the sole basis of this commentary—to attempt to generalize about the method and intentions of all middle commentaries, or, for example, about those of the Middle Commentary on On Generation and Corruption. Any such accounts will inevitably offer, at best, superficial generalizations at the expense of accuracy and will be more misleading than helpful. I am here talking about attempts to distinguish the short commentaries from the middle commentaries. The long commentary—which goes by the name sharh․
or tafsıˉr—is clearly identifiable.6 It comments on the entire text of Aristotle and reproduces the text of Aristotle in Arabic translation, lemma by lemma. Averroes wrote five such long commentaries.
Another unfounded assumption—related to the first—is that the middle
commentaries (t alaˉkhıˉs․) are all paraphrases (or paraphrases, as the Latin titles
suggest) of the texts of Aristotle.7
A third unfounded assumption—also related to the first—is that the
short commentaries are all abbreviated epitomes of Aristotle’s works.
A fourth assumption—perhaps unfounded—is that all commentaries
are indeed either short, middle, or long commentaries, as Averroes understood these terms.
A fifth assumption—perhaps unfounded and related to the fourth assumption—is that the mukhtas․a raˉt or short commentaries on the books
of the Organon are indeed j awaˉmi ʿ, the usual term Averroes uses for his
short commentaries.
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 473
And finally, a sixth assumption—perhaps unfounded and also related to
the fourth assumption—is that Averroes knew from the beginning what
he intended by calling a commentary talkhıˉs․ or middle commentary, and
hence all such commentaries have more or less the same structure.
If certain of these assumptions prove false, the task of trying to identify
the genre of some of the commentaries will be very difficult and perhaps
not even possible. At the very least, there will be a need to avoid simplified
generalizations.
Differences among the Short, Middle, and Long
Commentaries
Over twenty years ago, I addressed some of these issues in a lecture at a
conference in Cordoba in commemoration of the eight-hundredth anniversary of Averroes’ death. A revised version of that lecture, “Similarities and Differences among Averroes’ Three Commentaries on Aristotle’s
Physics,” appeared in 2011.8 In this chapter, I pointed to several very helpful scholarly attempts to explain the differences among Averroes’ three
commentaries on a particular Aristotelian book, and suggested that Alfred Ivry’s comparative studies on Averroes’ three commentaries on On
the Soul—and the robust debate to which they gave rise—elevated the
discussion to a new level. Ivry made the first focused attempt to compare
Averroes’ three kinds of commentaries on a single work of Aristotle on
the basis of a careful reading of each of the commentaries.9 His studies
sought to describe the nature of the three types of commentaries on On the
Soul and to highlight the differences between them, but he also devoted
much thought to determining the order in which they—and any revisions
of them—were written. Ivry’s most startling and controversial claim was
that, contrary to the conventional view, Averroes wrote the Long Commentary on On the Soul before the Middle Commentary and that the former
was written in preparation of the latter.10 The issue of the order in which
Averroes wrote the three commentaries is, of course, not simply a curiosity. It is important for evaluating what his goals were in the commentaries and for determining—when he offers differing interpretations of a
passage or teaching in the various commentaries—which represents his
most mature thought. For Ivry, Averroes began by writing the short commentaries on Aristotle when he was about thirty, in the late 1150s. The
short commentary is indeed an epitome, but more a summary of the topic
being discussed than of the book of Aristotle. The goal, in Ivry’s words, is
“to bring the reader to an adequate if minimal level of expertise, even to a
certain degree of perfection in the subject.” Accordingly, the Aristotelian
text “serves at times only as a point of departure and reference” that can
play but a “minor role in his presentation of the science [taught in the particular short commentary].” Thus, Averroes’ primary concern in the Short
Commentary on On the Soul is “the subject of the science of the soul, and not
474 Steven Harvey
Aristotle’s text per se.” To this end, Averroes makes liberal use in the Short
Commentary of the Greek and Islamic commentators.11 Indeed, so far is
Averroes from Aristotle’s text in his Short Commentary that Thérèse-Anne
Druart has mused whether Averroes had read On the Soul carefully before writing the short commentary on it.12 Regardless, the Short Commentary on On the Soul disproves our third assumption.
Ivry’s conclusion with regard to the middle and long commentaries, based upon his studies of Averroes’ commentaries on On the Soul, was that Averroes likely first wrote the long commentaries in preparation for writing the middle commentaries. The long commentary was then, with suitable revisions, used as a model for the middle commentary.13 According to Ivry, the middle commentary, like the long commentary, “often quotes Aristotle directly, and comments on nearly every line, or every other line, in the text,” “without rearranging the text or deviating from it.” In fact, the middle commentary often appears to be an abridgement of the long commentary, borrowing phrases, sentences, and even passages verbatim from it.14 It “stays close to Aristotle’s text,” and, unlike the long commentary, refrains generally from exploring the entailments and post-Aristotelian additions to the text,” from “discussing at length the views of his predecessors, both Greek and Muslim, and adjudicating between them.”15 Averroes’ main concern in the middle commentary “is to present Aristotle’s text in a manner accessible to the audience for which it was written, a lay [. . .] audience, and for that reason to present it in as uncomplicated a manner as possible.” While the long commentary offers no concessions to Muslim sensitivities, the middle commentary adroitly adjusts the text for his intended audience. The middle commentary is more “politically discreet” than the long commentary, for the latter text explicates “every nuance if not word of Aristotle’s text for his own sake, without regard for the skills, patience or sensitivities of whoever may read it.” “This discretion is part of Averroes’ style [in the middle commentary], affecting [its] form and hence substance.”16
Ivry’s comparative studies provided the first such in-depth comparisons of the different ways Averroes approached a particular work of Aristotle in his three commentaries. He encouraged his readers to carry out similar comparative studies: “Other studies of this kind should be undertaken to see whether the style of the De anima commentaries is anomalous or not, and this may force a reevaluation of the order of Averroes’ compositions in general.”17
In my above-mentioned study, “Similarities and Differences among Averroes’ Three Commentaries on Aristotle’s Physics,” I followed Ivry’s lead and attempted a parallel study on Averroes’ three commentaries on the Physics.
My conclusions differed sharply from those of Ivry. This divergence underscores the different methods and styles employed by Averroes in his commentaries on the different books of the Aristotelian corpus. I concluded:
The order of the writing of the commentaries [on the Physics] is the
one conventionally believed: short, middle, long. The Short Commentary
hardly brings the reader to any degree of perfection in the
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 475
subject. The Middle Commentary is not at all an abridgement of the
Long Commentary, nor is the Long Commentary a simple expansion of
the Middle Commentary. The audience of the Middle Commentary may have been no less sophisticated than that of the Long Commentary. The
Middle Commentary rarely quotes Aristotle directly and does, at times,
rearrange the text of Aristotle. And finally, in the section considered,
there was no lengthy borrowing from one commentary to the other.18
Ruth Glasner, for the most part, agrees with my conclusions in her
groundbreaking study of creative aspects of Averroes’ physics.19 As I have
written elsewhere, Glasner’s book is “a work of immense scholarship, impressive detective work, and convincing argumentation.”20 My concern in the present study is with the first part of her book, which assesses the
differences among Averroes’ three commentaries on the Physics and determines the order in which the three commentaries were written and the
various stages in which Averroes edited and revised them. As mentioned,
Glasner shares my view regarding the order of the writing of the three
commentaries on the Physics and the differences among them, but she adds
some interesting points. For example, she observes that “while the structure of the middle commentary is dictated by the argument, that of the
long commentary is dictated by the word-for-word commentary genre.”21
She then shows that when Averroes began the long commentary, he tried
to adhere to the structure of the middle commentary, with its divisions
into parts and chapters, and, as in the middle commentary, to include a
short table of contents at the beginning of each book and part. Indeed, for
the beginning of the long commentary, the divisions are the same. But
while Averroes may have intended to carry out the division into parts
and chapters from the middle commentary, he later, apparently, “gave up
on the idea.”22 Glasner’s account is also, in a few places, admirably more
emphatic than mine. For example, after mentioning Ivry’s comparison of
the three commentaries on On the Soul and the similar or identical passages that he found in the middle and long commentaries on it, she notes,
“I have not found similar passages in the middle and long commentaries
on the Physics.”23 Regarding the nature of the middle commentary on
the Physics, she states unequivocally that the “middle commentary on the
Physics can by no means be described as paraphrase,” for Averroes offers
new interpretations, presents arguments with other commentators, and at
times restructures the text.24
I should mention that the Middle Commentary on the Physics and the
Long Commentary on the Physics are two of the five Averroean commentaries that are no longer extant in Arabic. The other three commentaries
are the Long Commentary on On the Soul, the Short Commentary on On
Animals, and the Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics.25 These five commentaries—which are all extant in Hebrew translation and,
for the most part, in Latin translation—are crucial for understanding
what Averroes does in the different kinds of commentaries. The three
476 Steven Harvey
commentaries on the Physics arguably provide us with the best examples
of the most successful and helpful of such commentaries, but perhaps this
is a personal prejudice.
Another study that attempts at some length to explain the differences
among the three Averroean commentaries on a particular book is Yehuda Halper’s 2010 Bar-Ilan dissertation on Averroes’ Long Commentary on
Metaphysics, Book Δ. In this doctoral study, Halper discusses the structure
and intention of each of the three commentaries on Book Δ, and sums up:
Averroes’ Short Commentary on Metaphysics Δ presents an original metaphysical discourse, loosely based on the text of Aristotle, but restructured in such a way as to form an independent treatise. The Middle Commentary on Metaphysics Δ, however, appears to be little more than
a slightly simplified restatement of the text of Ust․
aˉth’s Arabic translation of Aristotle in which obscure words and sentences have been
restated for clarity. Averroes’ Tafsıˉr or Long Commentary on Metaphysics
Δ appears, in terms of the originality of its structure, to stand somewhere in between the Short Commentary and the Middle Commentary.
The Long Commentary includes the entire text of Ust․
aˉth’s translation
as textus separated from the commentaria of Averroes’ discussion.26
The Short Commentaries
Halper shows the drastic restructuring of the Short Commentary. Not only
is the order of the books rearranged in the Short Commentary, beginning
essentially with Book Δ, but within Δ, Averroes has reorganized the ordering of the chapters on terms so as to relate the terms one to another and
especially to “being,” the first of the terms in Averroes’ reorganization.27
Yet despite these differences, there is no question that the discussions of all
the terms are clearly based on the text of Metaphysics Δ.28
A similar account of the originality of the Short Commentary on the Metaphysics
is given by Rüdiger Arnzen in the introduction to his translation of
the Short Commentary. He describes the short commentaries in general—
but clearly based on the entire text he has translated—as
abridged introductions or summaries, in which [Averroes] breaks
away from the authoritative work at a remarkably higher degree than
in the two aforementioned literary forms [i.e., the middle commentaries and the long commentaries], secludes any non-demonstrative
sections or excursions he encountered in the Aristotelian work or in
the commentaries thereon he had at his disposal, and presents what he
conceives as the gist of this work in his own words.29
We thus have seen three accounts of the short commentary, and they
are quite different. These three short commentaries were likely written
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 477
within a period of less than five years and presumably had some of the
same goals and intentions in mind. The short commentary on On the
Soul, as we have seen, is described by Ivry as “more a summary of
the topic being discussed than of the book of Aristotle,” intended “to
bring the reader to an adequate if minimal level of expertise, even to a
certain degree of perfection in the subject.” Accordingly, the Aristotelian
text “serves at times only as a point of departure and reference.” Druart
even wonders how familiar Averroes was with the On the Soul when he wrote the short commentary.30 The short commentary on the Metaphysics
totally restructures the work, yet there is no question that its discussions
are based on the text of Metaphysics and that Averroes intends to present
“the gist of the work” in his own words. The short commentary on the
Physics sticks much closer to the text of the Physics, covers most of its topics,
and, in general, preserves its order. In consideration of these three short
commentaries, it seems almost pointless to try to generalize about the nature of the short commentaries.
The situation becomes even more complicated when we try to include Averroes’ short commentaries on the logic into our generalization. Charles Butterworth, who has studied the Kitaˉb al-d․aruˉrıˉ fıˉ l-mant․iq (What
Is Necessary in Logic) and has edited and translated parts of it under the title Averroës’ Three Short Commentaries on Aristotle’s “Topics,” “Rhetoric,” and “Poetics,” has painstakingly made the case not only that this work comprises the short commentaries on the logic, but that it is indeed a commentary on Aristotle and not an independent treatise. Part of the problem is that Averroes did not at all keep to the order of Aristotle’s Organon
but rather seems to have been influenced by al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s ordering.31
In addition, Butterworth lists several other factors that call into question the naming of Kitaˉb al-d․a ruˉrıˉ as a short commentary. For example, Averroes presented a novel interpretation of the different kinds of syllogisms and introduced some that were not mentioned by Aristotle, and he gave a disproportionate amount of attention to some topics while neglecting others. Moreover, he never explicitly wrote in this work that he intended to set forth the teachings of Aristotle in it.32 Yet this work is Averroes’ short commentary on the Organon. Or perhaps I should say that in Averroes’ youthful project of writing short commentaries on Aristotle’s writings, the commentaries on the logical writings as well as that on the soul fit in nicely, however little he may have had direct knowledge of these Aristotelian texts.33
Clearly, Averroes had some very different styles and intentions in writing the various short commentaries. How then can we generalize? And
how can we identify a text as a short commentary? Interestingly, both
Butterworth and Arnzen point out that there were short commentaries
and we have the middle commentaries on these texts, so the works they
translated must be the short commentaries. There are, of course, other
arguments that they marshal for their claims.
478 Steven Harvey
The Middle Commentaries
The situation regarding the middle commentaries is not much less obscure. Glasner, as we have seen, has emphatically explained that the
“middle commentary on the Physics can by no means be described as
paraphrase,” for Averroes offers new interpretations, presents arguments
with other commentators, and at times restructures the text.34 The Latin
name for some of these middle commentaries, paraphrasis, would thus seem
to be misleading. Yet respected Averroes scholars in their most recently
published translations of Averroes’ commentaries continue to refer to the
middle commentaries as “paraphrases.” Richard Taylor, for example, describes them as “paraphrastic summaries,” and Arnzen calls them simply
“paraphrases” or “rewordings of the Aristotelian text which avoid for the
most part raising any textual problems or dogmatic inconsistencies and
are characterized by the highest degree of approval to and coherent representation of the Aristotelian doctrines.”35 I have shown elsewhere that
in the Middle Commentary on the Physics, Averroes keeps much closer to
the text than in the Short Commentary, “reorganizes it, makes it easier to
understand,” removes ambiguities, and “provides new examples.” Moreover, occasionally he adds introductory lines to a chapter and concluding
words. At times, he even speaks in his own name.36 To some extent, this
account is not so different from Ivry’s account of the Middle Commentary on On the Soul:
The middle commentaries are more than mere paraphrases of Aristotle’s text. [. . .] In various places [. . .] Averroes goes beyond Aristotle’s
words and purview to introduce explanations and viewpoints of his
and other writers. [. . .] [The middle commentaries] go step by step
through Aristotle’s texts, explicating them carefully and economically. [. . .] Aristotle’s struggles with an issue are duly recorded, [and]
the text conveyed in a manner that combines paraphrase and explicit
interpretation.37
Yet Halper’s discussion of the Middle Commentary on the Metaphysics, as we
have seen, at least with regard to Averroes’ commentary on Book Δ, seems
to present a far simpler and less impressive commentary, which “appears
to be little more than a slightly simplified restatement of [. . .] Aristotle
in which obscure words and sentences have been restated for clarity.”38
The organization of the Middle Commentary follows the organization of
the Metaphysics, and the Aristotelian text within the commentary closely
follows the text of Ust․
aˉth’s translation, although these citations are often
rephrased for the sake of clarification, simplification, or elaboration. It is
not without significance that for all its changes for clarification, simplification, and explanation, the text of the Middle Commentary on the Metaphysics
is very similar to Aristotle’s text of the Metaphysics.39
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 479
Here, it seems that one could try to offer a generalized account of the
middle commentaries—despite their differences and in contrast to the
short commentaries—on the basis of these three commentaries. The middle commentary is a rephrased account of most of the Aristotelian teachings of the given work, at times reorganized but sticking closely to the
text, replete with explanatory additions, new explanations, and illustrations, and with occasional reference to the teachings and arguments of the
ancient and medieval commentators.
Yet some of the middle commentaries on the logical works appear for
the most part to be little more than paraphrases. And the Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics often simply reproduces the medieval
Arabic translation,40 not even bothering to rephrase or paraphrase it.
I have tried elsewhere to show with regard to this middle commentary
that “there is no reorganization of the text, little reformulation, and only
slight explication of and digression from it.” This led me to conclude that
the commentary appears to be “among the least helpful of [Averroes’]
middle commentaries for understanding an Aristotelian text, [for] often he
seems to do little more than copy the Arabic translation.”41
There are, of course, significant exceptions to this generalization of the
Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics. Lawrence Berman, the editor
of the medieval Hebrew translation of the commentary, has discussed the
most interesting of these exceptions, and Maroun Aouad and Frédérique
Woerther have pointed to others.42 Woerther and I reconsidered the question of the nature of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics
in light of a careful study of the Hebrew and Latin translations of Book 1.
We concluded:
Averroes, for the most part, copies the text of the Arabic translation,
but he does not hesitate to insert words as he copies in order to make
the text clearer and easier to understand. Where lengthier explanations are needed, they too are provided between sentences of the Arabic text. But, as we have seen, these lengthy explanations and even
reworkings of the text in Book I—at times in response to problematic
translations in the Aristotelian text before him—are usually not so
helpful or insightful, and, in some cases, misleading. Averroes’ modus
operandi is not consistent throughout Book I, and seems dependent on
the subject matter, but also on the clarity of the Arabic translation.
Thus, we have pointed to some instances of Averroes’ rearranging the
Aristotelian text and omitting certain passages.43
With this assessment in mind, we can thus slightly modify as follows
our generalization above of the middle commentaries to accommodate
middle commentaries such as that on the Nicomachean Ethics: The middle
commentary is an account of most of the Aristotelian teachings of the
given work, at times reorganized but staying close to the text, replete with
480 Steven Harvey
explanatory additions, and with occasional new explanations and illustrations. Is this very broad description of the middle commentaries useful for
discerning whether an Averroean commentary is a middle one or a short
one? I am not sure, but the test would be the commentaries on On Animals
and on the Parva naturalia.
On Animals, Parva naturalia, and the Smoking Gun
There is no ijmaˉʿ concerning the commentary on On Animals, that is,
whether it is a middle or a short one, and the situation is not much different for the commentary on the Parva naturalia, completed a few months
later. The DARE Averroes website lists all of Averroes’ commentaries on
Aristotle as short, middle, or long, with two exceptions that are listed simply as “Commentary”: the commentaries on On Animals and on the Parva naturalia.44 However, both are somewhat long, remain rather close to the
text, and are called talkhıˉs․ (presumably indicating a middle commentary)
in the Arabic inventories of the commentaries.45 Resianne Fontaine also
refers to the commentary on On Animals simply as a “commentary.” She
explains: “This commentary is generally referred to as Jawaˉmi ʿ [or short
commentary], although in length and structure it is more akin to the Middle Commentaries.”46 Elsewhere, Fontaine writes:
Although its structure is more akin to a Middle Commentary, Averroes’ De animalibus does not reveal the neat division into parts, chapters and sections that we know from other Middle Commentaries,
such as that on the Physics or On the Heavens. It should be noted that
such a division is also lacking in the Middle Commentary on the
Meteorology (1172), which is nevertheless classified as a Middle Commentary and is clearly different from the Epitome on this text. It is
also absent in Averroes’ commentary on the Parva naturalia, the only
other Aristotelian treatise on natural philosophy on which Averroes
composed only one commentary and which was written around the
same time as that on the De animalibus. The Middle Commentary on
the Physics, the first “genuine” Middle Commentary in the field of
natural philosophy, dates from the same period. In sum, in the years
1169–72 Averroes composed Middle Commentaries alongside two
commentaries that differ from Epitomes on the one hand and from
Middle Commentaries on the other. It might well be that he did not
feel himself confined to writing one specific type of commentary.47
Fontaine groups the commentaries on On Animals and the Parva naturalia
together and treats them as differing from both the short commentaries
and the middle ones. In effect, she questions our fourth and sixth assumptions. Yet Ruth Glasner brings what seems to be smoking gun evidence
for the commentary on On Animals (and that on Parva naturalia) being a
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 481
middle commentary. She cites from the Hebrew translation of Averroes’
Long Commentary on the Physics:
The treatise on minerals is not available to us, nor is the treatise on
plants, except for two books of it which are attributed to Aristotle; but
we do have the book of animals and have already completed its commentary
[beʾur] according to the signification [ke-fi ha-ʿinyan]. We shall
work further, if God wills in our life, on a word-for-word commentary as we shall try to do, God willing, on the rest of the books. We
have not yet had the opportunity to carry out this intention except in
the case of De anima, and this book that we start now [the Physics]. But
we have already laid down commentaries on all his books according to
the signification in the three disciplines—logic, natural science, and
metaphysics.48
By a “commentary according to the signification” (beʾur ke-fi ha-ʿinyan),
Averroes means his middle commentaries.49 He states he has already
written such a commentary on On Animals, and from his remark that
he has already written such commentaries on all his books “in the three disciplines—logic, natural science, and metaphysics,” we can infer that the
commentary on the Parva naturalia is also a middle commentary. I believe
this evidence is definitive. But what if we didn’t have this statement? How
could we decide what kind of commentaries these two are? In fact, both
were completed seemingly before Averroes completed writing his middle
commentaries on the other books on natural science. As Fontaine notes,
they are not divided into parts and chapters as certain other middle commentaries are, and they are not replete with the qaˉla/amar/dixit, as so many
of the middle commentaries. On the other hand, from what we know of
the short commentaries from Averroes himself, his aim was to abstract the
scientific statements from the Aristotelian works and deal only with them.
He explains this at the beginning of the Short Commentary on the Organon:
The aim [al-gharad․
] of this treatise is to abstract [tajrıˉd] from the art
of logic the statements necessary to explain the ranks of the kinds of
concept and assent employed in each of the five arts, viz., the demonstrative, dialectical, sophistical, rhetorical, and poetical.50
He explains it yet more clearly at the beginning of the Short Commentary on the Physics as follows:
Our intention [qasdunaˉ] in this treatise is to approach the books of
Aristotle by abstracting [tajrıˉd] from them the scientific statements
[al-aqaˉwıˉl al-ʿilmiyya] which determine his teachings—I mean, the
most cogent [of these statements]—and by disregarding the statements
of the ancients which are other than his own.51
482 Steven Harvey
And he states it in a similar fashion at the beginning of the Short Commentary on the Metaphysics:
Our intention [qasdunaˉ] in this treatise, in accordance with our custom in the preceding books, is to glean [naltaqit․
u] the scientific statements
[al-aqaˉwıˉl al-ʿilmiyya] from the treatises of Aristotle written on
the science of metaphysics.52
Averroes refers to this custom of his in the short commentaries in the colophon to his commentary on On Animals when he writes: “And this treatise
is completed, and with it the commentary [beʾur] on all the scientific statements
[ha-maʾamarim ha-maddaʿiyyim] from this book, and praise to God.”53
Would not this custom be grounds for considering it a short commentary?
For whatever reasons, Moritz Steinschneider, Harry Wolfson, Harry
Blumberg (the editor and translator of the commentary on the Parva naturalia), and most other scholars considered the commentaries on On Animals
and on the Parva naturalia short commentaries. Actually, Blumberg, writing in 1961, makes an interesting case for considering the commentary on
the Parva naturalia a short commentary. First, he presents his own general
understanding of Averroes’ method in his short commentaries:
Averroes’ aim in the epitomes was to summarize Aristotle’s conclusions on a given topic as clearly and concisely as possible, to arrange
these topics in a systematic and logical manner, departing from the
original Aristotelian order wherever necessary, eliminating the unessential details of argumentation, drawing upon Greek commentaries
on Aristotle translated into Arabic as well as upon the works of earlier
Arabic philosophers for further elucidation or corroboration of the
text, and stating his own interpretation or conclusion on a given topic
where Aristotle’s text is vague or inconclusive.
Then he states that Averroes does precisely this in his commentary on the
Parva naturalia:
[A]t the very beginning of the book on Sense and its Objects, in commenting upon Aristotle’s brief statement as to the contents of the
work, Averroes elaborates upon it and gives a detailed and orderly
classification of the topics of the book under four headings. Or in
discussing the manner in which the faculties perceive their sense-objects, Averroes takes the two theories of the ancient philosophers
that are mentioned by Aristotle, expands them into four and proceeds to expound them with clarity and precision. Or in his comment
on Aristotle’s mention of common sense, imagination and memory,
Averroes increases these three inner senses to five, drawing upon the
views of Galen, Alexander Aphrodisias, Alfarabi and Avicenna. Or in
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 483
his comment upon Aristotle’s statement about the cognition of future
events in dreams, he elucidates the topic by drawing upon numerous
related topics from various other works of Aristotle.54
We have already cautioned about generalizations concerning both the short commentaries and the middle commentaries. Yet the Hebrew translation of the commentary on the Parva naturalia is clearly identified as a qis․
s․
ur or short commentary, even though Arabic manuscripts call it a talkhıˉs․, the term used for middle commentaries. It would seem then that there are compelling reasons for considering these two commentaries short commentaries, and there are compelling reasons for considering them middle commentaries. This is what I think. I believe there is, at least, a modicum of truth to
the 850-year-old report that Sarah Stroumsa has called into question.55
According to this oft-repeated narrative, after 1163 and presumably between 1166 and 1168, about ten years after Averroes began writing the
short commentaries, the Almohad prince Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb Yuˉsuf hinted to Ibn
T․
ufayl that he wanted someone, seemingly Ibn T․ufayl himself or someone
he would recommend, to “expound the aims” of Aristotle’s books and
write t alaˉkhıˉs․ or middle commentaries on them. For well over a century
and a half, virtually all leading modern scholars of Averroes have accepted
the veracity of this report and adduced it to show that Averroes wrote his
middle commentaries at the bidding of the Almohad prince.56 Indeed this
view is supported by Averroes’ earliest middle commentaries, which are,
in fact, dated between 1168 and 1172.57 Averroes began writing the middle commentaries on certain logical works in 1168, although some of the
undated logical works may have been written a few years earlier; he completed the commentary on On Animals in November 1169, then the commentary on Parva naturalia in January 1170; and when that was completed,
he turned to the Middle Commentary on the Physics, which he completed
in March 1170, at which point he started work on completing the middle
commentaries on the other books of natural science, in their proper order,
one after the other.58 But if Stroumsa is correct—and there is much that is
persuasive in her arguments—then something else happened in Seville at
precisely that time that led him to start writing the middle commentaries,
unless it was just a coincidence, and Averroes began the first major project of his life on his own, without courtly patronage. But if so, I wonder
whether the historian al-Marraˉkushıˉ (who, granted, had a good sense of
imagination to go with his Almohad sympathies) could have believed that
he could so easily rewrite history and convince his readers of a direct
connection between his beloved Almohads and Ibn T․ufayl, Averroes, and
the flowering of philosophy. After all, the meeting between Ibn T․ufayl and the prince—if it indeed occurred—would have taken place only fifty
years earlier, Averroes’ death only twenty-five years earlier, and the student and jurist Abuˉ Bakr Bunduˉd Ibn Yah․y aˉ al-Qurt․ubıˉ, who according
to al-Marraˉkushıˉ reported to him what his teacher Averroes had told him
484 Steven Harvey
of the meeting, likely did not share this fascinating story only with al-Marraˉkushıˉ. How much of the story could al-Marraˉkushıˉ have concocted?
It seems more reasonable to me that there is, at least, some truth to the
report. At the time, Averroes may have been thinking of completing the
project of the short commentaries and may even have started writing
the commentaries on the two remaining works, On Animals and Parva naturalia,
as short commentaries. But we know that, around this time, he also
recognized the need to write more serious commentaries. In the colophon
to his Middle Commentary on the Physics, he writes: I completed this commentary on Saturday, the first of Rajab 565
[March 1170], in the city of Seville. I already have among the multitude a commentary that I made in my youth, and it is short. I saw fit
now to do this more complete commentary.59
The commentary of his youth that is short is, no doubt, the Short Commentary.
It was apparently intended as an introductory commentary. The second commentary was intended as a more serious commentary of the entire book. He called this “more complete commentary” a talkhıˉs․, the same term he had used for the more advanced commentaries on the books of the Organon
that he had begun writing a few years before, although, as we have seen above, there were marked differences among the various middle commentaries. But why did he call them t alaˉkhıˉs․? It is tempting to answer, as others (myself among them) have done, that this was the term used by the Almohad prince Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb Yuˉsuf when he expressed his wish to Ibn T․ufayl that someone would expound the aims of Aristotle’s books and write t alaˉkhıˉs․
or middle commentaries on them. By taking on the project proposed by the prince and calling his commentaries t alaˉkhıˉs․, he may well have gained the patronage of the prince for his own project. Stroumsa has convincingly claimed that al-Marraˉkushıˉ “does not seem to distinguish” between the three kinds of Averroean commentaries and seems to have used talkhıˉs․ for all three. She also writes that “it would be difficult to deduce from [his] fuzzy report the inception of any specific kind of commentary.”60 I think this is a reasonable assessment. If there is any truth to the report, the prince just wanted someone who understood Aristotle to make his books accessible and easier to comprehend. If so, his request for t alaˉkhıˉs․ came at a propitious time, for Averroes was about to embark—or had just embarked—on his own project of writing longer and “more complete” commentaries.
We do not know why Averroes did not write short commentaries on
On Animals and on the Parva naturalia when he wrote the other short commentaries on Aristotle’s writings. He may well have begun both as short
commentaries to complete at last the set of short commentaries on the
books of logic, natural science, and metaphysics. Perhaps when he began
to heed the request of the prince—in whatever form it was made—he
decided to call these commentaries t alaˉkhıˉs․, and to modify and adapt them
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 485
for inclusion in the new project of “more complete commentaries” or
commentaries according to the signification. That he indeed considered
both commentaries as “more complete” or middle commentaries is established, as we have seen, from the passage cited above, translated by Glasner
from the Hebrew translation of Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Physics:
[W]e do have the book of animals and have already completed its commentary according to the signification. [. . .] [W]e have already laid
down commentaries on all his books according to the signification in
the three disciplines—logic, natural science, and metaphysics.61
In other words, we should now refer to the commentaries on On Animals
and on the Parva naturalia as middle commentaries. But while Averroes regarded them all as commentaries of the same sort, there are, as we have seen, noticeable differences among them. It is true that by the time he concluded the two commentaries under discussion, he had already concluded several such commentaries on the books of the Organon. But these commentaries are quite different. Averroes apparently did not, at first, have a clear idea of how to write his middle commentaries and, I suspect, he thought a lot about this while working on the two commentaries. Perhaps, in the end, it was the Aristotelian book upon which he commented that determined the way he would write each middle commentary. If our leading scholars have not been able to agree on whether the two commentaries are short or middle ones, this may be because they are, despite their titles, hybrids, and the lines between the two types of commentaries are not always as sharply defined as one might assume. This brings us to our sixth and last assumption. In the course of this chapter, I have tried to show that most of the listed assumptions are mistaken. The last assumption is that Averroes knew in some detail from the beginning what he intended by calling a commentary talkhıˉs․ or
middle commentary, and hence that all such commentaries have more or less the same structure. Apparently, he did not, and they certainly do not.
Conclusion
The path to classifying Averroes’ various Aristotelian commentaries has been clouded by unfounded assumptions, some reasonable and some blindly adopted from other writers. We have tried to draw attention to these assumptions, while not stumbling on them ourselves. The basic account of Averroes put forward over a century and a half ago by scholars such as Ernest Renan and Salomon Munk—that Averroes wrote three kinds of commentaries on Aristotle, and that the short ones were written in his youth, the middle commentaries next, and the long commentaries in his advanced age—is fundamentally correct with significant qualifications. These scholars knew that Averroes wrote only five long commentaries, and their descriptions of the three different kinds of commentaries
486 Steven Harvey
were certainly true for some commentaries of each kind.62 Perhaps inevitably, in their zeal, they also presented unfounded assumptions that would be followed and repeated by others, some of whom—at times, the most learned—introduced their own assumptions, again generalizing on the basis of the commentaries they had studied. It is only now, with relatively easy access to all of Averroes’ commentaries and important studies on many of them, that we can discern the problems with many of these unfounded assumptions and offer an accurate classification of the commentaries. Most significantly, while the general account of the three types of commentaries and the stages in Averroes’ life in which they were written is basically sound, not all short commentaries are alike and neither are all middle ones; yet it is still correct to speak of the three general kinds of commentaries.
Averroes indeed wrote short introductory commentaries in “his youth,”
during his early and mid-thirties. These are generally known as j awaˉmi ʿ
(or, for at least some of them, j awaˉmi ʿ s․ighaˉr) or, as in the case of the ones
on the Organon, mukhtas․a raˉt . As we have seen, these differ markedly in
the extent to which they focus on the underlying text of Aristotle, but
they are all part of the project of giving short introductory accounts of the
Aristotelian texts. This is true for the Short Commentary on the Organon,
whose main access to the Aristotelian text seems to be via the writings of
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ. It is also true for the Short Commentary on On the Soul, which
Averroes revised, in part, decades later on the basis of his much improved
knowledge of the Aristotelian text. The short commentaries were written
on all the available Aristotelian works, apart from On Animals, the Parva naturalia, and the Nicomachean Ethics. The middle commentaries (t alaˉkhıˉs․)
were begun by Averroes in his early forties and occupied him for a decade
or so. As he himself testifies, he wrote middle commentaries—or more
precisely, as he describes them, t alaˉkhıˉs․ ʿalaˉ l-maʿnaˉ (commentaries that
elucidate the sense63)—on all Aristotle’s books in the three disciplines:
logic, natural science, and metaphysics, and we may add practical philosophy. They are more complete, serious, and text-based commentaries.
The third set of commentaries consists of the long word-for-word
commentaries, called sharh․
or tafsıˉr. Averroes referred to these literal commentaries as his s huruˉh ʿalaˉ l-lafz․. These commentaries are undated, although, as Averroes tells us, he completed the one on On the Soul first, and it was followed by the one on the Physics.64 It seems that Averroes
completed the Long Commentary on On the Soul in his mid to late fifties
and completed four others before his death at the age of seventy-two in
1198.65 We know he intended to write more such literal commentaries. If
only God had granted him an even longer span of life!66
Notes 1 On the Spanish tradition, see, e.g., Alonso, Teología de Averroes, 54–98; Cruz
Hernández, Historia de la filosofia española, 2:48–51 and 60–64; Cruz Hernández,
Abuˉ-l-Walıˉd Muh․ammad Ibn Rusˆd, 46–48 and 57–59; and Puig Montada,
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 487
Averroes, 19–21 and 123–26. Despite inevitable shortcomings, one of the most
valuable and in-depth resources for assessing the differences among Averroes’
three commentaries and for building a chronology remains al-ʿAlawıˉ, Al-
Matn al-Rushdıˉ.
2 See, most recently, Horst Schmieja’s critical edition with a learned introduction of Michael Scot’s Latin translation of the Long Commentary on the Physics,
Book 8: Averroes, Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis Physicorum librum
octavum.
3 Averroes, Long Commentary on the De anima, trans. Taylor. 4 Wolfson, “Plan for the Publication of a Corpus commentariorum Averrois in Aristotelem,” versions of 1931 and 1961. 5 For a list of editions of Averroes’ commentaries, see Endress, “Averrois Opera.” An updated version is available at https://dare.uni-koeln.de/app/works.
See further, the descriptive listing of the commentaries by al-ʿAlawıˉ, Al-Matn al-Rushdıˉ , 14–45 (for an attempt at a chronology, 47–126). I do not concern
myself in this study with Averroes’ Quaestiones—such as his “Questions in
Logic,” “Questions in Physics,” and De Substantia orbis—and other independent writings related to the Aristotelian corpus either directly or indirectly. 6 Not all scholars agree. See Fakhry, History of Islamic Philosophy, 305: “The
distinction between the large and intermediate commentaries is not always
easy to make.” Perhaps Fakhry’s surprising statement in his popular history
may be explained by his identifying the middle commentary with Averroes’
sharh․
, one of two terms Averroes used for his long commentaries. On this
identification, see Fakhry, Averroes (Ibn Rushd), 3 (and, similarly, 131): “The
commentaries are usually divided into large (tafsıˉr), intermediate (sharh․), and
short, i.e. paraphrase or epitomes (j awaˉmi ʿ).” 7 On the suitability of the term “paraphrase” (or, for that matter, “middle commentary”) for translating Averroes’ term talkhıˉs․, see Gutas, “Aspects of Literary Form,” 38–43 (on paraphrasis, cf. 40 and 56). 8 Harvey, “Similarities and Differences.” 9 See, in particular, Ivry, “Averroes’ Three Commentaries.” This study is the first such attempt in modern times. Five years earlier, Thérèse-Anne Druart briefly compared Averroes’ three commentaries on On the Soul; see Druart, “Averroes,” esp. 197–202. One medieval thinker who compared the three kinds of commentaries is the fifteenth-century Jewish philosopher Abraham Bibago. Bibago compared Averroes’ three commentaries on Aristotle’s Metaphysics in
his supercommentary on Averroes’ middle commentary on the Metaphysics; see Steinschneider, “Abraham Bibago’s Schriften,” 131 and nn. 33 and 34. 10 See Ivry, “Averroes’ Middle and Long Commentaries,” 76–78, 83–84, 91. 11 Ivry, “Averroes’ Short Commentary,” esp. 511–13 and 548; Ivry, “Averroes’
Three Commentaries,” 200, 209, 216. On Averroes’ use of the commentators
in his three commentaries on On the Soul, cf. Druart, “Averroes,” 191–93 and
197–202. 12 Druart, “Averroes,” 193. 13 Ivry, “Averroes’ Short Commentary,” 519; Ivry, “Averroes’ Middle and Long
Commentaries,” 91. 14 Ivry, “Averroes’ Middle and Long Commentaries,” 76; Ivry, “Averroes’ Short
Commentary,” 513 and 516. Ivry, “Averroes’ Middle and Long Commentaries,” 76, likens Averroes’ style to that of Avicenna, who, Ivry writes, “wrote
his al-Najaˉt by abridging the Shifaˉʾ.” But the example is not accurate, for
the Najaˉt actually shares lengthy passages verbatim with the Shifaˉʾ while, of
course, omitting others entirely. In any case, Dimitri Gutas states in Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition, 113–14, that the Najaˉt “is not a summary or
abridgment” of the Shifaˉʾ, as frequently claimed, but rather both copy passages
from earlier works by Avicenna.
488 Steven Harvey 15 Ivry, “Averroes’ Three Commentaries,” 201; Ivry, “Averroes’ Short Commentary,”
513. 16 Ivry, “Averroes’ Three Commentaries,” 202; Ivry, “Averroes’ Short Commentary,” 517–19; Ivry, “Averroes’ Middle and Long Commentaries,” 85–86; Ivry,
“Response,” 154; and Ivry, “La logique de la science de l’âme,” 696. 17 Ivry, “Averroes’ Middle and Long Commentaries,” 91. 18 Harvey, “Similarities and Differences,” 96–97. 19 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics. Her references are to a pre-publication version of
my paper. 20 Harvey, “Reflections on Ruth Glasner’s Averroes’ Physics,” 403. 21 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 14. 22 Ibid., 15–17. 23 Ibid., 21 n. 13. 24 Ibid., 11. 25 On the rather large number of Arabic (Judeo-Arabic) fragments of the Long
Commentary on On the Soul, see Sirat and Geoffroy, L’original arabe.
26 Halper, “Averroes on Metaphysical Terminology,” 93. 27 Ibid., 91. 28 Ibid., 77. 29 Arnzen, “Translator’s Introduction,” 2. 30 See notes 11 and 12 above. 31 In fact, Averroes’ Kitaˉb al-d․aruˉrıˉ fıˉ l-mant․iq, his short commentary on the
logic, seems to follow al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s short commentaries, most noticeably with
regard to its structure. See al-ʿAlawıˉ, Al-Matn al-Rushdıˉ, 49–52. For a good
illustration of al-Faˉraˉbıˉ’s influence on Averroes’ short commentaries on the
logic (as opposed to his middle commentaries), see Lamprakis, “Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ
and Averroes.” See also Elamrani-Jamal, “Averroès, le commentateur d’Aristote?” 646–48. Al-ʿAlawıˉ also argued that Averroes’ summaries on the logic
were of subjects, not books of Aristotle (against Butterworth’s conclusions).
He referred to these summaries as mukhtas․a raˉt․ (summaries or epitomes). For
the same reason, he also called the short commentary on the De anima the
Mukhtas․
ar on On the Soul. Butterworth defended his position in “Account of
Recent Scholarship,” 93–97. 32 Butterworth, “Introduction,” 5–10. 33 On this point, see Ivry, “Averroes’ Short Commentary,” 512–13, 520–21, 548–
49. See also Druart, “Averroes,” 190–93. Decades later, Averroes returned to
the Short Commentary on On the Soul—as he did to other commentaries—and
made revisions on the basis of his improved knowledge and new understanding of the Aristotelian text. See Druart, “Averroes,” 193; Ivry, “Averroes’
Short Commentary,” 516, 520–21, 546–47, cf. 523. 34 Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 11. 35 Taylor, “Introduction,” xvi; Arnzen, “Translator’s Introduction,” 2. Gutas,
“Aspects of Literary Form,” 56, refers to Averroes’ t alaˉkhıˉs․ of the books of
the Organon as “paraphrases.” Earlier in that paper, he explains that “during
the period of translations, and perhaps ever [. . .] [the verb] lakhkhas․
a did
not and does not mean ‘to comment’ in the sense of sharh․
or tafsıˉr, nor
did it mean ‘paraphrase’ as the term is understood either in Greek or in
English” (40). 36 Harvey, “Similarities and Differences,” 91 and 95. 37 Ivry, “Averroes’ Short Commentary,” 512–13. 38 Halper, “Averroes on Metaphysical Terminology,” 93. 39 Ibid., 46, 48, 68. For a more detailed account of Averroes’ changes in his
Middle Commentary on the Metaphysics to the Arabic text of Aristotle, see now
Halper, “Averroes’ Rewrite.” For Yehuda Halper, the Middle Commentary on
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 489
Metaphysics Δ is not only very similar to Aristotle’s Metaphysics Δ but is the
closest of all three commentaries to it (263). 40 It now appears that Ish․aˉq ibn H․unayn translated only the first four books,
while Ust․
aˉth translated books 5–10. See Schmidt and Ullmann, Aristoteles in
Fes, 15–16. 41 Harvey, “Nature and Importance,” 271–73. 42 See, e.g., Berman, “Ibn Rushd’s Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics,” esp. 293; Aouad and Woerther, “Le commentaire par Averroès.” 43 Harvey and Woerther, “Averroes’ Middle Commentary,” 283. See also Woerther, Le plaisir, esp. 84–107. On the above-mentioned exceptions, see Harvey and Woerther, “Averroes’ Middle Commentary,” 257–58. 44 See the entries for Parva naturalia and De animalibus at http://dare.uni-koeln.
de/app/ (accessed March 14, 2022). 45 See, for example, Cruz Hernández, Abuˉ-l-Walıˉd Muh․ammad Ibn Rusˆd, 362;
al-ʿAlawıˉ, Al-Matn al-Rushdıˉ, 19 (cf. 70–71, 136–37). The Arabic title of the
commentary on the Parva naturalia calls it a talkhıˉs․.
46 Fontaine, “Averroes as a Commentator of Aristotle,” 103. 47 Fontaine, “Averroes’ Commentary,” 491. On the previous page, Fontaine
leans toward considering the commentary on On Animals a middle commentary: “It looks more like a Middle Commentary. Not only is it considerably
longer than Averroes’ other Epitomes, but it also follows the Aristotelian text
closer than the Epitomes do” (490). 48 Translated in Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 20, from the Hebrew translation of
Averroes’ Long Commentary on the Physics. Concerning Averroes’ statement
in his commentary on On Animals on how he sees his commentary, see his
introduction to it (especially the end), translated from the medieval Hebrew
by Gerrit Bos and David Wirmer, Averroes, Sefer Ba‘alei Hayyim.
49 Ar.: ʿalaˉ l-maʿnaˉ. Averroes distinguishes clearly between the middle commentaries and the long commentaries, referring to the middle commentaries as
“according to the signification” (or, in Endress’ translation, “elucidating the
sense”) and the long commentaries as “word-for-word” or “literal” (Ar.: ʿalaˉ l-lafz․, He.: millah be-millah). See Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 20; Endress, “‘If
God Grant Me Life,’” esp. 245. 50 Translated in Harvey, “Averroes’ Use of Examples,” 92. 51 Translated in ibid., 93. See, similarly, the beginning of Averroes’ Commentary [Beʾur] on Plato’s Republic: “The intention of this treatise is to abstract such
scientific arguments [ha-maʾamarim ha-maddaʿiyyim] attributable to Plato as are
contained in the Republic by eliminating the dialectical arguments from it.”
Averroes, Averroes on Plato’s Republic, trans. Lerner, 3. 52 Translated in Harvey, “Averroes’ Use of Examples,” 93. Arnzen, in Averroes,
On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics,” 21, translates this passage: “In this treatise, we
wish to present scientific doctrines gathered from the treatises Aristotle devoted to the science of metaphysics in the manner we have practised generally
in the preceding books.” 53 Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Marsh. 472 (Neubauer 1381), fol. 254r. 54 Blumberg, “Introduction,” xiii–xiv. 55 Sarah Stroumsa has for nearly two decades questioned the credibility of the
“semihagiographic” story reported in 1224 by the Maghribian historian ʿAbd
al-Waˉh․id al-Marraˉkushıˉ. See, most recently, Stroumsa, Andalus and Sefarad,
esp. 135–41. 56 For one recent illustration, see Endress, “‘If God Grant Me Life,’” 240:
“[Averroes] rejoined the amıˉr Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb Yuˉsuf [. . .] the same who after his
accession in 1166 had encouraged [Averroes] to make the commentary of
Aristotle the project of his life.”
490 Steven Harvey 57 See, e.g., the dating in Alonso, Teología de Averroes, 76–88; Cruz Hernández,
Historia de la filosofia española, 2:61–62; Cruz Hernández, Abuˉ-l-Walıˉd Muh․ammad Ibn Rusˆd, 58–59; Puig Montada, Averroes, 124; al-ʿAlawıˉ, Al-Matn al-Rushdıˉ , 61–86. 58 The Middle Commentary on On the Soul may well have been written later; see
note 10 above. 59 The Hebrew reads as follows: ןוהיתה השלמתי בעשיית הביאור הזה יום שבת, ראשו
רלחדש רגב, שנת תקס”ה לחשבון ישמעאל, וזה במדינת שביליה. וכבר יש לי בהמון ביאו
םעשיתיו בעת הנערות, והוא קצר, וראיתי עתה לעשות זה הביאור יותר של . See the Hebrew
translation of the Middle Commentary on the Physics, Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale, MS héb 938 (Oratoire 125), fol. 156v; translated in Harvey, “Similarities
and Differences,” 87. 60 Stroumsa, Andalus and Sefarad, 140–41. Actually, al-Marraˉkushıˉ’s confusion
may have been rooted in Averroes’ own use of the term talkhıˉs․ as a title for
the Short Commentary on the Physics, as evidenced by at least one manuscript of
the short commentaries (al-jawaˉmiʿ al-s․ighaˉr) and to describe as well the Short
Commentary on the Meteorology and the three other j awaˉmi ʿ s․ighaˉr of natural
science that preceded it, in the colophon of that short commentary, as evidenced by at least two manuscripts. On these references, see Averroes, Epitome
de fisica, trans. Puig, introduction, 25 and 65; al-ʿAlawıˉ, Al-Matn al-Rushdıˉ,
55–57; Gutas, “Aspects of Literary Form,” 41–42. Averroes also uses nulakhkhis․
, a verb form of talkhıˉs․, at the beginning of the Short Commentary on the
Physics (in all the extant manuscripts, shortly after the passage quoted at note
51), when stating what he will do in that book: “and we will elucidate [nulakhkhis․
] what is in each of the treatises [of the Physics] of scientific statements.”
Averroes, Epitome in physicorum libros, ed. Puig, 8. For Averroes’ statement on
the difference between his short and middle commentaries on the Physics,
see the previous note. See also Endress, “‘If God Grant Me Life,’” 244, for
Averroes’ use in the Middle Commentary on the Prior Analytics of “our talkhıˉs․ on
these topics,” in reference to an earlier writing. 61 See notes 48 and 49 above. 62 See Renan, Averroès et l’averroïsme, 44–48; Munk, Mélanges de philosophie juive et arabe, 431–34. These scholars’ knowledge of Averroes’ commentaries—
attained, in great part, through perusing numerous manuscripts—is indeed impressive, although not, of course, definitive. We can today correct their overgeneralizations and imprecisions, while still appreciating their great contributions toward classifying Averroes’ many commentaries. Gutas, “Aspects of Literary Form,” 55, views things differently. Rather than seeing himself as standing on the shoulders of these scholars and others, such as Moritz Steinschneider (see 41–42), he regards them as an “albatross” around our necks. Gutas writes: “The accepted wisdom about Averroes’s commentatorial activity, namely, that he wrote three kinds of commentaries for most of Aristotle’s works—the short in his youth, the middle in his mature age and the long in his old—dates back to the Renaissance and has since been codified as dogma through sheer repetition. Like other similar pieces of accepted wisdom, it fails accurately to depict what Averroes actually did, but rather seems to reflect European perceptions of the Latin Averroes.” This statement about the periodization of Averroes’ commentatorial activity is translated from Renan’s French along with Renan’s remark that it was already generally accepted during the Renaissance (Renan, Averroès et l’averroïsme, 45–46 n. 3). However, what neither Renan nor Munk nor Steinschneider would mistakenly write is Gutas’ insertion that Averroes “wrote three kinds of commentaries for most of Aristotle’s works,” for they knew that he wrote only five long commentaries. It is also misleading to suggest that they accepted this opinion blindly without checking it out themselves (see, e.g., Munk, Mélanges de philosophie juive et arabe,
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 491
423 and 431). Gutas is correct, as we have seen, that the “accepted wisdom” is not completely accurate, but this was hardly a “failure”; it was unavoidable at the time. Munk’s and Renan’s knowledge of what Averroes “actually did” in his various commentaries was, as mentioned, based primarily on their perusal of manuscripts, and certainly not simply on the basis of their titles in Arabic, Hebrew, and Latin, or on their statements of aim and intention. 63 Endress’ translation; see note 49 above. 64 There are reasonable attempts by learned scholars to date the completion of
the long commentaries, but I know of no definitive dating for any. Few scholars seem aware of the passage, quoted at note 48, where Averroes refers to
his earliest long commentaries. In his Long Commentary on On the Heavens,
Averroes expresses his hope to be able to write a long commentary on the
Metaphysics, so we know that long commentary was written after the one on
On The Heavens; see Endress, “‘If God Grant Me Life,’” 251. 65 If Ivry is correct that the Long Commentary on On the Soul was written before
the middle commentary, it may well be the case that it was not completed or
circulated before the latter. This indeed is Ivry’s suggestion (Ivry, “Averroes’
Middle and Long Commentaries,” 91): “The positive reception of his Middle
Commentary would have encouraged him to publish the Long Commentary
afterwards, later in his life.” During this last period of his life, when he was
engaged, inter alia, in writing the long commentaries, he also made the effort to revise his earlier commentaries. On these revisions, see, e.g., Druart,
“Averroes.” Glasner, Averroes’ Physics, 28, writes that “all three commentaries on the Physics were massively revised,” and she illustrates these revisions
throughout her book. Curiously, Glasner argues that “sometimes, in [late
revisions to] the short commentary, we find Averroes’ last word on issues that
were of the utmost importance for him” (30). Significantly, she adds that the
“long is the most heavily revised of the three commentaries on the Physics and
possibly the whole corpus of Averroes’ commentaries” (32). See, in general,
her chapter, “Versions and Revisions,” 28–40, and 35–36 on Averroes’ revisions to his Long Commentary on the Metaphysics.
66 On Averroes’ repeated prayer throughout his career, “from the first beginning to the very end,” that God might grant him “a life long enough to attain his goal,” see Endress, “‘If God Grant Me Life,’” esp. 228, 244, 246, 252; and above at note 48. In the passage quoted at note 48, Averroes states his hope to be able to write long commentaries on On Animals and indeed on all the remaining Aristotelian books. On his explicit hope to be able to write a long commentary on the Prior Analytics, see Endress, “‘If God Grant Me Life,’” 244, and on the Sophistics,
245; on his hope, if God will grant him life, to write a long commentary on the Metaphysics, which he in fact achieved, see Munk, Mélanges de philosophie juive et arabe, 423 and 431, and the reference in note 64 above.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Averroes (Ibn Rushd). Averroes on Plato’s Republic. Translated by Ralph Lerner.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1974.
Averroes. Averroes’ Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics: Critical Edition of
the Arabic Version, French Translation and English Introduction. Edited and translated by Maroun Aouad. Leiden: Brill, 2023.
Averroes. Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis Physicorum librum octavum. Edited by
Horst Schmieja. Frankfurt am Main: Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic
Science, 2020.
492 Steven Harvey
Averroes. Epitome de fisica (Filosofia de la naturaleza). Translated by Josep Puig. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Instituto Hispano-Arabe
de Cultura, 1987.
Averroes. Epitome in physicorum libros. Arabic text edited by Josep Puig. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Instituto Hispano-Arabe de Cultura, 1983.
Averroes. Epitome of Parva naturalia. Translated by Harry Blumberg. Cambridge,
MA: The Mediaeval Academy of America, 1961.
Averroes. On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics”: An Annotated Translation of the So-called
“Epitome.” Edited by Rüdiger Arnzen. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2010.
Averroes. Sefer Baʿalei Hayyim (De animalibus). Preliminary translation and study
of the Introduction by Gerrit Bos and David Wirmer. At https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/326299859_Averroes_Sefer_Ba’alei_Hayyim_
De_animalibus.
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba. Long Commentary on the De anima of Aristotle.
Translated with an introduction and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with
Thérèse-Anne Druart. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Secondary Literature
Al-ʿAlawıˉ, Jamaˉ l-al-Dıˉn. Al-Matn al-Rushdıˉ: Madkhal li-qiraˉʾa jadıˉda. Casablanca:
Daˉr Tuˉbqaˉ l, 1986.
Alonso, Manuel. Teología de Averroes (1947). Seville: Fundación el Monte, 1998.
Aouad, Maroun, and Frédérique Woerther. “Le commentaire par Averroès du
chapitre 9 du livre X de l’Éthique à Nicomaque: Pédagogie de la contrainte, habitudes et lois.” Mélanges de l’Université Saint-Joseph 62 (2009): 353–80.
Arnzen, Rüdiger. “Translator’s Introduction.” In Averroes, On Aristotle’s “Metaphysics”: An Annotated Translation of the So-called “Epitome,” edited by Rüdiger
Arnzen, 1–20. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2010.
Berman, Lawrence V. “Ibn Rushd’s Middle Commentary on the Nicomachean Ethics
in Medieval Hebrew Literature.” In Multiple Averroès: Actes du colloque international organisé à l’occasion du 850e. anniversaire de la naissance d’Averroès, edited by
Jean Jolivet, 287–321. Paris: Belles Lettres, 1978.
Blumberg, Harry. “Introduction.” In Averroes, Epitome of Parva naturalia, translated by Harry Blumberg, xi–xv. Cambridge, MA: The Mediaeval Academy
of America, 1961.
Butterworth, Charles E. “An Account of Recent Scholarship in Medieval Islamic
Philosophy.” Interpretation: A Journal of Political Philosophy 16 (1988): 87–97.
Butterworth, Charles E. “Introduction.” In Averroes, Averroës’ Three Short Commentaries on Aristotle’s “Topics,” “Rhetoric,” and “Poetics,” edited and translated by
Charles E. Butterworth, 1–42. Albany: SUNY Press, 1977.
Cruz Hernández, Miguel. Abuˉ -l-Walıˉd Muh․
ammad Ibn Rusˆd (Averroes): Vida, Obra,
Pensamiento, Influencia. 2nd edition. Córdoba: CajaSur, 1997.
Cruz Hernández, Miguel. Historia de la filosofia española: Filosofia Hispano-Musulmana.
2 vols. Madrid: Asociación Española para el Progreso de las Ciencias, 1957.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne. “Averroes: The Commentator and the Commentators.”
In Aristotle in Late Antiquity, edited by Lawrence P. Schrenk, 184–202. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1994.
Averroes’ Three Kinds of Aristotelian Commentaries 493
Elamrani-Jamal, Abdelali. “Averroès, le commentateur d’Aristote?” In Penser avec
Aristote, edited by M. A. Sinaceur, 64–51. Toulouse: Érès, 1991.
Endress, Gerhard. “Averrois Opera: A Bibliography of Editions and Contributions to the Text.” In Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources, Constitution and Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn Rushd (1126–1198), edited by
Gerhard Endress and Jan A. Aertsen with Klaus Braun, 339–81. Leiden:
Brill, 1999.
Endress, Gerhard. “‘If God Grant Me Life’: Averroes the Philosopher: Studies on
the History of Development.” Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale
15 (2004): 227–53.
Fakhry, Majid. Averroes (Ibn Rushd): His Life, Works and Influence. Oxford: Oneworld, 2001.
Fakhry, Majid. A History of Islamic Philosophy. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1970.
Fontaine, Resianne. “Averroes as a Commentator of Aristotle: The Case of the
Meteorologica and the De animalibus.” In La lumière de l’intellect: La pensée scientifique et philosophique d’Averroès dans son temps, edited by Ahmad Hasnawi,
99–108. Leuven: Peeters, 2011.
Fontaine, Resianne. “Averroes’ Commentary on Aristotle’s De generatione animalium
and Its Use in Two Thirteenth-century Hebrew Encyclopedias.” In
Islamic Thought in the Middle Ages: Studies in Text, Transmission and Translation,
in Honour of Hans Daiber, edited by Anna Akasoy and Wim Raven, 489–502.
Leiden: Brill, 2008.
Glasner, Ruth. Averroes’ Physics: A Turning Point in Medieval Natural Philosophy.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Gutas, Dimitri. “Aspects of Literary Form and Genre in Arabic Logical Works.”
In Glosses and Commentaries on Aristotelian Logical Texts: The Syriac, Arabic and
Medieval Latin Traditions, edited by Charles Burnett, 29–76. London: The Warburg Institute, 1993.
Gutas, Dimitri. Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition. Leiden: Brill, 1988.
Halper, Yehuda. “Averroes on Metaphysical Terminology: An Analysis and Critical Edition of the Long Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics Δ.” PhD diss.,
Bar-Ilan University, 2010.
Halper, Yehuda. “Averroes’ Rewrite of Aristotle’s Metaphysics Δ: Establishing the
Plain Meaning of the Text in the Middle Commentary.” Recherches de théologie et
philosophie médiévales 86, no. 2 (2019): 259–81.
Harvey, Steven. “Averroes’ Use of Examples in His Middle Commentary on the Prior
Analytics, and Some Remarks on His Role as Commentator.” Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy 7, no. 1 (1997): 91–113.
Harvey, Steven. “The Nature and Importance of Averroes’ Middle Commentary on the Ethics and the Extent of Its Influence on Medieval Jewish Thought.” In
Averroes et les averroïsmes juif et latin, edited by Jean-Baptiste Brenet, 257–73.
Turnhout: Brepols, 2007.
Harvey, Steven. “Reflections on Ruth Glasner’s Averroes’ Physics.” Aleph 12, no.
2 (2012): 403–12.
Harvey, Steven. “Similarities and Differences among Averroes’ Three Commentaries on Aristotle’s Physics.” In La lumière de l’intellect: La pensée scientifique et
philosophique d’Averroès dans son temps, edited by Ahmad Hasnawi, 81–97. Leuven: Peeters, 2011.
494 Steven Harvey
Harvey, Steven, and Frédérique Woerther. “Averroes’ Middle Commentary on
Book I of the Nicomachean Ethics.” Oriens 42, no. 1–2 (2014): 254–87.
Ivry, Alfred L. “Averroes’ Middle and Long Commentaries on the De anima.”
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 5, no. 1 (1995): 75–92.
Ivry, Alfred L. “Averroes’ Short Commentary on Aristotle’s De anima.” Documenti e
studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale 8 (1997): 511–49.
Ivry, Alfred L. “Averroes’ Three Commentaries on De anima.” In Averroes and
the Aristotelian Tradition: Sources, Constitution and Reception of the Philosophy of Ibn
Rushd (1126–1198), edited by Gerhard Endress and Jan A. Aertsen with Klaus
Braun, 199–216. Leiden: Brill, 1999.
Ivry, Alfred L. “La logique de la science de l’âme: Étude sur la méthode dans le
Commentaire d’Averroès.” In Penser avec Aristote, edited by Mohammed A.
Sinaceur, 687–700. Toulouse: Érès, 1991.
Ivry, Alfred L. “Response.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 7 (1997): 153–55.
Lamprakis, Alexander. “Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ and Averroes on the Completeness of Aristotle’s
List of Fallacies: Reconstructing the Debate between al-Amkina al-Mughallit․
a
and Talkhıˉs․ al-Safsat․
a” (forthcoming).
Munk, Salomon. Mé langes de philosophie juive et arabe. Paris: A. Franck, 1859.
Puig Montada, Josep. Averroes, juez, médico y filósofo andalusí. Seville: Consejería de
educación y ciencia, 1998.
Renan, Ernest. Averroès et l’averroïsme: essai historique. Paris: Auguste Durand, 1852.
Schmidt, Ernst A., and Manfred Ullmann. Aristoteles in Fes: Zum Wert der arabischen Überlieferung der Nikomachischen Ethik für die Kritik des griechischen Textes.
Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag Winter, 2012.
Sirat, Colette, and Marc Geoffroy. L’original arabe du Grand commentaire d’Averroès
au De anima d’Aristote: Prémices de l’édition. Paris: Vrin, 2005.
Steinschneider, Moritz. “Abraham Bibago’s Schriften.” Monatsschrift für Geschichte
und Wissenschaft des Judentums 32, no. 2 (1883): 76–96.
Stroumsa, Sarah. Andalus and Sefarad: On Philosophy and Its History in Islamic Spain.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2019.
Taylor, Richard C. “Introduction.” In Averroes (Ibn Rushd) of Cordoba, Long
Commentary on the De anima of Aristotle, translated and with an introduction
and notes by Richard C. Taylor, with Thérèse-Anne Druart, xv–cx. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009.
Woerther, Frédérique. Le plaisir, le bonheur, et l’acquisition des vertus: Édition du Livre
X du Commentaire moyen d’Averroès à l’Éthique à Nicomaque d’Aristote. Leiden:
Brill, 2018.
Wolfson, Harry A. “Plan for the Publication of a Corpus commentariorum Averrois
in Aristotelem.” Speculum 6, no. 3 (1931): 412–27.
Wolfson, Harry A. “Plan for the Publication of a Corpus commentariorum Averrois
in Aristotelem,” revised version of 1961. In Harry A. Wolfson: Studies in the History
of Philosophy and Religion, edited by Isadore Twersky and George H. Williams,
1:430–54. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1973.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003309895-26
Appendix
“Aquinas and ‘the
Arabs’”—A Short History
Richard C. Taylor and Brett Yardley
This Appendix is an edited account of Richard C. Taylor’s comments on the
origins, history, and purpose of the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International
Working Group,” as told to Brett Yardley in 2019.
I’m often asked what “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’” is and how it came to be.
As its longer name implies, “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’” is an international
group of scholars with a common expertise who critically engage one
another’s work in friendly, but astute, ways—that area of expertise being medieval philosophy in the classical rationalist tradition in the Islamic
world and its impact on the Latin West, namely Christian thinkers of the
High Middle Ages in Europe.
It is well known that when developing the foundation of his metaphysical thought, Thomas Aquinas drew heavily on Moses Maimonides’
Guide of the Perplexed for his famous proofs for the existence of God, and
on Avicenna’s distinction of essence and existence. Less well known is
that Thomas and his teacher, Albert the Great, put Averroean concepts
into their natural theology, their epistemology and psychology, and even
their supernatural theology of beatitude, all of which are key to understanding human nature and the unity of the human person as body and
soul together. As such, the project is not limited to Aquinas, but rather
seeks to promote the understanding of philosophical thought in all three
Abrahamic traditions in themselves, as well as their interactions with one
another and their influences on later thinkers. To that end, the project
encourages work in all three traditions and is particularly interested in
contributions, influences, parallel developments, and valuable philosophi-
cal and theological insights within the history of philosophy.
As for origins, there is no fateful day, no epiphany, that we can point
to as the impetus for what is today called the “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’
International Working Group” (AAIWG). It evolved slowly and naturally
from a rather unremarkable beginning. For years, David Twetten and I
had invited speakers to Marquette University’s campus to discuss prominent philosophical and theological issues within the Abrahamic traditions
throughout the medieval period, whether the issues be found in Arabic,
Hebrew, or Latin writings. It was only in the fall of 2005 that we held
496 Richard C. Taylor and Brett Yardley
our first meeting under the title “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs,’” so as to reflect
the rich legacy of the classical rationalist tradition in the Islamic cultural
milieu, whose thinkers the Latin West historically referred to as “the Arabs” because they were unaware of their ethnic differences.1 However, we really saw ourselves as merely continuing the long history of Jesuit
education’s engagement around the globe, not only to educate young people of all religions but also to contribute research for interreligious and
cross-cultural understanding and cooperation.
As such, we merely stood on the shoulders of nineteenth- and twentieth-century scholars and teachers, whose sound scholarship greatly contributed
to the study of Arabic/Islamic philosophy in its own right, to the study
of Greek sources foundational for the development of Arabic/Islamic philosophy, and to the powerful and penetrating influence of Arabic/Islamic
philosophy on the Latin West. For example, we were emulating scholars
like those from Saint Joseph University, established in Beirut in 1860, and
Baghdad College, established in 1932, such as the renowned Jesuit scholar
Rev. Maurice Bouyges, SJ, who produced critical editions of Averroes’
works (editions which continue to be considered exemplars of scholarship nearly seventy years after their completion), in addition to many articles on Arabic philosophy and its influence in Mélanges, an important
research periodical on Arabic/Islamic philosophy that was published by
Saint Joseph University. Another key figure was Rev. Georges Anawati,
OP, of the Dominican Institute for Oriental Studies in Cairo, who produced editions of Avicenna’s Metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ and Galen’s Arabic
texts, as well as a bibliography of Averroes, to name just a few of his contributions. We felt that these scholars provided a model for future work in
medieval philosophy: research within the context of Islamic culture and
religion that respects and appreciates the sophisticated philosophical
and theological insights of medieval thinkers. In this respect, “Aquinas
and ‘the Arabs’” is really just a natural continuation of work begun decades, even centuries, ago.
Within three years of our first meeting, we were able to open up the
group more broadly, initially thanks to assistance from the College of Arts
and Sciences at Marquette University, which allowed us to become an
international working group by engaging with scholars outside of North
America in earnest. This led to a cooperative arrangement, after some discussion in Paris and Palermo in 2007, between the AAIWG at Marquette
and the Commissio Leonina for an international project on the thought
of Thomas Aquinas and the role of the Arabic philosophical tradition as
a source during his development.2 Although time and resources never
allowed for the culmination of this ambitious joint series, which aimed to
explicate Aquinas’ first, foundational encounters with Arabic philosophy
in his early Commentary on the Sentences, the project confirmed both the
value of and the need for understanding classical philosophy in the Islamic
“Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’”—A Short History 497
world as regards its influence on the Latin West. Furthermore, a visit by
Adriano Oliva, OP, of the Paris Leonine Commission to Marquette University in 2008 marked the official launch of our biannual conferences
on “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs.’” Moving forward, our conference schedule
continued to expand, as the group became better friends and colleagues:
Adriano Oliva hosted us at the Sorbonne in Paris; Luis Xavier López-Farjeat in Mexico City; Edward Houser in Houston; Cristina D’Ancona in
Pisa; and then, in 2018, Fouad Ben Ahmed hosted us in Rabat, followed
immediately by Jamal Rachak in Marrakesh, for our first conferences in a
traditionally Muslim country.
The fruit of these conferences, and of the group’s collaboration more
generally, is evidenced in the numerous publications by our members,
including both edited books such as The Judeo-Christian-Islamic Heritage:
Philosophical and Theological Perspectives (2013) and The Routledge Companion
to Islamic Philosophy (2016) and special issues of journals such as The Thomist
(2012), American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly (2014), and Anuario Filosófico
(2015). Members of our group have also published their works on the
subject in other journals, including Tópicos: Revista de filosofía, Recherches de théologie et philosophie médiévales, and Oriens. The impact of these publications, in addition to our members’ numerous individual contributions,
was even formally recognized by the Société Internationale pour l’Étude
de la Philosophie Médiévale (SIEPM). With new publications every year,
“Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’” continues demonstrating that knowledge of the
Arabic philosophical tradition is essential to understanding philosophical
thought within all three Abrahamic traditions, including the Latin West.
At the time of writing, membership of the working group has grown to
include over one hundred scholars from across North Africa, the Middle
East, Europe, and North America. Each is interested in medieval philosophy, focusing on either medieval philosophy in the Islamic world, the
Latin West through the time of Thomas Aquinas, or both. Work to iden-
tify the Arabic philosophical influences on Thomas and his teacher Albert
the Great is well on its way, but the current group leaves other influential
Scholastics—such as Suárez, Ockham, and Scotus—to future scholars. My
hopes for the AAIWG are that, as the next generation takes the reins, we
will be able to integrate more scholars from even more institutions across
the globe, especially the Islamic world. Most of all, I hope to see “Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International Working Group” members continue to
support one another, while mentoring future scholars. Through exploring and explicating the thought of Thomas Aquinas and the influence of
the Arabic/Islamic philosophical tradition upon his thought, I believe the
group is able to make a special contribution not only to our knowledge
of the Catholic philosophical tradition but also to establishing and publicizing the real historical foundations for interfaith dialogue found in the
medieval world.
498 Richard C. Taylor and Brett Yardley
Notes 1 Of course, today we know better than scholars of the Latin West. Though al-
Kindıˉ, known as “the philosopher of ‘the Arabs,’” was truly of Arab lineage
(he was born and studied in Baghdad), in toto the falaˉsifa—the philosophers or the classical rationalists within the Islamic world—were of diverse origins
and even faiths. Al-Faˉraˉbıˉ (Alfarabi) was born in Turkestan and studied in
Baghdad, in what is now Afghanistan and Iraq respectively. Ibn Sıˉnaˉ (Avicenna) was born to a culturally Persian family in Afshana, near Bukhara, and
moved west to study in Hamadan and Isfahan, in present-day Uzbekistan and
Iran, respectively. Ibn Rushd (Averroes) was born in Cordoba and should be
properly considered Andalusian or Maghrabi, now Spain. Maimonides, who
resided in Cordoba, Morocco, and Egypt, is also included among the philosophers of the tradition, since his philosophical thought was importantly formed
through study of Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, among other sources, and
is, in significant respects, a continuation of the classical rationalist tradition. 2 The Commissio Leonina was established to edit and study the works of
Thomas Aquinas in 1879 by Pope Leo XIII, with a directive and financial
support provided to a scholarly collège of Dominicans who chose to honor
Pope Leo by taking the name “Commissio Leonina.” Since then, the Commissio Leonina has published some thirty-eight volumes of scholarly, critical
editions of the works of Thomas, with a number of volumes now awaiting
publication and still others in the process of being studied and prepared for
editing. See www.commissio-leonina.org for more details on the work of the
commission.
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by “n” denote endnotes.
ʿAbd al-Rah․maˉn al-Jaˉmıˉ 464
Abelard, Peter 319n15
Abraham de Balmes 121, 125, 127n31
Abuˉ-al-Barakaˉt al-Baghdaˉdıˉ 158, 160, 161, 166, 174n34
Abuˉ al-H․usayn al-Bas․
rıˉ 174n31
Abuˉ Bakr Bunduˉd Ibn Yah․yaˉ al-Qurt․
ubıˉ 483–484
Abuˉ H․aˉtim Raˉzıˉ 12, 76, 81, 84, 85
Abuˉ Tammaˉm 152
Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb Sijistaˉnıˉ 76, 78–79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85
Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb Yuˉsuf 483, 484, 489n56
Accattino, Paolo 48n38, 49n39
action, al-T․uˉsıˉ’s theory of 453–459, 462–463
Adamson, Peter 17, 80, 393, 403n10, 404n24
the afterlife 99–102, 103, 106
agent intellect 47n31, 49n39; in Albert
367, 375–376, 377–378; see also
Albert the Great, intellect in; in
Alexander 35–38, 44, 49n39, 49n40, 49n41; in Averroes 41–45, 346, 364, 375–376, 378, 381n15, 387n70; and
human intellect 49n41, 375–376, 377–378, 387n70; light compared to
184, 189; and passive intellect 366, 377, 381n15, 387n70
agents of tradition 13, 14
aitheˉr 34, 47n31
al-ʿAlawıˉ, Jamaˉl-al-Dıˉn 116, 487n1, 488n31
Albert the Great 14, 46n17; Alexander
influencing 364, 372, 377; on
Aristotle 322n64, 371–373, 380n11; Augustine influencing 309–310,
314, 317, 318n8, 322n64, 372, 379; on Averroes 200–204, 219n97, 221n111, 372, 375–379, 385n54, 387n70; Averroes mediating
scholars to 384n43; Avicenna and
110n14, 196, 218n86, 308, 314–315, 317–318, 321n57, 364, 372–373, 375; Dionysian influence on 317, 322n66; disposition of the sacraments
in 314–315, 317, 321n49; efficient
causality in 315–316; First Cause in
363, 380n2, 384n47; al-Ghazaˉlıˉ and
364, 373; hylomorphism in 320n39; institution in 308, 309, 310–314, 315, 316–318, 321n49; instrumentality
in 315–316; intellect prioritized
over intelligibles by 368–369; Liber
de causis influencing 316–317,
322n63, 364, 372, 373, 374; material
causality in 312–313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318n5; medicinal metaphor
in 311–312, 316, 317, 322n68; “metaphor” used by 310, 319n19; Peter Lombard influencing 309–310, 311, 319n15, 319n24; preparation
in 314, 315, 317; Prime Mover in
47n25; reconstruction of Aristotelian
texts by 380n11; see also Albert the
Great, De intellectu et intelligibili of;
Albert the Great, light in; Albert the
Great, works of; sacraments
Albert the Great, De intellectu et
intelligibili of 18, 363, 364, 379, 387n70; composition of 369–371, 383n32, 383n35; emanationism in
373–375; integration of sources in
373; Peripatetic sources of 364, 369, 371–379, 382n30, 385n54; placement
of 367–368, 369–370, 371; Platonic
sources of 373, 374–375; prologue
of 364
500 Index
Albert the Great, intellect in: as capacity
and as form 377–378; didactic
presentation of 368–369, 373; holism
of 363, 379; science of 365–372; uniqueness of 363–366
Albert the Great, light in 206–207, 217n80, 218n85, 219n91, 221n106; Bonaventure disagreeing with 198; as color-actualizing 182, 207; and
criticism of Averroes 200–204, 219n97, 221n111; vs. darkness
215n66; hylomorphic language
for 196; as metaphor 375, 377; transparency and 199–200; works on
215n67
Albert the Great, works of: Commentary
on the De caelo 375; Commentary
on the Parva naturalia 365, 367, 370; Commentary on the Physics
365, 367–369; Commentary on the
Sentences 308–309, 312, 315–317, 318n8, 322n64, 322n66, 373; De
anima commentary of 202–203, 367, 373, 375–379, 382n26, 382n30, 387n70; De animalibus 370, 383n35; De causis et processus universitatis a
prima causa 316; De homine 200–204,
218n85, 364, 372, 378–379, 387n70; De iuventute et senectute 380n11; De
IV coaequaevis 367; De memoria et
reminiscentia 368, 383n39; De motibus
animalium 380n11; De nutrimento et
nutribili 368, 380n11, 383n39; De
sacramentis 308, 309, 311, 316, 318n8; De sensu et sensato 368, 383n39; De
spiritu et respiratione 365, 380n11; Liber de natura et origine animae 370,
378, 381n18, 383n32, 383n35, 384n47; Metaphysica 316, 383n32; Parva naturalia 18, 367–368, 383n31, 383n39; see also Albert the Great, De
intellectu et intelligibili of
Albumasar 92
Alcinous 45n7
Alexander of Aphrodisias 10, 12; agent
intellect in 35–38, 44, 49n39, 49n40, 49n41; Albert influenced by 364, 372, 377; Averroes influenced by
115, 117, 119–120; celestial soul in
31–32, 33–37, 47n21, 49n39, 49n40, 49n41; divergent readings of 48n32, 48n34, 48n35; on elements 120, 122, 123; and the “four causes” 41; Galen
refuted by 119, 125; Liber de causis
influenced by 230, 241n28; on light
202; middle Platonism and 45n7; on
motion, Averroes influencing 30–35, 41–42, 119, 122–123; on motion, generally 12, 48n34, 49n40, 49n41, 119–120; on the Prime Mover
31–38, 41, 43–44, 46n12, 46n14, 48n32; “Principle of the Causality of
the Maximum” in 49n39; separate
Intelligence in 33–38; Simplicius
on 34–35, 46n14, 48n34; on souls
29–30, 31–32, 45n7, 47n21, 49n39, 49n40; —Works: Commentary on the
Metaphysics 33; Commentary on the
Physics 33–34, 38, 47n21, 117; De
anima 35–37, 38, 49n39, 49n41; De
intellectu 49n41; On the Principles of
the Universe 31, 33, 46n17, 50n45; Quaestiones 31, 72n26; 1.25, 37–38, 49n38
Alfred of Sarashel 375
allelopoiesis 20n1
Alonso Alonso, Manuel 299
Alonso del Real, Concepción 299
Ammonius 60–61; on demiurgic logoi
56, 60–61, 63, 65, 67–69, 71n21, 72n28; intellect and forms in 71n20; Philoponus on 12, 56, 62–63, 65, 67–69, 72n25; Proclean metaphysics
simplified by 65, 69; Proclus and 12, 48n34, 57, 60, 71n13, 71n21; see also
Pseudo-Ammonius
Ammonius, school of 48n34
Anawati, Georges 496
Anaxagoras 43, 81–82
Anaximenes 83
angels 97, 98
animals, motion of 47n30, 114, 116–117, 122–123, 124
antichrist 97, 103, 106
Anzulewicz, Henryk 18
Aouad, Maroun 479
apophatic theology 79, 226
Apuleius of Maudara 98
“Aquinas and ‘the Arabs’ International
Working Group” (AAIWG) 7, 20, 23n24, 130, 142n1, 495–497; and
the Catholic philosophical tradition
496, 497; continuity of, with
earlier scholars 496; publications
of 497
Arabic language, status of 132
Arabic philosophy: defining 130, 142n1; diversity of ethnicities in 142n1,
Index 501
498n1; and John of Damascus 131, 134, 141, 142n1, 142n12
Aˉ
raˉʾ al-falaˉsifa: creation in 76–81; God’s
will and action in 81–82; polemic in
85; return/reversion in 83–84; text
of 75
Aristotelian commentators 3–4; Aristotle neglected by 409–410; “discrepancies” in 13; diverging
paradigms established by 419; methodology for judging 4; paucity of theology in 154–155; see also Averroes, Aristotelian
commentaries of
Aristotelian corpus: appropriations of
5–6, 9, 14, 17, 182, 372; commending
vs. condemning 1–2; defining 3, 5, 22n13; translations of 5–6
Aristotelianism: family tree of 4; as
myriad 3, 5–6, 8, 13–14; newness in
4, 5–6, 8, 9, 10, 17, 23n18; radical 445
Aristotle: abridgments of 114; active
intellect in 48n35; anthropocentric
design in 338n14; atomism vs. the
continuum in 120, 125; Bacon
on 101; celestial soul in 47n25; as
color-realist 209n11; composite
substances in 63–64; dependence
on vs. independence from 18–19; dialectic in 326, 327, 330, 331; doctrine of the soul in 367, 381n23; emanationist readings of 46n14; forms in 56, 59, 60–70, 71n20; “four causes” of 41, 43, 44, 48n34, 451–452, 465; on imagination 341, 344, 347, 350, 352; see also Averroes, the imaginative faculty in; Liber de
causis attributed to 225, 373, 374; on
light 10, 14, 182–189; see also light;
minima naturalia in 125; on motion
98, 114, 116–121, 122–126; see
also light; Prime Mover; and Plato, harmonization of 60–62, 63, 66, 69–70; Plato critiqued by 59, 61–62, 64, 66–69, 126; Platonic roots of 5, 22n16; the Prime Mover in 29–33, 41–44, 45n3, 46n14, 47n25, 49n39, 50n54, 162, 335; Pseudo-Ammonius
and 81, 82; temporality in 322n63; translations of 5–6, 23n18, 358n40, 380n11, 436, 438, 472; see also under
Aristotle, De anima of; on truth 246, 255, 256, 258; types of discourse in
326; as ultimately inaccessible 6; see
also Aristotle, De anima of; Aristotle, light in; Aristotle, works of
Aristotle, De anima of 268n65, 364, 367, 371, 381n23; Averroes’ version
of 187; the Demiurge in 60–61; imagination in 341, 350, 358n40; light in 183–187, 208n4, 210n23; “neglect” of 409, 410; Philoponus
on 62–63; Plotinus on 57; and the
science of intellect 364, 366, 367, 369; translations of 184–185, 199
Aristotle, light in 14, 182–183, 200, 207; as “actuality of the diaphanous” 183–184, 199; Albert on 196–197, 201–202, 217n80; Averroes on 188, 190; Avicenna on 190, 194–195, 198, 205, 212n39, 212n40, 218n86; color-actualizing role of 182, 184, 187, 196, 198, 202, 205, 209n13; vs. darkness 184–187, 209n19; as
receiver-disposing 182, 184, 187, 190, 194–195, 199, 204
Aristotle, Metaphysics of 15, 35, 68, 116; 12.6, 45n6; Z 6, 61, 63–64; α 259;
Γ 247; Θ 258; Λ 48n31, 60, 227, 230–232, 237; Λ 4, 42; Λ 7, 11, 29, 30, 40, 43; Λ 10, 43
Aristotle, Physics of 29, 316; 1.1, 3, 23n17; 2.3, 41; 5, 117; 6, 117, 119; 7, 12, 118, 125–126; 7-8 30; 8 44, 48n31, 117, 118, 125, 335; 8.2 47n30; 8.5 32–33; 8.6 38–41, 47n21, 47n25, 47n30; 8.10 33–34, 40
Aristotle, works of: Categories 60, 116; De divinatione per somnum 383n31;
De insomniis 342, 383n31; De
interpretatione 266n41; De iuventute
et senectute 383n31; De longitudine et
brevitate vitae 383n31; De memoria
139, 342, 343–344, 383n31; De morte
et vita 383n31; De motu animalium
48n31; De respiratione 383n31; De
sensu et sensato 185, 196–197, 202, 342–343, 356n8, 358n51, 383n31, 403n16; De somno 342, 383n31; Meteorology 394–395; Nicomachean
Ethics 4, 23n21, 44; Organon 15,
277–278, 290n1, 410, 418; see also
under Averroes, works of; Parts of
Animals 44, 337; Parva naturalia 17,
341, 358n51, 367–368; Poetics 93,
108, 111n34; Politics 19, 436, 438, 441, 445–446; Posterior Analytics 19,
63–67, 127n37, 278, 326, 437–438,
502 Index
445; Rhetoric 93, 108, 326; Sophistical
Refutations 278; Topics 4, 17, 23n25, 285, 326, 327, 330; see also Aristotle, Metaphysics of; Aristotle, Physics of
Arnzen, Rüdiger 85, 395, 476, 477, 478, 489n52
artisan metaphor 41–42, 57–58, 69, 398–399
Asclepius 48n32, 60–61, 71n20
Ashʿarıˉ 79
Ashʿarite theology 165, 174n31; Averroes on 333–334; on creation
161; on divine incorporeality 149–
150, 151, 154; on God’s attributes
162, 166; on God’s will 452–453; opposition to 167; on proving God’s
existence 156; see also al-Ghazaˉlıˉ; al-Raˉzıˉ, Fakhr al-Dıˉn
astral determinism 374, 375; see also
heavenly bodies
atomism 120, 123–126; vs. the
continuum 120, 298, 303–304
Augustine 16, 93, 94, 109; Albert
influenced by 309–310, 314, 317, 318n8, 322n64, 372, 379; on creation
in time 399–400, 404n41; on
sacraments 309, 310, 314, 317, 319n9
authorial intent 3, 22n11
authority 21n4, 373
Avempace (Ibn Baˉjja) 8, 125, 376, 384n43; access of, to Avicenna’s texts
415, 424n21; on Aristotle’s Physics
118, 120–121; Averroes on 408, 409, 410; Avicennian overtones in 424n26; on light 187, 188
Averroes (Ibn Rushd) 7–8, 10, 13, 19, 46n17, 142n1, 498n1; Albert
influenced by 364; Albert on
200–204, 219n97, 221n111, 372, 375–379, 385n54, 387n70; Alexander
of Aphrodisias influencing 115, 117, 119–120; Aquinas influenced by 201, 308, 495; and Aristotelian orthodoxy
18–19; Avicennian style compared to
487n14; on being 115–116; celestial
souls in 32, 38–41, 43–44, 46n12, 50n50, 162; chronology of works by
355n6, 471, 473–474, 487n1, 491n64; on creation 161–164; critical editions
of 172n5, 427n40, 496; on dialectic
326–329, 410, 413; as dialectician
336–337; on direction 149–150, 153–154, 159, 160; on dreaming 160, 162, 342, 344–346; efficient cause
in 49n39; on the elements 119, 120, 122; elephant metaphor in 344, 348, 352; evolution in thinking of 125; formal cause in 42–44; on forms, reception of 342–343, 346–347; fruit
metaphor of 343, 353, 354, 358n52; on al-Ghazaˉlıˉ 332, 334, 336, 338n7, 428n43; on God’s attributes 150–154, 157–159, 161–162, 164–166; on
God’s existence 156–157, 162, 166; on God’s knowledge of particulars
158, 159–160, 174n34; on God’s light
159, 175n35; Hebrew translations of
116; influence of, on Ibn Taymiyya
148; on the intellect 18, 364; kalaˉm
critiqued by 150, 327, 332–336; Marsilius influenced by 437, 443–
445, 448n30; on memory 343–344; mirror metaphor of 342–343, 349–350, 356n8; on mutakallimuˉn
17, 157, 173n12, 326, 333, 336; on
philosophy 329–331, 334–335, 337, 338n10; physics vs. metaphysics of
42; on Plato 114–115, 123; political
theory of 443–444; prayer of, to
complete his work 490n66; on the
Prime Mover 30–32, 38–41, 42–45, 46n12, 125, 153; as reader of al-Shifaˉʾ
415–416, 428n44, 428n45, 429n46, 429n48; on revelation 326, 336; the
self-mover in 117–118, 123, 126; sensory faculties in 341, 357n31, 357n32; separate Intelligence in
38–41; syllogisms in 116, 477; translations of 116, 121–122, 126, 379, 438, 475, 479, 483, 489n40; see also under specific works; see also
Averroes, Aristotelian commentaries
of; Averroes, the imaginative faculty
in; Averroes, light in
Averroes, Aristotelian commentaries
of 19–20, 114–115, 116–117, 471–472; On Animals as test case
480–481, 482, 483, 484–485, 486, 489n47; assumptions about 472–473, 485–486, 490n62; audiences of
474; development of, as genre
19–20; extant copies of 475–476; genre differences among 473–476, 479, 480–481, 484–485; long 114, 472, 486, 487n6, 489n49; middle
473–474, 478–481, 483–486, 487n6, 489n47, 489n49; “paraphrases” 472, 475, 478, 479, 487n6, 488n35; Parva
Index 503
naturalia as test case 480, 481, 482–
485, 486; reason for writing 483–485, 489n56; relation of Aristotelian
texts to 473–474, 475, 476–477, 478, 482–483, 484–485; revisions of
488n33; short 473–475, 476–477, 482, 483, 484–485, 486
Averroes, Decisive Treatise of 16–17,
19, 148, 167, 175n38, 176n50, 327, 426n35; dialectic in 329–332, 336–337; elitism of 329, 337; law in
329–332, 338n10; revelation in 443; translation of 444; types of discourse
in 326
Averroes, Exposition of 17, 148, 149–159, 327, 336–337; elitism in
338n15; kalaˉm in 332–336; as sequel
to the Treatise 332
Averroes, the imaginative faculty in 17, 341; and absence of objects 352–355, 357n29; as abstractive 356n11; Albert
on 387n70; cogitation and 343–345, 350, 352–354, 355, 358n35, 358n37, 358n38; the common sense and
342–343, 345, 348–350, 357n29, 357n31, 358n38; creativity and 344; demonstration and 429n48; and
the double subject theory 349–350, 358n35, 358n38; dreams and 342, 344–346, 349, 357n23; as human
or general power 341–342, 348; as imitation 345–347, 357n24; as
incessantly active 345; as “internal
senses” 355n2; memory and 343–344, 345, 352–353, 356n13; opinion and
350–351; perception and 342–347, 350–351, 352–354, 355, 358n52; and reception of forms 342–343; spirituality of 342, 346–347, 349, 350, 354; synthesis and 343, 344, 356n14; terminology for 341, 355n1, 355n2; as voluntary vs. involuntary
347–348, 357n27, 357n28, 357n29
Averroes, light in 194, 210n26, 210n27; Albert’s critique of 200–204, 219n91, 219n97; Aristotle’s theory of 188, 190; color and 209n19; as receiver-
disposing 182, 195, 199, 200, 208; and two senses of visibility 187–189; as visible per se 185
Averroes, Long Commentary on the De
anima of 356n6, 357n29, 358n40, 372, 378–379, 471, 473, 476, 486, 488n25, 491n65; on Avicenna’s bad
influence 408, 409–410, 411–412, 415; on Avicenna’s distance from
Aristotle 408, 409–412, 413–415, 419, 422n10, 429n51; color and light
in 185, 187, 189, 200–204; date of
486, 491n65; al-Faˉraˉbıˉ in 411, 412, 413, 422n9; imagination in 341, 349–
354, 355; on intellect 372, 378–379; on logic in Avicenna 408, 409, 410, 412–413, 422n11, 422n12, 423n15; “long time” in 409, 421n2, 421n3; on
natural philosophy in Avicenna 408, 412–415, 416–421; preceding Middle
Commentary 473; Taylor edition
of 408, 471; translation of 421n2; the writing of 474, 475, 486; Γ.30,
al-Juˉzjaˉnıˉ inspiring 417–419; Γ.30,
parallels to 411–415; Γ.30, text of
409–410, 422n8
Averroes, Middle Commentary on
the Physics of 121–124, 480, 483; colophon to 484; vs. short and
long commentaries 474–475, 478; translation of 116, 121–122, 126
Averroes, works of: Alpha Meizon
and Alpha Elatton 114–115, 116; Commentary on the Nicomachean
Ethics 448n32; Commentary on Plato’s
Republic 19, 443, 489n51; Commentary
on the Poetics 93, 108; De separatione
primi principii 424n23; Epitome of the
De anima 347–350, 473–474, 477, 486, 488n31, 488n33; Epitome of the
Metaphysics 414, 428n42, 476, 482; Epitome of the Meteorologica 427n42,
490n60; Epitome of the Organon 327,
472, 477, 481, 486; Epitome of the
Parva naturalia 341, 342–347, 348, 355n6, 357n27, 378, 387n70; Epitome
of the Physics 429n47, 476, 477; Epitome of the Poetics 477; Epitome
of the Rhetoric 477; Epitome of the
Topics 327, 328, 335, 336, 337, 477; Epitome on On animals 475; Epitome
on the Logic 477, 488n31; Epitome on
the Physics 117, 118–121, 474–475, 476, 481, 484, 490n60; Fas․
l al-maqaˉl
see Averroes, Decisive Treatise of; Long
Commentary on the De caelo 423n16,
491n64; Long Commentary on the
Metaphysics 427n42, 428n45, 429n48, 443–445, 476, 491n64, 491n66; Long Commentary on the Physics 12,
32, 114–115, 124–126, 475, 481,
504 Index
485–486; Long Commentary on the
Posterior Analytics 427n42; Masʾala
(D․
amıˉma) 148, 158, 159–161, 175n38; Middle Commentary on the
De anima 352, 356n6, 357n29, 478, 490n58, 491n65; Middle Commentary
on the Metaphysics 115–116, 425n33, 428n44, 475, 476, 478; Middle
Commentary on the Nicomachean
Ethics 475, 479, 489n40; Middle
Commentary on the Organon 488n33;
Middle Commentary on the Posterior
Analytics 438; Middle Commentary
on the Sophistici Elenchi 413, 414, 425n33, 429n46; Middle Commentary
on the Topics 423n14; Paraphrase of the
Rhetoric 331, 338n16; Paraphrase of the
Topics 327, 328, 329, 330; Al-Qawl
425n33, 425n35; Quaestiones in
Logicam 411, 487n5; On the Substance
of the Sphere 32, 487n5; 2, 39–40; Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut 31, 148, 150–151, 159–166, 173n18, 416, 425n35, 443; see also Averroes, Decisive Treatise of;
Averroes, Exposition of; Averroes, Long Commentary on the De anima of;
Averroes, Middle Commentary on the
Physics of
Averrois Opera 471
Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ) 8, 10, 13, 142n1, 498n1; the afterlife in 99–102, 107; Albert the Great and 110n14, 196, 218n86, 308, 314–315, 317–318, 321n57, 364, 372–373, 375; Andalusian thought influenced
by 415–416, 424n21, 424n22, 424n23, 424n28, 425n31, 425n32, 426n35; anniyya interpreted by
233; Aristotle critiqued by 419, 422n10; autobiography of 429n51; Averroes’ critique of 18–19, 356n10, 427n42; see also under Averroes, Long Commentary on the De anima
of; Bacon conflating with Aristotle
98; Bacon de-Islamicizing 93, 97, 102–106, 107–108; Bacon influenced
by 91–93, 95–96, 97–106, 107–108, 109, 110n14; on beatitude 101; bodily resurrection in 98–99, 103–
104; celestial souls in 49n41, 162; on choice 454–455, 458, 462–463; on color 427n42; on the common
sense 358n31; compatibilist theory
of 455, 462; on creation 98, 104, 162, 259, 267n51, 269n75; on delight 98, 99–100, 101; dispositive causality
of 314–315; dualism of 99, 100, 103–104; emanationism in 91, 162, 237, 373, 375; on First Intelligence
227; on forms 250, 258, 266n36; on
God’s knowledge of particulars 160, 174n34; Gundissalinus’ use of 16; on human relations 104–105; Ibn
Taymiyya on 150, 151, 154–155, 156, 158, 160–162, 164–167; imagination
in 356n18; misunderstandings of
97, 98, 212n39, 218n86, 266n46; on moral philosophy 94, 103, 109; Muhammad critiqued by
107–108; natural philosophy in, Averroes critiquing 423n16, 427n42; Necessary Principle in 237, 248–249, 256–257, 259–260, 261; on prayer
102–103; and the Principle of
Sufficient Reason 467n4; Proclus
influencing 164, 267n51; proof for
God in 425n35, 427n42, 428n44; self-distancing from Aristotle 411, 412; on sensibles 99–101, 356n18, 427n42; separate intelligences of
98; sexual reputation of 93, 111n18; studies of 429n51; and Theology
of Aristotle 237; al-T․uˉsıˉ on 450, 454–455, 458, 462–463; on world’s
age 450; on worship 101–102; see also
Avicenna, light in; Avicenna, truth in; Avicenna, works of
Avicenna, Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ of: abridgment
of 487n14; Averroes as reader of
415–416, 428n44, 428n45, 429n46, 429n48; colors of rainbow in
427n42; diffusion of, in Andalusia
415–416; explicit mentions of
425n33, 425n35; innovation in
414–415, 420; introduction to 409, 416–421, 424n29; logic in 417–418, 419–420; sophistry in 413, 429n46; translations of 13, 415, 420, 424n28, 424n29, 425n31
Avicenna, light in 190–195, 198–200, 207, 212n38, 215n66; air as conduit
for 199, 200; Albert on 203; color-
actualizing role of 182, 187, 198, 205, 214n53; in Latin translation 199, 211n35, 212n39
Avicenna, Metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ of
13, 19, 92, 94–97; de-islamicization
of 106, 111n23; editions of 110n8;
Index 505
on incontrovertibility of philosophy
247; Latin translation of 13, 96, 104, 111n23; truth in 246–247, 256
Avicenna, truth in 15, 246; as absolute
247, 257, 259–260, 269n72; assent
to 250–257, 260, 265n29, 265n32, 265n33, 266n42, 268n63; beauty and
101, 268n62; conception of 249–254, 255, 257–258, 265n33, 265n34, 266n38, 266n42; definition of
246–249; and dianoia 249, 251, 252, 263n15; diverging from Aristotle 255; essence and 250–251, 255–258, 261, 267n47, 267n49, 268n53, 269n75; as
eternal 247–248, 255–256, 258–259, 260, 267n50, 267n51; factuality
and 247, 248, 249; and falsity 248, 252–253, 254, 256–257, 258, 259, 260; al-h․aqq 246–248, 255–256, 258, 262n8, 263n10; intellection of 252, 254–255, 260, 266n46; language
and 252–253; lexicon of terms for
262n8, 262n9, 262n10, 263n15, 263n19; logical 250–255, 256, 261; Meno paradox and 253; names of
God in 258, 268n69; the Necessary
as 248, 255–261, 267n49, 269n74, 269n75; necessity of existence
in 264n26, 268n59, 268n60; and
nous 251, 252, 263n15; ontological
255–258, 259–260, 261; ontological
vs. logical 247–249, 255–256, 269n74; predication and 247–249, 251–253, 255, 256, 265n29; and
the principle of non-contradiction
247, 248, 249, 250, 259–260, 261n4, 269n74; principle of the excluded
middle in 247, 248, 249, 261n4; as
propositional 247–248, 253–255, 257, 260–261, 266n38; of quiddities
250–251, 253–255, 257–260, 264n24, 264n25, 268n65, 268n66, 269n72; as reality 255–258, 268n65, 268n66; and relations between representations
251–252, 253–257, 266n35, 267n47, 267n48, 268n52; terms for
“necessary” in 263n19; the “thing” in
250–251, 254–258, 262n10, 264n23, 264n24, 265n29, 265n31, 265n32, 267n47; of the triangle and whiteness
258, 268n65
Avicenna, works of: Canon of Medicine
424n21; Ins․aˉf 426n35; al-Ishaˉraˉt
wa-l-tanbıˉhaˉt 450, 451, 453–459, 463; Kitaˉb al-Taʿlıˉqaˉt 252; Liber de anima
190–194, 372; Metaphysics of 454–
455; Najaˉt 425n35, 487n14; Risaˉla
ad․h․
awiyya fıˉ amr al-maʿaˉd 426n35;
Risaˉla fıˉ aqsaˉm al-ʿuluˉm al-ʿaqliyya
256; see also Avicenna, Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ
of; Avicenna, Metaphysics of the
Shifaˉʾ of
Bacon, Roger 10, 13; on the afterlife
99–102; on beatitude 101; conflating
Aristotle and Avicenna 98; Gundissalinus influencing 297; Islam
as understood by 93, 97, 103–104, 106, 107–108, 111n33; on moral
philosophy’s status 94, 103, 108; Opus
tertium 109; on poetics 93, 108–109; on prophecy 107; on true religion
93, 95, 106–108; see also Moralis
philosophia (Bacon)
Badawıˉ, ʿAbd-ar-Rah․maˉn
424n21
Baghdad College 496
Barthes, Roland 22n11
Basil the Great 139, 140
the Bat․iniyya 154, 155, 156
beatitude 101
being: Averroes on 115–116; dynamic
conception of 312, 320n33; hierarchy
of 373
Belo, Catarina 426n38
Ben Ahmed, Fouad 173n10, 175n38, 497
Benevich, Fedor 268n65
Berengar of Tours 319n9, 319n15
Bergemann, Lutz 20n1
Berman, Lawrence 479
Bernard of Clairvaux 310, 319n27
Berti, Enrico 29–30, 45n6, 45n7, 45n9, 46n11, 46n12, 46n14
Bertolacci, Amos 18–19, 110n14, 174n32, 249, 268n59
bias 14
Bibago, Abraham 487n9
al-Bit․rıˉq, Yah․yaˉ ibn 394–395, 403n13
Black, Deborah L. 17
Blumberg, Harry 355n6, 356n10, 482–483
Blyth, Dougal 47n31
bodies: four elementary 114, 119, 120, 122–123, 124, 126; light and 183, 193–194, 199, 208, 215n62; simple
vs. complex 31, 119, 122; see also
hylomorphism
506 Index
the body 12; intellect connected to
367, 369, 371; intellect separate from
366, 371, 376; resurrection of 95, 97, 98–99, 103–104; Universal 404n31; in worship 131, 135–138
Boethius 16, 294; Commentary on Isagoge
294, 298; De consolatione philosophiae
299; De hebdomadibus 299; De unitate
et uno ascribed to 294, 298–299
Böhme, Hartmut 21n4
Bonaventure: on the First Cause 226; on light 182, 197, 198, 199, 206
Book of the Pure Good 394
Book of the Senses and the Sensibles
403n16
Bori, Caterina 172n1
Bouyges, Maurice 91, 496
Bradshaw, David 29
Brentano, Franz 29
Broadie, Sarah 29, 44, 45n3, 46n11
Burgundio of Pisa 133
Burke, Robert B. 110n7
Burnyeat, Miles 209n13
Butterworth, Charles E. 175n38, 443–444, 477, 488n31
the Byzantine scholiast 33, 34
causality: and the age of the world
450–451, 465; auto kath’ auto
principle of 233, 234; of dispensation
321n58; dispositive 308, 311–315, 317, 318n5, 320n39, 321n49; efficient, Aristotelian 316; efficient, in Albert 315–316; efficient, reduced
to final 49n39; efficient or “source” 29–35, 36–38, 41–42, 44, 45n9, 46n12, 49n39, 50n52; exemplar 30, 46n11; final or “end” 29–30, 34–35, 38, 41–44, 49n39; formal 42–45, 69, 322n63; see also forms; of grace
308, 309, 310–317, 319n27; and
infinite causal chains 164; and the
intelligible realm 227, 229; “making” 41; material, Albert on 312–313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318n5; moral 318; Neoplatonic 228–229; occasional
312; physical 308, 314, 315, 317–318; and the “principle of the
causality of the maximum” 49n39; representational 308, 309, 310–314, 315, 316–318, 320n47; sacramental
308, 310–314, 316, 317, 321n58; unity and 296, 299–300; see also
emanationism; motion; Prime Mover
celestial soul 50n43; in Alexander
31–32, 33–37, 47n21, 49n39, 49n40, 49n41; in Aristotle 47n25; in Averroes 32, 38–41, 43–44, 46n12, 50n50, 162; God as 45n2, 46n17; heavens moved by 29–32, 33–41, 45, 47n21, 47n31, 49n40, 49n41; intellection in 44–45; see also
heavenly bodies
Chase, Michael 18
Chladenius, Johann Martin 22n11
Christ: humanity of 135, 138–139, 140; images of 139–140; sacraments
instituted by 313, 316, 317, 322n65
Christianity: Bacon’s argument for 93, 95, 106–108; doctrinal disputes in
132, 133–134; Melkite 132, 142n4
Chrysippus 81
Cicero 94, 101
cogitation, imagination and 343–345, 350, 352–354, 355, 358n35, 358n37, 358n38
cognitive powers see the Intellect
cognitive soul 374
color: in De anima vs. De sensu 210n23;
and disposition 182, 184, 189–193, 194–195, 199–204, 208, 209n8; and
generation of hues 210n24; light
actualizing, generally 189, 190–191, 193–200, 201–202, 205, 207, 208; light actualizing, in Aristotle 182, 184, 187, 196, 198, 202, 205, 209n13; as matter-bound 202–204; mechanics
of the actualizing of 207; as motive
of light 204; as motive of sight 202; as motive of transparency 185–189, 201–202, 220n97; order of, in
rainbow 427n42; as radiance 182, 195, 198, 205, 206; surface vs. depth
of 185–187, 197, 209n15, 210n25; terminologies of 207; as viewer-
dependent or-independent 192–193;
as visible in itself 184–185, 187–189, 201–204
the Command (amr) 82
Commissio Leonina 496, 498n2
common sense 341, 347, 482; in
Avicenna 357n31; and dreams 345; in al-Faˉraˉbıˉ 356n20; relation of, to
other senses 342–343, 346, 348–350, 354–355, 357n31, 358n38
Conclusiones de intellectu et intelligibili 367
confirmation bias 205–206, 207
contextualism 8
Index 507
the continuum see atomism
Correns, Paul 299
Cory, Therese Scarpelli 10, 14
cosmic soul 231
cosmology: hierarchy of rulers in 230–
231, 240n16, 240n19, 241n30, 373; intellect theory and 36–41, 297–298; see also creation; heavenly bodies
Covenant, theology of 309, 312, 321n48; see also sacraments
creation: Avicenna on 98, 104, 162, 259, 267n51, 269n75; by being 395–396, 397, 398, 401; divine support of
84, 454; eternal 161, 399–400, 450, 454, 459; ex nihilo (ibdaˉʿ) 12, 76–81, 86n25, 400–401; God choosing
moment of 451–453, 459–462; instantaneous 80–81, 396–401; of the
Intellect 227; in Moralis philosophia
97–98, 103; necessity of 450–451; in
Plotiniana Arabica 18, 241n33, 241n34, 396–399; al-Raˉzıˉ on 450, 451–453, 457, 458–459, 464; and salvation 313, 321n53; temporality of 333, 400–401, 451–454, 455, 460–461, 464; through
the Intellect 232; union and unity
ordering 298, 300–301; and will
12, 19, 81–82, 399–401, 450–451, 454–455, 460–461, 463–464, 467; and will, negation of 241n34; see also
principle of sufficient reason
creatures, God and 295, 299, 463–464
Crowley, Theodore 91, 98
cultural production 21n4
Damascus: Ibn Taymiyya and 147, 172n3; and John of Damascus
130–131
D’Ancona, Cristina 14–15, 403n10, 497
darkness 201, 209n19, 210n26; color
in 184, 187–188, 191, 197, 200, 202, 206; as impediment 215n66; as
metaphor 296, 301, 302; as privation
183, 194, 198, 209n5; see also light
Darʾ see Ibn Taymiyya, Darʾ of
Davidson, Herbert A. 428n44
definitions 62–64, 68
Del Medigo, Elia 126n5
Delorme, Ferdinand 100, 110n7, 110n8, 110n9
the Demiurge: in Aristotle 60–61, 65; forms and 57–59, 60–62, 65–66, 68, 70n5, 71n13; in Plotinus 57–58; in
Porphyry 398; in Proclus 58–59, 70n5; in Timaeus 57, 66, 401
Democritus 80–81, 84, 212n38
demonstration 16; dialectic vs. 327,
329, 333–334, 337; the imaginative
faculty and 429n48; in political
theory 436, 437–442, 443, 445; see
also Marsilius of Padua, Defensor pacis
of; principle of the excluded middle
in 247, 248, 249, 261n4; principle
of non-contradiction in 247, 248, 249, 250, 259–260, 261n4, 269n74; principles of 248–250, 256, 260, 269n74, 437–439, 443, 455–456; religion subordinated to 19, 442–443, 445–446; see also al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, syllogistic
arts in
demonstrative chains 64, 125
Derrida, Jacques 21n8
desire: for assimilation to the divine 30, 45n9, 374; motion caused by 29–31, 35, 38, 43–45, 48n31, 48n34, 162, 232; for unity 303; see also motion
De Smet, Daniel 84, 88n45
De Vaux, Roland 91
dialectic 16–17; in Aristotle 326, 327, 330, 331; Averroes on 329–332, 336–337, 410, 413; definition of 327; doubt and 328, 331, 333; al-Ghazaˉlıˉ
on 332; legal argumentation and
329–332; vs. logic 410, 412–413, 422n5, 422n11, 422n13; premises of
327–328, 333, 335–336, 337, 338n15; vs. rhetoric 334, 338n16; usefulness
of 328–329
dianoia 249, 251, 252, 263n15
the diaphanous 183–184, 185–186, 187–189, 195–196, 199–200, 202, 208n4
Dietrich of Freiberg 366, 367, 381n15
différance 3, 21n8
Dionysius the Areopagite 16, 136, 242n38, 317, 367, 372, 373
disability, metaphors of 99–100, 107, 108
disciplines, creation of 18, 19–20, 22n11, 293, 304n2, 365–367, 445–446
discrepancies in texts 13
“discriminative faculty” 356n10
disposition: color and 182, 184, 189–193, 194–195, 199–204, 208, 209n8; as instinct 335; in sacramental
theology 308, 310–318
508 Index
dispositive causality 308, 311–315, 317, 318n5, 320n39, 321n49
divine incorporeality 149–150, 151, 154
Divine Will see under will
Dominican Institute for Oriental
Studies 496
Dondaine, Hyacinthe 308
Donini, Pierluigi 49n39
the double subject theory 349–350, 358n35, 358n38
doxography 75
dreams 160, 162, 342, 344–346, 349, 357n23, 369
Druart, Thérèse-Anne 10, 13, 249, 474, 477, 487n9
dulia 134, 135, 138–139
Dunlop, D. M. 290n7
eidos see forms
Elamrani-Jamal, Abdelali 422n7
emanationism: in Albert 373–375; attributed to Aristotle 46n14; in
Avicenna 91, 162, 237, 373, 375
Empedocles 81, 82, 84
Endress, Gerhard 81, 471, 489n49, 489n56
English Reformation 446n4
Esots, Janis 12
essence: of God 77, 79–82, 151, 152–
153, 158, 165; ontologically primary
substances as 61
estimative faculty 257, 356n10, 458, 461, 466
Eustathius 114, 115
Eustratius of Nicaea 372, 373
excluded middle, principle of 247, 248, 249, 261n4
Existential Principle 458–459, 460
Fakhry, Majid 487n6
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ 6, 8, 10, 76, 142n1, 281–282, 498n1; Albert influenced by 372–
373; Averroes critiquing 411, 412, 413, 422n9; Averroes’ knowledge
of Aristotle mediated by 477, 486; Bacon influenced by 13, 91, 92, 93, 106–107, 110n12, 110n13; editions of works by 290n1, 290n7, 291n13, 291n17; elephant and camel
metaphors in 356n15; on the First
Cause 237; on grammarians 281, 283; on imagination 345–346, 356n20; on music 109; personal pronouns as
used by 281–282; Plato influencing
111n34; on poetics 108–109, 279; re-ordering Aristotle’s Organon 477;
see also al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, syllogistic arts in; al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, works of
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, syllogistic arts in 15, 276, 278; Aristotle’s influence on
277–278, 281, 283, 285; in the
Book of Dialectic 277, 286–289; and
the dialectic arts 276, 277, 279, 286–288; diverging from Aristotle
278; and first intelligibles 285, 287, 289; in the Five Aphorisms 15, 277, 282–286, 288, 290n7; and generally
accepted opinions 285, 287, 288, 289; induction and 290n5; influence
of 290n3; knowledge prior to 276, 277, 284, 285–288, 289; language’s
role in 278, 281–283, 288–289; in
the Letter 278–282, 284; logic as
defined in 279–280, 281; vs. manual
arts 277, 278; “people of the art of
logic” in 281–282; philosophical 279, 280; practitioners of 281; Qurʾaˉnic
allusion in 284–285; and received
tradition 284–285; rhetorical 279; science dependent on 280, 289; and sense perception 285, 286–287, 289; sophistical 279; subjects and
predicates in 279, 280–281, 282
al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, works of: Book of
Demonstration 277, 278; Book of
Dialectic 277, 286–288; Book of the
Eisagoge 278; Book of Resolution 277,
278; Book of Sophistical Places 277,
278; Book of Syllogism 277, 278; De
scientiis 13, 107, 109, 110n9; Five
Aphorisms 15, 277, 282–286, 288, 290n7; On the Harmonization of the
Opinions of the Two Sages 22n16, 237; Letter with which the Book Begins 15,
277, 278–282, 283, 284
First Agent 80, 86n25, 396–397, 403n23
First Cause: Albert on 363, 380n2, 384n47; as auto kath’ auto of being
233, 234; in emanationism 373–375, 384n47; forms and 49n39, 227–229, 232, 234–235, 252, 374–375, 397; Intellect as effect of 226–227, 228–
229, 231–233; in Plotiniana Arabica
241n33, 395, 401; as pure being 226, 228, 233, 234–237; as simple and
knowing 227–228, 242n38; see also
the Necessary Being; Prime Mover
first intelligibles 257, 284, 285, 287
Index 509
First Principle see the Necessary Being; Prime Mover
fit․ra 335
Fontaine, Resianne 480, 481, 489n47
“formative faculty” 355n3
forms 70n2; in Aristotle 56, 59, 60–70, 71n20; Averroes on reception of
342–343, 346–347; Avicenna on 250, 258, 266n36; Demiurge and 57–59, 60–62, 65–66, 68, 70n5, 71n13; as eternal 259; First Cause and
49n39, 227–229, 232, 234–235, 252, 374–375, 397; in late Neoplatonism
56; as material 64–65; vs. matter 225,
296, 297, 299–300, 302; as objects
vs. subjects 64–65; “participated” 59, 64; and perceptibles 61, 68; pre-
demiurgic 56, 60, 66–67, 69, 71n13; pre-existent 77–79; in sacramental
theology 309–310; seated in the
Intellect 228–229; spiritual vs.
corporeal 346; as substances 61, 71n20, 72n37; in Timaeus 57; as
universals 59–60, 68, 70n5; universals
distinct from 62, 63–64, 67, 69; and
the Word 78; see also universals
Fortin, Ernest 110n7
Foucault, Michel 22n11
free will 450–451, 452–453, 454, 464
Galen 118, 119, 123, 125; Alexander
refuting 119, 125; On the Usefulness of
the Parts 337
Galonnier, Alain 109, 110n9
genus 62–63, 72n26
Gerard of Cremona 15, 106, 110n9, 225, 293
Gerson, Lloyd 70n4
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ 92, 110n10, 155, 166, 264n25; Albert and 364, 373; Averroes correcting 332, 334, 336, 338n7, 428n43; on dialectic 332; on
God’s creation of the world 452–453, 456, 457; see also al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, works of
al-Ghazaˉlıˉ, works of: Maqıˉs․
id al-Falaˉsifa
428n43; Mishkaˉt al-anwaˉr 151, 159, 175n35; Tahaˉfut 163, 175n34, 416
Gilson, Étienne 91, 443
Glasner, Ruth 127n31, 485; on
Averroes’ sources 120, 122; on classification of Averroes’ commentaries 475, 478, 480–481, 491n65; on evolution of Averroes’ thought 125
God 46n17; anthropomorphizing
152–153, 154, 174n28, 174n29; of
Aristotle 47n17, 162, 174n34; see
also Prime Mover; attributes of
150–154, 157–161, 162, 164–166, 174n28; as celestial soul 45n2, 46n17; composition of 150, 165–166; corporeality of 140, 150–151, 152, 158–159, 162–164, 174n28, 338n15; creating by mere being 395–396; creatures and 295, 299, 463–464; essence of 77, 79–82, 151, 152–153, 158, 165; as eternal 452; existence
of 107, 125, 156–157, 162–163, 166; heavenly bodies arranged
by 452, 453, 459–460, 468n37; ineffability of 240n15; knowledge
of the changeable by 158, 160, 166; knowledge of particulars by
158, 159–160, 174n34; light and
159, 175n35; vs. nondivine creators
80; simplicity and immutability of
396, 397–398, 399–400, 404n41, 454, 462–464; throne of 152–153, 173n25; triune 95, 97, 103, 104; unity
of 157, 235–236, 295–299, 300–301, 303, 454; universe imitating 30, 45n9; will of 160, 166, 396, 403n23, 404n24, 452–453; see also creation; see also agent intellect; creation; First
Cause; Prime Mover; sacraments; worship of God
Goldin, Owen 11–12
Golitsis, Pantelis 47n21, 48n34, 62, 66, 67
Gourinat, Jean-Baptiste 41
grace, causality of 308, 309, 310–317, 319n27; see also sacraments
Grosseteste, Richard 142n11, 204, 221n109, 221n110
Gundissalinus, De unitate et uno of 16,
294; attributed to Boethius 294, 298–299; diverging from Boethius
299; hylomorphism in 295–297, 298, 299–300; Ibn Gabirol’s influence
on 16, 294, 296, 297; influence of
299; quantity in 298, 302, 303–304; structure of 295; translation of 299–
304; types of unity in 298, 300–301; unity vs. union in 295, 296–297, 300
Gundissalinus, Dominicus 304n5; access
of, to Arabic sources 294; al-Faˉraˉbıˉ
rendered by 110n9; Avicenna
de-islamicized by 106; Avicenna
510 Index
influencing 294; role of, in European
philosophy 293–294
Gundissalinus, Dominicus, works
of: De divisione philosophiae 105;
De processione mundi 16, 297; Fons
vitae translated by 294; see also
Gundissalinus, De unitate et uno of
Gutas, Dimitri 160, 419–420, 425n31, 426n35, 487n14, 488n35, 490n62
Guthrie, W. K. C. 29
Guyomarc’h, Gweltaz 49n39
Hackett, Jeremiah M. G. 109, 110n7
Al-H․akam II 425n32
Halevi, Judah 424n21, 425n31
Halper, Yehuda 476, 478
Hamlyn, David W. 50n43
H․
anbalism 147, 154
Hansberger, Rotraud 355n2, 356n9, 403n16
al-h․aqıˉqa 250, 257–258, 259, 268n53; semantic range of 262n8, 262n10; synonyms of 247, 264n25
al-h․aqq 246–248, 255–256, 258, 262n8, 263n10
al-Harawıˉ 175n35
Hartmann, Nicolai 366
Harvey, Steven 10, 19–20, 424n21
h․
ashwiyya 156, 334
Hasse, Dag Nikolaus 190, 194, 206, 212n39, 218n86, 221n111
heaven 151–154, 163, 173n12, 173n20, 174n29, 334–335
heavenly bodies 124–125, 126; and
astral determinism 374, 375; celestial
soul moving 29–32, 33–41, 45, 47n21, 47n31, 49n40, 49n41; desire
of, to assimilate to God 29–30, 42–44, 45; as First Principle 164; God
as commander of 162–163; as gods
46n17; God’s choice in arranging
452, 453, 459–460, 468n37; and the
Principle of the Causality of the
Maximum 49n39; as self-moving 12, 32–33, 47n31, 98, 114; source cause
of motion of 41–42, 44–45
Heraclitus 84
Hermann the German 108, 448n32
Hermes Mercurius 103
h․
ilya 228, 239n9; confused with hyle
15, 225; definition of 225–226; of
First Cause 228, 233, 235; kulliyya
replacing 238n4, 238n5; see also First
Cause; Liber de causis
historical consciousness 21n9
historical epistemology 21n6
historicism 3, 21n9
historiographies 11–13, 19; diverging
types of 1, 20n1; judgment of 2, 6, 9; texts useful for 6–7
history: of “Aquinas and the Arabs” 7, 20, 23n24, 130, 142n1, 495–497; medieval scholars’ views of 10, 176n50; as non-teleological 6, 23n21; tradition kept alive by 1–2; transmission 370–371, 419–420
holism 8
Hoover, Jon 167, 172n10, 176n49
horaton 185, 209n19
Houser, Edward 497
Hübener, Wolfgang 443–444, 448n30
al-H․udhayl 82
Hugh of St. Cher 321n49, 321n58
Hugh of St. Victor 16, 313–314, 318n8; on creation and salvation 321n53; institution in 308–309, 310–314, 315, 316–317, 321n49; preparation in 314, 317
Hugon, R. P. 318n5
the human: intellect 49n41, 375–376, 377–378, 387n70; limitations of, in
understanding God 463–464; qua
human 363, 367, 371–372, 383n35
the “human factor” 2, 4, 10
H․
unayn ibn Ish․aˉq 393–394
hyle 15, 225, 398
hylomorphism 31–32, 69, 134, 141, 225; in Albert the Great 320n39; Aquinas
on 225, 239n8; in Boethius 299; in
color theories 195; unity understood
in relation to 295
hyperdulia 139
Iamblichus 60
Iberia, migrations within 293
Ibn Abıˉ Us․aybiʿa 425n33
Ibn al-Rawandıˉ 154
Ibn Baˉjja see Avempace (Ibn Baˉjja)
Ibn Daud, Abraham 293, 415, 424n25, 424n29
Ibn Fuˉrak 175n35
Ibn Gabirol: as Arab philosopher 130; on the First Cause 226; Fons vitae 16,
294, 297; Gundissalinus influenced
by 16, 294, 296, 297
Ibn Kullaˉb 152–153, 173n25
Ibn Naˉʾima H․ims․ıˉ 18, 393, 394, 402, 403n9, 403n10
Index 511
Ibn Rushd see Averroes (Ibn Rushd)
Ibn Sıˉnaˉ see Avicenna (Ibn Sıˉnaˉ)
Ibn Taymiyya: on arguments for God’s
existence 162–164; on Aristotle 154, 158, 162, 163, 167, 174n34; and
Averroes, generally 148, 167–168, 176n49; and Averroes’ Fas․
l 148–149,
172n8; Averroes’ Kashf used by
148–159, 172n10; and Averroes’ Masʾala (D․
amıˉma) 148, 158, 159–161; Averroes’ Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut used by
148, 150–151, 159, 160, 161–166, 173n18; on Avicenna 150, 151, 154–
155, 156, 158, 160–162, 164–167; background of 147; on creation
161–164, 174n31; on direction
149–150, 153–154, 159, 160, 173n12, 173n20; on existence 149–150; on
God’s knowledge of particulars 158, 159–160, 174n34; on incoherence
between Islamic schools 160–161; on
kalaˉm 148–149, 150, 156, 157, 166, 167, 168; on philosophy, generally
155, 176n50; on philosophy and
theology 153, 160–161, 167, 172n9, 174n34, 175n48; on the Qurʾaˉn 149, 157, 167, 172n9, 173n13, 173n20; reception of 147–148, 172n1; on
revelation 148–149, 152, 156–157, 159, 161, 167–168; as
theologian 175n48; see also Ibn
Taymiyya, works of
Ibn Taymiyya, Darʾ of 13, 148, 172n4; Fas․
l not quoted in 148–149, 167; Kashf quoted in 148, 149–159; Masʾala quoted in 148, 158, 159–161; Tahaˉfut al-tahaˉfut quoted in 148,
150–151, 159, 160, 161–166
Ibn Taymiyya, works of: Averting
Contradiction between Reason and
Revelation see Ibn Taymiyya, Darʾ of;
Bayaˉn talbıˉs al-Jahmiyya 148–149, 167, 172n10, 173n12; Epistle
176n50
Ibn T․ufayl 8, 415, 424n22, 425n31, 483, 484
Ibn Tuˉmart 173n10
Iconoclasm 131, 133–134, 138, 139
icons 139–140
idea see forms
Ierodiakonou, Katerina 199
images in worship: of Christ 139–140, 141; forbidden 140; use of 12, 131, 133–134, 138–141
imagination see Averroes, the
imaginative faculty in
Inati, Shams 263n19
incarnation 95, 97, 103, 313
innovations 9, 10, 17–20; new
disciplines as 19–20
institution, sacraments and 308, 309, 310–315, 316–318, 319n24, 320n33, 320n45, 321n48
the Intellect 57–58; actualization
of 377; and agent intellect 364, 375–376; Aristotelian doctrine of
367, 371, 372; Aristotelian doctrine
of, vs. Platonic 363–364; and body, as
connected 367, 369, 371; and body, as separate 366, 371, 376; as capacity
377–378; cosmic vs. human 49n39,
58; creation through 232; as effect of
the First Cause 226–227, 228–229, 231–233; emanationist theories of
58, 67, 237, 373–375; and eternal
life 363, 380n2; expressed as h․
ilya
233; as form 377–378; formation
of 370; forms seated in 228–229; and hierarchy of intelligences
227, 240n21; human 365–372; in
Liber de causis 226–228, 231–234, 240n21, 364, 372, 373; mediation
by 228, 232–233, 234; metaphysics
of 366; motion of 403n21; in ordo
rationis 368, 382n26; participated
vs. unparticipated 58–59, 62, 65; particular vs. Universal 83–84, 372, 376–378, 379, 386n60; passive 366, 377, 381n15, 387n70; power of
230, 233; practical vs. speculative
101; Pseudo-Ammonius on 76, 78, 80–82; science of 363–365, 366–367; as separate substance 227; shape
possessed by 233; transmission of
forms to 397; unity of 230, 297, 301, 302, 371–372, 376–377, 379; see also Albert the Great, De intellectu
et intelligibili of; Albert the Great, intellect in
intellection 260, 276, 358n38, 369; cause of 33–38, 44–45, 49n40; of
form 57–58; of God 227, 252; as
relational 254–255, 266n35; see also
desire
intelligible realm 227, 229, 231
intelligibles: Albert prioritizing intellect
over 368–369; cause of 36–37, 43, 49n40, 50n41; first 257, 284, 285,
512 Index
287; intellect extracted from 377; knowing 57; light and 208; orders of
38, 121; received 287; relation of, to
images 410
interdependence, transformation and
21n4
interfaith dialogue 497
“internal senses” 355n2; see also
Averroes, the imaginative faculty in
Ish․aˉq ibn H․unain 394, 489n40
Islam: Bacon misunderstanding 93, 97, 103–104, 106, 107–108, 111n33; creation in 161–164, 166, 174n31; see also creation; five pillars of 102, 104, 111n23; God’s attributes in
150–153; heaven in 151–154, 163, 173n12, 173n20, 174n29, 334–335; Iconoclasm in 133, 138; John of
Damascus on 133, 142n11; literalists
within 156; prophet and clergy
in 95–96, 97, 103, 104, 107–108; revelation in 148–149, 152, 156–162, 166, 172n9; see also Qurʾaˉn; role of
philosophy in 16–17, 172n9, 326, 329–332, 496; and the Salaf 156, 162, 168, 173n20; Sunnıˉ vs. Shiʿite 154
Ismaˉʿıˉlıˉ thought 12, 75–76, 85, 154; God’s will in 81–82; ibdaˉʿ in 76–81;
Qarmaˉt․
ıˉ 84; return or reversion in
83–84; T․ayyibıˉ 83, 84
Israeli, Isaac 373
Ivry, Alfred 473, 474, 477, 478, 487n9, 487n14, 491n65
jadal see dialectic
James of Venice 185, 199, 201
Janssens, Jules 13, 91, 421n2, 421n3, 422n5
jawaˉmiʿ, 114, 472, 480, 486, 487n6, 490n60
Johannes Hispanus 293, 294
John of Damascus 12–13, 130; Aquinas
influenced by 131, 134–141; as Arab
philosopher 131, 134, 141, 142n1, 142n12; Aristotelianism of 132, 134, 141; background of 130–131; on
exterior religious worship 135–138; family of 131–132; on images in
worship 133–134, 138–140; Islamic
context of 132, 138; theory of
worship developed by 131–134; translation of works by 132; see also
John of Damascus, works of
John of Damascus, works of: De fide
orthodoxa 133, 134, 141; Dialectica
132; A Dispute Between a Saracen
and a Christian 142n11; On Heresies
132–133; On Images 133–134, 137
John the Grammarian see Philoponus
(John the Grammarian)
John XXII, Pope 436, 446n8
Jolivet, Jean 262n8
Jorissen, Hans 320n39
al-Juwaynıˉ 149, 154, 156, 174n31, 333, 334
al-Juˉzjaˉnıˉ 19, 409, 417–421
kalaˉm: Averroes critiquing 150, 327, 332–336; Christian engagement with
142n11; as failed dialectic 332–336; Ibn Taymiyya on 148–149, 150, 156, 157, 166, 167, 168; the Kullaˉbiyya
and 152; Muʿtazilites and 153–154
Kalderon, Mark Eli 209n8
Kalonymos ben Kalonymos 121, 122
the Karraˉmiyya 154, 174n28
Kaufmann, David 121
al-Khayyaˉt 154
al-Kindıˉ 22n16, 81, 142n1, 255, 498n1; Albert influenced by 364, 372; circle
of, translations by 75, 85n1, 230–231, 237, 241n28, 259, 393–394; Plotiniana
Arabica edited by 18, 85n1, 393, 402, 403n10
Kirmaˉnıˉ, H․ amıˉd al-Dıˉn 76, 82, 84
Kitaˉb al-khayr al-mah․d․ 80
Kleven, Terence J. 15
knowledge: in the afterlife 370; beginning in the senses 134, 137–138, 141, 285; divine 232, 236; first intelligibles as 285; generally
accepted opinions as 285; received
tradition as 284–285; as a relation
253; self- 166, 372; theoretical vs.
practical 246; through forms, not
matter 302; see also Avicenna, truth in
Kosman, Aryeh 29, 45n3
Krause, Katja 8, 205
the Kullaˉbiyya 152–153
de Lagarde, Georges 442, 443
Lameer, Josep 111n18
Lanfranc of Bec 319n9
language: in Farabian logic 278–283, 288, 289; of logic vs. religion 443; nontechnical 56–57, 69; opinions
Index 513
embedded in 288; propositional
252–254; and translation 6, 103–104
latria 134–135, 136, 137, 138–140, 141
Leo XIII, Pope 498n2
Liber de causis 14–15, 225; Albert
influenced by 316–317, 322n63, 364, 372, 373, 374; annıˉyah faqat․
in context of 226–234; Aquinas on
225–226, 238n3, 238n7; attributed
to Aristotle 225, 373, 374; Being and
Good in 233–234; “Greek Sage” and 234–237, 242n39; hierarchy of
rulers in 230–231, 240n16, 240n19, 241n30; Intellect’s nature and activity
in 226–228, 231–234, 240n21, 364, 372, 373; Neoplatonism of 227, 228, 234–237; numbering of propositions
in 238n2; Plotinus inspiring 228, 229–230, 231, 234–237, 241n27; Proclus inspiring 225, 226–227, 228, 229–230, 237, 238n3; source of
annıˉyah faqat․ in 234–237; see also h․
ilya
light: and bodies 183, 193–194, 199, 208, 215n62; Bonaventure on 182, 197, 198, 199, 206; color-actualizing
role of, generally 189, 190–191, 193–200, 201–202, 205, 207, 208; color-actualizing role of, in Aristotle
182, 184, 187, 196, 198, 202, 205, 209n13; as color-radiance 182, 195, 198, 205, 206; colors made visible by
181–184, 185–189, 192; compared
to agent intellect 184, 189; creation
of 404n47; God and 159, 175n35; Gundissalinus on 296–297, 302–303; and hierarchy of brightness 204–207; inhering as brightness vs. color
199–200; luminous vs. radiant 190,
212n38, 212n39; metaphors of 181, 184, 208, 374–375, 377; objects made
visible by 181, 182, 184; ontology
of 207; as passive 182, 184, 186, 189; receiver-disposing role of 182, 184, 187–190, 194–195, 199, 201, 202–204, 208, 212n40; “return” of particles of 83, 84; Scholastic
reception of theories of 195–207; sources of 182, 186, 189, 195, 198–200; sources on 182, 205–207; Thomas Aquinas on 182, 197–198, 199, 201, 206; translation issues
regarding 190, 194, 199, 201–202, 205, 212n39, 219n97; translucent
bodies and 193–194; transparency
of 183, 185–186, 188, 194–196, 199, 202, 209n8, 212n39; and types of
visibility 187–189; see also Albert
the Great, light in; Aristotle, light in; Averroes, light in; Avicenna, light in; color
liminal spaces 7–8, 9–10, 11
Lindberg, David 212n35, 212n39
Lizzini, Olga L. 15
logic: Christian works on 132; vs.
dialectic 410, 412–413, 422n5, 422n11, 422n13; and ontological
vs. logical truth 247–249, 255–256, 269n74; see also demonstration
logoi: as causes of things 63; demiurgic
59, 60–61, 63, 65–68, 71n21, 72n28, 72n37; forms as 59, 60, 61, 65, 66–67, 68
López-Farjeat, Luis Xavier 8, 497
Louis de Valladolid 370
Lucchetta, Francesca 426n35
Macfarland, Joseph C. 110n7
Maimonides 130, 142n1, 495, 498n1
Maloney, Thomas S. 100, 110n7
Manichaeanism 83, 88n45
Mansuˉr Ibn Sarjuˉn see John of
Damascus
Mantino, Jacob 121
Marius Victorinus 402
Marmura, Michael 119
Marquette University 495, 496, 497
al-Marraˉkushıˉ 483–484, 489n55, 490n60
Marsilius of Padua, Defensor pacis of 19,
436; Aristotle’s Politics influencing
436, 438, 441, 445–446; Averroes and
437, 443–445, 448n30; Ciceronian
influence on 445, 446n2; civil life
in 437, 438–440, 441–442, 445; dedication of 446n8; demonstration
in 436, 437–442, 445; as heretical
446n6; method in 437–442; Posterior
Analytics influencing 437–438, 445; on priesthood 437, 441–442; on
revelation 439, 440–441, 442; the
self-evident in 437, 439, 440, 442; the
temporal vs. the spiritual in 440–442; translation of, into English 446n4
Marsilius of Padua, education of
446n10
Martijn, Marije 65–66
514 Index
Martini, Cecilia 114–115
Massa, Eugenio 100, 110n7, 110n8, 110n9
matter: color bound to 202–204; contrary to unity 296, 297, 300, 301–302; vs. forms 225, 296, 297, 299–300, 302; receiving forms 314–
315, 318n5; in sacraments 309, 310, 311–314, 315, 316–317; and separate
substances 225–226; souls informing
297, 301–302
maxims, theories becoming 207
McCarthy, Donald 110n7
McGinnis, Jon 19, 125, 190, 193
McKeon, Richard 110n7
Meersseman, Gilles 308
Mélanges 496
memory and the imaginative faculty
343–344, 345, 352–353, 355, 356n13
Menn, Stephen 427n40
Meno paradox 253
metaphysics vs. theology 269n73; see
also Aristotle, Metaphysics of
methodology: of Aristotelian scholars
9; Aristotle on 4; implicit decisions
about 9–10; for judging Aristotelian
commentators 4; of modern
scholars 10; see also source-based
contextualism
Michot, Yahya M. 176n50
minima naturalia 125
the moderni 408–412; see also Averroes, Long Commentary on the De anima of
Moralis philosophia (Bacon): al-Faˉraˉbıˉ
in 91, 92, 93, 106–107, 108–109, 111n34; anti-Judaism in 101, 107; Arabic influences on 13, 91–92, 109; Avicenna in 91–93, 95–96, 97–106, 107–108, 109; creation in 97–98, 103; editions 110n7; ethnic and religious
groups in 106–107, 108, 111n33; human relation to God in 94–104; human relation to other people in
104–105, 111n35; introduction to
95; law in 104–105; Opus tertium and
109; our relation to ourselves in 105–
106; poetics in 93, 108–109; practical
section of 106–108; seventeen
principles of 95–97; six principles of
95, 97–104; structure of 93
moral philosophy: Avicenna on 94, 103, 109; salvation and 95, 106; see also
Moralis philosophia (Bacon)
Moraux, Paul 49n41
Moses, political power of 439
motion: Alexander on 12, 38, 44, 46n14, 48n34, 49n40, 49n41, 119–120; Alexander on, Averroes
influenced by 30–35, 41–42, 119, 122–123; of animals 47n30, 114, 116–117, 122–123, 124; circular 38, 40, 429n47; color and 185–189; of
four elementary bodies 114, 119, 120, 122–123, 124, 126; of heavens
see heavenly bodies; Prime Mover; of the Intellect 403n21; per se vs.
accidentally 12, 33, 118, 119–120, 122–123, 124, 126; and primary
movables 118–120, 122–124, 126; see
also causality; Prime Mover
Moulin, Isabelle 16
mukhtas․araˉt 114, 472, 486, 488n31
Munk, Salomon 485, 490n62
murtad․ayan 284
music 109
mutakallimuˉn 17; Averroes on 17, 157, 173n12, 326, 333, 336; on creation
79, 156; on divine attributes 152, 158, 159, 160; see also kalaˉm
mutammam 465, 468n38
mutaʾakhkhir 412
Muʿaˉwiya 131
Muʿtazilite thought 81–82, 87n36, 155, 156, 162, 174n29; Averroes on 332, 333, 428n44; vs. eternalist philosophy
174n31; on God’s attributes 150, 151, 153–154, 236; Plotiniana Arabica and
393
Nasafıˉ 76, 78, 80, 84, 85
natural philosophy: in Avicenna, Averroes on 408, 412–415, 416–421; disciplines of 369; and metaphysics, unification of 366–367; the soul in
381n23; see also Albert the Great, De
intellectu et intelligibili of
nature: design in 338n14; form of
297; in hierarchy of rulers 230–231, 240n16, 240n19, 241n28, 241n30
al-Naz․z․aˉm 82
the Necessary Being: attributes of
164–165, 267n49; Avicenna on 237, 248–249, 256–257, 259–260, 261; free will of 450–451, 452–453, 454, 464; and the world’s age 450
Neoplatonism 6; “forms” in 56–62, 374–375; in the Liber de causis 14–15;
and Neoplatonic causality 228–229;
Index 515
Plato and Aristotle harmonized in
60–62; in Plotiniana Arabica 398; the
Prime Mover in 30; in Theology of
Aristotle 393–394
non-contradiction, principle of 247, 248, 249, 250, 259–260, 261n4, 269n74
North, John D. 91, 108, 111n33
nous 251, 252, 263n15
Oliva, Adriano 497
One with Pure Being 14–15
optics 208n1
ordo rationis 368, 382n26
origins of Aristotelianism 9, 10, 11–13
Oschman, Nicholas A. 8
overflow, metaphor of 57
papal power: English Reformation
and 446n4; Ockham and Dante
critiquing 446n6; plenitudo potestatis
436, 440–441, 445
Parens, Joshua 110n7
particulars: form uniting 56, 57, 59, 60, 69; God knowing 77, 158, 159–160, 174n34; vs. universals 62–63
passive intellect 366, 377, 381n15, 387n70
Paulus, Jean 44, 48n31
peirastikeˉ 288, 291n18
perception 482; desire and 31; of form
258, 356n11; of God 77–78; of
heavenly delight 100, 101; in the
hierarchy of being 373; imagination
and 342–347, 350–351, 352–354, 355, 358n52, 376; received 286–287, 289; see also light
perfection 227, 233–234
Peripatetics: anti-Avicennist 160, 161; authority of 373; old vs. recent, in Albert 372–373; philosophical
psychology in 363–364
Peter Lombard 309–310, 311, 319n15, 319n24
Petrus Hispanus 203
Philoponus (John the Grammarian)
11–12, 48n38, 384n43, 398; on Aristotle and Plato 65–69; Christianity of 70; dating texts by
56, 62; De anima commentary of
62–63, 67, 395; on demiurgic logoi
65–67, 72n28, 72n37; diverging from
Ammonius 72n25; on forms 62–69; the genus in 62–63, 72n26; on light
404n47; Neoplatonic background of
57–62; Posterior Analytics commentary
of 63–67; Against Proclus’ On the
Eternity of the World 67–69, 72n37; universals vs. particulars in 62–63, 67
philosophical psychology 14, 18; Avicennian framework for 458; in
Marsilius 441–442; see also Albert
the Great, intellect in; Averroes, the
imaginative faculty in; light
philosophy, religion and 93, 94, 445–446, 454, 462
“Philosophy in the Abrahamic
Traditions of the Middle Ages” (PATMA) 23n24
Pines, Shlomo 119, 404n49
Plato: and Aristotle, harmonization of
60–62, 63, 66, 69–70; Aristotle in
dialogue with 5, 11–12; in medieval
scholarship 6; and pre-demiurgic
forms 56, 71n13, 71n20; Pseudo-
Ammonius and 81, 82; Socrates
misunderstood by 68; see also Plato, works of
Plato, works of: Meno 69; Sophist
266n41; Symposium 98; Timaeus 57,
66, 227, 373, 374–375, 396, 400
plenitudo potestatis 436, 440–441, 445
Plotiniana Arabica 18, 85n1, 237; authorship and development of
393, 401–402; creation by mere
being in 395–396, 397, 398; creation
in, generally 18, 241n33, 241n34, 396–399; doctrine of 395–398; First
Principle in 241n33, 395, 401; Greek
sources of doctrine in 398–399, 400–401; instantaneous creation in
396–399; interpolations in 393, 394; al-Kindıˉ editing 18, 85n1, 393, 402, 403n10; structure of 394; see also
Theology of Aristotle
Plotinus 15, 48n32, 69; Demiurge in
57–58; Enneads 18, 230, 234, 393–
395, 402, 405n52; First Principle in
395; the Good in 234; Islamicization
of 402, 405n52; On the One, or
the Good 235–236; polytheism in
405n52; and Sayings of the Greek
Sage 397; “scattered quotations” of
80; On the Three Hypostases That Are
Principles 234–235; three principles of
230, 241n27; translation of 234–237, 393–395; on will of God 403n21
Plutarch 78, 81–82
516 Index
poetics 91, 93, 108–109, 278, 280
Polansky, Roland 210n23
“Political Averroism” 443–445, 448n30
political philosophy: of Averroes 443–
444; demonstration in 436, 437–442, 443, 445; and “Political Averroism” 443–445, 448n30; see also Marsilius of
Padua, Defensor pacis of
Polloni, Nicola 16
Popper, Karl 21n9
Porphyry 132; as author of Theology of
Aristotle 393, 394, 401–402, 404n49; Commentary on the Parmenides of 395;
on creation by being alone 398–399, 400–401
power: infinite 38–40, 102, 235–236; nonmaterial 38–39, 40
prayer 102–103, 131, 136, 141, 143n14
predicates: and predicables 295; types of
280–281
Prime Mover 10, 11, 12; Albert on
47n25; Alexander on 31–38, 41, 43–44, 46n12, 46n14, 48n32; in
Aristotle 29–33, 41–44, 45n3, 46n14, 47n25, 49n39, 50n54, 162, 335; Averroes on 30–32, 38–41, 42–45, 46n12, 125, 153; contemporary
scholarship on 29–30; divergent
meanings of 47n25; efficient causality
of, defenses of 30–31; as final and
source cause 41–42, 44, 46n12, 48n32; Ibn Taymiyya rejecting 162; as intellect 33–41; as intelligibles’ efficient cause 36–37, 49n40; in Liber
de causis 227, 230, 231–232; as maker
41, 43, 50n45; as object of desire
29–31, 35, 38, 43–45, 48n31, 48n34, 162, 232; as self-mover 32–33, 45n3; as world soul 45n3
principle of the excluded middle 247, 248, 249, 261n4
principle of non-contradiction 247, 248, 249, 250, 259–260, 261n4, 269n74
principle of sufficient reason 452, 455–458, 460, 462, 463, 465–467, 467n4
principle of the causality of the
maximum 49n39
Proclus 58–60, 63, 64; and Ammonius
12, 48n34, 57, 60, 71n13, 71n21; Avicenna influenced by 164, 267n51; on the Demiurge 58–59, 70n5; demiurgic logoi in 59, 72n28; Elements of Theology 225, 226–227, 238n3, 240n16, 394; On the Eternity
of the World 398; on Henads 240n16; Philoponus’ polemic against 67–69, 72n37; on Porphyry 398–399
properties 302, 310; causes of 229; colors as 185–186, 191, 196–197, 198, 207; as descriptive, not defining
280–281; of the imaginative faculty
344–345; intrinsic vs. extrinsic
459–461; and sacraments 309, 311
prophecy 154–155, 335–336; Bacon on
96, 100, 102, 107–108; imaginative
346; as truth 149, 166, 167
Pseudo-Alexander 49n40
Pseudo-Ammonius: Abuˉ H․
aˉtim Raˉzıˉ
and 76, 81; Aˉraˉʾ al-falaˉsifa 75–85; on
creation 76–81; on God’s will and
action 81–82; polemic in 85; on
return/reversion 83–84
Pseudo-Aristotle 79, 81, 231–232, 237, 241n28, 255
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite see
Dionysius the Areopagite
Pseudo-Faˉraˉbıˉ 79
Puig Montada, Josep 12, 425n32
qis․
s․
ur 483
Quero-Sánchez, Andrés 381n15
Qurʾaˉn: allegory in 331; “delightful
one” in 284–285; Gabriel in 97, 104; God’s existence in 157; heaven
in 153; Ibn Taymiyya on 149, 157, 167, 172n9, 173n13, 173n20; John
of Damascus quoting 133; symbolic
interpretation of 173n20
Rachak, Jamal 497
Raˉfid․ites 154, 174n29
Rashed, Marwan 22n16, 34
al-Raˉzıˉ, Fakhr al-Dıˉn 19, 81, 85, 155, 159, 174n31, 175n37; al-Ghazaˉlıˉ
and 452–453; on God’s creation
of the world 450, 451–453, 457, 458–459, 464; Ishaˉraˉt commentary
of 454; Muh․as․s․
al of 450–453, 456, 463, 464–467; al-T․uˉsıˉ’s response to
459–462
“recipient culture” 20n1
“reference culture” 20n1
Reisman, David C. 174n32
religio 134, 135–136
religion: dialectic in 326; external acts
of 133–138, 141; Iconoclasm in 131,
Index 517
133–134, 138, 139; and philosophy, relation between 93, 94, 445–446, 454, 462; prayer and 102–103, 131, 136, 141, 143n14; subordinated to
demonstration 19, 442–443, 445–
446; true, Bacon on 93, 106, 107, 108, 109; see also Ashʿarite theology; Christianity; God; Islam; sacraments; Theology of Aristotle
Renan, Ernest 485, 490n62
representation: conceptual 249, 250–257, 262n10; and imagination
346–347, 358n49; institution and
313–314, 316, 317, 321n48; and
signification 310, 313, 316, 317–318, 320n47
Rescher, Nicholas 119
Rescigno, Andrea 48n32
return or reversion 12, 83–84
Revel, Jean-Philippe 321n49
Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg 21n6
rhetoric 16, 334, 338n16; see also
dialectic
Richardson, Kara 467n4
Roland of Cremona 321n58
Romero Carrasquillo, Francisco J. 12–13
Rosenthal, Franz 119
Rosier-Catach, Irène 108, 109, 319n19
Ross, W. D. 29, 30, 44, 45n2, 115, 123
Rowson, Everett 84
Rudolph, Ulrich 75, 81, 83, 84
Rufus, Richard 203–204, 379
sacraments: definitions of 309–310; God
bound to 311, 312; institution and
308, 309, 310–315, 316–318, 319n24, 320n33, 320n45, 321n48; legitimacy
of 311; material dimension of 309, 310, 311–314, 315, 316–317; order
of 317, 322n63, 322n68; preparation
by 314, 315, 317; and signification
309–311, 312–313, 317, 319n15, 320n45
Saint Joseph University 496
the Salaf 156, 162, 168, 173n20
Saˉlim, Muh․ammad Rashaˉd 148, 172n4, 174n32
Salis, Rita 46n12, 49n40
salvation: creation and 313, 321n53; moral philosophy and 95, 106; sacraments and 308, 309, 311–312
Sayings of the Greek Sage 396, 397
Schleiermacher, Friedrich 22n11
Scot, Michael 125, 126, 409, 412, 413, 421n2
Second Council of Nicaea 133, 139
the self-mover 117–118, 123, 126
Sells, Michael 284
Seneca 93, 94, 103, 106
sensibles 342–343, 427n42; absence
of 17, 344–347, 351, 352–354; Avicenna on 99–101, 356n18, 427n42; colors as 197, 204, 209n19; and the common sense 348–350;
as involuntary 347–348; light as
noblest of 159; reception of 342–343; senses impeded by 357n31; universal
characteristics in 62; in worship
134–137
sensible world, attention to 99, 100, 105
sensory faculties 341, 342–343, 368, 371m 358n52; abstraction and
343–344, 345, 348, 353; imagination
superior to 342–343, 355; involuntary working of 347–348; knowledge beginning in 134, 137–
138, 141, 285; sensibles impeding
357n31
separate intelligence: in Alexander
33–38; in Averroes 38–41; in
Avicenna 98
separate substances 45n6, 267n51; First
Cause as 228; Intellect as 227; matter
and 225–226
Sergius of Reshʿaynaˉ 393
al-Shahrastaˉnıˉ 174n28
shakk 328, 331, 333
sharh․ 114, 472, 486, 487n6, 488n35
sharıˉʿa, outer and inner senses of 148
al-s․idq 247
signification: causality and 319n19; and
conception 250; and power 321n57; representation and 310, 313, 316, 317–318, 320n47; in sacramental
theology 309–311, 312–313, 317, 319n15, 320n45
Sijistaˉnıˉ see Abuˉ Yaʿquˉb Sijistaˉnıˉ
Silverman, Allan 210n19
Simonin, H.-D. 308
Simplicius 33, 34–35, 46n14, 48n34, 123
sin 99–100
Siraˉj al-Dıˉn al-Urmawıˉ 175n37
Société Internationale pour l’Étude
de la Philosophie Médiévale
(SIEPM) 497
Socrates 68
518 Index
sophistry 413, 414
Sorabji, Richard 59
Soto-Bruna, María Jesús 299
souls: Albert on 368, 374–375; Alexander on 29–30, 31–32, 45n7, 47n21, 49n39, 49n40; Averroes on 47n19; and bodies, as unity 99; vs. bodies 83–84, 100; definition of 62–63; “descended” vs. “undescended” 58; forms and
58–59, 60–61, 62–63, 65; “hatching” the nature of 315, 321n56; and
the heuristic hypothesis 29, 45n6; immortality of 95, 97, 98–99, 103; vs. Intelligence 38–39; light
and, in Ismaˉʿıˉlism 83, 84; matter
informed by 297, 301–302; in
natural philosophy 381n23; non-
hylomorphic 31–32; order of 302; particular vs. Universal 83–84; Prime
Mover as like 45n3; see also celestial
soul; heavenly bodies
source-based contextualism 4, 7, 181
Steinschneider, Moritz 482, 490n62
Stern, Samuel Miklos 75, 84
Stewart, Devin J. 284
Stoics 81, 83–84
Strauss, Leo 21n9
Stroumsa, Sarah 483, 484, 489n55
Suárez, Francisco 436, 446n5
substance: composite 64; forms as
61, 71n20, 72n37, 297; in Plato vs.
Aristotle 61; unity of 295–296
sufficient reason, principle of 452, 455–458, 460, 462, 463, 465–467, 467n4
the S․uˉfıˉs 464
syllogisms see demonstration; al-Faˉraˉbıˉ, syllogistic arts in
synthesis 16; Averroes on 343, 344, 356n14; Avicenna on 260–261
Syriac philosophical tradition 393
Syrianus 46n13, 48n34
systematic theology 16
tafsıˉr 114, 394, 401, 472, 486, 487n6, 488n35
t․
ah․qıˉq 262n6
Takahashi, Adam 46n17
al-takhayyul see Averroes, the
imaginative faculty in
talaˉkhıˉs․ 473, 480, 483, 484–485, 489n45, 490n60
Tamer, Georges 172n9, 175n48
Taylor, Richard C. 20, 30–31, 130; on
Aquinas and Liber de causis 14–15,
225–226, 228, 238n5, 238n7; on
Averroes 408–409, 421n3, 471, 478; on the Plotiniana Arabica 237, 241n34, 395; and source-based contextualism
4, 7, 181; see also “Aquinas and ‘the
Arabs’ International Working Group” (AAIWG)
taʾwıˉl 148, 167, 331
Tellkamp, Joerg Alejandro 19
temporality: Aristotelian 322n63; of
creation 333, 400–401, 451–454, 455, 460–461, 464; of the descended
soul 58; God’s knowledge of 175n34; in political thought 436, 440; in
Pseudo-Dionysius 242n38; and the
real possible 164
textualism 8
Thaˉbit Ibn Qurra 156, 174n32
Thales 77, 81, 82
Themistius 118, 384n43
theology: apophatic 79, 226; vs.
metaphysics 269n73; paucity of, in commentators 154–155; see
also Ashʿarite theology; religion; sacraments; Theology of Aristotle
Theology of Aristotle 231–232, 237, 241n28; authorship of 394, 401–402, 403n10, 404n49; creation in 396, 397, 399, 401; dating 394; prologue
of 393–395
Theophrastus 45n7
Thillet, Pierre 404n49
Thomas Aquinas 12–13, 29; Arabic
influence on 130, 131, 141, 308, 495, 497; Averroes’ influence on 201, 308, 495; on creation 464; on De
unitate et uno 299; exterior religious
worship in 134–138, 141; on God’s
existence 125; on hylomorphism
225, 239n8; on images in worship
138–140; instrumentality in 320n34; on intellect 18, 365–366, 386n60; and John of Damascus’ ethnicity
142n1, 142n12; John of Damascus
influencing 131, 134–141; on Liber
de causis 225–226, 238n3, 238n7; on
light 182, 197–198, 199, 201, 206; Principle of the Causality of the
Maximum in 49n39; on
sacraments 308, 312, 314, 320n34; see also Thomas Aquinas, works of
Index 519
Thomas Aquinas, works of: Commentary
on the Sentences 314, 496; Contra
Gentiles 137; De anima commentary
201; Posterior Analytics commentary
127n37; Quaestiones disputatae de
anima 201; Sentences commentary
134, 135; Summa theologiae
134, 135, 308
traditions: aliveness of 1, 5–6; development of 3, 10, 13–16; liminal
spaces in 7–8, 9–10, 11
transcendence: of Forms 61, 63; of
Prime Mover or First Cause 29, 158, 226, 232, 233, 234–237; of sensible
things 137
transformation 20n1, 21n4, 23n18; confirmation bias and 205–206, 207; “dissociated” 205
“translation movement” 293
translations 22n13, 205; of Aristotle
5–6, 23n18, 358n40, 380n11, 436, 438, 472; see also under Aristotle, De
anima of; of Averroes 116, 121–122, 126, 379, 438, 475, 479, 483, 489n40; see also under specific works;
of Avicenna 190, 207–208, 211n35, 212n39, 263n19, 266n46; see also
Avicenna, Kitaˉb al-Shifaˉʾ of; Avicenna, Metaphysics of the Shifaˉʾ of; of Defensor
pacis 446n4; by Gundissalinus 16, 294, 299–304; of John of Damascus 132; of al-Juwaynıˉ’s introduction to the
Shifaˉʾ 417; by al-Kindıˉ’s circle 85n1, 230–231, 237, 241n28, 259, 393–394; and language, generally 6, 103–104; of Liber de causis 14–15, 225–226; of
light 190, 194, 199, 201–202, 205, 212n39, 219n97; of Plotinus 18, 234–237, 393–395
Treiger, Alexandra 393
truth 15, 124; see also Avicenna, truth in
Tuozzo, Thomas 41
al-T․uˉsıˉ 19; on Avicenna, generally
450, 454–455, 458, 462–463; on
Avicenna’s al-Ishaˉraˉt wa-l-tanbıˉhaˉt
450, 451, 453–454, 455–457, 458; on
creation’s necessity 453; Existential
Principle of 458–459, 460; on
God choosing moment of creation
460–462; influence of 464; Muh․as․s․
al
commentary of 450, 451, 456, 457, 464–467; Principle of Sufficient
Reason of 452, 455–458, 460, 462, 463; Rawd․a-yi taslıˉm 463–464; theory
of action of 453–459, 462–463; on
world’s infinitude 450
Twetten, David 10, 11, 117, 495–496
unity 58, 255; causative power of 296, 299–300; definition of 295; divine
157, 236, 240n15, 296, 454; effects
of 297; of God 157, 235–236, 295–299, 300–301, 303, 454; of
the human being 99, 104, 495; of
the intellect 230, 297, 301, 302, 371–372, 376–377, 379; of intellect
and intelligible 368; vs. matter 296;
multiplicity springing from 57; vs.
plurality 303–304; quantity and 298; sacramental, of sign and causality
313; source of 229; types of 298, 303; vs. union 295, 296–297, 300; see also
Gundissalinus, De unitate et uno of;
hylomorphism
universals: “before the many” 59, 61; in
demonstrations 64–65; “in the many” 63–64; living beings as 62–63, 72n26; vs. particulars 62–63, 72n26, 295; Platonic forms as 59–60, 68, 70n5; Platonic forms distinct from 62, 63–64, 67, 69; in Proclus 59–60
al-Uskuˉbıˉ, Muh․ammad bin Ah․mad
290n1
Ust․
aˉth 489n40
Van Riet, Simone 110n8, 212n38
Verrycken, Koenraad 56, 62, 64, 66, 71n24
via eminentiae 227–228
visibility 184–185, 187–189, 190–191, 201, 209n19, 210n28; extromissive
vs. intromissive 14, 206–207, 212n35, 215n67; as luminosity 192, 208, 214n53; terminology of 207; see also
light
Vitalis Dactylomelos 121
Wakelnig, Elvira 234, 242n39
Walker, Paul 75–76, 84
Weisweiler, Heinrich 321n58
will 31; of God 160, 396, 403n23, 404n24, 452–453; see also creation; of
God, vs. of humans 166; and reason
455–458, 460, 462, 465–467
William of Moerbeke 199, 209n18, 220n97
Wisnovsky, Robert 249
Woerther, Frédérique 479
520 Index
Wolfson, Harry A. 471, 482
the Word (kalima) 78, 82
the world, age of 450, 468n35; causation and 450–451, 465; and
divine choice 462–464; al-Raˉzıˉ on
451–453, 459–462; S․uˉfıˉs on 464; and
al-T․uˉsıˉ’s theory of action
453–462
world soul 45n3, 404n31
worship of God: adoration 136–137, 141, 143n14; Aquinas on exterior
forms of 134–138, 141; Aquinas
on images in 138–140; Aquinas on
interior forms of 135–136; Bacon on
95, 101–102; devotion 136, 143n14; facing East 136, 141; images in 12, 131, 133–134, 138–141; prayer
102–103, 131, 136, 141, 143n14
Xenophanes 77–78
Yale Workshop on the Eternity of the
World 468n35
Yardley, Brett 20
Zeller, Eduard 29
Zeno 81
Zerah․ya ben Yish․aq She’altiel H․en
121, 122
Zimmermann, Fritz 403n10