at 
eae. 


ie: 


Dialectical Logic, the fruit 
of the author’s many years’ 
work on the history of dia- 
lectical logic, surveys essen- 
tial aspects of the Marxist- 
_ Leninist theory of dialectics. 
- Its thought-provoking ana- 


lysis and readable presen- 


tation of some of the most 
complicated | problems . of 


philosophy will commend. Ft 
to the general reader. ©) 


Dr. E. V. Hyenkov is ‘a 


prominent. Soviet’ philoso- - ‘ 
pher, working at the USSR 
Academy of Sciences’ Insti- 


tute of Philosophy. His spe- 


ithe oe is dialectical. logic, as 


the theory of knowledge, 
and:the hear of. philoso- 


4 p= “ea pepe” 


EY. Ilyenkov 


DIALECTICAL LOGIC 


Essays on Its History and Theory 


[<a] 


PROGRESS PUBLISHERS 
MOSCOW 


Translated from the Russian by H. Campbell Creighton, 
M. A. (Oxon) 


Designed by N. Startsev 


9. B. HAbEHKOB 


JIMAJIEKTHYUECKAA JIOTHKA 
Ovepxu HcTOpHH H TeEOpHH 


Ha aHeautickom a3viKe 


First printing 1977 
© HaygateabpetBo momutTHyeckoH auTepaTyph 1974 


© Translation into English. Progress Publishers 1977 


Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 


10502-712 


o14(ol)-77 087 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 


PART ONE. From the History of Dialectics 
Essay One. The Problem of the Subject Matter 
and Sources of Logic . . 
ee Two. Thought as an Attribute of Substance 
Essay Three. Logic and Dialectics 
Essay Four. The Structural Principle of Logic. 


Dualism or Monism 

Essay Five. Dialectics as Logic é 

Essay Six. Once More about the Principle. of 
Constructing a Logic. Idealism or 
Materialism? 

PART TWO. Certain Problems of the Marxist- -Leninist 
Theory of Dialectics 

Essay Seven. A Contribution to the Problem of a 
Dialectical Materialist Critique of 
Objective Idealism Rees, 

Essay Eight. The Materialist Conception of 
Thought as the Subject Matter of 
Logic . 

Essay Nine. On the Coincidence of Logic with 
Dialectics and the Theory of Knowl- 
edge of Materialism Se ike 

Essay Ten. Contradiction as a Category of 
Dialectical Logic. 

Essay Eleven. The Problem of the General in 
Dialectics PS de 35 — 


CONCLUSION 


INTRODUCTION 


The task, bequeathed to us by V. I. Lenin, of 
creating a Logic (with a capital ‘L’), i.e. of a sys- 
tematically developed exposition of dialectics un- 
derstood as the logic and theory of knowledge of 
modern materialism, has become particularly 
acute today. The clearly marked dialectical char- 
acter of the problems arising in every sphere of 
social life and scientific knowledge is making it 
more and more clear that only Marxist-Leninist 
dialectics has the capacity to be the method of 
scientific understanding and practical activity, 
and of actively helping scientists in their theoret- 
ical comprehension of experimental and factual 
data and in solving the problems they meet in the 
course of research. 

In the past ten or fifteen years quite a few 
works have been written devoted to separate 
branches that are part of the whole of which we 
still only dream; they can justly be regarded as 
paragraphs, even chapters, of the future Logic, 
as more or less finished blocks of the building 
being erected. One cannot, of course, cement these 


5 


‘blocks’ mechanically into a whole; but since the 
task of a systematic exposition of dialectical logic 
can only be solved by collective efforts, we must 
at least determine the most general principles of 
joint work. In the essays presented here we at- 
tempt to concretise some of the points of depar- 
ture of such a collective work. 

In philosophy, more than in any other science, 
as Hegel remarked with some regret in his Phe- 
nomenology of Mind, ‘the end of final result 
seems ... to have absolutely expressed the com- 
plete fact itself in its very nature; contrasted with 
that the mere process of bringing it to light would 
seem, properly speaking, to have no essential 
significance’ .! 

That is very aptly put. So long as dialectics 
(dialectical logic) is looked upon as a simple tool 
for proving a previously accepted thesis (irre- 
spective of whether it was initially advanced as 
the rules of mediaeval disputes required, or only 
disclosed at the end of the argument, in order 
to create the illusion of not being preconceived, 
that is, of saying ‘Look, here is what we have 
obtained although we did not assume it’), it will 
remain something of ‘no essential significance’. 
When dialectics is converted into a simple tool 
for proving a previously accepted (or given) the- 
sis, it becomes a sophistry only outwardly resem- 
bling dialectics, but empty of content. And if it 
is true that real dialectical logic takes on life not 


1G. W. F. Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind. Trans- 
lated by J. B. Baillie (London, 1931) p 67. 


6 


in ‘naked results’, and not in the ‘tendency’ of the 
movement of thought, but only in the form of 
‘the result along with the process of arriving at 
it’,? then, during the exposition of dialectics as 
Logic, we must reckon with this truth. For it is 
impossible to go to the other extreme, taking the 
view that we had allegedly not set ourselves any 
aim determining the means and character of our 
activity from the very outset in the course of our 
analysis of the problem, but had set out swimming 
at random. And we are therefore obliged, in any 
case, to say clearly, at the very beginning, what 
the ‘object’ is in which we want to discover the 
intrinsically necessary division into parts. 

Our ‘object’ or ‘subject matter’ in general, and 
on the whole, is thought, thinking; and dialectical 
Logic has as its aim the development of a scien- 
tific representation of thought in those necessary 
moments, and moreover in the necessary sequence, 
that do not in the least depend either on our will 
or on our consciousness. In other words Logic 
must show how thought develops if it is scientific, 
if it reflects, i.e. reproduces in concepts, an 
object existing outside our consciousness and will 
and independently of them, in other words, creates 
a mental reproduction of it, reconstructs its self- 
development, recreates it in the logic of the 
movement of concepts so as to recreate it later 
in fact (in experiment or in practice). Logic then 
is the theoretical representation of such thin- 
king. 


2 Ibid., p 69. 


From what we have said it will be clear that 
we understand thought (thinking) as the ideal 
component of the real activity of social man 
transforming both external nature and himself 
by his labour. 

Dialectical Logic is therefore not only a uni- 
versal scheme of subjective activity creatively 
transforming nature, but is also at the same time 
a universal scheme of the changing of any natu- 
ral or socio-historical material in which this activ- 
ity is fulfilled and with the objective require- 
ments of which it is always connected. That, in 
our opinion, is what the real gist of Lenin’s thesis 
on the identity (not ‘unity’ only, but precisely 
identity, full coincidence) of dialectics, logic, and 
the theory of knowledge of the modern, scientific, 
i.e, materialist, world outlook consists in. This 
approach preserves as one of the definitions of 
dialectics that given by Frederick Engels (‘dia- 
lectics, however, is nothing more than the science 
of the general laws of the motion and develop- 
ment of nature, human society, and thought’? i.e. 
of natural and socio-historical development, and 
not of ‘specifically subjective’ laws and forms of 
thought). 

We think that one can unite dialectics and ma- 
terialism in precisely that way, and show that 
Logic, being dialectical, is not only the science 
of ‘thinking’ but also the science of the develop- 
ment of all things, both material and ‘spiritual’. 


3 Frederick Engels. Anti-Dihring. Translated by Emile 
Burns (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1975) pp 168-169. 


8 


Understood in that way Logic can also be the gen- 
uine science of thought, the materialist science 
of the reflection of the movement of the world in 
the movement of concepts. Otherwise it is inev- 
itably transformed, as has happened to it in the 
hands of Neopositivists, into a purely technical 
discipline, a description of systems of manipula- 
tions with the terms of language. 

The concretisation of the general definition of 
Logic presented above must obviously consist in 
disclosing the concepts composing it, above all the 
concept of thought (thinking). Here again a purely 
dialectical difficulty arises, namely, that to define 
this concept fully, i.e. concretely, also means to 
‘write’ Logic, because a full description cannot by 
any means be given by a ‘definition’ but only by 
‘developing the essence of the matter’. 

The concept ‘concept’ itself is also very closely 
allied with the concept of thought. To give a ‘def- 
inition’ of it here would be easy, but would it be 
of any use? If we, adhering to a certain tradition 
in Logic, tend to understand by ‘concept’ neither 
‘sign’ nor ‘term defined through other terms’, and 
not simply a ‘reflection of the essential or intrin- 
sic attributes of things’ (because here the mean- 
ing of the insidious words ‘essential’ and ‘intrinsic’ 
comes to the fore), but the gist of the matter, then 
it would be more correct, it seems to us, to limit 
ourselves in relation to definition rather to what 
has been said, and to start to consider ‘the gist of 
the matter’, to begin with abstract, simple defini- 
tions accepted as far as possible by everyone, in 
order to arrive at the ‘concrete’, or in this case at 


9 


a Marxist-Leninist understanding of the essence 
of Logic and its concretely developed ‘concept’. 

Everything we have said determines the design 
and plan of our book. At first glance it may seem 
that it is, if not wholly, then to a considerable 
degree, a study in the history of philosophy. But 
the ‘historical’ collisions of realising the ‘matter 
of Logic’ is not an end-in-itself for us, but only 
the factual material through which the clear out- 
lines of the ‘logic of Matter’ gradually show 
through,‘ those very general outlines of dialectics 
as Logic which, critically corrected and material- 
istically rethought by Marx, Engels, and Lenin, 
also characterise our understanding of this science. 


4 See Karl Marx. Contribution to the Critique of He- 
gel’s Philosophy of Law. In: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels. Collected Works, Vol. 3 (1843-44) (Lawrence and 
Wishart, London, 1975) p 18. 


PART ONE 
FROM THE HISTORY OF DIALECTICS 


ESSAY ONE 


The Problem of the Subject Matter 
and Sources of Logic 


The most promising means of resolving any 
scientific problem is the historical approach to it. 
In our case this approach proves a very essential 
one. The fact is that what are now called logic 
are doctrines that differ considerably in their un- 
derstanding of the boundaries of this science. 
Each of them, of course, lays claim not so much 
simply to the title as to the right to be considered 
the sole modern stage in the development of world 
logical thought. That, therefore, is why we must 
go into the history of the matter. 

The term ‘logic’ was first introduced for the 
science of thinking by the Stoics, who distin- 
guished by it only that part of Aristotle’s actual 
teaching that corresponded to their own views on 
the nature of thinking. The term itself was derived 
by them from the Greek word logos (which liter- 
ally means ‘the word’), and the science so named 
was very closely related to the subject matter of 
grammar and rhetoric. The mediaeval scholastics, 
who finally shaped and canonised the tradition, 
simply converted logic into a mere instrument 


11 


(organon) for conducting verbal disputes, a tool 
for interpreting the texts of the Holy Writ, and 
a purely formal apparatus. As a result not only 
did the official interpretation of logic become dis- 
credited, but also its very name. The emasculated 
‘Aristotelean logic’ therefore also became discred- 
ited in the eyes of all leading scientists and phi- 
losophers of the new times, which is the reason 
why most of the philosophers of the sixteenth to 
eighteenth centuries generally avoided using the 
term ‘logic’ as the name for the science of thought, 
intellect, and reason. 

Recognition of the uselessness of the official, 
formal, scholastic version of logic as the organon 
of real thought and of the development of scien- 
tific knowledge was the leitmotif of all the ad- 
vanced, progressive philosophers of the time. “The 
logic now in use serves rather to fix and give 
stability to the errors which have their founda- 
tion in commonly received notions than to help 
the search after truth. So it does more harm than 
good,’ Francis Bacon said.! ‘I observed in respect 
to Logic,’ said Descartes, ‘that the syllogisms and 
the greater part of the other teaching served bet- 
ter in explaining to others those things that one 
knows (or like the art of Lully, in enabling one 
to speak without judgment of those things of 
which one is ignorant) than in learning what is 
new. 2 John Locke suggested that ‘syllogism, at 


! Francis Bacon. Novum Organum. In: The Works of 
Francis Bacon, Vol. IV (New York, 1968) pp 48-49. 

2 René Descartes. Discourse on Method. Translated by 
E. T. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross. In: Great Books of the 


12 


best, is but the Art of fencing with the little 
knowledge we have, without making any Addi- 
tion to it...’°, On this basis Descartes and Locke 
considered it necessary to classify all the problems 
of the old logic in the sphere of rhetoric. And 
insofar as logic was preserved as a special science, 
it was unanimously treated not as the science of 
thinking but as the science of the correct use of 
words, names, and signs. Hobbes, for example, 
developed a conception of logic as the calculation 
of word signs.4 

In concluding his Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding, Locke defined the subject matter 
and task of logic as follows: “The business [of lo- 
gic—Ed.] is to consider the nature of signs the 
mind makes use of for the understanding of 
things, or conveying its knowledge to others.’> He 
treated logic as ‘the doctrine of signs’, i.e. as se- 
meiotics. 

But philosophy, fortunately, did not jell at that 
level. The best brains of the period understood 
very well that it might be all right for logic to 
be interpreted in that spirit, but not for the scien- 
ce of thinking. True, in general, the representa- 
tives of purely mechanistic views of the world 
and of thinking held such a view of logic. Since 


Western World, Vol. 31, Descartes. Spinoza (Encyclopae- 
dia Britannica Inc., Chicago, 1952) p 46. 

3 John Locke. An Essay Concerning Human Under- 
standing, Vol. II (London, 1710) p 299. 

4 See Thomas Hobbes. Leviathan or the Matter, Form 
and Power of a Commonwealth (London, 1894) p 27. 
5 John Locke. Op. cit., p 339. 


18 


they interpreted objective reality in an abstract, 
geometrical way (i.e. only purely quantitative 
characteristics were considered objective and 
scientific), the principles of thinking in mathemat- 
ical science merged in their eyes with the logical 
principles of thinking in general, a tendency that 
took final form in Hobbes. 

The approach of Descartes and Leibniz was 
much more careful. They too took to the idea of 
creating a ‘universal mathematics’ in place of the 
old, ridiculed, and discredited logic; and they 
dreamed of instituting a universal language, a 
system of terms strictly and unambiguously de- 
fined, and therefore admitting of purely formal 
operations in it. 

Both Descartes and Leibniz, unlike Hobbes, 
were well aware of the difficulties of principle 
standing in the way of realising such an _ idea. 
Descartes understood that the definition of terms 
in the universal language could not be arrived at 
by amical agreement, but must only be the result 
of careful analysis of the simple ideas, the bricks, 
from which the whole intellectual edifice of man 
was built; and that the exact language of ‘uni- 
versal mathematics’ could only be something de- 
rived from ‘true philosophy’. Only then would one 
succeed in replacing thinking about the things 
given in reflection or imagination (i.e. in the ter- 
minology of the day, in contemplation) and in 
general in people’s real sense experience by a 
kind of calculus of terms and statements, and in 
drawing conclusions and inferences as infallible 
as the solutions of equations. 


14 


In supporting this point of Descartes’, Leibniz 
categorically limited the field of application of 
the ‘universal mathematics’ solely to those things 
that belonged to the sphere of the powers of imag- 
ination. The ‘universal mathematics’ should also, 
in his view, be only (so to say) a logic of the 
powers of imagination. But that was precisely why 
all metaphysics was excluded from its province, 
and also such things as thought, and action, and 
the field of ordinary mathematics, commensurate 
only in reason. A very essential reservation! 
Thought, in any case, thus remained outside the 
competence of the ‘universal mathematics’. 

It is not surprising that Leibniz, with uncon- 
cealed irony, classified Locke’s treatment of logic, 
by which it was understood as a special doctrine 
of signs, as purely nominalist. Leibniz revealed 
the difficulties associated with such an understand- 
ing of logic. Above all, he said, the ‘science of 
reasoning, of judgments and inventions, seems 
| very different from recognition of the etymolo- 

gies and usage of words, which is something in- 

determinable and arbitrary. One must, moreover, 

when one wants to explain words, make an ex- 

cursion into the sciences themselves as was seen 

in dictionaries; and one must not, on the other 

hand, engage in a science without at the same 
time giving a definition of the terms.’ 

Instead of the threefold division of philosophy 
into different sciences (logic, physics, and ethics) 


8 G. W. Leibniz. Neue Abhandlungen tiber den mensch- 
lichen Uerstand (Leipzig, 1915) p 640. 


15 


that Locke had taken over from the Stoics, Leib- 
niz therefore suggested speaking of three different 
aspects, under which the same knowledge, the 
same truth, would function, namely theoretical 
(physics), practical (ethics), and terminological 
(logic). The old logic thus corresponded simply to 
the terminological aspect of knowledge, or, as 
Leibniz put it, ‘arrangement by terms, as in a 
handbook’? Such a systematisation, of course, 
even the best, was not a science of thought, be- 
cause Leibniz had a more profound appreciation 
of thinking. And he classed the true doctrine of 
thought as metaphysics, in this sense following 
Aristotle’s terminology and the essence of his 
logic, and not the Stoics. 

But why should thought be investigated within 
the framework of ‘metaphysics’? It was not a 
matter, of course, of indicating to which ‘depart- 
ment’ the theoretical understanding of thought 
‘belonged’, but of a definite way of approaching 
the solution of an essential philosophical problem. 
And the difficulty constantly facing every theo- 
retician lies in understanding what it is that 
links knowledge (the totality of concepts, theo- 
retical constructions, and ideas) and its subject 
matter together, and whether the one agrees with 
the other, and whether the concepts on which a 
person relies correspond to something real, lying 
outside his consciousness? And can that, in gen- 
eral, be tested? And if so, how? 


7 G. W. Leibniz. Neue Abhandlungen iiber den mensch- 
lichen Uerstand (Leipzig, 1915) pp 644-645. 


16 


The problems are really very complicated. An 
affirmative answer, for all its seeming obvious- 
ness, is not quite so simple to prove, and as for 
a negative answer, it proves possible to back it 
up with very weighty arguments, such as that, 
since an object is refracted in the course of its 
apprehension through the prism of the ‘specific 
nature’ of the organs of perception and reason, we 
know any object only in the form it acquires as a 
result of this refraction. The ‘existence’ of things 
outside consciousness is thus by no means neces- 
sarily rejected. One thing ‘only’ is rejected, the 
possibility of verifying whether or not such things 
are ‘in reality’ as we know and understand them. 
It is impossible to compare the thing as it is 
given in consciousness with the thing outside 
consciousness, because it is impossible to compare 
what I know with what I don’t know, what I do 
not see, what I do not perceive, what I am not 
aware of. Before I can compare my idea of a 
thing with the thing, I must also be aware of the 
thing, i.e. must also transform it into an idea. As 
a result I am always comparing and contrasting 
only ideas with ideas, although I may think that 
I am comparing the idea with the thing. 

Only similar objects, naturally, can be com- 
pared and contrasted. It is senseless to compare 
bushels and rods, poles, or perches, or the taste of 
steak and the diagonal of a square. And if, all 
the same, we want to compare steaks and squares, 
then we will no longer be comparing ‘steak’ 
and ‘square’ but two objects both possessing a 
geometrical, spatial form. The ‘specific’ property 


2—831 


17 


of the one and of the other cannot in general be 
involved in the comparison. 

‘What is the distance between the syllable A 
and a table? The question would be nonsensical. 
In speaking of the distance of two things, we 
speak of their difference in space.... Thus we 
equalise them as being both existences of space, 
and only after having them equalised sub specie 
spati [under the aspect of space—Ed.], we distin- 
guish them as different points of space. To belong 
to space is their unity.’® In other words, when we 
wish to establish a relation of some sort between 
two objects, we always compare not the ‘specific’ 
qualities that make one object ‘syllable A’ and 
the other a ‘table’, ‘steak’, or a ‘square’, but only 
those properties that express a ‘third’ something, 
different from their existence as the things enu- 
merated. The things compared are regarded as 
different modifications of this ‘third’ property 
common to them all, inherent in them as it were. 
So if there is no ‘third’ in the nature of the two 
things common to them both, the very differ- 
ences between them become quite senseless. 

In what are such objects as ‘concept’ (‘idea’) 
and ‘thing’ related? In what special ‘space’ can 
they be contrasted, compared, and differentiated? 
Is there, in general, a ‘third’ thing in which they 
are ‘one and the same’, in spite of all their di- 
rectly visible differences? If there is no such com- 


8 Karl Marx. Theories of Surplus-Ualue, Part III. 
Translated by Jack Cohen and S. W. Ryazanskaya (Prog- 
ress Publishers, Moscow, 1971) p 143. 


18 


mon substance, expressed by different means in 
an idea and in a thing, it is impossible to estab- 
lish any intrinsically necessary relationship be- 
tween them. At best we can ‘see’ only an external 
relation in the nature of that which was once 
established between the position of luminaries in 
the heavens and events in personal lives, i.e. re- 
lations between two orders of quite heterogeneous 
events, each of which proceeds according to its 
own, particular, specific laws. And then Wittgen- 
stein would be right in proclaiming logical forms 
to be mystical and inexpressible. 

But in the case of the relationship between an 
idea and reality there is yet another difficulty. 
We know where the search for some sort of 
special essence can and does lead, an _ essence 
that would at once not be an idea and not ma- 
terial reality, but would constitute their common 
substance, the ‘third’ that appears one time as an 
idea and another time as being. For an idea and 
being are mutually exclusive concepts. That which 
is an idea is not being, and vice versa. How, 
then, in general, can they be compared? In what, 
in general, can the basis of their interaction be, 
what is that in which they are ‘one and the same’? 

This difficulty was sharply expressed in its 
naked logical form by Descartes. In its general 
form it is the central problem of any philosophy 
whatsoever, the problem of the relationship of 
‘thought’ to the reality existing outside it and in- 
dependently of it, to the world of things in space 
and time, the problem of the coincidence of the 
forms of thought and reality, i.e. the problem of 


ae 19 


truth or, to put it in traditional philosophical lan- 
guage, the ‘problem of the identity of thought and 
being’. 

It is clear to everyone that ‘thought’ and ‘things 
outside thought’ are far from being one and the 
same. It is not necessary to be a philosopher to 
understand that. Everyone knows that it is one 
thing to have a hundred roubles (or pounds, or 
dollars) in one’s pocket, and another to have them 
only in one’s dreams, only in one’s thoughts. The 
concept obviously is only a state of the special 
substance that fills the brain box (we could go on, 
furthermore, explaining this substance as brain 
tissue or even as the very thin ether of the soul 
keeping house there, as the structure of the brain 
tissue, or even as the formal structure of inner 
speech, in the form of which thinking takes place 
inside the head); but the subject is outside the 
head, in the space beyond the head, and is some- 
thing quite other than the internal state of 
thought, ideas, the brain, speech, etc. 

In order to understand such self-evident things 
clearly, and to take them into consideration, it 
is not generally necessary to have Descartes’ 
mind; but it is necessary to have its analytical 
rigour in order to define the fact that thought 
and the world of things in space are not only and 
not simply different phenomena, but are also 
directly opposite. 

Descartes’ clear, consistent intellect is espe- 
cially needed in order to grasp the problem aris- 
ing from this difficulty, namely, in what way do 
these two worlds (i.e. the world of concepts, of 


20 


the inner states of thought, on the one hand, and 
the world of things in external space, on the 
other hand) nevertheless agree with one another? 

Descartes expressed the difficulty as follows. If 
the existence of things is determined through their 
extension and if the spatial, geometric forms of 
things are the sole objective forms of their exist- 
ence outside the subject, then thinking is not 
disclosed simply through its description in forms 
of space. The spatial characteristic of thinking in 
general has no relation to its specific nature. The 
nature of thinking is disclosed through concepts 
that have nothing in common with the expression 
of any kind of spatial, geometric image. He also 
expressed this view in the following way: thought 
and extension are really two different substances, 
and a substance is that which exists and is defined 
only through itself and not through something 
else. There is nothing common between thought 
and extension that could be expressed in a special 
definition. In other words, in a series of defini- 
tions of thought there is not a single attribute 
that could be part of the definition of extension, 
and vice versa. But if there is no such common 
attribute it is also impossible to deduce being 
rationally from thought, and vice versa, because 
deduction requires a ‘mean term’, i.e. a term such 
as might be included in the series of definitions 
of the idea and of the existence of things outside 
consciousness, outside thought. Thought and 
being cannot in general come into contact with 
one another, since their boundary (the line or 
even the point of contact) would then also be 


21 


exactly that which simultaneously both divides 
them and unites them. 

In view of the absence of such a boundary, 
thought cannot limit the extended thing, nor the 
thing the mental expression. They are free, as it 
were, to penetrate and permeate each other, 
nowhere encountering a boundary. Thought as 
such cannot interact with the extended thing, nor 
the thing with thought; each revolves within 
itself. 

Immediately a problem arises: how then are 
thought and bodily functions united in the human 
individual? That they are linked is an obvious 
fact. Man can consciously control his spatially 
determined body among other such bodies, his 
mental impulses are transformed into spatial 
movements, and the movements of bodies, caus- 
ing alterations in the human organism (sensations) 
are transformed into mental images. That means 
that thought and the extended body interact in 
some way after all. But how? What is the nature 
of the interaction? How do they determine, i.e. 
delimit, each other? 

How does it come about that a trajectory, 
drawn by thought in the plane of the imagina- 
tion, for example a curve described in its equa- 
tion, proves to be congruent with the geometrical 
contours of the same curve in real space? It means 
that the form of the curve in thought (i.e. in the 
form of the ‘magnitude’ of the algebraic signs of 
the equation) is identical with a corresponding 
curve in real space, i.e. a curve drawn on paper, 
in a space outside the head. It is surely one and 


22 


the same curve, only the one is in thought and 
the other in real space; therefore, acting in ac- 
cordance with thought (understood as the sense 
of words or signs), I simultaneously act in the 
strictest accord with the shape (in this case the 
geometrical contour) of a thing outside thought. 

How can that be, if ‘the thing in thought’ and 
‘the thing outside thought’ are not only ‘different’ 
but are also absolutely opposite? For absolutely 
opposite means exactly this: not having anything 
in ‘common’ between them, nothing identical, not 
one attribute that could at once be a criterion of 
the concept ‘thing outside thought’ and of the 
concept ‘thing in thought’, or ‘imagined thing’. 
How then can the two worlds conform with one 
another? And, moreover, not accidentally, but 
systematically and regularly, these two worlds 
that have absolutely nothing in common, nothing 
identical? That is the problem around which all 
Cartesians spin, Descartes himself, and Geulincx, 
and Malebranche, and the mass of their followers. 

Malebranche expressed the principal difficulty 
arising here in his own witty way, as follows: 
during the siege of Vienna, the defenders of the 
city undoubtedly saw the Turkish army as ‘trans- 
cendental Turks’, but those killed were very real 
Turks. The difficulty here is clear; and from the 
Cartesian point of view on thought it is absolute- 
ly insoluble, because the defenders of Vienna 
acted, i.e. aimed and fired their cannonballs in 
accordance with the image of Turks that they had 
in their brains, in accordance with ‘imagined’, 
‘transcendental Turks’, and with trajectories 


23 


calculated in their brains; and the shots fell 
among real Turks in a space that was not only 
outside their skulls, but also outside the walls of 
the fortress. 

How does it come about that two worlds having 
absolutely nothing in common between them are 
in agreement, namely the world ‘thought of’, the 
world in thought, and the real world, the world in 
space? And why? God knows, answered Descartes, 
and Malebranche, and Geulincx; from our point 
of view it is inexplicable. Only God can explain 
this fact. He makes the two opposing worlds 
agree. The concept ‘God’ comes in here as a 
‘theoretical’ construction by which to express the 
obvious but quite inconceivable fact of the unity, 
congruence, and identity perhaps, of phenomena 
that are absolutely contrary by definition. God is 
the ‘third’ which, as the ‘connecting link’, unites 
and brings into agreement thought and being, 
‘soul’ and ‘body’, ‘concept’ and ‘object’, action in 
the plane of signs and words and action in the 
plane of real, geometrically defined bodies outside 
the head. 

Having come directly up against the naked 
dialectical fact that ‘thought’ and ‘being outside 
thought’ are in absolute opposition, yet are never- 
theless in agreement with one another, in unity, 
in inseparable and necessary interconnection and 
interaction (and thus subordinated to some higher 
law—and moreover, one and the same law), the 
Cartesian school capitulated before theology and 
put the inexplicable (from their point of view) 
fact down to God, and explained it by a ‘miracle’, 


24 


i.e. by the direct intervention of supernatural 
powers in the causal chain of natural events. 
Descartes, the founder of analytical geometry, 
could therefore not explain in any rational way 
whatever the reason for the algebraic expression 
of a curve by means of an equation ‘correspond- 
ing’ to the spatial image of this curve in a draw- 
ing. They could not, indeed, manage without 
God, because according to Descartes, actions with 
signs and on the basis of signs, in accordance 
only with signs (with their mathematical sense), 
i.e. actions in the ether of ‘pure thought’, had 
nothing in common with real bodily actions in 
the sphere of spatially determined things, in ac- 
cordance with their real contours. The first were 
pure actions of the soul (or thinking as such), the 
second—actions of the body repeating the con- 
tours (spatially geometric outlines) of external 
bodies, and therefore wholly governed by the 
laws of the ‘external’, spatially material world. 
(This problem is posed no less sharply today by 
the ‘philosophy of mathematics’. If mathematical 
constructions are treated as constructions of the 
creative intellect of mathematicians, ‘free’ of any 
external determination and worked out exclusive- 
ly by ‘logical’ rules—and the mathematicians 
themselves, following Descartes, are quite often 
apt to interpret them precisely so—it becomes quite 
enigmatic and inexplicable why on earth the 
empirical facts, the facts of ‘external experience’, 
keep on agreeing and coinciding in their mathe- 
matical, numerical expressions with the results 
obtained by purely logical calculations and by the 


25 


‘pure’ actions of the intellect. It is absolutely un- 
clear. Only ‘God’ can help.) 

In other words the identity of these absolute op- 
posites (‘thought’, ‘spirit’, and ‘extension’, ‘body’) 
was also recognised by Descartes as a factual 
principle—without it even his idea of an 
analytical geometry would have been impossible 
(and not only inexplicable)—but it was explained 
by an act of God, by his intervention in the inter- 
relations of ‘thought and being’, ‘soul and body’. 
God, moreover, in Cartesian philosophy, and 
especially for Malebranche and Geulincx, could 
be understood as the purely traditional Catholic, 
orthodox God, ruling both the ‘bodies’ and the 
‘souls’ of men from outside, from the heights of 
his heavenly throne, and co-ordinating the ac- 
tions of the ‘soul’ with those of the ‘body’. 

Such is the essence of the famous psycho- 
physical problem, in which it is not difficult to 
see the specifically concrete and therefore histori- 
cally limited formulation of the central problem of 
philosophy. The problem of the theoretical under- 
standing of thought (logic), consequently, and 
hence not of the rules of operating with words or 
other signs, comes down to solving the cardinal 
problems of philosophy, or of metaphysics, to put 
it in a rather old-fashioned way. And that as- 
sumes mastering the culture of the genuinely 
theoretical thinking represented by the classical 
philosophers, who not only knew how to pose 
problems with maximum clarity, but also knew 
how to solve them. 


ESSAY TWO 


Thought as an Attribute of Substance 


An immense role in the development of logic, 
and in preparing the ground for modern views 
on its subject matter, a role far from fully ap- 
preciated, was played by Spinoza. Like Leibniz, 
Spinoza rose high above the mechanistic limita- 
tions of the natural science of his time. Any 
tendency directly to universalise partial forms 
and methods of thinking only useful within the 
bounds of mechanistic, mathematical natural 
science was also foreign to him. 

Insofar as logic was preserved alongside the 
doctrine of substance, Spinoza treated it as an 
applied discipline by analogy with medicine, 
since its concern proved not to be the invention 
of artificial rules but the co-ordination of human 
intellect with the laws of thought understood as 
an ‘attribute’ of the natural whole, only as ‘modes 
of expression’ of the universal order and connec- 
tion of things. He also tried to work out logical 
problems on the basis of this conception. 

Spinoza understood thought much more pro- 
foundly and, in essence, dialectically, which is 
why his figure presents special interest in the 


27 


history of dialectics; he was probably the only one 
of the great thinkers of the pre-Marxian era who 
knew how to unite brilliant models of acutely 
dialectical thought with a consistently held 
materialist principle (rigorously applied through- 
out his system) of understanding thought and 
its relations to the external world lying in the 
space outside the human head. The influence of 
Spinoza’s ideas on the subsequent development of 
dialectical thought can hardly be exaggerated. 
‘It is therefore worthy of note that thought must 
begin by placing itself at the standpoint of 
Spinozism; to be a follower of Spinoza is the es- 
sential commencement of all Philosophy.’! 

But orthodox religious scholasticism, in alliance 
with subjective idealist philosophy, has not ceased 
to flog Spinoza as a ‘dead dog’, treating him as 
a living and dangerous opponent. Elementary 
analysis reveals that the main principles of 
Spinoza’s thought directly contradict the con- 
ception of ‘thought’ developed by modern positiv- 
ism all along the line. The most modern systems 
of the twentieth century still clash in sharp 
antagonism in Spinoza; and that obliges us to 
analyse the theoretical foundation of his concep- 
tion very carefully, and to bring out the principles 
in it that, in rather different forms of expression 
perhaps, remain the most precious principles of 
any scientific thinking to this day, and as such 


' Hegel’s Lectures on the History of Philosophy. Trans- 
lated by E. S. Haldane and F. H. Simson, Vol. III (Rout- 
Icdge and Kegan Paul, London, 1968; Humanities Press, 
New York, 1974) p 257. 


28 


are very heatedly disputed by our contemporary 
opponents of dialectical thought. 

Hegel once noted that Spinoza’s philosophy was 
very simple and easy to understand. And in fact 
the principles of his thinking, which constitute the 
essential commencement of all Philosophy, i.e. 
the real foundation on which alone it is possible 
to erect the edifice of philosophy as a science, are 
brilliant precisely in their crystal clarity, free of 
all reservations and ambiguities. 

It is not so easy, however, to bring these bril- 
liant principles out because they are decked out 
in the solid armour of the constructions of formal 
logic and deductive mathematics that constitute 
the ‘shell’ of Spinoza’s system, its (so to say) 
defensive coat of mail. In other words, the real 
logic of Spinoza’s thinking by no means coincides 
with the formal logic of the movement of his 
‘axioms’, ‘theorems’, ‘scholia’, and their proofs. 

‘Even with philosophers who gave their work 
a systematic form, e.g. Spinoza, the real inner 
structure of their system is quite distinct from the 
form in which they consciously presented it,’ Karl 
Marx wrote to Ferdinand Lassalle.? 

Our job then cannot be once more to paraphrase 


2 Karl Marx. Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, May 31, 
1858. In: Marx/Engels, Werke, Bd. 29 (Dietz Verlag, Ber- 
lin, 1973) p 561. 

Marx repeated this idea eleven years later in a letter 
to M. M. Kovalevsky: ‘...It is mecessary ... to distin- 
guish between that which the author in fact offers and 
that which he gives only in his own representation. This 
is justifiable even for philosophical systems: thus what 
Spinoza considered the keystone of his system, and what 


29 


the theoretical foundations on which Spinoza 
built his main work, the Ethics, and the conclu- 
sions that he drew from them by means of his 
famous ‘geometric modus’. In that case it would 
be more proper simply to copy out the text of the 
Ethics itself once again. Our job is to help the 
reader to understand the ‘real inner structure’ of 
his system, which far from coincides with its for- 
mal exposition, i.e. to see the real ‘cornerstone’ of 
his reflections and to show what real conclusions 
were drawn from them, or could be drawn from 
them, that still preserve their full topicality. 

That can only be done in one way, and one 
way only, which is to show the real problem that 
Spinoza’s thought came up against quite independ- 
ently of how he himself realised it and in what 
terms he expressed it for himself and for others 
(i.e. to set the problem out in the language of our 
century), and then to trace what were the real 
principles (once more independently of Spinoza’s 
own formulation of them) on which he based the 
solution of the problem. Then it will become clear 
that Spinoza succeeded in finding the only 
formulation exact for his time of a real problem 
that remains the great problem of our day, only 
formulated in another form. 


in fact constitutes this keystone, are two quite different 
things.’ [This is retranslated from the Russian; the original 
letter, which was in English, has not come down to us, 
and is known only from a Russian text taken down from 
an oral translation by Kovalevsky himself. The letter is 
not included in the Werke, but is given in K. Marx and 
F. Engels. Sochineniya, Vol. 34 (Moscow, 1964) p 287.— 
Tr] 


30 


We formulated this problem in the preceding 
essay. Spinoza found a very simple solution to 
it, brilliant in its simplicity for our day as well as 
his: the problem is insoluble only because it has 
been wrongly posed. There is no need to rack one’s 
brains over how the Lord God ‘unites’ ‘soul’ 
(thought) and ‘body’ in one complex, represented 
initially (and by definition) as different and even 
contrary principles allegedly existing separately 
from each other before the ‘act’ of this ‘uniting’ 
(and thus, also being able to exist after their 
‘separation’; which is only another formulation of 
the thesis of the immortality of the soul, one of 
the cornerstones of Christian theology and ethics). 
In fact, there simply is no such situation; and 
therefore there is also no problem of ‘uniting’ 
or ‘co-ordination’. 

There are not two different and originally con- 
trary objects of investigation—body and thought— 
but only one single object, which is the thinking 
body of living, real man (or other analogous 
being, if such exists anywhere in the Universe), 
only considered from two different and even op- 
posing aspects or points of view. Living, real 
thinking man, the sole thinking body with which 
we are acquainted, does not consist of two 
Cartesian halves—‘thought lacking a body’ and a 
‘body lacking thought’. In relation to real man 
both the one and the other are equally fallacious 
abstractions, and one cannot in the end model a 
real thinking man from two equally fallacious 
abstractions. 

That is what constitutes the real ‘keystone’ of 


31 


the whole system, a very simple truth that is easy, 
on the whole, to understand. 

It is not a special ‘soul’, installed by God in 
the human body as in a temporary residence, that 
thinks, but the body of man itself. Thought is a 
property, a mode of existence, of the body, the 
same as its extension, i.e. as its spatial configura- 
tion and position among other bodies. 

This simple and profoundly true idea was 
expressed this way by Spinoza in the language 
of his time: thought and extension are not two 
special substances as Descartes taught, but only 
two attributes of one and the same substance; not 
two special objects, capable of existing separately 
and quite independently of each other, but only 
two different and even opposite aspects under 
which one and the same thing appears, two 
different modes of existence, two forms of the 
manifestation of some third thing. 

What is this third thing? Real infinite Nature, 
Spinoza answered. It is Nature that extends in 
space and ‘thinks’. The whole difficulty of the 
Cartesian metaphysics arose because the specific 
difference of the real world from the world as 
only imagined or thought of was considered to be 
extension, a spatial, geometric determinateness. 
But extension as such just existed in imagination, 
only in thought. For as such it can generally only 
be thought of in the form of emptiness, i.e. purely 
negatively, as the complete absence of any definite 
geometric shape. Ascribing only spatial, geometric 
properties to Nature is, as Spinoza said, to think 
of it in an imperfect way, i.e. to deny it in advance 


32 


one of its perfections. And then it is asked how 
the perfection removed from Nature can be 
restored to her again. 


The same argumentation applies to thought. 
Thought as such is the same kind of fallacious 
abstraction as emptiness. In fact it is only a prop- 
erty, a predicate, an attribute of that very body 
which has spatial attributes. In other words one 


can say very little about thought as such; it is not 
a reality existing separately from, and independ- 
ently of, bodies but only a mode of existence 
of Nature’s bodies. Thought and space do not 
really exist by themselves, but only as Nature’s 
bodies linked by chains of interaction into a 
measureless and limitless whole embracing both 
the one and the other. 


By a simple turn of thought Spinoza cut the 
Gordian knot of the ‘psychophysicai problem’, 
the mystic insolubility of which still torments the 
mass of theoreticians and schools of philosophy, 
psychology, physiology of the higher nervous 
system, and other related sciences that are forced 
one way or another to deal with the delicate theme 
of the relation of ‘thought’ to ‘body’, of ‘spiritual’ 
to ‘material’, of ‘ideal’ to ‘real’, and such like 
topics. 

Spinoza showed that it is only impossible to 
solve the problem because it is absolutely wrong- 
ly posed; and that such posing of it is nothing 
but the fruit of imagination. 

It is in man that Nature really performs, in a 
self-evident way, that very activity that we are 


3—83] 33 


accustomed to call ‘thinking’. In man, in the form 
of man, in his person, Nature itself thinks, and 
not at all some special substance, source, or 
principle instilled into it from outside. In man, 
therefore, Nature thinks of itself, becomes aware 
of itself, senses itself, acts on itself. And the 
‘reasoning’, ‘consciousness’, ‘idea’, ‘sensation’, 
‘will’, and all the other special actions that 
Descartes described as modi of thought, are simp- 
ly different modes of revealing a property 
inalienable from Nature as a whole, one of its own 
attributes. 

But if thinking is always an action performed 
by a natural and so by a spatially determined 
body, it itself, too, is an action that is also 
expressed spatially, which is why there is not and 
cannot be the cause and effect relation between 
thinking and bodily action for which the Carte- 
sians were looking. They did not find it for the 
simple reason that no such relation exists in 
Nature, and cannot, simply because thinking and 
the body are not two different things at all, exist- 
ing separately and therefore capable of interact- 
ing, but one and the same thing, only expressed 
by two different modes or considered in two 
different aspects. 

Between body and thought there is no relation 
of cause and effect, but the relation of an organ 
(i.e. of a spatially determinate body) to the mode 
of its own action. The thinking body cannot cause 
changes in thought, cannot act on thought, be- 
cause its existence as ‘thinking’ is thought. If a 
thinking body does nothing, it is no longer a 


34 


thinking body but simply a body. But when it 
does act, it does not do so on thought, because 
its very activity is thought. 

Thought as a spatially expressed activity there- 
fore cannot also be secreted from the body 
performing it as a special ‘substance’ distinct 
from the body, in the way that bile is secreted 
from the liver or sweat from sweat glands. Think- 
ing is not the product of an action but the action 
itself, considered at the moment of its perform- 
ance, just as walking, for example, is the mode 
of action of the legs, the ‘product’ of which, it 
transpires, is the space walked. And that is that. 
The product or result of thinking may be an 
exclusively spatially expressed, or exclusively 
geometrically stated, change in some body or 
another, or else in its position relative to other 
bodies. It is absurd then to say that the one gives 
rise to (or ‘causes’) the other. Thinking does not 
evoke a spatially expressed change in a body but 
exists through it (or within it), and vice versa; 
any change, however fine, within that body, in- 
duced by the effect on it of other bodies, is direct- 
ly expressed for it as a certain change in its 
mode of activity, i.e. in thinking. 

The position set out here is extremely important 
also because it immediately excludes any pos- 
sibility of treating it in a vulgar materialist, 
mechanistic key, i.e. of identifying thought with 
the material processes that take place within the 
thinking body (head, brain tissue), while neverthe- 
less understanding that thought takes place pre- 
cisely through these processes. 


as 35 


Spinoza was well aware that what is expressed 
and performed in the form of structural, spatial 
changes within the thinking body is not at all 
some kind of thinking taking place outside of and 
independently of them, and vice versa (shifts of 
thinking by no means express immanent move- 
ments of the body within which they arise). 
It is therefore impossible either to understand 
thought through examination, however exact and 
thorough, of the spatially geometric changes in 
the form of which it is expressed within the body 
of the brain, or, on the contrary, to understand 
the spatial, geometric changes in the brain tissue 
from the most detailed consideration of the com- 
position of the ideas existing in the brain. It is 
impossible, Spinoza constantly repeated, because 
they are one and the same, only expressed by two 
different means. 

To try to explain the one by the other simply 
means to double the description of one and the 
same fact, not yet understood and incomprehen- 
sible. And although we have two full, quite 
adequate descriptions of one and the same event, 
equivalent to one another, the event itself falls 
outside both descriptions, as the “third thing’, the 
very ‘one and the same’ that was not yet under- 
stood or explained. Because the event twice 
described (once in the language of the ‘physics of 
the brain’ and once in the language of the ‘logic 
of ideas’) can be explained and correspondingly 
understood only after bringing out the cause 
evoking the event described but not understood. 
Bishop Berkeley ascribed the cause to God. 


And so did Descartes, Malebranche, and Geulincx. 
The shallow, vulgar materialist tries to explain 
everything by the purely mechanical actions of 
external things on the sense organs and brain 
tissue, and takes for the cause the concrete thing, 
the sole object, that is affecting our bodily organ- 
isation at a given moment and causing corre- 
sponding changes in our body, which we feel 
within ourselves and experience as our thinking. 

While rejecting the first explanation as the 
capitulation of philosophy before religious theo- 
logical twaddle, Spinoza took a very critical 
attitude as well toward the superficially material- 
ist—mechanistic—explanation of the cause of 
thought. He very well understood that it was 
only a ‘bit’ of an explanation, leaving in the dark 
the very difficulty that Descartes was forced to 
bring in God to explain. 

For to explain the event we call ‘thinking’, to 
disclose its effective cause, it is necessary to in- 
clude it in the chain of events within which it 
arises of necessity and not fortuitously. The ‘be- 
ginnings’ and the ‘ends’ of this chain are clearly 
not located within the thinking body at all, but 
far outside it. 

To explain a separate, single, sensuously per- 
ceived fact passing momentarily before our eye, 
and even the whole mass of such facts, as the 
cause of thought means to explain precisely 
nothing. For this very fact exerts its effect 
(mechanical, say, or light) on stone as well, but 
no action of any kind that we describe as ‘think- 
ing’ is evoked in the stone. The explanation must 


37 


consequently also include those relations of cause 
and effect that of necessity generate our own 
physical organisation capable (unlike a stone) of 
thinking, i.e. of so refracting the external 
influences and so transforming them within 
itself that they are experienced by the thinking 
body not at all only as changes arising within it- 
self, but as external things, as the shapes of things 
outside the thinking body. 

For the action produced on the retina of our 
eye by a ray of light reflected from the Moon is 
perceived by the thinking being not simply as a 
mechanical irritation within the eye but as the 
shape of the thing itself, as the lunar disc hang- 
ing in space outside the eye, which means that 
the Ego, the thinking substance or creature, 
directly feels not the effect produced on it by the 
external thing but something quite different, viz. 
the shape or form (ie. the spatial, geometric 
configuration) and position of this external body, 
which has been evoked within us as a result of 
the mechanical or light effect. In that lies both the 
enigma and the whole essence of thinking as the 
mode of activity of a thinking body in distinction 
to one that does not think. It will readily be 
understood that one body evokes a change by its 
action in another body; that is fully explained by 
the concepts of physics. It is difficult, and from 
the angle of purely physical concepts (and in 
Spinoza’s time of even ‘purely’ mechanical, geo- 
metric concepts) even impossible, to explain just 
why and how the thinking body feels and per- 
ceives the effect caused by an external body 


38 


within itself as an external body, as its, and not 
as its own shape, configuration, and position in 
space. 

Such was the enigma, in general, that Leibniz 
and Fichte came up against later; but Spinoza had 
already found a fully rational, though only gen- 
eral, theoretical solution. He clearly understood 
that the problem could only be fully and finally 
solved by quite concrete investigation (including 
anatomical and physiological) of the material 
mechanism by which the thinking body (brain) 
managed to do the trick, truly mystically incom- 
prehensible (from the angle of purely geometric 
concepts). But that it did the trick—that it saw 
the thing and not the changes in the particles of 
the retina and brain that this body caused by its 
light effect within the brain—was an undoubted 
fact; and a fact calling for fundamental explana- 
tion and in a general way outlining paths for 
more concrete study in the future. 

What can the philosopher say here categori- 
cally, who remains a philosopher and does not 
become a physiologist, or an anatomist, or a 
physicist? Or rather, what can he say, without 
plunging into a game of the imagination, without 
trying to construct hypothetical mechanisms in 
the fancy by which the trick mentioned ‘might’, 
in general, be performed? What can he say while 
remaining on the ground of firmly established 
facts known before and independently of any con- 
crete, physiological investigation of the inner 
mechanisms of the thinking body, and not 
capable either of being refuted or made doubtful 


89 


by any further probing within the eye and the 
skull? 

In the given, partial, though very characteristic 
case, there is another, more general problem, 
namely that of the relation of philosophy as a 
special science to the concrete research of the 
natural sciences. Spinoza’s position on this point 
cannot in principle be explained if we start from 
the positivist idea that philosophy has made all 
its outstanding achievements (and makes them) 
only by purely empirical ‘generalisation of the 
progress of its contemporary natural sciences’. 
Because natural science did not find the answers 
to the problem before us either in the seventeenth 
century, in Spinoza’s time, or even in our day, 
three hundred years later. Furthermore, the 
natural science of his day did not even suspect 
the existence of such a problem; and when it did, 
knew it only in a theological formulation. As 
for the ‘soul’ or ‘spirit’, and in general everything 
connected one way or another with ‘spiritual’, 
psychic life, the natural scientists of the time 
(even the great ones like Isaac Newton) found 
themselves prisoners of the prevailing (ie. re- 
ligious, theological) illusions. Spiritual life they 
gladly left to the Church, and humbly acknowl- 
edged its authority, interesting themselves exclu- 
sively in the mechanical characteristics of the 
surrounding world. And everything that was 
inexplicable on purely mechanical grounds was 
not subjected to scientific study at all but was left 
to the competence of religion. 

If Spinoza had in fact tried to construct his 


40 


| 
‘ 
' 
: 
‘ 
‘ 


philosophical system by the method that our con- 
temporary positivism would have recommended 
to him, it is not difficult to imagine what he would 
have produced as a ‘system’. He would only have 
brought together the purely mechanical and re- 
ligious, mystical ‘general ideas’ that were guiding 
all (or almost all) naturalists in his day. Spinoza 
understood very clearly that religious, theological 
mysticism was the inevitable complement of a 
purely mechanistic (geometrical, mathematical) 
world outlook, i.e. the point of view that considers 
the sole ‘objective’ properties of the real world 
to be only the spatial, geometrical forms and 
relations of bodies. His greatness was that he did 
not plod along behind contemporaneous natural 
science, i.e. behind the one-sided, mechanistic 
thinking of the coryphaei of the science of the 
day, but subjected this way of thinking to well 
substantiated criticism from the angle of the 
specific concepts of philosophy as a special scien- 
ce. This feature of Spinoza’s thinking was brought 
out clearly and explicitly by Frederick Engels: 
‘It is to the highest credit of the philosophy of the 
time that it did not let itself be led astray by the 
restricted state of contemporary natural know- 
ledge, and that—from Spinoza right to the great 
French materialists—it insisted on explaining the 
world from the world itself and left the justifica- 
tion in detail to the natural science of the future.” 

That is why Spinoza has come down in the 


3 Frederick Engels. Dialectics of Nature. Translated by 
Clemens Dutt (Lawrence and Wishart, London, 1940) p7. 


41 


history of science as an equal contributor to its 
progress with Galileo and Newton, and not as 
their epigone, repeating after them the general 
ideas that could be drawn from their work. He 
investigated reality himself from the special, 
philosophical angle, and did not generalise the 
results and ready-made findings of other people’s 
investigation, did not bring together the general 
ideas of the science of his day and the methods of 
investigation characteristic of it, or the method- 
ology and logic of his contemporary science. He 
understood that that way led philosophy up a 
blind alley, and condemned it to the role of the 
wagon train bringing up in the rear of the 
attacking army the latter’s own ‘general ideas 
and methods’, including all the illusions and prej- 
udices incorporated in them. 

That is why he also developed ‘general ideas 
and methods of thought’ to which the natural 
science of the day had not yet risen, and armed 
future science with them, which recognised his 
greatness three centuries later through the pen of 
Albert Einstein, who wrote that he would have 
liked ‘old Spinoza’ as the umpire in his dispute 
with Niels Bohr on the fundamental problems of 
quantum mechanics rather than Carnap or 
Bertrand Russell, who were contending for the 
role of the ‘philosopher of modern science’ and 
spoke disdainfully of Spinoza’s philosophy as an 
‘outmoded’ point of view ‘which neither science 
nor philosophy can nowadays accept’.4 Spinoza’s 

4 Bertrand Russell. History of Western Philosophy 
(London, 1946) p 601. 


42 


understanding of thinking as the activity of that 
same nature to which extension also belonged is 
an axiom of the true modern philosophy of our 
century, to which true science is turning more and 
more confidently and consciously in our day 
(despite all the attempts to discredit it) as the 
point of view of true materialism. 

The brilliance of the solution of the problem 
of the relation of thinking to the world of bodies 
in space outside thought (i.e. outside the head of 
man), which Spinoza formulated in the form of 
the thesis that thought and extension are not two 
substances, but only two attributes of one and the 
same substance, can hardly be exaggerated. This 
solution immediately rejected every possible kind 
of interpretation and investigation of thought by 
the logic of spiritualist and dualist constructions, 
so making it possible to find a real way out both 
from the blind alley of the dualism of mind and 
body and from the specific blind alley of Hege- 
lianism. It is not fortuitous that Spinoza’s profound 
idea only first found true appreciation by the 
dialectical materialists Marx and Engels. Even 
Hegel found it a hard nut to crack. In fact, on 
the decisive point, he returned again to the posi- 
tion of Descartes, to the thesis that pure 
thought is the active cause of all the changes oc- 
curring in the ‘thinking body of man’, i.e. in the 
matter of the brain and sense organs, in language, 
in actions and their results, including in that the 
instruments of labour and historical events. 

From Spinoza’s standpoint thought before and 
outside of its spatial expression in the matter 


43 


proper to it simply does not exist. All talk about 
an idea that first arises and then tries to find 
material suitable for its incarnation, selecting the 
body of man and his brain as the most suitable 
and malleable material, all talk of thought first 
arising and then ‘being embodied in words’, in 
‘terms’ and ‘statements’, and later in actions, in 
deeds and their results, all such talk, therefore, 
from Spinoza’s point of view, is simply senseless 
or, what is the same thing, simply the atavism of 
religious theological ideas about the ‘incorporeal 
soul’ as the active cause of the human body’s 
actions. In other words, the sole alternative to 
Spinoza’s understanding proves to be the concep- 
tion that an idea can ostensibly exist first some- 
where and somehow outside the body of the 
thought and independently of it, and can then 
‘express itself’ in that body’s actions. 

What is thought then? How are we to find the 
true answer to this question, i.e. to give a 
scientific definition of this concept, and not simply 
to list all the actions that we habitually subsume 
under this term (reasoning, will, fantasy, etc.), as 
Descartes did? One quite clear recommendation 
follows from Spinoza’s position, namely: 
if thought is the mode of action of the thinking 
body, then, in order to define it, we are bound to 
investigate the mode of action of the thinking 
body very thoroughly, in contrast to the mode of 
action (mode of existence and movement) of the 
non-thinking body; and in no case whatsoever to 
investigate the structure or spatial composition 
of this body in an inactive state. Because the 


44 


thinking body, when it is inactive, is no longer 
a thinking body but simply a ‘body’. 

Investigation of all the material (i.e. spatially 
defined) mechanisms by which thought is effected 
within the human body, i.e. anatomical, physi- 
ological study of the brain, of course, is a most in- 
teresting scientific question; but even the fullest 
answers to it have no direct bearing on the answer 
to the question ‘What is thought?’. Because that 
is another question. One does not ask how legs 
capable of walking are constructed, but in what 
walking consists. What is thinking as the action 
of, albeit inseparable from, the material 
mechanisms by which it is effected, yet not in 
any way identical with mechanisms themselves? In 
the one case the question is about the structure of 
an organ, in the other about the function the organ 
performs. The ‘structure’, of course, must be such 
that it can carry out the appropriate function; 
legs are built so that they can walk and not so 
that they can think. The fullest description of the 
structure of an organ, i.e. a description of it in 
an inactive state, however, has no right to pres- 
ent itself as a description, however approximate, 
of the function that the organ performs, as a 
description of the real thing that it does. 

In order to understand the mode of action of 
the thinking body it is necessary to consider the 
mode of its active, causal interaction with other 
bodies both ‘thinking’ and ‘non-thinking’, and not 
its inner structure, not the spatial geometric rela- 
tions that exist between the cells of its body and 
between the organs located within its body. 


45 


The cardinal distinction between the mode of 
action of a thinking body and that of any other 
body, quite clearly noted by Descartes and the 
Cartesians, but not understood by them, is that 
the former actively builds (constructs) the shape 
(trajectory) of its own movement in space in con- 
formity with the shape (configuration and posi- 
tion) of the other body, co-ordinating the shape 
of its own movement (its own activity) with the 
shape of the other body, whatever it is. The 
proper, specific form of the activity of a thinking 
body consists consequently in universality, in that 
very property that Descartes actually noted as the 
chief distinction between human activity and the 
activity of an automaton copying its appearance, 
i.e. of a device structurally adapted to some one 
limited range of action even better than a human, 
but for that very reason unable to do ‘everything 
else’. 

Thus the human hand can perform movements 
in the form of a circle, or a square, or any other 
intricate geometrical figure you fancy, so reveal- 
ing that it was not designed structurally and 
anatomically in advance for any one of these 
‘actions’, and for that very reason is capable of 
performing any action. In this it differs, say, 
from a pair of compasses, which describe circles 
much more accurately than the hand but cannot 
draw the outlines of triangles or squares. In other 
words, the action of a body that ‘does not think’ 
(if only in the form of spatial movement, in the 
form of the simplest and most obvious case) is 
determined by its own inner construction, by its 


46 


‘nature’, and is quite unco-ordinated with the 
shape of the other bodies among which it moves. 
It therefore either disturbs the shapes of the other 
bodies or is itself broken in colliding with in- 
superable obstacles. 

Man, however, the thinking body, builds his 
movement on the shape of any other body. He 
does not wait until the insurmountable resistance 
of other bodies forces him to turn off from his 
path; the thinking body goes freely round any 
obstacle of the most complicated form. The 
capacity of a thinking body to mould its own 
action actively to the shape of any other body, to 
co-ordinate the shape of its movement in space 
with the shape and distribution of all other 
bodies, Spinoza considered to be its distinguishing 
sign and the specific feature of that activity that 
we call ‘thinking’ or ‘reason’. 

This capacity, as such, has its own gradations 
and levels of ‘perfection’, and manifests itself to 
the maximum in man, in any case much more 
so than in any other creature known to us. But 
man is not divided from the lower creatures at 
all by that impassable boundary that Descartes 
drew between them by his concept of ‘soul’ or 
‘spirit’. The actions of animals, especially of the 
higher animals, are also subsumed, though to a 
limited degree, under Spinoza’s definition of 
thinking. 

This is a very important point, which presents 
very real interest. For Descartes the animal was 
only an automaton, i.e. all its actions were 
determined in advance by ready-made structures, 


47 


internally inherent to it, and by the distribution 
of the organs located within its body. These actions, 
therefore, could and had to be completely 
explained by the following scheme: external 
effect—movement of the inner parts of the body— 
external reaction. The last represents the response 
(action, movement) of the body evoked by the 
external effect, which in essence is only trans- 
formed by the working of the inner parts of the 
body, following the scheme rigidly programmed 
in its construction. There is a full analogy with 
the working of a self-activating mechanism (pres- 
sure on a button—working of the parts inside the 
mechanism—movement of its external parts). 
This explanation excluded the need for any kind 
of ‘incorporeal soul’; everything was beautifully 
explained without its intervention. Such in gen- 
eral, and on the whole, is the theoretical scheme 
of a reflex that was developed two hundred years 
later in natural science in the work of Sechenov 
and Pavlov. 

But this scheme is not applicable to man be- 
cause in him, as Descartes himself so well under- 
stood, there is a supplementary link in the chain 
of events (i.e. in the chain of external effect— 
working of the inner bodily organs according to 
a ready-made scheme structurally embodied in 
them—external reaction) that powerfully inter- 
feres with it, forces its way into it, breaking the 
ready-made chain and then joining its discon- 
nected ends together in a new way, each time in 
a different way, each time in accordance with new 
conditions and circumstances in the external 


48 


action not previously foreseen by any prepared 
scheme and this supplementary link is ‘reflection’ 
or ‘consideration’. But a ‘reflection’ is that activity 
(in no way outwardly expressed) which directs 
reconstruction of the very schemes of the trans- 
formation of the initial effect into response. Here 
the body itself is the object of its own activity. 

Man’s ‘response’ mechanisms are by no means 
switched on just as soon as ‘the appropriate button 
is pressed’, as soon as he experiences an effect 
from outside. Before he responds he contemplates, 
i.e. he does not act immediately according to any 
one prepared scheme, like an automaton or an 
animal, but considers the scheme of the forth- 
coming action critically, elucidating each time 
how far it corresponds to the needs of the new 
conditions, and actively correcting, even designing 
all over again, the whole set-up and scheme of the 
future actions in accordance with the external 
circumstances and the forms of things. 

And since the forms of things and the circum- 
stances of actions are in principle infinite in 
number, the ‘soul’ (i.e. ‘contemplation’) must be 
capable of an infinite number of actions. But that 
is impossible to provide for in advance in the 
form of ready-made, bodily programmed schemes. 
Thinking is the capacity of actively building and 
reconstructing schemes of external action in ac- 
cordance with any new circumstances, and does 
not operate according to a prepared scheme as an 
automaton or any inanimate body does. 

‘For while reason is a universal instrument 
which can serve for all contingencies, these 


4—83! 49 


[bodily —EUI/] organs have need of some special 
adaptation for every particular action,’ Descartes 
wrote.® For that reason he was unable to conceive 
of the organ of thought bodily, as structurally 
organised in space. Because, in that case, as many 
ready-made, structurally programmed patterns of 
action would have to be postulated in it as there 
were external bodies and combinations of external 
bodies and contingencies that the thinking body 
would generally encounter in its path, that is, in 
principle, an infinite number. ‘From this it 
follows,’ Descartes said, ‘that it is morally im- 
possible that there should be sufficient diversity in 
any machine to allow it to act in all the events 
of life in the same way as our reason causes us 
to act,’ i.e. each time taking account again of 
any of the infinite conditions and circumstances 
of the external action. (The adverb ‘morally’ in 
Descartes’ statement, of course, does not mean 
impossible ‘from the aspect of morals’ or of ‘moral 
principles’, etc., moralement in French meaning 
‘mentally’ or ‘intellectually’ in general.) 

Spinoza counted the considerations that drove 
Descartes to adopt the concept of ‘soul’ to be 
quite reasonable. But why not suppose that the 
organ of thought, while remaining wholly 
corporeal and therefore incapable of having 
schemes of its present and future actions ready- 
made and innate within it together with its 
bodily-organised structure, was capable of active- 


5 René Descartes. Op. cit., p 59. 
8 Ibid., p 59. 


50 


ly building them anew each time in accordance 
with the forms and arrangement of the ‘external 
things’? Why not suppose that the thinking thing 
was designed in a special way; that not having 
any ready-made schemes of action within it, it 
acted for that very reason in accordance with 
whatever scheme was dictated to it at a given 
moment by the forms and combinations of other 
bodies located outside it? For that was the real 
role or function of the thinking thing, the only 
functional definition of thinking corresponding to 
the facts that it was impossible to deduce from 
structural analysis of the organ in which and by 
means of which it (thinking) was performed. Even 
more so, a functional definition of thinking as 
action according to the shape of any other thing 
also puts structural, spatial study of the thinking 
thing on the right track, i.e. study in particular of 
the body of the brain. It is necessary to elucidate 
and discover in the thinking thing those very 
structural features that enable it to perform its 
specific function, i.e. to act, not according to the 
scheme of its own structure but according to the 
scheme and location of all other things, including 
its own body. 

In that form the materialist approach to the 
investigation of thought comes out clearly. Such is 
the truly materialist, functional definition of 
thought, or its definition as the active function of 
a natural body organised in a special way, which 
prompts both logic (the system of functional 
definitions of thought) and brain physiology (a 
system of concepts reflecting the material structure 


4% 51 


of the organ in and by which this function is 
performed) to make a really scientific investiga- 
tion of the problem of thought, and which excludes 
any possibility of interpreting thinking and the 
matter of its relation to the brain by the logic of 
either spiritualist and dualist constructions or of 
vulgar mechanistic ones. 

In order to understand thought as a function, 
i.e. as the mode of action of thinking things in 
the world of all other things, it is necessary to go 
beyond the bounds of considering what goes on 
inside the thinking body, and how (whether it 
is the human brain or the human being as a whole 
who possesses this brain is a matter of in- 
difference), and to examine the real system 
within which this function is performed, i.e. the 
system of relations ‘thinking body and its object’. 
What we have in mind here, moreover, is not any 
single object or other in accordance with whose 
form the thinking body’s activity is built in any 
one specific case, but any object in general, and 
correspondingly any possible ‘meaningful act’ or 
action in accordance with the form of its object. 

Thought can therefore only be understood 
through investigation of its mode of action in the 
system thinking body—nature as a whole (with 
Spinoza it is ‘substance’, ‘God’). But if we examine 
a system of smaller volume and scale, i.e. the 
relations of the thinking body with as wide a 
sphere of ‘things’ and their forms as you like, 
but still limited, then we shall not arrive at what 
thought is in general (thought in the whole full- 
ness of its possibilities associated with its nature), 


52 


but only at that limited mode of thinking that 
happens in a given case; and we shall therefore 
be taking only definitions of a partial case of 
thinking, only its modus (in Spinoza’s_par- 
lance) as scientific definitions of thought in 
general. 

The whole business consists in this, that the 
thinking body (in accordance with its nature) is 
not linked at all by its structural, anatomical 
organisation with any partial mode of action 
whatsoever (with any partial form of the external 
bodies). It is linked with them, but only current- 
ly, at the given moment, and by no means origi- 
nally or forever. Its mode of action has a clearly 
expressed universal character, i.e. is constantly 
being extended, embracing ever newer and newer 
things and forms of things, and actively and 
plastically adapting itself to them. 

That is why Spinoza also defined thought as an 
attribute of substance, and not as its modus, not 
as a partial case. Thus he affirmed, in the language 
of his day, that the single system, within which 
thought was found of necessity and not fortuitous- 
ly (which it may or may not be), was not a single 
body or even as wide a range of bodies as you 
wished, but only and solely nature as a whole. 
The individual body possessed thought only by 
virtue cf chance or coincidence. The crossing and 
combination of masses of chains of cause and 
effect could lead in one case to the appearance of 
a thinking body and in another case simply to 
a body, a stone, a tree, etc. So that the individual 
body, even the human body, did not possess 


53 


thought one whit of necessity. Only nature as a 
whole was that system which possessed all its 
perfections, including thought, of absolute neces- 
sity, although it did not realise this perfection in 
any single body and at any moment of time, or 
in any of its ‘modi’. 

In defining thought as an attribute Spinoza 
towered above any representative of mechanistic 
materialism and was at least two centuries in 
advance of his time in putting forward a thesis 
that Engels expressed in rather different words: 
‘The point is, however, that mechanism (and also 
the materialism of the eighteenth century) does 
not get away from abstract necessity, and hence 
not from chance either. That matter evolves out 
of itself the thinking human brain is for him 
[Haeckel] a pure accident, although necessarily 
determined, step by step, where it happens. But 
the truth is that it is in the nature of matter to 
advance to the evolution of thinking beings, 
hence, too, this always necessarily occurs wher- 
ever the conditions for it (not necessarily identical 
at all places and times) are present.” 

That is what distinguishes materialism, sensible 
and dialectical, from mechanistic materialism that 
knows and recognises only one variety of ‘neces- 
sity, namely that which is described in the 
language of mechanistically interpreted physics 
and mathematics. Yes, only Nature as a whole, 
understood as an infinite whole in space and time, 
generating its own partial forms from itself, pos- 


7 Frederick Engels. Dialectics of Nature, p 228. 


54 


sesses at any moment of time, though not at any 
point of space, all the wealth of its attributes, .i.e. 
those properties that are reproduced in its make- 
up of necessity and not by a chance, miraculous 
coincidence that might just as well not have 
happened. 

Hence it inevitably follows logically, as Engels 
said, ‘that matter remains eternally the same in 
all its transformations, that none of its attributes 
can ever be lost, and therefore, also, that with the 
same iron necessity that it will exterminate on 
the earth its highest creation, the thinking mind, 
it must somewhere else and at another time again 
produce it.’8 

That was Spinoza’s standpoint, a circumstance 
that seemingly gave Engels grounds for replying 
categorically and unambiguously to Plekhanov 
when he asked: ‘So in your opinion old Spinoza 
was right in saying that thought and extension 
were nothing but two attributes of one and the 
same substance?’ “Of course,” answered Engels, 
“old Spinoza was quite right”. 

Spinoza’s definition means the following: in 
man, as in any other possible thinking creature, 
the same matter thinks as in other cases (other 
modi) only ‘extends’ in the form of stones or any 
other ‘unthinking body’; that thought in fact 
cannot be separated from world matter and 
counterposed to it itself as a special, incorporeal 


8 Ibid., p 25. 
2G. V. Plekhanov. Bernstein and Materialism. In: 
Sochineniya, Vol. XI (Moscow-Petrograd, 1923) p 22. 


55 


‘soul’, and it (thought) is matter’s own perfection. 
That is how Herder and Goethe, La Mettrie and 
Diderot, Marx and Plekhanov (all great ‘Spino- 
zists’) and even the young Schelling, understood 
Spinoza. 

Such, let us emphasise once more, is the general, 
methodological position that later allowed Lenin 
to declare that it was reasonable to assume, as the 
very foundation of matter, a property akin to 
sensation though not identical with it, the property 
of reflection. Thought, too, according to Lenin, is 
the highest form of development of this universal 
property or attribute, extremely vital for matter. 
And if we deny matter this most important of its 
attributes, we shall be thinking of matter itself 
‘imperfectly’, as Spinoza put it, or simply, as 
Engels and Lenin wrote, incorrectly, one-sidedly, 
and mechanistically. And then, as a result, we 
should continually be falling into the most real 
Berkeleianism, into interpreting nature as a 
complex of our sensations, as the bricks or 
elements absolutely specific to the animated being 
from which the whole world of ideas is built 
(i.e. the world as and how we know it). Because 
Berkeleianism too is the absolutely inevitable 
complement making good of a one-sided, mecha- 
nistic understanding of nature. That is why 
Spinoza too said that substance, i.e. the universal 
world matter, did not possess just the single at- 
tribute of ‘being extended’ but also possessed 
many other properties and attributes as inalienable 
from it (inseparable from it though separable 
from any ‘finite’ body). 


56 


| 


Spinoza said more than once that it was imper- 
missible to represent thought as attribute in the 
image and likeness of human thought; it was only 
the universal property of substance that was the 
basis of any ‘finite thought’, including human 
thought, but in no case was it identical with it. 
To represent thought in general in the image and 
likeness of existing human thought, of its modus, 
or ‘particular case’, meant simply to represent it 
incorrectly, in ‘an incomplete way’, by a ‘model’, 
so to say, of its far from most perfected image 
(although the most perfected known to us). 

With that Spinoza also linked his profound 
theory of truth and error, developed in detail in 
the Ethica ordine geometrico demonstrata (Ethics), 
Tractatus de intellectus emendatione, Tractatus 
theologico-politicus, and in numerous letters. 

If the mode of action of the thinking body as 
a whole is determined in the form of an ‘other’, 
and not of the immanent structure of ‘this’ body, 
the problem arises, how ever are we to recognise 
error? The question was posed then with special 
sharpness because it appeared in ethics and theo- 
logy as the problem of ‘sin’ and ‘evil’. The 
criticism of Spinozism from the angle of theology 
was invariably directed at this point; Spinoza’s 
teaching took all the sense out of the very dis- 
tinguishing of ‘good and evil’, ‘sin and righteous- 
ness’, ‘truth and error’. In fact, in what then did 
they differ? 

Spinoza’s answer again was simple, like any 
fundamentally true answer. Error (and hence 
‘evil’ and ‘sin’) was not a characteristic of ideas 


57 


and actions as regards their own composition, 
and was not a positive attribute of them. The 
erring man also acted in strict accordance with 
a thing’s form, but the question was what the 
thing was. If it were ‘trivial’, ‘imperfect’ in itself, 
i.e. fortuitous, the mode of action adapted to it 
would also be imperfect. And if a person trans- 
ferred this mode of action to another thing, he 
would slip up. 

Error, consequently, only began when a mode 
of action that was limitedly true was given uni- 
versal significance, when the relative was taken 
for the absolute. It is understandable why Spinoza 
put so low a value on acting by abstract, formal 
analogy, formal deduction based on an abstract 
universal. What was fixed in the abstract ‘idea’ 
was what most often struck the eye. But it, of 
course, could be a quite accidental property and 
form of the thing; and that meant that the nar- 
rower the sphere of the natural whole with 
which the person was concerned, the greater was 
the measure of error and the smaller the meas- 
ure of truth. For that very reason the activity of 
the thinking body was in direct proportion to the 
adequateness of its ideas. The more passive the 
person, the greater was the power of the nearest, 
purely external circumstances over him, and the 
more his mode of action was determined by the 
chance form of things; conversely, the more 
actively he extended the sphere of nature deter- 
mining his activity, the more adequate were his 
ideas. The complacent position of the philistine 
was therefore the greatest sin. 


58 


Man’s thinking could achieve ‘maximum per- 
fection’ (and then it would be identical with 
thought as the attribute of substance) only in one 
case, when his actions conformed with all the 
conditions that the infinite aggregate of interact- 
ing things, and of their forms and combinations, 
imposed on them, i.e. if they were built in accord- 
ance with the absolutely universal necessity of 
the natural whole and not simply with some one 
of its limited forms. Real earthly man was, of 
course, still very, very far from that, and the 
attribute of thought was therefore only realised 
in him in a very limited and ‘imperfect’ (finite) 
form; and it would be fallacious to build oneself 
an idea of thinking as an attribute of substance 
in the image and likeness of finite human thought. 
On the contrary one’s finite thought must be built 
in the image and likeness of thought in general. 
For finite thought the philosophical, theoretical 
definition of thinking as an attribute of substance 
poses some sort of ideal model, to which man 
can and must endlessly approximate, though nev- 
er having the power to bring himself up to it 
in level of ‘perfection’. 

That is why the idea of substance and its all- 
embracing necessity functioned as the principle 
of the constant perfecting or improvement of in- 
tellect. As such it had immense significance. Every 
‘finite’ thing was correctly understood only as a 
‘fading moment’ in the bosom of infinite sub- 
stance; and not one of its ‘partial forms’, however 
often encountered, should be given universal sig- 
nificance. 


59 


In order to disclose the really general, truly 
universal forms of things in accordance with 
which the ‘perfected’ thinking body should act, 
another criterion and another mode of knowledge 
than formal abstraction was required. The idea 
of substance was not formed by abstracting the 
attribute that belonged equally to extension and 
thought. The abstract and general in them was 
only that they existed, existence in general, i.e. 
an absolutely empty determination in no way dis- 
closing the nature of the one or the other. The 
really general (infinite, universal) relation be- 
tween thought and spatial, geometric reality could 
only be understood, i.e. the idea of substance ar- 
rived at, through real understanding of their 
mode of interaction within nature. Spinoza’s 
whole doctrine was just the disclosure of this 
‘infinite’ relation. 

Substance thus proved to be an absolutely nec- 
essary condition, without assuming which it 
was impossible in principle to understand the 
mode of the interaction between the thinking 
body and the world within which it operated as 
a thinking body. This is a profoundly dialectical 
point. Only by proceeding from the idea of sub- 
stance could the thinking body understand both 
itself and the reality with and within which it 
operated and about which it thought; any other 
way it could not understand either the one or 
the other and was forced to resort to the idea of 
an outside power, to a theologically interpreted 
‘God’, to a miracle. But, having once understood 
the mode of its actions (ie. thought), the thinking 


60 


body just so comprehended substance as the ab- 
solutely necessary condition of interaction with 
the external world. 

Spinoza called the mode of knowledge or cog- 
nition described here ‘intuitive’. In creating an 
adequate idea of itself, i.e. of the form of its 
own movement along the contours of external 
objects, the thinking body thus also created an 
adequate idea of the forms and contours of the 
objects themselves. Because it was one and the 
same form, one and the same contour. In _ this 
understanding of the intuitive there was nothing 
resembling subjective introspection. Rather the 
contrary. On Spinoza’s lips intuitive knowledge 
was a synonym of rational understanding by the 
thinking body of the laws of its own actions 
within nature. In giving itself a rational account 
of what and how it did in fact operate, the think- 
ing body at the same time formed a true idea of 
the object of its activity. 

From that there followed the consistent mate- 
rialist conclusion that ‘the true definition of any 
one thing neither involves nor expresses anything 
except the nature of the thing defined’.!? That 
is why there can only be one correct definition 
(idea) in contrast and in opposition to the plu- 
rality and variety of the individual bodies of the 
same nature. These bodies are as real as the 
unity (identity) of their ‘nature’ expressed by the 
definition in the ‘attribute of thought’ and by 

10 Benedict de Spinoza. Ethics. Translated by W. H. 


White. In: Great Books of the Western World, Vol. 31, 
Descartes, Spinoza, p 357. 


61 


real diversity in the ‘attribute of extension’. 
Variety and plurality are clearly understood here 
as modes of realisation of their own opposition, 
ice. of the identity and unity of their ‘nature’. 
That is a distinctly dialectical understanding of 
the relation between them, in contrast to the fee- 
ble eclectic formula (often fobbed off dialectics) 
that ‘both unity and plurality’, ‘both identity and 
difference’ equally really exist. Because eclectic 
pseudodialectics, when it comes down to solving 
the problem of knowledge and of ‘definition’ or 
‘determination’, arrives safely at exactly the con- 
trary (compared with Spinoza’s solution), at the 
idea that ‘the definition of a concept’ is a verbally 
fixed form of expression in consciousness, in the 
idea of a real, sensuously given variety. 

Talk of the objective identity, existing outside 
the head, of the nature of a given range of var- 
ious and opposing single phenomena thus safely 
boils down to talk about the purely formal unity 
(i.e. similarity, purely external identity) of sen- 
suously contemplated, empirically given things, of 
isolated facts, formally subsumed under ‘con- 
cept’. And it then generally becomes impossible 
to consider the ‘definition of the concept’ as the 
determination of the nature of the defined thing. 
The starting point then proves to be not the 
‘identity and unity’ of the phenomena but in fact 
the ‘variety and plurality’ of isolated facts alleg- 
edly existing originally quite ‘independently’ of 
one another, and later only formally united, tied 
together as it were with string, by the ‘unity of 
the concept’ and the ‘identity of the name’. So 


62 


the sole result proves to be the identity in con- 
sciousness (or rather in name) of the initially het- 
erogeneous facts, and their purely verbal ‘unity’. 

Hence it is not difficult to understand why Neo- 
positivists are dissatisfied with Spinoza and at- 
tack the logical principle of his thinking. ‘Spino- 
za’s metaphysic is the best example of what may 
be called “logic monism”—the doctrine, namely, 
that the world as a whole is a single substance, 
none of whose parts are logically capable of exist- 
ing alone. The ultimate basis for this view is the 
belief that every proposition has a single subject 
and a single predicate, which leads us to the 
conclusion that relations and plurality must be 
illusory.’!4 

The alternative to Spinoza’s view, in fact, is 
the affirmation that any ‘part’ of the world is not 
only ‘capable’ of ‘existing’ independently of all 
other parts, but must do so. As another authority 
of this trend postulated it, ‘the world is the total- 
ity of facts, not of things’, by virtue of which ‘the 
world divides into facts’, and so ‘any one can 
either be the case or not be the case, and every- 
thing else remain the same’.!2 

Thus, according to the ‘metaphysic of Neopos- 
itivism’, the external world must be considered 
some kind of immeasurable accumulation, a 
simple conglomeration, of ‘atomic facts’ abso- 
lutely independent of each other, the ‘proper de- 


{1 Bertrand Russell. Op. cit., pp 600-601. 
2 Ludwig Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
(London, 1955) p 31. 


63. 


termination’ of each of which is bound to be ab- 
solutely independent of the determination of any 
other fact. The determination (definition, descrip- 
tion) remains ‘correct’ even given the condition 
that there are no other facts in general. In other 
words, ‘a scientific consideration of the world’ 
consists in a purely formal, verbal uniting of a 
handful of odd facts by subsuming them under 
one and the same term, under one and the same 
‘general’. The ‘general’, interpreted only as the 
‘meaning of the term or sign’, always turns out 
to be something quite arbitrary or ‘previously 
agreed upon’, ie. ‘conventional’. The ‘gen- 
eral’ (unity and identity) as the sole result of 
the ‘scientific logical’ treatment of the ‘atomic 
facts’, is consequently not the result at all, but 
a previously established, conventional meaning of 
the term, and nothing more. 

Spinoza’s position, of course, had no connection 
with this principle of ‘logical analysis’ of the 
phenomena given in contemplation and imagina- 
tion. For him the ‘general’, ‘identical’, ‘united’ 
were by no means illusions created only by our 
speech (language), by its subject-predicate struc- 
ture (as Russell put it), but primarily the real, 
general nature of things. And that nature must 
find its verbal expression in a correct definition 
of the concept. It is not true, moreover, that ‘re- 
Jations and plurality must be illusory’ for Spino- 
za, as Russell said. That is not at all like Spinoza, 
and the affirmation of it is on Russell’s conscience, 
that he should have stooped so low to discredit 
the ‘concept of substance’ in the eyes of ‘modern 


64 


science’ as ‘incompatible with modern logic and 
with scientific method’.!3 

One thing, however, is beyond doubt here: 
what Russell called ‘modern logic and scientific 
method’ really is incompatible with the logic of 
Spinoza’s thinking, with his principles of the 
development of scientific definitions, with his 
understanding of ‘correct definitions’. For Spinoza 
‘relations and plurality’ were not ‘illusory’ (as 
Russell described them) and ‘identity and unity’ 
were not illusions created solely by the ‘subject- 
predicate structure’ (as Russell himself thought). 
Both the one and the other were wholly real, and 
both existed in ‘God’, i.e. in the very nature of 
things, quite irrespective of whatever the verbal 
structures of the so-called ‘language of science’ 
were. 

But for Bertrand Russell, both the one and the 
other were equally illusions. ‘Identity’ (i.e. the 
principle of substance, of the general nature of 
things), was an illusion created by language and 
‘relations and plurality’ were illusions created by 
our own sensuality. But what, in fact, is inde- 
pendent of our illusions? I do not know and I 
don’t want to know; I don’t want to know because 
I cannot, Russell answered. I know only what is 
the ‘world’ given to me in my sensations and 
perceptions (where it is something ‘plural’) and 
in my language (where it is something ‘identical’ 
and related). But what is there besides this 
‘world’? God only knows, answered Russell, word 


43 Bertrand Russell. Op. cit., p 601. 


5—831 


65 


for word repeating Bishop Berkeley’s thesis, 
though not risking to affirm categorically after 
him that ‘God’ in fact ‘knew’ it, because it was 
still not known if God himself existed. 

There we have the polar contrast of the posi- 
tions of Spinoza and of Berkeley and Hume (whom 
the Neopositivists are now trying to galvanise 
back to life). Berkeley and Hume also primarily 
attacked the whole concept of substance, trying 
to explain it as the product of an ‘impious mind’. 
Because there is a really unpersuasive alternative 
here, namely two polar and mutually exclusive 
solutions of one and the same problem—the pro- 
blem of the relation of ‘the world in conscious- 
ness’ (in particular in ‘correct definition’) to the 
‘world outside consciousness’ (outside ‘verbal defi- 
nition’). For here a choice must be made: either 
nature, including man as part of it, must be 
understood through the logic of the ‘concept of 
substance’, or it must be interpreted as a complex 
of one’s sensations. 

But let us return to consideration of Spinoza’s 
conception. Spinoza well understood all the scep- 
tical arguments against the possibility of finding 
a single one correct definition of the thing that 
we are justified in taking as a definition of the 
nature of the thing itself and not of the specific 
state and arrangement of the organs within our- 
selves, in the form of which this thing is repre- 
sented ‘within us’. In considering different va- 
riants of the interpretation of one and the same 
thing, Spinoza drew the following direct conclu- 
sion: ‘All these things sufficiently show that every 


66 


one judges things by the constitution of his brain, 
or rather accepts the affections of his imagination 
in the place of things.’ In other words, we have 
within us, in the form of ideas, not the thing itself 
and its proper form, but only the inner state that 
the effect of the external things evoked in our 
body (in the corpus of the brain). 

Therefore, in the ideas we directly have of the 
external world, two quite dissimilar things are 
muddled and mixed up: the form of our own 
body and the form of the bodies outside it. The 
naive person immediately and uncritically takes 
this hybrid for an external thing, and therefore 
judges things in conformity with the specific state 
evoked in his brain and sense organs by an ex- 
ternal effect in no way resembling that state. 
Spinoza gave full consideration to the Cartesians’ 
argument (later taken up by Bishop Berkeley), 
that toothache was not at all identical in geomet- 
ric form to a dentist’s drill and even to the geo- 
metric form of the changes the drill produced in 
the tooth and the brain. The brain of every per- 
son, moreover, was built and tuned differently, 
from which we get the sceptical conclusion of the 
plurality of truths and of the absence of a truth 
one and the same for all thinking beings. ‘For 
every one has heard the expressions: So many 
heads, so many ways of thinking; Each is wise in 
his own manner; Differences of brains are not less 
common than differences of taste;—all which 
maxims show that men decide upon matters ac- 


4 Spinoza. Op. cit., p 372. 


67 


cording to the constitution of their brains, and 
imagine rather than understand things.’ 

The point is this, to understand and correctly 
determine the thing itself, its proper form, and 
not the means by which it is represented inside 
ourselves, i.e. in the form of geometric changes 
in the body of our brain and its microstructures. 
But how is that to be done? Perhaps, in order to 
obtain the pure form of the thing, it is simply 
necessary to ‘subtract’ from the idea all its ele- 
ments that introduce the arrangement (disposi- 
tion) and means of action of our own body, of 
its sense organs and brain into the pure form of 
the thing? 

But (1) we know as little of how our brain is 
constructed and what exactly it introduces into 
the composition of the idea of a thing as we know 
of the external body itself; and (2) the thing in 
general cannot be given to us in any other way 
than through the specific changes that it has 
evoked in our body. If we ‘subtract’ everything 
received from the thing in the course of its re- 
fraction through the prism of our body, sense or- 
gans, and brain, we get pure nothing. “Within us’ 
there remains nothing, no idea of any kind. So 
it is impossible to proceed that way. 

However differently from any other thing man’s 
body and brain are built they all have something 
in common with one another, and it is to the 
finding of this something common that the activity 
of reason is in fact directed, i.e. the real activity 
of our body that we call ‘thinking’. 

5 Spinoza. Op. cit., p 372. 


68 


In other words an adequate idea is only the 
conscious state of our body identical in form with 
the thing outside the body. This can be represent- 
ed quite clearly. When I describe a circle with 
my hand on a piece of paper (in real space), my 
body, according to Spinoza, comes into a state 
fully identical with the form of the circle out- 
side my body, into a state of real action in the 
form of a circle. My body (my hand) really de- 
scribes a circle, and the awareness of this state 
(i.e. of the form of my own action in the form of 
the thing) is also the idea, which is, moreover, 
‘adequate’. 

And since ‘the human body needs for its pres- 
ervation many other bodies by which it is, as it 
were, continually regenerated’’®, and since it “can 
move and arrange external bodies in many ways’"’, 
it is in the activity of the human body in the 
shape of another external body that Spinoza saw 
the key to the solution of the whole problem. 
Therefore ‘the human mind is adapted to the 
perception of many things, and its aptitude in- 
creases in proportion to the number of ways in 
which its body can be disposed.’!8 In other words, 
the more numerous and varied the means it has 
‘to move and arrange external bodies’, the more 
it has ‘in common’ with other bodies. Thus the 
body, knowing how to be in a state of movement 
along the contours of a circle, in that way knows 


16 Tbid., p 380. 
17 bid. 
18 [bid. 


how to be in a state in common with the state 
and arrangement of all circles or external bodies 
moving in a circle. 

In possessing consciousness of my own. state 
(actions along the shape of some contour or other), 
I thus also possess a quite exact awareness (ade- 
quate idea) of the shape of the external body. 
That, however, only happens where and when I 
actively determine myself, and the states of my 
body, i.e. its actions, in accordance with the shape 
of the external body, and not in conformity with 
the structure and arrangement of my own body 
and its ‘parts’. The more of these actions I know 
how to perform, the more perfect is my thinking, 
and the more adequate are the ideas included in 
the ‘mind’ (as Spinoza continued to express it, 
using the language normal to his contemporaries), 
or simply in the conscious states of my body, as 
he interpreted the term ‘mind’ on neighbouring 
pages. 

Descartes’ dualism between the world of ex- 
ternal objects and the inner states of the human 
body thus disappeared right at the very start of 
the explanation. It is interpreted as a difference 
within one and the same world (the world of 
bodies), as a difference in their mode of existence 
(‘action’). The ‘specific structure’ of the human 
body and brain is here, for the first time, inter- 
preted not as a barrier separating us from the 
world of things, which are not at all like that 
body, but on the contrary as the same property 
of universality that enables the thinking body 
(in contrast to all others) to be in the very same 


states as things, and to possess forms in common 
with them. 

Spinoza himself expressed it thus: “There will 
exist in the human mind an adequate idea of 
that which is common and proper to the human 
body, and to any external bodies by which the 
human body is generally affected—of that which 
is equally in the part of each of these external 
bodies and in the whole is common and proper. 

‘Hence it follows that the more things the 
body has in common with other bodies, the more 
things will the mind be adapted to perceive.’ 

Hence, also it follows that ‘some ideas or no- 
tions exist which are common to all men, for ... 
all bodies agree in some things, which ... must 
be adequately, that is to say, clearly and distinct- 
ly, perceived by all.”2° In no case can these 
‘common ideas’ be interpreted as specific forms 
of the human body, and they are only taken for 
the forms of external bodies by mistake (as hap- 
pened with the Cartesians and later with Ber- 
keley), despite the fact that ‘the human mind per- 
ceives no external body as actually existing, un- 
less through the ideas of the affections of its 
body’.?! 

The fact is that the ‘affections of one’s body’ are 
quite objective, being the actions of the body in 
the world of bodies, and not the results of the 
action of bodies on something unlike them, ‘in- 


19 Spinoza. Op. cit., pp 386, 387. 
20 Ibid., p 386. 
21 Tbid., p 384. 


corporeal’. Therefore, ‘he who possesses a body 
fit for many things possesses a mind of which 
the greater part is eternal’. 

From all that it follows that ‘the more we un- 
derstand individual objects, the more we under- 
stand God,’ i.e. the general universal nature of 
things, world substance; the more individual 
things our activity embraces and the deeper and 
more comprehensively we determine our body to 
act along the shape of the external bodies them- 
selves, and the more we become an active com- 
ponent in the endless chain of the causal relations 
of the natural whole, the greater is the extent to 
which the power of our thinking is increased, and 
the less there is of the ‘specific constitution’ of our 
body and brain mixed into the ‘ideas’ ‘making 
them ‘vague and inadequate’ (ideas of the ima- 
gination and not of ‘intellect’). The more active 
our body is, the more universal it is, the less it 
introduces ‘from itself’, and the more purely it 
discloses the real nature of things. And the more 
passive it is, the more the constitution and arrange- 
ment of the organs within it (brain, nervous 
system, sense organs, etc.) affect ideas. 

Therefore the real composition of psychic activ- 
ity (including the logical component of thought) 
is not in the least determined by the structure and 
arrangement of the parts of the human body and 
brain, but by the external conditions of univer- 
sally human activity in the world of other bodies. 


22 Spinoza. Op. cit., p 462. 
2 Ibid., p 458. 


72 


This functional determination gives an exact 
orientation to structural analysis of the brain, 
fixes the general goal, and gives a criterion by 
which we can distinguish the structures through 
which thinking is carried on within the brain from 
those that are completely unrelated to the process 
of thought, but govern, say, digestion, circulation 
of the blood, and so on. 

That is why Spinoza reacted very ironically to 
all contemporaneous ‘morphological’ hypotheses, 
and in particular to that of the special role of 
the ‘pineal gland’ as primarily the organ of the 
‘mind’. On this he said straight out: since you are 
philosophers, do not build speculative hypotheses 
about the structure of the body of the brain, but 
leave investigation of what goes on inside the 
thinking body to doctors, anatomists, and physiolo- 
gists. You, as philosophers, not only can, but are 
bound to, work out for doctors and anatomists 
and physiologists the functional determination of 
thinking and not its structural determination, and 
you must do it strictly and precisely, and not 
resort to vague ideas about an ‘incorporeal mind’, 
‘God’, and so on. 

But you can find the functional determination 
of thought only if you do not probe into the think- 
ing body (the brain), but carefully examine the 
real composition of its objective activities among 
the other bodies of the infinitely varied univer- 
sum. Within the skull you will not find anything 
to which a functional definition of thought could 
be applied, because thinking is a function of 
external, objective activity. And you must there- 


73 


fore investigate not the anatomy and physiology 
of the brain but the ‘anatomy and physiology’ of 
that ‘body’ whose active function in fact is 
thought, i.e. the ‘inorganic body of man’, the 
‘anatomy and physiology’ of the world of his cul- 
ture, the world of the ‘things’ that he produces 
and reproduces by his activity. 

The sole ‘body’ that thinks from the necessity 
built into its special ‘nature’ (i.e. into its specific 
structure) is not the individual brain at all, and 
not even the whole man with a brain, heart, and 
hands, and all the anatomical features peculiar 
to him. Of necessity, according to Spinoza, only 
substance possesses thought. Thinking has its nec- 
essary premise and indispensable condition (sine 
qua non) in all nature as a whole. 

But that, Marx affirmed, is not enough. Ac- 
cording to him, only nature of necessjty thinks, 
nature that has achieved the stage of man social- 
ly producing his own life, nature changing and 
knowing itself in the person of man or of some 
other creature like him in this respect, univer- 
sally altering nature, both that outside him and 
his own. A body of smaller scale and less ‘struc- 
tural complexity’ will not think. Labour is the 
process of changing nature by the action of social 
man, and is the ‘subject’ to which thought belongs 
as ‘predicate’. But nature, the universal matter 
of nature, is also its substance. Substance, having 
become the subject of all its changes in man, the 
cause of itself (causa sui). 


ESSAY THREE 


Logic and Dialectics 


The most direct path to the creation of dia- 
lectical logic, as we have already said, is ‘repe- 
tition of the past’, made wise by experience, rep- 
etition of the work of Marx, Engels, and Lenin, 
or critical, materialist rethinking of the achieve- 
ments that humanity owes in the realm of the 
Higher Logic to classical German philosophy of 


the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the 
nineteenth centuries, to the process of spiritual 
maturing, striking in its rapidity, associated with 
the names of Kant, Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. 

The ‘matter of logic’ then underwent, in a very 
short historical period, the most prodigious ‘flight 
of imagination’ since antiquity, marked in itself 
by an inner dialectic so tense that even simple 
acquaintance with it still cultivates dialectical 
thinking. 

First of all we must note that it was German 
classical philosophy that clearly recognised and 
sharply expressed the fact that all problems of 
philosophy as a special science somehow or other 
turned on the question of what thought was and 
what were its interrelations with the external 


75 


SS 


world. Understanding of this fact, already ma- 
tured earlier in the systems of Descartes and © 
Locke, Spinoza and Leibniz, was now transformed 
into the consciously established jumping-off point 
of all investigations, into the basic principle of a 
critical rethinking of the results of the preceding 
development. Philosophy, completing in Kant a 
more than two-century cycle of investigation, 
entered on a fundamentally new stage of under- 
standing and resolving of its special problems. 
The need to examine and analyse the path 
critically was not of course dictated only by the 
inner needs of philosophy itself, by the striving 
to completeness and orderliness (although the 
philosophers themselves so expressed it), but 
mainly by the powerful pressure of outside cir- 
cumstances, the crisis-ridden, pre-revolutionary 
state of all intellectual culture. The intense con- 
flict of ideas in all spheres of intellectual life, 
from politics to natural science, willy-nilly in- 
volved in ideological struggle, more and more 
insistently impelled philosophy to ‘dig down ulti- 
mately to the very roots and sources of what was 
happening, to understand where the general cause 
of the mutual hostility between people and ideas 
was hidden, to find and point out to people the 
rational way out of the situation that had arisen. 
Kant was the first to attempt to embrace within 
the framework of a single conception all the main 
opposing principles of the thought of the time ) 
which was approaching a catastrophic collision. 
In trying to unite and reconcile those principles 
within one system he only, against his will, ex- 


76 


SS SSS 


posed more clearly the essence of the problems 
which were unresolvable by the tried and known 
methods of philosophy. 

The actual state of affairs in science presented 
itself to Kant as a war of all against all; in the 
image of that ‘natural’ state which, following 
Hobbes, he characterised (as applied to science) 
as ‘a state of injustice and violence’. In this state 
scientific thought (‘reason’) ‘can establish and 
secure its assertions only through waz...’. In 
that case ‘the disputes are ended by a victory to 
which both sides lay claim, and which is gen- 
erally followed by a merely temporary armistice, 
arranged by some mediating authority. ..’.? 

Putting it another way, it was the tension of 
the struggle between opposing principles, each of 
which had been developed into a system claiming 
universal significance and recognition, that con- 
stituted the ‘natural’ state of human thought for 
Kant. The ‘natural’, actual, and obvious state of 
thought, consequently, was just dialectics. Kant 
was not at all concerned to extirpate it once and 
for all from the life of reason, i.e. from science 
understood as a certain developing whole, but 
only ultimately to find a corresponding ‘rational’ 
means of resolving the contradictions, discussions, 
disputes, conflicts, and antagonisms arising in 
science. Could reason itself, without the aid of 
‘authority’, overcome the anguish of dissension? 


1 Immanuel Kant. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated 
by N. K. Smith (Macmillan, London, 1929) p 601. 
2 Ibid. 


77 


———E——— EE ee 


‘The endless disputes of a merely dogmatic rea- 
son,’ as he put it, ‘thus finally constrain us to seek 
relief in some critique of reason itself, and in a 
legislation based upon such criticism.” 

The state of endless disputes, and hostility be- 
tween theoreticians, seemed to Kant to be a con- 
sequence of the fact that the ‘republic of scholars’ 
did not as yet have a single, systematically de- 
veloped ‘legislation’ recognised by all, or ‘con- 
stitution of reason’, which would enable it to seek 
solution of the conflicts not in war ‘to the death’ 
but in the sphere of polite, academic discussion, 
in the form of a ‘legal process’ or ‘action’ in which 
each party would hold to one and the same ‘code’ 
of logical substantiation and, recognising the 
opponent as an equally competent and equally 
responsible party as himself, would remain not 
only critical but also self-critical, always ready to 
recognise his mistakes and transgressions against 
the logical rules. This ideal of the inter-relations 
of theoreticians—and it is difficult to raise any 
objection against it even now—loomed before 
Kant as the goal of all his investigations. 

But thereby, at the centre of his attention, there 
was above all that field which tradition assigned 
to the competence of logic. It was quite obvious 
to Kant, on the other hand, that logic in the form 
in which it existed could not in any way satisfy 
the pressing needs of the situation created, or 
serve as a tool to analyse it. The very term 
‘logic’ was so discredited by then that Hegel was 


3 Immanuel Kant. Op. cit., p 604. 


78 


fully justified in speaking of the universal and 
complete scorn for this science that for ‘hundreds 
and thousands of years ... was just as much hon- 
oured as it is despised now’.* And only the pro- 
found reform that it underwent in the 
work of the classical German philosophers 
restored respect and dignity to the very name of 
the science of thought. Kant was the very first to 
try to pose and resolve the problem of logic spe- 
cifically by way of a critical analysis of its con- 
tent and historical fate. For the first time he com- 
pared its traditional baggage with the real proc- 
esses of thinking in natural science and in the 
sphere of social problems. 

Kant above all set himself the goal of bringing 
out and summing up the undisputed truths which 
had been formulated within the framework of 
traditional logic, though also scorned for their 
banality. In other words he tried to bring out 
those ‘invariants’ that had remained unaffected 
during all the discussions on the nature of think- 
ing stretching over centuries and millennia, the 
propositions that no one had called in question, 
neither Descartes nor Berkeley, neither Spinoza 
nor Leibniz, neither Newton nor Huygens, not 
one theoretically thinking individual. Having sin- 
gled this ‘residue’ out from logic, Kant was satis- 
fied that what remained was not very much, a few 
quite general propositions formulated in fact by 
Aristotle and his commentators. 


4 Hegel's Lectures on the History of Philosophy, Vol. 
II, p. 210. 


79 


From the angle from which Kant surveyed the 
history of logic it was impossible to draw any 
other conclusion; for it went without saying that 
if one sought only those propositions in logic 
with which everyone equally agreed, both Spinoza 
and Berkeley, both the rationalist-naturalist and 
the theologian, and all their disagreements were 
taken out of the brackets, then nothing else would 
remain within the brackets, nothing except those 
completely general ideas (notions) about thought 
that seemed indisputable to all people thinking in 
the defined tradition. There thus existed a purely 
empirical generalisation, really stating only that 
not a single one of the theoreticians so far occu- 
pying themselves with thought had actually dis- 
puted a certain totality of judgments. But you 
could not tell from these judgments whether they 
were true in themselves, or were really only com- 
mon and generally accepted illusions. 

For all theoreticians had hitherto thought (or 
had only tried to think) in accordance with a 
number of rules. Kant, however, transformed the 
purely empirical generalisation into a theoretical 
judgment (i.e. into a universal and necessary one) 
about the subject matter of logic in general, about 
the legitimate limits of its subject matter: “The 
sphere of logic is quite precisely delimited; its 
sole concern is to give an exhaustive exposition 
and a strict proof of the formal rules of all 
thought. .. > Here ‘formal’ means quite independ- 
ent of how thought precisely is understood, and 


5 Immanuel Kant. Op. cit., p 18. 


80 


of its origins and objects or goals, its relations to 
man’s other capacities and to the external world, 
and so on and so forth, i.e. independent of how 
the problem of the ‘external’ conditions within 
which thinking is performed according to the 
rules is resolved, and of metaphysical, psychologi- 
cal, anthropological, and other considerations. 
Kant declared these rules to be absolutely true and 
universally obligatory for thought in general, 
‘whether it be @ priori or empirical, whatever be 
its origin or object, and whatever hindrances, ac- 
cidental or natural, it may encounter in our minds 
(Gemiit)’ 6 

Having thus drawn the boundaries of logic 
(‘that logic should have been thus successful is an 
advantage which it owes entirely to its limita- 
tions, whereby it is justified in abstracting—in- 
deed, it is under obligation to do so—from all 
objects of knowledge and their differences. . . .”’), 
Kant painstakingly investigated its fundamental 
possibilities. Its competence proved to be very 
narrow. By virtue of the formality mentioned, it 
of necessity left out of account the differences in 
the views that clashed in discussion, and remained 
absolutely neutral not only in, say, the dispute 
between Leibniz and Hume but also in a dispute 
between a wise man and a fool, so long as the 
fool ‘correctly’ set out whatever ideas came into 
his head from God knew where, and however ab- 
surd and foolish they were. Its rules were such 


6 Ibid., p 18. 
7 Ibid. 


6—831 


that it must logically justify any absurdity so long 
as the latter was not self-contradictory. A self- 
consistent stupidity must pass freely through the 
filter of general logic. 

Kant especially stresses that ‘general logic con- 
tains, and can contain, no rules for judgment’,® 
that is ‘the faculty of subsuming under the rules; 
that is, of distinguishing whether something does 
or does not stand under a given rule (casus datae 
legis)’.9 The firmest knowledge of the rules in 
general (including the rules of general logic) is 
therefore no guarantee of their faultless applica- 
tion. Since ‘deficiency in judgment is just what 
is ordinarily called stupidity’, and since ‘for such 
a failing there is no remedy’, general logic can- 
not serve either as an ‘organon’ (tool, instrument) 
of real knowledge or even as a ‘canon’ of it, i.e. 
as a criterion for testing ready-made knowledge. 

For what then, in that case, is it in general 
needed? Exclusively for checking the correctness 
of so-called analytical judgments, i.e. ultimately, 
acts of verbal exposition of ready-made ideas 
already present in the head, however unsound 
these ideas are in themselves, Kant stated in full 
agreement with Berkeley, Descartes, and Leibniz. 
The contradiction between a concept (i.e. a rigor- 
ously defined idea) and experience and the facts 
(their determinations) is a situation about which 
general logic has no right to say anything, be- 


8 Immanuel Kant. Op. cit., p 177. 
9 Ibid. 
10 Jbid. 


cause then it is a question already of an act of sub- 
suming facts under the definition of a concept and 
not of disclosures of the sense that was previously 
contained in the concept. (For example, if I affirm 
that ‘all swans are white’, then, having seen a 
bird identical in all respects except colour with 
my idea of a swan, I shall be faced with a diffi- 
culty, which general logic cannot help me to re- 
solve in any way. One thing is clear, that this 
bird will not be subsumed under my concept 
‘swan’ without contradiction, and I shall be ob- 
liged to say: it is not a swan. If, all the same, I 
recognise it as a swan, then the contradiction be- 
tween the concept and the fact will already be 
converted into a contradiction between the deter- 
minations of the concept, because the subject of 
the judgment (swan) will be defined through two 
mutually exclusive predicates (‘white’ and ‘not 
white’). And that is already inadmissible and 
equivalent to recognition that my initial concept 
was incorrectly defined, and that it must be al- 
tered, in order to eliminate the contradiction.) 

So that every time the question arises of wheth- 
er or not to subsume a given fact under a given 
concept, the appearance of a contradiction cannot 
be taken at all as an index of the accuracy or 
inaccuracy of a judgment. A judgment may prove 
to be true simply because the contradiction in the 
given case demolishes the initial concept, and 
reveals its contradictoriness, and hence its falsity. 
That is why one cannot apply the criteria of 
general logic unthinkingly where it is a matter 
of experimental judgments, of the acts of sub- 


Ge 83 


suming facts under the definition of a concept, of 
acts of concretising an initial concept through the 
facts of experience. For in such judgments the 
initial concept is not simply explained but has 
new determinations added to it. A synthesis takes 
place, a uniting of determinations, and not anal- 
ysis, i.e. the breaking down of already existing 
determinations into details. 

All judgments of experience, without excep- 
tion, have a synthetic character. The presence of a 
contradiction in the make-up of such a judgment 
is consequently a natural and inevitable phenom- 
enon in the process of making a concept more 
precise in accordance with the facts of expe- 
rience. 

To put it another way, general logic has no 
right to make recommendations about the capacity 
of a judgment since this capacity has the right 
to subsume under the definition of a concept those 
facts that directly and immediately contradict 
that definition. 

Any empirical concept is therefore always in 
danger of being refuted by experience, by the 
first fact that strikes the eye. Consequently, a 
judgment of a purely empirical character, i.e. one 
in which an empirically given, sensuously con- 
templated thing or object functions as subject 
(e.g. our statement about swans), is true and cor- 
rect only with the obligatory reservation: ‘All 
swans that have so far come within our field of 
experience are white’. Such a statement is indis- 
putable, because it does not claim to apply to 
any individual things of the same kind that we 


84 


LS 


have not yet been able to see. And further expe- 
rience has the right to correct our definitions and 
to alter the predicates of the statement. 

Our theoretical knowledge is constantly coming 
up against such difficulties in fact, and always 
will. 

But if that is so, if science develops only through 
a constant juxtaposition of concepts and facts, 
through a constant and never ending process of 
resolving the conflict that arises here again and 
again then the problem of the theoretical scien- 
tific concept is sharply posed immediately. Does 
a theoretical scientific generalisation (concept), 
claiming universality and necessity, differ from 
any empirical, inductive ‘generalisation’? (The 
complications that arise here were wittily described 
a century or more later by Bertrand Russell 
in the form of a fable. Once there was a hen in a 
hen-coop. Every day the farmer brought it corn 
to peck, and the hen certainly drew the conclu- 
sion that appearance of the farmer was linked 
with the appearance of corn. But one fine day the 
farmer appeared not with corn but with a knife, 
which convincingly proved to the hen that there 
would have been no harm in having a more exact 
idea of the path to a scientific generalisation.) 

In other words, are such generalisations pos- 
sible as can, despite being drawn from only frag- 
mentary experience relative to the given object, 
nevertheless claim to be concepts providing scien- 
tific prediction, i.e., to be extrapolated with as- 
surance to future experience about the self-same 
object (taking into consideration, of course, the 


85 


effect of the diverse conditions in which it may 
be observed in future)? Are concepts possible 
that express not only and not simply more or less 
chance common attributes, which in another place 
and another time may not be present, but also 
the ‘substance’ itself, the very ‘nature’ of the given 
kind of object, the law of their existence? That 
is to say, are such determinations possible, in the 
absence of which the very object of the given 
concept is absent (impossible and unthinkable), 
and when there is already another object, which 
for that very reason is competent neither to con- 
firm nor to refute the definition of the given con- 
cept? (As, for example, consideration of a square 
or a triangle has no bearing on our understand- 
ing of the properties of a circle or an_ ellipse, 
since the definition of the concept ‘circumference 
of a circle’ contains only such predicates as strictly 
describe the boundaries of the given kind of fig- 
ure, boundaries that it is impossible to cross with- 
out passing into another kind). The concept thus 
presupposes such ‘predicates’ as cannot be elimi- 
nated (without eliminating the object of the given 
concept itself) by any future, ‘any possible’ (in 
Kant’s terminology) experience. 

So the Kantian distinction between purely em- 
pirical and theoretical scientific generalisations 
arises. The determinations of concepts must be 
characterised by universality and necessity, i.e. 
must be given in such a way that they cannot be 
refuted by any future experience. 

Theoretical scientific judgments and gener- 
alisations, unlike purely empirical ones, in any 


86 


case claim to be universal and necessary (howev- 
er the metaphysical, psychological, or anthropo- 
logical foundations of such claims are explained), 
to be confirmable by the experience of every- 
body of sound mind, and not refutable by that 
experience. Otherwise all science would have no 
more value than the utterances of the fool in the 
parable who produces sententious statements at 
every opportune and inopportune moment that 
are only pertinent and justified in strictly limited 
circumstances, i.e. thoughtlessly uttering state- 
ments applicable only on particular occasions as 
absolutes and universals, true in any other case, 
in any conditions of time and place. 

The theoretical generalisations of science (and 
judgments linking two or more) have to indicate 
not only the definition of the concept but also the 
whole fullness of the conditions of its applica- 
bility, universality, and necessity. But that is the 
whole difficulty. Can we categorically establish 
that we have listed the whole series of necessary 
conditions? Can we be sure that we have included 
only the really necessary conditions in it? Or have 
we perhaps included superfluous ones, not ab- 
solutely necessary? 

Kant remained open on this question, too; and 
he was right, since there is always the chance of 
a mistake here. In fact, how many times science 
has taken the particular for the general. In any 
case it is clear that ‘general’, i.e. purely formal, 
logic has no right here either to formulate a rule 
making it possible to distinguish the simply gen- 
eral from the universal; to distinguish that which 


87 


has been observed up to now from that which 
will be observed in the future, however long our 
experience goes on for and however broad the 
field of facts that it embraces. For the rules of 
general logic judgments of the type of ‘all swans 
are white’ are quite indistinguishable from state- 
ments of the type of ‘all bodies are extended’, 
because the difference in them consists not in the 
form of the judgment but exclusively in the con- 
tent and origin of the concept embraced in it. 
The first is empirical and preserves its full force 
only in relation to experience already past (in 
Kant’s parlance it is only true @ posteriori); the 
second claims to a greater force, to be correct also 
in relation to the future, and to any possible ex- 
perience regarding natural bodies (in Kant’s 
parlance it is true @ priori, i.e. prior to, before 
being tested by experience). For that reason we 
are convinced (and science lends our conviction 
the character of an apodictic affirmation) that 
however far we travelled in space and however 
deep we penetrated into matter we would never 
and nowhere encounter a ‘natural body’ that re- 
futed our conviction, i.e. ‘a body without exten- 
sion’. 

Why? Because there cannot be a body without 
extension in nature? To answer thus, Kant said, 
would be impudent. All we can say is the follow- 
ing: if, even in the infinite universe, such remark- 
able bodies did exist, they could never, in any 
case, come within our field of vision, within our 
field of experience. And if they could, then they 
would be perceived by us as extended, or would 


88 


ee 


not be perceived at all. For such is the structure 
of our organs of perception that they can only 
perceive things in the form of space, only as 
extensions and continuities (in the form of time). 

It may be said that they are such ‘in themselves’ 
(an sich); Kant did not consider it possible to deny 
that, or to assert it. But ‘for us’ they are precise- 
ly such, and cannot be otherwise, because then 
they would not in general be part of our 
experience, would not become objects of ex- 
perience, and therefore would not serve as the 
basis for scientific statements and propositions, 
for mathematics, physics, chemistry, and other 
disciplines. 

The spatial-temporal determinations of things 
(the modes of describing them mathematically) 
are thus rescued from danger of refutation by any 
possible experience, because they are precisely 
true on condition of that very experience being 
possible. 

All theoretical propositions as such (i.e. all 
statements linking two or more determinations 
together) acquire a universal and_ necessary 
character and no longer need to be confirmed by 
experience. That is why Kant defined them as 
a priori, synthetic statements. It is by virtue of 
this character of theirs that we can be quite con- 
fident that two times two are four and not five 
or six not only on our sinful earth but also on 
any other planet; that the diagonal of a square 
will be just as incommensurate with its sides; and 
that the laws discovered by Galileo, Newton, and 
Kepler will be the same in any corner of the 


89 


Universe as in the part investigated by us. 
Because only and exclusively universal and 
necessary definitions (in the sense explained 
above), predicates of the concept, are linked 
together (synthesised) in these propositions. 

But if the main problem that science comes up 
against proves not to be analytical judgments 
but synthetic ones, and general logic is only com- 
petent to judge analytical correctness, then we 
must inevitably conclude that there must be a 
special logic, apart from general logic, having to 
do only with theoretical applications of the in- 
tellect, with the rules of producing theoretical (in 
Kant’s parlance, a priori, synthetic) judgments, 
i.e. judgments that we are entitled to appraise as 
universal, necessary, and therefore objective. 

“When we have reason to consider a judgment 
necessarily universal ... we must consider it 
objective also, that is, that it expresses not merely 
a reference of our perception to a subject, but a 
quality of the object. For there would be no reason 
for the judgments of other men necessarily agree- 
ing with mine, if it were not the unity of the 
object to which they all refer, and with which 
they accord; hence they must all agree with one 
another.’!1 

True, we still do not know anything about the 
thing in itself, i.e. outside the experience of all 
people in general; but that, in the experience of 
all existing and future people organised like our- 


‘! Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena zu einer jeden kiinfti- 
gen Metaphysik. In: Sdmiliche Werke (Leipzig, 1938) 
p 58. 


90 


selves, it will necessarily look exactly the same 
(and therefore anybody will be able to test the 
correctness of our statement) a theoretical judg- 
ment must guarantee. 

Hence Kant also drew the conclusion that there 
must be a logic (or rather a section of logic) that 
dealt specially with the principles and rules of 
the theoretical application of thought or the con- 
ditions of applying the rules of general logic to 
the solution of special theoretical problems, to 
acts of producing universal, necessary, and thus 
objective judgments. This logic was still not 
entitled, unlike general logic, to ignore the 
difference between knowledge (ideas) in content 
and origin. It could and must serve as an adequate 
canon (if not as an organon) for thinking that 
laid claim to the universality and necessity of 
its conclusions, generalisations, and propositions. 
Kant conferred the title of transcendental logic 
on it, i.e. the logic of truth. 

The centre of attention here naturaliy turned 
out to be the problem of what Kant called the 
intellect’s synthetic activity, i.e. the activity by 
which new knowledge was achieved, and not ideas 
already existing in the head clarified. ‘By 
synthesis, in its most general sense,’ he said, ‘I 
understand the act of putting different represen- 
tations together and of grasping what is manifold 
in them in one (act of) knowledge.’ Thus he 
assigned synthesis the role and ‘sense’ of the 
fundamental operation of thinking, preceding any 


12 Immanuel Kant. Critique of Pure Reason, p 111. 


91 


analysis in content and in time. Whereas analysis 
consisted in act of arranging ready ideas and 
concepts, synthesis served as an act of producing 
new concepts. And the rules of general logic had 
a very conditional relation to that act, and so in 
general to the original, initial forms of the work- 
ing of thought. 

In fact, Kant said, where reason had not pre- 
viously joined anything together there was 
nothing for it to divide, and ‘before we analyse 
our representations, the representations must 
themselves be given, and therefore as regards 
content no concepts can arise by way of analysis.’!8 
So the original, fundamental, logical forms, it 
transpired, were not the principles of general 
logic, not the fundamental principles of analytical 
judgments (i.e. not the law of identity and the 
principle of contradiction), but only universal 
forms, schemas, and means of uniting various 
ideas into the body of some new idea, schemas 
ensuring unity in diversity, means of identifying 
the different and uniting the heterogeneous. 

Thus, notwithstanding the formal order of his 
exposition, and despite it, Kant in essence affirmed 
that the really universal—initial and  funda- 
mental—logical forms were not those at all that 
were considered such by traditional formal logic, 
but that these were rather the ‘second storey’ of 
logical science, and so derivative, secondary, and 
true only insofar as they agreed with the more 
universal and important, with the propositions 


4 Immanuel Kant. Critique of Pure Reason, p 111, 


92 


relating to the synthesis of determinations in the 
composition of a concept and judgment. 

It was clearly a complete revolution in views 
on the subject matter of logic as the science of 
thought. Not enough attention is usually paid to 
this point in expounding Kant’s theory of thought, 
although it is here that he proved to be the real 
progenitor of a fundamentally new dialectical 
stage in the development of logic as a science. 
Kant was the first to begin to see the main logical 
forms of thinking in categories, thus including 
everything in the subject matter of logic that all 
preceding tradition had put into the competence 
of ontology and metaphysics, and never into that 
of logic. 

‘The union of representations in one conscious- 
ness is judgment. Thinking therefore is the same 
as judging, or referring representations to judg- 
ments in general. Hence judgments are either 
merely subjective, when representations are re- 
ferred to a consciousness in one subject only, and 
united in it, or objective, when they are united 
in a consciousness generally, that is, necessarily. 
The logical functions of all judgments are but 
various modes of uniting representations in con- 
sciousness. But if they serve for concepts, they are 
concepts of their necessary union in a conscious- 
ness, and so principles of objectively valid judg- 
ments.’!4 

Categories are also ‘principles of objectively 
valid judgments’. And just because the old logic 


44 Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena. Op. cit., p 66. 


93 


had turned up its nose at investigating these 
fundamental logical forms of thinking, it could 
neither help the movement of theoretical, scientific 
knowledge with advice nor tie up the loose ends 
in its own theory. ‘I have never been able to ac- 
cept the interpretation which logicians give of 
judgment in general,’ Kant said. ‘It is, they de- 
clare, the representation of a relation between 
two concepts. I do not here dispute with them as 
to what is defective in this interpretation—that 
in any case it applies only to categorical, not to 
hypothetical and disjunctive judgments (the two 
latter containing a relation not of concepts but of 
judgments), an oversight from which many 
troublesome consequences have followed. I need 
only point out that the definition does not de- 
termine in what the asserted relation consists.’ 

Kant clearly posed the task of understanding 
categories as logical units, and of disclosing their 
logical functions in the process of producing and 
transforming knowledge. True, as we shall see 
below, he also displayed an almost uncritical at- 
titude to the definitions of the categories borrowed 
by logic from ontology. But the problem was 
posed: the definitions of categories were under- 
stood as logical (ic. universal and necessary) 
schemas or the principles of linking ideas together 
in ‘objective’ judgments. 

Categories were thus those universal forms 
(schemas) of the activity of the subject by means 
of which coherent experience became possible in 


Immanuel Kant. Critique of Pure Reason, p 158. 


94 


general, i.e. by which isolated perceptions were 
fixed in the form of knowledge: ‘...Since 
experience is knowledge by means of connected 
perceptions, the categories [my italics——-EUI] are 
conditions of the possibility of experience, and are 
therefore valid a priori for all objects of 
experience.*6 Any judgment, therefore, that 
claimed to universal significance, always—overtly 
or covertly—included a category: ‘we cannot 
think an object save through categories. . .’.17 

And if logic claimed to be the science of think- 
ing it must also develop just this doctrine of 
categories as a coherent system of categorial 
determinations of thought. Otherwise it simply 
had no right to call itself the science of thought. 
Thus it was Kant (and not Hegel, as is often 
thought and said) who saw the main essence of 
logic in categorial definitions of knowledge, and 
began to understand logic primarily as the 
systematic exposition of categories, universal and 
necessary concepts characterising an object in 
general, those very concepts that were traditional- 
ly considered the monopoly of metaphysical in- 
vestigations. At the same time, and this is linked 
with the very essence of Kant’s conception, 
categories were nothing other than universal 
forms (schemas) of the cognitive activity of the 
subject, purely logical forms of thinking under- 
stood not as a psychic act of the individual but 
as the ‘generic’ activity of man, as the impersonal 


16 Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena. Op. cit., p 171. 
7 Ibid., p 173. 


95 


process of development of science, as the process 
of the crystallising out of universal scientific 
knowledge in the individual consciousness. 

Kant, not without grounds, considered Aristotle 
the founder of this understanding of logic, that 
same Aristotle on whom, following mediaeval 
tradition, responsibility had been put for the 
narrow, formal understanding of the boundaries 
and competence of logic, though in fact it was 
not his at all. Kant, however, reproached Aristotle 
for not having given any ‘deduction’ of his table 
of categories, but simply only setting out and 
summing up those categories that already func- 
tioned in the existing consciousness of his time. 
The Aristotelean list of categories therefore 
suffered from ‘empiricism’. In addition, and on 
Kant’s lips the reproach sounds even more severe, 
Aristotle, not having been content with explaining 
the logical function of categories, had also ascribed 
a ‘metaphysical meaning’ to them, explaining 
them not only as logical (i.e. theoretical cognitive) 
schemes of the activity of the mind but also as 
universal forms of existence, universal determina- 
tions of the world of things in themselves, that is 
to say he ‘hypostatised’ the purest logical schemas 
as metaphysics, as a universal theory of objectivity 
as such. 

Kant thus saw Aristotle’s main sin as having 
taken the forms of thinking for the forms of being 
or existence, and so having converted logic into 
metaphysics, into ontology. Hence also the task 
of having, in order to correct Aristotle’s mistake, 
to convert metaphysics into logic. In other words 


96 


Kant still saw the real significance of Aristotle, 
through the converting prism of his initial 
precepts, as the ‘father of logic’ and understood 
that Aristotle was such in his capacity as author 
of the Metaphysics. So Kant once and for all cut 
the roots of the mediaeval interpretation both of 
Aristotle and of logic, which had seen the logical 
doctrine of the Stagirite only in the texts of the 
Organon. This unnatural separation of logic from 
metaphysics, which in fact was due not to Aristotle 
at all but to the Stoics and Scholastics, acquired 
the force of prejudice in the Middle Ages, but 
was removed and overcome by Kant. 

Kant did not give his system of categories in 
the Critique of Pure Reason, but only posed the 
task of creating one in general fashion, ‘since at 
present we are concerned not with the complete- 
ness of the system, but only with the principles to 
be followed in its construction. ..’.1° He also did 
not set out the logic, but only the most general 
principles and outlines of its subject matter in its 
new understanding, its most general categories 
(quantity, quality, relation, and modality, each of 
which was made more concrete in three deriva- 
tives). Kant considered that the further develop- 
ment of the system of logic in the spirit of these 
principles no longer constituted a special work: 
*.. .it will be obvious that a full glossary, with all 
the requisite explanations, is not only a possible, 
but an easy task.’!9 ‘...It can easily be carried 


48 Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena. Op. cit., p 114. 
19 Ibid., p 115. 


7—831 97 


out, with the aid of the ontological manuals— 
for instance, by placing under the category of 
causality the predicables of force, action, pas- 
sion; under the category of community the pred- 
icables of presence, resistance; under the pre- 
dicaments of modality, the predicables of coming 
to be, ceasing to be, change, etc.’”? 

Here again, as was the case with general logic, 
Kant displayed an absolutely uncritical attitude 
to the theoretical baggage of the old metaphysics, 
and to the determinations of categories developed 
in it, since he reduced the business of creating 
the new logic to very uncritical rethinking, to a 
purely formal transformation of the old meta- 
physics (ontology) into logic. In practice it some- 
times resulted simply in the renaming of 
‘ontological’ concepts as ‘logical’. But the very 
carrying out of the task posed by Kant very 
quickly led to an understanding that it was not 
so simple to do, since what was required was not 
a formal change but a very serious and far- 
reaching, radical transformation of the whole 
system of philosophy. Kant himself still did not 
clearly and completely realise this fact; he had 
only partially detected the dialectical contradic- 
tions of the old metaphysics, in the form of the 
famous four antinomies of pure reason. A start, 
however, had been made. 

According to Kant categories were purely 
logical forms, schemas of the activity of the in- 
tellect linking together the facts of sensuous 


2 Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena. Op. cit., p 115. 


98 


experience (perceptions) in the form of concepts 
and theoretical (objective) judgments. In them- 
selves categories were empty, and any attempt to 
use them as other than logical forms of the gen- 
eralisation of empirical facts led one way or the 
other only to balderdash and logomachy. Kant 
expressed this idea in his own manner, affirming 
that it was impossible in any case to understand 
categories as abstract determinations of things in 
themselves as they existed outside the conscious- 
ness of people and outside experience. They 
characterised, in a universal (abstract-universal) 
way only the conceivable object, i.e. the external 
world as and how we of necessity thought of it, 
as and how it was represented in consciousness 
after being refracted through the prism of our 
sense organs and forms of thinking. Transcen- 
dental logic, therefore, the logic of truth, was 
logic, and only logic, only the doctrine of think- 
ing. Its concepts (categories) told us absolutely 
nothing about how matters stood in the world 
outside experience, whether, in the world of the 
‘transcendental’ outside the bounds of experience, 
there was causality, necessity, and chance, quanti- 
tative and qualitative differences, a difference in 
the probability and inevitability of an event 
occurring, and so on and so forth. That question 
Kant thought it impossible to answer; but in the 
world as given to us by experience matters stood 
exactly as logic pictured them, and science needed 
nothing more. 

Science was therefore always and everywhere 
obliged to discover causes and laws, to 


ze 


99 


differentiate the probable from the absolutely 
inevitable, to explain and numerically express the 
degree of probability of any particular event 
happening, and so on. In the world with which 
science was concerned there was no need, even 
as hypothetically assumed factors, for ‘unextended’ 
or ‘eternal’ factors (i.e. taken outside the power 
of the categories of space and time), ‘incorporeal’ 
forces, absolutely unalterable ‘substances’, and 
other accessories of the old metaphysics. The place 
of the old ontology must now be taken not by 
some one science, even though new in principle 
and clarified by criticism, but only the whole 
aggregate of real experimental sciences—mathe- 
matics, mechanics, physics, chemistry, celestial 
mechanics (i.e., astronomy), geology, anthropol- 
ogy, physiology. Only all the existing sciences 
(and those that might arise in the future) together, 
generalising the data of experience by means of 
the categories of transcendental logic, were in a 
position to tackle the task that the old ontology 
had monopolised. 

To tackle it Kant, however, emphasised, but by 
no means to solve it. They could not solve it; for 
it was insoluble by the very essence of the matter 
and not at all because the experience on which 
such a picture of the world as a whole was built 
was never complete, and not because science, 
developing with time, would discover more and 
more new fields of facts and correct its own prop- 
ositions, thus never achieving absolute finality in 
its constructions of the world in concepts. If Kant 
had argued like that he would have been absolute- 


100 


ly right; but with him this quite true thought 
acquired a rather different form of expression, 
and was converted into a basic thesis of agnosti- 
cism, into an affirmation that it was impossible in 
general to construct a unified, scientifically 
substantiated picture of the world even relatively 
satisfactory for a given moment of time. 

The trouble was that any attempt to construct 
such a picture inevitably collapsed at the very 
moment of being made, because it was immediat- 
ely smashed to smithereens by antinomies and im- 
manent contradictions, by the shattering forces of 
dialectics. The picture sought would inevitably 
be self-contradictory, which was the equivalent 
for Kant of its being false. Why was that so? The 
answer is in the chapter of the Critique of Pure 
Reason devoted to analysis of the logical 
structure of reason as the highest synthetic func- 
tion of the human intellect. 

Another task, it turned out, remained outside 
the competence of either general or transcendental 
logic, a task with which scientific understanding 
was constantly in collision, that of the theoretical 
synthesis of all the separate ‘experimental’ state- 
ments that made up a single theory developed 
from a single common principle. Now the job 
already was not to generalise, i.e. to unite and 
link together, the sensuously contemplated, em- 
pirical facts given in living contemplation, in 
order to obtain concepts, but the concepts them- 
selves. It was no longer a matter of schemas of 
the synthesis of sensuous facts in reason, but of 
the unity of reason itself and the products of its 


101 


activity in the structure of a theory, in the struc- 
ture of a system of concepts and judgments. Ge- 
neralising of the factual data by means of a con- 
cept, and the generalising of concepts by means 
of a theory, by means of an ‘idea’ or general 
guiding principle, were of course quite different 
operations. And the rules for them must be diffe- 
rent. 

There is therefore yet another storey in Kant’s 
logic, a kind of ‘metalogic of truth’ bringing 
under its critical control and surveillance not in- 
dividual acts of rational activity but all reason 
as a whole: Thinking with a capital “T’, so to 
say; thinking in its highest synthetic functions 
and not separate and partial operational schemas 
of synthesis. 

The striving of thought to create a single, 
integral theory is natural and ineradicable. It 
cannot be satisfied, and does not wish to be, by 
simple aggregates, simple piling up of partial 
generalisations, but is always striving to bring 
them together, to link them together by means of 
general principles. It is a legitimate striving, and 
since it is realised in activity and thus appears as 
a separate power, Kant called it reason (Uernunft) 
in distinction from understanding (UVerstand). 
Reason is the same as understanding, only it is 
involved in the solving of a special task, explana- 
tion of the absolute unity in diversity, the 
synthesis of all its schemas and the results of their 
application in experience. Naturally it also 
operates there according to the rules of logic, but 
in resolving this task, thought, though exactly 


102 


observing all the rules and norms of logic (both 
general and transcendental) without exception, 
still inevitably lands in a contradiction, in self- 
destruction. Kant painstakingly showed that this 
did not happen as a consequence of slovenliness 
or negligence in any thinking individuals at all, 
but precisely because the individuals were 
absolutely guided by the requirements of logic, 
true, where its rules and norms were powerless 
and without authority. In entering the field of 
reason, thinking invades a country where these 
laws do not operate. The old metaphysics 
struggled for whole millenia in hopeless contradic- 
tions and strife because it stubbornly tried to do 
its job with unsuitable tools. 

Kant set himself the task of discovering and 
formulating the special ‘rules’ that would subor- 
dinate the power of thinking (which proved in 
fact to be its incapacity) to organise all the 
separate generalisations and judgments of ex- 
perience into a unity, into the structure of an in- 
tegral, theoretical schema, i.e. to establish the 
legislation of reason. Reason, as the highest 
synthetic function of the intellect, “endeavours to 
carry out the synthetic unity, which is thought in 
the category, up to the completely uncondi- 
tioned’.2! In this function thinking strives for a 
full explanation of all the conditions in which 
each partial generalisation of understanding (each 
concept and judgment) can be considered justified 
without further reservations. For only then would 
a generalisation be fully insured against refutation 

*t Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena. Op. cit., p. 318. 


103 


by new experience, i.e. from contradiction with 
other, just as correct generalisations. 

The claim to absolutely complete, unconditional 
synthesis of the existing determinations of a con- 
cept, and so of the conditions within which these 
determinations are unreservedly true is exactly 
equivalent to a claim to understand things in 
themselves. In fact, if I risk asserting that 
subject A is determined by predicate B in its 
absolute totality, and not just in part that existed 
or might exist in our field of experience, I remove 
the very limitation from my assertion (statement) 
that transcendental logic has established for all 
experimental judgments; that is to say, I am no 
longer stating that it is true only in conditions 
imposed by our own forms of experience, our 
modes of perception, schemas of generalisation, 
and so on. I begin to think that the statement 
ascribing predicate B to subject A is already true 
not only within the conditions of experience but 
outside them, that it relates to A not only as the 
object of any possible experience but also irre- 
spective of that experience, and defines A as an 
object existing in itself. 

That means to remove ali the limitations 
governing it from the generalisation, including 
the conditions imposed by experience. But all the 
conditions cannot be removed, ‘for the conception 
of the absolute totality of conditions is not ap- 
plicable in any experience, since no experience is 
unconditioned’.22 This illegitimate demarche of 


2 Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena. Op. cit., p 318. 


104 


thinking Kant called transcendental application 
of reason, i.e. the attempt to affirm that things in 
themselves are such as they appear in scientific 
thinking, that the properties and predicates we 
attribute to them as objects of any possible 
experience also belong to them when they exist 
in themselves and are not converted into objects 
of somebody’s experience (perceptions, judg- 
ments, and theorising). 

Such a transcendental application of under- 
standing entails contradictions and antinomies. A 
logical contradiction arises within reason itself, 
disrupting it, breaking up the very form of think- 
ing in general. A logical contradiction is also an 
index for thought indicating that it has taken on 
the solution of a problem that is in general beyond 
its strength. A contradiction reminds thought that 
it is impossible to grasp the ungraspable (bound- 
less). 

Understanding falls into a state of logical con- 
tradiction (antinomy) here not only because, and 
even not so much because, experience is always 
unfinished, and not because a_ generalisation 
justified for experience as a whole has been drawn 
on the basis of partial experience. That is just 
what reason can and must do, otherwise no 
science would be possible. The matter here is quite 
different; in trying fully to synthesise all the 
theoretical concepts and judgments drawn from 
past experience, it is immediately discovered that 
the experience already past was itself internally 
antinomic if it of course was taken as a whole and 
not some arbitrarily limited aspect or fragment 


105 


of it in which, it goes without saying, contradic- 
tion may be avoided. And the past experience is 
already antinomic because it includes generalisa- 
tions and judgments synthesised according to 
schemas of categories that are not only different 
but are directly opposite. 

In the sphere of understanding (Verstand), as 
transcendental logic showed, there were pairs of 
mutually opposing categories, i.e. schemas of the 
action of thinking having diametrically opposite 
directions. For example, there is not only a 
category of identity orienting the intellect to dis- 
covering the same invariant determinations in 
various objects, but also its polar category of 
difference, pointing to exactly the opposite opera- . 
tion, to the discovery of differences and variants 
in objects seemingly identical. In addition to the 
concept of necessity there is the concept of chance, 
and so on. Each category has another, opposite to 
it and not unitable with it without breaking the 
principle of contradiction. For clearly, difference 
is not identity, or is non-identity, while cause is 
not effect (is non-effect). True, both cause and 
effect are subsumed purely formally under one and 
the same category of interaction, but that only 
means that a higher category embracing both of 
them is itself subordinated to the law of identity, 
i.e. ignores the difference between them. And any 
phenomenon given in experience can always be 
comprehended by means both of one and of 
another categorial schema directly opposite to it. 
If, for example, I look on some fact as an effect, 
my search is directed to an infinite number of 


106 


phenomena and circumstances preceding the given 
fact, because behind each fact is the whole history 
of the Universe. If, on the contrary, however, | 
wish to understand a given fact as a cause, I shall 
be forced to go into the chain of phenomena and 
facts following it in time, and to go further and 
further away from it in time with no hope of 
encountering it again anywhere. Here are two 
mutually incompatible lines of search, never 
coinciding with one another, two paths of in- 
vestigating one and the same fact. And they will 
never converge because time is infinite at 
both ends, and the causal explanation will go 
further and further away from the search for 
effects. 

Consequently, relative to any thing or object in 
the Universe, two mutually exclusive points of 
view can be expressed, and two diverging paths 
of investigation outlined, and therefore two 
theories, two conceptions developed, each of 
which is created in absolute agreement with all 
the requirements of logic and with all the facts 
(data of experience) relating to the matter, but 
which nevertheless, or rather precisely because of 
this, cannot be linked together within one theory 
without preserving and without reproducing this 
same logical contradiction within it. The tragedy 
of understanding is that it itself, taken as a whole, 
is immanently contradictory, containing categories 
each one of which is as legitimate as the other, 
and whose sphere of applicability within the 
framework of experience is not limited to any- 
thing, i.e. is as wide as experience itself. In 


107 


relation to any object, therefore, two (at least, 
of course) mutually opposite theories inevitably 
must always arise and develop, before, now, and 
henceforth, forevermore, each of which advances 
a fully logical claim to be universal, to be correct 
in relation to all experience as a whole. 

The antinomies could be eliminated in one 
way only, by discarding from logic exactly half 
of its categorial schemas of synthesis, recognising 
one category in each pair as legitimate and cor- 
rect, and banning the other from use in the arsenal 
of science. That is what the old metaphysics did. 
It, for example, proclaimed chance or fortuity a 
purely subjective concept, a characteristic of our 
ignorance of the causes of phenomena, and so 
converted necessity into the sole objective 
categorial schema of a judgment, which led to 
recognition of the fatal inevitability of any fact, 
however minute and ridiculous. 

That is why Hegel somewhat later called this 
method of thinking metaphysical. It was, in fact, 
characteristic of the old, pre-Kantian metaphysics, 
delivering itself from internal contradictions 
simply by ignoring half of all the legitimate 
categories of thought, half of the schemas of 
judgments with objective significance; but at the 
same time the question arises of which category 
in the polar pair to prefer and keep, and which to 
discard and declare a ‘subjective illusion’. Here, 
Kant showed, there was not, and could not be, 
any objective basis for choosing. It was decided 
by pure arbitrariness, by individual preference. 
Both metaphysical systems were therefore equally 


108 


correct (both the one and the other went equally 
with the universal principle) and equally 
subjective, since each of them denied the objective 
principle contrary to it. 

The old metaphysics strove to organise the 
sphere of reason directly on the basis of the law 
of identity and of the principle of contradiction 
in determinations. The job was impracticable in 
principle because, if categories were regarded as 
the universal predicates necessarily inherent in 
some subject, then this subject must be the thing 
in itself; but the categories, considered as the 
predicates of one and the same subject of a judg- 
ment, prove to contradict one another and to 
create a paradoxical situation. And then the 
statement fell under the principle of contradic- 
tion, which Kant formulated thus: ‘...No pred- 
icate contradictory of a thing can belong to 
it.....% So, if I determine a thing in_ itself 
through a category, I still have no right, without 
breaking the principle, to ascribe the determina- 
tions of the opposing category to it. 

Kant’s conclusion was this: quite rigorous 
analysis of any theory claiming to be an uncon- 
ditionally full synthesis of all determinations (all 
the predicates of one and the same thing in itself), 
claiming the unconditional correctness of its own 
judgments, will always discover more or less 
artfully disguised antinomies in the theory. 

Understanding, clarified by criticism, i.e. con- 
scious of its legitimate rights and not claiming any 


3 Immanuel Kant. Prolegomena. Op. cit., p 190. 


109 


sphere of the transcendental banned to it, will 
always strive for an unconditionally full synthesis 
as the highest ideal of scientific knowledge, but 
will never permit itself to assert that it has 
already achieved such a synthesis, that it has 
finally determined the thing-in-itself through a 
full series of its universal and necessary 
predicates, and so given a full list of the condi- 
tions of the truthfulness of its concept. The age- 
old theoretical opponents should therefore, instead 
of waging endless war to the death, come to some 
kind of peaceful co-existence between them, 
recognising the equal rights of each other to rel- 
ative truth, to a relatively true synthesis. They 
should understand that, in relation to the thing- 
in-itself, they are equally untrue, that each of 
them, since he does not violate the principle of 
contradiction, possesses only part of the truth, 
leaving the other part to his opponent. Converse- 
ly, they are both right in the sense that under- 
standing as a whole (i.e. reason) always has not 
only different interests within it but also opposing 
ones, equally legitimate and of equal standing. 
One theory is taken up with the identical 
characteristics of a certain range of phenomena, 
and the other with their differences (the scientific 
determinations, say, of man and animal, man and 
machine, plant and animal). Each of the theories 
realises in full the legitimate, but partial interest 
of reason, and therefore neither the one nor the 
other, taken separately, discloses an objective 
picture of the thing as it exists outside of and 
prior to consciousness, and independently of each 


110 


_- 


of these interests. And it is impossible to unite 
these theories into one without converting the 
antinomic relation between them into an antino- 
mic relation between the concepts within one 
theory, without disrupting the deductive-analyti- 
cal schema of its concepts. 

What should ‘critique of reason’ give to 
scientific understanding? Not, of course, recipes 
for eliminating dialectics from knowledge; that is 
impossible and impracticable because knowledge 
as a whole is always obtained through polemic, 
through a struggle of opposing principles and in- 
terests. It is therefore necessary that the warring 
parties in science will be fully self-critical, and 
that the legitimate striving to apply its principle 
rigorously in investigating the facts will not be 
converted into paranoic stubbornness, into 
dogmatic blindness preventing the rational kernel 
in the theoretical opponent’s statements from 
being seen. Criticism of the opponent then be- 
comes a means of perfecting one’s own theory, 
and helps stipulate the conditions for the cor- 
rectness of one’s own judgments more rigorously 
and more clearly, and so on and so forth. 

Thus the ‘critique of reason’ and its inevitable 
dialectic were converted by Kant into the most 
important branch of logic, since prescriptions 
were formulated in it capable of rescuing thought 
from the bigoted dogmatism into which under- 
standing inevitably fell when it was left to its 
own devices (i.e. thinking that knew and observed 
the rules of general and transcendental logic and 
did not suspect the treacherous pitfalls and traps 


of dialectics), and also from the natural comple- 
ment of this dogmatism, scepticism. 

After this broadening of the subject matter of 
logic, after the inclusion in it both of the 
categorial schemas of thinking and principles of 
constructing theories (synthesis of all concepts), 
and after the comprehension of the constructive 
and regulative role and function of ideas in the 
movement of knowledge, this science acquired the 
right for the first time to be, and to be called, the 
science of thinking, the science of the universal 
and necessary forms and patterns of real thought, 
of the processing of the facts of experience and 
the facts of contemplation and representation. In 
addition, dialectics was also introduced into the 
structure of logic, as the most important branch 
crowning the whole, that same dialectics that had 
seemed, before Kant, either a ‘mistake’, only a 
sick state of the intellect, or the result of the 
casuistic unscrupulousness and incorrectness of 
individual persons in the handling of concepts. 
Kant’s analysis showed that dialectics was a 
necessary form of intellectual activity, character- 
istic precisely of thinking concerned with solv- 
ing the highest synthetic problems”* and with 
constructing a theory claiming universal 
significance, and so objectivity (in Kant’s sense). 
Kant thus weaned dialectics, as Hegel put it, of 
its seeming arbitrariness and showed its absolute 
necessity for theoretical thinking. 


% See V. F. Asmus. Dialektika Kanta (Kant’s Dialectics) 
(Moscow, 1930) pp 126-127. 


112 


— 


Since it was the supreme synthetic tasks that 
were pushed to the foreground in the science of 
that period, the problem of contradiction (the 
dialectics of determinations of the concept) 
proved to be the central problem of logic as a 
science. At the same time, since Kant himself 
considered the dialectical form of thought a 
symptom of the futility of scientists’ striving to 
understand (i.c. to express in a rigorous system of 
scientific concepts) the position of things outside 
their own Ego, outside the consciousness of man, 
the problem also rapidly acquired ideological 
significance. The fact is that at that time the 
development of science was generating ever tenser 
conflicts between its theories, ideas, and concep- 
tions. The Kantian ‘dialectic’ did not in fact in- 
dicate any way out, no path for resolving conflicts 
of ideas. It simply stated in general form that 
conflict of ideas was the natural state of science, 
and counselled ideological opponents everywhere 
to seek some form or other of compromise accord- 
ing to the rule of live and let live, to hold to their 
truth but to respect the truth of the other man, 
because they would both find themselves ultimate- 
ly in the grip of subjective interests, and because 
objective truth common for all was equally in- 
accessible to both of them. 

In spite of this good advice, however, not one 
of the really militant theories of the time wanted 
to be reconciled with such a pessimistic conclu- 
sion and counsel, and orthodoxy became more 
and more frantic in all spheres as the revolution- 
ary storm drew nearer. When, in fact, it broke, 


8—881 113 


Kant’s solution ceased to satisfy either the 
orthodox or the revolutionaries. This change of 
mood was also reflected in logic in the form of a 
critical attitude to the inconsistency, reticence, 
and ambiguity of the Kantian solution. 

These moods were expressed most clearly of 
all in the philosophy of Fichte; through it the 
‘monistic’ strivings of the times to create a single 
theory, a single sense of law, a single system of 
all the main concepts on life and the world, also 
burst into the sphere of logic, into the sphere of 
understanding of the universal forms and patterns 
of developing thought. 


ESSAY FOUR 


The Structural Principle of Logic. 
Dualism or Monism 


Kant did not accept the improvements that 
Fichte suggested for his theory of thought, on the 
grounds that they led directly to a need once 
more to create that very unified metaphysic that 
Kant had declared impossible and doomed to 
death from internal contradictions. Before Fichte, 
in fact, there loomed the image of a certain, per- 
haps transcendental (in the Kantian sense), but 
still single and uncontradictory system of con- 
cepts providing the main principles of life for 
humanity. Dialectics was dialectics, but a true 
theory appertaining to the most important things 
in the world should still be the one and only 
theory: ‘The author of this system, for his part, 
is convinced that there is only one single philos- 
ophy, as there is only one single mathematics, 
and that as soon as this one possible philosophy 
had been founded and recognised, no new one 
will arise, and that everything that hitherto had 


ee 115 


been called philosophy will be counted as an 
attempt and preparation. . .’.t 

This single system should still, in spite of 
Kant’s advice, defeat any other not agreeing with 
it. For that it would have to be ‘more rational’ in 
every respect, in other words would have to ex- 
plain and interpret the other system and so be- 
come broader than it. 

For Fichte the position that Kant pictured as 
eternally insuperable, i.e. the existence of two 
equally true, and at the same time equally un- 
true, theories, was only a temporary, transitional 
state of spiritual culture that had to be overcome 
and resolved in a united, single world conception 
(Weltanschauung). The dialectic that Kant rec- 
ognised on the scale of all scientific knowledge 
developing through discussion Fichte therefore 
wished to incorporate into a single scientific sys- 
tem that would include the principle opposing it, 
interpret it in a certain fashion, and convert it 
into its own, partial and derivative, principle. 

Let the single world conception be transcen- 
dental as before, i.e. let it equally say nothing 
about the world in itself; but for all normally 
thinking people it should be one and the same, 
necessarily universal, and in that sense absolutely 
objective. The dualism that Kant affirmed as a 
quality of the eternally insuperable state of spi- 
itual culture seemed to revolutionary-minded 
Fichte only a manifestation of the timidity and 


1 J. G. Fichte. Sonnenklarer Bericht an das gréssere 
Publikum iiber das eigentliche Wesen der neuesten Philo- 
sophie (Berlin, 1801) p IV. 


116 


inconsistency of thought in realising its own prin- 
ciples. Logic could not justify two mutually ex- 
clusive systems at once and if, for all that, it did, 
then not everything in it was in order. 

Fichte sought and found the fundamental in- 
consistency in the Kantian doctrine on thought 
in the initial concept that Kant consciously pro- 
posed as the basis of all his constructions, in the 
concept of the ‘thing-in-itself’. Already, in this 

| concept, and not in the categorial predicates that 

might be ascribed to things, there was a flagrant 
contradiction: the supreme fundamental principle 
of all analytical statements was violated, the 
principle of contradiction in determinations. This 
concept was thus inconsistent in a logically devel- 
oped system-theory. In fact, in the concept ‘of 
a thing as it exists before and outside any pos- 
sible experience’ there was included a bit of non- 
sense not noted by Kant: to say that the Ego was 
conscious of a thing outside consciousness was the 
same as to say that there was money in one’s 
pocket outside one’s pocket. 

Whether the famous ‘thing-in-itself’ existed 
was not the question here; for, Fichte was con- 
vinced that its concept was logically impossible. 
It was therefore also impossible to build a system 
of concepts on this foundation because the flaw of 
contradiction ran right through the very founda- 
tion of Kant’s theoretical construction. 

Fichte’s conclusion was irreproachable: to 
think a thing-in-itself meant to think the un- 
thinkable (from the standpoint of the principle of 
contradiction, of course), meant to violate the su- 


117 


preme fundamental principle of all analytical 
statements in the very course of their substantia- 
tion. He reproached Kant with having set a bad 
example of juggling with the rules of logic itself 
in the course of substantiating his own system of 
logic. 

Fichte posed the problem as follows. Was logic 
itself, as a science, obliged to follow the same 
principles that it affirmed as absolutely universal 
for any correct thinking, or was it entitled to 
ignore them? Should logic be a science among 
other sciences, or was it rather to be likened to a 
wilful princeling who dictated laws obligatory 
for all other people but not binding in himself? 
The question, it would seem, was purely rhetor- 
ical. But surely, according to Kant, it was right 
after all that man thought of things given in 
contemplation (i.e. in the field of all special 
sciences) by one set of rules (those of the logic of 
truth) and about the things given in thought by 
another set (in the spirit of transcendental dia- 
lectics). It was not surprising that contradictions 
and the flaws of antinomies appeared between 
understanding and reason, and, furthermore, 
within reason itself. 

But in that case the very concept of thinking, 
of the subject, I, was made senseless from the 
very beginning, i.e. was made contradictory 
within itself. All the fundamental categories of 
logic proved to be concepts that denoted not only 
different but diametrically opposite objects of 
thought. So we got the position that there were 
two different Is in every person, in every think- 


118 


ing individual, in constant polemic with each 
other. One of them contemplated the world and 
the other thought. Correspondingly, it was sug- 
gested, there were two different worlds, the con- 
templated and the thought of, although they 
merged into one in direct experience and in real 
life. 

In general Kant was also inclined to that idea, 
that the I itself, the subject of thinking, was also 
a ‘thing-in-itself’. And for that reason, when one 
tried to create a system of all the determinations 
of this I, ie. a logic as a system of the logical 
parameters of thinking, the system proved con- 
tradictory through and through, i.e. self-destroy- 
ing. As a result, if one followed Kant, it was quite 
impossible to construct a logic as a science. It was 
impossible, in constructing it, to observe the very 
rules that it prescribed as universal and neces- 
sary for all other sciences. But then there was no 
thought in general as one and the same capacity 
in different applications, but two different sub- 
jects, two different Is (each of which had to be 
considered without connection with the other) as 
two fundamentally heterogeneous objects, yet 
nevertheless called by one and the same 
name. 

Apart from the fact that this led to a muddle 
of concepts (Kant himself was forced to call one 
of the Is phenomenal and the other noumenal), 
the very idea of logic as a science quite lost sense 
for, according to Fichte, all the conclusions drawn 
from considering thinking about thinking (as a 
‘thing-in-itself’ or noumenon) would equally have 


119 


no relation at all to thinking about things given 
in contemplation and representation. So all the 
propositions of logic (i.e. of thinking about think- 
ing) would have no binding force for thinking 
about things, i.e. for the thinking of natural 
scientists. 

Hence that central idea of Fichte’s philosophy 
was born, the idea of a general scientific doctrine, 
a theory that, unlike Kantian logic, would set out 
principles that were really significant for any 
application of thought. This science would set 
out laws and rules equally binding on both think- 
ing about thinking and thinking about things. 
Thinking about thinking, i.e. logic, must provide 
a model and example of observation of the prin- 
ciples of thought (the principles of scientific schol- 
arship) for the other sciences in general. These 
principles must remain the same both when 
thinking was directed to phenomena in mathe- 
matics, physics, or anthropology, and when di- 
rected to concepts, i.e. to itself. 

For a concept was just as much an object of 
scientific study as any other object; the more so 
that we only knew any other object scientifically 
insofar as it was expressed in concepts, and in 
no other way. That meant that to determine or de- 
fine a concept and to determine the object were 
absolutely identical expressions. 

The initial principle of Fichte’s science of 
science (Wissenschaftslehre) was therefore not 
the contrast or opposition of things and conscious- 
ness, of the object and its concept, but the opposi- 
tion within the I itself. From two different, dual- 


120 


istically isolated halves, having no connection at 
all with each other, you could not create a single, 
integral system. What was needed was not dual- 
ism, but monism, not two initial principles but 
one only. Because, when there were two different 
initial principles, there were two different 
sciences, which never merged into one. 

Fichte also interpreted the object and its con- 
cept as two different forms of existence of one 
and the same I, as the result of self-differentia- 
tion of the I into itself.. What had appeared to 
Kant as the object or ‘thing-in-itself’ (object of 
the concept) was in fact the product of the un- 
conscious, unreflecting activity of the I, since it 
produced the sensuously contemplated image of 
the thing by virtue of imagination. A concept 
was the product of the same activity, but taking 
place with consciousness of the course and mean- 
ing of the activities themselves. 

The initial identity of concept and object, or 
rather of the laws by which the sensuously con- 
templated world was constituted and those by 
which the world thought about, the world of con- 
cepts, was built, was therefore already included 
in the identity of their subject, of their origin. 
The Ego initially created a certain product, by 
virtue of imagination, and then began to look on 
it as something distinct from itself, as the object 
of the concept, as the non-Ego or not-I. But in 
fact the Ego, in the form of the not-I, was solely 
concerned, as before, with itself, and regarded 
itself as it were from the side, as in a mirror, as 
an object located outside itself. 


121 


The job of thought as such thus consisted in 
understanding its own activity in creating an im- 
age of contemplation and representation, in 
consciously reproducing that which it had pro- 
duced earlier unconsciously, without giving itself 
a clear account of what it was doing. The laws 
and rules of discursive thinking (i.e. of thinking 
that consciously obeyed the rules) were in fact 
nothing more nor less than the conscious laws 
(expressed in logical schemas) of intuitive think- 
ing, i.e., of the creative activity of the subject, the 
I, creating the world of contemplated im- 
ages, the world as it is given in contempla- 
tion. 

Only from that angle did the operation of 
comparing a concept with its object acquire ratio- 
nal sense. Fichte showed that the opposition, in 
no way mediated, between the thing-in-itself and 
its concept (dualism) had also led Kant into the 
fullest dualism both within the concept itself and 
within the system of concepts. Fichte quite con- 
sistently, from his point of view, showed that 
denying the principle of the identity of an object 
and its concept as the initial principle of logic 
and logical thinking meant, as well, denying the 
principle of identity in its general form, as a 
logical postulate. In other words, if logic as a 
science considered the principles of identity and 
contradiction (the latter was nothing but a nega- 
tive formulation of the law of identity) as an 
absolutely indispensable condition of the correct- 
ness of any thinking, then it must apply them to 
the understanding of thinking itself, and to deter- 


122 


minations of its specific object or subject matter, 
which was the concept. 

In logic, in fact, the concept was also the object 
of study; and logic must dissect the concept of 
concept. That being so, in logic, of all sciences, 
the concept and its object were fully synony- 
mous because any other object could only interest 
logic to the extent that, and insofar as, it had 
already been converted into a concept, expressed 
in a concept; for logic was not concerned with 
sensuously contemplated or intuited things. 

There was no place in logic, therefore, as a 
scientific system of determinations of thought, and 
could not be, for such expressions as a ‘thing-in- 
itself’ or ‘the object before its expression in a 
concept’. Logic had no business in general with 
such objects, for they were transcendental things 
for it, that is lying beyond its possibilities of ex- 
pression, beyond its competence. Beyond those 
limits began the sphere of super-rational under- 
standing, faith, irrational intuition, and other 
aptitudes; but they were not competent to operate 
within science. And Fichte did not want to have 
anything to do with them, at least within his 
Wissenschaftslehre. 

Such, in essence, was Fichte’s criticism of Kant’s 
attempt to create a logic, a classically consistent 
model (from the logical angle) of a ‘right-wing’ 
critique of dualism, i.e. from the position of sub- 
jective idealism. It is no accident that all modern 
Neopositivists repeat Fichte word for word, dis- 
carding the question of the relation of a concept 
to the external object in a similar way, and re- 


128 


placing it by the question of its relation to the 
concept (i.e. of a concept to itself). The latter 
relation is also naturally defined as an identity 
of ‘sign’ (the term that takes the place of ‘con- 
cept’) and of the designatum. The law of identity 
(and correspondingly the principle of contradic- 
tion) then boils down to this, that one and the 
same sign must designate one and the same 
thing, must have one and the same meaning or 
sense, 

Let us, however, return to Fichte. He, having 
contemplated building a system of logic and a 
logical model of the world, naturally came into 
conflict with the conceptions of his teacher Kant. 
To Kant his venture immediately seemed unac- 
ceptable: ‘...I declare herewith: that I consider 
Fichte’s science of knowledge a completely un- 
tenable system. Because a pure science of knowl- 
edge is nothing more nor less than a naked logic, 
which, with its principles, does not achieve the 
material of understanding but abstracts from the 
content of the latter as pure logic, from which 
it is a vain task to pick out a real object and 
therefore one never attempted, but which, when 
transcendental philosophy is at stake, must pass 
into metaphysics.’2 

Kant from the outset repudiated the attempt to 
create a metaphysic; not because it must describe 


2 Johann Gottlieb Fichte’s Leben und_literarischer 
Briefwechsel von seinem Sohne Immanuel Hermann Fichte, 
Bd. JI (Leipzig, 1862) p 161. See also R. Adamson. 
Fichte (London, 1881) pp 50-51. 


124 


the world of things in themselves but only because 
Fichte wanted to create a logic which when ap- 
plied, would ensure the building of a single sys- 
tem of concepts not cracked by the flaws of anti- 
nomies, a system that would synthesise in itself 
all the most important conclusions and generali- 
sations of science. That, according to Kant, was 
unrealisable however the system obtained was 
interpreted, whether objectively (materialisti- 
cally) or subjectively (transcendentally). One way 
or the other it was equally impossible. It was 
quite natural therefore that Kant considered it a 
groundless reproach that he ‘had not created a 
system’ but had only posed the task and equipped 
science with the important (though not com- 
pletely and consistently worked out) principles 
needed for such a construction: “The presumption, 
attributing to me the intention, that I wished to 
provide a propaedeutic to transcendental philos- 
ophy and not the system of the philosophy itself, 
is incomprehensible to me.” 

Fichte began by insisting that Kant’s system 
of philosophical concepts was not a system but 
only a concatenation of the opinions and prin- 
ciples needed for constructing such and, more- 
over, very inconsistent ones. The argument there- 
fore passed to a new plane: what was a system? 
What were the principles and criteria enabling 
us to differentiate a system of scientific concepts 
from a concatenation of judgments each of which 


3 [bid., p 162. 


125 


might be true of and by itself, but was not, all 
the same, linked with the others? 

In explaining his concept of ‘system’, Fichte 
formulated it as follows: ‘...My exposition, as 
any scientific one must (my italics—EUI], pro- 
ceeds from the most indefinite, which is again 
determined before the reader’s eyes; therefore, in 
the course of it, quite other predicates will, of 
course, be linked to the objects than were origin- 
ally linked to them; and further this exposition 
will very often pose and develop propositions 
which it will afterward refute, and in this way 
advance through antithesis to synthesis. The 
finally determined true result obtained from it is 
only found here in the end. You, of course, only 
seek this result; and the way that it is found is of 
no interest to you. Thus, according to him a sys- 
tem proved to be the result of the removal of 
contradictions. They remained unmediated out- 
side the system, and as such negated each other. 
Therefore there was no system in Kant, but only 
propositions unmediated by development that he 
took over ready-made and vainly tried to link 
together formally, which was impossible since 
they had already negated one another. With 
Fichte the whole arose precisely from bits, 
through their successive unification. 

In counterposing his position to Kant’s, Fichte 
said: “The generality that I affirm in no way 
arises through apprehension of plurality under 
unity, but rather through derivation of endless 


4 J. G. Fichte. Sonnenklarer Bericht, pp 217-218. 


126 


plurality from the unity grasped in a glance.® 
The initial generality, which was differentiated 
in the course of its own disintegration into a va- 
riety of particulars, also had to be established in 
scientific system before all else. 

But Kant’s image of the whole, too, was brought 
to light through the particulars from which it was 
built up, as from bits. And now, after Kant, the 
task could only consist in getting from this whole 
to the particulars, in testing and re-testing them 
critically, in purging the system of everything 
superfluous and fortuitous, and in preserving in it 
only the diverse definitions that were required of 
necessity in order to construct the whole. The 
whole (the generality) then proved to be a crite- 
rion for the selection of particulars; it was now 
necessary to develop the whole system of partic- 
ulars systematically, step by step, starting from 
that one, single principle. Then we would get 
science, a system. 

In other words, the logic of analysing Kant’s 
philosophy had immediately concentrated Fichte’s 
attention on the problems that had been brought 
together in the section of the Critique of Pure 
Reason on transcendental dialectic, on the prob- 
lems of the absolute synthesis of concepts and 
judgments into a theory understood as a single 
system. There also was to be found the ‘growing 
point’ of logical science. Fichte proposed calling 
the new field of investigation of thought ‘the 
science of knowledge’ (Wissenschaftslehre), i.e. 


5 Ibid., pp 112-113. 


the science of the universal forms and laws of 
development of a system of scientific determina- 
tions. These determinations would, of course, be 
invariant for any particular science, be it mathe- 
matics or physiology, celestial mechanics or an- 
thropology. They must define any object, and that 
meant they must represent a system of universal 
determinations of every possible object of scien- 
tific study, its logical ‘parameters’. 

Science, consequently, must give itself a clear 
account of its own activities, achieve self-cons- 
ciousness, and express its self-consciousness 
through the same categories through which it 
comprehended everything else, any other object 
given in experience. The science of science was 
in fact a system of determinations outlining any 
possible object, and at the same time the struc- 
ture of the subject constructing that object, and 
the logical forms in turn were the forms realised, 
abstractly expressed, and built up into a system 
of rational consciousness in general, i.e. not the 
empirical consciousness of this or that individual, 
but only the necessary and universal forms (sche- 
mas) of the activity of any possible being possess- 
ing thought. 

What used to be called ‘logic’ was only an ab- 
stract schema of this universal activity of con- 
structing any possible object in consciousness. 
Fichte specially investigated and explained his 
understanding of the relation between his Wis- 
senschaftslehre and ‘logic’. The latter proved to be 
only an abstract schema of the same activity as 
was outlined in the former. Therefore, as he put 


128 


it, the Wissenschaftslehre could not be demon- 
strated logically, and it was impossible to prem- 
ise any logical proposition on it, even the law 
of contradiction; on the contrary, any logical 
thesis and all logic must be deduced from the 
Wissenschaftslehre. Thus logic received its sig- 
nificance from the science of knowledge and not 
the science of knowledge from logic. 

The fact was that theoretical ‘schematising’ 
(i.e. operations controlled by logical rules and 
propositions) by no means lacked necessary and 
natural premises. Their analysis became vitally 
important precisely when thinking came up 
against certain changes, which in essence were a 
uniting of contradictory, opposing determinations. 

Here Fichte did not differ with Kant, who well 
understood that change ‘presupposes one and the 
same subject as existing with two opposite deter- 
minations’,® and that one and the same thing 
could at different moments of time have a certain 
predicate A, and then lose it and be not-A. If, 
however, a thing could lose predicate A without 
ceasing to be itself, and be transformed into 
something else (into the object of another con- 
cept), that meant, according to Kant, that the 
disappearing predicate did not belong to the con- 
cept of the given thing, was not one of its univer- 
sal and necessary determinations. The concept 
(in contrast to the empirically general representa- 
tion) expressed only the absolutely unaltered 
characteristics of the thing. Theory was not in- 


6 Immanuel Kant. Critique of Pure Reason, p 218. 


9-831 129 


terested in change—that old prejudice also 
trapped Kant. All change was a matter of empiric- 
al views and not of theory. Theory, constructed 
according to the rules of logic, must give a picture 
of the object withdrawn, as it were, from the 
power of time. Theory had no right to include in 
the definitions of a concept those determinations 
that the passage of time had washed off a thing. 
A concept therefore always came under the pro- 
tective cover of the principle of contradiction. 
But how did matters stand if the object repre- 
sented in theory (in the form of a theoretical 
schema constructed according to the rules of logic) 
began to be understood not as something abso- 
lutely unchanging but as something coming into 
being, if only in consciousness, as with Fichte? 
How did it stand with the principle of contra- 
diction, if the logical schema had in fact to pic- 
ture a process of change, the beginning or the 
becoming of a thing in consciousness and by 
virtue of consciousness? What was to be done if 
logic itself was understood as an abstract schema 
of the construction of an object in the eyes of a 
reader, i.e. as a schema of the consistent enriching 
of the initial concept with newer and newer pred- 
icates, a process whereby there was initially only 
A, but later B necessarily arose (which in itself 
was understandably not A or was not-A), and 
then C, D, E, right down to Z? For even the 
simple combination of A and B was a combina- 
tion of A and not-A. Or was B nevertheless A? 
Fichte’s conclusion was: choose between these 
two—either the principle of contradiction was 


130 


absolute (but then no synthesis was possible in 
general, not uniting of different determinations) 
or there was development and a synthesis of the 
determinations of concepts (and they did not con- 
form to the absolute requirements of the prin- 
ciple of contradiction). 

Fichte followed another, third path. He started 
from the point that what was impossible to rep- 
resent in a concept, that is to say the combina- 
tion or synthesis of mutually exclusive determina- 
tions, constantly occurred in contemplation or in- 
tuition (in activity to construct the image of a 
thing). Thus, by analysing Zeno’s famous para- 
dox and showing that we divide any finite length 
into infinity, Fichte concluded: ‘From this you 
see that what is impossible and contradictory in 
the concept actually happens in the intuition of 
space.” 

If, therefore, you came up against a contradic- 
tion in a logical expression, the thing was not to 
hasten to declare that it could not be, but to 
return to the intuition (Anschauung), the rights 
of which were higher than those of formal logic; 
and if analysis of the act of intuition showed you 
that you were forced of necessity to pass from 
one determination to another, opposing one in 
order to unite it with the first, if you saw that A 
was necessarily transformed into not-A, you 
would then be obliged to sacrifice the require- 
ment of the principle of contradiction. Or rather, 


7 J. G. Fichte, Thatsachen des Bewusstseyns (Stuttgart 
and Tubingen, 1817) p 9. 


a 131 


that principle could not then be regarded as the 
indisputable measure of truth. 

Fichte also demonstrated this dialectic from 
the example of the origin of consciousness, of the 
‘positing’ of the non-Ego (not-I) by the activity 
of the Ego, the differentiation of the person him- 
self as the thinking being from himself as thought 
of, as the object of thought. Could a person be- 
come aware of himself, of the acts of his own 
consciousness, of his own constructive activity? 
Obviously he could. He not only thought, but also 
thought about his thinking, and converted the 
very act of thinking into an object; and that 
exercise was always called logic. 

The starting point in this case, as was shown 
above, could only be I, the Ego (Ich, das Selbst) 
understood as the subject of an activity produc- 
ing something different from itself, that is to say 
the product, the recorded result. The Ego was 
initially equal to itself (1 = I) and, considered as 
something active, creative, creating, already con- 
tained in itself the necessity of its own transfor- 
mation into a non-Ego (not-I). We saw and knew 
this directly, from self-observation, for conscious- 
ness in general was realised only insofar as a 
representation of something else arose in it, a 
representation of a non-Ego, a thing, an object. 
There could not be empty consciousness not filled 
by anything. 

The transformation of the I into the not-I 
occurred, of course, quite independently of study 
of the rules of logic, and before their study. It 
was a matter of natural—‘primary’—thought. It 


132 


——— 


was a prototype of logical, reflective thinking 
that discovered a certain law-governed necessity 
in itself, in its activity in constructing images of 
things, and then expressed it in the form of a 
number of rules, in the form of logic, in order 
henceforth to follow them consciously (freely) and 
to submit to them. 

All logical rules must therefore be deduced, de- 
rived by analysis of actual thinking. In other 
words they had a certain prototype with which 
they could be compared and contrasted. This 
approach differed radically from Kant’s position, 
according to which all fundamental logical prin- 
ciples and categories had only to be consistent 
in themselves so that their predicates did not in- 
clude contradictions. Kant therefore postulated 
the laws and categories of logic, while Fichte re- 
quired them to be deduced, and their universality 
and necessity demonstrated. 

True, Fichte, like Kant, did not encroach on 
the actual content of logical forms and laws. On 
the contrary, he wanted to demonstrate the cor- 
rectness of all the logical schemas known in pre- 
Kantian and Kantian logic, by indicating more 
rigorous conditions for their application. But he 
thereby also limited them, establishing that the 
principle of contradiction was only fully author- 
itative in relation to one determination, and that 
within a developing system it was constantly 
being set aside or discarded, since each succeeding 
determination negated the preceding one both in- 
dividually and absolutely. 

Fichte tried in that way to deduce the whole 


183 


system of logical axioms and categories, in order 
to understand them as the universal schemas, con- 
sistently taken into practice, for uniting of empiri- 
cal data, as degrees or phases of the production of 
concepts, for concretising the initial, still undi- 
vided concept into a number of its universal and 
necessary predicate-definitions. There is no need 
here to explain why Fichte did not succeed in his 
programme of deducing the whole system of logi- 
cal categories, why he did not succeed in turning 
logic into an exact science, into a system. In this 
case it was important to have posed the problem. 
Let us merely note that the ensuing criticism of 
his conception was directed precisely at explain- 
ing the reasons for his failure, and at analysing 
the premises that hindered his idea of reforming 
logic, of deducing its whole content from an inves- 
tigation of actual thinking, and in that way of 
uniting within one and the same system catego- 
ries that stood in a relation of direct negation of 
one another (formal contradiction), and that had 
seemed to Kant to be antinomically uncombinable, 
and not includable within one non-contradictory 
system. 

Schelling, too, occupied himself primarily, from 
the very start, with the problem of a system of 
knowledge, or rather, with the problem of the an- 
tinomies that inevitably arose in attempts to create 
such a system. The difficulty lay exclusively in 
representing in a logically systematic way the fact 
(directly apparent (intuitive) to every thinking 
being) that the world is one, and that thought, 
striving for its own systematic presentation, was 


134 


also one in itself. But the rules of logic and laws 
of the activity of the intellect were such that the 
single world, refracted through them, was split 
into two in the eyes of reason. And each of the 
halves so formed claimed the role of the sole true, 
absolute and unconditional, logically systematic 
representation of the whole world. 

Like Kant, Schelling saw the way out not on the 
plane of logically consistent constructing of deter- 
minations but in the practical realisation of the 
system that presented itself to the human mind as 
most worthy of it, most acceptable to it, most in 
accord with its innate strivings. It was impossible 
to demonstrate anything by formal logic, i.e. to 
work out a system of uncontradictory proofs that 
could not be counterposed by its opposite. Such a 
system simply had to be taken on direct trust and 
followed unconditionally. The system that Schell- 
ing himself chose was expressed in the follow- 
ing principle: ‘My vocation in criticism is to strive 
for unchangeable selfness (Selbstheit), uncondi- 
tional freedom, unlimited activity.’ This system 
could never be completed, it must always be 
‘open-ended’ in the future—such was the concept 
of activity. Activity when completed, embodied, 
‘fixed’ in its product, was already not act- 
ivity. 

It is easy to discern Fichte’s proud principle in 
these arguments. It was activity that was the abso- 
lute and unconditional that could never and must 


8 FLW. J. Schelling. Friihschriften. Erster Band (Berlin, 
1971) p 152. 


135 


never be completed by the creation of a system 
crystallised once and for all; the absolutely uni- 
versal in which new differences, differentiations, 
peculiarities, and particulars would ever be aris- 
ing and accordingly be merged (identified) with 
what had previously been established, and on ad 
infinitum. This form of criticism, according to 
Schelling, embraced dogmatism as its own mo- 
ment, because it confirmed the thesis that the 
whole edifice of man’s spiritual culture must 
henceforth be built on a clear and categorically 
established foundation, namely on the understand- 
ing that the sole subject of all possible predicates 
was the Ego, i.e., the infinite creative principle 
existing in every human being and freely presum- 
ing both itself and the whole world of objects that 
it saw, contemplated (intuited), and thought, and 
on the understanding that no one result already 
achieved had the force of an absolute, ‘objective’ 
authority for the Ego, i. e. the force of dogma. 

And if there were an opposing system that 
looked upon man as the passive point of applica- 
tion of previously given, externally objective 
forces, as a speck of dust in the vortex of elemental 
world forces, or a toy in the hands of God and 
his representatives on earth, that dogmatic system, 
though it had been rigorously proved formally 
and was not self-contradictory, would have to be 
combated by the supporter of true criticism until 
final victory. 

Like Fichte, Schelling stood for a new, critical, 
‘enlightened’ dogmatism: ‘Dogmatism—such is the 
result of our common inquiry—is irrefutable in 


136 


{ 


| 


theory because it itself has quit the theoretical 
field to complete its system in practice. It is there- 
by refutable in practice for us to realise a system 
in ourselves absolutely opposed to it.’? 

Practical activity was the ‘third’ thing on which 
all mutually contradictory systems came together 
as on common soil. It was there, and not in the 
abstractions of pure reason, that the real battle 
raged that could and must be won. That was 
where the proof lay that one party, unswervingly 
following its principle, defended not only its own, 
egoistic private interest, but also an interest coin- 
ciding with the universal tendencies of the uni- 
verse, i.e. with absolute and unconditional objec- 
tivity. 

‘Criticism cannot follow dogmatism into the 
sphere of the Absolute (understood purely theo- 
retically—EU/}, nor can the latter follow it, be- 
cause for both there can be only one assertion as 
an absolute assertion that takes on notice of the 
opposing system, and that determines nothing for 
the opposing system. 

‘Only now, after both have encountered one 
another, one of them can no longer ignore the 
other, and whereas before [i.e. in the purely theo- 
retically logical sphere—EUJ) they were without 
any resistance to the position won, now the posi- 
tion must be won by victory.’ 

That is the point that divided Fichte and Schell- 
ing from Kant; the intellectual culture of human- 


° F. W. J. Schelling. Frithschriften. Erster Band, p 156. 
10 Ibid., pp 181-132. 


187 


ity cannot lie eternally like Buridan’s ass be- 
tween two equally logical systems of ideas about 
the most important things in life. Mankind has, 
in practice, to act, to live; but it is impossible to 
act simultaneously in accordance with two oppos- 
ing systems of recommendations. We are forced to 
choose one of them and then to act strictly in the 
spirit of its principles. 

Kant himself, it is true, demonstrated in his last 
works that the arguments of practical reason must 
all the same tip the scales in favour of one system 
or the other, although on a purely theoretical 
plane they are absolutely equal. But with him 
this theme only broke through as one of the trends 
of his thinking, while Fichte and Schelling trans- 
formed it into the starting point of all their medi- 
tations. Hence the slogan about victory, too, in the 
theoretical sphere. One of the clashing logical 
conceptions must still prevail over the other, its 
opposite, and for that it must be reinforced by 
arguments no longer of a purely logical, rather 
purely scholastic quality, but armed with practi- 
cal (moral and aesthetic) advantages as well. Then 
it was assured of victory, and not simply of the 
right and the chance of waging an eternal acad- 
emic dispute. 

Like Fichte, Schelling saw the main problem of 
the theoretical system in synthetic statements and 
in uniting them: ‘It is these riddles that oppress 
the critical philosopher. His chief question is not 
how there can be analytical statements, but how 
there can be synthetic ones... The most com- 
prehensible thing is how we define everything ac- 


138 


CS —_——— 


cording to the law of identity, and the most enig- 
matic how we can define anything still outside 
this law.”!! 

That is aptly formulated. Any elementary act 
of synthesising determinations in a judgment— 
be it that A is B—in fact already requires us to go 
beyond the law of identity, i.e. to infringe the 
boundaries established by the principle of contra- 
diction in determinations; for, whatever the ad- 
joined statement B, it is in any case not A, is 
not-A. It is clearly the logical expression of the 
fact that any new knowledge infringes the strictly 
acknowledged limits of the old knowledge, re- 
futes it, and revises it. 

Any dogmatism that obstinately insisted on the 
knowledge already attained and mastered would 
therefore always reject any new knowledge from 
the outset on the sole grounds that it contradicted 
the old. And it did in fact formally contradict it 
because it was not analytically included in the 
old and could not be ‘derived’ from it by logical 
contrivances of any kind. It must be united with 
the old knowledge in spite of the fact that it for- 
mally contradicted it. 

That meant, according to Schelling, that a gen- 
uine synthesis was not realised by purely theoret- 
ical ability that strictly adhered to the rules of 
logic, but by quite another capacity, which was 
not bound by the strict limitations of the funda- 
mentals of logic, and even had the right to trans- 
gress them when it experienced a powerful need 


11 FW. J. Schelling. Frithschriften, pp 129, 130. 


139 


to do so. ‘A system of knowledge is necessarily 
either a trick, a game of ideas...—or it must 
embrace reality not through a theoretical ability, 
but through a practical one, not through a per- 
ceptive ability but through a productive, realising 
one, not through knowledge but through ac- 
tion.’!2 

With Kant this productive ability was called 
power of imagination (Einbildungskraft). Follow- 
ing him Schelling also plunged into analysis of it, 
which took him along a rather different road 
than Fichte’s, onto the rails of an objective ideal- 
ism that was not only reconciled to the thesis of 
the real existence of the external world but also 
built a theory of understanding it, although with 
Schelling himself this theory proved to be some- 
thing quite different from logic and tended rather 
to a kind of aesthetics, to a theory of the artistic, 
aesthetic comprehension of the mysteries of the 
universe. For the men of science Schelling 
retained, as a working tool, the same old logic that 
he himself, following Fichte, declared to be a 
completely unsatisfactory instrument for under- 
standing and to be justified solely as a canon of 
the outward systematisation and classification of 
material obtained by quite other, illogical, and 
even alogical, means. 

Whereas Fichte had provided a classical model 
of criticism of Kant and his logic from the right, 
from the standpoint of a consistently constructed 
subjective idealism, another motif began to be 


2 F, W. J. Schelling. Frihschriften. pp 126-127. 


140 


clearly seen in the reformatory strivings of the 
young Schelling, in tendencies leading him to ma- 
terialism. 

In the circles in which he moved, and where his 
thinking matured, quite other moods prevailed 
than those induced by Fichte’s philosophy. All 
Fichte’s thought had been concentrated on the so- 
cial and psychic revolution stimulated in minds by 
the events of 1789-93. The flight of his imagina- 
tion was also linked with the events and problems 
of those years; as the revolutionary wave subsided 
his philosophy folded its wings, and he could not 
find a new source of inspiration. For Schelling 
the fervour born of the revolution was only a cer- 
tain stage that he reached as a sympathiser and 
even a disciple of Fichte; but, just as the forces of 
rude reality forced the most zealous Jacobins to 
reckon with them, so too it became clear to Schell- 
ing that to insist on one infinite creative power, 
the Ego, and on the strength of its moral fervour, 
in face of the persistent external world meant to 
bang one’s head against the wall of incomprehen- 
sion, as had actually happened in the end to 
Fichte. 

Being closely linked with the circle of Goethe 
and the romantic writers, Schelling was much 
more interested than Fichte in nature (read: natu- 
ral science) on the one hand, and in the inherited, 
traditional (in the parlance of Kant and Fichte, 
objective) forms of social life on the other hand. 
From the very beginning natural science and art 
constituted the medium that shaped his mind and 
his aspirations as an inquirer. 


14] 


Schelling, it is true, began in the same way as 
Fichte; he too treated the opposition between sub- 
ject and object as an opposition within human 
consciousness, as an opposition between the im- 
ages of the external world that a person produced 
‘freely’, and the images of the same world that 
he produced not freely but unconsciously, in obe- 
dience to a compelling force of necessity unknown 
to him. Like Fichte, Schelling warred with dog- 
matism (in the idea of which, for him, there were 
merged both religious orthodoxy, which ascribed 
necessity to an external God, and philosophical 
materialism, which ascribed it to external things, 
to ‘pure objects’). For Schelling criticism was a 
synonym for the standpoint that the objective (uni- 
versal and necessary) determinations of the human 
psyche were initially innate in the psyche itself 
and discovered in it in the course of its active 
self-discovery. 

In that way Schelling, following Fichte, tried to 
overcome the dualism of Kant’s conception; but 
with Fichte the dualism had still been preserved 
and even reproduced in ever sharper form within 
his conception. All the Kantian antinomies had in 
fact been merged by him in a single antinomy, in 
the contradiction between two halves of one and 
the same Ego. One of them unconsciously created 
the objective world of images by the laws of cau- 
sality, space, and time, while the other recon- 
structed it in the spirit of the requirements of the 
transcendental ideal, in accordance with the re- 
quirements of ‘morality’. 

It was presupposed, as before, that there were 


142 


two different Egos in every person, but it was not 
known how and why they were connected togeth- 
er; and although Fichte united them in the con- 
cept activity, the opposition was reproduced again 
within the Ego in the form of two different 
principles of activity. And as before it remained 
an open question what was the inner necessary 
relation between the two halves of the human Ego. 
Did they have a common root, a common source, 
a common ‘substance’, through the splitting of 
which the two halves of necessity arose? 

Fichte did not find the solution, in spite of his 
concept of activity. The world of necessary ideas 
was formed within all Egos quite independently 
of the activity of the ‘better’ I, before it awoke in 
man. The ‘better’ I already, during its awakening, 
found the existing world in itself. In turn it (the 
pure form of practical reason or the ideal) came 
into the world of necessarily produced ideas, as 
it were, from outside, like a judge who emerged 
from somewhere unknown and who brought with 
him the criteria for evaluating and re-evaluating 
what existed, i.e. the fruits of the Ego’s past 
labour. 

The human Ego was again converted into a 
field of endless battle between two originally 
heterogeneous principles. The absolute Ego must 
take the world of existing ideas, incomplete and 
unconnected, even mutually contradictory, in ac- 
cordance with itself and one another. But that 
again was only attainable in infinity. ‘Full agree- 
ment of man with himself, and—so that he can 
agree with himself—agreement of all things out- 


143 


side him with his necessary practical concepts of 
them—concepts that determine how they must 
be....’ (as Fichte formulated the essence of the 
problem!3), proved unattainable in the existing 
world. 

Fichte freed himself from the Kantian form of 
antinomies but reproduced them all intact in the 
form of contradictions within the very concept of 
‘activity’. The problem was simply transferred to 
the sphere of the individual psyche and so made 
completely insoluble. Schelling reached the same 
conclusion and began to seek a way out along a 
new path with the young Hegel. Gradually, in the 
course of criticising Fichte, the main outlines of 
a new conception began to appear. 

Schelling and Hegel were more and more dis- 
satisfied with the following ‘points’ in the posi- 
tion of Kant and Fichte: 

(1) the posing of all the concrete burning issues 
of the day in a subjective, psychological form; 

(2) the feeble appealing to ‘conscience’ and 
‘duty’ that stemmed from that, which put the 
philosopher into the pose of a preacher of fine 
and noble but impracticable phrases and slogans; 

(3) the interpretation of the whole sensuous em- 
pirical world, if not as hostile, at least as a pas- 
sive obstacle to the dictates of ‘duty’ and the 
‘ideal’; 

(4) the absolute indifference to everything except 
pure morality (including the history of humanity 


3 J. G. Fichte. Uber den Gelehrten (Berlin, 1956) p 45. 


144 


and of nature), and to natural science (which 
underlay Fichteanism); 

(5) the powerlessness of the categorical impera- 
tive (ideal) in the struggle against the ‘egoistic’, 
‘immoral’, ‘irrational’ motives of man’s behaviour 
in society, the indifference of real earthly men to 
the preachers of the higher morality (how light 
all the means of paradise developed by the 
Church and supported by the fullest scholastic 
explanations were in the scales when the passions 
and forces of circumstance, upbringing, example, 
and government were thrown into the other pan; 
the whole history of religion from the beginning 
of the Christian era went to prove that Christian- 
ity could only make people good when they were 
already good, the young Hegel said, having in 
mind by the ‘scholastic explanations’ any philos- 
ophy oriented on morality, including that of Kant 
and Fichte); 

(6) the difference, insuperable in principle, be- 
tween the real and the proper, between necessary 
and free activity, between the world of pheno- 
mena and the active essence of man, etc., etc. 

All that led to one thing, namely, to compre- 
hending that it was ultimately necessary to find 
the ‘common root’ itself of the two halves of 
human being from which they both stemmed and 
could be understood. Only then would the human 
personality appear before us not as the passive 
point of application of external forces (be they 
nature or God), i.e. not as an object, but as some- 
thing acting independently (das Selbst), as subject. 

From that was born the idea of the philosophy 


10—881 145 


of identity. Like any idea it existed originally 
only in the form of an hypothesis, in the form of 
a principle not yet realised in detail, in the spirit 
of which the whole mass of existing theoretical 
material, and in particular the conception of Kant 
and Fichte, had to be critically revised. 

Originally the young Schelling only affirmed 
that the two halves of the human being, which 
had been depicted by Kant and Fichte as original- 
ly heterogeneous in essence and origin (in spite 
of their efforts to link them), had something in 
common after all, ie. that somewhere in the 
depths, in the initial essence of matter, they had 
been merged in one image before being torn apart 
and separated in dispute, discussion, and antino- 
my. Schelling’s thesis stated that both forms of the 
Ego’s activity (the unconscious and the consciously 
free) had really to be understood as two branches 
growing from one and the same trunk, and that it 
was necessary to discover that trunk first and then 
trace its growth before it forked. 

Schelling had not yet affirmed anything more 
concrete and definite besides that such identity 
must be and was. He had said nothing about 
where exactly this initial identity was to be seen. 
His description was, in essence, negative; it was 
not consciousness, but it was also mot matter; it 
was not spirit, but it was also mot substance; it 
was not ideal, but it was also mot real. What then 
was it? 

Here, in Heine’s witty comment ‘philosophy 
ends with Herr Schelling and poetry—I mean 
folly—begins.’ ‘But Herr Schelling has now left 


146 


the philosophical path and is seeking through an 
act of mystical intuition to achieve contemplation 
of the absolute itself; he is seeking to intuit it at 
its centre, in its essence, where there is nothing 
ideal and nothing real, neither idea nor extension, 
neither subject nor object, neither mind nor mat- 
ter, but there was who knows what!’!4 

Why did Schelling nevertheless turn from the 
path of philosophy here, from the path of thinking 
in rigorously defined determinations, to the path 
of poetry, to the path of metaphors and a kind of 
aesthetic intuition? Only because the logic that he 
knew and recognised did not permit the uniting 
of opposing contradictory predicates in concepts 
of one and the same subject. He, like Kant, held 
it sacred that the law of identity and the principle 
of contradiction were absolutely unbreakable laws 
for conceptual thinking, and that breaking them 
was tantamount to breaking the laws of thought in 
general, the forms of scientism. Here, he thought, 
in agreement with Fichte, that everything that 
was impossible in a concept (because of contradic- 
tion) became possible in contemplation or intui- 
tion. 

Schelling supposed that all the acts performed 
consciously by man in accordance with the rules 
of logic had been quite fully and exactly de- 
scribed in the transcendental philosophy of Kant 
and Fichte. That part of philosophy seemed to 


‘' Heinrich Heine. Zur Geschichte der Religion und 
Philosophie in Deutschland. In: Werke und Briefe, Bd. 5 
(Aufbau-Verlag, Berlin, 1961) p 299. 


Ws 147 


him to have been created once and for all. He did 
not intend to reform it at all; he only wanted to 
broaden the scope, the sphere of action, of its 
principles, wanted them to embrace the fields that 
had fallen outside Fichte’s field of vision, in par- 
ticular natural science. 

The turn to natural science here was not fortui- 
tous. The fact was that the attempt to investigate 
the sphere of unconscious activity in more detail 
led directly to it, that is to say the attempt to in- 
vestigate the mode of vital activity that man had 
followed before and irrespective of how he began 
a special reflection, converted himself into an 
object of special investigation, and began to reflect 
specifically on what originated within himself, 
and how it did so. But all his activity at this stage 
(which also followed from Kant’s point of view), 
being subordinated to the conditions of space, 
time, and causality, came within the competence 
of the natural sciences. In other words, the forms 
and modes of unconscious activity were scientif- 
ically described precisely through the concepts of 
physics, chemistry, physiology, psychology, and 
so on. 

For unconscious activity was nothing else than 
life, the mode of existence of organic nature, of 
the organism. But in the life of the organism (of 
any biological individual) mechanical, chemical, 
and electrical motions were joined together, and 
the organism could therefore be studied by me- 
chanics, chemistry, physics, and optics. In the 
living organism, Nature had concentrated all her 
secrets and determinations, and had synthesised 


148 


them. After the organism had been broken down 
into its constituents, however, the chief thing of 
all remained uncomprehended, namely, why were 
they linked together that way and not in some 
other way? Why in fact was a living organism 
obtained and not a pile of its components? 

With a purely mechanical approach the organ- 
ism proved to be something quite incomprehen- 
sible, because the principle of a mechanism was 
the uniting (consistent synthesis) of ready-made, 
previously given parts; the living organism, how- 
ever, did not originate through the building up of 
parts into a whole but, on the contrary through 
the beginning or origin, the generation of parts 
(organs) from an originally undifferentiated 
whole. Here the whole preceded its own parts, 
and functioned in relation to them as the purpose 
they all served. Here each part could only be 
understood through its role and function in the 
whole, outside of which it simply did not exist, or 
not, in any case, as such. 

The problem of understanding organic life was 
analysed by Kant in his Critique of the Power of 
Judgment (Kritik der Urteilskraft) as the prob- 
lem of the purposefulness of the structure and 
function of the living organism. But the stand- 
point of transcendental idealism forced him to 
affirm that, although we and our reason could 
not cognise the organism other than by means of 
the concept of a goal, nevertheless it was impos- 
sible to attribute any goal to the organism in itself, 
because a goal presupposed consciousness (and that 
meant the whole apparatus of transcendental 


149 


apperception) and the animal and vegetable did 
not possess such, 

The problems of life also proved to be the 
stumbling block that forced Schelling to stop and 
critically re-examine certain concepts of the 
philosophy of transcendental idealism. Like Kant, 
he categorically objected to introducing supernat- 
ural causes into the framework of the thinking of 
the natural sciences On those grounds he resolute- 
ly rejected vitalism, the idea that, in inorganic 
nature (i.e. the world of mechanics, physics, and 
chemistry), a certain ‘higher principle’ descended 
from somewhere outside and organised the physi- 
cal, chemical particles in the living body. There 
was no such principle outside consciousness, 
Schelling affirmed, following Kant. The natural- 
ist must seek in nature itself the causes of the 
origin of the organism from inorganic nature. Life 
must be fully explained by way of natural science, 
without implicating any kind of extranatural or 
supernatural force in it. “There is an older delu- 
sion, which is that organisation and life are inex- 
plicable by the principles of Nature.—With it 
only so much can be said: the first source of 
organic nature is physically inscrutable; so this 
unproved statement serves no purpose other than 
to sap the courage of the investigator. ... It would 
be at least one step toward that explanation if 
one could show that the succession of all organic 
beings had come about through the gradual evolu- 
tion of one and the same organisation.’!> 


FLW. J. Schelling. Uon der Weliseele (Hamburg, 
1809) pp vi-vii. 


150 


Man and his peculiar organisation stood at the 
logic apex of the pyramid of living creatures. And 
in that case we had every grounds and right to 
ascribe to nature itself, if not purpose in the trans- 
cendental sense, at least that objective character- 
istic which is reproduced in our reason (by virtue 
of its specifically transcendental structure) as a 
purpose, ‘in the form of a goal’. 

What was that characteristic Schelling did not 
consider it possible to say. In any case it was a 
matter of the capacity involved in nature itself 
to engender a succession of more and more com- 
plex and highly organised living creatures, up to 
and including man, in whom a ‘soul’, conscious- 
ness, was awakened and transcendental mechan- 
isms arose, i.e. a capacity consciously (freely) 
to reproduce everything that occurred in 
nature unconsciously, without a goal or pur- 
pose. 

But then it was necessary to think of nature 
not as naturalists had so far done (the mathema- 
tician plus the physicist, plus the chemist, plus the 
anatomist, each of them occupying himself with 
only his own private field and not even trying to 
link the results of his investigations with those of 
his neighbour). It must be considered as some kind 
of primordial whole in which the subject matter 
of the special sciences was differentiated. We 
must therefore not build up the picture of the 
whole like a mosaic, from the special sciences, but 
must endeavour, on the contrary, to understand 
them as consecutive stages in the development of 
one and the same whole, initially undivided. The 


151 


idea of nature as a whole, quite characteristic of 
the classical Greeks and of Spinoza, Schelling 
also advanced as the main principle by which 
alone the antinomy between mechanism and 
organism could be scientifically resolved (without 
appeal to supernatural factors). ‘As soon as our 
investigation ascends to the idea of Nature as an 
entity the opposition between mechanism and 
organism disappears immediately, an opposition 
that has long hampered the progress of natural 
science and that will long continue to block our 
enterprise’s success in the eyes of quite a 
few... .’16 

Schelling sought the way out by developing the 
concepts of mechanics and organic life from one 
and the same truly universal principle, which led 
him to the idea of representing nature as a whole, 
as a dynamic process in the course of which each 
successive stage or phase negated the preceding 
one, i.e. included a new characteristic. The purely 
formal (analytical) determination of a higher phase 
of the process could therefore not be deduced 
from the determination of a lower one; that was 
done simply by making a synthesis, by adding on 
a new determination. It was not surprising that, 
when the higher phase of a dynamic process was 
put directly alongside a lower phase of the same 
process, they were thought to be two  si- 
multaneously co-existing ‘objects’ (which is 
precisely how they look in empirical intuition), 


16 FW. J. Schelling. Uon der Weltseele, pp vii-viii. 


152 


and proved to be mutually directly contradictory. 

The basic task of the philosophy of nature, con- 
sequently, consisted just in tracing and showing 
how, in the course of a dynamic process, determi- 
nations arose that were directly opposed to the 
initial one. In other words, we thought of a 
dynamic process only as one of the gradual en- 
gendering of oppositions, of determinations of one 
and the same thing, i.e. of nature as a whole, that 
mutually negated one another. 

Schelling saw in that the universal law of the 
natural whole, operating identically in the field of 
mechanics, and of chemistry, and of electromag- 
netism, and of organic life. Such was the truly 
universal (i.e. identical for all the phenomena of 
nature) law of bifurcation, of the polarisation of 
the initial state. The attraction and repulsion of 
masses in mechanics, the north and south poles in 
magnetism, positive and negative electricity, acids 
and alkalis in chemical reactions—such were the 
examples flooding in on Schelling from all sides, 
and supplied again and again by the discoveries 
of Volta and Faraday, Lavoisier and Kielmeyer. 
The most diverse scientific discoveries were seen 
as fulfilment of Schelling’s predictions, and his 
fame grew. His disciples were to be found among 
doctors, geologists, physicists, and biologists; and 
that not by chance. Schelling’s philosophy pro- 
posed a form of thinking, the need for which was 
already imminent in the womb of theoretical nat- 
ural science. Exhilarated by success, Schelling 
continued to work the lode he had discovered for 
all it was worth. 


153 


But the transition of mutual opposites described 
appeared most marked and unsullied precisely on 
the boundary where natural and transcendental 
philosophy met, which was where the Ego arose 
from the sphere of the unconscious dynamic pro- 
cess (from the non-Ego), i.e. the transcendental, 
spiritual organisation of man, or, on the contrary, 
where objective knowledge of the not-I was born 
from the conscious activity of the I. This mutual, 
reciprocal passage of the determination of the 
Ego into a determination of the non-Ego demon- 
strated the action of the universal law of the 
dynamic process in its purest and most general 
form, i.e. the act of the transformation of A into 
not-A, of the bifurcation or splitting into two, of 
the ‘dualisation’ of the initial, originally undiffer- 
entiated state. 

But how was the initial absolute state, identical 
in itself, to be thought of, from the polarisation 
of which there arose the main ‘dualism’ of the 
natural whole, i.e. the Ego and the non-Ego, the I 
and the not-I, the freely conscious creativity of 
the subject and the whole vast sphere of the 
‘dead’, congealed, fossilised creative activity, the 
world of objects? 

That was where the specifically Schelling 
philosophising began. It turned out that it was im- 
possible to think of the initial identity, ie. to 
express it in the form of a rigorously delimited 
concept. On being expressed in a concept it im- 
mediately came forward as an antinomic bifurca- 
tion. Identity was realised in the concept (in 
science) precisely through its absence, through 


154 


contrasts that had nothing formally in common 
between them. 

We have reached a very important point. That 
Schelling called his system the philosophy of iden- 
tity was not at all because it represented a system 
of determinations or definitions common to the I 
and the not-I. Rather the contrary. Schelling 
denied the possibility of such a system of concepts 
in principle. His philosophy was put forward in 
the form of two formally unjoined systems of con- 
cepts, formally opposed in all their determinations 
yet nevertheless mutually presupposing each other. 
One was the system of determinations of the Ego 
as such (transcendental philosophy); the other was 
the system of assembled universal determinations 

| of the object, of the non-Ego (natural philosophy). 

The first disclosed and described in the shape 
of formally non-contradictory constructions the 

specifically subjective forms of man’s activity that 

it was impossible to ascribe to nature existing 
outside of and before human consciousness. The 
second, on the contrary, strove to disclose pure 
objectivity, carefully purged of everything intro- 
duced into it by man’s conscious, volitional activi- 
ty, and to depict the object as it existed ‘before it 
entered consciousness’. 

Within the confines of natural philosophy (theo- 
retical natural science) the theoretical scientist 
‘fears nothing more than interference of the sub- 
jective in this kind of knowledge’. Within the 
limits of transcendental philosophy (logic and 
epistemology), on the contrary, he was ‘most of all 
afraid that something objective has been impli- 


135 


cated in the purely subjective principle of know- 
ledge.’!? 

To sum up: if transcendental philosophy were 
constructed just as correctly as natural philosophy, 
there would be nothing of the other in the struc- 
ture of each and there could not be a single con- 
cept or theoretical determination between them; 
for such a determination would directly infringe 
the two supreme principles of logic, the law of 
identity and the principle of contradiction. It 
would simultaneously express both the objective 
and the subjective, and would contain directly 
identified opposites. The two given sciences could 
not therefore be formally united into one. It was 
impossible to develop two series of scientific (for- 
mally correct) determinations from one and the 
same concept because it would be formally incor- 
rect and inadmissible from the standpoint of the 
rules of logic. 

Therefore philosophy on the whole was impos- 
sible as one science. From that Schelling con- 
cluded that the whole system of philosophy would 
‘find consummation in two fundamental sciences, 
which, mutually opposed in principle and direc- 
tion, seek each other out and complement each 
other’.!8 There was not, and could not be, some 
‘third’ science in which would be discovered what- 
ever there was in common between the world in 
consciousness and the world outside consciousness, 


17 F. W. J. Schelling. System des transzendentalen Idea- 
lismus (Hamburg, 1957) p 11. 
418 Tbid., p 10. 


156 


and which would be a system of laws and rules 
obligatory in the same way for the one world and 
the other. It was impossible in principle to present 
such laws and rules in the form of a_ science 
because it would then be built from the outset on 
an infringement of the law of identity. 

But there were, all the same, laws common to 
the world and knowledge, otherwise it would be 
senseless in general to speak of knowledge, of 
agreement of the objective and the subjective, and 
the very concept of truth as the coincidence of 
knowledge with its object would be nonsense. 
General laws consequently did operate, but not as 
rigidly binding rules, but rather as reasons not 
strictly formulated, related to the aspirations of 
the poet-artist who directly experienced his blood 
relationship and unity with the cognised object 
and with nature. The artist of genius and nature 
operated by the same laws. 

The identity of the laws of the subjective and 
objective worlds could only be realised in the act 
of creation. But creativity did not submit to for- 
mal schematising, dying and becoming fossilised 
in it. Thus it came about that ‘an absolute Simple, 
Identical, cannot be comprehended or commu- 
nicated through description, and not at all through 
conception. It can only be intuited.’!9 Here intu- 
ition was all powerful, the inspired intuition of 
creative insight, intellectual and aesthetic intu- 
ition. Thus it was, therefore, that Schelling’s sys- 


19 F. W. J. Schelling. System des transzendentalen Idea- 
lismus, p 294. 


157 


tem culminated in and was completed by a philos- 
ophy of art. 

Thus the primary identity was a fact but was 
not expressible in a concept, was the initial prem- 
ise of any concept, but was not determined 
through a concept. Identity was, as it were, made 
up of two always diverging trends of investiga- 
tion, namely demonstration of how the objective 
was transformed into the subjective (which was 
the competence of theoretical natural science, 
spinning its thread from mechanics through chem- 
istry to biology and anthropology, i.e. to man), 
and demonstration of how the subjective was 
transformed into the objective (which was the 
competence of transcendental philosophy, starting 
from knowledge and its forms as from fact, and 
demonstrating the objectivity, i.e. the universali- 
ty and necessity, of knowledge). 

The problem consequently began to appear as 
follows: two diametrically opposite spheres stood 
facing one another contrasted in all their charac- 
teristics. Their identity (the fact of their agree- 
ment was truth) was realised precisely through 
the transition that transformed the one into the 
other. But the transition, the moment of the tran- 
sition itself, was irrational and could not be ex- 
pressed by a non-contradictory concept, because it 
was at that very moment that the transition from 
A into not-A took place, i.e. their coincidence, 
their identity. To express it in a concept meant to 
smash the form of the concept. 

Here Schelling came directly up against the 
narrowness of the Kantian logic, which attributed 


158 


to the law of identity and the principle of con- 
tradiction the character of the absolute premises 
of the very possibility of thinking in concepts. For 
there was no room within these rules for the mo- 
ment of the transition of opposites into one 
another, and it broke them. Schelling, while agree- 
ing that there was self-destruction of the form of 
thinking here, was forced in fact to conclude that 
real truth could not be caught and expressed 
through a concept. In his eyes therefore art and 
not science represented the highest form of mental 
activity. 

If the rules of general logic were absolute, then 
the passage of consciousness into nature and vice 
versa, by which the time-honoured identity of the 
subjective and the objective was realised, 
remained inexpressible in concepts; and the act of 
knowing was forced again and again to make a 
leap, a jump, an act of irrational intuition, of 
poetic seizing of the absolute idea, of truth. 

In other words, Schelling, beginning with a 
quite justified statement of the fact that logic in its 
Kantian conception actually put an insurmount- 
able barrier in the way of attempts to understand, 
that is to express, the fact of the transformation 
of opposites into one another in concepts, i.e. in 
rigorously defined determinations, took the step 
toward rejection of logic in general. It did not 
even occur to him to reform logic itself in order 
to make it a means of expressing what appeared 
in intuition (contemplation) as a self-evident fact. 
Instead he began to make up for and compensate 
the limitedness and insufficiency of the existing 


159 


logic (mistaken by him as the inferiority of thought 
as such), by the force of intellectual and aesthetic 
intuition, an absolutely irrational capacity that it 
was impossible either to study or to teach. This 
magic force also had to unite everything that rea- 
son (thought in general) was not in a position to 
join together but was only capable of ripping to 
bits, separating, and choking to death. 

In his own constructions, in spite of a mass of 
bold guesses and ideas, some even of genius, that 
influenced the development of nineteenth century 
science, and which in essence had a clearly marked 
dialectical character, Schelling kept adopting the 
pose of a God-inspired prophet and genius, unit- 
ing without fear or doubt concepts that seemed to 
contemporary scientists to be fundamentally un- 
unitable. And whereas he himself, in his youth, 
had had sufficient tact and competence in the field 
of the natural sciences, and had often hit the nail 
on the head by intuition, his pupils and succes- 
sors, who adopted the empty schema from him but 
did not possess his erudition in science or his 
talent, reduced his method and manner of philos- 
ophising to the caricature that Hegel later jeered 
at so caustically. 

Schelling, however, exposed the rigidity of 
Kant’s logic. And though he did not set himself 
the task of reforming it radically, he prepared the 
ground very thoroughly for Hegel. 

Logic as such remained only an episode in 
Schelling’s system of ideas, an insignificant section 
of the transcendental philosophy, a scholastic de- 
scription of rules of a purely formal order in ac- 


160 


cordance with which it was necessary only to for- 
malise, i.e. to classify and schematise, knowledge 
obtained in quite another way and by quite other 
abilities. For Schelling logic, consequently, was by 
no means a schema for producing knowledge, but 
served as a means of describing it verbally, termi- 
nologically ‘for others’, of expressing it through a 
system of rigorously defined and non-contradicto- 
rily determined terms (Schelling himself called 
them ‘concepts’). Ultimately its recommendations 
seemed only external, verbally explicated forms of 
knowledge, and nothing more. 

The process of producing knowledge was itself, 
in fact, done by the power of imagination, which 
Schelling analysed very closely and circumstan- 
tially in the form of various ‘intuitions’. And here, 
in the field of intuition and imagination he also 
discovered dialectics as the true schema of the 
productive, actively subjective capacity of man to 
understand and alter the world of the images and 
concepts of science. 

So Schelling confirmed dialectics as the genuine 
theory of scientific knowledge, but then broke all 
its links with logic. His position returned logic 
once more to the pitiable condition in which it 
had been before the attempts of Kant and Fichte 
to reform it in accordance with the needs of the 
times. 

After Schelling the problem consisted in uniting 
dialectics as the true schema of developing knowl- 
edge and logic as the system of rules of thinking 
in general. What was the relation of the rules of 
logic to the real schemas (laws) of the develop- 


11—831 161 


ment of understanding? Were they different, mu- 
tually unconnected ‘things’? Or was logic simply 
the conscious and deliberately applied schema of 
the real development of science? If it was, it was 
all the more inadmissible to leave it in its old, so 
primitive form. At this point the torch was taken 
up by Hegel. 


ESSAY FIVE 


Dialectics as Logic 


Hegel’s solution of the problem of the subject 
matter of logic has played a special role in the 
history of this science. In order to understand the 
Hegelian logic it is not enough just to clarify the 
direct sense of its propositions. It is more impor- 
tant and difficult to consider the real subject mat- 
ter through the fanciful turns of Hegel’s style. It 
is about this that we shall now speak, which will 
also give us a chance to understand Hegel criti- 
cally, and to restore for ourselves an image of the 
original from its distorted presentation. Learning 
to read Hegel in a materialist way, as Lenin 
read him and advised reading him, means learning 
to compare his representation of the object criti- 
cally with the object itself, at every step tracing 
the divergence between the copy and the original. 

It would be an easy task if the reader had the 
two objects of this comparison—the copy and the 
original—ready-made before him. The copy exists. 
But where is the original? We cannot take the 
existing logical consciousness of the scientist as 
the original, for this consciousness itself must be 
tested for its logicality, and itself presupposes a 


critical analysis of existing logical forms from the 
standpoint of their correspondence with the real 
requirements of the development of science. And 
for an understanding of the real forms and laws 
of theoretical cognition Hegel's Science of Logic, 
despite all its faults associated with idealism, can 
offer more than the ‘logic of science’. 

The true logic of science is not given to us 
directly; it still has to be dug out and understood, 
and then converted into a consciously applied in- 
strument for working with concepts, into a logi- 
cal method of resolving problems that do not ad- 
mit of solution by traditional logical methods. 
That being so, critical study of the Science of 
Logic cannot be reduced to a simple comparison 
of its propositions with those of the logic by which 
scientists are consciously guided, accepting it as 
irreproachable and admitting of no doubts. 

So comparing the copy (the science of logic) 
with the original (with the actual forms and laws 
of theoretical understanding) proves to be quite 
a difficult matter. The difficulty is that Hegel’s 
presentation of the subject matter (in this case 
thought) has to be compared critically not with a 
ready-made, previously known prototype of it, but 
with an object whose outlines are only beginning 
to be traced out for the first time in the course of a 
critical surmounting of the idealist constructions. 
This reconstruction is feasible if the structure 
of the optics through which Hegel examined 
the object of his investigation is clearly under- 
stood. This distorting lens, while a magnifying 
one (the system of the fundamental principles of 


164 


Hegelian logic) enabled him to see exactly, 
although in an idealistically distorted form, the 
dialectic of thought, which is the logic that re- 
mains invisible to the eye not philosophically 
equipped, and to simple common sense. 

It is important, first of all, to understand clearly 
what the real object was that Hegel investigated 
and described in his Science of Logic, so as to 
find the critical range immediately in regard to 
his presentation. “That the subject matter of logic 
is thought, with that everyone agrees,’ Hegel 
stressed in his Lesser Logic.! Later, quite natural- 
ly, logic as a science received the definition of 
thinking about thought or thought thinking about 
itself, 

In that definition and the conceptions expressed 
by it there is still nothing either of the specifi- 
cally Hegelian or of the specifically idealist. It is 
simply the traditional ideas of the subject mat- 
ter of logic as a science, quite clearly and suc- 
cinctly expressed. In logic the object of scientific 
comprehension proves to be thought itself, while 
any other science is thinking about something else. 
In defining logic as thinking about thought, Hegel 
quite accurately indicated its sole difference from 
any other science. 

The next question, however, arises from that 
and requires a no less clear answer. But what is 


' G. W. F. Hegel. System der Philosophie. Erster Teil, 
Die Logik. In: Sdmtliche Werke, Vol. 8 (Stuttgart, 1929) 
p 69. (In other works it is known by its original title En- 
cyclopaedie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grund- 
risse.—Tr.) 


165 


thought? It goes without saying, Hegel replied 
(and one again has to agree with him), that the 
sole satisfactory answer can only be an exposition 
of the heart of the matter, i.e. a concretely devel- 
oped theory, a science of thought, a ‘science of 
logic’, and not an ordinary definition. (Compare 
Engels’ view in Anti-Dihring: ‘Our definition of 
life is naturally very inadequate.... All defini- 
tions are of little value. In order to gain an ex- 
haustive knowledge of what life is, we should have 
to go through all the forms in which it appears, 
from the lowest to the highest.’2 And later: “To 
science definitions are worthless because always 
inadequate. The only real definition is the devel- 
opment of the thing itself, but this is no longer a 
definition.” 

In any science, however, and therefore in logic 
too, one has to mark everything out in advance 
and outline its contours, if only the most general 
boundaries of the object of investigation, i.e. to 
indicate the field of the facts to which the given 
science must devote its attention. Otherwise the 
criterion for their selection will be unclear and its 
role will be tyrannous and arbitrary, taking only 
those facts into consideration that confirm its 
generalisations, and ignoring everything else as 
allegedly having no relation to the matter or to 
the competence of the science concerned. Hegel 
gave such a preliminary explanation, not con- 
cealing from the reader exactly what he under- 
stood by the word ‘thought’. 


2 Frederick Engels. Anti-Diihring, p 98. 
3 [bid., p 391. 


166 


This is a very important point, and everything 
else hangs on proper understanding of it. It is 
no accident that the main objections to Hegel, 
both justified and unjustified, have hitherto been 
directed precisely at it. Neopositivists, for exam- 
ple, unanimously reproach Hegel with having in- 
admissibly broadened the subject matter of logic 
by his conception of thought, including in the 
sphere of examination a mass of ‘things’ that one 
cannot call thought in the usual and strict sense; 
above all the concepts traditionally referred to 
metaphysics, and to ‘ontology’, i.e. to the science 
of things themselves, the system of categories (the 
universal definitions of reality outside conscious- 
ness, outside subjective thinking understood as 
the psychic capability of man). 

If thinking were to be so understood, the Neo- 
positivist reproach must really be considered rea- 
sonable. Hegel actually understood as thought 
something at first glance enigmatic, even mysti- 
cal, when he spoke of it as taking place outside 
man and apart from man, independently of his 
head, and of ‘thought as such’, of ‘pure thought’, 
and when he considered the object of logic to be 
precisely that ‘absolute’ superhuman thought. 
Logic in his definition must be understood even 
as having a content that ‘shows forth God as he is 
in his eternal essence before the creation of Na- 
ture and of a Finite Spirit’ 4 


4 Hegel's Science of Logic. Translated by W. H. John- 
ston and L. G. Struthers, Vol. I (Allen and Unwin, Lon- 
don, 1929) p 60. 


167 


Such definitions are capable of confusing and 
disorienting at the very start. But of course there 
is no such ‘thought’ as some superhuman force 
creating nature, and history, and man himself and 
his consciousness from itself somewhere in the 
Universe. But is Hegel’s logic then the presenta- 
tion of a non-existent subject? Of an invented, 
purely fantastic object? In that case, how are we 
to rethink his constructions critically? With what, 
with what real object, must we compare and con- 
trast his strings of theoretical determinations in 
order to distinguish the truth in them from the 
fallacy? With the real thinking of man? But He- 
gel would reply that in his Science of Logic it is 
a matter of quite another object, and that if em- 
pirically observed human thought is not like it, 
that is no argument against his logic, for criticism 
of a theory only makes sense when the theory is 
compared with the same object as it represents, 
and not with another one; and it is impossible to 
compare logic with the acts of thinking actually 
taking place in people’s heads because people 
think very ilogically at every step, even elemen- 
tarily illogically, let alone according to a logic 
of a much higher order, of the kind that Hegel 
had in mind. 

When you point out to a logician, therefore, that 
man’s real thinking does not occur as it is depicted 
in his theory, he could reasonably reply that it was 
so much the worse for this thinking and that the 
theory did not need to be adapted to the empiri- 
cal but that real thought must be made logical 
and brought into harmony with logical principles. 


168 


For logic as a science, however, a fundamental 
difficulty arises here. If it were only permissible 
to compare logical principles with logical thought, 
did that then not wipe out any possibility what- 
soever of checking whether or not they were cor- 
rect? It is quite understandable that these prin- 
ciples would always be in agreement with 
thoughts that had previously been made to agree 
with them. After all, it only meant that logical 
principles agreed with themselves, with their own 
embodiment in empirical acts of thought. In that 
case, a very ticklish situation was created for 
theory. Logic had in mind only logically immac- 
ulate thinking, and logically incorrect thinking 
was not an argument against its schemas. But it 
consented to consider only such thinking as logi- 
cally immaculate as exactly confirmed its own 
ideas about thought, and evaluated any deviation 
from its rules as a fact falling outside its subject 
matter and therefore to be considered solely as a 
‘mistake’ needing to be ‘corrected’. 

In any other science such a claim would evoke 
consternation. What kind of a theory was it that 
consented to take into account only such facts as 
confirmed it, and did not wish to consider con- 
tradictory facts, although there must be millions 
and billions such? But surely that was exactly 
the traditional position of logic, which was pre- 
sented by its devotees as standing to reason, and 
which made logic absolutely unself-critical on the 
one hand and incapable of development on the 
other. 

That, incidentally, was where Kant’s illusion 


169 


ca a a aan a ee, 


originated, the illusion that logic as a theory had 
long ago acquired a fully closed, completed char- 
acter and not only was not in need of develop- 
ment of its propositions but could not be by its 
very nature. Schelling also understood Kant’s lo- 
gic as an absolutely precise presentation of the 
principles and rules of thinking in concepts. 

Hegel had doubts about the fact that it was the 
rules of logic that prevented understanding of 
the process of the passage of the concept into the 
object and vice versa, of the subjective into the 
objective (and in general of opposites into one 
another). He saw in it not evidence of the organic 
deficiency of thought but only the limitations of 
Kant’s ideas about it. Kantian logic was only a 
limitedly true theory of thought. Real thought, 
the real subject matter of logic as a science, as a 
matter of fact was something else; therefore it 
was necessary to bring the theory of thought into 
agreement with its real subject matter. 

Hegel saw the need for a critical reconsidera- 
tion of traditional logic primarily in the extreme, 
glaring discrepancy between the principles and 
rules that Kant considered absolutely universal 
forms of thought and the real results that had 
been achieved by human civilisation in the course 
of its development. ‘A comparison of the forms to 
which Spirit has risen in the worlds of Practice 
and Religion, and of Science in every department 
of knowledge Positive and Speculative—a com- 
parison of these with the form which Logic—that 
is, Spirit’s knowledge of its own pure essence— 
has attained, shows such a glaring discrepancy 


170 


SS 


——— 


that it cannot fail to strike the most superficial 
observer that the latter is inadequate to the 
lofty development of the former, and unworthy 
of it.” 

Thus the existing logical theories did not cor- 
respond to the real practice of thought, and think- 
ing about thought (i.e. logic) consequently lagged 
behind thinking about everything else, behind the 
thinking that was realised as the science of the 
external world, as consciousness fixed in the form 
of knowledge and things created by the power of 
knowledge, in the form of the whole organism of 
civilisation. In functioning as thinking about the 
world, thought had achieved such success that 
beside it thinking about thought proved to be 
something quite incommensurable, wretched, defi- 
cient, and poor. To take it on faith that human 
thought had really been and was guided by the 
rules, laws, and principles that in the aggregate 
constituted traditional logic was to make all the 
progress of science and practice simply inexplica- 
ble. 

Hence there arose the paradox that the human 
intellect, which had created modern culture, had 
come to a standstill in amazement before its own 
creation. Schelling had also expressed this amaze- 
ment of the ‘spirit’, and it was just at this point 
that Hegel began to differ with him. 

Hegel considered that the rules by which the 
‘spirit? was actually guided, contrary to the illu- 
sions that it had created on its own account (in 


5 Ibid., p 62. 


the person of professional logicians) and had set 
out in the form of textbooks of logic, could and 
must be brought out and set forth in the form of 
a concept, quite rationally, without shifting every- 
thing hitherto not comprehended onto ‘intuition’, 
i.e. onto an ability that was from the very outset 
something quite different from thought. Hegel’s 
posing of the matter played a special role because 
it, for the first time, subjected all the main con- 
cepts of logical science, above all the concept of 
thought, to careful analysis. 

At first glance (and people usually proceed 
from such a ‘first glance’, adopting it absolutely 
uncritically from everyday usage), thought repre- 
sented one of man’s subjective psychic abilities 
along with others like intuition, sensation, mem- 
ory, will, and so on and so forth, By thinking 
was also understood a special kind of activity 
directed, unlike practice, at altering ideas, at re- 
organising the images that were in the individ- 
ual’s consciousness, and directly at the verbal 
shaping of these ideas in speech; ideas, when ex- 
pressed in speech (words, terms) were called con- 
cepts. When man altered real things outside his 
head, and not ideas, that was no longer consid- 
ered thinking, but at best only activities in accor- 
dance with thought, according to the laws and 
rules dictated by it. 

Thought was thus identified with reflection, 
i.e. with psychic activity in the course of which 
a person gave himself an account of what he was 
doing, and how, and became aware of all the 
schemas and rules by which he acted. The sole 


172 


job of logic then proved, quite understandably, 
to be simply the ordering and classifying of the 
corresponding schemas and rules. Every individ- 
ual could discover them for himself in his own 
consciousness because, even without any study of 
logic, he was guided by them (only not, perhaps, 
systematically). As Hegel justly put it, ‘such logic 
had no other business than could be done through 
the activity of simple formal thought, and so it 
certainly produced nothing that one could not 
otherwise have done just as well’.® 

Everything we have said also applied fully to 
Kant, which is why Hegel said that ‘the Kantian 
philosophy could not have any effect on the treat- 
ment of the sciences. Jt left the categories and 
methods of ordinary knowledge quite undis- 
turbed’.’ It only introduced order into the schemas 
of existing consciousness, only built them into a 
system (in so doing, true, it came up against the 
facts of a mutual contradiction between the var- 
ious schemas). So the Kantian logic appeared as 
a kind of honest confession of existing conscious- 
ness, of its systematically expounded self-con- 
sciousness, and nothing more; or rather, of its 
conceits—an exposition of what existing thought 
thought of itself. But just as it was a blunder to 
judge a person according to what and how he 
thought of himself, so it was impossible to judge 
thinking by its self-opinion; it was much more 
useful to examine what it was really doing, and 


8 G. W. F. Hegel. Sdmiliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 70. 
7 [bid., p 159. 


178 


how, possibly even without giving itself a proper 
evaluation of it. 

Having thus posed the problem Hegel proved 
to be the first professional logician who resolute- 
ly and consciously threw aside the old prejudice 
that thought was presented to the investigator 
only in the form of speech (external or internal, 
oral or written). The prejudice was not acciden- 
tal; thought could only look at itself from the 
side, as it were, as an object different from itself, 
only insofar as it had expressed itself, embodied 
itself in some external form. And the completely 
conscious thought that all the old logic had in 
view really assumed language, speech, the word, 
as its outward form of expression. In other words 
thought achieved awareness of the schemas of its 
own activity precisely through and in language. 
(This circumstance had in fact been recorded in 
the very name of logic, which is derived from the 
Greek logos, word.) Not only Hegel and the He- 
gelians, incidentally, spoke of this, but also some 
of their opponents in principle, like Trendelen- 
burg, who noted that traditional (formal) ‘logic 
becomes conscious of itself in speech and so in ma- 
ny respects is a grammar absorbed with itself’. 

Let us note in passing that all schools of logic, 
without exception, having ignored Hegel’s criti- 
cism of the old logic have shared this old preju- 
dice to this day as though nothing had happened. 
It is most outspokenly professed by Neopositiv- 


8 Adolf Trendelenburg. Logische Untersuchungen (Ber- 
lin, 1840) p 16. 


174 


ists, who directly identify thought with linguistic 
activity and logic with the analysis of language. 
The most striking thing about this is the self- 
conceit with which they project this archaic prej- 
udice as the latest discovery of twentieth cen- 
tury logical thinking, as the manifestation to the 
world at long last of the principle of the scientific 
development of logic, as an axiom of the ‘logic 
of science’. 

Language (speech) is, nevertheless, not the sole 
empirically observed form in which human 
thought manifests itself. Does man really not dis- 
cover himself as a thinking being in his actions, in 
the course of actually shaping the world around 
him, in the making of things? Does he really only 
function as a thinking being when talking? The 
question is surely purely rhetorical. The thought 
of which Hegel spoke discloses itself in human 
affairs every bit as obviously as in words, in 
chains of terms, in the lacework of word combina- 
tions. Furthermore, in real affairs man demon- 
strates the real modes of his thinking more ade- 
quately than in his narrations of them. 

But, that being so, man’s actions, and so too 
the results of his actions, the things created by 
them, not only could, but must, be considered 
manifestations of his thought, as acts of the ob- 
jectifying of his ideas, thoughts, plans, and con- 
scious intentions. Hegel demanded from the very 
start that thought should be investigated in all the 
forms in which it was realised, and above all 
in human affairs, in the creation of things and 
events. Thought revealed its force and real power 


175 


not solely in talking but also in the whole gran- 
diose process of creating culture and the whole ob- 
jective body of civilisation, the whole ‘inorganic 
body of man’ (Marx), including in that tools and 
statues, workshops and temples, factories and 
chancelleries, political organisations and systems 
of legislation. 

It was on that basis that Hegel also acquired 
the right to consider in logic the objective deter- 
minations of things outside consciousness, outside 
the psyche of the human individual, in all their 
independence, moreover, from that psyche. There 
was nothing mystical nor idealist in that; it meant 
the forms (‘determinations’) of things created by 
the activity of the thinking individual. In other 
words, the forms of his thought embedied in nat- 
ural materials, ‘invested’ in it by human activity. 
Thus a house appeared as the architect’s concep- 
tion embodied in stone, a machine as the embodi- 
ment of the engineer’s ideas in metal, and so on; 
and the whole immense objective body of civili- 
sation as thought in its ‘otherness’ (das Idee in der 
Form des Anderssein), in its sensual objective em- 
bodiment. The whole history of humanity was 
correspondingly also to be considered a process of 
the ‘outward revelation’ of the power of thought, 
as a process of the realisation of man’s ideas, con- 
cepts, notions, plans, intentions, and purposes, as 
a process of the embodying of logic, i.e. of the 
schemas to which men’s purposive activity was 
subordinated. 

The understanding and careful analysis of 
thought in this aspect (investigation of the ‘active 


176 


side’ as Marx called it in his first thesis on Feuer- 
bach) was still not idealism. Logic, furthermore, 
by following such a path, thus took the decisive 
step toward genuine (‘intelligent’) materialism, 
toward understanding of the fact that all logical 
forms without exception were universal forms of 
the development of reality outside thought, 
reflected in human consciousness and tested in the 
course of millennia of practice. In considering 
thought in the course of its materialisation as well 
as in its verbal revelation Hegel did not go beyond 
the bounds of the analysis of thought at all, 
beyond the limits of the subject matter of logic as 
a special science. He simply brought into the field 
of view of logic that real phase of the process of 
development of thought without understanding 
which logic could not and never would be able to 
become a real science. 

From Hegel’s standpoint the real basis for the 
forms and laws of thought proved to be only the 
aggregate historical process of the intellectual de- 
velopment of humanity understood in its univer- 
sal and necessary aspects. The subject matter of 
logic was no longer the abstract identical schemas 
that could be found in each individual conscious- 
ness, and common to each of them, but the history 
of science and technique collectively created by 
people, a process quite independent of the will 
and consciousness of the separate individual 
although realised at each of its stages precisely 
in the conscious activity of individuals. This pro- 
cess, according to Hegel, also included, as a phase, 
the act of realising thought in object activity, and 


12-831 177 


through activity in the forms of things and events 
outside consciousness. In that, in Lenin’s words, 
he ‘came very close to materialism’ .® 

In considering thought as a real productive pro- 
cess expressing itself not only in the movement of 
words but also in the changing of things, Hegel 
was able, for the first time in the history of logic, 
to pose the problem of a special analysis of 
thought-forms, or the analysis of thought from the 
aspect of form. Before him such an aim had not 
arisen in logic, and even could not have. ‘It is 
hardly surprising that economists, wholly under 
the influence of material interests, have over- 
looked the formal side of the relative expression 
of value, when professional logicians, before He- 
gel, even overlooked the formal aspect of the prop- 
ositions and conclusions they used as examples.’!° 

Logicians before Hegel had recorded only the 
external schemas in which logical actions, judg- 
ments and inferences functioned in speech, i.e. as 
schemas of the joining together of terms signify- 
ing general ideas, but the logical form expressed 
in these figures, i.e. the category, remained out- 
side their sphere of investigation, and the con- 
ception of it was simply borrowed from metaphys- 
ics and ontology. So it had been even with Kant, 
despite the fact that he had nevertheless seen 
categories precisely as the principles of judgments 
(with objective significance, in his sense). 


9 V. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks. In: Collected 
Works, Vol. 38 (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1963) p 278. 
$0 See Karl Marx. Das Kapital, Vol. 1 (Hamburg, 1867) 


p 21. 
178 


And since logical form, about which Marx spoke 
in the first edition of Das Kapital, was under- 
stood as a form of activity realised equally well 
in the movement of verbal terms and in the move- 
ment of the things involved in the work of the 
thinking being, there then for the first time only, 
arose the possibility of analysing it specially as 
such, of abstracting it from the special features of 
its expression in some partial material or other 
(including those which were linked with the 
specific features of its realisation in the fabric of 
language). 

In logos, in reason, Sage und Sache"', i.e. myth 
and fact, or rather legend and true story, were 
equally expressed in the logical aspect (in contrast 
to the psychological-phenomenological). (Inciden- 
tally, play on words, for example, was very char- 
acteristic of Hegel, puns however that threw light 
on the genetic relationship of the ideas expressed 
by the words. Sage is legend, myth, hence ‘saga’, 
a legend of high deeds (cf. bylina, the form of 
Russian epic); Sache is a broad capacious word 
signifying not so much a single, sensuously per- 
ceived thing, as the essence of the matter, situa- 
tion, the point, the actual state of affairs (or 
things), ie. everything that is or was in the matter 
itself (cf. Russian byl’, meaning a true story, fact, 
what really happened). This etymology is used in 
the Science of Logic to express very important 
shades of meaning, which sound as follows in 


1 See G. W. F. Hegel. Jenaer Realphilosophie (Berlin, 
1969) p 183. 


aoe 179 


Lenin’s translation and materialist interpretation: 
‘“With this introduction of Content into logical 
consideration”, the subject becomes not Dinge 
but die Sache, der Begriff der Dinge [i.e. not 
things, but the essence, the concept of things— 
Ed.), not things but the laws of their movement, 
materialistically.’!? 

Considered as the activity of the thinking being 
in its universal form, thought was also fixed in 
those of its schemas and moments as remained 
invariant in whatever special material the rele- 
vant activity was performed and whatever prod- 
uct it put out at any one instant. In the Hegelian 
view it was quite irrelevant how, precisely, the 
action of thinking took place or takes place, wheth- 
er in articulated vibrations of the ambient air 
and their identifying signs or in some other natu- 
ral, physical substance. ‘In all human contempla- 
tion there is thought, just as thought is the general 
in all conceptions, recollections, and on the whole 
any mental activity, in all wishes, desires, etc. All 
these are only further specifications of thought. 
While we so conceive thought, it itself appears in 
another aspect than when we only speak; we have 
intellectual power over and above any other abili- 
ties, like contemplation, imagination, will and the 
like,”8 

All the universal schemas being depicted in the 
activity of the thinking being, including that di- 
rected toward immediately intuited or repre- 


42 V_ I. Lenin, Op. cit., p 94. 
13 G. W. F. Hegel. Sdmtliche Werke, Vol. 8, pp 84-85. 


180 


sented material, must therefore be considered not 
less as logical parameters of thought than the sche- 
mas of its expression in language, or in the form 
of the figures known in the old logic. Thought in 
the broadest sense of the word, as activity alter- 
ing images of the external world in general ex- 
pressed in words (and not the words in them- 
selves), the thought that really ‘effects everything 
human and makes humanity human’,"4 as a capac- 
ity that creates knowledge in any forms, includ- 
ing that of the contemplated images, and ‘pene- 
trates’ into them, and hence not simply the sub- 
jective, psychic act of using or treating words, 
was the subject matter of logic, the science of 
thought. 

Thought, in fact, included the human ‘deter- 
mination of sensation, intuition, images, ideas, 
aims, obligations, etc., and also thoughts and con- 
cepts’ (‘thoughts and concepts’ here have the 
meaning of the old, purely formal logic). Thought 
in general thus ‘appears at first not in the form of 
thought but as feeling, intuition, imagination— 
forms that are to be distinguished from thought 
as form’.!6 The thought-form as such appears to 
us only in the course of thinking about thought 
itself, i.e. only in logic. 

But before man began to think about thought, 
he had already to think, though still not realising 
the logical schemas and categories within which 


% Ibid., p 42. 
15 Ibid., p 44. 
6 Ibid., p 42. 


181 


this thinking took place, but already embodying 
them in the form of the concrete statements and 
concepts of science, engineering, morals, and so 
on. Thought was thus realised at first as activity 
in all the diversity of its outward manifestations. 
The thought-form here was ‘sunk’ into the mate- 
rial of concrete thoughts, sense images, and ideas, 
was ‘sublated’ in them, and was therefore coun- 
terposed to conscious thinking as the form of ex- 
ternal reality. In other words, thought and the 
thought-form did not appear at first to the think- 
ing being as forms of his own activity at all (of 
his ‘self’—das Selbst), creating a certain product, 
but as forms of the product itself, i.e. of con- 
crete knowledge, images and concepts, intuition 
and representation, as the forms of tools, ma- 
chines, states, etc., etc. and as the forms of 
realised aims, wishes, desires, and so on. 

Thought could not ‘see’ itself otherwise than in 
the mirror of its own creations, in the mirror of 
the external world, which we knew through 
thought-activity. Thought, as it appeared in logic, 
was thus the same thought as had been realised in 
the form of knowledge of the world, in the form 
of science, engineering, art, and morality. But it 
was far from the same thing in form, because 
‘there is a difference between having sensations 
and ideas, determined and penetrated by thought, 
and having thoughts about them’. 

Neglect of this very important distinction led 
the old logic into a dual error. On the one hand it 


7G. W. F. Hegel. Sdmtliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 43. 


182 


only defined thought as ‘a subjective, psychic ca- 
pability of the individual’ and therefore counter- 
posed to thought so understood the whole sphere 
of ‘intuition, ideas, and will’ as something exist- 
ing outside thought and having nothing in com- 
mon with it, as the object of reflection existing 
outside thought. On the other hand, in not distin- 
guishing in form between the relative strength of 
the two revelations of thought mentioned above, 
it could also not say how the thought-form as 
such (‘in and for itself’) was differentiated from 
the form of intuition and representation, in the 
shape of which it had originally appeared and 
was hidden, and consequently confused the one 
with the other, taking the form of the concept for 
the form of intuition, and vice versa. 

Hence, too, it came about that, under the form 
of concept, the old logic considered every kind of 
idea or notion whatsoever, insofar as it was 
expressed in speech or in a term, that is to say, 
the image of intuition or contemplation held in 
consciousness by means of speech, which recorded 
it. As a result, too, the old logic embraced the 
concept itself only from the aspect from which it 
was really not distinguished in any way from any 
notion or intuitive image expressed in speech, 
from the aspect of the abstract and general, which 
was really just as common to the concept as to 
the notion. Thus it came about that it took the 
form of abstract identity or abstract universality 
for the specific form of the concept, and could 
therefore only raise the law of identity and the 
principle of contradiction in determinations to the 


183 


rank of absolute, fundamental criteria of the 
thought-form in general. 

Kant also took that stand, understanding by 
concept any general notion insofar as it was fixed 
by a term. Hence his definition: “The concept 
is... a general image or representation of that 
which is common to many objects, consequently 
a general idea, provided that it can be included in 
several objects.’ '® 

Hegel himself required a more profound solu- 
tion of the problem of the concept and of thinking 
in concepts from logic. For him a concept was pri- 
marily a synonym for real understanding of the 
essence of the matter and not simply an expres- 
sion of something general, of some identity of the 
objects of intuition. A concept disclosed the real 
nature of a thing and not its similarity with other 
things; and not only should it express the abstract 
generality of its object (that was only one of the 
moments of a concept, relating it to notion), but 
also the special nature or peculiarity of the object. 
That was why the form of the concept proved to 
be a dialectical unity of universality and particu- 
larity, a unity that was also revealed through 
manifold forms of judgment and inference, and 
came out into the open in judgments. It was not 
surprising that any judgment destroyed the form 
of abstract identity and represented its self-evi- 
dent negation. Its form was: A is B (i.e. not-A). 

Hegel distinguished clearly between universal- 
ity, which dialectically contained the whole rich- 


{8 Immanuel Kant. Logik (Leipzig) p 98. 


184 


ness of the particular and the singular within it- 
self and in its determinations, and the simple 
abstract generality, identicalness, of all the single 
objects of a given kind. The universal concept 
expressed in itself the actual law of the origin, 
development, and fading or disappearance of sin- 
gle things. And that was already quite another 
angle on the concept, much truer and deeper, 
because, as Hegel demonstrated with a mass of 
examples, the real law (the immanent nature of 
the single thing) did not always appear on the 
surface of phenomena in the form of a simple 
identicalness, of a common sign or attribute, or in 
the form of identity. If that were so there would 
be no need for any theoretical science. The job of 
thought was not limited to empirically register- 
ing common attributes. The central concept of 
Hegel’s logic was therefore the concrete-univers- 
al: he brilliantly illustrated its distinction from 
the simple, abstract universality of the sphere of 
notions in his famous pamphlet Wer denkt ab- 
strakt? (Who Thinks Abstractly?). To think 
abstractly meant to be enslaved by the force of 
current catchphrases and cliches, of one-sided, 
empty definitions; meant to see in real, sensuously 
intuited things only an insignificant part of their 
real content, only such determinations of them as 
were already ‘jelled’ in consciousness and func- 
tioned there as ready-made stereotypes. Hence 
the ‘magic force’ of current catchphrases and ex- 
pressions, which fence reality off from the thinking 
person instead of serving as the form of its ex- 
pression. 


185 


In this last interpretation logic finally became a 
real logic of the understanding of unity in varie- 
ty, and not a scheme for manipulating ready- 
made ideas and notions; a logic of critical and 
self-critical thought and not a means of the un- 
critical classification and pedantic, schematic pre- 
sentation of existing ideas. 

From premises of that kind Hegel concluded 
that real thought in fact took other forms and was 
governed by other laws than those that current 
logic considered the sole determinations of think- 
ing. Thought had obviously to be investigated as 
collective, co-operative activity in the course of 
which the individual, with his schemas of con- 
scious thinking, performed only partial functions. 
In fulfilling them, however, he was constantly 
forced at the same time to perform actions that 
were not fit in, in any way, with the schemas of 
ordinary logic. In really taking part in common 
work he was all the time subordinating himself to 
the laws and forms of universal thought, though 
not conscious of them as such. Hence the ‘topsy- 
turvy’ situation arose in which the real forms and 
laws of thought were expressed and understood as 
some kind of external necessity, as an extra-logi- 
cal determination of the action; and on the sole 
ground that they were still not revealed and rea- 
lised by logic, not acknowledged as logical inter- 
pretations. 

As can easily be seen, Hegel criticised tradition- 
al logic, and the thinking appropriate to it, by 
the same ‘immanent procedure’ that was one of 
his main conquests, namely, he counterposed to 


186 


the assertions, rules, and basic propositions of 
logic not some kind of opposing assertions, rules 
and basic propositions but the process of the prac- 
tical realisation of its own principles in real 
thought. He showed it its own image, pointing out 
those of its features that it preferred not to notice 
and not to recognise. Hegel required only one 
thing of thinking in accordance with logic, namely 
uncompromising consistency in applying the prin- 
ciples adduced. And he showed that it was the 
consistent application of these principles (and not 
departure from them) that in fact led inevitably, 
with inexorable force, to negation of the princi- 

| ples themselves as one-sided, incomplete, and 
abstract. 

That was the very critique of reason, from the 
standpoint of reason itself, that Kant had begun; 
and this critique (self-criticism) of reason and its 
circumscribing logic led to the conclusion that ‘the 
nature of thought is itself dialectics, that as un- 
derstanding it must fall into the negative of itself, 
into contradiction. . .’.19 Kant had actually reached 
a similar conclusion; and whereas before him 

| logic could be unself-critical out of ignorance, 
now it could maintain its precarious position only 
if it quite consciously rejected facts unacceptable 
| to it, only by becoming consciously unself-critical. 

The historically unavoidable defect of Kantian 
logic was that it pedantically schematised and 
described a mode of thought that led to a bring- 
ing out and sharp formulation of the contradic- 


19 G. W. F. Hegel. Sdémiliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 55. 


187 


tions contained in any concept but did not show 
how they could and should be resolved logically 
without shifting this difficult task onto ‘practical 
reason’, onto ‘moral postulates’, and other factors 
and abilities lying outside logic. Hegel, however, 
saw the main job facing logic after the work of 
Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, as precisely in find- 
ing, bringing out, and indicating to thought, the 
means of intelligently and concretely resolving 
the contradictions into which it inevitably fell 
when consciously guided by the traditional, pure- 
ly formal logic. That, too, was the real distinc- 
tion between Hegel’s conception of thought and 
logic and all preceding ones. 

The old logic, coming up against the logical 
contradiction that it itself brought to light just 
because it rigorously followed its own principles, 
always balked at it, retreated to analysis of the 
preceding movement of thought, and always 
strove to find an error or mistake in it leading to 
the contradiction. For formal logical thinking 
contradictions thus became an insurmountable 
barrier to the forward movement of thought, an 
obstacle in the way of concrete analysis of the 
essence of the matter. It therefore also came about 
that ‘thought, despairing of managing by itself 
to resolve the contradiction into which it had got 
itself, turns back to the solutions and reliefs that 
were the spirit’s lot in its other modes and 
forms’.”° It could not be otherwise, since the con- 
tradiction did not develop through a mistake. No 


* G. W. F. Hegel. Sdémtliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 56. 


188 


—_ 


— 


mistake, it ultimately proved, had been made in 
the preceding thinking. It was necessary to go 
even further back, to uncomprehended contempla- 
tion, sense perception, aesthetic intuition, i.e. to 
the realm of lower forms of consciousness (lower, 
that is, in relation to conceptual thinking), where 
there was really no contradiction for the simple 
reason that it had still not been disclosed and 
clearly expressed. (It never hurts, of course, to go 
back and analyse the preceding course of argu- 
ment and check whether there has not been a for- 
mal mistake, for that also happens not infre- 
quently; and here the recommendations of formal 
logic have a quite rational sense and value. It 
may turn out, as a result of checking, that a given 
logical contradiction is really nothing but the re- 
sult of committing an error or mistake somewhere. 
Hegel, of course, never dreamed of denying such a 
case. He, like Kant, had in mind only those anti- 
nomies that developed in thought as a result of the 
most formally ‘correct’ and faultless argumenta- 
tion.) 

Hegel also suggested that a contradiction should 
be resolved as well as disclosed, and resolved by 
the same logical thinking as had brought it out 
when a definite concept was being developed. 

He treated both the origin and the mode of re- 
solution of logical contradictions differently. Like 
Kant he understood that they did not arise at all 
through the negligence or carelessness of indivi- 
dual thinking persons but unlike Kant he under- 
stood that they could and must be resolved and 
must not always be preserved as antinomies. But 


189 


so that it could resolve them thought must fix 
them sharply and clearly in advance, precisely 
as antinomies, as logical contradictions, as real, 
and not imaginary, contradictions in determina- 
tions. 

Dialectics, according to Hegel, was the form 
(or method or schema) of thought that included 
the process both of elucidating contradictions 
and of concretely resolving them in the corpus of 
a higher and more profound stage of rational un- 
derstanding of the same object, on the way to- 
ward further investigation of the essence of the 
matter, i.e. in the course of developing science, 
engineering, and ‘morality, and all the spheres 
he called the ‘objective spirit’. 

This conception immediately brought about 
constructive shifts in the whole system of logic. 
Whereas Kant’s ‘dialectic’ was only the final, 
third part of logic (the doctrine on the forms of 
understanding and reason), where it was a mat- 
ter actually of the statement of the logically un- 
resolvable antinomies of theoretical cognition, 
with Hegel it appeared quite another matter. 
With him the sphere of the logical was divided 
into three main sections or aspects, i.e. three 
main directions were distinguished in it, as fol- 
lows: 

(1) the abstract or rational; 

(2) the dialectical or negatively reasonable; 

(3) the speculative or positively reasonable. 

Hegel specially stressed that ‘these three as- 
pects in no case constitute three parts of logic, 
but are only moments of any logically real na- 


190 


ture, that is of any concept or of any truth in 
general’?! 

In the empirical history of thought (as in any 
given, historically achieved state of it) these three 
aspects appeared either as three consecutive ‘for- 
mations’ or as three different but closely related 
systems of logic. Hence we got the illusion that 
they could be depicted as three different sections 
(or ‘parts’) of logic, following one after the other. 

Logic as a whole, however, could not be ob- 
tained by a simple uniting of these three aspects, 
each of which was taken in the form in which it 
had been developed in the history of thought. 
That called for critical treatment of all three 
aspects from the standpoint of higher principles, 
those historically last achieved. Hegel character- 
ised the three ‘moments’ of logical thought that 
should constitute Logic as follows. (1) “Thought 
as understanding remains stuck in firm determi- 
nation and does not get beyond differentiation 
of the latter; such a limited abstraction applies 
to it as existing and being for itself.’22 The sepa- 
rate (isolated) historical embodiment of this “mo- 
ment’ in thought appeared as dogmatism, and its 
logical, theoretical self-awareness as ‘general’, 
i.e. purely formal logic. 

(2) ‘The dialectical moment is the own self- 
abolition of such ultimate determinations and 
their transition into their opposites.’2? Historically 


21 G, W. F. Hegel. Sémtliche Werke, Vol. 8, pp 184-185. 
2 Ibid., p 185. 
23 Ibid., p 189. 


191 


this moment appears as scepticism, i.e. as the state 
in which thought, feeling bewildered among op- 
posing, equally ‘logical’ and mutually provoking 
dogmatic systems, is powerless to choose and 
prefer one of them. Logical self-awareness, cor- 
responding to the stage of scepticism, was distin- 
guished in the Kantian conception of dialectics as 
a state of the insolubility of the antinomies be- 
tween dogmatic systems. Scepticism (Kant’s type 
of ‘negative dialectic’) was higher than dogmat- 
ism both historically and in content because the 
dialectic included in reason or understanding 
was already realised, and existed not only ‘in 
itself’ but ‘for itself’. 

(3) “The speculative or positively reasonable 
conceives the unity of determinations in their 
opposition, the affirmation that is contained in 
their resolution and their transition.’* Hegel also 
saw systematic treatment of this last ‘moment’ 
(and correspondingly critical rethinking of the 
first two from the angle of the third) as the his- 
torically pressing task in logic, and therefore his 
own mission and the aim of his work. 

When critically rethought in the light of the 
principles only now elicited, the ‘moments’ con- 
sidered ceased to be independent parts of logic 
and were transformed into three abstract aspects 
of one and the same logical system. Then a logic 
was created such that, when thinking was guided 
by it, thought became fully self-critical and was 
in no danger of falling into either the dullness of 


% G. W. F. Hegel. Sdmtliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 195. 


192 


dogmatism or into the sterility of sceptical neu- 
trality. 

Hence, too, there followed the external, formal 
division of logic into (1) the doctrine of being, (2) 
the doctrine of essence, and (3) the doctrine of the 
notion (concept, idea). 

The division of logic into the objective (the 
first two sections) and the subjective coincided at 
first glance with the old division of philosophy 
into ontology and logic proper; but Hegel stressed 
that such a division would be very inexact 
and arbitrary because, in logic, the opposition 
between the subjective and the objective (in their 
ordinary meaning) disappeared’. 

His position on this question calls besides for 
a thorough commentary since superficial criticism 
of his conception of logic and its subject matter 
has so far been primarily that his position ig- 
nored the opposition (contrast) between the sub- 
jective and the objective (between thinking and 
being) and therefore casuistically produced spe- 
cifically logical schemas of thought for the onto- 
logical determination of things outside thought 
and, on the contrary, universal definitions of the 
reality outside thought for schemas of the logical 
process, thus committing two sins: (a) hyposta- 
tising logical forms, and (b) logicalising reality. 

If the original sin of Hegelianism had really 
been a simple, naive blindness in relation to the 
contrast between thought and reality, between the 
concept and its object, then Kant’s dualism would 


% Ibid., p 84. 


18—831 193 


have been the apex of philosophical wisdom. In 
fact, however, Hegel’s ‘error’ was not so simple, 
and was not in the least characterised by the eva- 
luation cited above. Hegel saw the difference and, 
what is more important, the contradiction (opposi- 
tion) between the world of things outside con- 
sciousness and the world of thought (the world in 
thought, in science, in concepts), and was much 
more acutely aware of it than his naive critics 
among the Kantians; and in any case he ascribed 
much greater significance for logic to this opposi- 
tion than, say, positivists do (who, especially in 
logic, directly identify the concept and the object 
of the concept). 

The point is quite another one; and another un- 
derstanding of it follows from the specifically He- 
gelian conception of thought, and thus also from 
Hegel’s solution of the problem of the relation of 
thought and the world of things. 

That is why, when Hegel formulated a pro- 
gramme for the critical transformation of logic as 
a science, he posed the task of bringing it (i.e. 
thought’s awareness of the universal schemas of its 
own work) into correspondence with its real object, 
i.e. with real thought, with its real universal forms 
and laws. 

The last-named do not exist in thought simply 
or even so much as schemas and rules of conscious 
thinking, but rather as universal schemas of ob- 
jective thinking that are realised not so much as 
a subjective psychic act as the productive process 
that created science, technique and morality. 

In defending the objectivity of logical forms 


194 


so understood, Hegel of course was right in many 
respects; and his critique of the subjective ideal- 
ist interpretation of the logical (Hume, Kant, 
Fichte) is topical in the struggle against many of 
their present-day successors, in particular Neo- 
positivists. As social formations science and tech- 
nique (‘the materialised power of knowledge’ as 
Marx defined it) exist and develop of course out- 
side the individual’s consciousness. But, accord- 
ing to Hegel, there was no other consciousness 
than that of the individual, never had been, and 
never would be; and the logical forms of deve- 
lopment of science and technique really stood in 
opposition to the consciousness and will of the 
individual as quite objective limits to his indi- 
vidually performed actions, even as limits dictated 
to him from outside. ‘According to these determi- 
nations, thoughts can be called objective, and 
they can also be taken to include the forms that 
are considered for the present in ordinary logic 
and are looked upon only as forms of conscious 
thought. Logic here coincides with Metaphysics, 
with the science of things conceived in 
thought. . . .’26 

In this conception of the objectivity of thought- 
forms there was as yet, of course, no facet of the 
specifically Hegelian, i.e. objective, idealism. One 
cannot reproach Hegel with having allegedly 
extended the boundaries of the subject matter of 
logic impermissibly so that it began to embrace 
not only thought but things. Hegel (and Kant, 


% G, W. F. Hegel. Sémtliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 88. 


180 195 


too) did not in general speak just about things as 
such; he had in mind exclusively things compre- 
hended in thoughts. It was in that sense that he 
asserted that ‘in logic thoughts are so conceived 
that they have no other content than that belong- 
ing to the thought itself and produced through 
it’.27 In other words logic had in mind not things 
but those of their determinations as were posited 
by the action of thought, i.e. scientific determina- 
tions. 

Thus, what Hegel affirmed within the limits of 
consideration of pure thought was much more 
rigorous and consistent than the logic before him; 
and he justly reproached it precisely for not 
having been able to confine itself rigorously with- 
in the bounds of its own subject matter, and for 
having imported into it material not assimilated 
by thought and not reproduced by thought-ac- 
tivity. 

His requirement of including all the categories 
(the subject matter of the old metaphysics and 
ontology) in logic in no way meant going beyond 
the limits of thought. It was equivalent to a de- 
mand for a critical analysis to be made of the 
thought-activity that had engendered the deter- 
minations of the old metaphysics, and for those 
thought-forms to be brought out that both logic 
and metaphysics had applied quite uncritically 
and unconsciously, without clearly realising what 
they consisted of. Hegel had no doubt that 
‘thought-forms must not be used without having 


7G. W. F. Hegel. Sdmtliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 87. 


196 


pS Sere eee ee 


been subjected to investigation’ and that ‘we must 
make the thought-forms themselves the object of 
cognition’.22 But such an_ investigation was 
already thought, and the activity taking place in 
those very forms was the act of applying them. 
If we looked on logic as investigation (cognition) 
of thought-forms, he wrote, this investigation 
‘must also unite the activity of thought-forms and 
their critique in cognition. The thought-forms 
must be taken in and for themselves; they are the 
object and the activity of the object itself; they 
themselves inquire into themselves, must deter- 
mine their limits and demonstrate their defects 
themselves. That will then be that activity of 
thought that will soon be given separate conside- 
ration as dialectics. . .’.29 

The subject matter of logic then proved to be 
those really universal forms and patterns within 
which the collective consciousness of humanity 
was realised. The course of its development, em- 
pirically realised as the history of science and 
technique, was also seen as that ‘whole’ to the in- 
terests of which all the individual’s separate logi- 
cal acts were subordinated. 

And inasmuch as the individual was involved 
in the common cause, in the work of universal 
thought, he was continually forced to perform 
actions dictated ‘by the interests of the whole’ 
and not confined to the schemas of ‘general’ logic. 
He would naturally not realise his actions in 


8 Ibid., p 125. 
% Ibid. 


logical concepts, although these acts were per- 
formed by his own thinking. The schemas (forms 
and laws) of universal thought would be realised 
unconsciously through his psyche. (Not ‘uncon- 
sciously’ in general, but without logical conscious- 
ness of them, without their expression in logical 
concepts and categories.) 

In this connection Hegel introduced one of his 
most important distinctions between thought ‘in 
itself’? (an sich), which also constituted the sub- 
ject matter, the object of investigation, in logic, 
and thought ‘for itself’ (ftir sich selbst), i.e. 
thought that had already become aware of the 
schemas, principles, forms, and laws of its own 
work and had already worked quite consciously in 
accordance with them, fully and clearly realising 
what it was doing, and how it was doing it. Logic 
was also consciousness, the expression through 
concepts and categories of those Jaws and forms 
in accordance with which the process of thinking 
‘in itself’ (an sich) took place. In logic it also be- 
came the object for itself. 

In logic thought had consequently to become 
the same ‘for itself’ as it had earlier been only 
‘in itself’. 

Hegel therefore also formulated the task of 
bringing logic into line with its real subject mat- 
ter, with real thought, with the really universal 
forms and laws of development of science, tech- 
nique, and morality. 

In other words he wanted to make the subjec- 
tive consciousness of thought about itself identical 
with its object, with the real universal and neces- 


198 


sary (objective) forms and laws of universal (and 
not individual) thought. That also meant that the 
principle of the identity of the subjective and the 
objective must be introduced into logic as the 
highest principle, i.e. the principle that the real 
forms and laws of thought must be delineated in 
logic exactly, adequately, and correctly. The 
principle of the identity of subject and object 
signified nothing more, and did not signify any 
‘hypostatisation’ of the forms of subjective 
thought, because one and the same thought was 
both object and subject in logic, and it was a 
matter of the agreement, coincidence, and identi- 
ty of this thought (as a consciously performed 
activity) with itself as unconsciously performed 
productive activity, or as activity hitherto taking 
place with a false consciousness of its own ac- 
tions. 

In defending the objectivity of logical forms, 
Hegel of course stood head and shoulders above 
(and closer to materialism) than all those who up 
to the present have reproached him with having 
‘hypostatised’ logical forms in order to defend 
their version of the identity of thought and object 
as a purely conventional principle, as the prin- 
ciple of the identity of sign and thing designated, 
of the concept and that which is thought in it. 
Hegel was 100 per cent right in his critique of 
the subjective idealist version of the logical and 
of its objectivity (as merely the agreement of all 
thinking individuals, as merely the identity— 
read equality—of all the schemas by which each 
Ego taken separately operated). His critique not 


199 


only hit at Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, but also 
strikes all today’s Neopositivists. 

(Marx, incidentally, also defined the categories 
of political economy as ‘objective thought-forms’: 
‘They are the socially valid, and therefore ob- 
jective thought-forms. . . .3°) 

Thus the statement that there was no difference 
for logic between the subjective and the objective 
did not mean anything else on Hegel’s lips than 
an affirmation that logic must consider, within 
itself, within its own theory, and link together in 
one system, literally all the logical schemas of 
thought activity, beginning with the categories 
and finishing up with the figures of judgments 
and conclusions. And within it there must be 
room both for those schemas that prior to Kant 
were considered simply determinations of things 
outside consciousness and for those that were 
usually considered to be ‘specific’ to consciousness 
and had allegedly vo relation to things outside the 
mind. 

Hegel did not dream of repudiating the differ- 
ences between the categorial schemas given in the 
determinations of categories and the figures of for- 
mal logic, of course; but he did require them to 
be explained and disclosed within logic itself and 
not to be presumed in advance, uncritically bor- 
rowed from the old metaphysic and its corres- 
ponding logic. He required the one and the other 
to be included in logic in critically rethought form. 


% Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I. Translated by Eden and 
Cedar Paul (International Publishers, New York, 1929) p 50. 


200 


‘The relation of such forms as concept, judgment, 
and conclusion to other forms like causality, etc., 
can only be discovered within logic itself.’*4 

Hegel thus did not include the determinations 
of things as they existed outside the mind or in 
everyday consciousness in logic at all, but solely 
those determinations that appeared to the mind 
in science, and in theoretical consciousness, that 
were ‘posited’ or formulated by thought itself. 
And since science was the realised force (faculty) 
of thought, materialised mental, theoretical la- 
bour, he also saw primarily ‘objectified’ determina- 
tions of thought in the determinations of things. 

The requirement of including all categories in 
logic was therefore equivalent to requiring a crit- 
ical analysis to be made of those activities of 
thought that were materialised or objectified in 
the concepts of the old metaphysic, and to re- 
quiring disclosure of the logic of thought that was 
earlier realised in the form of various schemas 
of the universe, and so to requiring a critical un- 
derstanding of all the categories that the old logic 
had taken over quite uncritically from ontological 
systems. 

Hegel thus did not go outside the framework 
of the subject matter of logic at all but only 
beyond the limits of the notions of earlier logi- 
cians about these limits. While remaining within 
the boundaries of the investigation of thought, 
and only of thought, he nevertheless saw more 
within those boundaries than previous logicians, 


31 G, W. F. Hegel. Sdmtliche Werke, Vol. 8, p 83. 
201 


and saw those logical (universal) schemas of 
developing thought that the old logic had not 
considered universal at all and had therefore not 
included in the theory. Logic thus proved to be 
pinned to discovery and investigation of the ob- 
jective laws governing the subjective activity of 
individuals, and those forms in which, whether or 
not the individuals so wished it, or whether or 
not they realised it, they were forced, insofar in 
general as they thought, to express the results of 
their subjective efforts. 

That is in what Hegel saw the true difference 
between the real Jaws of thought and the rules 
that the old logic had promoted to the rank of 
laws. Man can break rules, unlike laws, and does 
so at every step, thus demonstrating that they are 
not laws. Because laws cannot be broken, they 
constitute the determinateness of the object, which 
cannot be omitted without the object itself, in 
this case thought, ceasing to exist. 

And if man thinks, then his activities are sub- 
ordinated to law and cannot overstep its bounds, 
although he may at the same time break the rules 
in the most flagrant way. A law can be ‘broken’ 
in one way only, by ceasing to think, i.e. by es- 
caping from the realm that is governed by the 
laws of thought and where they operate as in- 
exorably as the law of gravitation in the world of 
spatially determined bodies. But for man such a 
‘way out’ is equivalent to overstepping the bounds 
of human existence in general. 

Hegel also showed that the real development 
of determinations, i.e. the real forward move- 


202 


een meaner atten 


ment of thought, even in the simplest cases, not 
to mention the process of development of science, 
technique, and morality, took place precisely 
through breach (or removal) of all the rules that 
had been established for thought by the old logic, 
through their dialectical negation. But the con- 
stant negation of the rules established by con- 
scious thought for itself got out of control, was 
not aware of itself, and proved to be a fact out- 
side thought, although it took place within the 
latter. Thought had this fact ‘in itself’ but not ‘for 
itself’. 

But as soon as this fact was recognised as a 
universal and necessary—logical—thought-form, 
it was also transformed into a fact of conscious- 
ness, a fact of conscious thought, and the latter 
became consciously dialectical. Previously it had 
only been so ‘in itself’, i.e. despite its own con- 
sciousness of itself. But now it became ‘for itself’ 
precisely what it had previously been only ‘in 
itself’. 

The subject matter of logic consequently could 
not merely be the forms that had already been 
realised or apprehended, and had already been 
included in existing consciousness (in textbooks of 
logic and metaphysics). It was impossible to grasp 
them ready-made, or to classify them. They had 
to be brought out in the very course of reasoning 
about them, in the course of actual thinking about 
thought. 

And when Kant considered the forms of 
thought as some ready-made object, already de- 
picted (realised, comprehended), his logic repre- 


203 


sented only an uncritical classification of existing 
notions about thought. 

But if logic was to be a science, it must be a 
critical, systematic investigation that did not ac- 
cept a single determination on faith, and un- 
proved by thought, i.e. without being reproduced 
by it quite consciously. In this investigation crit- 
icism of the thought-forms known to cultivated 
thinking was only possible and thinkable as self- 
criticism. The schemas, rules, forms, principles, 
and laws of this thought were here subjected to 
criticism not by comparing them with some object 
lying outside them, but solely by bringing out 
the dialectic they included in themselves and 
which was discovered immediately as soon as we 
began in general to think, rigorously and fully 
realising what we were doing and how we were 
doing it. 

In that way, too, the very identity of the forms 
of cultivated thought with the forms of the un- 
consciously performed actions of the intellect must 
be carried out, actions to which thought had had 
to submit during the historical process of its real- 
isation in the form of science, technique, art and 
morality. Logic was nothing else (or rather should 
be nothing else) than the proper apprehension of 
those forms and laws within which the real 
thinking of people took place. The identity of 
thought and the conceivable, as the principle of 
the logical development and construction of logic, 
signified nothing more. 

It was merely a matter of this, that the schemas 
of cultivated thought (i.e. of the processes 


204 


taking place in the consciousness of the individ- 
ual) should coincide with those of the structure 
of the science in the movement of which the in- 
dividual was involved, i.e. with the ‘logic’ dictat- 
ed by its content. If the schema of the activity 
of a theoretician coincided with that of the devel- 
opment of his science, and the science was thus 
developed through his activity, Hegel would at- 
test the logicality of his activity, i.e. the identity 
of his thinking with that impersonal, universal 
process which we also call the development of 
science. Logic recognised the activities of such a 
theoretician as logical also when they were even 
formally not quite irreproachable from the stand- 
point of the canons of the old logic. 

Hegel therefore began to consider all the cate- 
gories (of quality, quantity, measure, causality, 
probability, necessity, the general and the par- 
ticular, and so on and so forth) in quite a new 
way. For him they were not at all the most gener- 
al determinations of the things given in intuition 
or contemplation or in direct experience to each 
individual, not transcendental schemas of syn- 
thesis directly inherent (i.e. inborn) in each indi- 
vidual consciousness (as Kant, Fichte, and Schel- 
ling had in fact treated them). It was impossible 
to discover these thought-forms in the separate 
consciousness taken in isolation, within the in- 
dividual Ego. They were there at best only ‘in 
themselves’, only in the form of unrealised ten- 
dencies and so not brought to awareness. Cate- 
gories were only discovered and demonstrated 
their determinations through the historically de- 


205 


veloping scientific, technical, and moral ‘perfect- 
ing’ of the human race, because only in it, and 
not in the experience of the isolated individual, 
did thought become ‘for itself’? what it had been 
‘in itself’. 

Categories manifested themselves in the indi- 
vidual’s own experience (were revealed in action, 
in processing of the data of perception) not in 
the whole fullness and dialectical complexity of 
their composition and connections but only in ab- 
stract, one-sided aspects. It was therefore impos- 
sible to derive them from analysis of the expe- 
rience of the isolated individual. They were only 
discovered through the very complex process of 
the interaction of a mass of single minds mutually 
correcting each other in discussion, debate, and 
confrontations, i.e. through a frankly dialectical 
process that, like a huge centrifuge, ultimately 
separated the purely objective schemas of thought 
from the purely subjective (in the sense of indi- 
vidual, arbitrary) schemas of activity, and as a 
result crystallised out logic, a system of deter- 
minations of purely universal, impersonal, and 
featureless thought in general. 

Categories were therefore also universal forms 
of the origin of any object in thought, gradually 
depicted in the aggregate scientific consciousness 
of humanity. They were universal determinations 
of the object as and how it appeared in the eyes 
of science, in the ether of ‘universal thought’. 
Hegel consented to call determinations of things 
only those determinations that had been devel- 
oped by science, by active thought. They were, 


206 


therefore, none other than thought-forms realised 
in concrete material, determinations of thought 
embodied in the object, i.e. in the scientific con- 
cept of the external thing. Hegel, therefore, and 
only therefore, also spoke of the identity of 
thought and object and defined the object as 
a concept realised in sensuous, physical mate- 
rial. 

The determinations of categories, naturally, 
could also function as determinations of things 
in the contemplation (experience) of the individ- 
ual; not of every individual, however, but only 
of those who in the course of their education had 
mastered the historical experience of humanity, 
and ‘reproduced’ in their individual consciousness 
the path taken by human thought (of course, only 
in its main, decisive features and schemas). Cate- 
gories were the forms of organisation of this ex- 
perience (described by Hegel in his Phenomenol- 
ogy of Mind). 

Categories were thus universal forms of the 
reconstruction, reproduction, in the consciousness 
of the individual of those objects that had been 
created before him by the collective efforts of past 
generations of thinking beings, by the power of 
their collective, impersonal thought. In individ- 
ually repeating the experience of humanity, which 
had created the world of spiritual and material 
culture surrounding him from the cradle, this in- 
dividual also repeated that which had been done 
before him and for him by the ‘universal spirit’, 
and so acted according to the same laws and in 
the same forms as the impersonal ‘universal spi- 


207 


rit’ of humanity. That means that categories ap- 
peared at once as universal schemas of the scien- 
tific formation of the individual consciousness, 
rising gradually from the zero level of its erudi- 
tion to the highest stages of spiritual culture at 
the given moment, and as schemas of the individ- 
ual mastery (reproduction) of the whole world 
of images created by the thought of preceding 
generations and standing opposed to the individ- 
ual as a quite objective world of spiritual and 
material culture, the world of the concepts of 
science, technique, and morality. 

This world was the materialised thought of 
humanity, realised in the product, was alienated 
thought in general; and the individual had to de- 
objectify, and arrogate to himself, the modes of 
activity that were realised in it, and it was in 
that the process of his education properly con- 
sisted. In the trained mind categories actually 
functioned as active forms of thought-activity, 
forms of processing the material of sense impres- 
sions into the form of a concept. When the in- 
dividual had them in his experience, and made 
them forms of his own activity, he also possessed 
them, and knew and realised them, as thought- 
forms. Otherwise they remained only general 
forms of the things given in contemplation and 
representation, and counterposed to thought as a 
reality existing outside it and independently of it. 

With this was linked the naive fetishism that 
directly accepted the available concepts and no- 
tions of science about things, the norms of morals 
and justice, the forms of the state and political 


208 


system and the similar products of the thinking 
of people who had objectified their own conscious 
activity in them, for purely objective determina- 
tions of things in themselves. It accepted them 
as such only because it did not know that they 
had not been created without the involvement of 
thought, and did not know how, moreover, they 
were produced by thought. It could not reproduce 
or repeat the process of thought that had brought 
them into being and therefore, naturally, con- 
sidered them eternal and unalterable determina- 
tions of things in themselves, and the expression 
of their essence. It believed quite uncritically, on 
trust, everything that it was told about these 
things in the name of science, the state, and God. 
It believed not only that these things appeared so 
today in the eyes of the thinking man but also 
that they were really so. 

Hegel’s conception of thought (in the context 
of logic as a science) thus of necessity also in- 
cluded the process of the ‘objectification of 
thought’ (Uergegenstdndlichung oder Entdusserung 
des Denkens), i.e. its sense-object, practical reali- 
sation through action, in sensuous-physical mate- 
rial, in the world of sensuously contemplated 
(intuited) things. Practice, the process of activity 
on sense objects that altered things in accordance 
with a concept, in accordance with plans matured 
in the womb of subjective thought, began to be 
considered here as just as important a level in the 
development of thought and understanding, as 
the subjective-mental act of reasoning (according 
to the rules) expressed in speech. 


14—881 209 


Hegel thus directly introduced practice into 
logic, and made a fundamental advance in the 
understanding of thought and in the science of 
thought. 

Since thought outwardly expressed itself (sich 
entdussert, sich entfremdet, i.e. ‘alienates itself’, 
‘makes itself something outside itself’) not only 
in the form of speech but also in real actions and 
in people’s deeds, it could be judged much better 
‘by its fruits’ than by the notions that it created 
about itself. Thought, therefore, that was realised 
in men’s actual actions also proved to be the true 
criterion of the correctness of those subjective- 
mental acts that were outwardly expressed only 
in words, in speeches, and in books. 


ESSAY SIX 


Once More about the Principle 
of Constructing a Logic. 
Idealism or Materialism? 


So far we have spoken almost exclusively about 
Hegel’s positive gains, which constituted an epoch 
in logic as a science. Let us now touch on the 
historically inevitable ‘costs of production’ con- 
nected with the idealism of Hegel’s conception of 
thought, and on the defects in his logic that do 
not permit us to adopt his conception in toto, and 
that can only be surmounted by developing ma- 
terialist philosophy. 

Historically things developed in such a way 
that Feuerbach was the first person in Germany 
to speak about the ‘costs of production’ of He- 
gelian idealism. 

Like every materialist Feuerbach fought the 
dualist opposing of thought to being as the initial 
principle of philosophy. In the course of his 
reasoning, therefore, he naturally reproduced 
Spinoza’s decisive arguments against Cartesian 
dualism. This line of polemic, it is true, has to 
be deduced by analysis, since Feuerbach had in 
mind not only dualism in the pure form in which 
it was expressed by Kant, but also the philosophy 


14% 211 


of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, i.e. the attempts 
systematically made to overcome dualism ‘from 
the right’, in the form of idealistic monism. 
Feuerbach strove, however, to show that the sur- 
mounting of dualism in this case inevitably re- 
mained fictitious, formal, and verbal, and that 
idealism in general did not, and could not, en- 
croach on the fundamental premises of the Kan- 
tian system. In Schelling and Hegel, therefore, he 
primarily considered the unsurmounted Kant. “The 
Hegelian philosophy is the abolition of the con- 
tradiction of thought and being as Kant in partic- 
ular expressed it, but, mark you, only its aboli- 
tion ... within one element, within thought.’! 

As a matter of fact, the so-called philosophy of 
absolute identity was a philosophy of the identity 
of thinking in itself; as before there was an un- 
filled gap between thought and being outside 
thought. The problem seemed to be resolved only 
because conceivable being, i.e. being in the form 
in which it had already been expressed in thought, 
had been put everywhere in the place of real 
being. Under the grandiose, profoundly thought- 
out construction of the Hegelian philosophy, 
therefore, there was hidden as a matter of fact an 
empty tautology; we thought the surrounding 
world as and how we thought it. 

So the philosophy of Schelling and Hegel had 
not, in fact, established any identity of thought 


1 Ludwig Feuerbach. Vorlaufige Thesen zur Reform der 
Philosophie. In: Kleinere Schriften I] (1839-1846) (Berlin, 
1970) p 257. 


212 


and being and not just an ‘absolute’ one, because 
‘being as such’—free, independent, self-sufficient 
being existing outside and independently of 
thought—had simply not been taken into account 
in it, and remained something wholly immate- 
rial and undetermined. 

The fundamental principle of Kantian dualism 
thus remained untouched. The thinking mind was 
considered from the very outset as something ab- 
solutely opposed to everything sensuous, corpo- 
real, and material, as a special immaterial being, 
organised in itself and formed by immanent log- 
ical laws and schemas as something independent 
and self-sufficient. Hegel’s Logic also represented 
thought as the activity of such a supernatural and 
extraphysical subject, which was then forced to 
enter into special relations of ‘mediation’ from 
outside with nature and man so as to shape them 
in its own image and likeness. 

Such a presentation of the thinking mind of 
necessity presupposed, in addition, that nature 
and man, as the ‘opposites’ of the mind, or spirit, 
as the object and material of its moulding activ- 
ity, were represented as something passive and 
amorphous in themselves. Only as a result of the 
moulding activity of the thinking spirit did na- 
ture and man become what they were and acquire 
all their well-known, concrete forms. Moreover, 
nothing other was represented in fact, as the prod- 
uct of the activity of the spirit, than the empiri- 
cally obvious state of affairs in the real world; 
and the whole complicated magic of mediation 
once more merely served, in the guise of a ‘gift 


213 


of God’, to return the same determinations to 
man and nature that had been previously taken 
from them by the act of abstraction. Without this 
preliminary ‘robbery’ of man and nature the spiri- 
tualistic philosophy could not have attributed a 
single one of its very impoverished determinations 
to the thinking spirit. 

In this interpretation of the problem of the rela- 
tion of thought and being, Feuerbach above all 
saw a scholastically refurbished, ‘rationalised’ 
theology. The absolute thinking spirit of spiri- 
tualism, like the Biblical God, was a fantastic 
creature, constructed out of determinations 
alienated from man by an act of abstraction. The 
thinking about which Hegelian logic was con- 
cerned was, in fact, human thought, but abstract- 
ed from man and counterposed to him as the 
activity of a special being existing outside him. 

Proceeding from that quite correct understand- 
ing (in general and on the whole) of the root 
errors of Hegelian idealism (and thereby of 
idealism in general, since the Hegelian system 
was the most consistent expression of the idealist 
point of view), Feuerbach rethought the very 
posing of the problem of the relation of thought 
to being. It was impossible, he showed, to ask 
how ‘thought in general’ was related to ‘being in 
general’, since that already presupposed that 
thought (in its form alienated from man) was 
looked upon as something independent, contrast- 
ed with being from outside. But being, however, 
understood not in Hegel’s way, i.e. not as an ab- 
stract, logical category, not as being in thought, 


214 


but as the real, sensuously objective world of na- 
ture and man, already included thought. Being 
included not only stones, trees, and stars, but also 
the thinking body of man. 

Thus, to represent being as something deprived 
of thought meant to represent it incorrectly, to 
exclude man, capable of thinking, from it in ad- 
vance; and that meant to deprive being of one 
of its most important ‘predicates’, to think of it 
‘imperfectly’. The argument given here repeated 
the course of Spinoza’s thought, was its developed 
interpretation, its translation into the language of 
a more modern philosophical terminology. 

The whole problem thus boiled down to resolv- 
ing whether thought could, in general, be dis- 
tinguished from man as a material, sensuously 
objective creature, and to fixing it and consider- 
ing it from the very beginning as something in- 
dependent, in contrast to everything corporeal, 
sensuous, and material; or whether thought should 
be understood as a property (‘predicate’) insepa- 
rable from man. Feuerbach considered the deci- 
sive argument in favour of materialism to be the 
arguments of natural science, medicine, and phys- 
iology. Materialism, relying on medicine, was also 
‘Archimedes’ fulcrum in the dispute between ma- 
terialism and spiritualism, for it was a matter here, 
in the final count, not of the divisibility or non- 
divisibility of matter, but of the divisibility or non- 
divisibility of man, not of the being or not-being 
of God but of the being or not-being of man, not 
of the eternity or temporality of matter but of the 
eternity or temporality of man, not of matter 


215 


scattered and extended outside man in heaven 
and earth but of matter concentrated in the hu- 
man skull. In short, it is a matter, in this dispute, 
so long as it is not conducted in mad confusion, 
only of the head of man. It alone is both the 
source and the goal and end of this dispute’.? 

Feuerbach considered that the basic problem 
of philosophy was thus, and only thus, put on a 
firm footing of fact, and so, naturally, resolved 
in favour of materialism. 

Thought was the real function of the living 
brain, and was inseparable from the matter of 
the brain. If we had brain matter in mind, then 
it was quite ridiculous in general to ask how 
thought was ‘linked’ with it, how the one was 
connected with the other and ‘mediated’ it, be- 
cause there simply was no ‘one’ and ‘the other’ 
here, but only one and the same thing; the real 
being of the living brain was also thought, and 
real thought was the being of the living brain. 

That fact, expressed in philosophical catego- 
ries, revealed ‘the immediate unity of soul and 
body, which admits of nothing in the middle be- 
tween them, and leaves no room for distinction 
or even contrast between material and immaterial 
being, is consequently the point where matter 
thinks and the body is mind, and conversely the 
mind is body and thought is matter’.? The ‘iden- 
tity’ of thought and being, so understood, must 


2 Ludwig Feuerbach. Uber Spiritualismus und Materia- 
lismus. In: Kleinere Schriften 1U (Berlin, 1972) p 125. 
3 Ibid., pp 152-153. 


216 


| 


also (according to Feuerbach) constitute an axiom 
of true philosophy, i.e. a fact not requiring 
scholastic proof and ‘mediation’. 

Feuerbach did not reproach Schelling and He- 
gel at all for having recognised in general the 
unity (‘identity’) of thought and being in the 
thinking man, but only for having tried to de- 
pict it as the final unity of opposites, as the prod- 
uct of the joining together of an insubstantial 
thinking spirit and unthinking flesh. He re- 
proached them with thus having tried to stick 
together a picture of the real fact from two equally 
false abstractions, of proceeding from illusion to 
fact and from abstraction to reality. 

The materialist, Feuerbach affirmed, must pro- 
ceed in the opposite way, taking as his starting 
point the directly given fact, in order to explain 
the origin of those false abstractions that idealists 
uncritically accepted as facts. 

Schelling and Hegel started from the thesis of 
the initial opposition of incorporeal thought and 
of flesh without thought in order ultimately to 
reach the unity of the opposites. That was false 
path of spiritualism. The materialist must pro- 
ceed from the factual direct unity (indivisibility) 
of the human individual in order to understand 
and show how and why the illusion of an imag- 
inary opposition of thinking and _ corporeal 
being arose in the head of this individual. 

The illusion of the opposition of the thinking 
spirit and the flesh in general was consequently 
a purely subjective fact, ie. a fact existing only 
in the head of the human individual, a purely 


217 


psychological fact. It arose for a quite natural 
reason, precisely because the thinking brain was 
the same sort of material, sensuous organ as all 
of man’s other organs. 

The position was the same as with the eye, the 
organ of vision. If I saw stars by means of the 
eye, then quite understandably I could not at the 
same time see the eye itself; and conversely, if I 
wanted to examine the eye, even in a mirror, I 
would have to turn my gaze away from the stars. 
Vision would be impossible in general if I were to 
see all the detail of the structure of the eye itself 
at the same time as the object, i.e. all the inner 
material conditions by means of which this vision 
was effected. In the same way, too, ‘the brain 
could not think if, in thinking, the organic foun- 
dation and conditions of thought became objects 
of its consciousness’,* i.e. the material structures 
and processes themselves by means of which 
thinking took place in the body of the brain. As 
structures they became objects only for physiol- 
ogy and anatomy. As the organ of thought the 
brain was structurally and functionally adapted 
exactly so as to perform activity directed toward 
external objects, so as to think not about itself 
but about the other, about the objective. And it 
was quite natural that ‘the organ gets lost, and 
forgets and disavows itself in the opus fervet 
(the work heat) of its own activity, the activity 
in its objects’.5 Hence, too, arose the illusion of 


4 L. Feuerbach. Kle inere Schriften IU, p 123. 
5 Ibid., p 124. 


218 


the complete independence of everything corpo- 
real, material, and sensuous, including the brain, 
from thought. 

But the illusion is understandably no argument 
in favour of idealism. Of itself, in spite of the 
inevitable illusions, thought always remained the 
material activity of a material organ, a material 
process. ‘What for me, or subjectively, is a pure- 
ly mental, immaterial, unsensuous act, in itself or 
objectively is a material, sensuous act. ‘In the 
brain-act, as the highest act, arbitrary, subjective, 
mental activity, and involuntary, objective ma- 
terial activity are identical and indistinguish- 
able.”? 

Thus the logic of the struggle against dualism 
and spiritualism directly forced Feuerbach, in 
essence, to express a dialectical proposition to 
recognise that the living, thinking brain was an 
‘object? in which there proved to be directly 
identical oppositions, namely, thought and sensu- 
ously objective being, thinking and what was 
thought, the ideal and the real, the spiritual and 
the material, the subjective and the objective. 
The thinking brain was the special ‘object’ that 
could be properly expressed in philosophical cat- 
egories only through directly identifying mu- 
tually exclusive determinations, through a thesis 
that embraced a direct unity, i.e. identity, of op- 
posing categories. 


6 Ludwig Feuerbach. Wider den Dualismus von Leib 
und Seele, Fleisch und Geist. In: Kleinere Schriften Il 
(Berlin, 1971) p 125. 

7 Ibid. 


Not having mastered dialectics in its general 
form, Feuerbach, it is true, often wavered, con- 
stantly admitting determinations that he was then 
forced to correct, supplement, and make specific; 
as a result his exposition was made rather nebu- 
lous and ambiguous, but the essence remained 
the same. 

It was just because thinking was a material 
process, the material activity of a material organ 
directed to material objects, that the products of 
that activity (thoughts) could be correlated, com- 
pared, and collated with ‘things in themselves’, 
with things outside thought, which everybody did 
at every step without the aid of the mediating 
activity of God or an absolute spirit. Concepts 
and images existed in the same space and in the 
same time as real things; and one and the same 
subject thought about and sensuously perceived 
the surrounding world, and that subject was pre- 
cisely the human individual, the same individual 
who really lived and existed as a sensuously 
objective creature. The unity (indivisibility) of 
the object, of the surrounding, sensuously objec- 
tive world, corresponded to the unity (indivisi- 
bility) of this subject. Just as a thinking and sen- 
suously contemplating person was one and the 
same person and not two different beings co- 
ordinating their inter-relations with the help of 
God or the absolute spirit; so the world thought 
of, on the one hand, and sensuously contemplat- 
ed, on the other hand, were again one and the 
same world (namely the real one), and not two 
different worlds between which one had to look 


220 


for a special passage or bridge, or mediation, 
resorting to the aid of a divine principle. 

That was why determinations of the world in 
thought (logical determinations) were directly 
and spontaneously determinations of the sensu- 
ously contemplated or intuited world. And it was 
absurd to ask what was the special relation of 
the system of logical determinations to the sensu- 
ously given world, to the world in intuition 
and representation. A logical system was 
nothing else than the expression of the de- 
terminateness of the sensuously contemplated or 
intuited world. The question of the relation of 
logical and metaphysics was also an illusory and 
sham question. There was no such relation, be- 
cause logic and metaphysics were spontaneously 
and directly one and the same. The universal 
determinations of the world in thought (logical 
determinations, categories) were nothing else than 
the expression of the abstract, universal determi- 
nateness of things given in intuition, because both 
thought and intuition (contemplation) had to do 
with one and the same real world. 

And if by logic was understood not a collection 
of rules for the expression of thought in speech, 
but the science of the laws of development of real 
thinking, then, similarly, by logical forms must 
be understood not the abstract forms of sen- 
tences and expressions, but the abstract, universal 
forms of the real content of thought, ie. of the 
real world sensuously given to man. “The so- 
called logical forms of judgments and conclusions 
are therefore not active thought-forms, not causal 


221 


conditions of reason. They presuppose the meta- 
physical concepts of universality, singularity, and 
particularity, the whole and the parts, necessity, 
foundation and consequence; they are given only 
through these concepts; they are consequently 
arbitrary, derived, not original thought-forms. 
Only metaphysical conditions or relations are 
logical ones—only metaphysics as the science of 
categories is the true esoteric logic—that was 
Hegel’s profound thought. The so-called logical 
forms are only abstract, elementary speech- 
forms; but speech is not thought, otherwise the 
greatest chatter-box would be the greatest 
thinker.’ 

Thus Feuerbach agreed completely with He- 
gel on logical forms and laws being absolutely 
identical with metaphysical ones, although he 
understood the reason and the grounds for that 
circumstance quite differently from the idealist 
Hegel. Here we have a clearly expressed materi- 
alist interpretation of the principle of the iden- 
tity of the laws and forms of thought and being. 
From the materialist point of view it states that 
logical forms and patterns are nothing else than 
the realised universal forms and patterns of 
being, of the real world sensuously given to man. 

That is the reason why Neokantians like Bern- 
stein called consistent materialism spiritualism 
inside out. Nevertheless Feuerbach’s interpreta- 
tion of the identity of thought and being remains 
true and indisputable for any materialist, includ- 

8 Ludwig Feuerbach. Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Philo- 
sophie (Berlin, 1955) p 35. 


222 


ing the Marxist, but only, of course, in the most 
general form, so long as we are concerned with 
the fundamentals of logic and the theory of 
knowledge, and not with the details of the knowl- 
edge built up on that foundation. Since Feuer- 
bach later began a specifically anthropological 
concretisation of general materialist truths, argu- 
ments developed in his exposition that were 
obviously weak not only in comparison with the 
Marxist-Leninist solution of the problem, but 
even in comparison with Spinoza’s conception; 
and they subsequently gave vulgar materialists, 
positivists, and even Neokantians occasion to 
consider him their predecessor and their—though 
not completely consistent—ally. 

A rather more detailed analysis of the fea- 
tures of Feuerbach’s treatment of the identity of 
thinking and being is not without interest for two 
reasons: (1) because it was materialism; and 
(2) because it was materialism without dialectics. 

The materialism consisted in this case in an 
unqualified recognition of the fact that thought 
was the mode of the real existence of the material 
body, the activity of the thinking body in real 
space and time. The materialism appeared, fur- 
thermore, in recognition of the identity of the 
mentally comprehended and sensuously perceived 
world. Feuerbach’s materialism, finally, was ex- 
pressed in man’s being recognised as the subject 
of thought, that same man who lived in the real 
world, and not a special being hovering outside 
the world, contemplating and comprehending it 
‘from outside’. All those are fundamental tenets 


223 


of materialism in general, and consequently also 
of dialectical materialism. 

What then were the weaknesses of Feuerbach’s 
position? In general, and on the whole, they were 
the same as those of all pre-Marxian materalism, 
and primarily incomprehension of the role of 
practical activity as activity altering nature. For 
even Spinoza had in mind only the movement of 
the thinking body along the given contours of 
natural bodies and lost sight of this moment, a 
point that Fichte made against him (and so in 
general against the whole form of materialism 
represented by him), namely that man (the think- 
ing body) did not move along ready-made forms 
and contours presented by nature but actively 
created new forms, not inherent in nature, and 
moved along them, overcoming the ‘resistance’ of 
the external world. 

‘The chief defect of all materialism up to now 
(including Feuerbach’s) is that the object, reality, 
what we apprehend through our senses, is under- 
stood only in the form of the subject or contem- 
plation*; but not as sensuous human activity, as 
practice, not subjectively. Hence in opposition 
to materialism the active side was developed 
abstractly by idealism—which of course does not 
know real sensuous activity as such. Feuerbach 
wants sensuous objects, really distinguished from 


* Note by R. Pascal (Jbid., p 207): ‘Anschauung. I have 
used “contemplation” for this term. This, the normal trans- 
lation, is somewhat ambiguous, and should be understood as 
“sense-perception” in strong contrast to its meaning of “me- 
ditation”.’ 


224 


the objects of thought: but he does not under- 
stand human activity itself as objective activi- 
ty? 

Hence it followed that man (the subject of 
cognition) was considered the passive side of the 
object-subject relation, as the determined mem- 
ber of this inter-relation. Furthermore, man was 
abstracted here from the combination of social 
relations and transformed into an isolated indi- 
vidual. The man-environment relations were there- 
fore interpreted as the relations of the individ- 
ual to all the rest, to everything that lay outside 
the individual brain and existed independently 
of it. But outside the individual, and indepen- 
dently of his will and consciousness, there existed 
not only nature but also the social historical 
environment, the world of things created by 
man’s labour, and the system of relations between 
man and man, developed in the labour process. 
In other words, not only did nature by itself (‘in 
itself’) lie outside the individual but also human- 
ised nature, altered by labour. For Feuerbach 
the surrounding world or environment given in 
intuition or contemplation was taken as the start- 
ing point, and its premises were not investigated. 

When, therefore, he faced the problem of 
where and how man (the thinking body) was in 
immediate union (contact) with the environment, 
he answered: in intuition, in the individual’s con- 


9 Karl Marx. Theses on Feuerbach. Translated by Roy 
Pascal. In: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. The German 
Ideology (Lawrence & Wishart, London, 1938), p 197. 

* Second note by R. Pascal: ‘Activity through objects.’ 


15—881 225 


ae 


templation, since it was the individual that he 
always had in mind. That was the root of all his 
weaknesses, because in contemplation there was 
given to the individual the product of the activity 
of other individuals interacting among themselves 
in the process of producing material life, and 
those properties and forms of nature that had 
already been transformed into the properties and 
forms of the activity of man, its object and its 
product. The ‘nature as such’ that Feuerbach 
wished to ‘contemplate’ did not, as a matter of fact, 
lie within his field of view, because this ‘nature, 
the nature that preceded human activity, is not 
by any means the nature in which Feuerbach 
lives, nor the nature which to-day no longer 
exists anywhere (except perhaps on a few Aus- 
tralian coral-islands of recent origin) and which, 
therefore, does not exist for Feuerbach’.1° 
Feuerbach’s attention was also diverted from 
the real complexities of the social relations be- 
tween theory and practice, from the division of 
labour that ‘alienated’ thought (in the form of 
science) from the majority of individuals and 
converted it into a force existing independently 
of them and outside them. He therefore saw noth- 
ing in the thought idolised by Hegel (i.e. science) 
than a certain modification of religious illusions. 


10 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. The German 
Ideology, p 37. 


a 


PART TWO 
CERTAIN PROBLEMS 


OF THE MARXIST-LENINIST THEORY 
OF DIALECTICS 


ESSAY SEVEN 


A Contribution to the Problem 
of a Dialectical Materialistic Critique 
of Objective Idealism 


In order to overcome the weaknesses, or rather 
defects, of any philosophical system, it is neces- 
sary to understand them. Marx demonstrated 
this sort of ‘understanding’ in relation to Hegel, 
and thereby went much further in matters of 
logic than either Hegel or his materialist anti- 
pode Feuerbach. 

Marx, Engels, and Lenin showed both the 
historical contribution of Hegel and the his- 
torically conditioned limitations of his scientific 
advances, the clearly drawn boundary across 
which the Hegelian dialectic could not step, and 
the illusions, whose power it was incapable of 
overcoming despite all the strength of its creator’s 
mind. Hegel’s greatness, like his limitations, was 
due on the whole to his having exhausted the 
possibilities of developing dialectics on the basis 
of idealism, within the limits of the premises 
that idealism imposed on scientific thinking. Ir- 


= 227 


respective of his intentions, Hegel showed, with 
exceptional clarity, that idealism led thinking up 
a blind alley and doomed even dialectically 
enlightened thought to hopeless circling within 
itself, to an endless procedure of ‘self-expression’ 
and ‘self-consciousness’. For Hegel (precisely be- 
cause he was a most consistent and unhypocritical 
idealist, who thereby disclosed the secret of every 
other, inconsistent and incomplete idealism) ‘be- 
ing’, i.e. the world of nature and history existing 
outside thought and independently of it, was 
inevitably transformed into a mere pretext for 
demonstrating the logical art, into an inexhaust- 
ible reservoir of ‘examples’ confirming over and 
over again the same schemas and categories of 
logic. As the young Marx remarked, ‘the mat- 
tet of logic’ (die Sache der Logik) fenced the 
‘logic of the matter’ (die Logik der Sache) off 
from Hegel, and therefore both the Prussian mon- 
arch and the louse on the monarch’s head could 
equally well serve the idealist dialectician as 
‘examples’ illustrating the category ‘real indi- 
viduality in and for itself’. 

With such an approach both a boiling tea- 
kettle and the Great French Revolution were only 
‘examples’ illustrating the relation of the catego- 
ries of quality and quantity; but any empirical 
reality impinging on the eye, however fortuitious 
it might be in itself, was thereby converted into 
an external embodiment of absolute reason, into 


‘ See Karl Marx. Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s 
Philosophy of Law. Of. cié., p 18. 


228 


one of the necessary dialectical stages of its self- 
differentiation. 

The profound flaws in the Hegelian dialectic 
were directly linked with idealism, due to which 
the dialectic was readily transformed into inge- 
nious, logically subtle apologies for everything 
that existed. It is therefore necessary to look into 
all these circumstances more closely. 

Hegel actually counterposed man and his real 
thought to impersonal, featureless—‘absolute’— 
thought as some force existing for ages, in accor- 
dance with which the act of ‘divine creation of 
the world and man’ had occurred. He also under- 
stood logic as ‘absolute form’, in relation to which 
the real world and real human thought proved to 
be something essentially derivative, secondary 
and created. 

In that, too, the idealism of Hegel’s concep- 
tion of thinking was revealed; and it was the 
specifically Hegelian objective idealism that con- 
verted thought into some new god, into some 
supernatural force existing outside man and 
dominating him. This specifically Hegelian illu- 
sion, however, did not at all express an idea 
simply taken uncritically by Hegel from religion, 
or a simple atavism of religious consciousness, as 
Feuerbach suggested, but a much more profound 
and serious circumstance. 

The fact is that the Hegelian conception of 
thought represented an uncritical description of 
the real position of things formed on the soil of 
a narrowly professional form of the division of 
social labour, that is to say, on the division of 


229 


mental work from physical labour, from imme- 
diately practical, sensuously objective activity. 

Under the spontaneously developing division 
of social labour there arose of necessity a peculiar 
inversion of the real relations between human 
individuals and their collective forces and col- 
lectively developed faculties, ie. the universal 
(social) means of the activity, an inversion known 
in philosophy as estrangement or alienation. 
Here, in social reality, and not at all simply in 
the fantasies of religiously minded people and 
idealist philosophers, universal (collectively real- 
ised) modes of action were organised as special 
social institutions, established in the form of trades 
and professions, and of a kind of caste with 
its own special rituals, language, traditions, and 
other ‘immanent’ structures of a quite impersonal 
and featureless character. 

As a result, the separate human individual did 
not prove to be the bearer, i.e. to be the subject, 
of this or that universal faculty (active power), 
but, on the contrary, this active power, which was 
becoming more and more estranged from him, 
appeared as the subject, dictating the means and 
forms of his occupation to each individual from 
outside. The individual as such was thus trans- 
formed into a kind of slave, into a ‘speaking tool’ 
of alienated universally human forces and facul- 
ties, means of activity personified as money and 
capital, and further as the state, law, religion, 
and so on. 

The same fate also befell thought. It, too, 
became a special occupation, the lot for life of 


230 


— — 


ee 


professional scholars, of professionals in mental, 
theoretical work. Science is thought transformed 
in certain conditions into a special profession. 
Given universal alienation, thought achieved the 
heights and levels of development needed for 
society as a whole only in the sphere of science 
(i.e. within the community of scholars), and in 
that form was really opposed to the majority of 
human beings and not simply opposed to them 
but also dictating to them what they must do from 
the standpoint of science, and how they must do 
it, and what and how they must think, etc., etc. 
The scientist, the professional theoretician, lays 
down the law to them not in his own name, per- 
sonally, but in the name of Science, in the name 
of the Concept, in the name of an absolutely uni- 
versal, collective, impersonal power, appearing 
before other people as its trusted representative 
and plenipotentiary. 

On that soil, too, there arose all the specific 
illusions of the professionals of mental, theoreti- 
cal work, illusions that acquired their most con- 
scious expression precisely in the philosophy of 
objective idealism, i.e. of the self-consciousness 
of alienated thought. 

It will readily be noted that Hegel, in his logic, 
quite exactly expressed, in scholastically disguised 
form, the fundamental features of human life 
activity: man’s faculty (as a thinking creature) 
to look at himself ‘from outside’ as it were, as 
something ‘other’, as a special object; or in other 
words to transform the schemas of his own activ- 
ity into its own object. (That is the very special 


231 


feature of man which the young Marx recognised 
as follows, and that in the course of a critique of 
Hegel: “The animal is immediately one with its 
life activity. It does not distinguish itself from 
it. It is its life activity. Man makes his life activ- 
ity itself the object of his will and of his con- 
sciousness. He has conscious life activity. It is 
not a determination with which he directly mer- 
ges.’”) 

Since Hegel looked upon this feature of human 
life activity exclusively through the eyes of logic, 
he registered it solely to the extent that it was 
already transformed into a scheme of thought, 
into a logical schema, into a rule in accordance 
with which man more or less consciously built 
this or that specific activity (be it in the material 
of language or something else). He therefore reg- 
istered things, and the position of things (acts) 
located outside the individual’s consciousness and 
beyond his will (Dinge und Sache), exclusively as 
moments, as metamorphoses of thought (subjec- 
tive activity), realised and realisable in natural, 
physical material, including in that also the organ- 
ic body of man himself. The special feature of 
human life activity described above in Marx’s 
words also appeared in the Hegelian representa- 
tion as a scheme of thought realised by man, as 
a logical figure. 

The real picture of human life activity obtained 
here is a topsy-turvy, upside-down representa- 


2 Karl Marx. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 
1844. Op. cit., p 277. 


232 


tion. In reality man thinks because that is his real 
life activity. Hegel said the contrary, that real 
human life activity was such because man 
thought in accordance with a definite schema. All 
determinations of human life activity, naturally, 
and through it the position of things outside 
man’s head, were only fixed here insofar as they 
were ‘posited by thought’, and appeared as the 
result of thought. 

This is only natural because the logician who 
specially studied thought was no longer interested 
in things (or the position of things) as such, as 
a reality existing before, outside of, and inde- 
pendently of man and his activity (the logician did 
not look on reality at all as the physicist or biol- 
ogist, economist or astronomer did), but in things 
as, and as what, they appeared as a result of the 
activity of a thinking being, of the subject, as the 
product of thought understood as an activity, the 
specific product of which was the concept. 

So Hegel was ‘guilty’ of remaining a ‘pure’ 
logician just there where the standpoint of logic 
was inadequate. This peculiar professional blind- 
ness of the logician showed up primarily in the 
fact that he looked upon practice, i.e. the real, 
sensuously objective activity of man, solely as a 
criterion of truth, solely as the verifying author- 
ity for thought, for the mental, theoretical work 
completed before and independently of practice, 
or rather for the results of that work. 

Practice there was thus also understood ab- 
stractly, was only illuminated from that aspect, 
and in those characteristics, which it owed in 


233 


fact to thought, because it was the act of realis- 
ing a certain intention, plan, idea, concept, or 
some aim selected in advance, was absolutely not 
analysed as such in a determination of its own, 
not dependent on some thought. All the results 
of people’s practical activity—things made by 
human labour, and historical events and 
their consequences—were correspondingly only 
taken into account insofar as they embodied or 
objectified some idea or another. In a conception 
of the historical process as a whole such a point 
of view was understandably the purest (‘abso- 
lute’) idealism. As regards logic, however, the 
science of thought, it was not only justified but 
was the sole rational position. 

In fact, can we reproach the logician for ab- 
stracting everything in the most rigorous fashion 
that had nothing to do with the subject matter 
of his investigation, and for paying attention to 
any fact only insofar as it could be understood 
as the consequence, as the form of disclosure, of 
his subject matter, of the subject matter of his 
science, i.e. of thought? To reproach the profes- 
sional logician for the fact that the ‘matter of 
logic’ concerned him more than the ‘logic of the 
matter’, (ic. the logic of any other concrete 
sphere of human activity) would be as stupid as 
to reproach the chemist for excessive attention 
to the ‘matter of chemistry’. But Marx’s words 
above, directed at Hegel, concealed quite another 
meaning. 

The fault of the narrow professional was not 
at all his rigorous limitation of thought to the 


234 


framework of the subject matter of his science, 
but his incapacity to see clearly the boundaries 
of the competence of his science associated with 
this limitation of his view of things. 

The same applied to Hegel, the typical pro- 
fessional logician. As a logician he was right to 
look upon a statement or a fact exclusively from 
the standpoint of the abstract schemas of thought 
revealed in it, when the logic of any matter 
interested him only insofar as it was revealed in 
it in general. The mysticism of Hegel’s logic, and 
at the same time its insidious feature, which Marx 
called his ‘false positivism’,? began where the 
special standpoint of the logician ex professo was 
adopted and distinguished from the sole scientific 
standpoint from the heights of which only the 
‘ultimate’, most profound, most cherished, and 
most important truth accessible in general to man 
and to humanity was allegedly discovered. 

As a logician Hegel was quite right in look- 
ing on any phenomenon in the development of 
human culture as an act disclosing the power of 
thought. But it was the work of a moment, by 
adding a little something to that view (admissible 
and natural in logic), namely that the essence of 
the phenomena in themselves from which the 
special, logical abstractions were drawn was 
expressed just in those abstractions, for the truth 
to be transformed into a lie. The exact results of 
a chemical investigation of the composition of the 


3 Karl Marx. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 
1844. Op. cit. p 339. 


235 


colours used to paint the Sistine Madonna would 
be converted into such a lie the moment the chem- 
ist looked on them as the sole scientific expla- 
nation of the unique ‘synthesis’ created by Ra- 
phael’s brush. 

Abstractions that quite precisely expressed 
(described) the forms and schemas of the flow of 
thought in all forms of its concrete realisation 
were immediately and directly passed off as 
schemas of the process that had created the whole 
diversity of human culture, in which they were 
discovered. As a result the whole mystique of 
Hegel’s conception of thought was concentrated 
in a single point. In considering all the manifold 
forms of human culture as a result of manifesta- 
tion of the faculty to think that functions in man, 
he lost any chance of understanding from where 
in general this unique faculty, and its schemas 
and rules, appeared in man. By raising thought 
to the rank of a divine power and force impel- 
ling man to historical creation from within, He- 
gel simply passed off the absence of a reply to 
this reasonable question as the only possible an- 
swer to it. 

The sensuously objective activity of the mil- 
lions of people who by their labour created the 
body of culture, the self-consciousness of which 
is scientific thought, remained outside Hegel’s 
field of view, seemed to him the ‘prehistory’ of 
thought. The external world therefore appeared 
as the initial material for producing the concept, 
as something that had to be processed by means 
of existing concepts in order to concretise them. 


236 


\ 


Thought was thus transformed into the only 
active and creative force, and the external world 
into its field of application. Naturally, if the sen- 
suously objective activity (practice) of social man 
was represented as the consequence, as the exter- 
nal objectification of ideas, plans, and concepts 
created by thought (i.e. by persons occupied in 
mental work), it became in principle impossible 
to say either what was the source of thought in 
the head of theoreticians or how it arose. 

Thought was, Hegel replied; and to ask about 
its origin from something else was to ask a futile 
question. It was, it operated in man, and gradu- 
ally arrived at awareness of its own activities, 
and of their schemas and laws. Logic was self- 
consciousness of this creative principle, of this 
infinite creative power, of this absolute form, 
which had never arisen from anywhere. In man 
this creative force was only revealed, objectified, 
and estranged so as then in logic to cognise itself 
as such, as the universal creative force. 

That was the whole secret of Hegel’s objective 
idealism. In logic, consequently, objective ideal- 
ism means the absence of any answer whatsoever 
to the question from whence thought originates. 
In the form of logic, defined as a system of 
eternal and absolute schemas of every kind of 
creative activity, Hegel deified real human 
thought and its logical forms and patterns. 

That was at once the strength and the weak- 
ness of his conception of thought and logic. Its 
strength was that he idolised (i.e. defined as given 
outside time, as absolute) the nevertheless real 


237 


logical forms and laws of human thought discov- 
ered by him through study of human spiritual 
and material culture. Its weakness was that, for 
all that, he idolised the logical forms and laws 
of human thought, i.e. declared them absolute, 
without even allowing the problem of their origin 
to be posed. 

The fact was that idealism, i.e. the view of 
thought as a universal faculty that was only 
‘aroused’ to self-consciousness in man and did 
not arise in the exact and strict sense from the 
soil of definite conditions formed outside him 
and independently of him, led to a number of 
absolutely unresolvable problems in logic itself. 

While making an exceptionally important advan- 
ce in understanding of the logical forms of thought, 
Hegel stopped halfway, and even turned back, 
as soon as he was faced with the question of the 
inter-relation of sensuously perceived forms of 
the embodiment of the mind’s activity (thought), 
in which the mind (or spirit) became the object 
of consideration for itself. Thus he refused to 
recognise the word (speech, language) as the sole 
form of the ‘effective being of the spirit’, of the 
external disclosure of the creative power of 
thought. Nevertheless, he continued to consider 
it the principal, most adequate form, the form 
in which thought was counterposed to itself. 

‘In the beginning was the Word’—in respect 
of human thought (the thinking mind of man) 
Hegel maintained the Biblical position unsullied, 
accepting it as something self-evident and mak- 
ing it the basic principle of all subsequent con- 


238 


os 


| struction, or rather reconstruction, of the develop- 
ment of the thinking spirit to self-conscious- 
ness. 

The thinking mind of man was first aroused 
(i.e. counterposed itself to everything else) pre- 
cisely in the word and through the word, as the 
faculty of ‘naming’, and therefore took shape 
primarily as the ‘kingdom of names’ and titles. 
The word also functioned as the first ‘objective 
reality of thought activity’, both in essence and 
in time, as the initial and immediate form of 
being of the spirit for itself. 

This appeared clearly as follows: one ‘finite 
| spirit’ (the thought of the individual) made itself 

the subject matter (object) of another, also ‘fi- 
nite’, spirit in the word and through the word. 
| Having arisen from the ‘mind’ as a definitely 
articulated sound, the word on being heard was 
again converted into ‘spirit’, into the state of the 
thinking mind of another person. The vibrations 
of the ambient air (the audible word) also proved 
to be only the pure mediator between the two 
states of the spirit, the mode of the relation of 
spirit to spirit, or, expressing it in Hegelian lan- 
guage, of the spirit to itself. 

The word (speech) functioned here as the first 
} tool of the external objectification of thought, 
| which the thinking spirit created ‘from itself’ in 

order to become the object for itself (in the im- 
age of another thinking spirit). The real tool— 
the stone axe or cutting tool, scraper or wooden 
plough—began to appear as the second and sec- 
ondary, derived tool of the same process of 


239 


objectification as the sensuously objective meta- 
morphosis of thought. 

Thus Hegel saw in the word the form of the 
actual being of the thinking spirit in which the 
latter manifested its own creative force (faculty) 
before everything, before and independently of 
the real moulding cf nature by labour. Labour 
only realised what the thinking spirit had found 
in itself in the course of utterance, in the course 
of its dialogue with itself. But in this interpreta- 
tion the dialogue proved to be only a monologue 
of the thinking spirit, only its mode of ‘manifes- 
tation’. 

In the Phenomenology of Mind all history 
therefore began with an analysis of the contra- 
diction that arose between thought (insofar as it 
expressed itself in the words ‘here’ and ‘now’) 
and all its other content not yet expressed in 
words. The Science of Logic also suggested this 
schema, and contained the same, though implicit 
premise at its very beginning. Thought, it was 
suggested there, had realised and was realising 
itself primarily in and through the word. So it 
was no accident that the consummation of all 
the ‘phenomenological’ and ‘logical’ history of 
the thinking spirit consisted in returning to the 
starting point: the thinking spirit achieved its 
absolutely exact and perfect representation, nat- 
urally in the printed word—in a treatise on 
logic, in the Science of Logic. 

Hegel therefore also maintained the following 
in logic: ‘It is in human Language that the Forms 
of Thought are manifested and laid down in the 


240 


=< 


—_—= 


first instance. In our day it cannot be too often 
recalled, that what distinguishes man from the 
beasts is the faculty of Thought. Language has 
penetrated into whatever becomes for man some- 
thing inner—becomes, that is, an idea, something 
which he makes his very own;—and what man 
transforms to Language contains concealed, or 
mixed up with other things, or worked out to 
clearness—a Category... .”4 

That was the deepest root of Hegel’s idealism. 
By that step thought as an activity taking place 
in the head in the form, precisely, of inner speech, 
was converted into the starting point for under- 
standing all the phenomena of culture, both spiri- 
tual and material, including all historical events, 
social, economic, and political structures, and so 
on and so forth. The whole world of the products 
of human labour, and all history, then began to 
be interpreted as a process taking place ‘from the 
head’, ‘from the power of thought’. The whole 
grandiose conception of the history of the estrange- 
ment (objectification) of the creative energy of 
thought and its inverse mastering of the fruits of 
its labour (disobjectification), which began with 
the word and completed its cycle in the word, 
was just the history outlined in the Science of 
Logic. 

The clue to Hegel’s conception is not so very 
complicated. The idea that man thought initially, 
and then only really acted served as the founda- 
tion of his schema. Hence also the schema ‘word— 


& Hegel's Science of Logic, Vol. 1, pp 39-40. 


16—831 24) 


act—thing made by the act—again word’ (this 
time a verbally expressed report on what had been 
done). And further, there was a new cycle ac- 
cording to the same schema, but on a new basis, 
owing to which the movement had the form not 
of a circle but of a spiral, each turn of which, 
however, both began and ended at one and the 
same point, in a word. 

The rational kernel and at the same time the 
mystifying feature of the schema described here 
are most easily considered by analogy (although 
it is more than a simple analogy) with the meta- 
morphoses that political economy brings out when 
analysing commodity-money circulation. Just as 
accumulated labour concentrated in machines, in 
the instruments and products of labour, functions 
in the form of capital, in the form of ‘self-expand- 
ing value’, for which the individual capitalist 
functions as ‘executor’, so too scientific knowledge, 
i.e. the accumulated mental labour of society 
functions in the form of Science, i.e. the same sort 
of impersonal and featureless anonymous force. 
The individual professional theoretician functions 
as the representative of the self-developing power 
of knowledge. His social function boils down to 
being the individual embodiment of the universal 
spiritual wealth accumulated over centuries and 
millenia of mental labour. He functions as the 
animated tool of a process that is completed inde- 
pendently of his individual consciousness and his 
individual will, the process of the increase of 
knowledge. He does not think here as such— 
Knowledge, which has taken root in his head dur- 


242 


ing his education, ‘thinks’. He does not control 
the concept; rather the Concept controls him, de- 
termining both the direction of his research and 
the modes and forms of his activity. 

There is the same turning upside down as in the 
sphere of material production based on exchange 
value, the same real mystification of the relations 
between the universal and the particular in which 
the abstract universal is not an aspect or property 
of the sensuously concrete (in this case living man) 
but rather the contrary, the sensuously concrete, 
individual man proves to be only an abstract, one- 
sided ‘embodiment’ of of the universal (in this case 
Knowledge, Concept, Science). This is not simply 
an analogy with what happens in the world of re- 
lations founded on value, but the same social pro- 
cess, only in the sphere of mental rather than ma- 
terial production. “This inversion, by which the 
sensibly concrete is regarded as a form of mani- 
festation of the abstract and general, instead of 
the abstract and general being regarded on the 
contrary as a property of the concrete, is charac- 
teristic of the expression of value. At the same 
time, it makes the expression of value difficult to 
understand. If I say: Roman law and German law 
are both law, that is self-evident. If, on the other 
hand, I say: the law, which is an abstraction, is 
realised as such in Roman law and in German 
law, which are concrete laws, the connection 
between the abstract and the concrete becomes 
mystical.”> 


5 Karl Marx. Das Kapital, Vol. I, p 771. 


ise 243 


So Hegel’s idealism was not in the least the 
fruit of religious fantasy or of a religiously ori- 
ented imagination. It was only an uncritical de- 
scription of the real state of things, on the soi! of 
which the professional theoretician, the narrow 
specialist of mental labour, operated (thought). 
The forms of his philosophy were the practically 
inevitable illusions (even practically useful) that 
he inevitably created in his own work, illusions 
that were fed by the objective position of that 
work in society, and reflected its position. It was 
the knowledge acquired by him as concepts im- 
mediately in the course of his education, i.e. in 
the form of verbal-sign expressions, which was 
for him the beginning (starting point) of his 
specific activity, and the end, its specific goal, 
its real “entelechy’. 

But the analogy we have used enables us also 
to understand another circumstance, i.e. the 
mechanism itself of the ‘inversion’ or ‘turning 
upside down’ described above. The pattern of 
commodity-money circulation is, as we know, 
expressed by the formula C—M—C. The com- 
modity (C) appears in it as both the beginning 
and the end of the cycle, and money (M) as its 
mediating link, as the ‘metamorphosis of the 
commodity’. But at a certain point in the self- 
closing cyclical movement C—M—C—M—C— 
M... and so on, money ceases to be a simple 
‘intermediary’, the means of circulation of the 
mass of commodities and suddenly discloses an 
enigmatic faculty for ‘self-expansion’. Schemat- 
ically this phenomenon is expressed in the for- 


244 


mula as follows: M—C—M’. The Commodity, 
the real starting point of the process as a whole, 
acquires the former role of money, the role of in- 
lermediary and means of the transient metamor- 
phosis of money, in which the latter is embodied 
in order to complete the act of ‘self-expansion’. 
Money, having acquired so mysterious a property, 
is also capital, and in the form of the latter ac- 
quires ‘the occult quality of being able to add val- 
ue to itself® and ‘suddenly presents itself as sub- 
stance endowed with an independent motion of 
its own, a substance of which commodities and 
money are themselves merely forms’.’ In the for- 
mula M—C—M’ value appears as an ‘automatic- 
ally operating subject’, as the ‘substance-subject’ 
of the whole cyclic movement, constantly return- 
ing to its starting point; ‘value is here the active 
factor in a process in which, while continually as- 
suming by turns the form of money and the form 
of commodities, it at the same time changes in 
magnitude, gives birth to surplus value, so that 
the original value spontaneously expands’® and 
this happens ‘in itself’. 

In his Science of Logic Hegel recorded the same 
situation, only not in regard to value but to 
knowledge (understanding, truth). In fact he dealt 
with the process of accumulation of knowledge, 
because the concept is also accumulated knowl- 
edge, the ‘constant capital’, so to say, of thought, 


6 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I, p 140. 
7 [bid., p 140. 
8 Ibid., pp 139-140. 


245 


which always appears in science in the form of 
the word. Hence, too, the idea of knowledge, anal- 
ogous to the idea of value, as a self-expanding 
substance, as a subject-substance. 

Thus we are dealing not with the abstract fan- 
tasies of an idealist but with the same uncritical 
description of the real process of the production 
and accumulation of knowledge as the theory of 
political economy, which takes as the starting 
point of its explanation an exactly recorded but 
not understood fact. The fact is that money, ap- 
pearing as the form of movement of capital, as 
the starting point and goal of the whole cyclical 
process of coming back ‘to itself’, discloses a mys- 
terious, occult faculty for self-expansion and self- 
development. This fact, left unexplained, becomes 
mysterious and occult; and a property is ascribed 
to it that in fact belongs to quite another process 
that is expressed (‘reflected’) in its form. 

In disclosing the secret of the self-expansion of 
value, i.e. the secret of the production and accu- 
mulation of surplus value, in Capital Marx em- 
ployed (and not by chance, but deliberately and 
consciously) the whole terminology of Hegelian 
logic given above, and of Hegel’s conception of 
thought. The fact is that the idealist illusion creat- 
ed by Hegel the logician had the same nature as 
the practically necessary (‘practically true’) illu- 
sions that entrap the mind of man caught up in 
the process of the creation and accumulation of 
surplus value, which is not understood by him and 
takes place independently of his consciousness and 
will. The logical and socio-historical patterns of 


246 


| 


the origin of these illusions were objectively and 
subjectively the same. 

For the capitalist a certain sum of money (a 
certain value indispensably expressed in money 
form) is the starting point of all his further activ- 
ity as a capitalist, and therefore the formal goal 
of his special activity. From where this sum of 
money arose, originally, with its occult proper- 
ties, and how, may have no special interest for 
him. 

Something analogous also happens with the 
professional theoretician, with the person who rep- 
resents ‘personified’ knowledge, science, the con- 
cept. For him, the knowledge accumulated by 
humanity, and recorded moreover in verbal, sign 
form, also appears simultaneously as the starting 
point and as the goal of his special work. 

From his point of view, naturally, the concept 
makes itself out to be a ‘self-developing substance’, 
‘an automatically operating subject’, ‘the subject 
substance of all its changes’, and of all its meta- 
morphoses. 

Hence, from the real form of the life activity of 
the professional theoretician there also grow all 
the practically necessary illusions about thought 
and concept that were systematically expressed in 
Hegel’s Science of Logic. The Hegelian logic de- 
scribed the system of the objective forms of thought 
within the limits of which revolved the process 
of extended reproduction of the concept, which 
never began, in its developed forms, ‘from the 
very beginning’, but took place as the perfecting 
of already existing concepts, as the transformation 


247 


of already accumulated theoretical knowledge, as 
its ‘increment’. The concept was always already 
presupposed here in the form of a jumping-off 
point for new conquests, since it was a matter of 
extending the sphere of the cognised, and in that 
the initial concepts played a most active role. 

If the separate forms of the manifestation that 
expanding, growing knowledge drew by turns 
into its living circulation were recorded, the fol- 
lowing definitions would be obtained: science (ac- 
cumulated knowledge) is words (the ‘language of 
science’); science is the things created on the basis 
of knowledge, i.e. the objectified, materialised 
force of knowledge. Knowledge becomes the sub- 
ject of a certain process in which, here, while 
constantly changing its verbal form into an ob- 
jective material one it alters its magnitude and its 
scale, throws off as surplus (added) knowledge from 
itself as the initial knowledge, and ‘self-develops’. 
For the movement in which knowledge unites new 
knowledge to itself is its own movement, and its 
expansion is consequently self-expansion, self-in- 
tensification, self-development. It has acquired 
the occult faculty of creating knowledge by virtue 
of the fact that it is itself knowledge. 

By analogy with the production and accumula- 
tion of surplus value, logical forms (the real 
forms of the production of knowledge) began 
therefore to appear here as forms of the ‘self- 
development’ of knowledge, and so were mysti- 
fied. The mystification consisted in the pattern or 
scheme that expressed the features of the activity 
of the professional theoretician, being accepted 


248 


and passed off as the pattern of development of 
knowledge in general. 

So, we see, it was the same mystification as in 
political economy, in analysing which Marx stres- 
sed that his investigation did not begin with an 
analysis of value, but with analysis of a commod- 
ity. 

From the logical standpoint that is most im- 
portant in principle, because it was the analysis 
of a commodity that bared the secret of the birth 
and origin of value, and then also the secret of 
its manifestation in money, in money form. In the 
contrary case, the secret of the birth of value was 
unresolvable in principle. 

The same thing took place with the concept of 
thought in the Hegelian scheme. Hegel recorded 
those features that were actually realised in the 
process of thought in its developed form, in the 
form of science, as a special (isolated) sphere of 
the division of social labour, and the formula that 
there quite accurately reflected the surface of the 
process appeared as follows: word—act—word 
(W—A—W), in which by ‘word’, is understood 
verbally recorded knowledge, knowledge in its 
universal form, in the form of the ‘language of 
science’, in the form of formulae, diagrams, sym- 
bols, models of all kinds, blueprints, etc., etc. 

A really critical mastering of Hegel’s logic, 
carefully preserving all its positive features and 
purging it of mystic worship of ‘pure thought’ and 
the ‘divine concept’, proved only to be within 
the power of Marx and Engels. No other philo- 
sophical system since Hegel has been able to 


handle it as a ‘tool of criticism’, since not one of 
them has adopted the standpoint of a revolution- 
ary, critical attitude to the objective conditions 
that feed the illusions of idealism, i.e. to the sit- 
uation of the estrangement (alienation) of the 
real, active faculties of man from the majority 
of individuals, the situation in which all the uni- 
versal (social) forces, i.e. the active faculties of 
social man, appear as forces independent of the 
majority of individuals and dominating them as 
external necessity, as forces monopolised by more 
or less narrow groups, strata, and classes of 
society. 

The sole path to a real, critical mastering of 
Hegel’s conception of thought lay through a re- 
volutionary, critical attitude to the world of 
alienation, i.e. to the world of commodity-capi- 
talist relations. Only along that path could the 
objective-idealist illusions of Hegel’s conception 
be really explained, and not simply attacked by 
such biting epithets (that equally explained noth- 
ing) as ‘mystical nonsense’, ‘theological atavism’, 
and others of that kind. 


ESSAY EIGHT 


The Materialist Conception 
of Thought as the Subject Matter 
of Logic 


After what Hegel had done it was only pos- 
sible to advance in a single direction, along the 
road to materialism, to a clear understanding of 
the fact that all the dialectical schemas and cate- 
gories revealed in thought by Hegel were univer- 
sal forms and laws, reflected in the collective 
consciousness of man, of the development of the 
external real world existing outside of and in- 
dependently of thought. Marx and Engels had 
already begun a materialist rethinking of the 
Hegelian dialectic at the beginning of the 1840s, 
and the materialistically rethought dialectic ful- 
filled the role, for them, of the logic of the de- 
velopment of the materialist world outlook. 

This movement was seen as a direct continua- 
tion of Feuerbach’s argumentation; and when it 
was expressed in the terms of his philosophy it 
appeared approximately as follows. The Ego did 
not think, nor Reason, nor even the brain. Man 
thought by means of his brain and, moreover, in 
unity and contact with nature. Abstracted from 


251 


ee — ES a Se 


that unity he no longer thought. That was where 
Feuerbach left it. 

But, continued Marx, man, too, did not think 
in immediate unity with nature. Man _ only 
thought when he was in unity with society, with 
the social and historical collective that produced 
his material and spiritual life. Abstracted from 
the nexus of the social relations within and — 
through which he effected his human contact 
with nature (ie. found himself in human unity 
with it), he thought as little as a brain isolated 
from the human body. 

Thus it was along the path of development of 
logic that the problem of the nature of human 
thought, the problem of the ideal, reached its full 
stature. 

The ideal is the subjective image of objective 
reality, i.e. reflection of the external world in 
the forms of man’s activity, in the forms of his 
consciousness and will. The ideal is not an indi- 
vidual, psychological fact, much less a physio- 
logical fact, but a socio-historical one, the prod- 
uct and form of mental production. It exists in — 
a variety of forms of man’s social consciousness 
and will as the subject of the social production 
of material and spiritual life. In Marx’s descrip- 
tion, ‘the ideal is nothing other than the mate- — 
rial when it has been transposed and translated 
inside the human head’.! 

All the diverse forms of resolving the problem 
of the ideal in the history of philosophy are at- 


_—=— 


! Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I, p 873. 
252 


——_——ie 


tracted to two poles—the materialist and the 

idealist. Pre-Marxian materialism, while justly 

| rejecting spiritualist and dualist ideas of the 

ideal as a special substance counterposed to the 
material world, considered the ideal as an image, 
as the reflection of a material body in another 
material body, i.e. as an attribute, a function, of 
specially organised matter. This general mate- 

' rialist conception of the nature of the ideal, 
which constituted the essence of the line of De- 
mocritus-Spinoza-Diderot-Feuerbach, _irrespec- 
tive of the variants of its concretisation by indi- 
vidual materialists, also served as the starting 
point for the Marxist-Leninist solution of the 
problem. 

The weak sides of the pre-Marxian material- 
ism, which appeared as a trend among the 
French materialists (especially in Cabanis and 
La Mettrie) and later in Feuerbach, and acquired 
independent form in the middle of the nine- 
teenth century as so-called vulgar materialism 
(Biichner, Vogt, Moleschott, and others), were 
linked with an unhistorical, anthropological, na- 
turalistic conception of the nature of man and 
led to a rapprochement and ultimately to direct 
identification of the ideal with the material, neuro- 

\ physiological structures of the brain and their 
functions. The old materialism set out from a 
conception of man as part of nature but, not 
bringing materialism as far as history, it could 
not understand man in all his peculiarities as a 
product of labour transforming both the external 
world and man himself. By virtue of that the 


253 


ideal could not be understood as the result and 
active function of labour, of the sensuously ob- 
jective activity of social man, as the image of 
the external world arising in the thinking body 
not in the form of the result of passive contem- 
plation but as the product and form of active 
transformation of nature by the labour of gener- 
ations succeeding one another in the course of 
historical development. The main transformation 
that Marx and Engels effected in the materialist 
conception of the nature of the ideal therefore 
related primarily to the active aspect of the rela- 
tion of thinking man to nature, i.e the aspect that 
had been mainly developed, as Lenin put it, by 
‘clever’ idealism, by the line of Plato-Fichte-He- 
gel, and was emphasised by them in an abstract, 
one-sided, idealist way. 

The main fact on which the classic systems of 
objective idealism had grown up was the inde- 
pendence of the aggregate social culture and its 
forms of organisation from the individual, and 
more broadly the conversion in general of the 
universal products of social production (both 
material and spiritual) into a special social force 
opposed to individuals and dominating their 
wills and minds. It was for that reason that ‘the 
social power, i.e. the multiplied productive force, 
which arises through the co-operation of dif- 
ferent individuals as it is determined within the 
division of labour, appears to these individuals, 
since their co-operation is not voluntary but nat- 
ural, not as their own united power but as an 
alien force existing outside them, of the origin 


254 


and end of which they are ignorant, which they 
| thus cannot control, which on the contrary pas- 
ses through a peculiar series of phases and stages 
| independent of the will and the action of man, 
| nay even being the prime governor of these’. 
The power of the social whole over individuals 
was directly disclosed and functioned in the 
form of the state and the political system of so- 
ciety, in the form of a system of moral, ethical, 
and legal limitations and norms of social be- 
haviour, and further, of aesthetic, logical and 
other standards and criteria. The individual was 
forced from childhood to reckon much more se- 
riously with the requirements and limitations ex- 
pressed and socially sanctioned in them than 
| with the immediately perceived external ap- 
pearance of single things and situations, or the 
organically inherent desires, inclinations, and 
needs of his own body. The social whole was 
also mystified in the ‘fundamental’ principles of 
objective idealism. 
Exposing the earthly basis of idealist illusions, 
Marx and Engels wrote: “This sum of productive 
forces, forms of capital and social forms of inter- 
course, which every individual and generation 
finds in existence as something given, is the real 
basis of what the philosophers have conceived as 
| “substance” and “essence of man”, and what 
they have deified and attacked... .’ 


2 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. The German Ideo- 


logy, p 24. 
3 [bid., p 29. 


All general images, however, without excep- 
tion, neither sprang from universal schemas of 
the work of thought nor arose from an act of 
massive contemplation of nature unsullied by 
man, but took shape in the course of its practical, 
objective transformation by man, by society. 
They arose and functioned as forms of the so- 
cial-man determination of the purposive will of 
the individual, i.e. as forms of real activity. Gen- 
eral images, moreover, were crystallised in the 
body of spiritual culture quite unintentionally, 
and independently of the will and consciousness 
of individuals, although through their activiti- 
es. In intuition they appeared precisely as the 
forms of things created by human activity, 
or as ‘stamps’ (‘imprints’) laid on natural, 
physical material by man’s activities, as forms 
of purposive will alienated in external sub- 
stance. 

People were only concerned with nature as 
such to the extent that it was involved in one 
way or another in the process of social labour, 
was transformed into material, into a means, a 
condition of active human practice. Even the 
starry heavens, in which human labour still could 
not really alter anything, became the object of 
man’s attention and contemplation when they 
were transformed by society into a means of ori- 
entation in time and space, into a ‘tool’ of the 
life activity of the organism of social man, into 
an ‘organ’ of his body, into his natural clock, 
compass, and calendar. The universal forms and 
patterns of natural material really showed 


256 


bp Rte 


through and were realised just to the extent to 
which this material had already been transformed 
into building material of the ‘inorganic body 
of man’, of the objective body of civilisation 
and so the universal forms of ‘things in them- 
selves’ appeared to man immediately as active 
forms of the functioning of his ‘inorganic 
body’. 

The ideal existed immediately only as the 
form (mode, image) of the activity of social man 
(i.e. of a quite objective, material being), 
directed to the external world. When, therefore, 
we spoke of the material system, of which the 
ideal was the function and mode of existence, 
that system was only social man in unity with 
the objective world through which he exercised 
his specifically human life activity. The ideal 
thus did not boil down to the state of matter 
found in the cranium of the individual, i.e. 
the brain. It was the special function of man 
as the subject of social labour activity, accom- 
plished in forms created by preceding develop- 
ment. 

Between contemplating and thinking man and 
nature in itself there existed a very important 
mediating link through which nature was trans- 
formed into thought, and thought into the body 
of nature. That was practice, labour, production. 
It was production (in the broadest sense of the 
word) that transformed the object of nature into 
the object of contemplation and thought. ‘Even 
the objects of the simplest “sensuous certainty” 
are only given to him [i.e. to man—EU/] through 


17-831 957 


social development, industry and commercial in- 
tercourse.”4 

Therefore, Marx said, Feuerbach also stopped 
at the standpoint of contemplation (intuition) of 
nature and ‘never manages to conceive the sen- 
suous world as the total living sensuous activity 
of the individuals composing it’,> did not see that 
the object of his contemplation was the product 
of joint human labour. And in order to single 
out the image of nature in itself it was necessary 
to expand rather more labour and effort than the 
simple efforts of ‘disinterested’, aesthetically de- 
veloped contemplation. 

In immediate contemplation (intuition) the ob- 
jective features of ‘nature in itself’ were bound 
up with the features and forms that had been 
stamped on it by the transforming activity of 
man, and all the purely objective characteristics 
of natural material, moreover, were given to 
contemplation through the image that the nat- 
ural material had acquired in the course of, 
and as a result of, the subjective activities of 
social man. Contemplation was immediately con- 
cerned not with the object but with objective ac- 
tivity (i.e. activity on objects), transforming it, 
and with the results of this subjective (practical) 
activity. 

A purely objective picture of nature was there- 
fore disclosed to man not in contemplation but 


4 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. The German Ideo- 
logy, p 35. 
5 [bid., p 37. 


258 


only through activity and in the activity of man 
socially producing his own life, of society. 
Thought, setting itself the aim of depicting the 
image of nature in itself, had to take that cir- 
cumstance fully into account, because only the 
same activity as transformed (altered and oc- 
casionally distorted) the ‘true image’ of nature, 
could indicate what it was like before and with- 
out ‘subjective distortions’. 

Only practice, consequently, was capable of 
resolving which features of the object given in 
contemplation belonged to the object of nature 
itself, and which had been introduced into it by 
man’s transforming activity, ie. by the subject. 

Therefore ‘the question whether objective 
truth is an attribute of human thought—is not a 
theoretical but a practical question. Man must 
prove the truth, i.e. the reality and power, the 
“this-sidedness” of his thinking in practice’, 
Marx wrote in his second thesis on Feuerbach. 
‘The dispute over the reality or non-reality of 
thinking that is isolated from practice is a purely 
scholastic question.” 

That, too, constitutes the solution of many of 
the difficulties that have faced and still face 
philosophers. 

In analysing the relation of production to 
consumption, i.e. a problem of political economy, 
and hence not a psychological one, Marx for- 
mulated the question as follows: ‘If it is clear 
that production offers consumption its external 


8 Ibid., p. 197. 


ig 259 


object, it is therefore equally clear that consump- 
tion ideally posits the object of production as an 
internal image, as a need, as a drive and as 
purpose.’ But consumption, as Marx showed, is 
only an inner moment of production, or produc- 
tion itself, since it creates not only the external 
object but also the subject capable of producing 
and reproducing this object, and then of con- 
suming it in the appropriate manner. In other 
words, production creates the form itself of 
man’s active practice, or the faculty of creating 
an object of certain form and using it for its 
purpose, i.e. in its role and function in the so- 
cial organism. In the form of an active, real fac- 
ulty of man as the agent of social production, 
the object exists ideally as a product of produc- 
tion, i.e. as an inner image, requirement, and an 
urge and goal of human activity. 

The ideal is therefore nothing else than the 
form of things, but existing outside things, name- 
ly in man, in the form of his active practice, 
ie. it is the socially determined form of the hu- 
man being’s activity. In nature itself, including 
the nature of man as a biological creature, the 
ideal does not exist. As regards the natural, ma- 
terial organisation of the human body it has the 
same external character as it does in regard to 
the material in which it is realised and objecti- 
fied in the form of a sensuously perceived thing. 
Thus the form of a jar growing under the hands 


7 Karl Marx. Grundrisse. Translated by Martin Nico- 
laus (Penguin Books, London, 1973) pp 91-92. 


260 


of a potter does not form part either of the piece 
of clay or of the inborn, anatomical, physiolog- 
ical organisation of the body of the individual 
functioning as potter. Only insofar as man trains 
and exercises the organs of his body on objects 
created by man for man does he become the 
bearer of the active forms of social man’s activ- 
ity that create the corresponding objects. 

It is clear that the ideal, ie. the active form 
of social man’s activity, is immediately embodi- 
ed, or as it is now fashionable to say, is ‘coded’, 
in the form of the neuro-cerebral structures of 
the cortex of the brain, i.e. quite materially. But 
the material being of the ideal is not itself ideal 
but only the form of its expression in the organic 
body of the individual. In itself the ideal is the 
socially determined form of man’s life activity 
corresponding to the form of its object and prod- 
uct. To try and explain the ideal from the ana- 
tomical and physiological properties of the body 
of the brain is the same unfruitful whim as to 
try and explain the money form of the product 
of labour by the physico-chemical features of 
gold. Materialism in this case does not consist at 
all in identifying the ideal with the material 
processes taking place in the head. Materialism 
is expressed here in understanding that the ide- 
al, as a socially determined form of the activity 
of man creating an object in one form or an- 
other, is engendered and exists not in the head 
but with the help of the head in the real objec- 
tive activity (activity on things) of man as the 
active agent of social production. 


261 


Scientific determinations of the ideal are there- 
fore obtained by way of a materialist analysis 
of the ‘anatomy and physiology’ of the social 
production of the material and spiritual life of 
society, and in no case of the anatomy and phys- 
iology of the brain as an organ of the indi- 
vidual’s body. It is the world of the products of 
human labour in the constantly renewed act of 
its reproduction that is, as Marx said, ‘the per- 
ceptibly existing human psychology’; and any 
psychology to which this ‘open book’ of human 
psychology remains unknown, cannot be a real 
science.8 When Marx defined the ideal as the 
material ‘transposed and translated inside the 
human head’, he did not understand this ‘head’ 
naturalistically, in terms of natural science. He 
had in mind the socially developed head of man, 
all of whose forms of activity, beginning with 
the forms of language and its word stock and 
syntactical system and ending with logical cate- 
gories, are products and forms of social develop- 
ment. Only when expressed in these forms is the 
external, the material, transformed into social 
fact, into the property of social man, i.e. into the 
ideal. 

At first hand, transformation of the material 
into the ideal consists in the external fact being 
expressed in language, which ‘is the immediate 
actuality of thought’ (Marx). But language of it- 
self is as little ideal as the neuro-physiological 


8 See Karl Marx. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts 
of 1844. Op. cit., pp 302-303. 


262 


a  ——— 


structure of the brain. It is only the form of ex- 
pression of the ideal, its material-objective being. 
Neopositivists, who identify thought (ie. the 
ideal) with language, with a system of terms and 
expressions, therefore make the same naturalis- 
tic mistake as scientists who identify the ideal 
with the structures and functions of brain tissuc. 
Here, too, the form only of its material expres- 
sion is taken for the ideal. The material is really 
‘transplanted’ into the human head, and not sim- 
ply into the brain as an organ of the individual’s 
body, (1) only when it is expressed in immediate- 
ly, generally significant forms of language (un- 
derstood in the broadest sense of the word, in- 
cluding the language of drawings, diagrams, mod- 
els, etc.), and (2) when it is transformed into an 
active form of man’s activity with a real object 
(and not simply into a ‘term’ or ‘utterance’ as 
the material body of language). In other words 
the object proves to be idealised only when the 
faculty of actively recreating it has been created, 
relying on the language of words or drawings; 
when the faculty of converting words into deeds, 
and through deeds into things, has been created. 

Spinoza understood this beautifully. With 
good reason he linked adequate ideas, expressed 
in the words of a language, precisely with abil- 
ity to reproduce given verbal forms in real space. 
It was just there that he drew the distinction be- 
tween a determination expressing the essence of 
the matter, i.e. the ideal image of the object, and 
nominal, formal definitions that fixed a more or 
less accidentally chosen property of the object, 


263 


its outward sign. A circle, for example, could be 
defined as a figure in which lines drawn from the 
centre to the circumference were equal. But such 
a definition did not quite express the essence of 
a circle, but only a certain property of it, which 
property was derivative and secondary. It was 
another matter when the definition included the 
proximate cause of the thing. Then a circle 
should be defined as a figure described by any 
line one end of which was fixed and the other 
moved. This definition provided the mode of 
constructing the thing in real space. Here the 
nomical definition arose together with the real 
action of the thinking body along the spatial 
contour of the object of the idea. In that case 
man also possessed an adequate idea, i.e. an 
ideal image, of the thing, and not just signs ex- 
pressed in words. That is also a materialist con- 
ception of the nature of the ideal. The ideal exists 
there where there is a capacity to recreate 
the object in space, relying on the word, on 
language, in combination with a need for the 
object, plus material provision of the act of crea- 
tion. 

Determination of the ideal is thus especially 
dialectical. It is that which is not, together with 
that which is, that which does not exist in the 
form of an external, sensuously perceived thing 
but at the same time does exist as an active fac- 
ulty of man. It is being, which is, however, not- 
being, or the effective being of the external thing 
in the phase of its becoming in the activity of 
the subject, in the form of its inner image, need, 


264 


a 


urge, and aim; and therefore the ideal being of 
the thing is distinguished from its real being, 
and also from the bodily, material structures of 
the brain and language by which it exists ‘within’ 
the subject. The ideal image of the object is dis- 
tinguished from the structure of the brain and 
language in principle by the fact that it is the 
form of the external object. It is also distinguished 
from the external object itself by the fact 
that it is objectified immediately not in the exter- 
nal matter of nature but in the organic body of 
man and in the body of language as a subjective 
image. The ideal is consequently the subjective 
being of the object, or its ‘otherness’, i.e. the 
being of one object in and through another, as 
Hegel expressed this situation. 

The ideal, as the form of social man’s activity, 
exists where the process of the transformation of 
the body of nature into the object of man’s ac- 
tivity, into the object of labour, and then into 
the product of labour, takes place. The same 
thing can be expressed in another way, as fol- 
lows: the form of the external thing involved in 
the labour process is ‘sublated’ in the subjective 
form of objective activity (action on objects); 
the latter is objectively registered in the subject 
in the form of the mechanisms of higher nervous 
activity; and then there is the reverse sequence 
of these metamorphoses, namely the verbally ex- 
pressed idea is transformed into a deed, and 
through the deed into the form of an external, 
sensuously perceived thing, into a thing. These 
two contrary series of metamorphoses form 


265 


a closed cycle: thing—deed—word—deed— 
thing. Only in this cyclic movement, constantly 
renewed, does the ideal, the ideal image of the 
thing exist. 

The ideal is immediately realised in a symbol 
and through a symbol, i.e. through the external, 
sensuously perceived, visual or audible body of 
a word. But this body, while remaining itself, 
proves at the same time to be the being of an- 
other body and as such is its ‘ideal being’, its 
meaning, which is quite distinct from its bodily 
form immediately perceived by the ears or eyes. 
As a sign, as a name, a word has nothing in com- 
mon with what it is the sign of. What is ‘com- 
mon’ is only discovered in the act of transform- 
ing the word into a deed, and through the deed 
into a thing (and then again in the reverse 
process), in practice and the mastering of its 
results. 

Man exists as man, as the subject of activity 
directed to the world around and to himself, 
from such time, and so long, as he actively pro- 
duces his real life in forms created by himself 
and by his own labour. And labour, the real 
transformation of the world around and of him- 
self, which is performed in socially developed 
and socially sanctioned forms, is just the process 
—beginning and continuing completely inde- 
pendent of thought—within which the ideal is 
engendered and functions as its metamorphosis, 
idealisation of reality, nature, and social relations 
is completed, and the language of symbols is 
born as the external body of the ideal image of 


266 


the external world. In that is the secret of the 
ideal and in that too is its solution. 

In order to make both the essence of the se- 
cret, and the means by which Marx resolved it, 
clearer, let us analyse the most typical case of 
the idealisation of actuality, or the act of the 
birth of the ideal, namely the phenomenon of 
price in political economy. “The price, or the 
money form, of commodities is, like their form 
of value generally, distinct from their palpable 
and real bodily form. It is, that is to say, only 
an ideal or imaginary form.” In the first place 
let ut note that price is an objective category and 
not a psycho-physiological phenomenon. Yet it 
is ‘only an ideal form’. It is that which consti- 
tutes the materialism of the Marxian conception of 
price. Idealism on the contrary consists in af- 
firming that price, since it is only an ideal form, 
exists solely as a subjective, psychic phenom- 
enon, the interpretation that was given by none 
other than Bishop Berkeley, who wrote not only 
as a philosopher but also as an economist. 

In making his critique of the idealist concep- 
tion of money, Marx showed that price was the 
value of the product of man’s labour expressed 
in money, for example, in a certain quantity of 
gold. But gold of itself, by its nature, was not 
money. It proved to be money because it per- 
formed a peculiar social function, the measure of 
value of all commodities, and as such functioned 
in the system of social relations between people 


§ Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. 1, p 71. 


267 


in the process of the production and exchange of 
products; hence, too, the ideality of the form of 
price. Gold, while remaining itself in the pro- 
cess of circulation, nevertheless proved to be im- 
mediately the form of existence and movement 
of a certain ‘other’, represented and replaced that 
‘other’ in the process of commodity-money cir- 
culation, and was its metamorphosis. ‘As price, 
the commodity relates to money on one side as 
something existing outside itself, and secondly, 
it is ideally posited as money itself, since money 
has a reality different from it.... Alongside real 
money, there now exists the commodity as ideal- 
ly posited money.’!? ‘After money is posited as 
a commodity in reality, the commodity is posited 
as money in the mind.’!4 

The ideal positing, or positing of the real prod- 
uct as the ideal image of another product, is 
accomplished during the circulation of the mass 
of commodities. It arises as a means of resolving 
the contradictions maturing in the course of the 
circulation process, and within it (and not inside 
the head, though not without the help of the 
head), as a means of satisfying a need that has 
become immanent in commodity circulation. This 
need, which appears in the form of an unresolved 
contradiction of the commodity form, is  sat- 
isfied and resolved by one commodity ‘being 
expelled’ from their equal family and being con- 
verted into the immediately social standard of 


0 Karl Marx. Grundrisse, p 190. 
Ml Jbid., p 191. 


268 


the socially necessary expenditure of labour. 
‘The problem and the means of solution,’ as 
Marx said, ‘arise simultaneously.’!? 

In real exchange, before the appearance of 
money (before the conversion of gold into mon- 
ey), the following position had already taken 
shape: ‘Intercourse in virtue of which the own- 
ers of commodities exchange their own articles 
for various other articles, and compare their own 
articles with various other articles, never takes 
place without leading the various owners of the 
various kinds of articles to exchange these for 
one special article in which the values of all the 
others are equated. Such a third commodity, in- 
asmuch as it comes to function as equivalent for 
various other commodities, acquires, though 
within narrow limits, a generalised or social 
equivalent form.’!® Thus the possibility and the 
necessity also arise of expressing the reciprocal 
exchange relation of two commodities through 
the exchange value of a third commodity, still 
without the latter entering directly into the real 
exchange but serving merely as the general mea- 
sure of the value of the commodities really ex- 
changed. And the ‘third commodity’, although it 
does not enter bodily into the exchange, is all 
the same involved in the act of exchange, since 
it is also present only ideally, i.e. in the idea, in 
the mind of the commodity-owners, in speech, on 
paper, and so on. But it is thus transformed into 


2 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. 1, pp 63-64. 
13 Ibid., p 64. 


269 


a symbol and precisely into a symbol of the so- 
cial relations between people. 

All theories of money and value that reduce 
value and its forms to pure symbolics, to the 
naming of relations, to a conventionally or legal- 
ly instituted sign, are associated with that cir- 
cumstance. By the logic of their origin and 
structure they are organically related to those 
philosophers and logicians who, not being able 
to conceive the act of birth of the ideal from the 
process of social man’s objective-practical activ- 
ity, proclaim the forms of expression of the ideal 
in speech, in terms and statements, to be conven- 
tional phenomena, behind which, however, there 
stands something mystically elusive—be it the 
‘experience’ of Neopositivists, the ‘existence’ of 
Existentialists, or the intuitively grasped, incor- 
poreal, mystical ‘eidetic being’ of Edmund Hus- 
serl. Marx disclosed once and for all the whole 
triviality of such theories of the ideal, and of its 
reduction to a symbol or sign of immaterial re- 
lations (or connections as such, connections with- 
out a material substratum). “The fact that com- 
modities are only nominally converted in the 
form of prices into gold and hence gold is only 
nominally transformed into money led to the 
doctrine of the nominal standard of money. Be- 
cause only imaginary gold or silver, i.e. gold and 
silver merely as money of account, is used in the 
determination of prices, it was asserted that the 
terms pound, shilling, pence, thaler, franc, etc., 
denote ideal particles of value but not weights of 
gold or silver or any form of materialised la- 


270 


bour.’!4 Furthermore it was already easy to pass 
to the notion that the prices of commodities were 
merely terms for relations or proportions, pure 
signs. 

Thus objective economic phenomena were 
transformed into simple symbols behind which 
there was hidden the will as their substance, re- 
presentation as the ‘inner experience’ of the in- 
dividual Ego, interpreted in the spirit of Hume 
and Berkeley. By exactly the same scheme mod- 
ern idealists in logic convert terms and _state- 
ments (the verbal envelope of the ideal image of 
the object) into simple names of relations in 
which the ‘experiences’ of the solitary individual 
are posited by the symbolising activity of lan- 
guage. Logical relations are transformed simply 
into the names of connexions (but of what with 
what is not known). 

It must be specially stressed that the ideal 
transformation of a commodity into gold, and 
thus of gold into a symbol of social relations, 
took place both in time and in essence before the 
real conversion of the commodity into money, 
i.e. into hard cash. Gold became the measure of 
the value of commodities before it became the 
medium of circulation, and so functioned initial- 
ly as money purely ideally. ‘Money only circu- 
lates commodities which have already been ideal- 
ly transformed into money, not only in the head 


44 Karl Marx. A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy. Translated by S. W. Ryazanskaya (Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1970), p 76. 


271 


of the individual but in the conception held by 
society (directly, the conception held by the par- 
ticipants in the process of buying and selling).’ 

That is a fundamentally important point of 
the Marxian conception not only of the phenom- 
enon of price but also of the problem of the 
ideal, the problem of the idealisation of reality 
in general. The fact is that the act of exchange 
always posits an already formed system of rela- 
tions between people mediated by things; it is 
expressed in one of the sensuously perceived 
things being transformed, without ceasing to 
function in the system as a separate, sensuously 
perceived body, into the representative of any 
other body, into the sensuously perceived body 
of an ideal image. In other words, it is the ex- 
ternal ‘embodiment of another thing, not its sen- 
suously perceived image but rather its essence, i.e. 
the law of its existence within the system that in 
general creates the situation being analysed. The 
given thing is thus transformed into a symbol, 
the meaning of which remains all the time out- 
side its immediately perceived image, in other 
sensuously perceived things, and is disclosed only 
through the whole system of relations of other 
things to it or, conversely, of it to all the others. 
But when this thing is really removed from the 
system it loses its role, i.e. its significance as a 
symbol, and is transformed once more into an 
ordinary, sensuously perceived thing along with 
other such things. 


1% Karl Marx. Grundrisse, p 187. 


272 


Its existence and functioning as a symbol con- 
sequently does not belong to it as such but only 
to the system within which it has acquired its 
properties. The properties attaching to it from 
nature therefore have no relation to its existence 
as a symbol. The corporeal, sensuously perceived 
envelope or ‘body’ of the symbol (the body of 
the thing that has been transformed into a sym- 
bol) is quite unessential, transient, and tempo- 
rary for its existence as a symbol; the ‘functional 
existence’ of such a thing completely ‘absorbs ... 
its material existence’, as Marx put it.16 Further- 
more, the material body of the thing is brought 
into conformity with its function. As a result the 
symbol is converted into a token, i.e. into an ob- 
ject that already means nothing in itself but only 
represents or expresses another object with which 
it itself has nothing in common (like the name of 
the thing with the thing itself). The dialectic of 
the transformation of a thing into a symbol, and 
of a symbol into a token, is also traced in Capi- 
tal on the example of the origin and evolution 
of the money form of value. 

The functional existence of a symbol consists 
precisely in its not representing itself but an- 
other, and in being a means, an instrument ex- 
pressing the essence of other sensuously perceived 
things, i.e. their universal, socially-human signif- 
icance, their role and function within the social 
organism. In other words, the function of a sym- 
bol consists in its being just the body of the ideal 


16 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. 1, p 110. 


18—881 278 


image of the external thing, or rather the law of 
its existence, the law of the universal. A symbol 
removed from the real process of exchange of 
matter between social man and nature also ceases 
in general to be a symbol, the corporeal envelope 
of the ideal image. Its ‘soul’ vanishes from its 
body because its ‘soul’ is in fact the objective 
activity of social man effecting an exchange 
of matter between humanised and virgin na- 
ture. 

Without an ideal image man cannot in general 
exchange matter with nature, and the individual 
cannot operate with things involved in the 
process of social production. But the ideal im- 
age requires real material, including language, 
for its realisation. Therefore labour engen- 
ders a need for language, and then language it- 
self. 

When man operates with symbols or with to- 
kens and not with objects, relying on symbols 
and tokens, he does not act on the ideal plane 
but only on the verbal plane. And it very often 
happens that, instead of discovering the real es- 
sence of things by means of terms, the individual 
sees only the terms themselves with their tradi- 
tional meanings, sees only the symbol and _ its 
sensuously perceived body. In that case the lin- 
guistic symbol is transformed from an instrument 
of real activity into a fetish, blocking off with 
its body the reality that it represents. Then, in- 
stead of understanding and consciously changing 
the external world in accordance with its gen- 
eral laws expressed in the form of the ideal 


274 


image, man begins to see and change only the 
verbal, terminological expression and_ thinks 
that, in so doing, he is changing the world it- 
self. 

This fetishisation of the verbal existence of 
the ideal was very characteristic of the Left He- 
gelian philosophy of the period of its decline, to 
which Marx and Engels drew attention at the 
time. It itself, and with it fetishisation of the 
system of social relations that it represents, 
proves to be the absolutely inevitable end of any 
philosophy that does not understand that the ide- 
al is engendered and reproduced only through 
social man’s objective-practical activity, and 
that it also only exists in that process. In the op- 
posite case some form or other of fetishisation 
both of the external world and of symbolics de- 
velops. 

It is very curious that no variety of fetishisa- 
tion of the verbal-symbolic existence of the ideal 
embraces the ideal as such. Fetishisation regis- 
ters the results of human activity but not man’s 
activity itself, so that it embraces not the ideal 
itself but only its estrangement in external ob- 
jects or in language, i.e. congealed products. 
That is not surprising; the ideal as a form of 
human activity exists only in that activity, and 
not in its results, because the activity is a con- 
stant, continuing negation of the existing, sen- 
suously perceived forms of things, is their change 
and sublation into new forms, taking place in 
accordance with general patterns expressed in 
ideal forms. When an object has been created 


18° 275 


society’s need for it is satisfied; the activity has 
petered out in its product, and the ideal itself 
has died. 

An ideal image, say of bread, may arise in the 
imagination of a hungry man or of a baker. In 
the head of a satiated man occupied in building 
a house, ideal bread does not arise. But if we take 
society as a whole ideal bread, and ideal houses, 
are always in existence, and any ideal object 
with which man is concerned in the process of 
production and reproduction of his material life. 
In consequence of that all nature is idealised in 
man and not just that part which he immediately 
produces or reproduces or consumes in a prac- 
tical way. Without a constant re-idealising of 
the real objects of human life activity, without 
their transformation into the ideal, and so with- 
out symbolisation, man cannot in general be the 
active subject of social production. 

The ideal also appears as the product and form 
of human labour, of the purposive transforma- 
tion of natural material and social relations ef- 
fected by social man. The ideal is present only 
where there is an individual performing his ac- 
tivity in forms given to him by the preceding 
development of humanity. Man is distinguished 
from beasts by the existence of an ideal plane of 
activity. ‘But what ... distinguishes the most in- 
competent architect from the best of bees, is that 
the architect has built a cell in his head before 
he constructs it in wax. The labour process ends 
in the creation of something which, when the 
process began, already existed in the worker’s 


276 


imagination, already existed in an ideal form.’!? 


We must once more note that if the head is 
understood naturalistically, i.e. as a material or- 
gan of the separate individual’s body, then there 
is no difference in principle, it transpires, between 
the architect and the bee. The wax cell that the 
bee builds also exists beforehand in the form of 
the pattern of the insect’s activity programmed 
in its nerve centres. In that sense the product of 
the bee’s activity is also given ‘ideally’ before its 
real performance. But the insect’s forms of ac- 
tivity are innate in it, inherited together with the 
structural, anatomical organisation of its body. 
The form of activity that we can denote as the 
ideal existence of the product is never differen- 
tiated from the body of the animal in any other 
way than as some real product. The fundamental 
distinction between man’s activity and the activ- 
ity of an animal is this, that no one form of this 
activity, no one faculty, is inherited together with 
the anatomical organisation of the body. All 
forms of activity (active faculties) are passed on 
only in the form of objects created by man for 
man. The individual mastery of a humanly de- 
termined form of activity, i.e. the ideal image of 
its object and product, are therefore transformed 
in a special process that does not coincide 
with the objective moulding of nature (shaping 
of nature in objects). The form itself of man’s 
activity is therefore transformed into a special 
object, into the object of special activity. 


7 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. 1, p 170. 
277 


When the ideal was defined above as the form 
of man’s activity, that definition was, strictly 
speaking, incomplete. It characterised the ideal 
only according to its objectively conditioned 
content; but the ideal is only there where the 
form itself of the activity corresponding to the 
form of the external object is transformed for 
man into a special object with which he can op- 
erate specially without touching and without 
changing the real object up to a certain point. 
Man, and only man, ceases to be ‘merged’ with 
the form of his life activity; he separates it from 
himself and, giving it his attention, transforms 
it into an idea. Since man is given the external 
thing in general only insofar as it is involved in 
the process of his activity, in the final product— 
in the idea—the image of the thing is always 
merged with the image of the activity in which 
this thing functions. 

That constitutes the epistemological basis of 
the identification of the thing with the idea, of 
the real with the ideal, ie. the epistemological 
root of any kind or shade of idealism. True, the 
objectification of the form of activity as a re- 
sult of which it becomes possible to take it as the 
form of the thing, and conversely the form of 
the thing as the product and form of subjective 
activity, as the ideal is still not, as a matter of 
fact, idealism. This real fact is only transformed 
into one variety or another of idealism or fe- 
tishism given certain social conditions, or more 
concretely given the spontaneous division of la- 
bour, in which the form of activity is forcibly 


278 


eee 


imposed on the individual by social processes that 
are independent of him and not understood by 
him. The objectification (materialisation) of so- 
cial forms of human activity characteristic of 
commodity production (commodity fetishism) is 
quite analogous to the religious alienation of ac- 
tive human faculties in ideas about gods. This 
analogy is realised quite clearly already within 
the limits of the objective-idealist view of the 
nature of the ideal. Thus the young Marx, still 
a Left Hegelian, noted that all the ancient gods 
possessed the same ‘real existence’ as money did. 
‘Did not the ancient Moloch reign? Was not the 
Delphic Apollo a real power in the life of the 
Greeks? Kant’s critique means nothing in_ this 
respect. If somebody imagines that he has a 
hundred talers, if this concept is not for him an 
arbitrary, subjective one, if he believes in_ it, 
then these hundred imagined talers have for him 
the same value as a hundred real ones.... Real 
talers have the same existence that the imagined 
gods have. Has a real taler any existence except 
in the imagination, if only in the general or rather 
common imagination of man?’!8 

The real nature of this analogy, however, was 
only disclosed by him later, on the basis of the 
materialist conception of nature and money and 
religious images. The ‘similarity’ of commodity 
fetishism and religious estrangement is rooted in 


48 Karl Marx. Doctoral Dissertation. In: Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels. Collected Works, Vol. 1 (Lawrence & 
Wishart, London, 1975) p 104. 


279 


ce tteencmecaoeinclan ag ns amma 


the real connexion of people’s social ideas and 
their real activity, and the forms of practice, in 
the active role of the ideal image (notion). Up 
to a certain point man is able to change the form 

of his activity (or the ideal image of the external 
thing) without touching the thing itself, but only 
because he can separate the ideal image from 
himself, objectify it, and operate with it as with 
an object existing outside him. Let us recall once 
more the example of the architect, cited by Marx. 
The architect builds a house not simply in his 
head but by means of his head, on the plane of 
ideas on Whatman paper, on the plane of the — 
drawing board. He thus alters his internal state, 
externalising it, and operating with it as with an 
object distinct from himself. In changing it he 
potentially alters the real house, i.e. changes it 
ideally, potentially, which means that he alters 
one sensuously perceived object instead of an- 
other. 

In other words activity on the plane of repre- 
sentation, altering the ideal image of an object, 
is also sensuous objective activity transforming 
the sensuously perceived image of the thing to 
which it is directed. Only the thing altered here 
is special; it is only the objectified idea or form 
of the person’s activity taken as a thing. That 
circumstance also makes it possible to slur over 
the fundamental, philosophical, epistemological 
difference between material activity and the ac- 
tivity of the theoretician and ideologist who di- 
rectly alters only the verbal, token objectification 
of the ideal image. 


280 


A person cannot pass the ideal as such to an- 
other person, as the pure form of activity. One 
can observe the activity of a painter or an engi- 
neer as long as one likes, striving to catch their 
mode of action, the form of their activity, but 
one can thus only copy the external techniques 
and methods of their work but never the ideal 
image itself, the active faculty itself. The ideal, 
as the form of subjective activity, is only master- 
able through active operation with the object and 
product of this activity, ie. through the form of 
its product, through the objective form of the 
thing, through its active disobjectification. The 
ideal image of objective reality therefore also 
only exists as the form (mode, image) of living 
activity, co-ordinated with the form of its ob- 
ject, but not as a thing, not as a materially fixed 
state or structure. 

The ideal is nothing else than a concatenation 
of the general forms of human activity realised 
by individuals, which determine the will and 
aptitude of individuals to act as an aim and law. 
It is quite understandable that the individual 
realisation of the ideal image is always linked 
with some deviation or other, or rather with con- 
cretisation of the image, with its correcting in 
accordance with the specific conditions, new so- 
cial needs, the peculiarities of the material, and 
so on. And so, it posits the capacity to correlate 
the ideal image consciously with real, not yet 
idealised actuality. In that case the ideal func- 
tions as a special object for the individual, and 
object that he can alter purposively in accord- 


28) 


ance with the needs (requirements) of his activ- 
ity. When, on the contrary, the individual only 
masters the ideal image formally, as a rigid pat- 
tern and sequence of operations, without under- 
standing its origin and links with real (not ideal- 
ised) actuality, he proves incapable of taking a 
critical attitude to this image, i.e. as a special ob- 
ject differentiated from him. Then he merges 
with it, as it were, and cannot treat it as an ob- 
ject correlated with reality and alter it accord- 
ingly. In that case, strictly speaking, it is not the 
individual who operates with the ideal image but 
the dogmatised image that acts in and through 
the individual. Here it is not the ideal image that 
is a real function of the individual but, on the 
contrary, the individual who is a function of the 
image, which dominates his mind and will as an 
externally given formal scheme, as an estranged 
image, as a fetish, as a system of unarguable rules 
coming inevitably from somewhere out of the 
blue. The idealist conception of the nature of 
the ideal corresponds to just such a conscious- 
ness. 

The materialist conception, on the contrary, 
will prove to be natural to the man of commu- 
nist society in which culture will not be counter- 
posed to the individual as something given to 
him from outside, something independent and 
alien, but will be the form of his own real activ- 
ity. In communist society, as Marx showed, it 
will become immediately obvious that all forms 
of culture are only forms of the activity of man 
himself, which is only brought to light in the 


282 


conditions of bourgeois society by a theoretical 
analysis dispelling the illusions inevitable under 
them. ‘Everything that has a fixed form, such as 
the product, etc., appears as merely a moment, 
a vanishing moment, in this movement.... The 
conditions and objectifications of the process are 
themselves equally moments of it, and its only 
subjects are the individuals, but individuals in 
mutual relationships, which they equally repro- 
duce and produce anew. The constant process of 
their own movement, in which they renew them- 
selves even as they renew the world of wealth 
they create.’!9 

A consistently materialist conception of 
thought, of course, alters the approach to the key 
problems of logic in a cardinal way, in particu- 
lar to interpretation of the nature of logical cat- 
egories. Marx and Engels established above all 
that external world was not given to the individ- 
ual as it was in itself simply and directly in his 
contemplation, but only in the course of its being 
altered by man: and that both the contemplating 
man himself and the world coniemplated were 
products of history. 

The forms of thought, too, the categories, were 
accordingly understood not as simple abstrac- 
tions from unhistorically understood sensueus- 
ness, but primarily as universal forms of social 
man’s sensuously objective activity reflected in 
consciousness. The real objective equivalent of 
logical forms was seen not simply in the abstract, 


19 Karl Marx. Grundrisse, p 712. 


283 


general contours of the object contemplated by 
the individual but in the forms of man’s real ac- 
tivity transforming nature in accordance with 
his own ends: ‘It is precisely the alteration of 
nature by men, not solely nature as such, which 
is the most essential and immediate basis of hu- 
man thought, and it is in the measure that man 
has learned to change nature that his intelligence 
has increased.’° The subject of thought here al- 
ready proved to be the individual in the nexus of 
social relations, the socially determined indivi- 
dual, all the forms of whose life activity were 
given not by nature, but by history, by the pro- 
cess of the moulding of human culture. 

The forms of human activity (and the thought- 
forms reflecting them) are consequently laid 
down in the course of history independently of 
the will and consciousness of individuals, to 
whom they are counterposed as the forms of a 
historically developed system of culture, a system 
that does not develop at all according to the laws 
of psychology, since the development of social 
consciousness is not a simple arithmetic sum of 
psychic process but a special process governed in 
general and on the whole by the laws of devel- 
opment of society’s material life. These laws not 
only do not depend on the will and consciousness 
of individuals but, on the contrary, also actively 
determine that will and consciousness. The sep- 
arate individual does not develop the universal 
forms of human activity by himself, and cannot 


*” Frederick Engels, Dialectics of Nature, p 172, 
284 


do so, whatever the powers of abstraction he pos- 
sesses, but assimilates them ready-made in the 
course of his own acquiring of culture, together 
with language and the knowledge expressed 
in it, 

Psychological analysis of the act of reflexion 
of the external world in the individual head 
therefore cannot be the means of developing log- 
ic. The individual thinks only insofar as he has 
already mastered the general (logical) determi- 
nations historically moulded before him and 
completely independently of him. And _ psycho- 
logy as a science does not investigate the devel- 
opment of human culture or civilisation, rightly 
considering it a premise independent of the in- 
dividual. 

While Hegel’s recording of these facts led him 
to idealism, Marx and Engels, having considered 
the real (objective) prototype of logical defini- 
tions and laws in the concrete, universal forms 
and laws of social man’s objective activity, cut 
off any possibility of subjectivist interpretation 
of the activity itself. Man does not act on nature 
from outside, but ‘confronts nature as one of her 
own forces’,24 and his objective activity is there- 
fore linked at every stage with, and mediated by, 
objective natural laws. Man ‘makes use of the 
mechanical, physical, and chemical properties of 
things as means of exerting power over other 
things, and in order to make these other things 
subservient to his aims.... Thus nature becomes 


21 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I, p 169. 


285 


an instrument of his activities, an instrument 
with which he supplements his own bodily or- 
gans, adding a cubit and more to his stature, 
scripture notwithstanding’.”? It is just in that that 
the secret of the universality of human activity 
lies, which idealism passes off as the consequence 
of reason operating in man: ‘The universality 
of man appears in practice precisely in the uni- 
versality which makes all nature his inorganic 
body—both inasmuch as nature is (1) his direct 
means of life, and (2) the material, the object, 
and the instrument of his life activity. Nature is 
man’s inorganic body—nature, that is, insofar as 
it is not itself the human body.’3 

The laws of human activity are therefore also, 
above all, laws of the natural material from 
which ‘man’s inorganic body’, the objective (ma- 
terial) body of civilisation, is built, i.e. laws of 
the movement and change of the objects of na- 
ture, transformed into the organs of man, into 
moments of the process of production of society’s 
material life. 

In labour (production) man makes one object 
of nature act on another object of the same na- 
ture in accordance with their own properties and 
laws of existence. Marx and Engels showed that 
the logical forms and laws of man’s action were 
the consequences (reflexion) of real laws of hu- 
man actions on objects, i.e. of practice in all its 


22 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I, p 171. 
23 Karl Marx. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 
1844. Op. cit., pp 275-276. 


286 


scope and development, laws that are indepen- 
dent of any thinking. Practice understood material- 
istically, appeared as a process in whose move- 
ment each object involved in it functioned (be- 
haved) in accordance with its own laws, bringing 
its own form and measure to light in the changes 
taking place in it. 

Thus mankind’s practice is a fully concrete 
(particular) process, and at the same time a uni- 
versal one. It includes all other forms and types 
of the movement of matter as its abstract mo- 
ments, and takes place in conformity with their 
laws. The general laws governing man’s chang- 
ing of nature therefore transpire to be also gen- 
eral laws of the change of nature itself, revealed 
by man’s activity, and not by orders foreign 
to it, dictated from outside. The universal laws 
of man’s changing of nature are also universal 
laws of nature only in accordance with which 
can man successfully alter it. Once realised they 
also appear as laws of reason, as logical laws. 
Their ‘specificity’ consists precisely in their uni- 
versality, i.e. in the fact that they are not only 
laws of subjective activity (as laws of the physi- 
ology of higher nervous activity or of language), 
and not only of objective reality (as laws of 
physics or chemistry), but also laws governing 
the movement both of objective reality and of 
subjective human life activity. (That does not 
mean at all, of course, that thought does not in 
general possess any ‘specific features’ worthy of 
study. As a special process possessing features 
specifically distinguishing it from the movement 


287 


of objective reality, i.e. as a psycho-physiological 
faculty of the human individual, thought has, of 
course, to be subjected to very detailed study in 
psychology and the physiology of the higher ner- 
vous system, but not in logic). In subjective con- 
sciousness these laws appear as ‘plenipotentia- 
ries’ of the rights of the object, as its universal, 
ideal image: ‘The laws of logic are the reflections 
of the objective in the subjective consciousness 
of man.’ 


% Y. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks. Op. cit., p 183. 


ESSAY NINE 


with Dialectics and the Theory 


| On the Coincidence of Logic 
of Knowledge of Materialism 


Like any other science logic is concerned with 
explaining and systematising objective forms 
and patterns not dependent on men’s will and 
| consciousness, within which human activity, both 

material-objective and mental-theoretical, takes 
place. Its subject matter is the objective laws of 
subjective activity. 

Such a conception is quite unacceptable to tra- 
ditional logic since, from the standpoint of the 
latter, it unites the unjoinable, i.e. an affirmation 
and its negation, A and not-A, opposing predi- 
cates. For the subjective is not objective, and 
vice versa. But the state of affairs in the real 
world and in the science comprehending it also 
proves unacceptable to traditional logic, because 
in it the transition, formation, and transforma- 
tion of things and processes (including into their 
own opposite) prove to be the essence of the mat- 
ter at every step. Traditional logic is consequent- 
ly inadequate to the real practice of scientific 
thought, and therefore has to be brought into 
correspondence with the latter. 


19—83] 289 


Marx and Engels showed that science and 
practice, quite independently of consciously ac- 
quired logical notions, developed in accordance 
with the universal laws that had been described 
by the dialectical tradition in philosophy. It can 
(and in fact does) happen, even in_ situations 
when each separate representative of science in- 
volved in its general progress is consciously guid- 
ed by undialectical ideas about thought. Science 
as a whole, through the clash of undialectical 
opinions mutually provoking and correcting one 
another, develops for all that in accordance with 
a logic of a higher type and order. 

The theoretician who has succeeded finally in 
finding the concrete solution to some contentious 
problem or other has been objectively forced to 
think dialectically. Genuine logical necessity 
drives a road for itself in this case despite the 
theoretician’s consciousness, instead of being real- 
ised purposively and freely. It therefore trans- 
pires that the greatest theoreticians and natural 
scientists, whose work has determined the main 
lines of development of science, have been guid- 
ed as a rule by the dialectical traditions in logic. 
Thus Albert Einstein owed much to Spinoza, and 
Heisenberg to Plato, and so on. 

Taking this conception as their starting point, 
Marx, Engels, and Lenin established that it was 
dialectics, and only dialectics, that was the real 
logic in accordance with which modern thought 
made progress. It was it, too, that operated at 
the ‘growing points’ of modern science, although 
the representatives of science were not wholly 


290 


— 


conscious of the fact. That was why logic as a 
science coincided (merged) not only with dialec- 
tics but also with the theory of knowledge of ma- 
terialism. ‘In Capital Marx applied to a single 
science logic, dialectics, and the theory of knowl- 
edge of materialism (three words are not needed; 
it is one and the same thing),’ is how Lenin cat- 
egorically formulated it.! 

The problem of the relation of logic, the the- 
ory of knowledge, and dialectics occupied a spe- 
cial place in Lenin’s work. One can say, without 
danger of exaggeration, that it forms the core of 
all his special philosophical reflexions, to which 
he returned again and again, each time formu- 
lating his conception and solution more succinct- 
ly and categorically. 

In Lenin’s reflexions, especially those arising 
in the course of critical rethinking of Hegelian 
structures, two themes are clearly distinguished: 
(1) the inter-relation between logic and episte- 
mology; and (2) the conception of dialectics as a 
science that includes its own scientific, theoretical 
solution of problems that are traditionally iso- 
lated from it in the form of logic and the theory 
of knowledge. Reconstruction of the considera- 
tions that enabled Lenin to formulate the posi- 
tion of modern materialism (i.e. Marxism) so 
categorically is very important for the simple 
reason that no unanimous interpretation of his 
propositions has yet been reached in Soviet phi- 
losophy. 


4 V. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks. Op. cit., p 319. 


190 291 


Although the direct object of the critical ana- 
lysis documented in the Philosophical Notebooks 
was first and foremost Hegel’s conception, it 
would of course be a mistake to see in that book 
only a critical commentary on Hegel’s works. 
Lenin was concerned, it goes without saying, not 
with Hegel as such but with the real content of 
problems that still preserve their urgent signif- 
icance to this day. In other words Lenin under- 
took, in the form of a critical analysis of the He- 
gelian conception, a survey of the state of affairs 
in philosophy in his own day, comparing and 
evaluating the means of posing and resolving its 
cardinal problems. Quite naturally, the problem 
of scientific knowledge came to the fore, around 
which—and more clearly as time went on—all 
world philosophical thought revolved at the end 
of the nineteenth century and the beginning of 
the twentieth. Here is how Lenin depicted the 
aim of his investigations: “The theme of logic. 
To be compared with present-day “epistemol- 
ogy”.”2 

The inverted commas enclosing the word ‘epis- 
temology’ are not there quite by chance. The fact 
is that the isolation of a number of old philosoph- 
ical problems in a special philosophical science 
(it is all the same whether we recognise it then 
as the sole form of scientific philosophy or as 
only of the many divisions of philosophy) is a 
fact of recent origin. The term itself came into 
currency only in the latter half of the nineteenth 


2 Ibid., p 103. 


292 


ha illite 


century as the designation of a special science, 
of a special field of investigation that had not 
been sharply distinguished in any way in the 
classical philosophical systems, and had not con- 
stituted either a special science or even a special 
division, although it would be an error, of course, 
to affirm that knowledge in general and scientific 
knowledge in particular had only become the 
subject of specially close attention with the de- 
velopment of ‘epistemology’. 

The setting up of epistemology as a_ special 
science was associated historically and essential- 
ly with the broad spread of Neokantianism, 
which became, during the last third of the nine- 
teenth century, the most influential trend in the 
bourgeois philosophical thought of Europe, and 
was converted into the officially recognised 
school of professorial, university philosophy, first 
in Germany, and then in all those areas of the 
world from which people came to the German 
universities hoping to study serious professional 
philosophy there. Neokantianism owed its spread 
not least to the traditional fame of Germany as 
the home of Kant, Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. 

Its special feature was not at all, of course, the 
discovery of knowledge as the central philosoph- 
ical problem, but the specific form in which it 
was posed, which boiled down (despite all the 
disagreements among the various branches of 
this school) to the following: ‘It is accepted to 
call the doctrine of knowledge, inquiring into the 
conditions by which indisputably existing knowl- 
edge becomes possible, and limits are established 


293 


in accordance with these conditions up to which 
any knowledge whatsoever can be extended but 
beyond which there opens up the sphere of equal- 
ly undemonstrable opinions, the “theory of 
knowledge” or “epistemology”... The theory of 
knowledge, of course, together with the tasks 
mentioned above, rightly poses itself yet other, 
and supplementary, tasks. But if it wants to be 
a science making sense it must, above all, con- 
cern itself with explaining the problem of the 
existence or non-existence of boundaries to 
knowledge. . . .”8 

The Russian Kantian A. I. Vvedensky, author 
of the definition just quoted, very accurately and 
clearly indicated the special feature of the science 
that ‘it is accepted to call’ epistemology in the 
literature of the Neokantian trend, and in all the 
schools that have arisen under its predominant 
influence. Dozens of similar formulations could 
be cited from the classical authors of Neokantia- 
nism (Rickert, Wundt, Cassirer, Windelband) 
and the work of such representatives of ‘daugh- 
ter’ branches as Schuppe and Vaihinger. 

The job of the theory of knowledge, conse- 
quently, was considered to be the establishment of 
‘limits of knowledge’, boundaries that knowledge 
could not cross in any circumstances, or however 
high the development of the cognitive capacities 


3 A. I. Vvedensky. Logika kak chast’ teorii poznaniya 
(Logic as Part of the Theory of Knowledge) (Moscow- 
Petrograd, 1923) p 29. 


294 


of a person or of humanity, or of the technique 
of scientific experiment and research. These ‘li- 
mits’ differentiated the sphere of what was know- 
able in principle from that of what was in prin- 
ciple unknowable, extralimital, ‘transcendent’. 
They were not determined at all by the limita- 
tion of human experience in space and time (in 
that case extension of the ‘sphere of experience’ 
would constantly widen them, and the problem 
would boil down simply to differentiation be- 
tween what was already known and what was not 
yet known but was, in principle, knowable), but by 
the eternal and immutable nature of man’s psy- 
cho-physiological peculiarities through which all 
external influences were refracted (as through a 
prism). These ‘specific mechanisms’, by which 
alone the external world was given to man, were 
those that generated the ‘limit’ beyond which lay 
what was in principle unknowable. What was 
unknowable in principle proved to be nothing 
more nor less than the real world lying outside 
man’s consciousness, as it was ‘before its appear- 
ance in consciousness’. In other words ‘epistem- 
ology’ was distinguished as a special science in 
this tradition only on the grounds of a priori ac- 
ceptance of the thesis that human knowledge was 
not knowledge of the external world (i.e. exist- 
ing outside consciousness) but was only a process 
of the ordering, organisation, and systematisa- 
tion of facts of ‘inner experience’, i.e. ultimately 
of the psycho-physiological states of the human 
organism, absolutely dissimilar to the states and 
events of the external world. 


295 


That meant that any science, be it physics or 
political economy, mathematics or history, did 
not tell us anything (and could not) about just 
how matters stood in the external world, because 
in fact it described only facts arising within our- 
selves, the psycho-physiological phenomena illu- 
sorily perceived as a sum of external facts. 

For the sake of special proof of this thesis a 
special science ‘epistemology’ was created that 
concerned itself exclusively with the ‘inner con- 
ditions’ of knowledge and purged them carefully 
of any dependence whatsoever on the effect of 
‘external conditions’, above all of a ‘condition’ 
such as the existence of an external world with 
its own objective laws. 

‘Epistemology’ was thus distinguished as a 
special science counterposed to ‘ontology’ (or 
‘metaphysics’), and not at all as a discipline in- 
vestigating the real course of human knowledge 
of the surrounding world; quite the contrary, it 
was born as a doctrine postulating that every 
form of knowledge without exception was not a 
form of knowledge of the surrounding world but 
only a specific schema of the organisation of the 
‘subject of knowledge’. 

From the standpoint of this ‘theory of knowl- 
edge’ any attempt to interpret existing knowledge 
as knowledge (understanding) of the surrounding 
world was impermissible ‘metaphysics’, ‘ontolog- 
isation’ of purely subjective forms of activity, 
an illusory attributing of determinations of the 
subject to ‘things in themselves’, to the world 
outside consciousness. 


296 


( 


By ‘metaphysics’ and ‘ontology’ then was meant 
not so much a special science of ‘the world as 
a whole’, a universal scheme of the world, as the 
whole aggregate of real, so-called ‘positive’ 
sciences (physics, chemistry, biology, political 
economy, history, and so on). So that the main 
fervour of Neokantian ‘epistemologism’ proved 
to be directed precisely against the idea of a 
scientific world outlook, of a scientific under- 
standing of the world realised in the real sciences 
themselves. A ‘scientific world outlook’, ac- 
cording to this view, was an absurdity, nonsense, 
since ‘science’ (read: the whole aggregate of nat- 
ural and social sciences) in general knew nothing 
about the world outside consciousness and did 
not speak of it. Under the scornful term ‘meta- 
physics’ Neokantians therefore in fact refuse 
the laws and patterns discovered and formulated 
by physics, chemistry, biology, political economy, 
history, etc., any philosophical significance as a 
world outlook. From their point of view meta- 
physics could not be a ‘science’, and science (read 
again: the aggregate of all sciences) could not 
and had no right to play the role of ‘metaphys- 
ics’, i.e. to lay claim to an objective meaning (in 
the materialist sense of the term) for its state- 
ments. A world outlook therefore also could not 
be scientific, because it was the connected aggre- 
gate of views of the world within which man 
lived, acted, and thought, and science was not in 
a position to unite its achievements in a world 
outlook without thereby falling into difficulties 
that were unresolvable for it, into contradictions. 


297 


This had already, allegedly, been demonstrated 
once and for all by Kant. It was impossible to 
build a world outlook from the data of science. 
But why not, precisely? 

Because the very principles of knowledge, 
which were the conditions for the possibility of 
any scientific synthesis of notions into concepts, 
judgments, and inferences, i.e. into categories, at 
the same time also proved to be the conditions 
of the impossibility of achieving a full synthesis 
of all scientific ideas into the body of a connect- 
ed, united, and non-contradictory picture of the 
world. And that, in the language of Kantians, 
meant that a world outlook built on scientific 
principles (or simply a scientific world outlook) 
was impossible in principle. In a scientific world 
outlook (and not by chance, not from lack of 
information, but of the necessity inherent in the 
very nature of thought expressed in categorial 
schemas) there were always flaws of contradic- 
tions cracking it to bits that were unconnectable 
with one another without flagrant breach of the 
supreme principle of all analytical judgments, 
the principle of contradiction in scientific deter- 
minations. 

Man could unite and connect the isolated frag- 
ments of the scientific picture of the world into 
a higher unity in one way only, by breaking his 
own supreme principles; or, what was the same 
thing, by turning unscientific schemas of the 
coupling of ideas in a united whole into the prin- 
ciples of synthesis, since the latter had no rela- 
tion with the principle of contradiction, but were 


298 


SS ee 


the principles of faith and opinion, dogmas that 
were equally undemonstrable and uncontrovert- 
ible scientifically, and were acceptable solely ac- 
cording to irrational whims, sympathy, conscience, 
etc., etc. Only faith was capable of synthesis- 
ing the fragments of knowledge into a united 
picture at those points where all attempts to do 
so by means of science were doomed to failure. 
Hence the slogan specific to all Kantians of the 
uniting of science and faith, of the logical prin- 
ciples of the construction of a scientific picture of 
the world and of irrational precepts (logically 
undemonstrable and incontrovertible), compen- 
sating the powerlessness organically built into 
the intellect to accomplish the highest synthesis 
of knowledge. 

Only within the limits described above could 
the meaning of the Kantian posing of the prob- 
lem of the relation of logic to the theory of 
knowledge be understood. Logic as such was in- 
terpreted by all Kantians as part of the theory of 
knowledge. Occasionally this ‘part’ was given the 
main significance and it almost swallowed the 
whole (for example, in the variants of Cohen and 
Natorp, Cassirer and Rickert, Vvedensky and 
Chelpanov), and occasionally it was relegated to 
a more modest place, subordinated to the other 
‘parts’ of the theory of knowledge; but logic was 
always ‘part’. The theory of knowledge was 
broader, because its job was wider, since reason 
(understanding) was not the sole, though the most 
important, means of processing the data of sen- 
sations, perceptions, and ideas into the form of 


299 


knowledge, into concepts and a system of con- 
cepts, into science. Logic, therefore, in the Kant- 
ian interpretation, never covered the whole field 
of the problems of the theory of knowledge; be- 
yond it lay an analysis of processes effected by 
other aptitudes, that is to say, perception, and in- 
tuition, and memory, and imagination, and many 
others. Logic, as the theory of discursive thought, 
which moved in rigorous determinations and in 
strict accord with rules clearly realisable and 
formulatable, only partly did the job of the the- 
ory of knowledge, only through analysis of its 
own object, singled out from the whole complex 
of cognitive faculties. The main job of the theory 
of knowledge, however, thus also remained log- 
ic’s chief task, i.e. to establish the limits of 
knowledge and clarify the inner limitedness of 
the possibilities of thought in the course of con- 
structing a world outlook. 

Logic therefore had neither the least connec- 
tion nor least relation with understanding of the 
real world of ‘things in themselves’. It was ap- 
plicable solely to things already realised (with or 
without its involvement), i.e. to the psychic phe- 
nomena of human culture. Its special task was 
rigorous analysis of the already available images 
of consciousness (transcendental objects), i.e. 
their resolution into simple components, expressed 
in strictly defined terms, and the reverse oper- 
ation, the synthesis or linking together of the 
components into complex systems of determina- 
tions (concepts, systems of concepts, theories) 
again by the same rigorously established rules, 


300 


Logic must also demonstrate that real discur- 
sive thought was incapable of leading knowledge 
beyond the limits of existing consciousness, or of 
crossing the boundaries dividing the ‘phenome- 
nal’ world from the world of ‘things in themsel- 
ves’. Thought, if it were logical, could not con- 
cern itself with ‘things in themselves’, and had no 
right to. So that, even within the boundaries of 
knowledge, thought was assigned in turn a lim- 
ited field of legitimate application, within 
which the rules of logic were binding and oblig- 
atory. 

The laws and rules of logic were inapplicable 
to the images of perception as such, to sensations, 
to ideas, to the phantoms of mythologised con- 
sciousness, including in that the idea of God, of 
the immortality of the soul, and so on. But they 
did, and had to, serve as filters, as it were, re- 
taining these images at the boundaries of scien- 
tific knowledge. And only that. To judge whether 
these images were true in themselves, whether 
they played a positive or a negative role in the 
body of spiritual culture, thought oriented on 
logic had neither the possibilities nor the right. 
In fact there was not and could not be a ratio- 
nally substantiated, scientifically verified position 
in relation to any image of consciousness if it 
arose before and independently of the special lo- 
gical activity of the mind, before and outside 
science. In science, inside its specific limits defined 
by logic, the existence of such images was in- 
admissible. Beyond its limits their existence was 
sovereign, outside the jurisdiction of reason and 


301 


oo 


comprehension and therefore morally and epist- 
emologically inviolable. 

Considering the special features of the Kantian 
interpretation of the relation of logic and episte- 
mology, one can understand the close attention 
that Lenin paid to Hegel’s solution of this prob- 
lem. In Hegel’s understanding of the matter 
logic as a whole and in full, without irrational 
vestiges, embraced the whole field of the prob- 
lems of knowledge and left no images of con- 
templation or fantasy outside its boundaries. It 
included their examination as external products 
(realised in the sensuously perceived material) of 
the real force of thought, because they were 
thought itself, only embodied not in words, judg- 
ments, and conclusions, deductions and infer- 
ences, but in things (actions, events, etc.) sensibly 
opposed to the individual consciousness. Logic 
merged here with the theory of knowledge be- 
cause all other cognitive faculties were consid- 
ered as forms of thought, as thinking that had not 
yet attained an adequate form of expression, had 
not yet matured to it. 

Here we come up against the extreme expres- 
sion, as it were, of Hegel’s absolute idealsm, ac- 
cording to which the whole world, and not only 
the cognitive faculties, was interpreted as alien- 
ated or estranged (embodied) thought that has 
not yet arrived at itself. With that, of course, 
Lenin as a consistent materialist could not agree. 
It is very indicative, however, that Lenin formu- 
lated his attitude to the Hegelian solution very 
cautiously: ‘In this conception (i.e. Hegel’s—EU/), 


302 


: 
é 


logic coincides with the theory of knowledge. 
This is in general a very important question.’ 
We have succeeded, it seems, in demonstrat- 
ing just why, in the course of Lenin’s reading of 
Hegel’s logic, this problem appeared more and 
more clearly to him to be ‘very important’, and 
perhaps the most important of all; why Lenin’s 
thought returned to it again and again, in circles 
as it were, each time becoming more and more 
definite and categorical. The fact is that the 
Kantian conception of logic, generally accepted 
at the time, as part of the theory of knowledge, 
by no means remained an abstract, philosophical, 
theoretical construction. The Kantian theory 
of knowledge defined the limits of the com- 
petence of science in general, leaving the 
most acute problems as regards world outlook 
beyond its limits, and declaring them ‘transcen- 
dental’ for logical thought, i.e. for theoretical 
knowledge and solution. But in this case the union 
of scientific investigation and faith in the corpus 
of a world outlook would be not only permissible 
but necessary. And it was in fact under the banner 
of Kantianism that the revisionist stream (the 
principles of which had been laid down by Edu- 
ard Bernstein and Conrad Schmidt) surged for- 
ward in the socialist movement. The Kantian 
theory of knowledge was directly oriented here 
on ‘uniting’ ‘rigorous scientific thought’ (the 
thinking of Marx and Engels, according to 
Bernstein, was not strictly scientific because it 


4 V. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks. Op. cit., p 175. 


303 


was marred by foggy Hegelian dialectics) with ~ 
‘ethical values’ and undemonstrable and irrefut- © 
able faith in the transcendental postulates of the 
‘good’, of ‘conscience’ of ‘love of one’s neigh- 
bour’ and of the whole ‘human race’ without ex- 
ception, and so on and so forth. 

The harm done to the working class movement 
by the propagation of ‘higher values’ was not, of 
course, the talk about conscience being good and 
lack of conscience bad, or about love of the hu- 
man race being preferable to hatred of it. The 
harm of the Kantian idea of uniting science with 
a system of ‘higher’ ethical values consisted in 
principle in its orienting theoretical thought it- 
self along lines other than those along which the 
teaching of Marx and Engels had been developed. 
It plotted its own, Kantian strategy of scien- 
tific research for social-democratic theoreticians 
and confused ideas on the main line of develop- 
ment of theoretical thought and on the lines 
along which theoretical solution of the real prob- 
lems of modern times could and should be 
sought. The Kantian theory of knowledge turned 
theoretical thinking not to analysis of the mate- 
rial, economic relations between people that 
form the foundation of the whole pyramid of so- 
cial relations, but to the elaborating of far-fetched 
‘ethical’ constructions, morally interpretable 
policies, and social psychology of the Berdyaev 
kind, and to other things, which were interesting 
but absolutely useless (if not harmful) to the 
working class movement. 

The orientation of theoretical thought not on 


304 


eae en ee 


the logic of Capital but on moral-fictional harp- 
ing on the secondary, derivative defects of the 
capitalist system in its secondary, superstructural 
storeys, led to the decisive, dominant trends of 
the new, imperialist stage of the development of 
capitalism escaping the notice of the theoreticians 
of the Second International; not because they 
lacked talent, but rather because of a petty- 
bourgeois class orientation and a false epistemo- 
logical position. 

In this respect the fate of Rudolf Hilferding 
and H. W.C. Cunow was very characteristic. In- 
sofar as they tried to develop Marx’s political 
economy by means of the ‘latest’ logical devices, 
rather than of dialectics, it inevitably degener- 
ated into a superficial classificatory description of 
contemporary economic phenomena, i.e. into a 
quite uncritical acceptance of them, into an apo- 
logia. This path led directly to Karl Renner and 
his Theory of the Capitalist Economy, the Bible 
of Right-wing socialism, which was already linked, 
as regards its method of thinking and _ logic 
of investigation, with vulgar positivist epistem- 
ology. Renner’s philosophical credo was as fol- 
lows: *...Marx’s Capital, written in an age far 
removed from us, with a quite different way of 
thinking, and a manner of exposition not worked 
out to the end, with every new decade increases 
the reader’s difficulties.... The style of writing 
of the German philosophers has become foreign 
to us. Marx came from a very philosophical age. 
Science today no longer proceeds deductively 
(not only in research but also in presentation), 


20—831 805 


but rather inductively; it starts from experiment- 
ally established facts, systematises them and so 
by degrees arrives at the level of abstract con- 
cepts. For an age that is so accustomed to think 
and to read, the first section of Marx’s principal 
work presents sheer insuperable difficulty.”> 

The orientation on ‘modern science’ and the 
‘modern way of thinking’, already begun with 
Bernstein, turned into an orientation on the ide- 
alistic and agnostic vogue interpretations of 
‘modern science’, on Humean-Berkeleian and 
Kantian epistemology. Lenin saw that quite clear- 
ly. From the middle of the nineteenth century 
bourgeois philosophy frankly moved ‘back to 
Kant’, and further back to Hume and Berkeley; 
and Hegel’s logic, despite all its absolute ideal- 
ism, was more and more clearly depicted as the 
pinnacle of the development of all pre-Marxian 
philosophy in the field of logic understood as the 
theory of the development of scientific knowl- 
edge, as the theory of knowledge. 

Lenin repeatedly stressed that it was only pos- 
sible to move forward from Hegel along one line 
and one line only, that of a materialist rework- 
ing of his achievements, because Hegel’s absolute 
idealism had really exhausted all the possibilities 
of idealism as a principle for understanding 
thought, knowledge, and scientific consciousness. 
But, because of certain circumstances lying out- 
side science, only Marx and Engels had been 


5 Karl Renner. Die Wirtschaft als Gesamtprozess und 
die Sozialisierung (Berlin, 1924) p 5. 


306 


te 


able to take that line. It was closed to bourgeois 
philosophy; and the slogan ‘Back to Kant’ was 
imperiously dictated by the fear aroused in the 
bourgeoisie’s ideologists by the social perspectives 
opened up from the heights of the dialectical 
view of thought. From the moment the material- 
ist view of history appeared, Hegel was seen by 
bourgeois consciousness as none other than the 
‘spiritual father’ of Marxism. That had a con- 
siderable grain of truth, too, for Marx and Eng- 
els had disclosed the genuine sense of Hegel’s 
main achievement, dialectics, and demonstrated 
not only the constructive, creative power of its 
principles, understood as the principles of man’s 
rational attitude to the world, but also their re- 
volutionary, destructive force. 

Why then did Lenin, while fighting Hegel’s 
absolute idealism, began to join sides with him 
more and more just at that point where the ideal- 
ism seemed in fact to become absolute? For sure- 
ly the conception of logic as a science embrac- 
ing in its principles not only human thought but 
also the real world outside consciousness was 
linked with panlogism, with the interpretation of 
the forms and laws of the real world as alienat- 
ed forms of thought, and thought itself as 
the absolute force and power organising the 
world? 

The fact is that Hegel was and remains the 
sole thinker before Marx who consciously intro- 
duced practice into logic with full rights as the 
criterion both of truth and of the correctness of 
the operations that man performs in the sphere 


20° 307 


of the verbal, symbolic explication of his psychic 
states. In Hegel logic became identified with the 
theory of knowledge precisely because man’s 
practice (i.e. realisation of the aims of the ‘spirit’ 
in sense objects, in natural, physical material) 
was brought into the logical process as a phase, 
was looked upon as thought in its external 
revelation, in the course of checking its re- 
sults through direct contact with ‘things in them- 
selves’. 

Lenin traced the development of Hegel’s cor- 
responding ideas with special scrupulousness. 
‘... The practice of man and of mankind is the test, 
the criterion of the objectivity of cognition. Is 
that Hegel’s idea? It is necessary to return to 
this,” he wrote. And returning to it, he wrote 
confidently, and quite categorically: ‘. .. Undoubt- 
edly, in Hegel practice serves as a Jink in the ana- 
lysis of the process of cognition, and indeed as 
the transition to objective (‘‘absolute”, accord- 
ing to Hegel) truth. Marx, consequently, clearly 
sides with Hegel in introducing the criterion of 
practice into the theory of knowledge: see the 
Theses on Feuerbach.” 

In appearing as a practical act thought includ- 
ed things outside consciousness in its movement, 
and then it turned out that the ‘things in them- 
selves’ were subordinated to the dictates of 
thinking man and obediently moved and changed 


8 V. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks. Op. cit., p. 211. 
7 [bid., p. 212. 


308 


CO 


according to laws and schemas dictated by his 
thought. Thus not only did the ‘spirit’ move ac- 
cording to logical schemas, but also the world of 
‘things in themselves’. Logic consequently proved 
to be precisely a theory of knowledge of things 
also, and not solely a theory of the self-knowl- 
edge of the spirit. 

Formulating the ‘rational kernel’ of Hegel’s 
conception of the subject matter of logic, Lenin 
wrote: ‘Logic is the science not of external forms 
of thought, but of the laws of development “of 
all material, natural and spiritual things”, i.e., of 
the development of the entire concrete content of 
the world and of its cognition, i.e., the sum-total, 
the conclusion of the History of knowledge of 
the world.’8 

There is no such a formulation, and further- 
more no such a conception of the subject matter 
of logic in Hegel himself. In this passage Lenin 
did not simply translate Hegel’s thought ‘into his 
own words’, but reworked it materialistically. 
Hegel’s own text, in which Lenin discovered the 
‘rational kernel’ of his conception of logic, does 
not sound at all like that. Here it is: “The indis- 
pensable basis, the Concept, the Universal, which 
is Thought itself—in so far, that is, as in using 
the word Thought one can abstract from the 
idea—this cannot be regarded as a merely in- 
different form which is attached to some content. 


8 V. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks. Op. cit., pp 92- 
93. 


809 


But these thoughts of all natural and spiritual 
things [Only these words are found in Lenin’s 
formulation—EU/} even the substantial content, 
are yet such as to possess manifold determina- 
tions and to contain the distinction between Soul 
and Body, between a concept and its respective 
reality; the deeper basis is the soul in itself, the 
pure concept, which is the very core of objects, 
their very life-pulse, as it is the core and pulse of 
subjective thinking itself. To bring into clear con- 
sciousness this logical character which gives soul 
to mind and stirs and works in it, this is our 
problem.” 

The difference between Hegel’s formulation 
and Lenin’s is one of principle, because there is 
nothing in Hegel about the development of nat- 
ural things, and could not even be. It would 
therefore be a gross error to think that the defi- 
nition of logic as the science of the laws of de- 
velopment of all material and spiritual things is 
only Hegel’s idea transmitted by Lenin, or even 
simply cited by him. It is nothing of the sort; 
it is Lenin’s own idea, formulated, by him in 
the course of a critical reading of Hegel’s 
words. 

Hegel’s logic is also his theory of knowledge 
for the reason that the science of thought was in- 
ferred by him from an investigation of the his- 
tory of the spirit’s self-knowledge, and thus of 


9 Hegel’s Science of Logic, Vol. I, p 45. 


810 


— ———  —— 


the world of natural things, since the latter were 
considered moments of the logical process, sche- 
mas of thought, concepts, alienated in natural 
material. 

Logic is also the theory of knowledge of Marx- 
ism, but for quite another reason, because the 
forms themselves of the activity of the ‘spirit’— 
the categories and schemas of logic—are inferred 
from investigation of the history of humanity’s 
knowledge and practice, i.e. from the process in 
the course of which thinking man (or rather hu- 
manity) cognises and transforms the material 
world. From that standpoint logic also cannot be 
anything else than a theory explaining the uni- 
versal schemas of the development of knowledge 
and of the transformation of the material world 
by social man. As such it is also a theory of 
knowledge; any other, definition of the tasks 
of a theory of knowledge inevitably leads to 
one version or another of the Kantian concep- 
tion. 

In no case, accoring to Lenin, logic and the 
theory of knowledge were two different sciences. 
Even less could logic be defined as part of the 
theory of knowledge. The logical determinations 
of thought therefore included exclusively univer- 
sal categories and laws (schemas) of the develop- 
ment of the objective world in general cognised 
in the course of the millenia of the development 
of scientific culture and tested for objectivity in 
the crucible of social man’s practice, schemas 
common to both natural and social-historical de- 
velopment. Being reflected in social conscious- 


S11 


ness, in mankind’s spiritual culture, they func- 
tioned as active logical forms of the work of 
thought, and logic was a systematic, theoretical 
depiction of the universal schemas, forms, and 
laws of the development of nature and of society, 
and of thought itself. 

In this conception, however, logic (ie. the 
materialist theory of knowledge) was fully merged 
without residue in dialectics. And once more 
there were not two sciences, however ‘closely 
linked’ with one another, but one and the same 
science, one in subject matter and its stock of 
concepts. And this, Lenin stressed, was not ‘an 
aspect of the matter’, but ‘the essence of the mat- 
ter’. In other words, unless logic was understood 
simultaneously as the theory of knowledge, it 
could not be truly understood. 

So logic (the theory of knowledge) and dia- 
lectics, according to Lenin, were in a relationship 
of full identity, full coincidence of subject mat- 
ter and stock of categories. Dialectics had no 
subject matter distinct from that of the theory of 
knowledge (logic), just as logic (the theory of 
knowledge) had no object of a study that would 
differ in any way from the subject matter of dia- 
lectics. In the one and in the other it was a mat- 
ter of universal forms and laws of development 
in general that were reflected in consciousness 
precisely in the shape of logical forms and laws 
of thought through the determination of catego- 
ries. And because categories as schemas of the 
synthesis of experimental data in concepts had a 
quite objective significance, the same significance 


$12 


also attached to the ‘experience’ processed with 
their aid, i.e. to science, the scientific picture of 
the world, the scientific outlook. 

‘Dialectics is the theory of knowledge of (He- 
gel and) Marxism,’ Lenin wrote in his notes ‘On 
the Question of Dialectics’, in which he summed 
up the vast job he had done in several years of 
hard work on critically reworking the Hegelian 
conception of logic in a materialist way. “This 
is the “aspect” of the matter (it is not “an as- 
pect” but the essence of the matter) to which 
Plekhanov, not to speak of other Marxists, paid 
no attention.’!9 That categorical conclusion, hard- 
ly admitting of any other interpretation than a 
literal one, must not be considered as a phrase 
dropped by chance, but as a real resume of all 
Lenin’s understanding of the problem of the re- 
lationship of dialectics, logic, and the theory of 
knowledge of modern materialism. 

In the light of the foregoing, attempts to in- 
terpret their relation in the body of Marxism in 
such a way that dialectics is transformed into a 
special category treating ‘pure forms of being’, 
and logic and the theory of knowledge into spe- 
cial sciences connected with dialectics but not, 
however, merged with it, and devoted exclusive- 
ly to the ‘specific’ forms of the reflexion of this 
ontology in men’s consciousness—the one (episte- 
mology) being devoted to the ‘specific’ forms of 
knowledge and the other (logic) to the ‘specific’ 


{0 V_ I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks. Op. cit., p 362. 


313 


forms of discursive thought—proved to be bank- 
rupt (and in no way linked with Lenin’s con- 
ception). 

The idea whereby logic is distinguished from 
dialectics as the particular from the general and 
therefore studies just that ‘specific feature’ of 
thought from which dialectics digresses, is based 
on a simple misunderstanding, on neglect of the 
fact that the ‘specific nature’ of the forms and 
laws of thought consists precisely in their uni- 
versality. 

Logic as a science is not at all interested in the 
‘specific features’ of the thinking of the physicist 
or chemist, economist or linguist, but only in 
those universal (invariant) forms and laws within 
which the thinking of any person flows, and of 
any theoretician, including the logician by pro- 
fession, who specially thinks about thought. 
From the angle of materialism, therefore, logic 
also investigates forms and laws that equally 
govern both thinking about the external world 
and thinking about thought itself, and is thus the 
science of the universal forms and patterns of 
thought and reality; so that the statement that 
logic must study the ‘specific forms’ of the move- 
ment of thought as well as the universal ones 
(common to thought and being), in fact ignores 
the historically formed division of labour be- 
tween logic and psychology, depriving psychol- 
ogy of its subject matter, and throwing onto lo- 
gic a task that is too much for it. 

To understand logic as a science distinguished 
from dialectics (though closely connected with it) 


314 


means to understand both logic and dialectics 
incorrectly, and not in a materialist way; be- 
cause logic, artificially separated from dialectics, 
is inevitably converted into a description of pur- 
ely subjective methods and operations, i.e. of 
forms of activities depending on the will and 
consciousness of people, and on the peculiarities 
of the material, and therefore ceases to be an ob- 
jective scitnce. While dialectics, counterposed to 
the process of the development of knowledge 
(thought), in the form of a doctrine about ‘the 
world as a whole’, in the form of ‘world schemat- 
ics’ is just as inevitably converted into a collec- 
tion of extremely general statements about every- 
thing on earth and not about anything in parti- 
cular (something of the sort of that “everything in 
nature and society is interconnected’, or that 
‘everything develops’ and even ‘through contra- 
dictions’, and so on). 

Dialectics, understood so, is tacked on to the 
real process of cognition in a purely formal way, 
through examples ‘confirming’ one and the same 
general proposition over and over again. But it 
is clear that such a formal superimposition of the 
general onto the particular does not deepen our 
understanding of either the general or the partic- 
ular by a single jot, while dialectics is trans- 
formed into a dead scheme. Lenin therefore 
quite justly considered the transformation of 
dialectics into a sum of examples as the in- 
evitable consequence of not understanding it 
as the logic and theory of knowledge of material- 
ism. 


315 


Being the science of the universal forms and 
patterns within which any process, either objec- 
tive or subjective, takes place, logic is a rigorously 
defined system of special concepts (logical cate- 
gories) reflecting the stages (‘steps’) consecutively 
passed through in the formation of any concrete 
whole (or correspondingly of the process of its 
mental-theoretical reproduction). The sequence of 
the development of the categories in the body of 
a theory has an objective character, i.e. does not 
depend on the will and consciousness of people. 
It is dictated primarily by the objective sequence 
of the development of empirically based theoret- 
ical knowledge,!! in the form of which, the ob- 
jective sequence of the real historical process, 
purged of its disruptive fortuities and of the his- 
torical form, is reflected in people’s conscious- 
ness. 

Logical categories are thus directly stages in 
distinguishing the world, i.e. of cognising it, 
and nodal points helping to cognise and master 
1 

In explaining this view Lenin remarked on the 
general sequence of the development of logical 
categories: ‘First of all impressions flash by, then 
Something emerges—afterwards the concepts of 
quality (the determination of the thing or the 
phenomenon) and quantity are developed. After 
that study and reflection direct thought to the 


11 See Frederick Engels. Dialectics of Nature, p 239. 
12 See V. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks, Op. cit., 
p 93. 


316 


cognition of identity—difference—Ground—Es- 
sence versus phenomenon—causality, etc. All 
these moments (steps, stages, processes) of cogni- 
tion move ... from subject to object, being tested 
in practice and arriving through this test at 
truth.”43 ‘Such is actually the general course of 
all human cognition (of all science) in general. 
Such is the course also of natural science and 
political economy (and history).!* The move- 
ment of scientific cognition, Lenin said, was the 
nub. $5 

Logical categories are stages (steps) in cogni- 
tion developing the object in its necessity, in the 
natural sequence of the phases of its own forma- 
tion, and not at all man’s technical devices im- 
posed on the subject like a child’s bucket on 
sandpies. Not only do the determinations of each 
of the logical categories therefore have an objec- 
tive character, i.e. determine the object and not 
simply the form of subjective activity, but the 
sequence in which the categories appear in the 
theory of thought also has the same necessary 
character. It is impossible to determine necessity 
or purpose strictly scientifically, on an objective 
basis, before and independently of the scientific 
determination of identity and difference, quality 
and measure, etc., just as it is impossible to un- 
derstand capital and profit scientifically unless 


13 VY. I. Lenin. Philosophical Notebooks, Op. cit., p 319. 
4 [bid., p 318. 
5 [bid., p 87. 


their ‘simple components’-—commodity and mo- 
ney—have previously been analysed, and just as 
it is impossible to understand the complex com- 
pounds of organic chemistry while their constit- 
uent chemical elements are unknown (not iden- 
tified by analysis). 

In outlining a plan for systematic treatment of 
the categories of logic, Lenin noted: ‘If Marx 
did not leave behind him a Logic (with a capital 
‘L’), he did leave the logic of Capital, and this 
ought to be utilised to the full in this question.’16 
Moreover, one can only distinguish the logical 
categories underlying the theory of political econ- 
omy from the movement of the theory by bas- 
ing oneself on the best (dialectical) traditions in 
the development of logic as a science. ‘It is im- 
possible completely to understand Marx’s Capi- 
tal, and especially its first chapter, without hav- 
ing thoroughly studied and understood the whole 
of Hegel’s Logic.’!” ‘In his Capital,’ Lenin wrote 
further, ‘Marx first analyses the simplest, most or- 
dinary and fundamental, most common and 
everyday relation of bourgeois (commodity) so- 
ciety, a relation encountered billions of times, 
viz. the exchange of commodities. In this very 
simple phenomenon (in this “cell” of bourgeois 
society) analysis reveals all the contradictions 
(or the germs of all the contradictions) of mod- 
ern society. The subsequent exposition shows us 
the development (both growth and movement) of 


16 Ibid., p 319. 
17 Tbid., p 180. 


318 


these contradictions and of this society in the e 
[summation—Ed.} of its individual parts, from 
its beginning to its end. 

‘Such must also be the method of exposition 
(or study) of dialectics in general (for with Marx 
the dialectics of bourgeois society is only a par- 
ticular case of dialectics).’18 


18 VY. I. Lenin, Philosophical Notebooks, Op. cit., 
pp 360-361. 


ESSAY TEN 


Contradiction as a Category 
of Dialectical Logic 


Contradiction as the concrete unity of mutu- 
ally exclusive opposites is the real nucleus of 
dialectics, its central category. On that score 
there cannot be two views among Marxists; but 
no small difficulty immediately arises as soon as 
matters touch on ‘subjective dialectics’, on dia- 
lectics as the logic of thinking. If any object is 
a living contradiction, what must the thought 
(statement about the object) be that expresses it? 
Can and should an objective contradiction find 
reflection in thought? And if so, in what form? 

Contradiction in the theoretical determinations 
of an object is above all a fact that is constantly 
being reproduced by the movement of science, 
and is not denied by dialectics or metaphysics, 
by materialists or idealists. The point that they 
dispute is something else, namely: what is the 
relationship of the contradiction in thought to 
the object? In other words, can there be a con- 
tradiction in true, correct thought? 

The metaphysical logician tries to demonstrate 
the inapplicability of the dialectical law of the 


320 


QE 


coincidence or concurrence of opposites, which 
amounts to their identity, to the very process of 
thought. Such logicians are occasionally prepared 
even to recognise that the object can, in 
agreement with dialectics, be by itself inwardly 
contradictory. The contradiction is in the object 
but must not be in the ideas about it. The meta- 
physician, however, still cannot permit himself 
in any way to recognise the truth of the law that 
constitutes the nucleus of dialectics, in relation 
to the logical process. The principle of contra- 
diction is transformed into an absolute, formal 
criterion of truth, into an indisputable a priori 
canon, into the supreme principle of logic. 

Some logicians strive to substantiate this posi- 
tion, which it is difficult to call other than eclec- 
tic, by citing the practice of science. Any science, 
when it comes up against a contradiction in de- 
terminations of an object, always strives to re- 
solve it. In that case does it not act in accordance 
with the recipes of metaphysics, which holds that 
any contradiction in thought is inadmissible, and 
something that must be got rid of somehow or 
other? The metaphysician in logic interprets sim- 
ilar moments in the development of science in 
such a way. Science, he says, always strives to 
avoid contradictions, but in dialectics there is an 
opposite tendency. 

The view under consideration is based on a 
misunderstanding, or rather simply on ignorance 
of the important historical fact that dialectics was 
born just where metaphysical thought (i.e. think- 
ing without knowing or desiring to know any 


21831 321 


a 


other logic than formal logic) finally became 
caught up in the logical contradictions it had 
brought to light just because it persistently and 
consistently observed the ban on any kind of 
contradiction whatsoever in determinations. Dia- 
lectics as logic is the means of resolving these 
contradictions, so that it is stupid to accuse it of 
an itch to pile up contradictions. It is irrational 
to see the cause of the illness in the coming of 
the doctor. The question can only be whether dia- 
lectics is successful in curing the contradictions 
into which thought falls, in fact, as a result of a 
most rigorous metaphysical diet that uncondition- 
ally forbids any contradiction. And if it is suc- 
cessful, just why is it? 

Let us turn to the analysis of a striking exam- 
ple, a typical case of how mountains of logical 
contradictions have been piled up just by means 
of absolutised formal logic, and rationally re- 
solved only by means of dialectical logic. We 
have in mind the history of political economy, 
the history of the disintegration of the Ricardian 
school and the rise of Marx’s economic theory. 
The way out of the blind alley of the theoretical 
paradoxes and antinomies into which the Ricar- 
dian school had got was found, as we know, only 
by Karl Marx, and was found precisely by means 
of dialectics as logic. 

That Ricardo’s theory contained a mass of log- 
ical contradictions was not discovered by Marx 
at all. It was plainly seen by Malthus, and Sis- 
mondi, and McCulloch, and Proudhon. But only 
Marx was able to understand the real character 


322 


a 


of the contradictions of the labour theory of val- 
ue. Let us, following Marx, consider one of them, 
the most typical and acute, the antinomy of the 
law of value and the law of the average rate of 
profit. 

David Ricardo’s law of value established that 
living human labour was the sole source and sub- 
stance of value, an affirmation that was an enor- 
mous advance on the road to objective truth. But 
profit was also value. In trying to express it the- 
oretically, i.e. through the law of value, a clear 
logical contradiction was obtained. The point was 
that profit was new, newly created value, or rather 
part of it. That was an indisputably true analytic- 
al determination. But only new labour produced 
new value. How, however, did that tie up with 
the quite obvious empirical fact that the quantity 
of profit was not determined at all by the quan- 
tity of living labour expended on its production? 
It depended exclusively on the quantity of capi- 
tal as a whole, and in no case on the size of that 
part that went on wages. And it was even more 
paradoxical that the higher the profit the less 
living labour was consumed during its produc- 
tion. 

In Ricardo’s theory the law of the average rate 
of profit, which established the dependence of 
the scale of profit on the quantity of capital as a 
whole, and the law of value, which established 
that only living labour produced new value, 
stood in a relation of direct, mutually exclusive 
contradiction. Nevertheless, both laws determined 
one and the same object (profit). This antin- 


ais 323 


TO 


omy was noted with spiteful delight in his day 
by Malthus. 

Here then was a problem that it was impos- 
sible to resolve on the principles of formal logic. 
And if thought had arrived here at an antinomy, 
and had landed in a logical contradiction, it was 
difficult to blame dialectics for it. Neither Ri- 
cardo nor Malthus had any idea of dialectics. 
Both knew only the Lockian theory of under- 
standing and the logic (and that formal) corre- 
sponding to it. Its canons were indisputable for 
them, and the only ones. This logic justified a 
general law (in this case the law of value) only 
when it was demonstrated as an immediately gen- 
eral empirical rule under which al! facts what- 
soever were subsumed without contradiction. 

It was found that there was in fact no such 
relationship between the law of value and the 
forms of its manifestation. As soon as one tried to 
treat profit theoretically (ic. to understand it 
through the law of value), it suddenly proved to 
be an absurd contradiction. If the law of value 
was universal, profit was impossible in principle. 
By its existence it refuted the abstract universal- 
ity of the law of value, the law of its own par- 
ticular existence. 

Ricardo, the creator of the labour theory of 
value, was primarily concerned with the accord 
of the theoretical statements with the object. He 
soberly, and even cynically, expressed the real 
state of affairs; and the latter, riddled with unre- 
solvable antagonisms, was naturally presented in 
thought as a system of conflicts, antagonisms, 


324 


ee 


and logical contradictions. This circumstance, 
which bourgeois theoreticians regarded as evi- 
dence of the weakness and incompleteness of his 
theory, was evidence rather of the contrary, of its 
strength and objectivity. 

When Ricardo’s disciples and successors no 
longer made correspondence of theory to the ob- 
ject their chief concern, but rather agreement of 
the developed theoretical determinations with the 
requirements of formal logical consistency, with 
the canons of the formal unity of theory, the la- 
bour theory of value began to disintegrate. Marx 
wrote of James Mill: ‘What he tries to achieve 
is formal, logical consistence. The disintegration 
of the Ricardian school “therefore” begins with 
him.,”! 

In fact, as Marx showed, the general law of 
value stood in a relation of mutually exclusive 
contradiction with the empirical form of its own 
manifestation, with the law of the average rate 
of profit. That was a real contradiction of a real 
object. And it was not surprising that, in trying 
to subsume the one law directly and immediately 
under the other, a logical contradiction was ob- 
tained. But when, nevertheless, they continued 
trying to make value and profit agree directly 
and without contradiction, they then obtained a 
problem that was, in Marx’s words, ‘much more 
difficult to solve than that of squaring the cir- 
cle.... It is simply an attempt to present that 
which does not exist as in fact existing’.? 


4 Karl Marx. Theories of Surplus-Ualue, Part III, p 84. 
2 Ibid., p 87. 


325 


———$ = - 


The metaphysically thinking theoretician, com- 
ing up against such a paradox, inevitably inter- 
prets it as the result of mistakes committed ear- 
lier in thought, in the working out and formula- 
tion of the universal law. And he naturally seeks 
a solution of the paradox by way of a purely 
formal analysis of the theory, by making the con- 
cepts more precise, by correcting expressions, and 
so on. A propos of this approach to solving the 
problem Marx wrote: ‘Here the contradiction be- 
tween the general law and further developments 
in the concrete circumstances is to be resolved not 
by the discovery of the connecting links but by 
directly subordinating and immediately adapt- 
ing the concrete to the abstract. This moreover is 
to be brought about by a verbal fiction, by 
changing vera rerum vocabula. (These are indeed 
“verbal disputes”, they are “verbal”, however, 
because real contradictions, which are not resol- 
ved in a real way, are to be solved by phrases.)’3 

When the general law contradicts the empiric- 
ally common position of things the empiricist 
immediately sees the way out in altering the for- 
mulation of the general law in such a fashion that 
the empirically general will be directly subsumed 
under it. At first glance that is how it ought 
to be; if thought contradicts the facts, then the 
thought should be altered so as to bring it into 
line with the general phenomena immediately 
given on the surface. In fact, this way is theore- 


3 Karl Marx. Theories of Surplus-Ualue, Part III, pp 87- 
88. 


326 


tically false, and by taking it the Ricardian school 
arrived at complete rejection of the labour 
theory of value. The general law revealed by 
Ricardo was sacrificed to crude empeiria (exper- 
ience), but the crude empiricism was inevitably 
converted into a ‘false metaphysics, scholastic- 
ism, which toils painfully to deduce undeniable 
empirical phenomena by simple formal abstrac- 
tion directly from the general law, or to show by 
cunning argument that they are in accordance 
with that law’.4 

Formal logic, and the metaphysics that made it 
an absolute, knew only two ways of resolving 
contradictions in thought. The first was to ad- 
just the general law to the directly general, em- 
pirically obvious, state of affairs. That, as we 
have seen, brought about loss of the concept of 
value. The second way was to represent the in- 
ternal contradiction, expressed in thinking as a 
logical contradiction, as an external contradic- 
tion of two things, each of which was, in itself, 
non-contradictory, a procedure known as reduc- 
ing the internal contradiction to a contradiction 
‘in different relations or at a different time’. It was 
done as follows. Profit could not be explained 
from value without contradiction? Well, what of 
it! There was no need to persist in a one-sided 
approach; one must admit that profit originated 
in reality not only from labour but also from 


“ Karl Marx. Theories of Surplus-Ualue, Part I. Trans- 
lated by Emile Burns (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1969) 
p 89. 


327 


a 


many other factors. It was necessary to take the 
role of land, and of machines, and of supply and 
demand, and of many, many other things into 
account. The point, they said, lay not in the con- 
tradictions but in the fullness. So the famous tri- 
une formula of vulgar economics was born: 
‘Capital—interest; land—rent; labour—wages’. 
There was no logical contradiction there, it is 
true; it had disappeared, but with it, too, had 
disappeared the theoretical approach to things in 
general. 

The conclusion was obvious; not every means 
of resolving the contradictions led to develop- 
ment of the theory. The two ways outlined above 
signified a solution such as was identical with 
converting the theory into empirical eclecticism. 
Because theory in general existed only where 
there was a conscious and principled striving to 
understand all the separate phenomena as neces- 
sary modifications of one and the same general, 
concrete substance, in this instance the substance 
of value, of living human labour. 

The only theoretician who succeeded in resolv- 
ing the logical contradictions of the Ricardian 
theory so as to bring about not disintegration but 
real development of the labour theory of value 
was, of course, Kar! Marx. What did his dialect- 
ical materialist method of resolving the antinomy 
consist in? First of all, we must state that the real 
contradictions discovered by Ricardo did not 
disappear in Marx’s system. Futhermore, they 
were presented in it as necessary contradictions 
of the object itself, and not at all as the result of 


328 


a 


mistakenness of the idea, or of inexactitudes in 
determinations. In the first volume of Capital, 
for example, it is demonstrated that surplus va- 
lue is exclusively the product of that part of cap- 
ital which is expended on wages and converted 
into living labour, i.e. variable capital. The pro- 
position in the third volume, however, reads: 
‘However that may be, the outcome is that sur- 
plus-value springs simultaneously from all por- 
tions of the invested capital.”> 

Between the first and the second propositions 
a whole system was developed, a whole chain of 
connecting links; between them, nevertheless, 
there was preserved a relationship of mutually 
exclusive contradiction banned by formal logic. 
That is why vulgar economists triumphantly de- 
clared, after the appearance of the third volume 
of Capital, that Marx had not fulfilled his pledge, 
that the antinomy of the labour theory of 
value remained unresolved by him and that the 
whole of Capital was consequently nothing more 
than speculative, dialectical hocus-pocus. 

The general is thus also contradicted in Capital 
by its own particular manifestation, and the con- 
tradiction between them does not disappear just 
because a whole chain of mediating links has been 
developed between them. On the contrary, this 
actually demonstrates that the antinomies of the 
labour theory of value are not logical ones at all 
but real contradictions in the object, correctly 
expressed by Ricardo, though not understood by 


5 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. III, p 36. 


$29 


him. In Capital these antinomies are not done 
away with at all as something subjective, but 
prove to be understood, i.e. have been sublated 
in the body of a deeper and more concrete the- 
oretical conception. In other words, they are pre- 
served but have lost the character of logical con- 
tradictions, having been converted into abstract 
moments of the concrete conception of economic 
reality. And there is nothing surprising in that; 
any concrete, developing system includes contra- 
dictions as the principle of its self-movement and 
as the form in which the development is 
cast. 

So let us compare how the metaphysician Ri- 
cardo and the dialectician Marx understood val- 
ue. Ricardo, of course, did not analyse value by 
its form. His abstraction of value, on the one 
hand, was incomplete, and on the other was for- 
mal, and for that reason was untrue. In what, 
then, did Marx see the fullness and pithiness of 
the analysis of value that was missing in Ricar- 
do? First, in value being a living, concrete con- 
tradiction. 

Ricardo showed value only from the aspect of 
its substance, i.e. took labour as the substance of 
value. As for Marx, he (to use an expression from 
Hegel’s Phenomenology of Mind) understood 
value not only as substance but also as subject. 
Value was represented as the substance-subject 
of all the developed forms and categories of po- 
litical economy; and with that conscious dialect- 
ics in this science began. Because the ‘subject’ in 
Marx’s conception (in this case he employed the 


330 


ee 


terminology of the Phenomenology of Mind) is 
reality developing through its own internal con- 
tradictions. 

But let us look a little closer at Marx’s analy- 
sis of value. First of all it investigates the direct, 
moneyless exchange or barter of commodity for 
commodity. In exchange, in the course of which 
one commodity is replaced by another, value is 
only manifested, is only expressed; and in no 
case is it created. It is manifested as follows: one 
commodity plays the role of relative value, and 
the other, counterposed to it, the role of equiva- 
lent. ‘In one expression of value, one commodity 
cannot simultaneously appear in both forms. 
These forms are polar opposites, are mutually 
exclusive.’ 

The metaphysician will no doubt be delighted 
to read that two mutually exclusive economic 
forms cannot simultaneously be combined in one 
commodity! But can one say that Marx was re- 
futing the possibility of the coincidence of mutu- 
ally exclusive determinations in the object and in 
its conception? Rather the contrary. The fact is 
that we are not yet concerned with the concept 
of value, with value as such. The passage cited 
crowns the analysis of the form of the revelation 
of value. Value itself still remains a mysterious 
and theoretically unexpressed essence of each of 
the commodities. On the surface of phenomena it 
really appears as if two abstract, one-sided forms 
of its revelation are visible. But value itself does 


6 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I, p 19. 


331 


—eEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEEEEEEEeEee 


not coincide with either of these forms, or with 
their simple, mechanical unity. It is a third some- 
thing, something lying deeper. In relation to its 
owner, for example, linen as a commodity ap- 
pears only in the relative form of value; and in 
that same relation it cannot be simultaneously an 
equivalent. 

But matters appear so only from an abstract, 
one-sided angle. For the owner of linen is abso- 
lutely equal to the owner of a coat, and from the 
position of the latter the relation under consider- 
ation proves directly the opposite, so that we do 
not have two different relations, but one con- 
crete objective relation, a mutual relation of two 
commodity owners. From the concrete standpoint 
each of the two commodities—linen and coat— 
mutually measures the other’s value and also 
mutually serves as the material in which it is 
measured. In other words each mutually presup- 
poses that the equivalent form of value is realised 
in the other commodity, the very form in 
which the latter can no longer be because it is in 
the relative form. 

In other words the exchange really being com- 
pleted presupposes that each of the two commod- 
ities mutually related in it simultaneously takes 
on both economic forms of the revelation of value 
in itself, both measuring its own value and serv- 
ing as the material for expressing the value of 
the other commodity. And if, from the abstract, 
one-sided point of view, each of them is only in 
one form, and functions as relative value in one 
relation and as equivalent in the other, from the 


332 


eee 


concrete aspect, i.e. in fact, each of the commod- 
ities is simultaneously and, moreover, within 
one and the same relation in both mutually ex- 
clusive forms of the expression of value. If the 
two commodities do not mutually recognise each 
other as equivalents, exchange simply cannot take 
place. If, however, exchange does take place, that 
means that the two polarly excluded forms of 
value are combined in each of the two commo- 
dities. 

What you get, then, says the metaphysician, is 
that Marx contradicts himself. How can he say 
that two polar forms of the expression of value 
cannot be combined in one commodity, and then 
state that in real exchange they are all the same 
so combined? The answer is that concrete exami- 
nation of things refutes the result obtained by 
the abstract, one-sided approach to them, and 
shows it to be untrue. The truth of commodity 
exchange is just that a relation is realised in it 
that is absolutely impossible from the angle of 
an abstract, one-sided view. 

Something else is discovered in the form of 
the contradiction under consideration, as analy- 
sis shows, and that is the absolute content of 
each of the commodities, its value, the inner con- 
tradiction of value and use-value. “Thus the con- 
trast between use-value and value hidden away 
within the commodity,’ Marx wrote, ‘has an out- 
ward and visible counterpart, namely the rela- 
tion between two commodities, the relation in 
which the commodity whose value is to be ex- 
pressed counts only as use-value, whereas the 


333 


—eeeeeeea 0.0 


commodity in terms of which value is to be ex- 
pressed counts only as exchange-value. The sim- 
ple value form of a commodity is, therefore, the 
simple phenomenal form of the inherent contrast 
(within the commodity) between use-value and 
value.” 

From the aspect of logic this point is extraor- 
dinarily instructive. The metaphysician, coming 
up against the fact of the coincidence of contra- 
dictory determinations in a concept, in the state- 
ment of a thing, sees in it a false theoretical ex- 
pression and strives to turn the internal contra- 
diction into an external contradiction of two 
things, each of which, in his view, is internally 
non-contradictory, into a contradiction ‘in various 
relations or at a different time’. Marx acted quite 
the contrary. He showed that the inner contra- 
diction hidden in each of the interrelated things 
was only outwardly manifested in a contradiction 
of an external order. 

As a result value was presented as an inner 
relation of a commodity to itself, outwardly re- 
vealed through the relation to another commod- 
ity. The other commodity played only the role of 
a mirror in which the inwardly contradictory 
nature of the commodity that expressed its value 
was reflected. In philosophical terms, the external 
contradiction was presented only as a phenome- 
non and the relation to the other commodity (as 
mediated through this relation) as the relation of 
the commodity to itself. The inner relation, the 


7 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I, p 33. 


334 


ee ee 


relation to itself, was also value as the absolute 
economic content of each of the mutually related 
commodities. 

The metaphysician always strives to reduce the 
internal relation to an external one. For him a 
contradiction in ‘one relation’ is an index of the 
abstractness of knowledge, an index of the con- 
fusion of different planes of abstraction, and so 
on, and an external contradiction is a synonym of 
the ‘concreteness’ of knowledge. For Marx, on 
the contrary, it was an index of the one-sided- 
ness and superficiality of knowledge when an 
object was presented in thought simply as an ex- 
ternal contradiction, signifying that only the out- 
ward form of the manifestation of an internal 
contradiction had been caught, instead of the 
contradiction itself. Dialectics obliges one always 
to see, behind a thing’s relation to another thing, 
its own relation to itself, its own inner rela- 
tion. 

The difference between dialectics and meta- 
physics does not consist at all in the former’s rec- 
ognising only inner contradictions and the lat- 
ter’s recognising only external ones. Metaphysics 
really always tries to reduce the inner contradic- 
tion to a contradiction ‘in different relations’, 
denying it objective significance. Dialectics by no 
means reduces the one to the other. It recognises 
the objectivity of both. The point, however, does 
not lie in reducing an external contradiction to 
an inner one, but in deriving the former from the 
latter and thus comprehending the one and the 
other in their objective necessity. Dialectics more- 


335 


over does not deny the fact that an inner con- 
tradiction always appears in phenomena as an 
external one. 

The immediate coincidence of mutually exclu- 
sive economic determinations (value and use-val- 
ue) in each of the two commodities meeting in 
exchange is also the true theoretical expression 
of the essence of simple commodity exchange. 
And this essence is value. From the logical aspect 
the concept of value (in contrast to the outward 
form of its manifestation in the act of exchange) 
is characterised by its being presented as an im- 
mediate contradiction, as the direct coincidence 
of two forms of economic existence that are polar 
opposites. 

Thus, what was effected in the real act of ex- 
change was impossible from the angle of abstract 
(formal, logical) reason, namely, the direct or 
immediate identification of opposites. This was 
the theoretical expression of the real fact that 
direct commodity exchange could not be complet- 
ed smoothly, without collisions, without conflicts, 
without contradictions and crises. The point was 
that direct commodity exchange was not in a posi- 
tion to express the socially necessary measure of 
the expenditure of labour in the various branches 
of social production, i.e. value. And value 
therefore remained, within the limits of the sim- 
ple commodity form, an unresolved and unresolv- 
able antinomy. In it the commodity had to be, 
yet could not be, in the two polar forms of ex- 
pression of value, and consequently real exchange 
by value was impossible. But it did happen some- 


336 


how, and consequently both polar forms of value 
were somehow combined in each commodity. 
There was no way out of the antinomy. Marx’s 
contribution was precisely that he understood 
that, and expressed it theoretically. 

Insofar as exchange through the market re- 
mained the sole and universal form of the social 
exchange of things, the antinomy of value found 
its solution in the movement of the commodity 
market itself. The market created the means for 
resolving its own contradictions. So money was 
born. Exchange became not direct and unmediated, 
but mediated—through money; and the coin- 
cidence of mutually exclusive economic forms in 
a commodity came to an end, as it were, since it 
was split into two ‘different relations’, into an act 
of sale (which transformed use-value into value) 
and an act of purchase (which converted value 
into use-value), The two antinomic acts, mutu- 
ally exclusive in their economic content, already 
did not coincide immediately but were complet- 
ed at a different time and in different parts of 
the market. 

The antinomy seemed at first glance to be re- 
solved by all the rules of formal logic; but the 
semblance was purely external. In fact the antin- 
omy had not disappeared at all, but had only 
acquired a new form of expression. Money did 
not become absolutely pure value, and the com- 
modity thus pure use-value. Both commodity and 
money were fraught, as before, with an inner 
contradiction that was expressed, as before, in 
thought in the form of a contradiction in deter- 


22831 837 


| 


minations; once again, moreover, the contradic- 
tion was unresolved and unresolvable, and _ re- 
vealed itself in the clearest way, though only from 
time to time, precisely in crises, and then making 
itself felt the more strongly. 

‘The only commodity is money,’ says the com- 
modity owner at times when this contradiction 
does not show on the surface. “The only money is 
commodities, he asserts in a directly opposite 
way during a crisis, refuting his own abstract 
statement. Marx’s theoretical, but concrete, think- 
ing showed that the inner opposition of the eco- 
nomic determinations of money existed at every 
fleeting second, even when they were not mani- 
fested in an obvious, visible way but were hidden 
in commodities and in money, when everything 
was apparently going swimmingly and_ the 
contradiction seemed resolved once and _ for 
all. 

In theoretical determinations of money the 
antinomy of value brought out earlier was pre- 
served; in them it formed the ‘simple essence’ 
both of commodities and of money, although on 
the surface of phenomena it proved to be annulled, 
broken down into two ‘different relations’. 
But these relations, like the direct exchange of 
commodity for commodity, formed on inner unity 
that was preserved in all its acuteness and ten- 
sion in both commodities and money, and conse- 
quently also in theoretical determinations of the 
one and of the other. As before, value remained 
an internally contradictory relation of a commod- 
ity to itself, which was no longer revealed, 


838 


though, on the surface through a direct relation 
to another commodity of the same sort, but 
through its relation to money. Money now func- 
tioned as the means by which the mutual, recip- 
rocal transformation of the two originally ex- 
posed poles of the expression of value (value and 
use-value) was effected. 

From that angle the whole logical structure of 
Capital was traced out from a new and very im- 
portant aspect. Any concrete category was pres- 
ented as a metamorphosis through which value 
and use-value passed during their reciprocal 
transformations into one another. The forming of 
the capitalist, commodity system appears in 
Marx’s theoretical analysis as a complicating of 
the chain of connecting links through which the 
poles of value, mutually attracting and at the 
same time excluding each other, have to pass. 
The path of the reciprocal transformation of val- 
ue and use-value becomes longer and longer, and 
more and more complicated, and the tension be- 
tween the poles increases. 

The relative and temporary resolution of the 
tension takes place through crises, and its final 
resolution is through socialist revolution. 

That approach to things immediately gave 
thought an orientation in the analysis of any 
form of economic relation. In fact, just as the 
commodity market found a relative resolution of 
its objective contradictions in the birth of money, 
so the theoretical determinations of money in 
Capital served as a means of relatively resolving 
the theoretical contradiction revealed in the anal- 


220 839 


=. —/ 


ysis of the simple form of value. Within the lim- 
its of the simple form the antinomy of value 
remained unresolved and fixed in thought as a 
contradiction in the concept. Its sole true logical 
resolution consisted in tracing how it was resolved 
objectively in practice in the course of the 
movement itself of the commodity market. And 
the movement of the investigating thought con- 
sisted in revealing this new reality that developed 
by virtue of the impossibility of resolving the 
objective contradiction originally disclosed. 

Thus the very course of theoretical thought be- 
came not a confused wandering but a rigorous, 
purposive process, in which thinking used empir- 
ical facts to find the conditions and data that 
were lacking for solution of a clearly formulated 
task, of problem. Theory therefore appeared as a 
process of the constant resolution of problems 
pushed to the fore by the investigation of the 
empirical facts itself. 

Investigation of the commodity-money circula- 
tion led to an antinomy. As Marx wrote: ‘Turn 
and twist as we may, the sum total remains the 
same. If equivalents are exchanged, then no sur- 
plus value is created; and if non-equivalents are 
exchanged, still no surplus value is created. Cir- 
culation, the exchange of commodities, does not 
create value.’8 So, he concluded, capital could not 
arise from circulation, just as it could not arise 
outside it. It ‘must simultaneously take place in 
the sphere of circulation and outside the sphere 


8 Karl Marx. Capital, Vol. I, p 150. 


340 


of circulation. Such are the conditions of the prob- 
lem. That is the nut we have to crack!’9 

Marx’s way of posing the problem was not at 
all fortuitous and was not simply a rhetorical de- 
vice. It was linked with the very essence of the 
dialectical method of developing theory, follow- 
ing the development of the actual object. The 
solution of the question corresponds to the pos- 
ing of it. The problem arising in thought in the 
form of a contradiction in the determination 
could only be resolved if the theoretician (and 
the real owner of money) was ‘lucky enough to 
find somewhere within the sphere of circulation, 
to find in the market, a commodity whose use- 
value has the peculiar quality of being a source 
of value; a commodity whose actual consumption 
is a process whereby labour is embodied, and 
whereby therefore value is created’. 

Objective reality always develops through the 
origin within it of a concrete contradiction that 
finds its resolution in the generation of a new, 
higher, and more complex form of development. 
Within the initial form of development, the con- 
tradiction is unresolvable. When expressed in 
thought it naturally appears as a contradiction in 
the determinations of the concept that reflects the 
initial stage of development. And that is not only 
correct, but is the sole correct form of movement 


9 Ibid., p 158. (Marx actually used the Latin tag Hic 
Rhodus, hic salta!, which the Pauls rendered here as “That 
is the nut we have to crack!’—Tr.) 

10 Ibid., p 154. 


341 


a 


of the investigating mind, although there is a 
contradiction in it. A contradiction of that type 
in determinations is not resolved by way of re- 
fining the concept that reflects the given form of 
development, but by further investigating reality, 
by discovering another, new, higher form of de- 
velopment in which the initial contradiction finds 
its real, actual, empirically established resolution. 

It was not fortuitous that the old logic passed 
this very important logical form over as a ‘ques- 
tion’. For the real questions, the real problems 
that arise in the movement of the investigating 
mind, always rise before thought in the form of 
contradictions in the determination, in the the- 
oretical expression of the facts. The concrete con- 
tradiction that arises in thought also leads to- 
ward a further and, moreover, purposive examin- 
ing of the facts, toward the finding and analysing 
of just those facts that are lacking for solving the 
problem and resolving the given theoretical con- 
tradiction. 

If a contradiction arises of necessity in the the- 
oretical expression of reality from the very course 
of the investigation, it is not what is called a 
logical contradiction, though it has the formal 
signs of such but is a logically correct expression 
of reality. On the contrary, the logical contradic- 
tion, which there must not be in a theoretical in- 
vestigation, has to be recognised as a contradic- 
tion of terminological, semantic origin and pro- 
perties. Formal analysis is also obliged to dis- 
cover such contradictions in determinations; and 
the principle of contradiction of formal logic ap- 


342 


plies fully to them. Strictly speaking it relates to 
the use of terms and not to the process of the 
movement of a concept. The latter is the field of 
dialectical logic. But there another law is domi- 
nant, the law of the unity or coincidence of op- 
posites, a coincidence, moreover, that goes as far 
as their identity. It is that which constitutes the 
real core of dialectics as the logic of thought that 
follows the development of reality. 


---=-- ——- © 


ESSAY ELEVEN 


The Problem of the General in Dialectics 


The category of the general or universal oc- 
cupies an extremely important place in the body 
of dialectical logic. What is the general or uni- 
versal? Literally, in the meaning of the word, it 
is relating to all, i.e. to all individua, in the form 
of the limitless multitude of which the world 
within which we live and about which we speak 
presents itself to us at first glance. That is all the 
unquestionable, very likely, that can be said 
about the general, equally acceptable to everyone. 

Without going into the philosophical disagree- 
ments about the general or universal, one can 
note that the term ‘common’ (or rather ‘general’ 
or ‘universal’) is used very ambigously in the liv- 
ing language, indeterminately, and relates not 
only to different objects or meanings that do not 
coincide with one another, but also to directly 
opposite ones that are mutually exclusive. Any 
large dictionary (e.g. the Shorter Oxford Dic- 
tionary) contains a dozen such meanings. At the 
extremes of the spectrum, moreover, there are 


344 


————————————————————eeeeeee——eEOeeeeee 


meanings such as can scarcely be considered con- 
sistent or compatible. ‘Common’ is used even for 
two objects, let alone all, both for what apper- 
tains to each of them (like the biped nature or 
mortality of both Socrates and Caius, or like the 
velocity or speed of an electron and of a train) 
and cannot exist separately from the relevant in- 
dividua in the form of a separate ‘thing’, and for 
what exists precisely outside the individua in the 
form of a special individuum, namely a common 
ancestor, a common field (i.e. one for two (or all)), 
a common motor vehicle or entry, a common 
(mutual) friend or acquaintance, and so on and 
so forth. 

One and the same word, or one and the same 
sign, obviously does not serve just for one and the 
same thing. Whether one sees in that the imper- 
fection of natural language or on the contrary 
considers it the superiority of the flexibility of a 
living language over the rigidity of the definitions 
of an artificial language, the fact itself remains 
a fact and one, moreover, that is often encoun- 
tered and therefore calls for explanation. 

But then the quite reasonable question arises, 
whether or not it is possible to find something 
common between two extreme, mutually exclus- 
ive meanings of the world ‘common’ (or ‘general’) 
in the living language, equally sanctioned by us- 
age, to find the basis of the fact of the divergence 
of meanings. In the interpretation that is sanc- 
tioned as the ‘sole correct one’ by the tradition of 
formal logic, it is impossible to discover such a 
common attribute as would form part of the de- 


345 


finition of two polar meanings of ‘common’ (‘ge- 
neral’). Nevertheless, it is clear that here, as in 
many other cases, we are dealing with related 
words which, like human relatives, although they 
have nothing in common between them, all with 
equal right bear one and the same surname. 

This relationship between the terms of natural 
language was once brought out by Ludwig Witt- 
genstein as quite typical in the following exam- 
ple: Churchill-A has a family likeness to Chur- 
chill-B in attributes a, b, c; Churchill-B shares at- 
tributes b, c, d with Churchill-C; Churchill-D 
has only a single attribute in common with Chur- 
chill-A, while Churchill-E and Churchill-A have 
not a single one in common, nothing except the 
name. 

The image of a common ancestor, however, of 
a progenitor, cannot be reconstructed by abstract- 
ing those attributes, and only those, that are 
genetically preserved by all his (or her) descen- 
dants. There simply are no such attributes. But 
there is a community of name, recording a com- 
mon origin. 

It is the same with ‘common’ (‘general’) as a 
term. The original meaning of the word also 
cannot be established by a purely formal union of 
attributes, uniting all the offspring-terms into one 
family, into one class, because (to continue the 
analogy) Churchill-Alpha would have to be rep- 
resented as an individuum who was simulta- 
neously both brunette and blonde (not-brunette), 
both gangling and dwarfish, both snub-nosed and 
hook-nosed, and so on. 


346 


But there, of course, the analogy ends, because 
the position with related terms is rather differ- 
ent. The ancestor, as a rule, does not die but 
continues to live alongside all its offspring as an 
individuum among other individua, and the prob- 
lem consists in discovering among the existing 
separate individua the one that was born before 
the others and therefore could have given birth 
to all the rest. 

Among the attributes of a common ancestor 
who continues to live among his descendants, one 
has to presuppose a capacity to give birth to 
something which is opposite to itself, i.e. 
a capacity to give birth both to the gangling 
(in relation to itself) and the dwarfish (again 
in relation to itself). The common ancestor, 
consequently, can be representable as an individ- 
uum of medium height with a straight nose, and 
ash-grey locks, i.e. to ‘combine’ opposing deter- 
minations (if only potentially) in himself, to com- 
bine both the one and the other, directly oppo- 
site determinations in himself, like a solution or 
mixture. Thus the colour grey can be fully repre- 
sented as mixture of black and white, i.e. as si- 
multaneously white and black. There is nothing 
incompatible in that with the ‘common sense’ 
that Neopositivists like to enlist as an ally against 
dialectical logic. 

But it is just here that the two incompatible 
positions in logic, and in understanding of the 
general (universal), take shape—that of dialec- 
tics and the completely formal conception. The 
latter has no desire to admit into logic the idea 


347 


EE 


of development organically linked (both in es- 
sence and in origin) with the concept of sub- 
stance, i.e. the principle of the genetic community 
of phenomena that are at first glance quite heter- 
ogeneous (insofar as no abstract, common attri- 
butes can be discovered among them). 

It was thus that Hegel saw the point of depar- 
ture of the paths of dialectical thought (in his 
terminology ‘speculative’) and purely formal 
thought; and in that connection he highly values 
Aristotle’s relevant statement: ‘As to what con- 
cerns more nearly the relation of the three souls, 
as they may be termed (though they are incor- 
rectly thus distinguished), Aristotle says of them, 
with perfect truth, that we need look for no one 
soul in which all these are found, and which in a 
definite and simple form is conformable with 
any of them. This is a profound observation, by 
means of which truly speculative thought marks 
iuself out from the thought which is merely logi- 
cal and formal (my italics—EUIJ}. Similarly 
among figures only the triangle and the other def- 
inite figures, like the square, the parallelogram, 
etc., are truly anything; for what is common to 
them, the universal figure [or rather the ‘figure 
in general’—EU/], is an empty thing of thought, 
a mere abstraction. On the other hand, the trian- 
gle is the first, the truly universal figure, which 
appears also in the square, etc., as the figure 
which can be led back to the simplest determi- 
nation. Therefore, on the one hand, the triangle 
stands alongside of the square, pentagon, etc., as 
a particular figure, but—and this is Aristotle’s 


348 


main contention—it is the truly universal figure 
[or rather the ‘figure in general’—EUI/].... Aris- 
totle’s meaning is therefore this: an empty uni- 
versal is that which does not itself exist, or is not 
itself species. All that is universal is in fact real, 
in that by itself, without further change, it con- 
stitutes its first species, and when further devel- 
oped it belongs, not to this, but to a higher 
stage.”! 

If we look at the problem of the determination 
of the general as a universal (logical) category 
from this angle, or at the problem of the theoret- 
ical reconstruction of the common ancestor of a 
family of related meanings seemingly having 
nothing in common, there is some hope of resolv- 
ing it. 

The stand of formal logic, oriented on finding 
the abstract, common element in every single rep- 
resentative of one class (all having one and the 
same name) yields nothing in this instance. The 
general in this sense cannot be found here, and 
cannot for the reason that there actually is no 
such thing, not in the form of attribute or deter- 
mination actually common to all the individua, 
in the form of a resemblance proper to each of 
them taken separately. 

It is quite clear that the concrete (empirically 
obvious) essence of the link uniting the various 
individua in some ‘one’, in a common multitude 
or plurality, is by no means posited and expres- 


t Hegel’s Lectures on the History of Philosophy, Vol. Il, 
pp 185-186. 


349 


See aaa... 


sed in an abstract attribute common to them, or 
in a determination that is equally proper to the 
one and the other. Rather such unity (or com- 
munity) is created by the attribute that one in- 
dividuum possesses and another does not. And 
the absence of a certain attribute binds one indi- 
viduum to another much more strongly than its 
equal existence in both. 

Two absolutely equal individuals, each of 
which has the very same set of knowledge, habits, 
inclinations, etc., would be absolutely uninterest- 
ing to one another, and the one would not need 
the other. They would simply bore each other to 
death. It is nothing but a simple doubling of sol- 
itariness. The general is anything but continu- 
ously repeated similarity in every single object 
taken separately and represented by a common 
atiribute and fixed by a sign. The universal is 
above all the regular connection of two (or more) 
particular individuals that converts them into 
moments of one and the same concrete, real unity. 
And it is much more reasonable to represent this 
unity as the aggregate of different, separate mo- 
ments than as an indefinite plurality of units in- 
different to one another. Here the general func- 
tions as the law or principle of the connection of 
these details in the make-up of some whole, or 
totality as Marx preferred to call it, following 
Hegel. Here analysis rather than abstraction is 
called for. 

If we return to the question of the genetic com- 
munity of the different (and opposing) meanings 
that the term ‘common’ or ‘general’ (‘universal’) 


350 


has acquired in the evolution of the living lan- 
guage, the problem seemingly boils down to rec- 
ognising that among them which can confidently 
be considered as the progenitor-meaning, and 
then to tracing why and how the initial meaning, 
first in time and immediately simple in essence, 
was broadened so as to embrace something op- 
posite, something that was not originally intend- 
ed at all. Since it is difficult to suspect our re- 
mote ancestors of an inclination to invent ‘ab- 
stract objects’ and ‘constructions’, it is more log- 
ical (it would seem) to consider the original 
meaning the one that the term ‘common’ still 
preserves in such expressions as ‘common ances- 
tor’ and ‘common field’. Philological research 
provides evidence, incidentally, in favour of that 
view. ‘What would old Hegel say in the next 
world,’ Marx wrote with satisfaction to Engels, 
‘if he heard that the general (Allgemeine) in 
German and Norse means nothing but the com- 
mon land (Gemeinland), and the particular, Sun- 
dre, Besondere, nothing but the separate property 
divided off from the common land? Here are the 
logical categories coming damn well out of “our 
intercourse” after all.’ 

It is quite understandable that if we have in 
mind here the originally simple, ‘truly general’ 
meaning of the word, as Hegel would have said, 
then it is impossible to discover in the idea ac- 
cording to which the general (universal) precedes 

1 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. Selected Correspon- 


dence (International Publishers, New York, 1936) pp 236- 
237. 


851 


aa eaten! 


the individual, the separate, the particular, the 
isolated, or exclusive, both in essence and in time, 
even a hint of the refined mysticism that perme- 
ates the corresponding views of Neoplatonists and 
mediaeval Christian scholasticism, whereby the 
universal is made a synonym of the idea, being 
considered from the very beginning as the word, 
as logos, as something incorporeal, spiritualised, 
purely mental. On the contrary, the universal in 
its original meaning appears distinctly in the 
mind, and therefore in the language expressing 
it, as a synonym of a quite corporeal substance, in 
the form of water, fire, tiny uniform particles 
(‘indivisibles’), and so on. Such a notion may be 
considered naive (though in fact it is far from 
being so naive), crudely sensual, ‘too materialis- 
tic’, but there is not the slightest tendency to, or 
trace of, mysticism in it. 

It is therefore quite absurd to press the accu- 
sation that is constantly advanced against mate- 
rialism by its opponents, the accusation of a dis- 
guised Platonism that is immanently linked, as it 
were, with the thesis of the objective reality of 
the universal. If, of course, one takes the view 
from the very beginning (but why—we do not 
know) that the universal is the idea, and only 
the idea, then not only do Marx and Spinoza turn 
out to be ‘cryptoplatonists’ but also Thales and 
Democritus. 

One is forced to evaluate the identification of 
the universal with the idea (as the initial thesis 
of any system of philosophical idealism) as an 
axiom accepted quite without proof, as the purest 


352 


prejudice inherited from the Middle Ages. Its 
vitality is not fortuitous but is linked with the 
really immense role that the word and the verbal 
‘explication’ of the idea have played and play in 
the moulding of intellectual culture. From that, 
too, arises the illusion that the universal alleged- 
ly has its actual existence (its reality) only and 
exclusively in the form of Jogos, in the form of 
the meaning of a word, term, or linguistic sign. 
Since philosophical consciousness specially re- 
flecting on the universal is concerned from the 
very beginning with its verbal expression, the 
dogma of the identity of the universal and the 
sense (meaning) of a word also begins to seem a 
natural premise, and the soil on which it grows, 
and the air that it breathes, to be something self- 
evident. 

We would note in passing that the prejudice 
described here, read as absolute truth by modern 
Neopositivists, also seemed such to Hegel, who is 
not a favourite with them. Hegel, too, candidly 
suggested that materialism was impossible as a 
philosophical system on the grounds that philos- 
ophy was the science of the universal, and the 
universal was the idea, just the idea, and only 
the idea, and could not be anything else. He had 
the immense advantage over the latest devotees of 
this prejudice that he understood thought itself 
much more profoundly. Thus it was Hegel him- 
self who thoroughly undermined the prestige of 
the prejudice that consisted in identifying thought 
and speech; but he returned a prisoner to it by a 
roundabout route since, though he did not con- 


23—831 353 


eee 


sider the word the sole form of the being there 
of an idea, it retained the significance of the first 
form of its being for him, both in time and in 
essence. Hegel, and this was typical of him in 
general, first smashed the old prejudice, and then 
restored it to all its rights by means of a cun- 
ningly clever dialectical apparatus. 

The radical, materialist rethinking of the 
achievements of his logic (dialectics) carried 
through by Marx, Engels, and Lenin, was linked 
with affirmation of the objective reality of the 
universal, not at all in the spirit of Plato or He- 
gel, but rather in the sense of a law-governed 
connexion of material phenomena, in the sense 
of the law of their being joined together in the 
composition of some whole, in the context of a 
self-developing totality or aggregate, all the 
components of which were related as a matter of 
fact not by virtue of their possessing one and the 
same identical attribute, but by virtue of a unity 
of genesis, by virtue of their having one and the 
same common ancestor, or to put it more exactly, 
by virtue of their arising as diverse modifications 
of one and the same substance of a quite material 
character (i.e. independent of thought and word). 

Uniform phenomena therefore do not neces- 
sarily possess anything like a ‘family resemblance’ 
as the sole grounds for being counted as one 
class. The universal in them may be outwardly 
expressed much better in the form of differences, 
even of opposites, that make the separate phenom- 
ena complement one another, components of a 
whole, of some quite real, organic aggregate, and 


354 


not an amorphous plurality of units taken to- 
gether on the basis of a more or less chance at- 
tribute. On the other hand, the universal, which 
manifests itself precisely in the particularities, in 
the individual characteristics of all the compo- 
nents of the whole without exception, also exists 
in itself as a particular alongside other isolated 
individua derived from it. In that there is noth- 
ing even remotely mystical; a father often lives 
a very long time side by side with his sons. And 
if he is not present, he was once, of course, i.e. 
must be definitely thought of in the category of 
‘being there’. The genetically understood univer- 
sal does not simply exist, naturally, in the ether 
of the abstract, in the elements of the word and 
idea; and its existence in no way abolishes or 
belittles the reality of its modifications and of the 
separate individua derived from it and depen- 
dent on it. 

In Marx’s analysis of capital the concept of 
the universal that we have briefly described plays 
a most important methodological role. “Io the 
extent that we are considering it here, as a rela- 
tion distinct from that of value and money, cap- 
ital is capital in general, i.e. the incarnation of 
the qualities which distinguish value as capital 
from value as pure value or as money. Value, 
money, circulation, etc., prices, etc., are presup- 
posed, as is labour, etc. But we are still concerned 
neither with a particular form of capital, nor with 
an individual capital as distinct from other in- 
dividual capitals, etc. We are present at the pro- 
cess of its becoming. This dialectical process of 


38 355 


its becoming is only the ideal expression of the 
real movement through which capital comes into 
being. The later relations are to be regarded as 
developments coming out of this germ. But it is 
necessary to establish the specific form in which 
it is posited at a certain point. Otherwise confu- 
sion arises.’ 

Here there is very clearly brought out that 
relation between value and capital which Hegel, 
in the passage cited above, discovered between a 
triangle and a square, pentagon, etc., and, more- 
over, in a dual sense. (1) The concept of value 
in general is in no case defined here through the 
aggregate of the abstract, general attributes that 
one may want to discover in the composition of 
all its special forms (i.e. commodities, labour 
power, capital, rent, interest, etc., etc.) but is 
achieved by way of the most rigorous analysis of 
one single, quite specific, and actually existing 
relation between people, the relation of the direct 
exchange of one commodity for another. In the 
analysis of this value reality, reduced to its sim- 
plest form, the universal determinations of value 
are brought out that are later met (reproduced) 
at higher levels of development and analysis as 
abstract, general determinations of money, and 
labour power, and capital. 

(2) If we are concerned with defining capital 
in general, then, as Marx specially remarked, we 
must take the following point of principle into 
account, which has ‘more of a logical than an 


3 Karl Marx. Grundrisse, p 310. 


356 


economic character’.4 ‘...Capital in general, as 
distinct from the particular real capitals, is itself 
a real existence. This is recognised by ordinary 
economics, even if it is not understood, and forms 
a very important moment of its doctrine of equil- 
ibrations, etc. For example, capital in this ger- 
eral form, although belonging to individual ca- 
pitalists, in its elemental form as capital, forms 
the capital which accumulates in the banks or is 
distributed through them, and, as Ricardo says, 
so admirably distributes itself in accordance with 
the needs of production.® Likewise, through 
loans, etc., it forms a level between the different 
countries. If it is therefore e.g. a law of capital 
in general that, in order to realise itself, it must 
posit itself doubly, and must realise itself in this 
double form, then e.g. the capital of a particular 
nation which represents capital par excellence in 
antithesis to another will have to lend itself out 
to a third nation in order to be able to realise it- 
self. This double positing, this relating to self as 
to an alien, becomes damn real in this case. While 
the general is therefore on the one hand only a 
mental (gedachte) mark of distinction (differentia 
specifica), it is at the same time a particular real 
form alongside the form of the particular and in- 
dividual.’ It is ‘the same also in algebra,’ Marx 


4 Ibid, p 450. 

5 —. Ricardo. On the Principles of Political Economy 
(London, 1821) p 139 (Marx’s footnote). 

6 Karl Marx. Grundrisse, pp 449-450. [There is a foot- 
note in the Grundrisse at this point (cf. Hegel. Science of 
Logic, p 600. Translated by A. V. Miller, London, 1969): 


357 


eran 


continued. ‘For example, a, b, c, are numbers as 
such; in general; but then again they are whole 
numbers as opposed to a/b, b/c, c/b, c/a, b/a, etc., 
which latter, however, presuppose the former as 
their general elements’.’ 

The situation of the dialectical relation be- 
tween the general (universal) and the particular, 
the individual, by virtue of which the general 
cannot in principle be revealed in the make-up 
of the particular individuals by formal abstrac- 
tion (by way of identifying the similar or identi- 
cal in them) can be most vividly demonstrated by 
the example of the theoretical difficulties con- 
nected with the concept ‘man’, with the definition 
of the essence of man, the solution of which was 
found by Marx, basing himself precisely on a 
dialectical understanding of the problem of the 
general.8 ‘...The essence of man is no abstraction 
inherent in each separate individual. In its reality 
it is the ensemble (aggregate) of social relations,® 
as Marx aphoristically formulated his conception 
in the famous theses on Feuerbach. 

Here one clearly sees not only the sociological 
principle of Marx’s thinking, but also its logical 
principle. Translated into the language of logic, 
his aphorism means that it is useless to seek the 
general determinations expressing the essence of 


‘This universal action contains the three moments: univer- 
sality, particularity, and individuality.’—T7r.] 

7 Ibid., p 450. 

8 See E. V. Ilyenkov. Dialektika abstrakinogo i konkret- 
nogo v ‘Kapitale’ Marksa (The Dialectics of the Abstract 
and Concrete in Marx’s ‘Capital’) (Moscow, 1960). 

9 Karl Marx. Theses on Feuerbach. Op. cit., p 198. 


358 


——— SSS 


a class, be it the human race or some other genus, 
in a series of the abstract, general attributes pos- 
sessed by each member of the given class taken 
separately. The essence of human nature in gener- 
al can only be brought out through a scientific, 
critical analysis of the ‘whole aggregate’, the 
‘whole ensemble’, of man’s social and _ historical 
relations to man, through concrete investigation 
and understanding of the patterns within which 
the process of the birth and evolution both of 
human society as a whole and of the separate in- 
dividual has taken place and is taking place. 
The separate individual is only human in the 
exact and strict sense of the word, insofar as he 
actualises—and just by his individuality—some 
ensemble or other of historically developed fac- 
ulties (specifically human forms of life activity), 
some fragment or other of a culture formed be- 
fore and independently of him, and mastered by 
him during upbringing (the moulding of the per- 
son). From that angle the human personality can 
rightly be considered as an individual embodi- 
ment of culture, i.e. of the universal in man. 
Universality so understood is by no means a 
silent, generic ‘sameness’ of individuals but real- 
ity repeatedly and diversely broken up within it- 
self into particular (separate) spheres mutually 
complementing each other and in essence mutu- 
ally dependent on each other and therefore linked 
together by bonds of community of origin no less 
firm and no less flexible than the organs of the 
body of a biological specimen developed from one 
and the same egg cell. In other words, theoretical, 


859 


logical determination of the concrete universality 
of human life can consist solely in disclosing the 
necessity with which the diverse forms of specif- 
ically human life activity develop one from the 
other and in interaction of the one on the other, 
the faculties of social man and his corresponding 
needs. 

The materialist conception of the essence of 
man sees (in full agreement with the data of an- 
thropology, ethnography, and archaeology) the 
universal form of human life in Jabour, in the 
direct transformation of nature (both external 
and his own) that social man brings about with 
the help of tools made by himself. That is why 
Marx felt such sympathy to Benjamin Franklin’s 
famous definition (quoted in Boswell’s Life of 
Johnson) of man as a tool-making animal: a 
tool-making animal and only therefore also a 
thinking animal, talking, composing music, obey- 
ing moral norms, and so on. 

The definition of man in general as a tool- 
making animal is a typical example in which the 
Marxian conception of the universal as the con- 
cretely universal is seen most clearly of all, and 
also the Marxian conception of its relation to the 
particular and the individual. From the stand- 
point of the canons of formal logic this definition 
is much too concrete to be universal, for uader it 
such undoubted members of the human race as 
Mozart or Leo Tolstoy, Raphael or Kant cannot 
be subsumed. 

Formally such a definition applies only to a 
narrow circle of individuals, to the workers in 


860 


engineering works, say, or workshops. Even 
workers who do not make machines (or tools) 
but only use them, formally do not come within 
the scope of this definition. The old logic there- 
fore rightly regarded it not as a universal but 
exclusively as a particular definition, not as a def- 
inition of man in general but of a particular 
profession. 

The general (concretely universal) stands op- 
posed to the sensuously given variety of separate 
individuals primarily not as a mental abstrac- 
tion but as their own substance, as a concrete 
form of their interaction. As such it also em- 
bodies or includes the whole wealth of the particu- 
lar and individual in its concrete determinateness 
and that not simply as the possibility of develop- 
ment but as its necessity. The conception of the 
general and of its paths of scientific realisation 
described here is by no means the monopoly of 
philosophical dialectics. Science, in its real his- 
torical development, unlike its depiction in the 
epistemological and logical constructions of Neo- 
positivists, always begins, more or less consistent- 
ly, from such a concept of the universal, and that 
often in spite of the conscious logical precepts 
and maxims that its representatives profess. This 
circumstance is clearly traceable in the history 
of the concept ‘value’, a universal category of 
political economy. 

The abstraction of value in general and the 
word that records it are as old as market rela- 
tions. The Greek axia, the German Werth, and 
so on were not created by Sir William Petty, or 


24—831 361 


ae 


Adam Smith, or Ricardo. Every merchant and 
peasant of all ages used ‘value’ or ‘worth’ for 
everything that could be bought or sold, every- 
thing that cost something, or was worth some- 
thing. 

And if the theoretical political economists had 
tried to work out a concept of value in general, 
guided by the recipes that purely formal, nomi- 
nalistly oriented logic still suggests to science, 
they would never, of course, have done so. Here 
it has not been a matter at all, from the very 
beginning, of the bringing out of the abstractly 
general, of the similar that each of the objects 
possesses, which general word usage long ago 
united in the term ‘value’ (in that case it would 
simply introduce order into the notions that any 
shopkeeper uses, and the matter would be limited 
to simple ‘explication’ of the shopkeeper’s notions 
about value, to a simple, pedantic enumeraticn of 
the attributes of those phenomena to which the 
word ‘value’ is opposite, and no more; and the 
whole exercise would amount simply to clarifica- 
tion of the scope of the term’s applicability). 
The whole point, however, is that the classical 
political economists posed the question quite dif- 
ferently, so that the answer to it proved to be a 
concept, i.e. an awareness of the real generality. 
Marx pointed out clearly the essence of their 
posing of the question. 

The first English economist Sir William Petty 
arrived at the concept of value by the following 
reasoning: ‘If a man can bring to London an 
ounce of Silver out of the Earth in Peru in the 


362 


eg re gg en een 


same time that he can produce a Bushel of Corn, 
then one is the natural price of the other... .’!° 

Let us note in passing that in the reasoning 
adduced here the term ‘value’ is absent in gener- 
al, ‘natural price’ being spoken of. But we are 
present here right at the birth of the fundamen- 
tal concept of all subsequent science of the pro- 
duction, distribution, and accumulation of wealth. 
Here the concept also expresses (reflects) (like 
Hegel’s example of the triangle) such a real 
phenomenon given in experience as (being quite 
particular among other particulars) at the same 
time proves to be universal and represents value 
in general. 

The classical political economists spontaneously 
groped out the way of determining value in its 
general form; but in retrospect, having already 
formed the relevant concept, they tried to ‘verify’ 
it in accordance with the canons of logic, rely- 
ing on Locke’s notions about thought and the 
universal, which led them into a number of para- 
doxes and antinomies. The general, when they 
tried to ‘justify’ it by analysis of its own particu- 
lar variants, like profit and capital, was not only 
not confirmed, but was directly refuted by them, 
contradicted by them. 

Only Marx succeeded in establishing the rea- 
son for the origin of the various paradoxes, and 


10 Sir William Petty. A Treatise of Taxes and Contri- 
butions (London, 1667); cited by Karl Marx in Theories of 
Surplus-Value, Part 1, p 356. 


24° 363 


Oe 


so the way out; and he did so just because he was 
guided by dialectical notions of the nature of the 
general and its inter-relations with the particu- 
lar and the individual. The reality of the univer- 
sal in nature is a law, but a law in its reality (as 
is shown, in particular, by modern natural science, 
e.g. the physics of the microworld) is not realised 
as some abstract rule by which the move- 
ment of each single particle taken separately 
would be governed, but only as a tendency man- 
ifesting itself in the behaviour of a more or less 
complex ensemble of individual phenomena, 
through the breach and negation of the universal 
in each of its separate (individual) manifesta- 
tions. And thought is forced willy-nilly to take 
that circumstance into account. 

The general determinations of value (of the 
law of value) are worked out in Capital in the 
course of an analysis of one example of the con- 
creteness of value, historically the first and there- 
fore logically the simplest, i.e, the direct ex- 
change or barter of one commodity for another, 
with the most rigorous abstraction of all other 
individual forms (developed on its basis), namely 
money, profit, land rent, and so on. Marx saw 
the shortcoming of Ricardo’s analysis of value 
precisely in his not being able, when examining 
the problem of value in its general form, to for- 
get profit. That is why Ricardo’s abstraction 
proved incomplete and so formal. 

Marx himself obtained a solution of the prob- 
lem in general form because all the subsequent 
formations—not only profit but also even money 


364 


pI I I a ia i I 


—were taken as not existent at the start of the 
analysis. Only direct exchange or barter without 
money was analysed; and it was immediately 
clear that such a raising of its individual to the 
general differed in principle from the act of sim- 
ple, formal abstraction. Here the peculiarities of 
the simple commodity form, specifically distin- 
guishing it from profit, land rent, interest, and 
other individual forms of value, were not thrown 
away as something inessential; quite the contrary, 
their theoretical expression coincided with 
the determination of value in its general 
form. 

The incompleteness of Ricardo’s abstraction, 
and the formality linked with it, consisted pre- 
cisely in its being formed on the one hand through 
his inability to abstract it from the existence of 
other developed forms of value, and on the other 
hand through his abstracting of the peculiarities 
of direct commodity exchange. The general was 
thus taken in the end as completely isolated from 
the particular and separate, and ceased to be its 
theoretical expression. That is what distinguishes 
the dialectical conception of the general from the 
purely formal conception. 

The distinction between Marx’s dialectical ma- 
terialist conception, however, and the interpre- 
tation given the general in Hegel’s idealistic dia- 
lectics is no less important. And it is important 
to bring this out clearly for the reason that their 
conceptions are too often equated in Western lit- 
erature. Yet it is quite obvious that the orthodox 
Hegelian interpretation of the general, despite all 


365 


” 


its dialectical value, comes close, on a decisive 
point of principle and not just in details, to that 
very metaphysical view that Hegel himself had 
so strongly undermined the authority and_ in- 
fluence of. This comes out particularly clearly in 
the concrete applications of the principles of He- 
gelian logic to the analysis of real, earthly prob- 
lems. 

The point is as follows. When Hegel explains 
his ‘speculative’ conception of the general in op- 
position to the ‘purely formal’ on the example of 
geometrical figures (treating the triangle as ‘the 
figure in general’) it may seem at first glance 
that here was the logical schema in ready-made 
form that enabled Marx to cope with the prob- 
lem of the general determination of value. Ac- 
tually, it would seem that Hegel saw the dif- 
ference between genuine universality and purely 
formal abstraction in the truly general’s itself 
existing in the form of the particular, i.e. as an 
empirically given reality existing in time and 
space (outside men’s heads) and perceived in 
contemplation. 

According to Hegel, the general as such, in its 
strict and exact sense, exists exclusively in the 
ether of ‘pure thought’ and in no case in the space 
and time of external reality. In that sphere we 
are dealing only with a number of particular 
alienations, embodiments, hypostasies of the ‘ge- 
nuinely general’. 

That was why the definition of man as a tool- 
making animal would have been quite unaccept- 
able to Hegelian logic, and logically incorrect. 


366 


For the orthodox Hegelian, as for any represen- 
tative of the formal logic criticised by him (a 
very notable unanimity!), Franklin’s definition 
(and Marx’s) was much too concrete to be general 
or universal. In the production of tools Hegel 
saw not the basis of everything human in man, 
but only one, though important, manifestation of 
his thinking nature. In other words the idealism 
of the Hegelian interpretation of the general 
leads to the very same result as the metaphysical 
interpretation he so disliked. 

When Hegelian logic is taken in its pristine 
form as the means of evaluating the movement 
of thought in the first chapters of Capital, the 
whole movement seems ‘illegitimate’ and ‘illog- 
ical’. The Hegelian logician would be right, from 
his angle, if he were to say of Marx’s analysis of 
value that there was no general determination of 
this category in it, that Marx only ‘described’ but 
did not theoretically ‘deduce’ the determination 
of one special, particular form of the realisation 
of value in general, because that, like any truly 
general category of human life activity, was a 
form immanent in the ‘rational will’ and not in 
man’s external being, in which it was only mani- 
fested and materialised. 

So Hegelian logic, despite all its superiority 
over formal logic, could not and cannot be taken 
into the armoury of materialistically oriented 
science without any essential amendments, and 
without a radical purging of all traces of ideal- 
ism. For idealism did not remain something 
‘external’ for logic at all, but orientated the very 


367 


logical sequence of thought. When Hegel spoke, 
for example, of the transitions of opposing cate- 
gories (including the general and the particular), 
the schema of the examination then and there re- 
ceived a one-way character. In the Hegelian 
schema there could be no place, say, for the tran- 
sition that Marx discovered in the determinations 
of value, the transformation of the singular or 
individual into the general. With Hegel only the 
general had the privilege of alienating itself in 
forms of the particular and the singular, while 
the singular always proved to be a product, a 
particular ‘modus’ of universality (and therefore 
poor in content). 

The actual history of economic (market) rela- 
tions testified, however, in Marx’s favour, dem- 
onstrating that the form of value in general was 
by no means always the general form of the or- 
ganisation of production. It became the general, 
but up to a certain point (and for very long) it 
remained a particular relation happening from 
time to time between people and things in produc- 
tion. Only capitalism made value (the commodity 
form of the product) the general form of the inter- 
relations of the components of production. 

This transition of the individual and chance 
into the general was not at all rare in history, but 
was even rather the rule. It has always happened 
in history that phenomena that subsequently be- 
came general arose first precisely as individual 
exceptions to the rule, as anomalies, as something 
particular and partial. Hardly anything really 
new can arise in any other way. 


368 


It is in the light of that, that the rethinking to 
which the Hegelian dialectical conception of the 
general was subjected by Marx and Lenin must 
be understood. While preserving all the dialecti- 
cal moments noted by Hegel, materialism deep- 
ened and broadened its conception, transform- 
ing the category of the general or universal into 
the most important category of the logic of con- 
crete investigation of concrete, historically de- 
veloping phenomena. 

In the context of the materialist conception of 
the dialectics of history and the dialectics of 
thought, the Hegelian formulas sound differently 
from on the lips of their creator, having lost all 
mystical colouring. The general includes and em- 
bodies in itself the whole wealth of details, not as 
the ‘idea’ but as a quite real, particular phenom- 
enon with a tendency to become general, and 
developing ‘from itself’ (by virtue of its inner 
contradictions) other just as real phenomena, 
other particular forms of actual movement. And 
there is not a trace of any of the Platonic-Hege- 
lian mystique in that. 


CONCLUSION 


Quite understandably we have not undertaken 
the task here of giving a systematic exposition of 
Marxist-Leninist logic. That is beyond the pow- 
ers of a single person, and can scarcely be done 
within the space of one book. We have simply 
tried to throw some light on a number of the 
conditions and premises for further work in that 
direction, which we consider should be a collec- 
tive effort. 

We think, however, that only by taking the 
conditions formulated above into account can 
such a work be successful, i.e. lead to the creation 
of a capital work which could rightly bear one 
of three titles: Logic, Dialectics, or The Theory 
of Knowledge (of the modern, materialist world 
outlook); and which could take as its epigraph 
Lenin’s words: “Three words are not needed: it is 
one and the same thing.’ 

The creation of a Logic understood as a sys- 
tem of categories, of course, constitutes only one 
stage. The next step would have to be the real- 
isation, actualisation of the logical system in a 


370 


concrete scientific investigation, because the end 
product of all work in the field of philosophical 
dialectics is the resolution of the concrete prob- 
lems of concrete sciences. Philosophy alone 
cannot achieve this ‘end product’; that calls for 
an alliance of dialectics and concrete scientific 
research, understood and realised as the business- 
like collaboration of philosophers and natural 
scientists, of philosophy and social and historical 
fields of knowledge. But in order for dialectics to 
be an equal collaborator in concrete scientific 
knowledge, it ‘must’ first develop the system of 
its own specific philosophical concepts, from the 
angle of which it could display the strength of 
critical distinction in relation to actually given 
thought and consciously practised methods. 

It seems to us that this conclusion stems direct- 
ly from the analysis we have presented here, and 
that this conception corresponds directly to Le- 
nin’s ideas both in the field of philosophical dia- 
lectics and on the plane of the inter-relations of 
the Jatter and the other branches of scientific 
knowledge. It appears to us that, in the concep- 
tion set out above, logic does become an equal 
collaborator with the other sciences, and not their 
servant, and not their supreme overseer, not a 
‘science of sciences’ crowning their system as just 
another variety of ‘absolute truth’. Understood as 
logic philosophical dialectics becomes a necessary 
component of the scientific, materialist world 
outlook, and no longer claims a monopoly real- 
isation of that outlook, or a monopoly in relation 
to the ‘world as a whole’. The scientific world 


371 


outlook can only be described by the whole sys- 
tem of modern sciences. That system also in- 
cludes philosophical dialectics, and without it 
cannot claim either fullness or scientism. 

The scientific world outlook that does not in- 
clude philosophy, logic, and the theory of knowl- 
edge, is as much nonsense as the ‘pure’ philosophy 
that assumes that it alone is the world outlook, 
taking on its shoulders a job that can only be 
done by a whole complex of sciences. Philosophy 
is also the logic of the development of the world 
outlook, or, as Lenin put it, its ‘living soul’, 


REQUEST TO READERS 


Progress Publishers would be glad to have 
your opinion of this book, its translation and 
design and any suggestions you may have for 
future publications. 

Please send all your comments to 21, Zu- 
bovsky Boulevard, Moscow, USSR. 


Progress Publishers 
will soon publish 


KUZNETSOV B. The Philosophy of 
Optimism 

Professor Boris Kuznetsov, 
author of this work, is a philo- 
sopher, physicist, science histo- 
rian, economist, President of the 
International Einstein Commit- 
tee. He is a well-known author 
and three of his books have 
already been published in 
English: Einstein (Moscow, 
1965), Einstein and Dostoyevsky 
(London, 1972), Reason and 
Being (Boston, 1974). 

This particular work has 
already appeared in a French- 
language version § (Brussels, 
1972). It treats various aspects 
of non-classical science, and its 
links with the scientific and 
technological progress at the 
end of the 20th century. 

The Philosophy of Optimism 
marks a new departure in the 
modern history of science and it 
is intended for readers acquain- 
ted with the history of philos- 
ophy and the basic principles of 
non-classical science. 


Progress Publishers 
will soon publish 


POPOV S. Socialism and Humanism 


Professor S. Popov, Doctor of 
Philosophy, is well known to 
Soviet readers as the author of 
a number of monographs on the 
history of philosophy and criti- 
cisms of modern bourgeois re- 
formist and revisionist ideology. 

This book discusses the emer- 
gence and development of the 
Marxist theory of humanism. 
Considerable attention is devo- 
ted to the practical application 
of the principles of Marxist- 
Leninist humanism in a devel- 
oped socialist society. The 
author demonstrates the inhu- 
man essence of imperialism 
and criticises current pseudo- 
humanist and anti-humanist theo- 
ries, including those connected 
with anti-scientism, technopho- 
bia and neo-Malthusianism. 
The author convincingly shows 
that the proponents of socialist 
humanism are far from being 
sectarian and that their natural 
allies are all who fight for peace, 
democracy and social progress. 


