A DICTIONARY 
PHILOSOPHY 





F 


A DICTIONARY OF PHILOSOPHY 


Edited by M. Rosenthal 
and P. Yudin 


Gu 
PROGRESS PUBLISHERS 
MOSCOW - 1967 





Translated from the Russian 


Edited by Richard R. Dixon and Murad Saifulin 


PHJIOCOPCKHÄÖ CJIOBAPb 


Ha aneauticxom nsoixe 








First printing 1967 


Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 











A uniform system of abbreviations has been adopt- 
ed for ease of reference. The word or words con- 
tained in the heading of each article are not repeat- 
ed in that article but are referred to by the initial 
letter or letters; in the article on Aristotle, for 
instance, the name “Aristotle” is replaced by the 
letter A.; in the article on Absolute and Relative 
Truth (two different categories compared} the letters 
A.T. are used for “Absolute Truth” and R.T. for 
“Relative Truth”; A. & R.T. represents the full title. 
References to books are given in italics; references 
to other articles are followed by the letters q.v.; 
where the title of an article consists of several 
words it is enclosed in brackets and preceded by the 
word “see”. This double system has been adopted 
because (a) some of the headings contain a number 
of words and come alphabetically under the initial 
letter of the first, whereas the (q.v.) comes after 
the last word; (b) italics alone would not suffice 
because the editors have followed the usual British 
practice of printing the titles of books, foreign 
words and expressions, etc., in italics. All other 
abbreviations are self-explanatory. 








A 


Abélard, Pierre (1079-1142), French 
philosopher and theologian; in the dis- 
pute about the nature of the universal, 
q.v. (the expression of the struggle 
between materialism and idealism) 
supported the idea of conceptualism 
(q.v.) which is close to materialism. 
He also polemised against scholastic 
realism (see Realism, Medieval). A.’s 
book Sic et Non demanded that reli- 
gious faith be restricted to “rational 
premises” and revealed irreconcilable 
contradictions in the utterances of the 
church authorities; under medieval 
conditions this book was of progressive 
significance and was condemned by 
the Catholic Church as heretical. 

Abilities, in a broad sense, the psy- 
chic properties of the individual which 
regulate his behaviour and serve as 
the condition of his activity. Poten- 
tially, A. are represented by a system 
of conditioned and unconditioned con- 
nections adapted for the performance 
of some activity. The formation of 
this activity, in which A. make them- 
selves manifest, is at once the for- 
mation of the relevant system of nerv- 
ous connections. A. already formed 
become the points of departure for the 
development of A. of a higher level. 
The most universal A. of the individ- 
ual are his sensory capacities, which 
improve during the entire length of 
his philo- and ontogenetic development. 
In the special sense, A. stand for the 
set of psychic properties that fit the 
individual for a definite, historically 
developed type of professional activity. 
In contrast to animals, whose A. are 
a synthesis of generic and individual 
experience handed down through the 
mechanism of biological heredity, 
man’s A. are a product of social devel- 
opment. Their formation implies the 
acquisition by the individual of 


the forms of activity worked out by 
mankind in the course of its socio- 
historical development. Thus, man’s 
A. depend not only on the activity 
of his brain, but above all on the 
level of historical development at- 
tained by mankind. In this sense, 
man’s A. are closely associated with 
the social organisation of labour and 
the pertinent system of education. In 
exploiting society the formation of 
A. in working people is retarded in 
every possible way. At the same time, 
the position of the exploited classes is 
usually “justified? on the plea that 
the working people lack highly devel- 
oped A. The harmonious development 
of versatile A. to give every man access 
to a variety of professions and forms 
of activity is one of the principal 
tasks in the building of communism. 

Absolute, The, a term used in ideal- 
ist philosophy to denote the eternal, 
infinite, unconditional, perfect and 
unchanging subject that is “complete 
in itself’, has no dependence on any- 
thing else, contains within itself every- 
thing that exists, and creates everything 
that exists. In religion the A. is God; 
in Fichte’s (q.v.) philosophy it is the 
ego, in Hegel’s (q.v.) it is the universal 
principle (the absolute spirit), in Scho- 
penhauer’s (q.v.) it is will, in Bergson’s 
(q.v.) it is intuition. Dialectical mate- 
rialism rejects the concept of the A. 
as unscientific. 

The Absolute and the Relative, as a 
philosophical category the A. is un- 
conditional, independent, irrelative, 
complete in itself, unconditioned and 
immutable; the R. describes a phenom- 
enon in its relations and connections 
with other phenomena and its depend- 
ence on them. On the whole, matter 
in motion is not conditioned and not 
limited by anything, it is eternal and 





Absolute Idealism 


inexhaustible, i.e., it is absolute. The 
infinite number of kinds of matter, 
the concrete forms of its motion that 
are constantly replacing each other, 
are temporary, finite, transitory, rel- 
ative. Every thing is relative but it 
is a part of a whole and in that sense 
contains within itself an element of the 
absolute; that which is relative in one 
connection is absolute in another, etc. 
From this it follows that the difference 
between the relative and the absolute 
is also relative. 

Absolute Idealism, see Idealism, Ob- 
jective. 

The Abstract and the Concrete Be- 
fore Hegel (q.v.) the C. was understood 
mainly as the sensually perceived mul- 
tiformity of individual objects and 
phenomena and the A. as the product 
of the mind alone (see Abstraction). 
Hegel was the first to make use of the 
categories of A. & C. in that specific 
philosophical meaning which was later 
to be developed in Marxist philosophy 
—the C. is a synonym of dialectic 
interrelations, of dismembered whole- 
ness; the A. is not counterposed to the 
C. but is a stage in the development 
of C. itself; it is the unrevealed, unde- 
veloped C. (Hegel compares the relation 
between the A. and the C. to the bud 
and the fruit, the acorn and the oak 
tree). According to Hegel, however, C. 
describes only the “spirit”, the thought, 
the “absolute idea”. Nature and the 
social relations of people are an il- 
lusory “other-being”, an abstract rev- 
elation of individual aspects or mo- 
ments in the life of the absolute spirit. 
In Marxist philosophy the subject or 
vehicle of C. is material reality, the 
universe of sensually perceived finite 
things and phenomena. The C. of an 
object is the objective interrelations 
of its aspects, determined by the es- 
sential, law-governed relations that 
underlie them; the C. of cognition is 
the reflection of those real interrela- 
tions in a system of concepts that 
structurally and genetically reproduce 
the objective content of the object 
being cognised. A. in real life is the 
expression of the non-whole, of the 
not fully unfolded, not fully developed 
and limited nature of any of the frag- 


= 65 


Abstract Art 


ments of the whole, since the frag- 
ment is taken in isolation (particu- 
larised), divorced from its intermediary 
connections and from its former and 
subsequent. history. Abstract knowl- 
edge, therefore, is counterposed to 
concrete knowledge because it is one- 
sided, expresses only one particular 
aspect of an object isolated from its 
connection with other aspects, isolated 
from that which determines the spe- 
cific nature of the whole. The purpose 
of theoretical knowledge, therefore, 
cannot and must not be merely the 
reproduction of the sensual multiform- 
ity; nor can that purpose be served 
by the isolation of certain “absolute” 
logical connections. As soon as such 
connections are isolated, they lose 
their concreteness and their truthful- 
ness. Really scientific theoretical cog- 
nition consists of a thought process 
that proceeds from the sensual multi- 
formity of the C. and achieves the 
reproduction of the object in all its 
essentiality and complexity. The meth- 
od for the reproduction of a whole 
in the consciousness is the ascent from 
the A. to the C.; this is the universal 
form in which scientific knowledge 
unfolds; the systematic reflection of 
the object in concepts. The ascent 
from the A. to the C., being a means 
of linking up concepts, is an integral 
system which reflects the objective 
dismemberment of the aspects of the 
object of study and the unity of ali 
its aspects, presupposes an original 
movement from the C. (perceived by 
contemplation) to the A. During this 
latter process, concepts are formed 
which reflect individual aspects and 
properties of the object that can them- 
selves be understood only insofar as 
they are regarded as parts of the whole, 
determined by its specific content. 
It is, therefore, essential to distinguish 
the C. which is the object of study, the 
starting point of the investigation (the 
sensual C.) from the C. which is the 
end-product, the result of the investi- 
gation, the scientific concept of the 
object (the thought C.). 

Abstract Art, a formalist trend in 
modern art that does not depict real 
objects. The theoreticians of A., such 





Abstract Identity 


as Michel Souphor, call a work of art 
abstract if it does not contain any- 
thing reminiscent of or in any way re- 
flecting reality as observed. A.A. is 
the logical culmination of cubism (q.v.), 
futurism (q.v.) and other formalist 
trends. One of the earliest abstract 
pictures was that of the Russian artist 
V. Kandinsky (1866-1944), painted in 
1910. Another Russian abstractionist, 
K. Malevich (1878-1935) called his art 
“suprematism”. A.A. soon emerged in 
France (Robert Delaunay) and Holland 
(the Stijl group, 1917; P. Mondrian; 
T. van Doesburg, and others). Since 
the Second World War A.A. has flour- 
ished in many capitalist countries, 
especially in the US (Jackson Pol- 
lock, Mark Rothko, and others). Its 
epistemological basis is subjectivism 
and idealism, in which art is divorced 
from life and the rational and the 
emotional (intuitive) aspects of the 
creative process are in antithesis, as 
are art forms and their ideological 
content. A.A. rejects the reproduction 
in art of the typical images of people, 
teal events and man’s environment, 
thus making if impossible to express 
the meaning and purpose of life in 
works of art. A.A. replaces the beauty 
and drama of reality inherent in all 
true art by the expression of some mys- 
tic “spiritual reality”, “intuitive ener- 
gy”, “vibrations of the human sub- 
conscious”. Typical of A.A. is the 
complete destruction of the art image 
by the extreme distortion of real forms, 
by turning images into a chaos of 
meaningless patches, lines, dots, planes 
and three-dimensional figures. 
Abstract Identity, see Identity. 
Abstraction, that aspect or form of 
cognition which mentally isolates prop- 
erties of an object or connections 
between its properties from the others. 
Both the process and its result are 
called A. In the process of A. it is 
sometimes necessary to disregard cer- 
tain of man’s subjective possibilities. 
It is impossible, for instance, to “count” 
the entire series of natural numbers, 
but if we disregard that possibility 
we get the abstraction of actual (i.e., 
“counted”, “completed”) infinity. The 
various concepts and categories—mat- 


a y5 


Academy of Plato 


ter, motion, value are the result of 
A. All cognition is inevitably con- 
nected with processes of A. Without 
them it is impossible to reveal the 
substance or penetrate into the “depth” 
of an object. The breaking down of 
an object, the isolation of its essential 
aspects and their all-round analysis 
in their “pure” form, all result from 
the mental work of abstraction. Lenin 
said the following about the signifi- 
cance of A. for cognition: “Thought pro- 
ceeding from the concrete to the ab- 
stract—provided it is correct...—does 
not get away from the truth but comes 
closer to it. The abstraction of matter, 
of a law of nature, the abstraction of 
value, etc., in short all scientific (cor- 
rect, serious, not absurd) abstractions 
reflect nature more deeply, truly and 
completely”. (Lenin, Vol. 38, p. 17].) 
The nature of A., and specifically what 
is to be extracted in each definite 
case, and which aspects of the object 
mental abstraction is to proceed from 
are all determined by the tasks of 
man’s practical and cognitive activ- 
ity and by the nature of the object 
being investigated. Practice is the 
criterion by which the true scientific 
nature of the Aa. introduced into 
science is judged. Dialectical material- 
ism provides a scientific explanation 
of the process of A. and its results. 
Idealism often speculated on the dif- 
ficulties connected with the thought 
processes of abstraction. Lenin warned 
that the possibility of idealism is 
inherent even in the most elementary 
A. The conversion of the products of A. 
(concepts, ideas) into the substance 
and the primary principle of the Uni- 
verse is typical of idealist philosophy. 
Idealism regards A. as the result of 
the activity of the mind, in no way 
connected with the objective world 
and the practical activities of man. 
Such a conception of A. is typical 
of modern positivism (q.v.) and other 
idealist trends. In dialectical logic 
(q.v.), the concept A. is also used to 
mean something one-sided and unde- 
veloped as distinct from concrete (see 
the Abstract and the Concrete). 
Academy of Plato, an ancient ideal- 
ist philosophical school founded by 





ae 
4 


a 


ia ae aa Coated as ae 


ee penne 


Accident 


ga 


Activity 





Plato (q.v.) in 387 B.C. near Athens 
which took its name from the grove 
in which it met. The influence of the 
Pythagoreans (q.v.) became great in 
the Older Academy (Speusippus and 
others, 4th-3rd centuries B.C.), and 
Plato’s views were systematised on the 
basis of the mystic theory of numbers. 
The Academy played an important 
part in the development of mathemat- 
ics and astronomy. The Middle Acad- 
emy (Arcesilaus and others, 3rd centu- 
ty B.C.) was influenced by scepticism 
(q.v.). The New Academy (Carneades 
and others, 2nd-Ist centuries B.C.) 
developed the scepticism of the Middle 
Academy and opposed the teachings 
of the stoics (q.v.) on the criterion 
of truth. In the later period the A.P. 
eclectically combined the teachings 
of. the Platonic, stoic, Aristotelian, 
and other schools. In the 4th and 5th 
centuries the A. went over completely 
to the doctrine of Neo-Platonism, 
q.v. (Plutarch of Athens). A.P. was 
closed in 529 by the Emperor Justin- 
ian. A.P. was founded in Florence 
at the time of the Renaissance (1459- 
1521) which combated from the Pla- 
tonic position a scholasticised Aristotle 
and translated and commented the 
writings of Plato (Marsilio Ficino). 

Accident, a temporary, transient, 
non-essential property of a thing as 
opposed to that which is essential, 
substantial (see Substance). The term 
was first used by Aristotle (q.v.) and 
became widespread in scholasticism 
(q.v.) and in the philosophy of the 
17th and 18th centuries. Not used in 
Marxist philosophy. 

Acosta (da Costa), Uriel (born in 
Portugal between 1585 and 1590, died 
1640), Dutch philosopher, rationalist; 
received Catholic education. Fled to 
Holland in 1614, renounced Christi- 
anity for Judaism (q.v.}. Soon opposed 
Jewish religious dogmatism and ac- 
cused the Pharisees (rabbis) of dis- 
torting the Mosaic faith. In 1623 he 
wrote a treatise on Sobre a mortalidade 
da alma do homen in which he denied 
the immortality of the soul and life 
beyond the grave. Was twice excom- 
municated from the Sinagogue for his 
views (1623 and 1633). Persecuted by 


the rabbis and the Dutch authorities, 
he committed suicide. His Exemplar 
humanae vitae criticises official reli- 
gion and also the idea of the natural 
law supposed to be inherent in man; 
this Jaw joins people together by mu- 
tual love and serves as basis for dis- 
tinguishing good from evil. A.’s ideas 
had an influence on Spinoza (q.v.). 

Action, Immediate and at a Distance, 
opposite concepts employed to explain 
the general character of the interaction 
of physical objects. The concept of 
I.A. states that an effect on a material 
object can be transmitted only from a 
given point in space to the immediate- 
ly adjacent point and within a finite 
period of time. A.D. admits of action 
transmitted from a distance with in- 
stantaneous speed, i.e., this concep- 
tion virtually admits of action outside 
time and space. After Newton (q.v.), 
this conception was widely accepted 
in physics, although Newton himself 
realised that the forces of A.D. which 
he had introduced (gravitation, for 
example) were merely a formal device 
enabling him to give a limitedly cor- 
rect description of observed phenomena. 
Final confirmation of the principle 
of I.A. came with the evolution of the 
concept of a physical field, the equa- 
tions of which describe the condition 
of a system at a given point and at 
a given moment as directly depending 
on the condition at the immediately 
preceding moment and the immediately 
adjacent point. 

Activity (psychic), a concept con- 
noting the function of the subject in 
its interaction with the object. A. is a 
specific relation of a living body to 
its environment; it mediates, regulates, 
and controls relations between the or- 
ganism and the environment, notably 
metabolism. A. is impelled by need, 
aimed at the object which can satisfy 
this need, and effected by a system of 
actions. It presumes that the body 
has mental powers, but at once con- 
stitutes the basic cause for the origin 
of this power and the motive force 
of its development. The elementary 
form of A. should be distinguished 
from its highest form. The former is 
typical of animals and consists in the 


es 





Actualisation 


instinctive (see Instinct) adaptation of 
the body to its environment. The latter, 
which stems from the former and trans- 
forms it, is exclusively an attribute 
of man. The specifically distinctive 
feature of the highest form of A. is 
man’s deliberate effort to transform 
his environment. The A. of man has 
a social complexion and is determined 
by the social conditions of life. The 
basic and historically primary form 
of A. of man is labour, by which man 
alters the shape of what is given by 
nature and “also realises a purpose of 
his own that gives the law to his modus 
operandi, and to which he must sub- 
ordinate his will”. (Marx, Capital, 
Vol. I, p. 178.) A. of man may be in- 
ternal or external. The former consists 
of specifically human operations with 
existing objects effected by the move- 
ment of arms, hands, fingers, and 
legs. The latter proceeds “in the mind” 
by means of “mental actions”, wherein 
man operates not with existing objects 
and not through physical movements, 
but with their images (q.v.). Interna! 
A. plans external A. It arises on the 
basis of external A. and realises itself 
through it. Development of labour 
causes a differentiation between theo- 
retical and practical forms of A. of 
man. Practical A. is aimed directly 
at altering some situation. In contrast, 
the purpose of theoretical A. is to 
establish the method of this alteration, 
to discover the laws which govern it. 
Theoretical A. develops under the 
influence of practical A. and facilitates 
fulfilment of the tasks of practical A. 
According to the range of man’s needs, 
there also arises the range of concrete 
types of A., each of which usually 
embraces elements of external and in- 
ternal, practical and theoretical A. 
Actualisation, or changes in being. 
This concept reveals only one aspect 
of motion—the transition of existence 
from a state of potentiality to a state 
of reality. In scholasticism (q.v.), 
Aristotle’s (q.v.) explanation of A. 
was bound to lead to the non-dialectical 
recognition of the stationary source of 
motion external to real being—the 
prime mover, or God as a pure act. 
The idea of the transition from the 


Aesthetic and Ethic 





potential to the real is most fully ex- 
pressed in the categories of materialist 
dialectics (see Possibility and Reality). 
The concept A. is not used in Marxist 
philosophy. 

Actuality, whatever exists and de- 
velops, contains its own essence and 
laws, and the results of its own action 
and development. Such A. is objective 
reality in all its concreteness. In that 
sense, A. differs not only from all the 
seeming, fancied and fantastic, but also 
from all the purely logical (reasoned), 
albeit entirely correct. It differs 
also from the merely possible, probable, 
but as yet inexistent (see Being, Real- 
ity, Matter, Essence, Existence). 

Adequate, the theory of knowledge 
regards as A. those images and that 
knowledge which correspond to the 
original object and are therefore authen- 
tic. The problem of the degree 
of adequacy, i.e., the exactness, pro- 
fundity, and fullness of a reflection and 
the process of obtaining the most ade- 
quate knowledge is connected with 
the problem of the correlation between 
relative and absolute truth and that 
of the criterion of true knowledge (see 
Truth). 

Aenesidemus (ist century B.C.), 
Greek sceptic philosopher, a pupil of 
Pyrrho (q.v.) and the follower of Pla- 
to’s Academy, who upheld scepticism 
(q.v.). According to A., it is impos- 
sible to have any authentic knowledge 
of things, because any assertion can 
be countered by an opposite assertion. 
It is best to renounce all assertions, 
because only in this way is it possible 
to attain inner satisfaction. One should 
act as everybody else usually acts, or 
as prompted by some indispensable 
need. A.’s philosophy was a product 
of the disintegration of classical Greek 
philosophy. 

Aesthetic and Ethic, the specific 
aspects of man’s relation to reality. 
The E. expresses in moral evaluations 
of the good and the evil, the just and 
the unjust, duty, honour, etc., the 
actions of man or groups of men, and 
their actions. The A. is a sensory em- 
bodiment of those aspects of objective 
social relations (including the assimi- 
lation of the forces of nature) which 








Å 
s 
$ 
$ 
| 
t 
$ 
j 
| 
i 
$ 
$ 
ý 
t 


{ 





Aesthetic Feelings 


Aesthetics 





promote, or do not promote, the har- 
monious development of the individ- 
ual, his free creation of the beautiful 
(q.v.), his realisation of the noble 
and heroic, his struggle against 
the ugly (q.v.) and the base. The A. 
also includes the subjective aspect— 
man’s enjoyment of the free display 
of his creative abilities and powers, 
of the beauty of the products of his 
creative activity in all spheres of so- 
cial and private life (labour, social 
relations, everyday life, culture). The 
arts (q.v.) are the fullest and most 
generalised expression of the A. They 
were singled out by the social division 
of labour from the sphere of practical 
activity and made a more or less in- 
dependent specific sphere of artistic 
creation. The unity of the A. and the 
E. is an objective law, appearing both 
in life and the arts. In the words of 
Belinsky (q.v.), beauty is morality’s 
own sister; if a work of art is truly 
artistic, it is moral by the same token. 
The unity of the A. and the E. is a 
most important principle of socialist 
realism. The positive artistic images 
reflecting the life of people, their no- 
bility and beauty command respect, 
love, and sincere admiration. Types 
of real heroes in life give the reader 
and the audience aesthetic enjoyment 
and delight. Negative images arouse 
feelings of moral condemnation and 
disgust, closely connected in character 
with the feelings of contempt and 
disgust we experience when we per- 
ceive what is ugly and base. Hence, 
the unity of the A. and the E. is the 
basis of the educational and ideologi- 
cally transforming role of the arts in 
social life. 

Aesthetic Feelings, emotional con- 
dition arising in the process of aesthetic 
perception of the phenomena of reality 
or works of art. Since man’s artistic 
attitude is ideologically emotional, it 
is neither exhausted by the A.F. nor 
can it exist without them. A.F. are 
a product of human historical develop- 
ment, an active assimilation of the 
aesthetic properties of both reality and 
the arts.°A.F. arise as an apprehension 
of either the beautiful or the noble, 
the tragic or the comic, according to 


the type of the aesthetic property. 
Works of art which materialise the 
A.F. in images are an effective means 
of either ideological or emotional edu- 
cation. They are meant to be a source 
of human joy and inspiration. 
Aesthetics, the science of the law- 
governed aesthetical assimilation of 
the world by man, of the essence and 
the laws of the development and the 
socially-transforming role of art (q.v.) 
as a special form of this assimilation. 
A. originated about 2,500 years ago, 
in the period of slave-owning society 
in Babylon, Egypt, India, and China. 
It was greatly developed in ancient 
Greece, in the works of Heraclitus, 
Democritus, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, 
and others; in ancient Rome, in the 
works of Lucretius, Horace, and oth- 
ers. The thinkers of the Renaissance 
(F. Petrarch, L. B. Alberti, Leonardo 
da Vinci, A. Diirer, J. Bruno, M. Mon- 
taigne, and others) developed human- 
istic, realistic trends in the struggle 
against the mystic medieval doctrines 
in the West on “divine beauty” (St. 
Augustine, Thomas of Aquinas). The 
theoreticians of the Enlightenment 
(Burke, Hogarth, Diderot, Rousseau, 
Winckelmann, Lessing, Herder, etc.), 
and the continuers of their tradition 
Schiller and Goethe affirmed that the 
arts are linked with real life; in this 
way they tried to defeat the reaction- 
ary ideas of aristocratic A. In spite 
of the fact that Kant, Schelling, and 
Hegel—the classics of German philos- 
ophy at the end of the 18th and begin- 
ning of the 19th century—succeeded 
in their attempts to treat a number 
of aesthetical problems dialectically, 
their idealistic theories were deeply 
contradictory. The works of Belinsky, 
Herzen, Chernyshevsky, and Dobrolyu- 
bov overcame the contradictions in a 
number of questions. The elaboration 
of revolutionary democratic A. on the 
laws of realist art, the principles of 
ideological orientation and kinship 
with the people, as well as its struggle 
against the theory of “pure art” served 
as a theoretical basis of the artistic 
method of critical realism (q.v.). Thus, 
the entire history of A. is but a con- 
flict between materialism and idealism, 





Aesthetics 


hie 


Aesthetics 





reflecting the struggle of the progres- 
sive and reactionary classes at every 
historical stage of social development. 
The idealists regarded aesthetic phe- 
nomena as spiritually born, whereas the 
materialists sought the objective basis 
of the aesthetical in nature and man’s 
life. Owing to its contemplative char- 
acter pre-Marxian materialism could 
not create scientific A. With the birth 
of Marxism the materialist understand- 
ing of the laws of historical develop- 
ment and the dialectical materialist 
epistemology spread also to aesthetical 
studies. This was the theoretical basis 
for the all-round elaboration of the 
cardinal problems in A. and for the 
struggle against its distortion. The 
subject-matter and the tasks of Marx- 
ist-Leninist A. are mainly determined 
by its aim, man’s aesthetic assimila- 
tion of the world; its specific subject 
consists of three inseparable aspects: 
(1) the aesthetic in objective reality; 
(2) the subjective-aesthetic (aesthetic 
consciousness); (3) the arts. A. studies 
the essence, the regularities, and the 
concrete manifestations of all these 
aspects in their dialectical unity. Con- 
trary to the idealistic and vulgar ma- 
terialistic theories, the Marxist-Lenin- 
ist A. holds that the objective basis 
of the aesthetical assimilation of the 
worldis man’s practical and purposeful 
creative activity. In this activity man’s 
social essence and creative forces, 
aimed at transforming nature and 
society, are harmoniously, comprehen- 
sively, and freely developed. The main 
aesthetic categories: the beautiful (q.v.) 
and the ugly (q.v.), the noble (q.v.) 
and the base, the tragic (q.v.) and 
the comic (q.v.), the heroic and the 
vulgar, appear as peculiar manifesta- 
tions of the aesthetic understanding 
of the world in each field of social 
being and human life—in man’s pro- 
ductive and socio-political activity, in 
attitude to nature, in culture and every- 
day life. The subjective aspect of 
aesthetic assimilation, aesthetic feel- 
ings (q.v.), tastes (q.v.), evaluations, 
experiences, ideas and ideals are regard- 
ed by Marxist-Leninist A. as specific 
forms of the reflection and embodiment 
of objective aesthetic processes and 


relations. A. studies the ways diverse 
aesthetic feelings arise in men—the 
aesthetic enjoyment of the fruits of 
man’s creativity, the joy he finds in 
struggling for noble aims, the free- 
dom and happiness of the people; the 
repugnance inspired by the ugly and 
the vulgar aspects of the conditions 
that enthrall him. Marxist-Leninist A. 
is the theoretical foundation of the 
aesthetic education of the Soviet peo- 
ple, of the formation of their well-de- 
veloped aesthetical feelings and tastes. 
The arts, artistic creativity are part 
of A. and its most essential aspect. 
Marxist-Leninist A. regards the arts 
as a unity of creative work according 
to the laws of beauty and artistic 
consciousness and reflection; thus it 
characterises the arts as a special form 
of assimilating the world. In analysing 
the essence of the arts and their laws, 
A. is intimately connected with all 
the special, theoretical, and historical 
sciences of the arts. But A. is a phil- 
osophical science. It studies the gener- 
al principles of the human aesthetic 
attitude to reality (including the arts), 
as distinguished from the sciences 
which study the arts and are concerned 
only and specially with the arts. A., 
just like philosophy, is an ideological 
science and sees its main task in solv- 
ing the problem of the relation of 
aesthetic consciousness and the arts 
to social being, to human life. Marx- 
ist-Leninist A. is guided by the mate- 
rialistic method of solving this prob- 
lem; it scientifically discloses the 
different aspects of the mature of the 
arts as well as the process of artistic 
creation: the origin of the arts; their 
essence and relation with the other 
forms of social consciousness; the 
partisanship (q.v.) of the arts and 
their kinship with the people (q.v.); 
their historical laws; the peculiarities 
of the artistic image (q.v.); the inter- 
relation of form and content in art 
(q.v.); artistic method (q.v.) and style 
(q.v.); the basic principles of socialist 
realism (q.v.), its socio-transforming 
role in building communism, etc. The 
main tasks of Marxist-Leninist A. are 
a profound scientific analysis and gen- 
eralisation of the aesthetic processes 











Aesthetics and Technology 


of the present times and the active 
solution of the problem of moulding 
the comprehensively developed, har- 
monious individual of communist so- 
ciety. 

Aesthetics and Technology, concepts 
reflecting the closely related aspects 
of human activity. The aesthetic feel- 
ings of man were formed in the course 
of his labour activity, and the aesthet- 
ic aSpects of labour were known to 
man long ago. The aesthetic qualities 
of the instruments of labour, of the 
surroundings (the form and colour of 
machines and instruments, the interior 
of the place of work, etc.) play an im- 
portant role in production. The artistic 
principle should inspire labour and 
educate a communist attitude to it. 
Many products of technical creation 
possess aesthetic qualities, for they 
may express an ideological-emotional 
content as well as an aesthetic ideal. 
The technological and working qual- 
ities required of industrial products 
must be combined with aesthetic de- 
mands, and purposefulness with beauty. 
The arts, too, cannot dispense with 
technology. The development of tech- 
nology makes possible the appearance 
of new forms of art (cinema) and in- 
fluences the most “ancient” of its 
forms (building machines in architec- 
ture, new materials and new methods 
of treating them in sculpture, new 
musical instruments, stage equipment, 
etc.). Technology plays also a great 
role in the dissemination of the arts 
(radio, television, polygraphic indus- 
try). Just as capitalist society is faced 
with the perspective of the aesthetic 
pauperisation of humanity, which gave 
tise to the pessimistic theory of “the 
death of art”, its incompatibility with 
scientific and technical progress, in 
the same way the society which is 
advancing towards communism is dis- 
tinguished by ever deeper penetration 
of aesthetics into the realm of techno- 
logy, and of the latter into the arts. 

Affection, an experience that is pow- 
erful and tempestuous in its action but 
differs from mood or passion (senses, 
q.v.) in being relatively brief—rage, 
horror, etc. A. is accompanied by 
jerky, expressive movements (specific 


E pe 


Agnosticism 


mime and gesticulation) and vocal 
reactions (crying, shouting). Some- 
times, on the contrary, numbness sets 
in. The outward expression of A. and 
its profundity depend to a great extent 
on individual peculiarities, in partic- 
ular on the training of will and the 
typological features of higher nervous 
activity (q.v.). A person in a state of 
A. is in the power of whatever caused 
it (“narrowed consciousness”); hence 
it interrupts the course of intellectual 
rocesses and disrupts control over 
Pona our, A. can be overcome only 
by considerable will-power, and more 
easily in the early stages. 

Affectivity, a term used by Kant 
(q.v.) to mean the property possessed 
by things to affect the sense-organs. 
The concept A. expresses the material- 
ist aspect of Kantianism; sense expe- 
rience is acquired only as the result 
of the action of “things-in-themselves” 
on the senses. This concept is coun- 
terposed in the Kantian system to the 
concept of transcendental appercep- 
tion (q.v.). Nevertheless, Kant still 
insisted that things are unknowable. 
The concept was criticised by the Neo- 
Kantians and all those who turned 
Kantianism into consistent idealism. 

Agnosticism, a doctrine that com- 
pletely or partially denies the pos- 
sibility of knowing the Universe. The 
term was first used by the British 
scientist Thomas Huxley (q.v.). Lenin 
laid bare the epistemological roots of 
A. and said that the agnostic separates 
substance from its appearance, that 
he does not go farther than sensations, 
remains aloof from phenomena and 
refuses to recognise anything apart 
from sensations as authentic. The at- 
titude of compromise adopted by A. 
leads its supporters into idealism. A. 
emerged in the form of scepticism 
(q.v.) in Greek philosophy (see Pyrrho) 
and was given its classic form in the 
philosophy of Hume (q.v.) and Kant 
(q.v.). A variety of A. is the theory 
of hieroglyphs (q.v.). A. is widespread 
in contemporary idealist philosophy. 
The champions of pragmatism (q.v.) 
and positivism (q.v.) have rid Kantian 
philosophy of the “thing-in-itself” 
(q.v.) and attempt to prove the im- 











Agrippa 


= "13 


Alberdi 





A 
possibility of knowing the world as 
it exists in itself. A. proceeds from 
an attempt to limit science, reject 
logical thought, and distract attention 
from cognition of the objective laws 
of nature and, especially, of society. 
Practice (experience), scientific exper- 
imentation and material production 
are the best refutation of A. If people 
cognise certain phenomena and then 
deliberately reproduce them, no place 
is left for the “unknowable thing-in- 
itself”. 

Agrippa, Roman sceptic philosopher 
(Ist-2nd centuries) to whom are as- 
cribed five arguments (tropes, q.v.) 
on the unknowability of the Universe. 
A.’s tropes touch on problems of ra- 
tional knowledge and contain elements 
of dialectics, which Lenin mentioned. 
(Vol. 38, p. 301.) 

Ajivika, a trend in ancient Indian 
philosophy denying the existence of 
the soul. A. was originally connected 
with Buddhism (q.v.) of which it was 
probably a variant, since it is first 
mentioned in early Buddhist canonical 
texts. The doctrine was fathered, ac- 
cording to tradition, by the wise man 
Markali Deva, believed to have lived 
in the 6th-5th centuries B.C. A. is 
based on the atomistic theory which 
determines the other ideas and con- 
ceptions of the theory. According to 
A. there are four varieties of atom, 
which make up the four elements of 
nature—earth, water, fire, and air; 
all atoms can combine. “Life” is not 
something atomic but is that which 
perceives and cognises combinations 
of atoms. The varieties of atoms and 
life constitute the five essences of 
which everything in existence is com- 
posed. Atoms are eternal, indivisible, 
were not created and cannot be de- 
stroyed. One variety of atom cannot 
be transformed into another variety. 
Atoms can move in any direction. 
The properties of a body depend on 
the kind of atoms it is composed of, 
the number of them in a unit of vol- 
ume, and the way in which they are 
combined. A. was a realist, and, in 
general, a materialist theory that op- 
posed the ancient Indian religions and 
Buddhist philosophy. 


Akhundov, Mirza Fatali (1812-78), 
Azerbaijanian writer, enlightener, and 
public figure. A.’s world outlook was 
formed under the influence of pro- 
gressive Russian social thought. A. 
was a materialist who recognised the 
existence of only one material sub- 
stance, which is its own cause and the 
basis of all processes and phenomena 
in the world. A.’s theory of knowledge 
proceeded from a recognition of the 
knowability of the world; he also de- 
fended the position of the sensualists. 
A.’s materialism was combined with 
atheism; he criticised Islam, stressed 
the incompatibility of faith and knowl- 
edge and the reactionary role of reli- 
gion in the history of society. A. was 
the founder of Azerbaijanian literature, 
dramaturgy, and theatre. He was a 
true patriot, a champion of the friend- 
ship of the peoples, and advocated 
the establishment of fraternal, interna- 
tional relations between the peoples 
of the Transcaucasus and the Russian 
people. A.’s main philosophical work 
was Three Letters of the Indian Prince 
Kamal-ud-Daula to the Persian Prince 
Jamal-ud-Daula and the Latter’s An- 
swers to Them. 

Al Kindi (c. 800-79), Arab philoso- 
pher, astrologer, mathematician, and 
physician, founder of Arabic Aristo- 
telian philosophy, honoured with the 
title of “The Philosopher of the Arabs”. 
A. K. wrote commentaries to Aristotle’ s 
works (Organon, et al.) and a number 
of papers on metaphysics. A. K.’s world 
outlook was based on the idea of the 
universal causal connection due to 
which everything, if completely under- 
stood, reflects the entire Universe as 
in a mirror. Orthodox believers in the 
Koran regarded A. K. as a heretic. Only 
fragments of A.K.’s numerous writings 
have been preserved. 

Alberdi, Juan Bautista (1810-84), 
Argentine statesman, writer, philoso- 
pher, and sociologist. His Bases para 
la Organización Politica de la Confede- 
ración Argentina (1852) greatly in- 
fluenced the state structure of the 
Argentine and formed the basis of the 
country’s Constitution. His famous 
book El crimen de la guerra was writ- 
ten under the impression of the horrors 





Albert the Great 


of the Paraguayan war (1864-70) and 
gave him a place in history as an im- 
passioned champion of peace and fra- 
ternity on earth. He declared that ag- 
gressive wars were crimes. His under- 
standing of war was influenced by the 
ideas of Grotius (q.v.). A.’s weakness 
was his approach to the problem of 
war from the standpoint of law and 
Christian morality. 

Albert the Great (b. 1193-1207; d. 
1280), German philosopher, natural- 
ist, and theologian. He and his dis- 
ciple, Thomas Aquinas (q.v.), revolted 
against the interpretation of Aristotle’s 
philosophy in the spirit of Averroism 
(q.v.) and against the progressive scho- 
lastic schools; he used Aristotelian ideas 
to elaborate a single philosophical- 
theological system. Apart from his 
purely philosophical writings (Summa 
Theologiae, etc.), A.G. wrote a number 
of treatises on natural history in which, 
side by side with biblical myths and 
fantastic legends, there are also direct 
observations of nature. 

Alembert, d’, Jean Le Rond (1717- 
83), French 18th century Enlightener, 
philosopher and mathematician, as- 
sociate of Diderot (q.v.), editor of the 
mathematics section of the Encyclo- 
paedia (see Encyclopaedists). Attempted 
to expound the origin and development 
of human cognition and toclassify the 
sciences mainly on the basis of Francis 
Bacon’s (q.v.) principles. Philosoph- 
ically, A. was an exponent of sensual- 
ism (q.v.) and opposed Descartes’ 
theory of innate ideas (q.v.). However, 
his sensualism was not consistently 
materialistic. A. denied that thought 
is a property of matter and believed 
that the soul exists independently of 
matter. His views were thus dualistic. 
He also denied that things were cog- 
nisable. In contrast to other French 
Enlighteners, he maintained that mor- 
als do not depend on the social envi- 
ronment. He pronounced God to be the 
creative substance. Diderot criticised 
A.’s inconsistent sensualism in his 
works, including Le Réve de d'Alem- 
bert. Essai sur les éléments de philoso- 
phie (1759) was A.’s main philosophica! 
work. 

Alexander, Samuel (1858-1938), Brit- 


Algebra of Logic 


ish neo-realist philosopher, author of 
the idealist theory of emergent evolu- 
tion (q.v.). He regarded space-time as 
being the primary matter of the Uni- 
verse and identified it with motion. 
A series of unforeseeable qualitative 
leaps cause the consecutive emergence 
of matter, life, the psyche, “tertiary 
values”, “angels”, God from this space- 
time. Emergent evolution is guided 
by an ideal impulse which is perceived 
as a striving towards the new. A.’s 
views contradict modern science. His 
chief works are Space, Time, and Deity 
(1920), Art and the Material (1925) 
and Beauty and Other Forms of Value 
(1933). 

Alexandrian School of Philosophy 
(Ist century B.C. to 6th century A.D.), 
took its name from the city of Alexan- 
dria, founded by Alexander the Great; 
the term occurs in literature in two 
different meanings. First, it is used 
to mean the Judaic philosophy of Philo 
of Alexandria who lived there in the 
Ist century B.C. and used the methods 
of stoic Platonism to interpret the 
Bible. This trend assumed Plato's 
ideas to be the basis of existence but 
understood them to be a creative fire 
that poured over the entire Universe, 
creating all living and inanimate things 
in it. All early Christian theology was 
strongly influenced by this stoic Platon- 
ism and was at first unable to apply 
purely monotheistic methods. Origenes 
and Clément, both with Alexandrian 
connections, were important propo- 
nents of this school of thought. Second- 
ly, there has always been a wider 
conception of the Alexandrian School 
in literature; it was made to include 
pagan Neo-Pythagoreanism and the 
eclectic schools of the first centuries 
and also the whole of Neo-Platonism 
(qg.v.), although that trend was cur- 
rent in Rome, Syria, and Pergamum 
as well as in Alexandria itself and had 
pagan as well as Christian forms. It 
is more correct to use the term A.S. 
for the school of Philo and the Alex- 
andrian Christian thinkers of the 2nd 
and 3rd centuries. 

Algebra of Logic, a division of math- 
ematical logic based on the use of 
algebraic methods for the study of 








Algorism 


logical objects—classes and proposi- 
tions. The proposition expresses, on the 
one hand, a thought (judgement) and, 
on the other, a truth or a falsity (T. or 
F.). Thus the propositions, “The Volga 
falls into the Caspian” and “2x 2=4” 
express different thoughts, but both 
express a truth (i.e., they have truth- 
value T.). A.L. examines propositions 
exclusively from the standpoint of 
their truth-value and regards state- 
ments as equal if they have the same 
truth-value. A.L. uses symbols (see 
Logical Symbols). In addition to the 
symbols used for the propositions them- 
selves there are symbols for operations 
—conjunction (q.v.), disjunction (q.v.), 
implication (q.v.) and negation (q.v.) 
with the aid of which some expression 
in A.L. is transformed into others. 
An expression is complex if it is formed 
from others by an algebraic operation 
and simple if the contrary is true. Two 
expressions are equal by interpretation 
(=int) if they have the same meaning 
irrespective of the combinations of the 
simple statements contained in them. 


Thus A+B=int A V B because all 
four possible combinations of T. and 
F. as applied to A and B(T.T., T.F., 
F.T., F.F.) give A>B the same mean- 


ingas A V B. A number of problems 
emerge from concepts introduced by 
A.L., and its theory is devoted to 
the solution of them. Historically, 
A.L. came into being as the algebra 
of classes (see Boole) and was only 
later interpreted as the algebra of 
propositions (q.v.). The work done by 
V. Shestakov and C. Shannon has given 
A.L. extensive application in the the- 
ory of electric and contact-relay sys- 
ems. 


Algorism (or Algorithm), a basic con- 
cept in logic and mathematics. The 
term A. derives from the Latin tran- 
scription of al-Khwarizmi, the surname 
of Muhammad ibn Musa, the 9th cen- 
tury Central Asian mathematician. A. 
is a set of instructions for the execution 
of a system of operations in a certain 
sequence which will give the solution 
of all problems of a similar type. The 
simplest examples of A. are the arith- 
metic rules of addition, subtraction, 


Alienation 


multiplication, and division, the ex- 
traction of square roots, the finding 
of the greatest common measure for 
any two natural numbers, etc. We are 
actually making use of A. whenever 
we master a means of solving a prob- 
lem of a general type, i.e., one which 
can be used for a whole class with 
varying conditions. Since A., as a 
system of instructions, is formal in 
character, a programme for a computer 
can always be evolved on the basis 
of it, and the problem solved mechani- 
cally. The solutions of a large group 
of problems by A. and the elaboration 
of the theory of A. are urgently re- 
quired in connection with the devel- 
opment of computer techniques and 
cybernetics (q.v.). 

Alienation, a concept describing both 
the process and the results of convert- 
ing, in definite historical conditions, 
of the products of human and social 
activity (products of labour, money, 
social relations, etc.) and also man’s 
properties and capabilities into some- 
thing independent of them and dominat- 
ing over them; also the transformation 
of some phenomena and relations into 
something different from what they 
are in themselves, the distortion in 
people’s minds of their actual relations 
in life. The sources of the A. idea can 
be traced to French (see Rousseau) 
and German (see Goethe, Schiller) 
enlighteners. Objectively, this idea 
expressed protest against the inhumane 
character of private property relations. 
This aspect of the problem was re flected 
in German classical philosophy, al- 
though here stress was laid on other 
aspects. In the works of Fichte (q.v.) 
A. of the subject is the creation of 
the world by the abstract Ego (q.v.). 
Hegel developed most fully the ideal- 
istic interpretation of A. The objective 
world appears as the “alienated spirit”. 
The purpose of development, according 
to Hegel, is to overcome this A. in the 
process of cognition. At the same time, 
Hegel’s understanding of A. contained 
rational surmises about some distinctive 
features of labour in an antagonistic 
society. Feuerbach regarded religion 
as A. of the human essence and ideal- 
ism as A. of reason. By reducing A. 








All-Round Development 


merely to consciousness, he found, 
however, no real way for its abolition, 
since he saw it only in theoretical 
criticism. Marx devoted much atten- 
tion to analysing A. in his early works, 
especially in Economic and Philosophi- 
cal Manuscripts (1844). He proceeded 
from the principle that A. characterises 
contradictions at a definite stage in 
society’s development. He associated 
the appearance of A. with private 
property and an antagonistic division 
of labour. Thus understood, A. em- 
braces all human activities, because 
each kind becomes the monopoly of 
an isolated group of people whose ac- 
tivity is alien to all other members 
of society. Marx focussed attention on 
the A. of labour, with the help of which 
he characterised the system of capital- 
ist relations and the position of the 
proletariat (the relation of the worker 
to the non-worker and their relation 
to labour and its products, the material 
character of social relations, the dom- 
ination in society of “inhuman 
forces”, the moral and physical degrada- 
tion of the worker, etc.). Moreover, he 
disclosed the real ways for the eliminat- 
ing A. (abolition of capitalist property). 
Recognition of A. of labour as the 
basis of all other forms of A., including 
ideological, made it possible to un- 
derstand that distorted, false conscious- 
ness is a result of the contradictions 
in real social life. The dependence of 
theory on practice was thus established 
and, on this basis, philosophy was 
reconstructed. In his classical works 
of the 1850s and 1860s Marx replaces 
the category of A. used in his early 
works by a whole system of concepts 
among which A. also appears as a 
concrete characteristic of capitalism’s 
relations of production (see Fetishism 
of Commodities). 

All-Round Development of the In- 
dividual, an essential condition for the 
building of communist society. A.D.I. 
implies harmonious development of 
spiritual qualities, moral purity and 
physical perfection in the individual. 
The harmoniously developed individual 
has a scientific world outlook and 
profound knowledge. He is free from 
survivals of the past, treats labour as 


ERE 


Altruism 


a prime and vital necessity, voluntarily 
observes the moral code of the builder 
of communism (see Moral Code, etc.), 
and is highly developed physically. 
Creation of the material and technical 
basis of communism (q.v.) and the 
development of socialist social rela- 
tions into communist relations are 
the main premises for A.D.I. The 
Programme of the CPSU and other 
Party documents stress that A.D.I. 
is an objective and natural process in 
socialist society. It is dictated above 
all by the needs of material produc- 
tion, inasmuch as modern technology 
requires versatile operators. The con- 
ditions for A.D.I. are created by the 
achievements of socialism and the 
gradual transition to communism. All 
working people will have equal op- 
portunities for creative labour and a 
free and equal choice of occupation, 
taking into account the interests of 
society. Increased leisure offers wide 
opportunities for developing the in- 
dividual’s gifts and talents. A.D.I. is 
intimately connected with cultural and 
technical progress, elimination of the 
essential distinctions between town 
and country, between mental and phys- 
ical labour. Lenin said it is essential 
“to educate school people, give them 
all-round development and an all-round 
training, so that they know how to do 
everything”. (Lenin, Vol. 3, p. 400.) 
Ability to perform many different types 
of work in communist society does not, 
however, rule out division of labour 
and specialisation. 

Alogism, the rejection of logical 
thinking as a means of arriving at 
the truth; A. is the substitution of in- 
tuition, faith and revelation for logic. 
It is used by reactionary philosophers 
to justify irrationalism, mysticism, 
and fideism. A. is refuted by man’s 
entire social experience and by the 
history of science. 

Altruism, selfless service rendered 
to other people, readiness to sacrifice 
one's own interests for the sake of 
others. The term was introduced into 
philosophy by Comte (q.v.). A. is the 
opposite of egoism (q.v.). In bourgeois 
ethics the concept of A. merges with the 
religious moral teaching of love for 


Amphiboly 


Tai = 


Analogy 





one’s neighbour, forgiveness, etc; it 
ignores the social, class basis of mo- 
rality. Only communist morality (q.v.), 
which rejects violence and exploita- 
tion, can reveal the real nature of 
altruism as the harmonious unity of 
personal and social interests (see Mo- 
rality). 

Amphiboly, a logical error resulting 
from the unclarity or ambiguity of a 
grammatical construction, particularly 
the use of one grammatical proposition 
or turn of speech with different mean- 
ings in the same passage. A. is to be 
distinguished from homonymy (q.v.), 
or mistakes arising out of the ambiguity 
of individual words. 

Analogue, a term used in the theory 
of knowledge to mean the ideal ob- 
ject (concept, theory, research method, 
etc.) that adequately reflects some 
material thing, process, or law. In 
modern philosophical literature A. is 
also used to mean a material object 
(including the various forms of human 
material experience) which is a real 
basis for any theory, any law in the 
theory of knowledge or any rule of 
logic. For instance, the commonest, 
most usual relations between things 
constitute the objective basis for judge- 
ments, speculations, and other forms 
of thought. By finding A., the genesis 
of some ideal phenomena is estab- 
lished, which is very important in the 
struggle agginst the various forms of 
idealism. The explanation of the spe- 
cific nature of a methodological law, 
rule of logic, etc., presumes the all- 
round analysis of their functions in 
a definite system of knowledge (see 
Analogue Simulation). 

Analogue Simulation, the reproduc- 
tion of the properties of an object un- 
der study by its analogue, specially 
constructed according to set rules. 
This analogue is called a model. If 
it has the same physical nature as the 
object, the model is constructed ac- 
cording to the principle of the physical 
A.S.; and if it has a different nature, 
then it is constructed according to the 
principle of the mathematical A.S. 
In any case its functioning is described 
by a system of equations similar to 
that system which describes the aspects 


2~-1682 


studied in the original. For the con- 
struction of a model some analogy 
between the aspects and processes of 
the object and of the model is required. 
In cases where it is expensive, dif- 
ficult or impossible to study real ob- 
jects, the A.S. facilitates the analysis 
of the processes in the original. The 
advantages of a model are that it is 
easy to produce it and that it is pos- 
sible arbitrarily and quickly to change 
the model's working regime and char- 
acteristics, to effect the necessary 
measurements in laboratory conditions, 
etc. Electronic simulation devices 
are now in particularly wide use. In 
this case the model is an electronic 
scheme of the equation describing the 
real process. The methods of construct- 
ing such models are worked out in the 
theory of similarity and the theory 
of A.S. The principle of A.S. is one 
of the foundations of cybernetics (q.v.) 
and is widely employed in calculating 
the trajectories of ballistic missiles, 
in the study of the working regime 
of machines and enterprises, in the 
building of “teaching” automatic ma- 
chines, in the study of the behaviour 
of biological objects and even of 
man’s mental activity. However, in 
analysing the possibilities of these 
systems one must not forget the limits 
of the analogy between model and 
object. To ignore these limits would 
mean to fall into gross technical and 
philosophical errors. 

Analogy, the establishment of simi- 
larity in certain aspects, properties 
and relations between dissimilar ob- 
jects; conclusions by A. are made on 
the basis of such similarities. The 
usual scheme of conclusion by analogy 
is the following. Object B possesses 
the properties a, b, c, d, e; object C 
possesses the properties b, c, d, e; 
it is, therefore, possible that object 
C also possesses the property a. A. 
is of great value in research work. 
At the early stages of the development 
of society A. takes the place of observa- 
tion and experiment and conclusions 
are drawn from external and secondary 
aspects. Most of the natura! philosoph- 
ical constructions of the ancients were 
formed in this way. In its further 








Analogy of Being 


development, A. lost its significance 
as a means of explanation. It still 
retains, however, its role as a guide 
to the solution of problems. Christian 
Huygens, when he discovered an A. 
in the behaviour of light and sound, 
got the idea of the wave theory of 
light; James Maxwell extended the 
idea to the characteristics of the mag- 
netic field. Viewed in isolation, A. 
is not proof, because the conclusions 
are mere probability. It has to be used 
jointly with other forms of cognition. 
To increase the probability of a con- 
clusion by A. the following are re- 
quired:(1) A. must be based on essential 
features and on the greatest possible 
number of common properties in the 
objects being compared; (2) there must 
be the greatest possible connection be- 
tween the property on which a con- 
clusion is being formed and the prop- 
erties common to the objects; (3) A. 
must be used to establish the similar- 
ity of the objects in a definite con- 
nection and not in all respects; (4) 
since the immediate purpose of A. is 
to establish the similarity of objects, 
it only points to differences, and must 
be supplemented by their investiga- 
tion. In modern science A. is widely 
applied in the theory of similarity and 
is also used in analogue simulation 
(q.v-). 

Analogy of Being, the central meth- 
odological concept of Catholic philos- 
ophy (see Neo-Thomism, scholasticism, 
Thomism, Thomas Aquinas). A.B. says 
that everything having existence (ma- 
terial object, event or idea) is similar 
to something else and at the same time 
unlike it. Catholic philosophy uses 
this principle to erect the hierarchic 
ladder of nature. According to scholas- 
tic metaphysics, insofar as similarity, 
uniformity, is primary and determin- 
ing in A.B., only the outer, super- 
natural force, God, in whom all differ- 
ences coincide, can be the cause, the 
primary source of the qualitative mul- 
tiformity of being (Thomas Aquinas 
and the modern  scholastics Erich 
Przywara and others). In the concept 
A.B., therefore, identity and similarity 
of objects and phenomena are made 
absolute and their qualitative di ffer- 


Analysis and Synthesis 


ences are reduced to quantitative di ffer- 
ences. This concept was introduced 
into medieval scholasticism. Modern 
scholastics declare the A.B. to be the 
antipode of the dialectical unity of 
opposites (see Unity and Conflict of 
Opposites, Law of). 

Analysis and Synthesis, in the most 
general meaning, the processes of men- 
tal or factual breaking-down of a whole 
into its component parts and the re- 
constitution of the whole from the 
parts. A. & S. play an important role 
in the process of cognition and take 
place at every stage. The centre of 
analytical and synthetical activity is 
the cortex of the cerebral hemispheres; 
such activity, however, arises and is 
carried out only during, and on the 
basis of, social production experience. 
In mental processes A. & S. occur as 
logical methods of thought that use 
abstract concepts and are closely con- 
nected with other mental operations— 
abstraction, generalisation, etc. Logi- 
cally, A. consists in mentally dividing 
the object being studied into its com- 
ponent parts and is a method of ob- 
taining fresh knowledge. A. takes on 
different forms according to the na- 
ture of the object of study. A multi- 
plicity of Aa. is acondition for the all- 
round cognition of an object. The 
breaking-down of the object into its 
component parts reveals its structure; 
the division of a complicated pheno- 
menon into simpler elements enables 
the investigator to separate the essen- 
tial from the non-essential and to re- 
duce the complex to the simple; one 
form of A. is the classification of objects 
and phenomena. The A. of a develop- 
ing process reveals its various stages, 
contradictory tendencies, etc. In the 
course of analytical geal the mind 
advances from the complex to the 
simple, from the fortuitous to the inev- 
itable, from multiformity to identity 
and unity. The purpose of A. is the 
cognition of the parts as elements of 
a complex whole, the establishment 
of the connections between them and 
the laws governing the developing 
whole. A., however, leads to the iso- 
lation of properties not yet connected 
with the concrete forms of their mani- 





Anarchism 


festation; a unity that remains abstract 
is not revealed as unity in variety. 
S., that is, the uniting in a single whole 
of parts, properties, and relations iso- 
lated by means of analysis, going 
from the identical, the essential, to 
the different and varied, combines the 
common and the individual, unity and 
variety, into a living, concrete whole. 
S. complements A. and is in indisso- 
luble unity with it. The dialectical- 
materialist concept of A. & S. is the 
opposite of the idealist concept of 
them as mere thought methods uncon- 
nected with the objective world and 
with man’s experience; metaphysicians 
isolate A. from S., counterpose them 
and make absolute either of these two 
indissolubly connected processes. In 
the history of philosophy the opposi- 
tion of A. to S. goes back to the emer- 
gence of the analytical method in 
natural science and classical bourgeois 
political economy in the 17th and 18th 
centuries. By substituting the study 
of empirical reality for speculative 
constructions, this method then played 
a progressive role. When it was devel- 
oped into an absolute philosophical 
method leading to the study of things 
outside their connections and develop- 
ment, the analytical method of in- 
vestigation was turned into a metaphys- 
ical method of thought. The develop- 
ment of science showed that the ana- 
lytical method was the historical 
forerunner of the synthetic method 
which is closely connected with it. 
From the point of view of their theoret- 
ical significance, once freed from their 
one-sidedness, both these methods be- 
come mutually conditioned logical proc- 
esses satisfying the general require- 
ments of the dialectical method. 
Anarchism, a petty-bourgeois socio- 
political trend that is hostile to all 
authority, including the dictatorship 
of the proletariat, and counterposes 
the interests of petty private owner- 
ship to the progress of society based on 
large-scale production. A. has its phil- 
osophical foundations in individual- 
ism, subjectivism, and voluntarism 
(q.v.). The emergence of anarchism 
is connected with the names of Schmidt 
(Stirner, q.v.), Proudhon, and Bakunin 


— ig 


Anaximander of Miletus 


(qq.v.), whose utopian theories were 
criticised in the writings of Marx 
and Engels. A. was widespread in 
France, Italy, and Spain in the 19th 
century. A. does not go further than 
general phrases against exploitation 
and lacks an understanding of the 
causes of exploitation and of the class 
struggle. The anarchists’ denial of 
the political struggle objectively serves 
to subordinate fhe working class 
to bourgeois politics. In the struggle 
against A. the most important issue is 
the attitude of the revolutionaries to 
the state and the role of the state in 
general. The anarchists demand the 
immediate abolition of the state and 
do not admit the possibility of using 
the bourgeois state to prepare the pro- 
letariat for the revolution. Today A. 
has a certain influence in Spain, Italy, 
and Latin America. 

Anaxagoras of Clazomenae (in Asia 
Minor), c. 500-428 B.C., Greek philos- 
opher, inconsistent materialist, ideolo- 
gist of the slave-owning democracy. He 
was accused of atheism and sentenced 
to death but left Athens to save his 
life. He recognised the infinite qualita- 
tive variety of the primary elements 
of matter (seeds of things) later known 
as homoeomeries (q.v.), various com- 
binations of which make up all existing 
things. The motive force that condi- 
tions the union and division of element- 
ary particles was the nous (q.v.), which 
he understood to be matter of the 
lightest and finest variety. A.’s cos- 
mogony asserts that systems of celestial 
bodies emerge from the primary chaot- 
ic mixture of substances as a result 
of their vortical rotation. 

Anaximander of Miletus (c. 610-546 
B.C.), Greek materialist philosopher, 
spontaneous dialectician, pupil of Tha- 
les (q.v.); author of the first philos- 
ophical work in Greece, On Nature, 
which has not, been preserved. A. in- 
troduced the concept of arché, the 
“primary principle”, or beginning of 
all things, which he considered to 
be the apeuron. A.’s cosmological the- 
ory placed the Earth, which had the 
shape of a flattened cylinder, in the 
centre of the Universe. Three celestial 
rings, solar, lunar, and astral, surround- 








Anaximenes of Miletus 


ed the Earth. A. was historically 
the first to propound the idea of evo- 
lution; man, like all other animals, 
evolved from the fish. 

Anaximenes of Miletus (c. 588-525 
B.C.), Greek materialist philosopher, 
spontaneous dialectician, pupil of Ana- 
ximander (q.v.). According to his the- 
ory, all things evolve from the pri- 
mary matter, air, and return to it. Air 
is infinite, eternal, and mobile. When 
it concentrates it first forms a cloud, 
then water, and lastly earth and rock; 
when it rarefies it turns into fire. Here 
A. gives expression to the idea of the 
transition from quantity to quality. 
The air embraces everything—it is the 
soul and it is the common medium 
of the endless worlds of the Universe. 
A. taught that the stars are fire but 
we do not feel their warmth because 
they are too far away (Anaximander 
placed the stars nearer than the plan- 
ets). A.’s explanation of eclipses of 
the Sun and Moon was close to the 
truth. 

Anichkov, Dmitry Sergeyevich (1733- 
88), Russian educationalist, philoso- 
pher; teacher of mathematics, logic, and 
philosophy at Moscow University; au- 
thor of Rassuzhdeniya iz naturalnoi 
bogoslovii o nachale i proisshestvii 
naturalnogo bogopochitaniya (A Dis- 
course from Natural Theology on the 
Beginning and Origin of the Natural 
Worship of God), 1769, in which he raised 
the question of the “natural” origin 
of religious beliefs. Like the 18th cen- 
tury French Enlighteners, A. showed 
that religious beliefs arose when people 
were at the “barbaric” stage of develop- 
ment as a result of three causes: ig- 
norance, fear, and imagination, when 
people were unable to explain the na- 
ture of the phenomena that surrounded 
them and ascribed everything incom- 
prehensible to supernatural forces. A. 
appraised the biblical legends and for 
this was persecuted by reactionary pro- 
fessors and by the church. A. was the 
author of a number of papers on phi- 
losophy: Slovo o svoistvakh poznaniya 
chelovecheskogo.... (An Essay on the 
Properties of Human Knowledge....), 
1770; Slovo o raznykh prichinakh.... 
(An Essay on Various Causes....), 1774, 


on 


Annihilation 


and others. In these papers A. developed 
ideas of materialist sensualism in 
the theory of knowledge and criticised 
the theory of innate ideas (q.v.) sup- 
ported by the followers of Descartes, 
Leibniz, and Wolff. A.’s materialism, 
however, was not consistent, it was 
wrapped up in a mantle of deism 
(q.v.); A. criticised the pre-established 
harmony (q.v.) theory of the Wolf- 
fians, but himself made concessions to 
religion, admitting the possible im- 
mortality of the soul. 

Animism, belief in the soul and in 
spirits that affect the lives of people 
and animals, and exert an influence 
over the objects and phenomena of the 
surrounding world. Animist concepts 
emerged in primitive society. Primitive 
man imagined that things, plants, 
and animals possessed souls. The chief 
reason for the emergence of A. was 
the extremely low level of development 
of the productive forces, the consequent 
small store of knowledge and man’s 
inability to oppose the elemental forces 
of nature, which seemed alien and 
mysterious to him. At a certain level 
of social development, the personi fica- 
tion of natural forces was a form in 
which they were mastered. Animist 
conceptions formed the basis of later 
religions; in principle, A. is part of 
all religions. 

Annihilation, destruction, the reduc- 
tion to nothing; in physics it is the 
process by which particles and anti- 
particles are converted into other par- 
ticles. The first A. to be observed (in 
1930) was that of an electron and a 
positron, which emitted photons when 
they collided. The reverse process also 
exists. Other known particles are the 
nucleons (proton, neutron) and the anti- 
nucleons (anti-proton, anti-neutron), 
hyperon and anti-hyperon. The term 
A. is not an exact one because the col- 
lision of the particles and anti-particles 
does not reduce them to nothing, but 
merely converts one form of matter 
into another; the total mass is retained, 
as are the energy, impulse, charge, 
and momentum of the system of par- 
ticles. The discovery of A. is of great 
philosophical importance; it confirms 
the infinite variety of the forms of 





Anselm of Canterbury 


matter and motion, and refutes the 
idealist theory of the “disappearance 
of matter” and “the materialisation 
of energy”; it also disproves the meta- 
physical view that primary forms of 
matter are eternal and immutable. 

Anselm of Canterbury (1033-1109), 
theologian and philosopher, early 
scholastic. A. maintained that faith 
must precede knowledge—one must 
believe in order to understand; faith, 
however, can be based on reason. In 
the dispute over the universals (q.v.) 
A. professed extreme realism (see Real- 
ism, Medieval). He developed the “on- 
tological” argument as proof of the 
existence of God (see Proof, etc.). As 
Archbishop of Canterbury his persist- 
ent aim was the exaltation of the 
Catholic Church. 

Antagonistic and Non-Antagonistic 
Contradictions, the basic contradic- 
tions typical of the development of so- 
ciety under various historical condi- 
tions. A.C. are proper to all social rela- 
tions in an exploiting society and are 
due to the irreconcilable interests of 
the hostile classes, social groups and 
forces. Contradictions of this type 
are resolved by the revolutionary class 
struggle and social revolution which 
changes the social system concerned. 
It is typical of A.C. that they become 
more acute and profound as they de- 
velop and the struggle between .them 
becomes a sharp conflict. The forms 
in which this conflict is resolved are 
determined by the specific historical 
conditions of the struggle. A clear 
example of A.C. is the contradiction 
between the bourgeoisie and the pro- 
letariat in capitalist society, and also 
the contradiction between the imperial- 
ist states arising out of the competi- 
tion between capitalist countries and 
their struggle for markets and spheres 
of influence. This is not a class contra- 
diction, but it leads to violent struggles 
between the imperialists of different 
countries. These contradictions are 
causes of imperialist wars, wars for the 
redivision of the world, for markets, etc. 
N.C. are those which exist not between 
hostile classes, but between classes and 
social groups which, side by side with 
contradictions, have basic interests in 


Anthropogenesis 


common. It is typical of these contra- 
dictions that their development does 
not necessarily lead to hostility, and 
the struggle between them does not pro- 
duce a conflict. An example of this 
type of contradiction is that which exist- 
ed in the Soviet Union before the con- 
struction of socialism between the work- 
ing class, the vehicle of socialism, and 
the peasantry as a class of small pro- 
prietors. N.C. are not resolved by a 
fierce class war, but by the planned 
gradual transformation of the econom- 
ic and other conditicns that give 
rise to the contradictions. N.C., like 
all others, are also overcome by the 
struggle of the new against the old, 
of the progressive against the backward, 
of the revolutionary against the con- 
servative. Changes in the nature and 
content of contradictions lead to changes 
only in the form of their resolution, 
but contradiction as a law of develop- 
ment does not disappear under social- 
ism, “Antagonism and contradiction 
are not the same thing. The former 
disappears and the latter remains 
under socialism.” (Lenin.) 

Antecedent and Consequent, see Im- 
plication. 

Anthropocenirism, a religious, ideal- 
ist conception which places man in 
the centre of the Universe and makes 
him the ultimate purpose of all crea- 
tion; A. is closely connected with te- 
leology (q.v.). The theories of Coper- 
nicus, q.v. (see Heliocentricism and 
Geocentricism), Darwin (q.v.), and 
other scientific discoveries helped to 
overcome A. 

Anthropogenesis, the origination of 
man. Darwin, Huxley, Haeckel (qq.v.) 
showed that man evolved from 
fossil apes. The motive force in A., 
as Engels showed, was the social la- 
bour of primitive man. This refutes the 
religious, idealist myths of the divine 
origin of man. Modern science con firms 
the social-labour theory of A. The 
emergence and development of man is 
divided into a number of stages—(1) 
Australopithecus; bipedal locomotion, 
hunting, regular use of natural imple- 
ments, and, later, the improvement 
and making of the implements; (2) 
the primitive horde, Pithecanthropus, 





j 
i 
| 
1] 
i 









Anthropologism 


Sinanthropus, Neanderthalers; the regular 
making of artificial tools. The emergence 
of social production conditioned the 
development of consciousness and speech 
and shaped the body of man. The making 
of man lasted hundreds of thousands 
of years (in South-East and Southern 
Asia, Anterior Asia and Africa); (3) 
the transformation of the primitive 
horde into primitive society and Nean- 
derthal man into modern man. 
Anthropologism, a typical feature 
of pre-Marxian materialism which re- 
garded man as the highest product 
of nature and explained all the specific 
features and qualities of man by their 
natural origin. The unity of man and 
nature was stressed in opposition to 
the idealist conception of man and 
against the dualist separation of body 
and soul. In the materialism of the 
17th and 18th centuries, A. was one of 
the arguments in favour of the bour- 
geois revolution showing the incompat- 
ibility of the feudal social system 
and religion with the real nature of 
man. On the whole A. is merely an 
inaccurate description of materialism. 
It possesses the faults inherent in all 
pre-Marxian materialism, the chief of 
which is the failure to understand 
the social nature of man and his con- 
sciousness. A. regarded all truly human 
traits and qualities as “abstract, in- 
herent ... in the individual” (Marx), 
i.e. apart from society and social 
experience, A. put the philosophical 
study of the “abstract man” in the 
foreground rather than the totality 
of social relations, the objective laws 
of social development, which actually 
create the human individual; this, in 
essence, is a biological approach to 
the study of man. Such an approach 
inevitably leads to idealism in the con- 
ception of history, since social phenom- 
ena are made to depend exclusively 
on the natural qualities of man. A. 
is most fully developed in the works 
of Feuerbach (q.v.) and Chernyshevsky 
(q.v.); some features of A. were over- 
come by the latter owing to his active, 
revolutionary attitude to life. In 
modern bourgeois philosophy A. pro- 
vides a basis for various forms of ideal- 
ism which regard the objective world 


Anthroposophy 


as something deriving from the nature 
of man. A. is an integral part of many 
trends in philosophy (existentialism, 
pragmatism, philosophy of life, qq-v.), 
in sociology (anthroposociology, So- 
cial-Darwinism, qq.v.), and also in 
psychology (see Freudism). 

Anthropomorphism, the transfer of 
human shape and characteristics to 
the external forces of nature and at- 
tributing them to mythical beings 
(gods, spirits). Xenophanes (q.v.) real- 
ised that A. was a peculiarity of re- 
ligion; the significance of A. in reli- 
gion was revealed fully and with great 
profundity by Feuerbach (q.v.). A. 
is connected with animism (q.v.) and 
totemism (q.v.) and occurs in most 
modern religions; in Islam and Juda- 
ism it occurs in a hidden form. In re- 
cent times attempts have been made 
to purge religion of naive anthropo- 
morphic conceptions (see Deism, The- 
ism). 

Anthroposociology, a reactionary ra- 
cialist theory; it falsifies anthropologi- 
cal facts and establishes a direct con- 
nection between the social position of 
individuals and groups of individuals 
and the anatomical and physiological 
properties of man (size and shape of 
skull, height, colour of hair, etc.), and 
examines social phenomena from this 
point of view. It was founded by 
J. V. Lapouge (1854-1936) who accept- 
ed and developed the pseudo-scienti fic 
theory of J. Gobineau (1816-82) to 
the effect that the Aryans are the higher, 
aristocratic race, and that the nobili- 
ty and the bourgeoisie belong to this 
race. A. depicts the class struggle as 
a struggle between races, and the growth 
of the workers’ liberation movement 
as retrogression brought about by a 
reduction of the Aryan element; La- 
pouge showed that eugenic (q.v.) 
measures, capable of moderating the 
“restless masses”, were essential. A. was 
one of the ideological weapons of the 
German nazis and is preached by 
present-day racialists. 

Anthroposophy, a mystical, decadent 
theory, a variation of theosophy 
ae A. is based on a conglomeration 
of religious and philosophical ideas 
borrowed from Pythagorean and Neo- 











Anti-Communism 


Platonic mysticism, gnosticism, caba- 
lism, free-masonry, and German natur- 
al philosophy. Its central feature is 
the deification of man’s nature, sup- 
posed to be revealed only to the initiat- 
ed. A. was founded on the eve of the 
First World War by the German occul- 
tist Rudolph Steiner (1861-1925), (Se- 
cret Science, 1910, Anthroposophic The- 
ses, 1925). A. is still current in the 
Federal Republic of Germany and 
also in Britain and the US. 
Anti-Communism, the chief ideolog- 
ical and political weapon of present- 
day imperialist reactionaries. Its main 
content is slander of the socialist sys- 
tem, the falsification of the policy and 
aims of the Communist Parties and of 
the doctrine of Marxism-Leninism. 
In the economic sphere, A. is mani- 
fested primarily by a denial of the 
socialist nature of the economic system 
of the USSR and the People’s Democ- 
racies and an attempt to classify the 
economy of the socialist countries as 
state capitalism; in the political sphere, 
A. consists of slanderous inventions 
about Soviet “totalitarianism”, and 
about the aggressive nature of world 
communism; in the ideological sphere, 
it is the repetition of the clumsy inven- 
tion of the “standardisation of thought” 
under socialism. These distortions of 
facts are crowned by the conception 
that social relations are “dehumanised” 
under socialism, that man is turned 
into an instrument for the achievement 
of certain aims of the “leadership”, 
and that the programme of scientific 
communism is utopian. “Anti-com- 
munism is a reflection of the extreme 
decadence of bourgeois ideology,” says 
the Programme of the CPSU. Bour- 
geois ideologists are unable to propose 
any sort of positive programme that 
meets the interests of the masses. Ha- 
tred of communism is born of the fear 
of it, fear of social progress. The pur- 
pose of the mass propaganda of anti- 
communism is to paralyse the revolu- 
tionary movement of the working peo- 
ple, sow distrust in the slogans and 
ideals of communism, and discredit 
and suppress all the genuinely demo- 
cratic movements of the day. A. is 
not merely a totality of ideas. It is 


2m = 


“Anti-Dühring” 


the actual political line of the most 
reactionary circles in the imperialist 
states, those circles that are trying to 
crown their anti-communist struggle 
with a nuclear war against the socialist 
countries. The growing successes of 
the world socialist system, the mount- 
ing struggle for peace, and the struggle 
against A. in the capitalist countries 
themselves serve to show that A. is 
fruitless and without prospects. 
“Anti-Dühring”, the name under 
which Engels’ Herr Eugen Dühring’s 
Revolution in Science has gone down 
in history; it contains an exhaustive 
exposé of the three component parts 
of Marxism—(1) Dialectical and His- 
torical Materialism, (2) Political Econ- 
omy, and (3) the Theory of Scientific 
Communism. A.D., wrote Lenin, ana- 
lyses “highly important problems in 
the domain of philosophy, natural 
science and the social sciences.... Itis a 
wonderfully rich and instructive book.” 
(Vol. 2, p. 25.) Engels wrote the book 
to defend Marxist theory from the at- 
tacks of Dithring (q.v.), a petty-bour- 
geois theoretician whose views were 
supported by some members of the 
young German Social-Democratic Par- 
ty. At the request of Wilhelm Lieb- 
knecht, Engels began work in May 1876 
on a series of articles against the new 
trend; the articles were published in 
Vorwärts, organ of the Social-Demo+ 
cratic Party, although Dihring’s sup- 
porters tried to prevent this. Marx 
read A.D. in manuscript and wrote 
the chapter on the history of political 
economy (Chapter X of Part II). The 
articles were published in book form 
in 1878 and were prohibited in that 
same year. A.D. consists of three parts: 
Philosophy, Political Economy, and 
Socialism. In Introduction, Engels de- 
scribes the development of philosophy 
and demonstrates the inevitability of 
the emergence of scienti fic communism. 
Part I outlines dialectical and histori- 
cal matertalism; it provides a materi- 
alist answer to the fundamental issue 
of philosophy (q.v.), postulates the ma- 
terial nature of the world, the funda- 
mental laws of the cognition (q.v.) of 
the world, time and space (q.v.) as 
forms of all being and the unity of 





l 


| 
| 





“Anti-Dihring” 


matter and motion. A.D. deals with 
the forms of the motion of matter and 
with the classification of the sciences 
(q.v.). Engels devotes considerable 
space to a description of dialectics, its 
basic laws, and the relation existing 
between dialectics and formal logic. 
A.D. examines important problems in 
natural history from the standpoint 
of dialectical materialism—Darwin’s 
(q.v.) theory, the role of the organic 
cell (q.v.) and the nature of life, the 
cosmogonic hypothesis of Kant (q.v.). 
Engels also studies morality (q.v.), 
equality (q.v.), freedom and necessity 
(q.v.), etc., from the point of view 
of materialist dialectics. In Part II 
Engels criticised Diihring’s views on 
political economy, detined the subject- 
matter and method of political econo- 
my, outlined Marx's theory of the com- 
modity and value, surplus value and 
capital, ground rent, etc. He criticised 
the idealist force theory (q.v.) and 
showed the decisive importance of the 
economy in the development of society, 
explained the origin of private property 
and classes (q.v.) and showed the pro- 
gressive role of force in a revolutionary 
epoch. Part IiI is a brilliant essay on 
the theory and history of scientific 
communism (q.v.), explains Engels’ 
attitude to utopian socialism (q.v.), 
provides a profound substantiation of 
the tasks and ways of the communist 
transformation of society, and out- 
lines the Marxist theory on a number 
of basic questions of socialism and 
communism—on production and dis- 
tribution of material values under 
socialism and communism, on the 
state (q.v.), the family (q.v.), the 
school, the elimination of the an- 
tithesis of town and country (q.v.), 
between mental and manual labour 
(qv, etc. Engels’ A.D. is a model 
of the consistent defence of the world 
outlook and interests of the revolu- 
tionary proletariat, a model of Marxist 
implacability towards distortions in sci- 
ence and opportunism in politics. 
Engels’ book is valuable as a text- 
book from which to study the world 
outlook of dialectical and historical 
materialism and as the ideological 
weapon of the working people. 


oy oe 


Antinomy 


Antilogism, a formula in logic that 
expresses the incompatibility of the 
premisses of a categorical syllogism 
with the negation of its conclusion. 
The theory of A. is one of the variants 
of syllogistic (q.v.). ; : 

Antinomies, Semantic, antinomies 
(q.v.) which arise in propositions whose 
object is expressions of a certain 
language. Representative of one of the 
main types of S.A. is the liar antinomy 
which is credited to Eubulides of Mi- 
let (4th century B.C.). It can be for- 
mulated as follows: [The sentence in 
square brackets on this page is false.] 
If this proposition is true, then from 
its content it follows that it is false. 
But if it is false then again it follows 
from its content that it is true. Thus, 
in violation of the logical law of con- 
tradiction, this proposition proves to 
be both true and false. Another exam- 
ple of the S.A. is the antinomy of 
Grelling based on the concept of the 
“heterological predicate”. A predicate, 
i.e., a word expressing a certain prop- 
erty, is called heterological, if it does 
not possess this property (for example, 
the word “tetrasyllabic” is not tetra- 
syllabic). An antinomy arises when ap- 
plying this definition to the predicate 
“heterological”: if it is heterological, 
according to the definition it does not 
possess the property it expresses, 1.e., 
it is not heterological; if it is not het- 
erological, then again, according to 
the definition it must possess the prop- 
erty it expresses, i.e., is heterological. 
Antinomies of this kind arise in cases 
when the language in which the antin- 
omy is constructed contains names 
for its own expressions and also pred- 
icates “true”, “false”, “heterologi- 
cal”, etc. There are different methods 
for excluding S.A.: one of them is to 
differentiate between a metalanguage 
(q.v.) and an object-language (q.v.) 
and in the strict definition of corres- 
ponding predicates in a metalanguage 
(see Truth in Formalised Languages). 

Antinomy, the appearance, in the 
course of reasoning, of two contradic- 
tory but equally well-founded infer- 
ences. The concept of A. was known 
in times of antiquity (Plato, Aristo- 
tle); Greek philosophers frequently 


Antinomy 


used the term “aporia” (q.v.) in the 
meaning of A. (e.g., Zeno of Elea uses 
aporia to express the contradiction 
of judgements on motion and plura- 
lity); some Aa. then current are now 
regarded as semantic. Scholastic logi- 
cians devoted considerable attention to 
the formulation and analysis of A. 
Kant used A. in an attempt to justify 
the basic thesis of his philosophy, 
according to which the intellect can- 
not go beyond the bounds of sensory 
experience and cannot cognise the 
thing-in-itself (res per se). Kant said 
that such attempts lead the intellect 
into contradictions, since they make 
it possible to prove both the assertion 
(thesis) and its negation (antithesis) 
in each of the following “antinomies 
of pure reason”: (1) the Universe is 
finite—the Universe is infinite; (2) 
every complex substance consists of 
simple parts—there is nothing simple 
in existence; (3) freedom exists in the 
world—there is no freedom in the 
world, only causality; (4) the primary 
cause of the Universe (God) exists— 
there is no primary cause of the Uni- 
verse. Kant’s Aa. are not the Aa. of 
modern formal logic, because the proof 
of the thesis and antithesis in them 
cannot be represented in the form of 
logically correct reasoning. Since the 
end of the 19th century investigations 
into the logical foundations of mathe- 
matics have led to the discovery of a 
number of real Aa. (including some 
that were formerly known). Today they 
are usually subdivided into the Aa. 
in logic and the set theory, and seman- 
tic Aa. (see Antinomies, Semantic; Par- 
adoxes in Logic and the Set Theory). 
A. is not the result of an individual’s 
subjective error; it is due to the dia- 
lectical nature of the process of cogni- 
tion, and in particular to the contra- 
diction between form and content. 
Any A. occurs within the framework 
of a certain formalisation of the proc- 
ess of reasoning (perhaps not clearly 
Perceived but always to be assumed 
in fact); it is evidence of the limita- 
tion of that formalisation and shows 
the need for its rearrangement. The 
solution of A. means the introduction 
of a new and fuller formalisation, one 


ORs 


Antithesis of Labour 


that is more in accordance with the 
content being reflected. A. cannot 
be excluded from cognition once and 
for all; nevertheless each individual 
A. can be excluded by relevant 
changes in that method of formalisation 
within which it appeared. Today var- 
ious ways of excluding A. have been 
evolved that permit a more profound 
description of the dialectics of cogni- 
tion and the role of logical formalisa- 
tion (q.v.) in it. 

Anti-Particles, | material particles 
whose existence was forecast in 1928 
by the relativist quantum theory (see 
Dirac) and later discovered in cosmic 
rays (anti-electron, i.e., positron, 1932) 
and then obtained in accelerators (anti- 
proton and anti-neutron, 1955). It has 
been established that, with few excep- 
tions, every ordinary “elementary” 
particle has an A. opposed to it, dis- 
tinguishable by an opposite charge and 
other properties. This is a manifesta- 
tion of the dialectically contradictory 
nature of the structure of matter. These 
pairs of particle and anti-particle 
have the specific capacity of annihi- 
lating each other, i.e., of being trans- 
formed into other qualitatively differ- 
ent forms of matter. The preponder- 
ance of ordinary particles in the Uni- 
verse about us has not yet been satis- 
factorily explained. 

Antisthenes of Athens (435-370 B.C.), 
a pupil of Socrates (q.v.), founder of 
the school of cynics that developed 
the Socratic teachings and regarded 
as real only the knowledge of the indi- 
vidual things. He criticised Plato’s 
(q.v.) theory of ideas (as independently 
existing general conceptions) and as- 
serted that only individual things ex- 
ist. Of greater importance was his crit- 
icism of civilisation with all its achieve- 
ments, his appeal to limit oneself 
to the most essential things, contempt 
for social-estate and class differences, 
and resultant aniy with the demo- 
cratic elements of the society of that 
time (see Cynics). 

Antithesis of Mental and Physical 
Labour, the historically formed re- 
lations between people, in which men- 
tal labcur is separated from physical 
labour, and the manual workers, i.e., 











SL ŘĖ 


Antithesis of Labour 


producers, become the object of ex- 
ploitation on the part of the ruling 
classes. This antithesis arises in the 
initial stage of the slave-owning so- 
ciety. The division of labour (q.v.) 
itself, and in particular the separation 
of mental from physical labour, was 
at the time a progressive phenomenon, 
insofar as some of the people were 
freed from arduous physical labour and 
thus allowed to engage in the develop- 
ment of science, culture, etc. In the 
antagonistic socio-economic formations, 
this separation takes the form of social, 
class antagonism: engagement in men- 
tal labour becomes the privilege of the 
dominant classes, while physical labour 
falls to the lot of the exploited classes. 
Under socialism, the liquidation of ex- 
ploitation of man by man, the sharingin 
government and culture by the masses, 
the increasing transformation of labour 
into creative labour in which physical 
and mental activities are drawn clos- 
er to each other, etc., help overcome 
the antithesis between physical and 
mental labour. The enmity between 
the manual workers and the intelli- 
gentsia also disappears; the intelligen- 
tsia themselves developing from among 
the working people change their social 
character. However, even under so- 
cialism there still remains an essential 
distinction between physical and men- 
tal labour. It lies in the distinct gap 
between the cultural and technical 
level of the intelligentsia, on the one 
hand, and of the working class and 
the peasantry, on the other, in the 
difference in the nature of their work. 
This difference precludes antagonism 
of interests and has an altogether 
different social content. The distinction 
between mental and physical labour 
gradually becomes obliterated in the 
process of communist construction. The 
decisive condition for this obliteration 
is the creation of the material and 
technical basis of communism (see Ma- 
terial, etc.), the transformation of the 
very nature of labour, in which ar- 
duous physical work is to be replaced 
by machines; production will demand 
workers of engineer-technician stand- 
ard, with a high cultural and techni- 
cal level. The shortening of the work- 


Ge 


Antithesis of Town and Country 


ing day frees time for man’s all-round 
physical and spiritual development. 
The old division of labour, which 
nailed a man to a particular special- 
ity, will disappear; possessing a high 
degree of training, each will be able 
to choose his profession and pass from 
one profession to another. All this will 
mean the complete merging of physical 
and mental labour. 

Antithesis of Town and Country, the 
historically formed relations express- 
ing the extreme backwardness of the 
country in relation to the town in econ- 
omy and culture, the antithetical con, 
tradiction between the basic interests 
of the working people of the country- 
side and those of the ruling exploiting 
classes. The antithesis between town 
and country is the upshot of the social 
division of labour (q.v.). The econom- 
ic basis of this opposition is the ex- 
ploitation of the peasantry, leading to 
its ruin. In socialist society, as a re- 
sult of the liquidation of all kinds 
of exploitation and the transformation 
of agriculture on socialist lines, the 
antithesis between town and country 
disappears. The town with its working 
class acts as the friend and ally of the 
labouring peasantry, as its leader, help- 
ing to overcome its former backwardness. 
The character of agricultural labour 
changes, coming closer and closer to 
industrial labour. The culture of the 
countryside grows on an unprecedent- 
ed scale. At the same time the presence 
of two forms of socialist ownership 
(public and collective-farm and co- 
operative) leads to the preservation of 
a substantia! difference between town 
and country. The elimination of this 
difference and the consequent removal 
of the distinctions between the work- 
ing class and the collective-farm peas- 
antry, is part and parcel of the build- 
ing of communism. The concrete way 
of eliminating these distinctions is 
outlined in the Programme of the Com- 
munist Party of the Soviet Union. 
The main task is the creation of the 
material and technical basis of com- 
munism (see Material, etc.) which pro- 
motes the raising of collective-farm 
and co-operative property to the level 
of public property, the conversion of 





Antonovich 





agricultural labour to a variety of in- 
dustrial labour, the raising of the social 
and economic conditions and the stand- 
ard of life of the countryside to the 
level of the town. However, even under 
communism some non-essential dis- 
tinctions between industrial and agri- 
cultural labour will remain owing to 
their specific peculiarities. 
Antonovich, Maxim Alexeyevich 
(1835-1918); Russian materialist philos- 
opher, publicist, and democrat; as- 
sociated with Chernyshevsky (q.v.) and 
Dobrolyubov (q.v.). Graduated from 
St. Petersburg Theological Academy. 
He renounced a church career and 
from 1859 became a contributor to 
the journal Sovremennik (The Contem- 
porary). His articles—“Contemporary 
Philosophy” (1861), “Two Types of 
Contemporary Philosophers” (1861), 
“The Philosophy of Hegel” (1861), 
“The Unity of Nature’s Forces” (1865), 
et al.—gave expression to the material- 
ist views upheld by the editors of 
Sovremennik. A. criticised Kant’s (q.v.) 
apriorism and agnosticism, the Hegel- 
ians (Strakhov and Chicherin, q.v.), 
Grigoryev’s Schellingism, the reli- 
gious, idealist views of Yurkevich (q.v.), 
Gogotsky (q.v.), Karpov, and others, 
the Slavophil theories and the eclectics 
of Lavrov (q.v.) and Mikhailovsky 
(q.v.). He fully realised the connection 
between the philosophical and polit- 
ical struggles. On the basis of the an- 
thropological principle propounded by 
Feuerbach (q.v.) and Chernyshevsky, 
A. demanded an improvement in the 
living conditions of the working peo- 
ple, the spread of literacy, and the 
granting of political liberties; in the 
struggle against liberalism he showed 
the need for radical changes in the 
social system of Russia. He cham- 
pioned the aesthetic theory of Cherny- 
shevsky and criticised the “art for 
art’s sake” theory. After the suppres- 
sion of Souremennik (1866) A. continued 
his propaganda of materialism and 
natural science in the periodical press, 
using for this purpose the achievements 
of science contemporary to him (the 
work of Sechenov, q.v., Darwin, q.v., 
and others). In 1896, he wrote the book 
Chariz Darvin i yego teoriya (Charles 


297. — 


Apeiron 





Darwin and His Theory). In 1909, A. 
opposed the Vekhi group of writers 
and called for a resurrection of the 
traditions of the literary criticism of 
the 60s (of Chernyshevsky and others). 
Although A. propagandised materialist 
ideas in natural science and upheld 
democracy, he at times simplified and 
vulgarised the ideas of his teachers, and 
his views were not as consistent as 
those of the revolutionary democrats. 
His materialism contained certain ele- 
ments of dialectics but remained, in 
te main, speculative and metaphys- 
ical. 

Apagogic Proof (or proof by oppo- 
sites), a form of indirect proof, also 
known as reductio ad impossibile. The 
following is a typical A.P. Let B be 
the thesis to be proved and Ay, Ag...An 
the true facts by means of which the 
thesis is proved. It is agreed to con- 
sider that non-B, the logical opposite 
of B, is true and it is included in the 
facts of the proof. From the series of 
facts thus obtained—A;, A,...An, and 
non-B—conclusions are formed until a 
situation is arrived at, which logically 
contradicts one of the facts of the evi- 
dence. This contradiction of the orig- 
inal facts, provided the conclusion is 
correct, is possible only if the facts of 
the proof are false. Since Ai, Ag...An 
are undoubtedly true, the assumption 
of the truth of non-B was false; hence 
B is true. 

Apathy, a state of indifference, limited 
activity, absence of any inducement 
to act (frequently the result of disor- 
ders of higher nervous activity}. In the 
ethical theories of the stoics (q.v.) A. 
is understood as impassivity, spiritual 
imperturbability, a state in which sen- 
sations do not interfere with the activi- 
ty of the mind. According to the stoics, 
A. is the ideal state for contemplation. 
It seems that Eastern religious and 
philosophical views, in particular the 
Buddhist (q.v.) and Jainist (q.v.), 
on nirvana, or absolute tranquillity as 
the highest state of the human soul, 
exercised an influence over the stoics. 

Apeiron, a concept introduced by 
Anaximander (q.v.) to denote bound- 
less, indefinite, qualityless matter in a 
state of constant motion. All the infi- 














Apodeictic 


nite multiplicity of objects, all worlds, 
came into being by the isolation from 
A. of opposites (hot and cold, wet 
and dry) and their struggle. The con- 
cept of A. was a step forward in the 
development of ancient Greek material- 
ism, since it identified matter with 
concrete substances (water, air). Ac- 
cording to the Pythagoreans, A. is the 
amorphous, boundless principle, which, 
together with its opposite (the limited), 
is the basis of everything which exists. 

Apodeictic, that which is proved 
beyond all dispute, a term used to 
mean absolute truth which Aristotle 
(q.v.) used to denote a strictly essential, 
deductively evolved proof from abso- 
lutely true premisses. He regarded the 
syllogism as an instrument of apodeic- 
tic knowledge. The term “apodeictic” 
is used to differentiate a judgement 
of necessity from a judgement of possi- 
bility (problematic) and a judgement 
of reality (assertoria). 

Apologetics, a branch of theology 
(q-v.) which defends and justifies a 
dogma by means of arguments ad- 
dressed to reason. A. is included in the 
Catholic and Orthodox systems of theol- 
ogy, but Protestantism rejects it and 
proceeds from the primacy of faith 
over reason. A. includes proof of the 
existence of God (see Proof, etc.), the 
immortality of the soul, the teaching 
of the signs of divine revelation (in- 
cluding miracles and prophecies), an 
analysis of the objections to religion 
and its various dogmas, and a theologi- 
cal analysis of alien faiths. A. pos- 
sesses the internal defect of appealing 
to reason and at the same time assert- 
ing that the basic religious dogmas 
cannot be grasped by reason, i.e., A. 
is rational in form but irrational in 
content. Typical of A. are its refined 
sophistry, its extreme bias and dogma- 
tism, obscurantism and unscientific 
nature. 

Apophansis (not to be confused with 
“apophasis”, which means negation), 
a proposition which Aristotle (q.v.) 
defines in this way: “Every sen- 
tence has meaning.... Yet every sen- 
tence is not a proposition; only such 
are propositions as have in them either 
truth or falsity.” In classical logic A. 


=fogv= 


Approbative Ethics 


means no more than the affirmation 
or negation of something about some- 
thing. When A. is used in conjunction 
with other statements for the purpose 
of drawing an inference, Aristotle uses 
the term “protasis” (premisses). 

Aporia, in ancient Greek philosophy, 
a problem which is difficult to solve, 
owing to some contradiction in the 
object itself or in the conception of 
it. The arguments of Zeno of Elea (q.v.) 
on the impossibility of motion are 
called A. (he did not use this term 
himself). In the A. “Dichotomy” it is 
stated that before moving any distance 
it is necessary to cover half that dis- 
tance, and before covering the half, 
a half of the half, and so on, to infini- 
ty. From this premise the conclusion 
is drawn that motion is impossible. 
In the A. “Achilles and the Tortoise” 
it is said that the swift Achilles can 
never catch up with the tortoise be- 
cause by the time the runner reaches 
the place where the tortoise was at the 
start, the tortoise has moved forward, 
etc. Zeno correctly noted the contra- 
dictory nature of motion but did not 
understand the unity of its contradic- 
tory moments and came to the conclu- 
sion that all motion is impossible. The 
term A. first acquired a philosophical 
meaning in the works of Plato and 
Aristotle (qq.v.); the latter defined the 
term as “equality between contrary 
reasonings”. Kant’s antinomies (q.v.) 
are close to A. 

A posteriori, the opposite of a priori 
(q.v.); it is used to qualify knowledge 
obtained by experience. 

Appearance, see Essence and Ap- 
pearance. 

Apperception, the dependence of eve- 
Ty new perception on the previous 
experience of a man and on his psychic 
condition at the moment of perception. 
The term was introduced by Leibniz 
(q.v.) to mean “consciousness of con- 
sciousness”—self-consciousness as op- 
posed to perception (see also Transcen- 
dental Apperception). 

Approbative Ethics, an idealist theo- 
ry of morality in which good is defined 
as that which someone has approved. 
According to who does the approving 
(God, man’s moral sense, society un- 








A priori 





derstood as the totality of individuals), 
A.E. is subdivided into theological, 
psychological, and social approbative 
theories. Examples of the first are the 
theories of Kar! Barth, Emil Brunner 
(Switzerland), Paul Tillich, Reinhold 
and Richard Niebuhr (USA). The theory 
of man’s moral sense developed as far 
back as the 17th and 18th centuries 
in England (Anthony Shaftesbury, 
Adam Smith, Hume), and was taken 
up in the 20th century by Edward 
Westermarck (Finland), Arthur Rog- 
ers (USA), and others. In its third 
form the theory was elaborated by 
Emile Durkheim and Lucien Levy- 
Brühl (q.v.), France. None of these 
theories has a scientific basis—they 
are voluntarist and subjectivist and 
deny objective criteria for morals. 

A priori In idealist philosophy, 
A. is used to qualify knowledge obtained 
prior to and independent of expe- 
rience, knowledge which is inherent 
in consciousness from the beginning 
as opposed toa posteriori (q.v.) knowl- 
edge, which results from experience. 
This contraposing of the two terms is 
particularly typical of Kant’s (q.v.) 
philosophy; Kant stated that knowl- 
edge obtained by means of sensory 
perception is untrue and contraposed 
to it as authentic knowledge the a 
priori forms of sensation (space and 
time) and reason (cause, necessity, etc.). 
Dialectical materialism does not ac- 
cept any form of a priori knowledge. 

Aquinas, Thomas (1225-74), Italian 
Catholic theologian, Dominican monk 
and disciple of St. Albert the Great 
(q.v.); was canonised in 1323. His 
objective idealist philosophy arose as 
a result of falsifying Aristotelianism 
and adapting it to the Christian reli- 
gion. T. A. emasculated the materialist 
ideas of Aristotelian philosophy and 
accentuated its idealist elements (doc- 
trine of the immobile world prime 
mover and others). The doctrines of 
Neo-Platonism (q.v.) also considerably 
influenced Thomism. In the dispute 
about universals (q.v.) he held a posi- 
tion of “moderate realism” (see Real- 
ism, Medieval) acknowledging univer- 
sals of three types: before individual 
things (in divine reason), in things 


— 29 — 


Areopagitics 





themselves (as universal in particular) 
and after things (in the human mind 
cognising them). The main principle 
of Thomism is the harmony of faith 
and reason; T.A. held that reason is 
capable of rationally proving the exist- 
ence of God and rejecting objections 
to the truths of religion. Everything 
existing is fitted by T.A. in the hierar- 
chic order created by God. This doc- 
trine of the hierarchy of being reflected 
the organisations of the church in the 
feudal epoch. In 1879, the scholastic 
system of T.A. was officially proclaimed 
the “only true philosophy of Cathol- 
icism”. It is utilised by the ideologists 
of anti-communism to combat the Marx- 
ist scientific world outlook (see Neo- 
Thomism). Main works: Summa contra 
Gentiles, 1261-64; Summa theologica, 
1265-73. 

Arcesilaus (315-241 B.C.), Greek phi- 
losopher, one of the founders of the 
Middle Academy (q.v.). This was the 
second Academy, a feature of which 
was a transition from Plato’s ideas 
towards scepticism (q.v.). All that re- 
mained of Plato was a strong tendency 
towards various types of logical con- 
ceptions, which in this case boiled 
down to a destruction of dogmatic 
philosophy and the assertion only 
of concepts of probability. In ethics 
also, A. is distinguished by the weak- 
ening of Plato's enthusiast theory 
which he reduced to imperturbability 
of the spiritual condition. 

Areopagitics, a collection of four 
treatises (“On Divine Names”, “On 
the Heavenly Hierarchy, “On the 
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy”, and “On 
Mystical Theology”) and ten epistles 
which for a long time were ascribed 
to Dionysius the Areopagite (hence the 
name), a lst century bishop of Athens, 
but later found by scholars to be a 
falsification. In the A. there is a strong 
Neo-Platonic (q.v.) influence, although 
this trend did not exist in the Ist cen- 
tury. It also contains a developed 
church doctrine which, again, could 
not have existed in the Ist century. 
There are no references to this work 
in early Christian literature up to the 
5th century. These arguments and 
others compelled scholars to date the 











Argument 


appearance of the A. to the 5th century 
and to conclude that Dionysius the 
Areopagite was recognised as the au- 
thor on account of his great authority 
in the early Christian Church. Some 
scholars attribute the authorship of 
the A. to Peter the Iberian, a Georgian 
bishop who was active in the East. 
A. is a systematic, planned medieval 
Christian doctrine; the centre of all 
being is the uncognisable godhead 
from whom gradually diminishing light 
emanations radiate in all directions, 
through the world of angels and through 
the domain of the church right 
down to ordinary people and things. 
The strong pantheistic elements in the 
teachings were progressive in compari- 
son with the church doctrine. For the 
whole thousand years preceding the 
Renaissance, A. was the most popular 
work of religious philosophy, and was 
one of the ideological sources of all 
medieval philosophy. 

Argument 1. In  logic—the prop- 
osition (or system of propositions) 
put forward in cofirmation of the truth 
of some other proposition (or system 
of propositions); the premiss of the 
proof, also known as the basis of the 
proof; sometimes the proof as a whole 
is called the A. 2. In mathematics and 
mathematical logic, A. is the inde- 
pendent variable on the value of which 
the value of a function (q.v.) or predi- 
cate (q.v.) depends. 

Aristarchus of Samos (c. 320-250 
B.C.), astronomer, Pythagorean, pupil 
of Strato, whose geometrical measure- 
ments of the distances from the Earth 
to the Sun and the Moon showed him 
the falsity of Aristotle’s geocentric 
system and led him to construct a 
heliocentric system (see Heliocentri- 
cism and Geocentricism). A.’s system 
was not accepted in times of anti- 
quity and remained forgotten until the 
days of Copernicus (q.v.). 

Aristippus (435-355 B.C.), philoso- 

her, disciple of Socrates (q.v.) and 
ounder of the Cyrenaic (hedonist) 
school (see Cyrenaics). His writings have 
been lost. A. combined sensationalism 
(q.v.) in the theory of knowledge with 
hedonism (q.v.) in ethics. He regarded 
pleasure as the highest purpose of life 


Te 


Aristotle 


but held that man should not be subor- 
dinated to pleasure, he should strive 
for the intellectual enjoyment which 
is his greatest blessing. 

Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), philosopher 
and encyclopaedic scientist, found- 
er of the science of logic and a number 
of other branches of special knowledge. 
Marx called him the “greatest thinker 
of antiquity”. He was born at Stagira 
in Thrace and was educated in Athens 
at the school of Plato (q.v.). He criti- 
cised Plato’s theory of disembodied 
forms (“ideas”) but was unable to over- 
come Plato’s idealism completely, wa- 
vering “between idealism and material- 
ism”. (Lenin, Vol. 38, p. 286.) He 
founded his own school in Athens (see 
Lyceum) in 335 B.C. In_ philosophy 
A. distinguished (1) the theoretical as- 
pect—dealing with being, its compo- 
nents, causes, and origins, (2) the prac- 
tical—dealing with human activity, 
and (3) the poetic—dealing with creativ- 
ity. The object of science is the gen- 
eral, that which can be attained by 
the mind. The general, however, exists 
only in the sensually perceived indi- 
vidual and is cognised through it; the 
condition for the cognition of the gen- 
eral is inductive generalisation, which 
is impossible without sensual percep- 
tion. Artistotle recognised four prime 
causes: (1) matter, or the passive pos- 
sibility of becoming; (2) form (essence, 
the essence of being), the reality of 
that which in matter is only a possi- 
bility, (3) the beginning of motion, 
and (4) aim. A. regards all nature as 
successive transitions from “matter” 
to “form” and back. In matter, how- 
ever, A. saw only the passive principle 
and attributed all activity to form, 
to which he reduced the beginning 
of motion and its aim. The ultimate 
source of all motion is God, the “Un- 
moved Prime Mover”. Nevertheless, 
A.’s objective idealist theory of “form” 
is, in many respects, “more objective 
and further removed, more general than 
the idealism of Plato, hence in the 
philosophy of nature more frequently = 
materialism”, (Lenin, Vol. 38, p. 282.) 
“Aristotle comes very close to material- 
ism”. (Ibid, p. 287.) A.’s formal logic 
is closely connected with the theory 





Aristotle 


— 31 — Art 





of being, the theory of knowledge, 
and the theory of truth, because in log- 
ical forms A. saw at the same time 
forms of being. In the theory of knowl- 
edge A. differentiated between the 
clearly established (see Apodeictic) 
and the probable, which belongs to 
the sphere of “opinion”, q.v., (see 
Dialectics). Nevertheless he connects 
these two forms of knowledge by lan- 
guage. Experiment, according to A., 
is not the last stage in the verification 
of “opinion”, and the higher postulates 
of science are ascertained directly for 
their truth by the mind and not by 
the senses. However, the speculatively 
accessible higher axioms of knowledge 
are not inherent in our minds and pre- 
sume activity—the collecting of facts, 
the direction of thought towards facts, 
etc. The ultimate purpose of science 
is to define the subject, and the con- 
dition for it is the combining of deduc- 
tion (q.v.) and induction (q.v.). Since 
there is no concept that can predicate 
all other concepts and, consequently, 
different concepts cannot be general- 
ised in a single common family, 
A. showed the categories, i.e., the 
higher families, to which all other 
families of truly existing things belong. 
In cosmology (q.v.) A. rejected the 
theory of the Pythagoreans (q.v.) and 
developed a geocentric system that 
gripped all minds until the days of 
Copernicus (q.v.), the creator of the 
heliocentric system. In ethics, A. re- 
garded contemplation the highest form 
of mental activity. This was due to 
the separation of the physical labour 
of the slaves from mental leisure, the 
privilege of the free, that was typical 
of the slave-owning state of Greece. 
According to A., the model of morality 
was God, the most perfect of philoso- 
phers, “thought thinking itself”. In his 
theory of society A. showed that slavery 
had its roots in nature. The highest 
forms of state authority were those that 
precluded the selfish use of power and 
those under which the authorities served 
the whole of society. A.’s waverings 
in philosophy account for the duality of 
his later influence; the materialist ten- 
dencies played an important part in 
the development of progressive ideas 


in the philosophy of feudal society, 
and the idealist elements were expand- 
ed by medieval churchmen, who made 
A.’s theories “a dead scholasticism by 
rejecting all the searchings, waverings 
and modes of framing questions”. 
(Lenin, Vol. 38, pp. 368-69.) Lenin 
studied A.’s Metaphysics (his basic 
work) and greatly appreciated “the 
living germs of dialectics and inguiries 
about it...», naive faith “in the power 
of reason, in the force, power, objective 
truth of cognition”. abid) 

Art, a specific form of social con- 
sciousness and human activity which 
reflects reality in artistic images and 
is one of the most important means 
of aesthetical comprehension and por- 
trayal of the world. Marxism rejects 
the idealist interpretations of A. as a 
product and expression of the “abso- 
lute spirit”, “universal will”, “divine 
revelation” or subconscious concep- 
tions and emotions of the artist. Labour 
is the source of artistic creation and 
also of the earlier process of shaping 
man’s aesthetic sentiments and require- 
ments. The first traces of primitive 
A. date back to the late paleolithic 
epoch, approximately from 40,000 to 
20,000 B.C. Among the primitive peo- 
ples A. bore an immediate relation to 
labour, but subsequently this relation 
became more intricate and mediated. 
Changes in the socio-economic struc- 
ture of society underlie the subsequent 
development of A. The people have 
always played a great part in the de- 
velopment of A. Its diverse bonds 
with the people have been consolidated 
in one of its specific features, namely, 
national character (q.v.). A form of 
reflection of social being, A. has much 
in common with other manifestations 
of society’s spiritual life: science, tech- 
nology (see Aesthetics and Technolo- 
gy), political ideology (see Partisanship 
in Art) and morals (see Aesthetic and 
Ethic). At the same time A. has a 
number of specific features which dis- 
tinguish it from all other forms of social 
consciousness. Man’s aesthetical rela- 
tion to reality is the specific subject- 
matter of A. and its task is the artistic 
portrayal of the world. It is for this 
treason that man as the vehicle of 








Art 


aesthetical relations is always in the 
centre of any work of art. The subject- 
matter of art (life in all its multifor- 
mity) mastered and presented by the 
artist in a specific form of reflection— 
in artistic images which represent the 
interpenetrating unity of the sensory 
and logical, concrete and abstract, in- 
dividual and universal, appearance and 
essence, and so on. Artistic images are 
created by the artist on the basis of 
his knowledge of life and his skill. 
The object and form of reflection of 
reality in A. determine its speci fic func- 
tion—to satisfy the aesthetic require- 
ments of people through the creation of 
beautiful works which can bring man 
happiness and pleasure, enrich him 
spiritually and at the same time devel- 
op, awaken in him the artist, capable 
in the concrete sphere of his endeavour 
to create according to the laws of 
beauty and to introduce beauty in life. 
It is through this aesthetical function 
that A. displays its cognitive signifi- 
cance and exercises its powerful ideolo- 
gical and educative influence. Marxism- 
Leninism has demonstrated the objective 
nature of artistic development, in the 
course of which the main types of A.— 
literature, painting, sculpture, music, 
theatre, cinema, etc.—have taken 
shape. The history of A. is the history 
of ever deeper artistic reflection of 
reality, extension and enrichment of the 
aesthetical cognition and transforma- 
tion of the world by man. The develop- 
ment of A. is inseverably bound up 
with the development of society, with 
changes in its class structure. Although 
the general line of A. is the improving 
of methods for more profound artistic 
reflection of reality, this development 
is uneven. Thus, even in antiquity A. 
attained a high level and in a certain 
sense acquired significance of a stand- 
ard. At the same time the capitalist 
mode of production, immeasurably 
higher than that of slave society, is 
hostile, to use Marx’s expression, to A. 
and poetry, because it abhors lofty 
social and spiritual ideals. In capital- 
ist society progressive A. is associated 
either with the period of emergence of 
capitalism, when the bourgeoisie was 
still a progressive class, or with the 


EE vce 


Art for Art’s Sake 


activity of artists who are critical of 
this system (see Critical Realism). Ideo- 
logical and artistic decline (see For- 
malism, Abstract Art) are features of 
contemporary reactionary A. The high- 
est aesthetical ideal is embodied in 
the world outlook and practical activ- 
ity of the working class and in the 
struggle for the communist remaking 
of the world. It is this ideal that 
underlies the A. of socialist realism 
(q.v.). Soviet A. is discharging its mis- 
sion proclaimed by the 22nd Congress 
of the CPSU—to promote the mould- 
ing of the harmonious personality 
of the member of communist society, 
the architect and builder of the new 
world. 

Art, Content and Form of, two sides 
of art or an artistic work that deter- 
mine each other, of which C. plays the 
leading part. The C. of art is diverse 
reality in its aesthetic specifics, chiefly 
man, human relations, social life in 
all its concrete manifestations. F. is 
the internal organisation and definite 
composition of an artistic work created 
with the help of artistic media of ex- 
pression for the purpose of bringing 
out and portraying C. The main ele- 
ments of C. in a work of art are its 
subject and idea. The subject is brought 
out by a range of life’s phenomena 
which are reflected in the given work. 
The idea expresses the essence of the 
portrayed phenomena and the contra- 
dictions of reality, their artistic and 
emotional appraisal from the positions 
of an aesthetic ideal, leading man to 
definite aesthetic, moral, and politi- 
cal conclusions. The F. of works of 
art is multifaceted. Its basic elements 
include: plot, artistic language, com- 
position, the artistic media of expres- 
sion (word, rhyme, rhythm, sound in- 
tonation, harmony, colour, line, draw- 
ing, light and shadow, volume, tecton- 
ics, mis-en-scéne, etc.). In contrast 
to formalism which divorces F. from C. 
and naturalism which identifies the 
two, Marxist aesthetics regards the 
inseverable unity, the balance of C. 
and perfect F. as an important crite- 
rion of artistry. 

Art for Art’s Sake (“Pure Art”), 
principle of idealist aesthetics, put 








Artistic Method 


forward in contrast to the realistic 
demand for high idea-content and par- 
tisanship in art (q.v.). Its theoretical 
sources date back to the thesis of Kant 
(q.v.) that aesthetic judgement is of 
no practical interest. This principle 
spread in the 19th and 20th centuries; 
when in the struggle against realism 
its proponents advocated the internal 
“self-aim” and “absolute nature” of 
art, which supposedly aims only at 
purely aesthetic pleasure. Denial of 
the cognitive, ideological, and educative 
significance of art and of its depend- 
ence on the practical requirements 
of the age inevitably lead to the claim 
that the artist is “free” of society 
and bears no responsibilities to the 
people, i.e., to extreme individualism 


Vi). 
Tactette Method, a historically deter- 
mined, specific way of reflecting being 
and reality and expressing man’s aes- 
thetic attitude to the world; a method 
of understanding and portraying reality 
in artistic images. A.M. is a means of 
embodying and asserting a definite 
aesthetic ideal (q.v.). Every A.M. in- 
volves selection, generalisation, and 
assessment of life’s facts and phenom- 
ena. The nature and trend of one A.M. 
or another, the degree of its capability 
to understand and mirror in artistic 
images the life of the people, the rela- 
tionship between the individual and 
society, etc., depend on the socio- 
political and spiritual conditions of 
mankind’s development at each given 
historical moment, on the objective 
role of one class or another in the 
life of society and the attitude of 
society to art. Every A.M. is closely 
connected with a world outlook which, 
being progressive or backward, exerts 
a positive or adverse influence on the 
work of the artist. But this is an 
intricate, dialectically contradictory 
relationship in which, as Engels dem- 
onstrated in the case of Balzac, the 
artist, owing to the power of his real- 
istic method, may overcome some of 
the limitations of his subjective views. 
Socialist realism (q.v.) is a qual- 
itatively new A. M. brought into being 
by the epoch of the struggle for social- 
ism and communism. It differs from 


3-1682 


2337 


Association 


preceding methods in art (classicism, 
romanticism, critical realism, and oth- 
ers) by portraying life in the light of 
the struggle for the triumph of the 
communist ideal. 

Asceticism, a way of life, the basic 
features of which are extreme absti- 
nence and the greatest possible rejec- 
tion of comforts for the achievement 
of a lofty moral or religious ideal. 
In ancient Greece the term asceticism 
was first applied to exercises in the 
virtues. It is also an important element 
of Brahmanism and Buddhism. In the 
first centuries of Christianity, ascetic 
was the name given to those who spent 
their lives in solitude and self-morti- 
fication, in fasting, and praying. The 
early Christian and leoa] ideal of 
asceticism underwent a change at the 
time of the Reformation. Protestant- 
ism demanded “wordly asceticism”. 
Early peasant and proletarian move- 
ments also called for asceticism as a form 
of protest against the luxury and idle- 
ness of the ruling classes. Marxist 
ethics regards asceticism as an irra- 
tional and unjustifiable extreme, as 
the result of incorrect conceptions of 
the ways leading to a moral ideal. 
The Programme of the CPSU is based 
on the principle “Everything for the 
sake of man, for the benefit of man”. 
Marxism, however, condemns the other 
extreme, lack of restraint in satisfying 
one’s needs, unnecessary luxury, and 
the reduction of life to the pursuit 
of enjoyment (see Hedonism). 

Association, the nexus between ele- 
ments of the psyche, which causes the 
appearance of any one of them to call 
forth, under certain circumstances, 
other connected elements. An example 
of A. in its simplest form is the repe- 
tition of the letters of the alphabet in 
proper sequence. A. emerges in the 
course of the interaction of subject 
and object as one of the elementary 
products of that interaction and re- 
flects real connections between things 
and phenomena. It is a necessary con- 
dition for mental activity. The phys- 
iological basis for the existence of A. 
was discovered by Ivan Pavlov (q.v.); 
it is the mechanism of the formation 
of temporary neural nexus, i.e., the 











Associationist Psychology 


formation of a nerve path between 
different areas of the cerebral cortex 
(in man and the higher animals) and 
the short-circuiting of the excitations 
of those areas. A. is the basis of all 
the more intricate formations of man’s 
psyche. 

Associationist Psychology, various 
trends in psychology that use associa- 
tion (q.v.) as their main principle. 
The pre-history of the subject goes back 
to Hobbes, Locke and Spinoza (qq-v-); 
as a rule each of the trends is divided 
into materialist and idealist branches. 
Hartley and later Priestley (qq.v.), 
following Hobbes, ‘developed the ma- 
terialist tradition; they explained psy- 
chological activity by the general laws 
of association and maintained that 
such activity is conditioned by cerebral 
oscillations. The idealist aspect of A.P. 
reduces psychological activity to the 
association of subjective conceptions 
and is based on Hume’s (q.v.) phenom- 
enalism (Hume spoke of “clusters of 
impressions”) and on Herbart (q.v.). 
A.P. took final shape, mainly in Brit- 
ain, in the 19th century (J.S. Mill, 
James Mill, q.v., Alfred Benn) and 
combines the materialist and idealist 
wings through mechanism (psycholog- 
ical atomism, mental chemistry, etc.). 
In the 20th century A.P. is continued 
in behaviourism (q.v.), which greatly 
exaggerates the mechanistic tendencies 
inherent in it. 

Astronomy, the science of the posi- 
tion, motion, structure and develop- 
ment of celestial bodies and their 
systems, and other forms of cosmic 
matter. A. is divided into a number 
of disciplines, each of which is again 
subdivided. Astrometry, for instance, 
includes spherical, geodesic, naviga- 
tional, and other branches of practical 
A. and deals with the problems of 
measuring the positions and sizes of 
celestial bodies. Astral A. studies the 
laws of the spatial distribution and 
motion of stars and their systems. 
Radio astronomy, which has developed 
since the Second World War, studies 
various cosmic objects by observing 
the radio waves they emanate. As- 
trophysics studies, among other things, 
the physical properties of cosmic mat- 


=e 


Astronomy 


ter (bodies, dust, gas) and fields; cos- 
mogony (q.v.) studies problems con- 
nected with their origin and develop- 
ment and cosmology (q.v-) studies the 
general laws of the structure of the 
Universe as a single connected whole, 
as an all-embracing system of cosmic 
systems. A. extends to a tremendous 
degree in time and space the experi- 
mental field in natural science and 
human knowledge in general. Thanks 
to A. the human mind is able to pen- 
etrate milliards of light years into 
outer space and hundreds and thou- 
sands of millions of years in time into 
the past and the future. A.’s objects 
are gigantic natural physical laborato- 
ries where the most varied processes 
are under way, processes that cannot 
yet be reproduced under terrestrial 
conditions, or, if they can, only on a 
tiny scale. Thermonuclear reactions, 
for instance, were first discovered in 
the stars and later reproduced on 
Earth (so far only as uncontrolled ex- 
plosions); particles in cosmic rays have 
energies that are not yet attainable 
in the most powerful accelerators; in 
space, too, we can observe matter in 
a state of superdensity or extreme 
rarefaction, gravitational and electro- 
magnetic fields of enormous extent and 
power, explosions and blasts on a ter- 
tific scale, etc. A. extends the experi- 
mental field of physics into boundless 
space, but itself relies first and fore- 
most on physical science and its means 
and methods. Until quite recently 
astronomers were almost completely 
confined to observation and could 
not mount experiments. Since 1957, 
however, when the USSR launched the 
first artificial Earth satellite and paved 
the way for space exploration, the 
situation has changed. Extra-terres- 
trial observation (measurements in in- 
terplanetary space, photographing of 
the reverse side of the Moon, etc.), 
and even visits to other celestial bodies 
and the mounting of experiments there 
have become possible. A. is one of 
the oldest sciences and more than 
any other natural science has served 
to elaborate and spread correct, mate- 
rialist views of nature. Since it deals 
with heavenly bodies, A. has not in- 











Ataraxia 


frequently been treated with suspicion 
by the church and churchmen and has 
met with their savage counteractions, 
which went so far as to attempt, by 
torture and death at the stake, to 
check the cognition of the Universe. 
The clericals and their idealist sup- 
porters are today forced to take into 
consideration the great authority of 
natural science; they still try to distort 
the data of A. to adapt them to justify 
religion. 

Ataraxia, a state of spiritual tran- 
quility and imperturbability which, 
according to some Greek philosophers, 
was attainable by a wise man. The 
road to A., according to Democritus, 
Epicurus, and Lucretius (qq.v.), was 
in the cognition of the Universe, the 
overcoming of fear and liberation from 
alarm. The sceptics (Pyrrho and others) 
taught that A. is achieved by absten- 
tion from making judgements, and 
indifference to what is going on, to 
joy and sorrow (see Apathy). Marxist 
ethics rejects the contemplative at- 
titude to life, and, consequently, re- 
jects A. as an ideal, especially the A. 
of which the sceptics spoke. 

Atheism, a system of views rejecting 
faith in the supernatural (spirits, gods, 
life beyond the grave, etc.). A. ex- 
plains the sources of religion and the 
reasons for its emergence, criticises 
religious dogmas from the standpoint 
of a scientific study of the Universe, 
exposes the social role of religion and 
shows how religious prejudices are to 
be overcome. A. emerged and developed 
as scientific knowledge increased. At 
every stage in history, A. reflected 
the level of knowledge reached and the 
interests of the classes that used it as 
an ideological weapon. The philosoph- 
ical basis of A. is materialism. The 
positive content and the defects of 
each form of A. are conditioned by 
concrete social and economic condi- 
tions, the level of development of sci- 
ence and of materialist philosophy. 
A.’s struggle against religion is closely 
connected with the class struggle. A. 
took shape as a system of views in 
slave-owning society. There were con- 
siderable atheistic elements in the 
works of Thales, Anaximenus, Herac- 


3° 


Laan 


Atom and Atomic Nucleus 


litus, Democritus, Epicurus, Xenopha- 
nes (qq.v.). They explained all phe- 
nomena by natural causes, their ap- 
proach was naive and speculative and 
combined rejection of religious faith 
with recognition of gods. In the Middle 
Ages, when the church and religion 
were dominant, A. made little prog- 
ress. Bourgeois A. was of great sig- 
nificance in undermining the rule of 
religion—Spinoza (q-v.), the French 
materialists, Feuerbach (q.v.), and 
others. The exposure of the reactionary 
nature of the church by bourgeois 
atheists played an historical role in 
the struggle against feudalism and 
facilitated its abolition. Bourgeois A., 
however, was inconsistent and limited, 
was enlightening in character and was 
not addressed to the people but to a 
narrow circle. The Russian revolution- 
ary democrats were militant and con- 
sistent atheists. A. acquired its most 
consistent form in Marxism-Leninism. 
The interests of the proletariat and 
its position and role in society coincide 
with the objective trends of social 
development owing to which Marxist 
A. is free from the class limitations 
that were typical of pre-Marxist forms 
of A. The philosophical basis of Marx- 
ist A. is dialectical and historical ma- 
terialism. Marxist A. is militant in 
character. For the first time in history 
it provides an all-round criticism of 
religion and shows ways and means 
of completely overcoming it. Marxist 
A. states that religion can be complete- 
ly overcome only when all its social 
roots have been destroyed in the 
course of communist construction. The 
experience of the USSR, where A. 
is practised on a mass scale, proves 
the correctness of these postulates. In 
the course of communist construction 
a new man is educated, a manj who is 
freed from religion and other survivals 
of the past and equipped with a scien- 
tific, atheist world outlook. 
Atom and Atomic Nucleus The 
atomis the smallest particle of a chem- 
ical element, a complicated system 
consisting of a heavy central, positive- 
ly charged nucleus surrounded by an 
envelope of light, negatively charged 
particles moving in orbits about the 











Atom and Atomic Nucleus 


nucleus and known as electrons. The 
atomic nucleus is also intricate in its 
structure; it consists of neutrons and 
protons (elementary particles, q.v.) 
that together are known as nucleons. 
The atom is something like one hun- 
dred millionth of a centimetre in size 
and its nucleus is ten thousand times 
smaller. The value of the charges on 
the nucleus is equal to the number 
of protons and coincides with the num- 
ber of electrons in the atom; this is the 
serial number of the given element 
in Mendeleyev’s (q.v.) periodic table. 
Almost the entire mass of the atom 
is concentrated in the nucleus. The 
existence of the atom as an integral 
formation is subject to the quantum 
laws, which explain the stability of 
the atom, the peculiar nature of the 
motion of the electrons determined by 
the duality of their corpuscular-wave 
nature, the spasmodic changes in the 
energy of the atom during transition 
from one stable state to another, the laws 
of the interaction of atoms, etc. Atoms 
can combine by the interaction of 
their electronic envelopes; this pro- 
vides the basis for various manifesta- 
tions of the chemical form of the mo- 
tion of matter. Chemical changes do 
not affect the atomic nucleus. The 
stability of the nucleus depends on 
the simultaneous action of opposite 
forces—on the one hand these are the 
electrical forces of repulsion of iden- 
tically charged protons and, on the 
other, the special forces of attraction 
that exist between all the particles 
of the nucleus, the specific nuclear 
forces which operate only over short 
distances. The mass of the nucleus 
is always less than the total mass of 
the particles of which it is constituted. 
This is explained by the release of a 
certain amount of energy when the 
nucleus is formed whereby the mass is 
correspondingly reduced (according to 
the relationship between energy and 
mass discovered by Einstein, q.v.). 
Atomic nuclei can split or combine 
with one another. The transformation 
of nuclei (conversion of chemical ele- 
ments, q.v., radioactivity, q.v.) is 
accompanied by the release of a tre- 
mendous amount of energy. The atoms 


=A 


Atomic Fact 


of different elements are linked by 
profoundly dialectic mutual bonds. 
Atoms and atomic nuclei are the “nodes” 
in the general series of increasing- 
ly intricate forms of matter and make 
their appearance at definite stages in 
the development of matter. The devel- 
opment of the atomic theory played a 
considerable role in the development 
of philosophy, natural science, and 
technology (see Atomistics). The 
achievements of modern physics—the 
discovery of the complex structure of 
the atom, the conversion of one atom 
into another (radioactivity), etc.— 
created a veritable revolutionin natural 
science that led to a review of former 
conceptions of the structure and prop- 
erties of matter and to materialism 
adopting a new form. In particular, 
the qualitative specifics of the micro- 
cosm were discovered as they are mani- 
fested in the unity of the opposite 
corpuscular-wave properties of matter; 
the infinite number of properties of 
any, even the “simplest” particle of 
matter was discovered, etc. All this 
served as a fresh confirmation of the 
truth of dialectical materialism. The 
practical use of atomic energy is not 
only one of the greatest scientific and 
technical problems that is being in 
many respects successfully solved, but 
is also one of the most acute problems 
in the life of modern society. The 
peaceful use of atomic energy opens up 
before mankind the broadest prospects 
for the development of the forces of 
production. 

Atomic Fact, one of the basic com- 
cepts of logical empiricism (q.v.). The 
A.F. is not divisible into component 
parts but consists of a combination 
of the things and objects of thought. 
Atomic facts are independent of each 
other. The existence (or non-existence) 
of one A.F. is not proof of the exist- 
ence (or non-existence) of another. 
Thus, mutual bonds (links) and the 
unity of the Universe are denied, and 
the process of cognition is confined 
in practice to the description of the 
A.F. This metaphysical concept grew 
up as a result of the transfer to the 
external world of certain properties 
of the “atomic” (elementary) sentences 





Atomistics 


that play an important part in mathe- 
matical logic. In essence the concept 
of A.F. is related to Mach’s (q.v-) 
“world elements”. 

Atomistics, the theory of the dis- 
crete structure of matter (from atoms 
and other microparticles). A. was 
first formulated in the ancient Indian 
philosophical theories of nyāyā and 
vaiseshika, but was formulated more 
fully and consistently in the philos- 
ophy of Leucippus, Democritus, Epi- 
curus, and Lucretius (qq.v.). Atoms 
were regarded as the ultimate, indi- 
visible, tiniest, in substance infinitely 
small particles. They differ in weight, 
velocity, and mutual disposition in 
bodies, owing to which different prop- 
erties arise. Between the 17th and 
19th centuries, A. was elaborated in 
the writings of Galileo, Newton, Lo- 
monosov, Dalton, Butlerov, Mende- 
leyev (q.v.), Boyle, Avogadro, and 
others, and became the physico-chemi- 
cal theory of the structure of matter. 
A. has almost always been a basis 
for materialist conceptions of the 
world. The old A., however, was to 
a considerable extent metaphysical, 
since the idea of discreteness was made 
absolute and the presence of an ul- 
timate, unchanging state of matter, 
the “primary bricks” of the world 
edifice, was recognised. Modern A. 
recognises a multiplicity of molecules, 
atoms, “elementary” particles, and 
other microobjects in the structure 
of matter, their infinite complexity 
and their faculty for conversion from 
one form into another. The existence 
of various discrete microobjects is 
regarded by A. as a manifestation of 
the law of the transition from quan- 
titative to qualitative changes; the 
Teduction of distances in space is 
due to the transition to qualitatively 
new forms of matter. Modern A. con- 
siders matter to be not only discrete 
but also continuous. The forces of 
Interaction between microparticles are 
carried across continuous fields—elec- 
tromagnetic, nuclear, etc., which are 
Inseverably connected with the “ele- 
mentary” particles. The spread of in- 
teraction in the fields occurs in the 
form of immediate ection (see Action, 


- 37 c= 


Augustine, Saint 


Immediate and at a Distance). Modern 
A. denies the existence of ultimate, 
unchanging matter and proceeds from 
the recognition of the quantitative 
infinity of matter. 

Attention, mental state in which a 
person directs and concentrates his 
cognitive and practical activity on a 
definite object or action. Involuntary 
A. to an object (an orientative re flex 
in the physiological sense) is evoked 
by the peculiar features of the object 
itself, such as newness, mutation, con- 
trast power of effect (e.g., bright light, 
powerful sounds). Deliberate A. is 
determined by a conscious aim. De- 
liberate A., which is peculiar to man, 
has developed in the course of centu- 
ries of labour. Of labour Marx wrote: 
“Besides the exertion of the bodily 
organs, the process demands that, dur- 
ing the whole operation, the work- 
man’s will be steadily in consonance 
with his purpose. This means close 
attention.” (Marx, Capital, Vol. I, 
p. 178.) 

Attribute, an inalienable quality 
possessed by a thing without which 
the thing cannot exist or cannot be con- 
ceived. Aristotle (q.v.) distinguished 
attribute from accident (q.v.). Descartes 
regarded Aa. as the basic qualities of 
substance (q.v.). For this reason the 
A. of a corporeal substance is to him 
its dimensions, while thought is the A. 
of a spiritual substance. Spinoza (q-v.) 
considered dimensions and thought 
to be the Aa. of a single substance. 
The 18th century French materialists 
regarded dimension and motion as the 
Aa. of matter, and some of them (Di- 
derot, Robinet, qq.v.) added thought. 
The term is used in modern philos- 
ophy. 

Augustine, Saint (354-430),- Bishop 
of Hippo (North Africa), Christian 
theologian and mystic philosopher, 
held views close to Neo-Platonism 
(q.v.), and was a prominent patristic 
(see Patristics). His world outlook 
had a well-defined fideist character 
based on the principle “Where there 
is no faith there is no knowledge, no 
truth”. His views constituted ore of 
the sources of scholasticism (q.v.). 
In his De Civitate Dei (The City of 








a 


aa 
E 


oo da 


“Te 


= 


“~~ 


Authority 


God) A. developed the Christian con- 
ception of world history comprehended 
fatalistically, as pre-ordained by God. 
He counterposes his “City of God”, 
the universal rule of the church, to 
Civitas terrena, the City of Earth, 
the “sinful” secular state. This doc- 
trine played an important part in the 
struggle of the Papacy against the 
feudal lords. A. considerably influenced 
the subsequent development, of 
Christian theology. Augustinism is 
still widely used today by both Cath- 
olic and Protestant clericals. 
Authority, an ethical concept denot- 
ing the universally recognised in- 
fluence of an individual, a system of 
views or an organisation deriving from 
certain qualities or services performed. 
A. may be political, moral, scien- 
tific, etc., depending on the sphere of 
influence. A system of A. is an essen- 
tial condition for the development of 
socio-historical practice. A. plays an 
important part in the conditions of 
socialist construction, when all the 
working people are drawn actively 
into the affairs of society. The abuse 
of A. may, in the final analysis, lead 
to a loss of confidence in the A. or to 
blind worship of it, which develops 
into the personality cult (q.v.). The 
22nd Congress of the CPSU stressed the 
vast difference between the A. of lead- 
ers and the personality cult, and showed 
that A. must be won by unselfish 
service to the people and the Party, 
by persistent labour and a profound 
knowledge of the task in hand. To 
retain A. one must listen to public 
opinion, keep in touch with the masses 
and rely on their experience. Criticism 
and self-criticism (q.v-) constitute the 
condition that prevents A. from devel- 
oping into the personality cult. 
Autogenesis, an idealist trend in 
biology and medicine that regards 
philogénesis (q.v.) and ontogenesis (q.v.) 
as resulting solely from internal, auto- 
nomous factors. This school divorces 
the organism from the environment 
and considers the mystical “principle 
of perfection’ and other immaterial 
causes to be the motive force determin- 
ing the development of organisms. 
Supporters of autogenetic concepts (the 


ty) 


Automat 


German botanist Nägeli, the Swiss 
zoologist Agassiz, the American biolog- 
ist Cohen, and others) regarded the 
evolution of living organisms as a pre- 
determined, teleological process (see 
Teleology). A. is close to vitalism 
(q.v.). y 

Automat, any technical device 
that performs some process, action or 
operation (e.g., a mechanical operation, 
production control, etc.) without the 
direct participation of man. Very sim- 
ple Aa. were known in antiquity. 
Automatic machine tools became wide- 
spread in the 19th and 20th cen- 
turies. Aa. with feedback (q.v.) and 
capable of maintaining a process as 
required under changing conditions 
have been developed in the last few 
decades. The development of cyber- 
netics (q.v.) and electronic computing 
techniques has led to the production 
of Aa. that maintain a process under 
optimal conditions. The development 
of modern Aa. shows that they are not 
only capable of replacing the muscular 
power of man but can undertake a 
number of functions usually carried 
out by the human brain—they can 
select the sequence and direction of 
actions, carry out intricate calculations 
and draw logical conclusions, “remem- 
ber” information, gather experience, 
“learn”, and so on. This opens up a 
wide fizld for the automation of some 
aspects and processes of mental 
labour. The theoretical study of Aa. 
belongs to the field of cybernetics and 
modern logic. These sciences regard 
as Aa. any devices for the processing 
of information. The theory of “ab- 
stract automats” studies idealised de- 
vices with several inlets by which the 
information is fed in and several out- 
lets for the processed information. 
The processed information depends on 
that fed into the A. and the state of 
the A. at the moment the information 
is received. The states of Aa. depend 
on information retained from the 
past—they are its “memory”. In a 
real A. there can be only a finite num- 
ber of these states, i.e., its “memory” 
is finite (finite A). An abstraction 
of the finiteness of the “memory” gives 
tise to the concept of an A. with a 











Automation 


ONS 


Axiology 





“memory” of infinite volume; an exam- 
ple of this is the Turing machine (q.v.) 
abstraction, which plays an important 
role in the development of modern 
logic. 

Automation, the performance of pro- 
duction, management, and other so- 
cially necessary processes without the 
immediate participation of man. A. 
is the highest stage in the development 
of technology and is marked by the 
appearance of automated lines of ma- 
chine tools (in the 20s of the 20th 
cent.); this was followed by automated 
shops and factories using (from the 
50s) modern computing and control- 
ling machines. A. does not eliminate 
the human element which is necessary 
to give general guidance and exercise 
control over the work of the machine 
(adjustment, programming, feeding raw 
material, repairs), although as A. de- 
velops the machines will more and 
more perform these functions them- 
selves. A. makes for a considerable 
increase in the productivity of labour 
and in the output of goods, reduces 
costs and improves quality. Control 
over a number of processes (in atomic 
power engineering, in space explora- 
tion, etc.) can be done only automati- 
cally. Extensive A. in industry has 
important economic, political, and 
cultural consequences. These differ 
radically under capitalism and social- 
ism. Under capitalism A. leads to mass 
unemployment, the transfer of work- 
ers to jobs that require lower skills 
and are lower paid; it increases eco- 
nomic depressions and crises and greatly 
aggravates the contradictions of bour- 
geois society. The introduction of A. 
by capitalists serves the purpose of 
obtaining superprofits and is extremely 
uneven. Under socialism and commu- 
nism A. serves to lighten the labour 
of man and create abundance, and 
leads to a constant improvement in 
living standards and culture and to 
the conversion of labour into a pri- 
mary necessity for man. The Pro- 
gramme of the CPSU envisages a con- 
stantly growing A. of production proc- 
esses as an essential condition for 
the creation of the material and tech- 
nical basis of communism. A. improves 


labour conditions, helps remove the 
distinctions between mental and phys- 
ical labour and raise the cultural 
and technical level of the working 
people. By considerably reducing the 
length of the working day it gives 
people in a communist society an op- 
portunity to apply their efforts to 
science, art, sport, etc. 

Avenarius, Richard (1843-96), Swiss 
philosopher of the subjective idealist 
School, one of the first exponents of 
empirio-criticism (q.v.), professor of 
Zürich University. The central feature 
of his philosophy is the concept of 
experience which is supposed to rec- 
oncile the opposites—consciousness 
and matter, the psychic and the phys- 
ical. A. criticised the materialist 
theory of knowledge which he described 
as introjection (q.v.), i.e., incorporat- 
ing the external world into the psyche. 
He also supported the theory of prin- 
cipal co-ordination (q.v.) of subject 
and object, i.e., the dependence of 
the latter on the former. That A.’s 
views were groundless and incompat- 
ible with the facts of natural science 
was shown by Lenin in his Material- 
ism and Empirio-Criticism (vol. 14). 
A.'s major work is Kritik der reinen 
Erfahrung (1888-90). 

Averroés, see Ibn Roshd. 

Averroism, the teachings of Averroés 
(see Ibn Roshd) and his followers, 
a trend in medieval philosophy; its 
supporters held that the world is eter- 
nal and the soul mortal and upheld 
the theory of twofold truth (q.v.). 
A. was brutally persecuted by the 
church. A. acquired considerable in- 
fluence in France (Siger de Brabant) 
in the 13th century as a progressive 
philosophical trend opposed to the 
ruling dogmatism of the church; it 
was also influential in Italy (the Pa- 
dua school) from the 14th to 16th 
century. 

Avicenna, see Ibn Sina. 

Axiology, the branch of philosophy 
dealing with values (q.v.). The Marx- 
ist theory of values is fundamentall 
opposed to bourgeois A. which too 
shape at the beginning of the 20th 
century (Rickert, q.v., M. Scheler, 
and others) and, as a rule, ignores the 











Axiom 


social nature of values. Non-Marxist 
theoreticians, therefore, reach subjectiv- 
ist or objective-idealist conclusions in 
A. The neo-positivists, for instance, 
deny altogether the real existence of 
property values in the object, assert- 
ing that the good and the beautiful are 
merely the expression of our subjective 
attitude to the object being appraised. 
Objective idealists consider value to 
be some sort of supernatural entity 
belonging to an extra-spatial, extra- 
sensory world. The Marxist approach 
to the theory of values is based, first, 
on the recognition of the objective 
character of social, scientific, moral, 
aesthetic, and other values; secondly, 
on the denial of the extra-historical 
nature of values and an understanding 
of their dependence on historical con- 
ditions, class relations, etc; thirdly, 
on the consideration of the dialectical 
relations between the relative and the 
absolute in the development of values. 
From the Marxist point of view, man 
and human happiness, and freedom 
achieved in struggle against all forms 
of oppression and in building com- 
munist society, constitute the supreme 
values. 

Axiom, a proposition in any scien- 
tific theory that is so constructed that 
it is taken as the starting point and 
does not have to be proved for that 
theory and from which (or from the 
totality of which) the remaining prop- 
ositions of the theory are deduced 
in accordance with set rules. From 
times of antiquity to the mid-19th 
century an A. was regarded as intui- 
tively obvious or a priori true. This 
conception lost sight of the conven- 
tional nature of Aa. deriving from 
many centuries of human practical 
cognitive activity. Lenin wrote that 
man’s practical activity required the 
repetition of logical figures myriads 
of times in the human mind, in order 
that these figures could become axi- 
oms. The present-day understanding 
of the axiomatic method (q.v.) does 
not require A. to be obvious a priori. 
Aa. must satisfy one condition—all 
other propositions of the given theory 
are derived from them and from them 
alone. The truth of Aa. selected is 


— 40 — 


Axiomatic Metho 


determined when interpretations (see 
Interpretation and Model) of the given 
system are found; if such interpreta- 
tions exist or, at least, may be assumed 
in principle, Aa. must be accepted 
as true (see Postulate). 

Axiom of the Syllogism, the basic 
principle of the syllogism which Aris- 
totle formulated as “all that is predic- 
ated of the predicate will be predicated 
also of the subject”. Aristotle often 
used the term “belongs to” instead of 
the term “is predicated of”, and con- 
sidered the expression “A is predicated 
of B” to be identical with “B is in- 
cluded in A”. Thus A.S. may be in- 
terpreted as content (intensively) and 
as volume (extensively). In traditional 
logic, the significance of A.S. is re- 
vealed in the reduction of all syllo- 
gisms to the first syllogistic figure (see 
Syllogistic). In modern formal logic, 
the problem of A.S. is handled in the 
context of a broader axiomatisation 
of syllogistic. 

Axiomatic Method, a deductive meth- 
od of building up a scientific theory 
in which (1) for a given theory a num- 
ber of propositions acceptable without 
proof are selected (axioms, q.v.); (2) 
the concepts they contain obviously 
cannot be defined within the frame- 
work of the given theory; (3) rules 
are elaborated for the deduction and 
definition of the given theory, which 
permit the necessary transition from 
some propositions to others and in- 
troduce new terms (concepts) into the 
theory; (4) all the remaining proposi- 
tions of the given theory are deduced 
from (1) on the basis of (3). The first 
ideas of the method appeared in Greece 
(Aristotle, Euclid). Later attempts were 
made to analyse various branches of 
science and philosophy axiomatically 
(Newton, Spinoza, and others). These 
analyses were an intensive (substan- 
tial) construction of a given theory 
(and of no other); attention was paid 
mainly to the intuitive definition and 
selection of obvious axioms. Beginning 
with the second half of the 19th cen- 
tury, when there was an intensive elab- 
boration of the problems involved in 
establishing the bases of mathematics 
and mathematical logic, the axiom 





Axiomatic System, Independence of 


theory came to be regarded as a sort 
of formal system estab ishing the rela- 
tion between its elements (symbols) 
and describing any number of objects 
that satisfied the axiom.The main at- 
tention was focussed on the non-con- 
tradiction (q.v-) of the system, its 
completeness and the independence 
of axioms (q.v.), etc. Since symbolic 
systems may be studied independ- 
ently of any content they may have or 
in connection with it, a distinction 
is made between syntactical and se- 
mantic axiomatic systems. This dis- 
tinction made it necessary to formulate 
two types of basic requirements for 
them—syntactical and semantic (syn- 
tactical and semantic non-contradic- 
tion, completeness, independence of 
the axioms, etc.). An analysis of the 
formalised axiomatic systems led to 
the conclusion that it is impossible to 
construct a general axiomatic system 
(Gödel, q.v.). Axiomatisation is only 
one of the methods of the organisation 
of scientific knowledge. It is usually 
carried out after the theory has been 
built up with sufficient content and 
its aim is greater precision in expound- 
ing the theory, particularly in deduc- 
ing all the consequences from the as- 
sertions that have been accepted. Dur- 
ing the last 30 or 40 years great at- 
tention has been paid to the axioma- 
tisation, not only of mathematical 
subjects, but also of certain branches 
of physics, biology, linguistics, etc. 
In studying natural sciences (in gener- 
al, any non-mathematical science) A.M. 
takes the form of the hypothetico- 
deductive method (q.v.) (see also For- 
malisation). 


Axiomatic System, Independence of, 
a characteristic of axiomatics (see Axio- 
matic Method). If not a single axiom 
underlying a deductive system can 
be inferred by the rules of deduction 
of this system, such a system of 
axioms is called independent. Other- 
wise the system of axioms is depend- 
ent. A study of any axiomatic 
system from this point of view is im- 
portant not only for simplifying axio- 
matics. It may be important in prin- 
ciple. Thus, establishment of the in- 
dependence of Euclid’s (q.v.) fifth pos- 


Rae | ee 


Axiomatic Theory 


tulate (q.v-) in the system of axioms 
of geometry facilitated the develop- 
ment of non-Euclidean geometries 
(q-v.). 

Axiomatic Theory, Completeness of, 
requirement that in all axiomatically 
constructed theories the truth of each 
proposition should be proved (i.e., 
deduced from axioms) for the given 
system. Because of the distinction 
between syntactic and semantic axio- 
matic theories (see Axiomatic Method) 
requirements for completeness differ- 
entiate: there are requirements for 
syntactical completeness in a strong 
sense (all propositions, belonging to 
a system, are deducible or disprovable 
in it), and in a weak sense (after add- 
ing to the axioms a proposition, not 
deducible in this system, it becomes 
a contradictory one), requirements for 
semantic completeness in respect to 
certain models (each proposition cor- 
responding to a true statement in a 
given model is deducible for the sys- 
tem), etc. In the process of investigat- 
ing sufficiently rich axiomatic theories 
(arithmetic, for example) proof was 
found (K. Gédel, q.v., in 1931, and 
the subsequent results), that they were 
incomplete in principle, i.e., they 
contain propositions which are not 
capable of proof or disproof in their 
framework. By virtue of this, complete- 
ness is not an absolutely indispens- 
able condition for successful axioma- 
tisation: theories which are to a cer- 
tain degree incomplete possess prac- 
tical value. 

Axiomatic Theory, Non-Contradic- 
tion of, a condition which must be 
fulfilled by any axiomatic theory and 
according to which a proposition P 


and its negation P cannot be simul- 
taneously deduced within the frame- 
work of the given theory. In view of 
the difference between the syntactic 
and semantic aspects of axiomatic 
theories (see Axiomatic Method), non- 
contradictoriness is formulated in two 
ways: a theory is syntactically non- 
contradictory if a proposition and its 
negation are not simultaneously deduced 
in it; a theory is semantically non-con- 
tradictory if it has at least one model, 
i.e., a certain sphere of objects, satis- 








Ayer — 42 — Ayer 


fying the given theory. Of all the 
conditions for axiomatic constructions 
(see Axiomatic Theory, Completeness 
of; Axiomatic System, Independence 
of) non-contradiction is the leading 
one: its violation makes the theory 
invalid, because it becomes possible 
to prove any proposition in it. 

Ayer, Alfred (1910- ), neo-positivist, 
professor of metaphysics at Oxford 
University (since 1959). Acquired rec- 
ognition for his book Language, Truth 
and Logic (1936) in which he propa- 
gandises the ideas of the Vienna Circle 
(q-v.). In his later writings (The 


Foundations of Empirical Knowledge, 
1940; Thinking and Meaning, 1947, 
The Problem of Knowledge, 1956, and 
others) he deviates somewhat from the 
orthodox form of logical positivism 
(q.v.) and comes strongly under the 
influence of linguistic philosophy (q.v.). 
In these books he attempts to investi- 
gate philosophical problems (the au- 
thenticity of knowledge, the relation 
between material objects and “sen- 
sory data”, etc.) from the positivist 
position by analysing the relevant 
concepts, translating them into “logi- 
cally clear” terminology. 





a ee ee es 





B 


Babouvism, the 18th century French 
revolutionary movement for “a re- 
public of equais»—a single national 
commune governed from a single cen- 
tre. The movement took its name from 
its leader and most consistent theoret- 
ician, Gracchus Babeuf (1760-97). In 
1796, Babeuf, and his companions 
(Buonarotti, Maréchal, Antonelle, Dar- 
thé, Germain, Debon, Lepelletier, and 
others) organised the “Conspiracy of 
Equals”, which was the culminating 
point of the movement. The conspiracy 
was uncovered and many of the partic- 
ipants were arrested and put on trial. 
Babeuf and Darthé were guillotined 
in 1797. B. signified the break-down of 
the alliance of exploited plebeians 
and the bourgeoisie that had taken 
shape during preparations for, and in 
the course of, the French Revolution. 
The instability of this alliance was 
obvious, for a bourgeois revolution 
could not give anything substantial 
to the most exploited section of the 
population. This was particularly clear 
at the time of the Thermidor reaction. 
B. was the political and ideological 
reflection of the early separation of 
the pre-proletariat from the general 
plebeian mass that had participated 
in the French Revolution. The Babouv- 
ists were the ideological heirs of French 
18th century materialism (q.v-), of the 
ideas of Mellier (q.v.) on the popular 
revolution, of the “rationalist” com- 
munism of Morelly (q.v.) and of the 
organisational and ideological experi- 
ence of the most radical trends in the 
French Revolution. B. was a step 
forward in the development of social- 
ist thinking, since it came into being 
at a new stage in the socio-economic 
development of France, the stage at 


which capitalist relations were being 
consolidated. The Babouvists were the 
first to attempt to convert socialism 
from a theory into the practice of the 
revolutionary movement. In addition 
to their general statute of the future 
“Republic of Equals”, the Babouv- 
ists elaborated a whole system of meas- 
ures to improve the condition of the 
poor and overcome the resistance of 
counter-revolutionary forces. They put 
forward the idea of retaining the dic- 
tatorship of the working people after 
the victory of the revolution; they tried 
to define the main stages of the rev- 
olutionary transformation of society; 
they put forward the proposition that 
history is a struggle between the rich 
and the poor, patricians and plebe- 
ians, between masters and servants, 
between the sated and the hungry. 
Although it possessed features of his- 
torical realism, B. did not go keyond 
conspiracies in its tactics; for this rea- 
son the movement is regarded as uto- 
pian, although ideologically and organ- 
isationally Babeuf and his companions 
contributed to the development of so- 
cialism from a utopia into a science. 

Bachofen, Johann Jakob (1815-87), 
Swiss historian of law and religion. 
His Das Mutterrecht (1861) was a 
pioneer work in the study of the his- 
tory of the family, particularly the 
matriarchy, but his idealist outlook 
prevented him from discovering the 
real nature of family and marital re- 
lations and their development. He con- 
sidered the evolution of religious ideas 
to be the driving force of history. His 
philosophy was comprehensively exam- 
ined by Engels in The Origin of the 
Family, Private Property and the State 
(q-v.). 





ee — 
as 





Bacon, Francis 


447 


Bacon, Roger 





Bacon, Francis (1561-1626), English 
philosopher, founder of the new ma- 
terialism and experimental science. Un- 
der James I, attained the high position 
of Lord Chancellor. In 1620, published 
the famous treatise, Novum Organum 
(the title was a reference to Aristotle’s 
Organon), in which he evolved a new 
conception of the tasks of science and 
the foundations of scientific induction 
(q-v.). Declaring that the purpose 
of learning was to increase man’s power 
over nature, B. maintained that this 
aim could be achieved only by learn- 
ing which revealed the true causes 
of things. He, therefore, opposed scho- 
lasticism. The early learning had suf- 
fered either from “dogmatism”, in the 
sense that the scholar starting from 
concepts of his own invention, wove 
his system of propositions in the same 
way as the spider weaves its web, 
or else it suffered from “empiricism”, 
i.e., mere enumeration of unrelated 
facts. On these grounds B. called for 
scepticism with regard to all previous 
learning. While admitting the pos- 
sibility of acquiring true knowledge, 
he held that the method of doing so 
must be reformed. The first step towards 
this reform should be to cleanse the 
mind of the preconceptions and preju- 
dices (Idols) by which it was constantly 
threatened. Some of these illusions 
were due to habits of mind character- 
istic of the whole human race, others 
to mental habits characteristic of the 
particular investigator or investigat- 
ors, yet others stemmed from the im- 
perfection and inaccuracy of language, 
and others, finally, were due to the 
uncritical acceptance of opinions. Hav- 
ing rid oneself of these bad habits 
of mind one could then adopt the true 
method of the new learning. This 
learning, according to B., should be 
a rational elaboration of the facts of 
experience. The premisses for the 
conciusions of the new learning (media 
axiomata) would be propositions based 
on cencepts arrived at through method- 
ical generalisation or induction. In- 
duction was based on analytical com- 
prehension of experiment. According 
to Engels, the one-sided development 
of Bacon’s theory enabled him, and 


after him, Locke, to shift the met- 
aphysical approach, which had taken 
shape in the 15th and 16th centuries, 
from natural science to philosophy. 
In his theory of induction B. was the 
first to point to the importance of what 
were called “negative instances”, i.e., 
cases contradicting the generalisation 
and calling for its revision. His con- 
tribution to the development of phi- 
losophy may be defined as follows. First, 
he restored the materialist tradition 
and reassessed the philosophical doc- 
trines of the past from this standpoint; 
he praised early Greek materialism 
and revealed the errors of idealism. 
Secondly, he evolved his own material- 
ist conception of nature, which he 
based on the idea that matter was a 
combination of particles, and nature 
a combination of bodies endowed with 
manifold properties. An essential qual- 
ity of matter was motion, which B. 
did not confine merely to mechanical 
movement (he defined 19 types of 
motion). Bacon’s views reflected the 
new demands made upon learning in 
England in the age of primitive capital 
accumulation. But B. was not a con- 
sistent materialist. His teaching, as 
Marx notes, is full of “theological in- 
consistency”. His political beliefs were 
reflected in the New Atlantis, a utopia 
in which an ideal society flourishes 
economically on the basis of science 
and an ingenious technology, while 
the antithesis between ruling and op- 
pressed classes remains. 

Bacon, Roger (c. 1214-92), English 
thinker of the Middle Ages, precursor 
of modern experimental science, ideol- 
ogist of the town craftsmen. He ex- 
posed feudal customs, ideology, and 
politics. In 1277, B. was dismissed 
from teaching at Oxford University 
because of his heretical views and was 
confined to a monastery by order of 
the church authorities. His world out- 
look was materialist but not consist- 
ently so. Condemning scholastic dog- 
matism and veneration of authority, 
he advocated the experimental study 
of nature and a new and independent 
approach to learning. He upheld ex- 
periment and mathematics as a means 
of obtaining knowledge, the aim of 





Baden School 


all learning being to increase man’s 
power over nature. In spite of the 
traces of alchemist, astrological, and 
magical superstition that are to be 
found in his works, B. put forward 
a number of bold scientific and tech- 
nical conjectures. 

Baden School, one of the most in- 
fluential Neo-Kantian (q.v.) schools 
in the early 20th century. The name 
derives from Heidelberg and Freiburg 
universities, both in the Land of Ba- 
den, at which Professors Windelband 
and Rickert taught the theory of the 
B.S. Basically it amounted to counter- 
posing the historic method to the 
natural scientific method; history, they 
said, is the science of individual facts 
of development which have cultural 
value; natural science is the study of 
the laws of natural phenomena which 
repeat themselves and are general. 
In neither case are concepts the reflec- 
tion of reality. They merely convert 
reality into thought that is subordi- 
nated to a priori principles; natural 
science is the cognition of the general, 
history, the cognition of the individu- 
al. The B.S., following Kant (q.v.), 
counterposes being to necessity. The 
denial of the laws of history, typical 
of the school, is associated with the 
theory of values. These theories were 
developed by H. Miinsterberg (1863- 
1916) and E. Lask (1875-1915) and 
were applied to aesthetics by J. Cohn 
(1869-1947) and B. Christiansen, and 
to sociology by Weber (q.v.). In mod- 
ern German sociology the ideas of 
the B.S. are being developed in a 
spirit of out-and-out subjectivism and 
Voluntarism (q.v.), which is opposed 
to Marxism. This school of sociology 
in West Germany is headed by W. 
Theimer and G. Ritter. 

Bakunin, Mikhail Alexandrovich 
(1814-76), Russian petty-bourgeois rev- 
olutionary, an aristocrat by birth, 
ideologist of anarchism (q.v.); in phi- 
losophy he was an eclecticist. From 
1836 to 1840, Bakunin lived in Moscow, 
where he studied Fichte and Hegel 
(qq.v.), interpreting the philosophy of 
the latter in a conservative spirit in 
his Gimnazicheskiye rechi Gegelya. 
(Predisloviye perevodchika) (Hegel's 


BS 


Basis and Superstructure 


Gymnasium Speeches. {Translators 
Preface}), 1838. In 1840, B. emigrated 
and joined the Young Hegelians, q.v. 
(Reaktsiya v Germanii [Reaction in 
Germany], 1842), taking part in the 
revolution of 1848-50 in Prague and 
Dresden. Returning to Russia, he was 
imprisoned in 1851 and in 1857 exiled 
to Siberia. In 1861, he escaped and 
spent the sixties and seventies in West- 
ern Europe, where he collaborated 
with Herzen and Ogaryov. He took an 
active part in organising the anarchist 
movement and fought against Marx- 
ism in the First International, from 
which he was expelled in 1872. Four 
years later he died in Berne. B.'s 
theory took final shape at the end of 
the sixties (Gosudarstvennost i anar- 
khiya (Statehood and Anarchy], 1873, 
et al.). B.’s basic concept is that the 
chief oppressor of man is the state, 
which relies on the fiction of God. 
Religion is “collective madness”, the 
ugly product of the consciousness of 
the oppressed masses, and the church 
is a “celestial tavern”, in which the 
oppressed seek to forget their daily 
misfortunes. To lead mankind to the 
“kingdom of freedom” it is first neces- 
sary to “blow up” the state and ex- 
clude the principle of authority from 
the people’s life. B. believed implic- 
itly in the socialist instincts and inex- 
haustible spontaneous revolutionary 
spirit of the masses, mainly the peas- 
antry and lumpenproletartat; he de- 
nied the need to prepare for revolu- 
tion and plunged headlong into revolu- 
tionary adventures. Unable to grasp 
the significance of the application of 
scientific method to the theory of 
society, he opposed the Marxist teach- 
ing on the class struggle and the dic- 
tatorship of the proletariat. In the 
seventies B.’s anarchist ideas were 
widespread among the revolutionary 
Narodniks of Russia and also in other 
economically poorly developed coun- 
tries (Italy, Spain, and others). B.’s 
anarchist theories were criticised by 
Marx, Engels, and Lenin. 

Basis and Superstructure, concepts 
of historical materialism that reveal 
the connection between economic so- 
cial relations and all other relations 








Basis and Superstructure 


within a given society. The B. is the 
totality of production relations (q.v.) 
that make up the economic structure 
of society. The concepts “B.” and 
“production relations” are synonymous 
but not identical. The concept “pro- 
duction relations” is correlated with 
the concept “productive forces” (q.v-), 
while the concept “B.” is correlated 
with the concept “S.”. The S. includes 
ideas, organisations and institutions. 
Superstructural ideas include politi- 
cal, legal, moral, aesthetic, religious, 
and philosophical views, which are 
also termed forms of social conscious- 
ness (see Forms, etc.). All forms of 
social consciousness reflect economic 
relations in one way or another; some 
of them, e.g., political and legal forms 
of consciousness, reflect economic re- 
lations directly} others are indirect 
reflections—e.g., art, philosophy. These 
latter are connected with the economic 
B. through such links as politics. 
Superstructural relations include ideo- 
logical relations (see Ideology). Unlike 
production relations, which take shape 
independently of human consciousness, 
ideological relations do not take shape 
until they have entered the conscious- 
ness. Although superstructural phenom- 
ena are determined by the B., they 
are relatively independent in their 
development. Certain organisations and 
institutions are connected with each 
form of social consciousness—political 
parties are connected with political 
ideas, state institutions, with political 
and legal ideas, the church and church 
organisations, with religion, etc. Each 
socio-economic formation (q.v.) has 
a definite B. and a corresponding S. 
Marxist historians make a distinction 
between B. & S. of the slave-owning, 
feudal, capitalist, and communist so- 
cieties. Changes in the B. & S. result 
from the change of one socio-economic 
formation into another. S. undergoes 
a certain evolution within a single 
formation; e.g., during the transition 
to imperialism S. shows signs of in- 
creased reaction; under socialist con- 
ditions the political S. develops in- 
creasingly democratic forms of organ- 
isation. An example of this is the 
transformation of the state of the 


Baturin 


dictatorship of the proletariat into a 
state governed by the whole people 
during the period of the full-scale 
construction of communism. S., which 
is brought into being by the economic 
B. and is its reflection, is not passive. 
It plays an active role in the historical 
process and affects it in all its aspects, 
including the economic, to which it 
owes its existence. In a society based on 
private property, B. & S. have an an- 
tagonistic structure. In capitalist so- 
ciety, for instance, there is a fierce 
ideological struggle between the bour- 
geoisie and the proletariat and be- 
tween the political, moral, philosophical 
and other views of these classes. The 
antagonistic nature of S. in a society 
split into classes determines the op- 
posite roles of the ideology of the 
classes in respect of the economic B. 
In capitalist society the bourgeois 
political S. with bourgeois ideas about 
iberty, equality, etc., actively serves 
the economic B. of capitalism, while 
proletarian ideology and proletarian 
organisations are directed towards the 
abolition of the economic foundations 
of capitalism. It is only in socialist 
society, where production relations 
are free of antagonisms, that S. be- 
comes more homogeneous in the so- 
cial sense and serves a common cause— 
the consistent improvement and devel- 
opment of the economic B. of social- 
ism. 

Baturin, Pafnuly Sergeyevich (c. 
1740-1803), Russian enlightener, deist; 
author of /ssledovaniya knigi o zab- 
luzhdeniyakh i istine (A Study of the 
Book of Errors and Truth), 1790, 
Kratkoye povestvovaniye o aravlyanakh 
(A Short Account of the Arabs), 1787, 
et al. The Study is a philosophical po- 
lemic which analyses the ideas of the 
mystic Saint-Martin contained in Des 
erreurs et de la vérité ou des hommes 
rappéles au principe universel de la 
science. B.’s book was almost the only 
work which criticised the religious 
mysticism of the masons, whose ideo- 
logical equipment included the above 
book by Saint-Martin. On the basis 
of natural science as known in his 
day, B. gave a materialist explanation 
of natural phenomena, defended the 








Baumgarten 


idea of heliocentrism in cosmogony, and 
the law of the conservation of matter 
and motion, and defended the material- 
ist theory of knowledge, giving a prom- 
inent place to observation and ex- 
perimental data. B. rejected the teach- 
ing of the mystics on non-corporeal 
substance. B.’s materialism was met- 
aphysical in character and deist in 
form. B. championed education and 
the development of the natural sciences 
and was in favour of “good” legislation 
and humanism. 

Baumgarten, Alexander Gottlieb 
(1714-62), German philosopher, dis- 
ciple of Leibniz and Wolff (qq.v.). 
In Meditationes philosophicae de non- 
nullis ad poema pertinentibus (1735) 
he introduced the term “aesthetics” 
to describe the study of man’s sensory 
knowledge of the beautiful and its 
expression in artistic forms, as opposed 
to logic, which is concerned with knowl- 
edge acquired through reason. His 
unfinished Aesthetica (Vol. 1, 1750, 
Vol. 2, 1758) treats of the problems 
of knowledge acquired through the 
senses. Though B. cannot be regarded 
as the founder of aesthetics as a sci- 
ence, his introduction of the concept 
was prompted by the thought of 
the day in this field and was widely 
adopted. 

Bayle, Pierre (1647-1706), publicist, 
philosopher of scepticism, representa- 
tive of the French Enlightenment. 
Professor of philosophy at Sedan Acad- 
emy and Rotterdam University. He 
carried on a polemic with Catholicism 
and eventually turned away from reli- 
gion and advocated religious toleration. 
Although he was never an atheist, the 
character of his indifference to religion 
was aptly described by Voltaire, who 
remarked that though B. might not 
be an unbeliever himself, he made 
unbelievers of others. B. launched the 
critical study of Christian doctrine 
as a variety of mythology. His argu- 
ments were based on the scepticism 
(q.v.) which had originated from the 
Cartesian principle of doubt and which, 
according to Marx, undermined all 
faith in metaphysics (q.v.) and theol- 
ogy. B. suggested that ethical prob- 
lems, instead of being determined by 


= 47) = 


Beautiful 


religion, should be examined from the * 
Standpoint of natural reason. He ar 
gued that it was possible for a society 
to be composed entirely of atheists. 
His writings, particularly his major 
work, the Dictionnaire historique et 
critique, paved the way for the French 
materialism of the 18th century. 
Beautiful, The, an aesthetical cate- 
gory reflecting and assessing phenomena 
of reality and works of art affording 
man the feeling of aesthetical enjoy- 
ment, embodying in an _ object-sen- 
sory form the freedom and fulness of 
creative and cognitive forces and the 
capabilities of man in all fields of 
social life: labour, socio-political, and 
spiritual. Idealism (Plato, Kant, He- 
gel) regarded the B. as a property 
of the spirit, of consciousness (objective 
or subjective). Pre-Marxist material- 
ism upheld the objectivity of the B., 
but not infrequently, owing to its 
contemplativeness, reduced the B. to 
a pure natural quality (symmetry, 
harmony of the parts and the whole, 
man as a natural creature, etc.). Cher- 
nyshevsky (q.v.) put forward an orig- 
inal and revolutionary definition of 
the B. as life, as the complete mani- 
festation of life. The concept B. bears 
an historical character and has a differ- 
ent content for different classes. Dialec- 
tical and materialist aesthetics pro- 
ceeds from the fact that B. is a product 
of social and historical practice. It 
comes into being and develops when 
man as a Social being (according to 
the measure the objective laws are 
cognised) realises more completely and 
freely in the given historical conditions 
his creative talents and capabilities, 
when he is the master of the objects 
of the sensory world, enjoys labour 
as the play of his physical and intel- 
lectual forces. The B. finds a synthe- 
sised and complete expression in works 
of art and artistic images. The B. in 
life and art, providing spiritual joy 
and pleasure, acquires a great cogni- 
tive and educational role in society. 
A beautiful work of art is one which, 
from the point of view of a progressive 
aesthetical ideal, truly reproduces real- 
ity. In contemporary conditions the 
truly B. arises only in the course of the 











Bebel 


48: — 


Being 





struggle for the revolutionary recon- 
struction of society. Favourable so- 
cio-economic conditions for the work- 
ing people to create works of beauty 
and to acquire a fuller ability to ap- 
preciate the B. can only be established 
by communism. 

Bebel, August (1840-1913), one of 
the founders of the German Social- 
Democratic Party, outstanding prop- 
agandist and theoretician of Marx- 
ism, an exponent of historical mate- 
rialism. His study of the problem of 
woman’s place in society is of partic- 
ular value. In Die Frau und der Sozial- 
ismus (1879) he showed that family 
relations change as the mode of pro- 
duction changes, and that women’s 
social inequality is due to the domi- 
nation of private property. The emer- 
gence of private property led to the 
“belittling and even contempt of wom- 
en”. Their emancipation is, there- 
fore, an aspect of the general problem 
of abolishing exploitation and social 
oppression. A militant atheist, B. ana- 
lysed religious teaching and showed 
that religion promised only an ephem- 
eral happiness, that it created an il- 
lusion that was useful to the ruling 
classes as a “means of domination”. 
He was an active opponent of bourgeois 
ideology and exposed Malthusianism 
(q-v.), philosophical idealism, and re- 
visionism (q.v.). He was one of the 
first to realise that the views of Bern- 
stein (q.v.) were fundamentally hostile 
to the proletariat. Although he com- 
mitted certain tactical mistakes and 
was wrong in some of his propositions, 
both his theoretical and practical work 
contributed enormously to the work- 
ers’ struggle against social oppres- 
sion. 

Behaviourism, a trend in modern 
psychology, based philosophically on 
pragmatism (q.v.). B. was originated 
in 1913 by J. B. Watson (1878-1958) 
of Chicago University, the experiment- 
al material being provided by the re- 
search into the behaviour of animals 
carried out by E. L. Thorndike (1874- 
1949). Watson’s theory was shared by 
K. S. Lashley (1890-1958), A. P. Weiss 
(1879-1931), and others. B. continues 
the mechanistic trend in psychology, 


reducing psychological phenomena to 
the reactions of the organism. It iden- 
tifles consciousness with behaviour, 
regarding the relation between stimu- 
lus and reaction as its basic unit. 
Knowledge, according to B., is entire- 
ly a matter of the conditioned reac- 
tions of organisms (including man). 
In the thirties Watson’s theory was 
superseded by a number of neo-behav- 
iourist theories known broadly as 
“conditioning”. Their leading expo- 
nents were Clark Hull (1884-1952), Ed- 
ward Tolman (b. 1886), and Edwin 
Guthrie (1886-1959). These theories 
developed under the influence of 
Pavlovian teaching. Having borrowed 
I. Pavlov’s (q.v.) terminology and 
classification of forms of behaviour, 
the neo-behaviourists substituted opera- 
tionism and logical positivism (qq.v-.) 
for the materialist foundations of his 
doctrine. While concentrating on con- 
ditioned reflexes, they ignore the role 
of the cerebral cortex in behaviour. 
Contemporary B. has modified the 
stimulus-reaction formula by insert- 
ing what are called “intermediate var- 
iables” (skill, stimulation and im 
hibition potential, need, etc.). This 
does not, however, change the mecha- 
nistic and idealist nature of B. 

Being 1. A philosophical concept 
denoting the objective world, matter 
(q.v-), which exists independently of 
consciousness. Regarding the material- 
ity of the world and its B. as identical, 
dialectical materialism rejects the ide- 
alist conception of B. as something 
that exists before matter or independ- 
ently of it, as well as idealist attempts 
to make B. a product of the act of 
consciousness. On the other hand, it 
is not enough to stress only the objec- 
tivity of B., because in that case the 
problem of the material or ideal char- 
acter of B. remains unsolved. While 
recognising B. as primary and con- 
sciousness as secondary, dialectical 
materialism nevertheless interprets con- 
sciousness as something more than a 
passive reflection of being, and regards 
it as an active force which influences 
B. 2. The most abstract concept denot- 
ing existence in general. In this sense 
B. must be distinguished from reality, 





Being, Social 





existence, actuality (qq.v.), etc., which 
are more concrete and more profound 
definitions of objective processes and 
phenomena. 

Being, Social, a philosophical cate- 
gory denoting the material life of so- 
ciety. It is primary in relation to so- 
cial consciousness and exists outside 
and independently of social conscious- 
ness. The material life of society com- 
prises the production of material goods 
and the material relations which 
take shape between people in the proc- 
ess of production and the concrete 
practical life of society. (See Being, 
Social Being, Social Consciousness.) 

Belinsky, Vissarion Grigoryevich 
(1811-48), Russian revolutionary dem- 
ocrat, literary critic, founder of 
Russian realist aesthetics. His appear- 
ance heralded the complete supersession 
of the nobility by the raznochintsy 
(middle-class and professional people) 
in the Russian liberation movement. 
Born in Sveaborg in the family of a 
doctor, he read literature at Moscow 
University from 1829 to 1832. In 1833 
he joined the magazine Teleskop, which 
published in its supplement (Molva) 
his first important article, “Literary 
Aspirations” (1834). From 1838 to 1839 
he edited the magazine Moskovsky 
Nablyudatel, he moved to St. Peters- 
burg at the end of 1839, where he took 
over the department of literary crit- 
icism in the magazine Otechestvenniye 
zapiski. In 1846, he became chief critic 
for the Sovremennik but for medica! 
reasons was obliged to go abroad in 
1847. He died of tuberculosis in St. 
Petersburg the following year. Ideo- 
logically, his work belongs to the period 
when Russian social thinkers were only 
just beginning to seek new ways of 
fighting the autocracy and serfdom, 
and to evolve a scientific theory of 
social development. Hence the ex- 
treme complexity and intensity of his 
ideological evolution. By the 40s he 
had arrived at a revolutionary demo- 
cratic outlook that reflected the mood 
of the peasantry, and had become deep- 
ly interested in socialism, atheism, 
and materialism. This led him to 
formulate his attitude to the philosoph- 
ical and socio-political doctrines of 


4-1682 


e OES 


Belinsky 


the 19th century (Fichte, Schelling, 
Hegel, Feuerbach, the Young Hegeli- 
ans, qq.v., the French utopian social- 
ists, and the early Marx). B. wrote no 
philosophical treatises, but all his 
major essays deal with philosophical 
problems. An ardent supporter of 
Hegel between 1837 and 1839, he 
interpreted his dictum “was wirklich 
ist, das ist vernünftig’ (what is real is 
Teasonable) in a spirit of political 
conservatism, of reconciliation with 
the Russian autocracy. But even in 
this period, which ended when B. 
proposed the idea of negation, the 
principle of struggle against all that 
is obsolescent and unreasonable, his 
thinking was directed mainly towards 
understanding the laws that control 
the life of man and of society as a whole. 
In the early 40s B. took up a ma- 
terialist stand. Discussing the problem 
of the unity of the material and the 
ideal, he argued that the “spiritual” 
is “nothing but the activity of the 
physical”. At the same time he 
stressed the active role played by con- 
sciousness in the process of interaction 
between man and his environment. 
Rejecting the conservatism of the 
Hegelian system, B. perceived in dia- 
lectics the basis of a method of scientific 
research and revolutionary action, the 
seed of a genuine “philosophy of his- 
tory”. Objective law, which he defined 
as the necessity of social progress 
operating through the sum total of 
human activity and expressing itself 
in the actions of great men, occupies 
a central place in his thinking. It was 
at the bottom of his approach to the 
problems of Russian history (role of 
Peter I, etc.), and its relation to the 
processes of world history. It was the 
core of his interpretation of the cor- 
relation between ideal and reality. 
Welcoming the socialist conception of 
a just society where “there will be no 
rich and no poor, no tsars and no 
subjects, but where there will be broth- 
ers, human beings”, B. was neverthe- 
less sceptical about the reformist proj- 
ects of some West European socialists. 
He maintained that it was unlikely 
that the new society could be estab- 
lished “by time alone, without violent 














Bellers 


upheavals, without bloodshed”. How- 
ever, he himself did not achieve a 
scientific perception of the inevitabil- 
ity of socialism. Hence his appeal to 
the ideas of primitive Christianity as 
the basis for the morality of the future. 
He acknowledged the progressive na- 
ture of the bourgeois system compared 
with feudalism, and considered that 
the immediate social tasks facing 
Russia were the destruction of the 
patriarchal, serf-owning forms of life 
(above all, serfdom itself) and the 
enactment of a number of bourgeois 
democratic reforms. With this as his 
point of departure B. waged a ruthless 
campaign against the retrograde ideas 
of “official reflection of the people’s 
feelings” and ridiculed the Slavophile 
idealisation of Russia’s patriarchal 
ast. His revolutionary democracy 
ound its most consistent expression in 
his “Letter to Gogol” (July 1847), 
one of the finest works of the uncen- 
sored Russian democratic press of the 
19th century. In this letter B. severe- 
ly criticised the autocracy and the 
Orthodox Church, calling for the im- 
mediate abolition of serfdom, and at- 
tacking monarchist, religious ideol- 
ogy. Historicity is characteristic of his 
aesthetic judgements. Regarding it as 
the essence and specifics of art to rep- 
roduce the typical features of reality 
through imagery, B. inveighed against 
reactionary romanticism and didactic 
fiction and advocated the principles 
of realism underlying the work of 
Pushkin and the “natural school” led 
by Gogol. Pointing to the connection 
between the concepts of kinship with 
the people and realism in art, he ad- 
vanced important propositions on the 
social significance of literature being 
dependent on its ability to bridge 
the gap between educated “society” 
and the mass of the people, and on 
“sympathy with contemporaneity”, i.e., 
with progress, as a quality essential 
to the true artist. B.’s views on art 
form an important contribution to 
the development of aesthetics. 
Bellers, John (1654-1725), English 
petty-bourgeois utopian, economist, 
and philanthropist. His work anticipat- 
ed the labour theory of value. Unlike 


Seo 0r 


Berdyayev 


the mercantilists, he stressed the need 
to increase the productivity of labour 
and change the existing mode of pro- 
duction. He was one of the first to 
propose the idea of agricultural co- 
operation. In Proposals for Raising a 
College of Industry of All Useful Trades 
and Husbandry (1695) he evolved a 
plan for producer co-operation based 
on collective ownership of the means 
of production and rational organisa- 
tion of labour on the principle “he who 
does not work, neither shall he eat”. 
He advocated social insurance and vo- 
cational education. 

Bentham, Jeremy (1748-1832), En- 
glish moralist and writer on law. In 
his theory of ethics B. reduced all the 
motiyes of human conduct to either 
pleasure or pain, identifying morality 
with the utility of an action (see Utili- 
tarianism). Morality could thus be cal- 
culated mathematically by balancing 
the pleasure against the pain that would 
accrue as the result of any partic- 
ular action. This metaphysical and 
mechanistic approach to morality (the 
hedonic calculus) led him to defend 
capitalist society, since he declared the 
satisiaction of one’s private interests 
(the principle of egoism) to be the 
means of providing “the greatest hap- 
piness of the greatest number” (prin- 
ciple of altruism). He criticised the 
theory of natural law (q.v.). While 
rejecting “natural religion” with its 
concept of God based on an analogy 
with earthly rulers, he defended “re- 
vealed religion”. As regards episte- 
mology, he was a nominalist. On the 
basis of one of B.’s MSS, Boole (q.v.) 
formulated the theory of the quanti- 
fication of the predicate (q.v.). His 
main work was Deontology or the Sci- 
ence of Morality (1834). 

Berdyayev, Nikolai Alexandrovich 
(1874-1948), Russian bourgeois mysti- 
cal philosopher, existentialist, founder 
of the so-called “new Christianity”, 
ideologist of Vekhism (q.v.). He began 
as an exponent of “legal Marxism” 
(q.v.), but by 1905 his “critical ap- 
praisal” of Marxism had developed 
into direct opposition to revolution, 
while his Neo-Kantian enthusiasms 
had led him to God-seeking and mys- 











Bergson 


ticism. To the class struggle for the 
liberation of the workers B. counter- 
poses an “inner”, “spiritual” libera- 
tion of the personality by way of 
religion (Filosofiya Svobody [ Philoso- 
phy of Freedom), 1911; Smysl Tvor- 
chestva [The Meaning of Creativity], 
1916, etc.). After the October Revo- 
lution of 1917, B. (now an émigré) 
set out to perfect a theory that would 
bring wavering intellectuals into the 
fold of mysticism. Capitalism was de- 
clared an “inhuman system”, the old 
Christianity a “weapon of exploita- 
tion’, and even the “truth of com- 
munism” was recognised to the extent 
that it rested on socialisation of pro- 
duction. At the same time B. claimed 
that Marxism could not solve the 
problem of the activity and freedom 
of the personality because it obscured 
the individual under the concept of 
class. This problem, according to B., 
is solved by Christian existentialism 
or personalism (qq.v.). He maintains 
that the “existence” of the subject, 
whose creativity is based on “absolute 
freedom” derived from the “abyss” 
(a borrowing from Böhme, q.v.), is 
the only reality; the substance of this 
creativity is the so-called “dialectics 
of theo-humanity”, the mystery of the 
“birth of God in man and man in 
God” (borrowed from Dostoyevsky, 
q.v.). B. places the realisation of this 
“theo-human creativity” in the so-called 
“new Middle Ages”, the after-life in 
the “fourth dimension”, all earthly 
creative work being regarded as futile 
—Ya i mir obyektov (I and the World 
of Objects), 1934; Opyt eskhatologi- 
cheskoi metafiziki, Tvorchestvo i obyek- 
tivatstya (Experience of Eschatological 
Metaphysics. Creation and Objectiva- 
tion), 1947, etc. The reactionary nature 
of B.’s philosophy shows up most of 
all in his main work Filosofiya nera- 
venstva (Philosophy of Inequality), 
1918, published in 1923, in which so- 
cial inequality is declared beneficial 
and right, and war the basis of the 
creative movement of humanity. 
Bergson, Henri (1859-1941), French 
idealist philosopher, representative of 
intuitionism (q.v.). In 1900, he became 
a professor of the Collége de France, 


4 


maS 


Berkeley 


and in 1914, was elected to the Acad- 
emy. The central concept of Bergson’s 
idealism is “pure”, i.e., non-material, 
“duration”, the basis and origin of 
all things. Matter, time, and motion 
are the various forms in which we 
conceive “duration”. Knowledge of 
duration can be obtained only by in- 
tuition, understood as mystical “per- 
ception” or “knowing”, in which “the 
act of knowing coincides with the 
act that creates reality”. To dialectics 
B. counterposes his doctrine of “creat- 
ive evolution”, based on the univer- 
salisation of concepts borrowed from 
biological idealism (see Vitalism). In 
his views on society B. justified the 
oppression of one class by another as 
a “natural” condition, and war as an 
inevitable “law of nature”. His phi- 
losophy is a vivid expression of ir- 
rationalism (q.v.). Main works: Essai 
sur les données immédiates de la con- 
science (1889), Matière et Mémoire 
(1896), L’évolution créatrice (1907), La 
pensée et le mouvant (1934), etc. 
Berkeley, George (1685-1753), Eng- 
lish philosopher, subjective idealist. 
In 1734, he became Bishop of Cloyne 
(Ireland). His main work was A Freatise 
Concerning the Principles of Human 
Knowledge (1710). Proceeding from the 
premise that man perceives nothing 
directly except his “ideas” (sensations), 
B. concluded that things exist only 
insofar as they can be perceived (esse 
est percipi). According to B., ideas 
are passive. They are perceived by an 
incorporeal substance, the soul, which 
is active and can also produce ideas. 
In an effort to avoid solipsism (q.v.), 
B. recognises a multiplicity of spiritual 
substances, and also the existence of 
the “cosmic mind”, God. Ideas, he 
says, exist potentially in the mind 
of God, but actually exist only in the 
human mind. Later B. took up objec- 
tive idealist positions close to Neo- 
Platonism (q.v.) and acknowledged 
the eternal existence of ideas in the 
mind of God. In an attempt to dis- 
prove atheism and materialism, B. at- 
tacked the concept of matter as ridden 
with internal contradictions and use- 
less in the quest for knowledge. The 
basis of his criticism of matter was 








Bernal 


idealist nominalism (q.v.). He rejected 
Locke’s theory of primary and second- 
ary qualities, q.v. (see also Locke) 
and declared all qualities to be sub- 
jective. Denying the ability of science 
to conceive of the world as a whole, 
B. considered the task of the scientist 
to be the “searching after and endeav- 
ouring to understand this language ... 
of the Author of nature and not the 
pretending to explain things by cor- 
poreal causes”. On these grounds he 
repudiated Newton’s theory of abso- 
lute space and attacked his theory of 
gravitation as a doctrine on the natural 
cause of the motion of material bodies, 
whereas, according to B.’s own phi- 
losophy, only spiritual substance could 
be active. He disapproved of Leib- 
niz and Newton’s infinitesimal cal- 
culus, since to recognise the infinite 
divisibility of “real space” would con- 
tradict the basic postulate of his phi- 
losophy. Since the middle of the 19th 
century, attempts have been made to 
revive B.’s philosophy and he has 
been borrowed from by many idealist 
schools; the immanence school, empirio- 
' criticism, pragmatism (qq.v.), and so 
on. The philosophy of B. and his 
20th century followers was criticised 
by Lenin in Materialism and Empirio- 
Criticism (q.v.). 

Bernal, John Desmond (1901- ), Brit- 
ish physicist, public figure. Member of 
the Royal Society (since 1937), and 
the Academies of several countries, 
including the Academy of Sciences of 
the USSR (since 1958), Lenin Interna- 
tional Peace Prize winner (1953). Be- 
sides his research in physics, biochem- 
istry, and crystallography, B. has writ- 
ten various works (The Social Function 
of Science, 1939; Science and Society, 
1953; Science in the History of Society, 
1954), in which he gives a general 
summing up of the achievements of 
science as a whole, revealing its phil- 
osophical significance and role in hu- 
man history, the contradictions of its 
development in a society based on 
exploitation and its steady progress 
under socialism. His analysis of the 
history of science is based on dialectical 
materialism. In his book World Without 
War (1958), he discusses the prospects 


= foe 


Biogenetic Law 


of the peaceful use of scientific discov- 
eries for the benefit of humanity. 

Bernstein, Eduard (1850-1932), Ger- 
man Social-Democrat, founder of re- 
visionism (q.v.) as a systematic theory 
and initiator of reformism (q.v.) in 
the working-class movement. In a se- 
Ties of articles entitled Problems of 
Socialism and the Tasks of Social-De- 
mocracy (1897-98) he revised the basic 
postulates of Marxism in philosophy, 
political economy, and the theory of 
scientific socialism. Proclaiming the 
slogan “Back to Kant”, B. repudiated 
any consistent materialist solution of 
the fundamental problem of philoso- 
phy, treating Marxist and Hegelian 
dialectics as identical. He denied the 
very possibility of scientific socialism, 
and regarded socialism as a mere moral 
and ethical ideal. Rejecting the idea 
of the dictatorship of the proletariat, he 
advocated the theory of the dying away 
of the class struggle and refused to 
Tecognise any goal for the working 
class except the winning of minor re- 
forms within the framework of capital- 
ism. Hence his well-known dictum: 
“The end ... is nothing, movement is 
everything.” Plekhanov (q.v.) did much 
to disprove B.’s revisionist ideas. B.'s 
followers in Russia, the Economists 
and Mensheviks, and also the revision- 
ists in the international movement, 
were exposed by Lenin. 

Bhutavada (elementalism), a trend 
in ancient Indian materialism. Prob- 
ably arose about the Ist century A.D. 
In some sources it is regarded as a 
variety of the Lokāyata (q.v.). Ac- 
cording to the doctrine of B., all qual- 
itative differences between objects re- 
sult from the different combination of 
the material elements of which they 
are formed. Consciousness is the result 
of a peculiar combination of material 
elements which, once it has occurred, 
can reproduce combinations similar to 
itself, but these other combinations 
can never cause consciousness. Like the 
advocates of the Lokayata, the fol- 
lowers of B. were sensualists in epis- 
temology and hedonists in ethics. 

Biogenetic Law, a biological law 
which states that each organism in the 
process of its individual. development 





Biological Schoo! in Sociology 


(ontogenesis) repeats certain features 
and peculiarities through which its 
ancestors passed in the process of evo- 
lution (philogenesis). The term was 
introduced by Haeckel (q.v.) in 1866, 
although the fact had been remarked 
on earlier (by the German natural 
philosopher Oken, the Russian biolo- 
gist K. Rulye, and others). It was Dar- 
win (q.v.), however, who made a fun- 
damental investigation of the relation- 
ship between ontogenesis and philogen- 
esis. The methodological significance of 
the B.L. is that it “has given the 
theory of evolution its most secure 
basis”. (Engels.) The B.L. was a con- 
firmation by natural science of the 
qualitative development from the sim- 
ple to the complex, a confirmation of 
the theory of evolution. Attempts to 
apply B.L. to the mental development 
of the individual (Baldwin, Stanley, 
Hall, Freud, and others) arise from 
the unsound, mechanical interpreta- 
tion of social phenomena through 
biological laws. 

Biological School in Sociology, a 
sociological trend, popular in the sec- 
ond half of the 19th and the early years 
of the 20th centuries. Its. basic postu- 
lates rest on the mechanical applica- 
tion of the laws of biology (survival of 
the fittest, natural selection, cell struc- 
ture of the organism, etc.) to the life 
of human society; the B.S.S. also 
made use of the ideas of Malthusianism 
(q.v.), eugenics (q.v.), and racialism 
(q.v.). The attempt to explain social 
phenomena in terms of biology is un- 
scientific. As Lenin wrote, “ the 
transfer of biological concepts in general 
to the sphere of the social sciences is 
phrase-mongering”. (Vol. 14, p. 329.) 
The class essence of this doctrine lies 
in the desire to overshadow the real 
laws of social life by treating man as 
a purely biological creature, suppos- 
edly endowed with “inalterable in- 
stincts” of private ownership, individu- 
alism, and so on (see also Anthroposo- 
ciology, Social-Darwinism; Society, 
Organic Theory of). 

Biology, the study of life (q.v.). 
B. deals with life as a special form 
of the motion of matter, the laws of the 
development of living nature, and 


Bbc. eee 


Biology 


also with the manifold forms of living 
organisms, their structure, function, 
evolution, individual development, and 
interrelation with the environment. 
B. includes the individual sciences of 
zoology, botany, physiology, embryol- 
ogy, paleontology, microbiology, genet- 
ics, etc. As a harmonious system of 
knowledge, B. was known to the an- 
cient Greeks, but it acquired a scien- 
tific basis only in modern times. The 
first relatively complete systematisa- 
tion of living and extinct organisms was 
made by John Ray (17th century) and 
Linnaeus (q.v.). In the 17th, 18th, and 
the first half of the 19th centuries B. was 
mainly descriptive. Engels called this 
period metaphysical, its theoretical 
basis being the idea of the permanence 
of species, a belief that the purpose- 
fulness of organisms is due to super- 
natural causes. Ignorance of the ma- 
terial causes of biological phenomena 
and failure to perceive their specific 
features gave rise to idealist and met- 
aphysical conceptions (vitalism, q.v., 
preformationism, q.v., mechanism, 
etc.). The discovery of the cellular 
structure of living creatures played 
an important part in establishing B: 
as a science. It was revolutionised by 
Darwin’s theory of evolution, which 
revealed the basic factors and motive 
forces of evolution and proposed and 
substantiated the materialist view of 
the relative expediency of living organ- 
isms, thus undermining the former 
domination of teleology (q.v.) in bio- 
logical theories. Important successes 
were achieved in the biological sciences 
at the end of the 19th and the begin- 
ning of the 20th centuries. But B. has 
made particularly rapid progress since 
the appearance of such branches as 
physiology, genetics, cytology, bio- 
chemistry, and biophysics, which are 
concerned with the laws of the basic 
vital processes—nutrition, reproduc- 
tion, metabolism, transmission of in- 
herited characteristics, etc. At the 
points where B. links up with other 
sciences (physics, chemistry, mathe- 
matics, etc.) there are possibilities of 
a break-through in a number of im- 
portant biological fields. The central 
problem of B. today is to discover the 











Biosphere 


essence of the vital processes, to inves- 
tigate the biological laws of the devel- 
opment of the organic world, to study 
the physics and chemistry of living 
things, to evolve various ways of con- 
trolling the vital processes, particu- 
larly metabolism, heredity, and the 
mutation of organisms. Physical, chem- 
ical, and mathematical methods of 
research have achieved fundamental 
results in various fields, primarily in 
genetics, where the material vehicles 
of heredity, genes, have been discov- 
ered, their structure and functions 
deciphered, and a general picture ob- 
tained of the mechanics of the transmis- 
sion of inherited characteristics. Over 
the past twenty years various methods 
of investigating the structure of pro- 
teins have been devised, and the sim- 
plest proteins have been synthesised. 
Biologists working in co-operation 
with chemists and physicists have made 
considerable progress in decipherin 
the mechanics of the biosynthesis ol 
proteins. The explanation of many 
biological phenomena, particularly 
those of heredity, has been discovered 
in the chemical processes of the living 
cell. This has led to what is called 
molecular biology, which has stimu- 
lated the development of a number of 
other biological sciences. The progress 
in B. has brought further clarity to 
Darwin’s theory of evolution. Darwin’s 
conception of the causes of the varia- 
tion of species has been made more 
precise by the elucidation of the nature 
of mutations on a molecular level. 
From the standpoint of modern B. 
mutations caused by the environment 
are the main factor in organic evolu- 
tion, the principle motive force being 
natural selection. Progress in B. may 
be equalled to the utilisation of 
nuclear energy: it is making a key 
contribution to economic advance. 
Considerable successes in plant phys- 
iology (see Timiryazev), animal phys- 
iology (see I. Pavlov), and selection 
and seed breeding (see Michurin), 
achieved by biologists of the materialist 
school, have contributed much to the 
theory and practice of agriculture. 
Biosphere, that part of the Earth 
in which life exists and which is thus 


354, — 


Bochénski 


endowed with a special geological and 
physico-chemical organisation. The con- 
cept was introduced by Eduard Suess 
and developed by Vernadsky (q.v.). 
Vernadsky visualised the origin of life 
on Earth and the formation of the B. 
not as the appearance of separate em- 
bryos at separate, isolated points, but 
as a powerful and unified process 
forming the “monolith” of life and 
encompassing every part of the planet 
where the right conditions obtain. 
With the appearance of human society 
and the development of science and 
technology the B. evolves into the 
noosphere (q.v.). 

Blanqui, Louis-Augusle (1805-81), 
French utopian communist. Took part 
in the revolutions of 1830 and 1848, 
was twice sentenced to death, and 
spent nearly half his life in prison. 
Blanqui’s world outlook was formed 
under the influence of the mecha- 
nistic materialism, atheism, and ration- 
alism of the 18th century, and also 
of utopian socialism (q.v.), particu- 
larly Babouvism (q.v.). Though a ma- 
terialist in his general philosophical 
outlook, B. gave an idealist explanation 
of historical progress as the dissemina- 
tion of enlightenment. He believed 
that history was essentially a progress 
from the absolute individualism of 
savages through various phases towards 
communism, a “future society”, which 
would be the “crown of civilisation”. 
At the same time B. was aware of the 
struggle between social forces in his- 
tory and sharply criticised the contra- 
dictions of capitalist society. His con- 
spiratorial tactics were erroneous and 
led to the failure of the actions under- 
taken by his supporters. B. failed to 
realise that a revolution could be suc- 
cessful only if it was carried out by 
the mass of, the working people led by 
a revolutionary party. Blanquism in- 
fluenced the revolutionary movement 
in other countries, particularly in 
Russia (see Narodism). B. is praised 
for his revolutionary services by the 
founders of Marxism-Leninism, but 
his tactics are criticised. His main 
work was Critique sociale (1885). 

Bochénski, Joseph (b. in Poland, 
1902), Neo-Thomist and Dominican, 











Boéthius 


became professor of philosophy at 
Freiburg University, Switzerland, in 
1945. As a historian and theorist of 
logic, B. specialises in distorting Marx- 
ism and Soviet philosophy. 

Boéthius, Anicius Manlius Severinus 
(480-524), late Roman philosopher. 
Though formally representative of Neo- 
Platonism (q.v.), his philosophy is 
remarkable for its eclecticism and a 
leaning towards the exact sciences; 
in its moral aspects it is close to stoic- 
ism. B. translated and interpreted 
Aristotle’s (q.v.) works on logic and 
also Porphyry’s Introduction to and 
Commentary on the Categories. B. also 
translated Euclid (q.v.) and gave 
an interpretation of the J/Jntroductio 
Arithmetica by Nicomachus. He also 
wrote a treatise containing a carefully 
elaborated theory on the music of 
ancient Greece. The stoical De Conso- 
latione Philosophiae is considered his 
main philosophical work. Some of his 
translations of Aristotle are now re- 
garded as spurious. 

Bogdanov (pseudonym of Malinov- 
sky), Alexander Alexandrovich (1873- 
1928), Russian philosopher and econ- 
omist, publicist, Social-Democrat. A 
doctor by training, he joined the Bol- 
sheviks in 1903. During the years of 
reaction following the defeat of the 
Russian Revolution of 1905-07, he 
became one of the leaders of the otzo- 
vists, who were against the Party’s 
making use of illegal! forms of struggle. 
He helped to organise an anti-Party 
school on the Island of Capri and in 
1909 was expelled from the Bolshevik 
Party. In 1926, he became director 
of the Institute of Blood Transfusion 
and died while carrying out an experi- 
ment on himself. Describing B.’s phil- 
osophical views in 1908, Lenin noted 
four stages in his “philosophical wander- 
ings”. To start with, B. was a “natural- 
historical” materialist (Osnouniye ele- 
menty istoricheskogo vzglyada na pri- 
rodu [Fundamental Elements of the 
Historical Outlook on Nature), 1899). 
Shortly before the turn of the century 
he took up a doctrine known as ener- 
gism, q.v. (see his book Poznaniye s 
istoricheskoi tochki zreniya [| Knowledge 
from the Historical Point of View), 


=g s 


Böhme 


1901). Then he supported the philoso- 
phy of Mach (q.v.). Finally, his efforts 
to overcome the contradictions of 
Machism and create a “kind of objec- 
tive idealism” brought him to empirio- 
monism, q.v. (Empirio-Monism, 1904- 
06). Later he attempted to formulate 
what he called a “tectology”, a univer- 
sal organisational science, the aim of 
which was to unite all the sciences and 
describe the forms and types of any 
organisation, since he considered that 
the whole world consisted of various 
forms of organisation of experience. 
The idealist foundation of “tectology”, 
its abstract and unhistorical approach, 
made it completely useless for analys- 
ing reality. B. opposed to Marxist 
dialectics the theory of equilibrium 
(q.v-). Criticisms of his views are to 
be found in Lenin’s Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism and also in the 
works of Plekhanov. Main works: 
Kratky kurs ekonomicheskoi nauki (A 
Short Course of Economic Science), 1897; 
Filosofiya zhivogo opyta (The Philoso- 
phy of Living Experience), 1913; Vseob- 
shchaya organizatsionnaya nauka (tekto- 
logiya) (The Universal Organisational 
Science [Tectology]), 1913-17; O pro- 
letarskoi kulture, 1904-24 (On Prole- 
tarian Culture, 1904-24), 1924, etc. 
Böhme, Jakob (1575-1624), German 
pantheist philosopher, whose work re- 
tained many elements of theology. A 
self-educated thinker, he created no 
consistent and uniform system, express- 
ing his dialectical surmises on the 
contradictory nature of things and the 
world as a whole in a language of 
poetic images and symbols borrowed 
from Christianity, astrology, alchemy, 
and cabala. In his works we find both 
simple paraphrases of Biblical myths 
inspired by the power of his religious 
imagination and some profound phil- 
osophic observations. God and nature, 
according to B., are one; nothing exists 
outside nature. Everything contains 
contradictions, both good and evil be- 
ing present even in God. B. saw this 
dualism as the source of development 
of the world. His main work Aurora 
oder die Morgenréte in Aufgange (1612) 
was condemned as heresy. His ideas 
infuenced the subsequent develop- 








Bohr 


ment of German philosophy (Hamann, 
Hegel, Schelling, etc.). 

Bohr, Niels (1885-1962), Danish phys- 
icist, one of the authors of the quan- 
tum theory, Nobel Prize winner. Elect- 
ed member of the Academy of Sciences 
of the USSR in 1929. After graduating 
at Copenhagen University, he worked 
in Rutherford’s laboratory in Man- 
chester. B.’s model of the hydrogen 
atom and his formulation of the cor- 
respondence principle (q.v.) date from 
1913. He strove to provide an episte- 
mological substantiation of the specific 
problems of physics. In order to inter- 
pret quantum mechanics he put for- 
ward and developed the positivist prin- 
ciple of complementarity (q.v.), which 
he regarded as applicable to various 
fields of knowledge. Overcoming neo- 
positivism (q.v.) in his later years, 
B. tended towards a materialist 
interpretation of a number of prob- 
lems of quantum mechanics and the 
theory of knowledge. Emphasising 
the growing role of measuring devices 
as instruments of research, and of 
mathematical formalism as a means 
of adequately describing microproc- 
esses, B. noted that “... a widening of 
the conceptual framework affords the 
appropriate means of ... enlarging the 
scope of objective description.” (Atom- 
ic Physics and Human Knowledge, 
1958, p. 70.) The objective content of 
his researches confirms that nature 
develops dialectically, and that it is 
of great importance to the scientist to 
have a conscious grasp of the method 
of materialist dialectics. 

Boltzmann, Ludwig (1844-1906), Aus- 
trian physicist, member of the Acad- 
emy of Sciences in Vienna. His main 
works deal with the theory of radiation, 
the kinetic theory of gases, and the 
Statistical interpretation of the second 
principle of thermodynamics (q.v.). 
His famous H theorem (1872) explained, 
on the basis of molecular-kinetic 
theory, the fundamental law of irrevers- 
ible processes, the law of the increase 
of entropy (q.v.). His formula estab- 
lished a relation between the probability 
of the thermodynamic state and its 
entropy. In opposition to the idealist 
concept of the “thermal death” of 


>B 


Border-Line Situation 


the Universe (see “Thermal Death”, 
etc.), B. advanced his hypothesis of 
fluctuation, according to which the 
general balanced state of the Universe 
as a whole is constantly and inevitably 
upset in certain spheres by gigantic 
fluctuations, which cause the uneven 
development of separate worlds. B. 
was a convinced materialist and criti- 
cised energism and Machism (qq.v.). 

Bonaventure, Giovanni di Fidanza 
(1221-74), scholastic philosopher, gener- 
al of the Franciscan Order. Opposed 
the progressive ideas of his time and 
persecuted Roger Bacon (q.v.). The 
predominant tendencies in B.’s scho- 
lasticism are the ideas of St. Augus- 
tine’s (q.v.) Neo-Platonism (q.v.) and 
mysticism. B. accepted the ontological 
proof of the existence of God (see Proof, 
etc.) and considered the highest stage 
of cognition to be a supernatural state 
of ecstatic contemplation in which man 
is united with God. In the controversy 
over universals (q.v.) B. maintained 
a position of realism (see Realism, 
Medieval). He was canonised in 1482, 
and in 1587 proclaimed a Doctor of 
the Church. 

Boole, George (1815-64), English lo- 
gician and mathematician. From 1849 
to the end of his life, professor of 
mathematics at Queen’s College, Cork. 
He evolved the first system of mathe- 
matical logic known to history, which 
afterwards became known as the al- 
gebra of logic (q.v.). The idea of the 
analogy between algebra and logic 
determined the direction of all his 
researches in logic, which are contained 
in his two main works: Mathematical 
Analysis of Logic (1847) and An Inves- 
tigation of the Laws of Thought (1854). 
He also investigated the theory of 
probability and mathematical analy- 
sis and was interested in the philosophy 
of Aristotle and Spinoza. His ideas 
on the algebra of logic were developed 
and systematised in the works of Peirce 
(q.v.), Schröder, and Poretsky (q.v.). 

Border-Line Situation, a category of 
the ethical teaching of Jaspers (q.v.). 
According to Jaspers, B.L.Ss. (fear, 
suffering, guilt, struggle, dissatisfaction, 
death, and others) form the “limits” 
of human spiritual life and practical 





Born 


activity, beyond which “non-being” 
is to be found. Inasmuch as a B.L.S. 
is fatal and universal, man cannot 
escape it, and the overcoming of it 
means the loss of “existence”. Accord- 
ing to Jaspers, man may make a truly 
moral decision only when he has real- 
ised the fatal nature of a B.L.S. 

Born, Max (1882-), German theoret- 
ical physicist. Became a professor at 
Göttingen University in 1921. Emigrat- 
ed to Britain during the period of 
nazi rule. At present lives in the 
Federal Republic of Germany. Member 
of many academies, including the 
Academy of Sciences of the USSR 
(since 1934). Author of a number of 
important works on the theory of the 
atom and crystals, he is best known 
for his important contribution to quan- 
tum mechanics, 1925-26. When it was 
shown that the movement of element- 
ary particles was due to a wave process 
and could be calculated by means of 
wave equation, B. suggested that wave 
equation determined only the proba- 
bility of the position of particles at 
a given moment. Idealist philosophers 
seized upon this conception of the laws 
of the motion of elementary particles 
as a “proof” provided by quantum me- 
chanics of the indeterminism of proc- 
esses taking place in the microworld. 
B. himself adhered to this idealist 
theory but subsequently approached 
a more general understanding of de- 
terminism, which incorporated statis- 
tical laws determining the behaviour 
of elementary particles. He also criti- 
cised neo-positivism (q.v.). 

Botev, Khristo (1849-76), Bulgarian 
poet and materialist philosopher. His 
world outlook embraced both revolu- 
tionary democracy and utopian social- 
ism. He was considerably influenced 
by Herzen and Chernyshevsky (qq.v.), 
whose ideas he advocated in Bulgaria. 
Leader of the peasant revolution in 
Bulgaria and an ardent patriot, B. 
thought it would be possible to set up 
a socialist system in his country as 
soon as it was liberated from the Turk- 
ish feudal lords and the exploiters 
among his own countrymen. He held 
that the peasant commune possessed 
“socialist principles’. Under the in- 


ae 57 


Brain 


fluence of the first volume of Marx’s 
Capital (q.v.) and the working-class 
movement in the West, B. came to 
the conclusion towards the end of his 
life that the proletariat would be the 
builder of socialism, but he was mis- 
taken in regarding the poor in general 
as the proletariat. Philosophically, B. 
was a materialist and he developed 
certain elements of dialectics; he was 
also an atheist. His understanding of 
social phenomena, however, was ideal- 
ist and he regarded the historical 
process as a result of the perfection 
of reason in the people’s struggle for 
liberation. Aesthetically, he followed 
Chernyshevsky, and in his poetry, 
which played an important part in 
the revolutionary movement, realism 
and revolutionary romanticism are 
organically merged. 

Brain, the central part of the nervous 
system. The uppermost sections of the 
cerebrum are directly connected with 
the psychic life of animals and man. 
The large hemispheres of man’s B. 
are the organ of speech and abstract 
vocal thought. The B. came into being 
at such a level of animal life when 
additional adaptive reactions became 
indispensable for the search of condi- 
tions of existence in the complicated 
changing medium. The central nervous 
system and its uppermost sections—the 
B.—are the organ of control, i.e., the 
system which co-ordinates the activity 
of the various organs and regulates the 
relationships of the organism with the 
outside environment through psychical 
reflection. Throughout the history of 
philosophy and the sciences about man 
there was a struggle between the ma- 
terialist and idealist trends over the 
problem of the nature of man’s psyche, 
consciousness. However, the progress 
of biological studies of the structure 
and the activity of the central nervous 
system, and the B. in particular, paved 
the way for the triumph of materialism 
in the solution of this problem. The 
ideas and works of Sechenov and I. Pav- 
lov (qq.v.), which proved the re flecto- 
ry, i.e., determinative nature of the 
psychical activity of animals and man, 
played a tremendous role. In addition 
to the first signal system, common to 











yay -< ~ yey = 


Bray — 58 — 


both animals and man, a second signal 
system (see Signal Systems)—speech— 
was formed in man in connection with 
abstract vocal thought. In the B. there 
are special centres of perception (audi- 
tory and visual) and of speech. The 
thoroughly social nature of man found 
its expression in the building of new, 
compared with animals, morphological 
structures, which ensure oral inter- 
course and vocal thought. The specific 
form of existence and the assimila- 
tion of the past experiences of humanity 
is also associated with the elaboration 
of new brain mechanisms. While the 
experience of the species in animals is 
inherited in the form of instincts, in 
man, on the other hand, the histori- 
cally-shaped forms of activity are as- 
similated in the process of the indivi- 
dual’s development. Hence, particular 
human aptitudes, such as the ear for 
music and for speech, the capacity for 
abstract thinking, etc., are functions 
not of morphological brain structures 
but of neuro-dynamic structures of 
relative stability. Man’s psychic activ- 
ity progressed not because of the 
morphological evolution of the B., as 
was the case in the history of the ani- 
mal world, but because of the fact that 
its functional potentialities improved 
steadily. This improvement is due to 
the development of the forms of human 
experience, of its storage, transmission, 
and processing as far as and including 
the creation of automatic mechanisms 
lightening mental work and enhancing 
man’s creative possibilities. Thanks 
to the wide use of cybernetics, the study 
of the activities of the B. by the clas- 
sical methods of the physiology of the 
higher nervous activity and electro- 
physiology has been supplemented by 
the method of models (see Cybernetics, 
Analogue Simulation). The simulation 
of the activity of the B. proceeds along 
two main directions: (1) the simulation 
of separate aspects of the activity of 
the B. and (2) the simulation of the 
formal structure of the ultimate prod- 
ucts of psychic activity. 

Bray, John Francis (1809-95), Eng- 
lish utopian socialist, economist, active 
figure in the working-class movement. A 
self-educated working man, he held that 


Bridgman 


the motive force of human development 
lay in man’s material needs, and that 
the root of the working people’s troubles 
was the system of exchange. Value, he 
taught, could be created only by ła- 
bour. The productive forces and labour 
must be socialised. He portrayed the 
future communist society in a manner 
close to that of Owen (q.v.). The road 
to such a society lay through industrial 
workers’ co-operatives, the various 
branches being co-ordinated by region- 
al and national centres, and through 
a system of “labour money” and barter 
markets and banks. These propositions 
influenced Proudhon (q.v.) and his 
school. An active figure in the Chartist 
movement, B. was well aware of the 
class contradictions in society and 
of the fact that only the working- 
class movement could bring commu- 
nism into being. He held, however, 
that the road to communism lay 
through reform. In his books Labour’s 
Wrongs and Labour’s Remedy (1839) 
and A Voyage from Utopia (1841) he 
produced a devastating criticism of 
capitalism, taking Britain and the 
United States as examples. 
Brentano, Franz (1838-1917), Austri- 
an idealist philosopher. Lectured on 
philosophy at Würzburg and Vienna. 
An opponent of Kant’s criticism (q.v.). 
B. produced his own philosophical sys- 
tem of metaphysics permeated with the 
spirit of theism and Catholic scholasti- 
cism. His main interest was in psychol- 
ogy. Taking empirical psychology as 
his basis, he created an idealist doctrine 
of the “intentionality” of mental 
phenomena. According to this doctrine 
the object exists only in the inten- 
tion of the subject, i.e., in his emotions. 
B.'s views had a great influence on 
Husserl (q.v.) and other bourgeois phi- 
losophers. He is considered one of the 
founders of the idealist theory of val- 
ues in Austrian philosophy. Main 
works: Psychologie vom empirischen 
Standpunkt (1874), Vom Ursprung sit- 
tlicher Erkenntnis (1889), and Die vier 
Phasen der Philosophie (1895). 
Bridgman, Percy Williams (1882- 
1961), American physicist and philos- 
opher. Graduated at Harvard, where he 
was. professor of mathematics and nat- 





Broglie 


ural philosophy until 1954. Won Nobel 
Prize for work on the physics of high 
pressures (1946). In philosophy B. was 
the founder and leader of a subjective- 
idealist trend known as operationism 
(q.v.). His philosophical views are ex- 
pounded in his books The Logic of 
Modern Physics (1927), The Nature of 
Physical Theory (1936), and other 
works. 


Broglie, Louis Victor de (1892- ), 
French physicist, professor of Paris 
University, foreign member of the Acad- 
emy of Sciences of the USSR. One 
of the founders of the modern theory 
of the motion of microobjects (see 
Quantum Mechanics). His theoretical 
research, which established the extreme- 
ly important law of nature that all 
microscopic material objects possess 
both corpuscular and wave properties, 
constitutes the basis of quantum me- 
chanics. This law of mathematics is 
expressed in the form of the Broglie 
equation, which shows the relation of 
the corpuscular characteristics of mi- 
croobjects (energy E, impulse p) to 
their wave characteristics (particle v, 


wave length à): E=hv, =, where A is 


the quantum of action (q.v.). Accord- 
ing to B., every microparticle has its 
particular wave, the characteristics of 
which can be defined by the above 
equations. The Broglie waves are, in 
fact, the psi-functions, which it is the 
basic aim of quantum mechanics to 
define. B. made a substantial contri- 
bution to various branches of modern 
physics. He studied relativist quan- 
tum mechanics, the theory of elec- 
trons, the problems of the structure of 
the nucleus, the theory of the distri- 
bution of electromagnetic waves in 
wave-conductors, etc. He is opposed 
to positivism and maintains material- 
ist positions in his interpretation of 
the phenomena of the microcosm. 


Bruno, Giordano (1548-1600), Italian 
philosopher, opponent of scholasticism 
and the Roman Catholic Church, fer- 
vent advocate of the materialist world 
outlook, which he conceived in the 
form of pantheism (q.v.). After eight 
years’ imprisonment he was burned 


= 59E== 


Bruno 





at the stake by the Inquisition in 
Rome. His main works were the philo- 
sophical dialogues De la causa, prin- 
cipio et uno and De l'infinito, universo 
et mondi. His world outlook was formed 
under the influence of ancient classical 
philosophy (Neo-Platonism and Py- 
thagoreanism, followed by the mate- 
rialists Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Epi- 
curus, and Lucretius, qq.v.), the Ital- 
ian materialist free-thinkers of the 
Renaissance, and the science of his 
day, particularly the heliocentric the- 
ory of Copernicus (q.v.). Consistently 
identifying an infinite deity with na- 
ture, B. was even more persistent 
than Nicholas of Cusa, by whom he 
had been influenced, in maintaining 
the infinity of nature itself. Using the 
discovery of Copernicus, B. strove 
to give concrete shape to the physical 
and astronomical implications of this 
philosophical principle and in so doing 
liberated the Copernican theory from 
its major defects: the traditional con- 
ception of a finite Universe, a closed 
sphere of motionless stars, and the 
idea that the Sun was stationary and 
constituted the absolute centre of the 
Universe. In the process B. deduced 
that the number of worlds in the Uni- 
verse is infinite, and that some of 
them might be inhabited. He refuted 
the natural philosophical dualism of 
scholasticism, asserting the homoge- 
neity of the earth and the celestial 
regions, all of which, he maintained, 
consist of earth, water, air, fire, and 
ether. Under the influence of Neo- 
Platonism he admitted the existence 
of a universal soul, which he under- 
stood as the principle of life, as a spir- 
itual substance permeating all things 
and constituting their motive princi- 
ple. In this B., like most of the ancient 
materialists, took up the position of 
hylozoism (q.v.) and held that matter 
was an active self-moving substance, 
and man and his consciousness part 
of nature, which was a single whole. 
B. also developed a number of dialecti- 
cal propositions: on unity, interdepend- 
ence, and universal motion in nature, 
and on the coincidence of contraries 
both in the infinitely great and the in- 
finitely small. 











Buckle 


Buckle, Henry Thomas (1821-62), 
English historian and positivist sociol- 
ogist, author of the History of Civili- 
sation in England (1857-61). Criticising 
the theological interpretation of his- 
tory, B. set out to discover the laws 
of the historical process and show how 
they had worked in the various coun- 
tries he took as examples. Following 
Comte (q.v.), he considered intellectual 
progress to be the main factor in his- 
torical development and denied the 
existence of moral progress. As a re- 
presentative of geographical determin- 
ism (see Geographical Environment, 
Geographical Determinism), B. attri- 
buted the peculiarities of the historical 
development of various peoples to the 
influence of natural factors (landscape, 
soil, climate, and also the type of 
food they ate). 

Buddhism, a world religion (see 
Christianity and Islam), which preaches 
relief from suffering through the ab- 
negation of desire and the achievement 
of the supreme enlightenment known 
as nirvana. B. originated in India in 
the 6th century B.C. In modern times 
it is widespread in Japan, China, 
Nepal, Burma, and other countries, 
where it has about 500 million adher- 
ents. In the period when the primitive- 
communal system was collapsing and 
class states were making their appear- 
ance, Siddhartha, the founder of B. 
called the Buddha (Englightened One), 
expressed the protest of the common 
people against the Brahman religion 
with its sacred caste distinctions, in- 
tricate rites of worship to the gods and 
sacrifice. He sought liberation from 
suffering not in social change or in fight- 
ing the forces of nature but in moral 
perfection, which could be obtained by 
withdrawing from life (beautific en- 
franchisement) and submerging one- 
self in nirvana. Buddha denied the 
existence of God the Creator, and also 
the religion of the Vedas (q.v.) but 
he accepted their teaching on the cycle 
of births and deaths (sansdra), and on 
retribution (karma), merely indicating 
that reincarnations depended not on 
the caste to which a man belonged 
nor on sacrifices he performed, but on 
his good or bad actions. At first (3rd 


= 60 


Bulgakov 


to lst centuries B.C.) the Buddha’s 
idea of salvation was founded on the 
philosophical doctrine that the world 
and the human personality constitute 
a stream of elements of matter and 
consciousness—the dharmas—continu- 
ally replacing one another. According 
to this doctrine, the road to salvation 
lay in suppressing any “agitation” of 
the dharmas. In the early centuries 
A.D., the Buddhist religion assumed 
acompletely different character. Simple 
reverence for the memory of the teacher 
was replaced by deification of Buddha, 
and man’s salvation was made depend- 
ent on the favour of the deity, which 
could be sought through repetition of 
the holy si#tras, or scriptures. This 
new religion became known as Mahaya- 
na, as distinct from the traditional 
trend of Hināyāna stemming from 
Buddha himself. The philosophy of 
B. also changed. Unlike the Hinayana 
philosophers, who had regarded ma- 
terial and psychical dharmas as real, 
the Mahayana philosophers argued that 
the dharmas were unreal and the whole 
world was unreal. The doctrine of the 
unreality of the dharmas, or of Sinyata 
(void), was put on a logical basis by 
Nagarjuna (2nd century A.D.). The 
treatises of Nagarjuna are remarkable 
among all the Mahayana siitras for 
their logic and consistency. His ra- 
tionalism became the point of depar- 
ture for Buddhist logic, which was 
represented by Dignaga and Dharma- 
kirti (500-700 A.D.). Nagarjuna’s teach- 
ing on the unreality of conceptual 
thought and on absolute intuitive 
knowledge became the basis of the later 
idealist schools (Madhyamaka, Vijiia- 
navada) of Tantric Buddhism, and Zen 
Buddhism (q.v.). Currently the advo- 
cates of B. stress its “rationalistic” 
and “atheistic” character. These new 
epithets are part of an attempt to 
propagate a modernised form of Bud- 
dhist religion. The Buddhists under the 
leadership of the World Buddhist Fel- 
lowship advocate disarmament and 
peaceful coexistence. 

Bulgakov, Sergei Nikolayevich (1871- 
1944), Russian economist and idealist 
philosopher, ideologist of Vekhism 
(q.v.).. Emigrated in 1922. Professor of 








Butlerov 


pee} ee 


Butlerov 





theology at Paris University 1925-44. 
A supporter of “legal Marxism” (q.v.), 
he began by criticising Narodism, q.v., 
(O rynkakh pri kapitalisticheskom pro- 
izvodstve {On Markets under Capital- 
ist Production}), 1897, and later be- 
came an avowed defender of capital- 
ism. His revisionist attempts to “test” 
Marx with Kant led him into conflict 
with historical materialism and the 
Marxist theory of progress (Osnouniye 
problemy teorii progressa [Basic Prob- 
lems of the Theory of Progress], 1902). 
His evolution as a philosopher culmi- 
nated in his recourse to a philosophy 
of religious mysticism, in which he 
attempted to “synthesise” science, phi- 
losophy, and religion, making them 
all ultimately dependent on faith, but 
avoiding the absurdities of pure reli- 
gion. Besides the “absolute” (God) 
and the “cosmos”, he introduced the 
concept of “sofia”, a “third being”, 
comprising both God and nature. His 
completely unscientific “system” is 
expounded in his works Svet nevecher- 
ny (Undying Light), 1917, Tikhiye 
dumy (Quiet Thoughts), 1918, and O 
bogochelovechestve (On Divine Human- 
ity), Part One, 1933. 

Butlerov, Alexander Mikhailovich 
(1828-86), Russian chemist. His works 
provide the foundation on which rests 
the whole modern science of the chemi- 


cal structure of matter and the nature 
of chemical compounds. The basic idea 
of his theory of chemical structure 
(1861) is that the chemical nature of 
the molecule as a whole is determined 
by the nature, quantity, and type of 
connection of the atoms of which it is 
composed, and their influence and 
disposition in relation to one another. 
While emphasising that the atoms in 
a molecule behave according to a stable 
pattern, B. regarded the molecule not 
as something dead and static but as a 
kind of dynamic system whose parts 
are in constant motion. He regarded 
chemical reactions as one of the mani- 
festations of the motion of matter. 
This theory played an important role 
in combating the then current idealist 
and agnostic views on chemistry. B. 
showed that the internal structure of 
molecules can be known and may, 
therefore, be actively used and changed 
by man. His theory of chemical struc- 
ture has now been further developed 
owing to the discovery of the complex 
structure of the atom, and elucidation 
of the quantum chemical connection 
between the atoms in a molecule. In 
his treatment of the fundamental prob- 
lems of chemistry B. adhered tc spon- 
taneous materialism, but when discuss- 
ing philosophy he expressed idealist 
views. 











C 


Cabanis, Pierre Jean Georges (1757- 
1808), French materialist philosopher, 
enlightener, and physician; contem- 
porary of the bourgeois revolution of 
1789-94, a Girondist, condemned the 
Jacobins’ terror. C. belonged to the 
school of materialists who subscribed 
to the physics of Descartes (q.v.), but 
was opposed to his metaphysics. 
Physiology was the main subject of his 
philosophical studies. He held that 
consciousness depends primarily on 
the physiological functions of man and 
the activity of his internal organs. C. 
claimed that the brain organically 
“secretes” thought, just as the liver 
secretes bile. Inclined towards vulgar 
materialism (q.v.), C. considered that 
the natural sciences furnish the basis 
for the social sciences; that medicine 
and physiology are destined to change 
the morals of society, and that knowl- 
edge of the structure and activity of 
the human organism provides the key 
to understanding social phenomena 
and their changes. Towards the end of 
his life C. became a vitalist, recognis- 
ing the independent existence of the 
soul (see Vitalism). His main work is 
Traité du physique et du moral de 
l'homme (1802). 

Cabet, Etienne (1788-1856), French 
utopian socialist, member of the secret 
Carbonari society, took part in the 
French Revolution of 1830. In his 
novel Voyage en Icarie (1840) he dem- 
onstrated the superiority of socialist 
society over capitalism. But C. was 
against the revolutionary struggle of the 
proletariat and advocated peaceful 
propaganda of socialism and gradual 
reforms. He left room for religion in 
the society of the future. On philosoph- 
ical questions, especially in his views 


of history, C. adhered to idealism, 
combining the rationalism of the 17th 
century with Platonism and Neo-Pla- 
tonism. Marx wrote that C. was a pop- 
ular, although most superficial, pro- 
ponent of communism. 

Calculus, the system of rules for 
manipulating symbols, which extends 
the possibilities of thought in solving 
problems and proving propositions ex- 
pressed by means (in the “language”) 
of the given C. A characteristic feature 
of C. is that the material objects (fig- 
ures, letters, and symbols) dealt with 
in it do not practically change when the 
rules of the C. are applied to them. 
What makes any C. important is that 
it can manipulate objects only in ac- 
cordance with pre-set rules and places 
them in correspondence with the ele- 
ments of the content studied. In this 
sense C. serves as the material shell 
of the content which is reflected in 
the process of reasoning. Historically, 
C. arose and developed in mathematics 
(for example, differential C., integral 
C., and others). Later, this method was 
extended to logic; logical and logico- 
mathematical C. appeared, as a result 
of which the science of mathematical, 
or symbolic logic, came into being. 
The presentation of certain spheres of 
knowledge, especially in the deductive 
sciences, in the form of C., based on 
methods devised in contemporary logic, 
is the most consistent method of for- 
malisation (q.v.) of the given sphere of 
knowledge; the efficiency of such for- 
malisation is confirmed by the practi- 
cal application of modern computers 
and the entire development of cyber- 
netics, q.v. (see Logistic Method). 

Calvin, Jean (1509-64), one of the 
leaders of the Reformation (q.v.}. Was 








Cambridge School 


born in France, settled in Geneva 
in 1536 and became the actual dictator 
of the city (1541), subordinating the 
secular authorities to the church. Cal- 
vinism, the system of Protestantism 
(q.v.), founded by C., expressed the 
demands of the “boldest part of the 
bourgeoisie at that time” (Engels). The 
basis of Calvinism is the doctrine of 
the divinely preordained “salvation” 
of some and “damnation” of others. 
This divine preordination, however, 
did not preclude man’s activity, for 
although man does not know his fate, 
he can prove by his personal life that 
he is one of “God’s elect”. Calvinism 
justified bourgeois enterprise in the 
epoch of primitive accumulation. This 
was expressed in declaring modesty 
and frugality the greatest virtues and 
in advocating asceticism in life. C. 
was intolerant of all other religious 
beliefs. By his order, the scientist Mi- 
chel Servet was burned at the stake 
(1553). C."s main work is Institution 
chrétienne (1536). 

Cambridge School 1. A trend in 
British 17th century philosophy which 
revived the philosophy of Plato 
(q.v.). To the empirical -materialism 
of Bacon (q.v.) and Hobbes (q.v.) it 
counterposed the idealistic teaching of 
innate ideas interpreted in a spirit of 
the Platonic doctrine of knowledge 
and medieval “realism” (q.v.). R. Cud- 
worth (1617-88) held the eternal ideas 
of truth and good in the divine reason 
as criteria of man’s judgements 
and his actions. Outside objects 
are only an occasion for cognition but 
not its source. Nature is a harmonious 
system implementing divine aims. An 
extremely mystic wing of the C.S. was 
represented by Henry More (1614-87) 
who went over from Cartesian met- 
aphysics to mysticism. Members of the 
C.S. fought against atheism and ma- 
terialism and defended religion. 2. 
A school of philosophical analysis, a 
variety of British neo-positivism (q.v-) 
which considers philosophy as logical 
analysis (as distinct from logical posi- 
tivism as a whole) of the living con- 
versational language and not artificial 
“languages”. An “analysis”, according 
to the proponents of the C.S., should 


e a 


Camus 


consist in expressing the analysed con- 
cept by means of a different concept 
which has the same content but is ex- 
pressed in a different form and does 
not imply the first concept. George 
Moore was the founder of the C.S., and 
its main representatives are Gilbert 
Ryle, Arthur John Wisdom, Max 
Black, and others. In philosophy they 
did not go beyond the bounds of neo- 
positivism. 3. In a broader sense, the 
name of C.S. denotes a group of philos- 
ophers belonging to different trends 
but grouped around Cambridge Uni- 
versity (“Cambridge Philosophy”)— 
C. Broad, K. Popper, A. Ayer, G. Ryle, 
R. Braithwaite, H. Bondi, etc. 

Campanella, Tommaso (1568-1639), 
Italian philosopher and utopian com- 
munist. Joined the Dominican Order 
at the age of 15. C. shared the views 
of the natural philosopher Telesio (q.v.) 
and opposed scholasticism (q.v.), com- 
bined the ideas of sensationalism (q.v.) 
and deism (q.v.), progressive for those 
days, with religious mystical views and 
enthusiasm for magic and astrology. 
Was persecuted by the Inquisition 
for his free-thinking. C. dreamed of 
the unity and welfare of mankind, 
hoping that this could be achieved with 
the help of the papacy. In 1599, C. 
tried to raise a rebellion to liberate 
Italy from Spanish rule. The plot was 
uncovered and C. after brutal tortures 
was kept in prison for 27 years. There 
he wrote in 1602 Civitas Solis about 
ideal communist society (it was pub- 
lished in 1623). Influenced by church 
ideology, C. depicted his utopia as a 
theocratic society ruled by wise men 
and priests. C. based his communist 
ideal on the dictates of reason and the 
laws of nature. Civitas Solis played a 
significant part in the development of 
progressive social ideas and social 
progress. 

Camus, Albert (1913-60), French phi- 
losopher and writer, representative of 
“atheistic” existentialism (q.v.); edi- 
tor of the newspaper Combat; Nobel 
Prize winner (1957). His main works 
are Le Mythe de Sisyphe (1942), La 
Peste (1947), and L’Homme Révolté 
(1951). His views were shaped under 
the influence of Schopenhauer, Nietz- 











“Capital” 


sche (qq.v-) and the German existen- 
tialists. According to C., the outside 
world, the Universe, is the state of 
the subject; the only philosophical 
problem is the “problem of suicide”. 
His ethical views are pervaded with 
extreme pessimism: man is always in 
an “absurd state”, encounters “absurd 
situations” (jealousy, ambition, sel fish- 
ness) and is doomed for meaningless 
and aimless activity. Extreme indivi- 
dualism (q.v.) and irrationalism (q.v.) 
are clearly expressed in his works. 
“Capital,” chief work of Marx, reveal- 
ing the laws of the capitalist mode 
of production and laying the scientific 
basis of socialism. Marx called C. his 
lifework. He started work on C. in the 
mid-1840s and continued it up to his 
death. The first volume was published 
in 1867 and the others after his death, 
having been prepared for printing by 
Engels: the second volume, in 1885, 
and the third, in 1894. The first trans- 
lation of C. into a foreign language was 
the Russian one (1872). The first volume 
analyses the process by which cap- 
ital is produced; the second volume 
studies the process of circulation, and 
the third volume analyses capitalist 
production as a whole. The fourth 
volume (Theories of Surplus Value) 
presents a history and critique of eco- 
nomic doctrines. Marx gave an exhaust- 
ive analysis of capitalism as a socio- 
economic formation (q.v.), disclosed 
the laws of its origin, development, and 
doom. The greatest economic study, 
C. is at the same time of tremend- 
ous philosophical significance. It rep- 
resents “a model of scientific, material- 
ist analysis of one—the most complex— 
formation of society, a model recognised 
by all and surpassed by none”. 
(Lenin, Vol. 1, p. 143.) In C. material- 
ist dialectics has been splendidly ap- 
plied and, moreover, elaborated in all 
main directions: as a method of study- 
ing objective reality and a system of 
logic and a theory of knowledge. 
Marx showed that capitalism is a de- 
veloping phenomenon, a historically 
transient mode of production, whose 
quantitative changes are preparing the 
prerequisites for its radical, qualitative 
change, for a leap to the new, socialist 


En: e 


“Capital” 


mode of production. Marx s analysis 
of capitalism is characterised through- 
out by its exposition of the contradic- 
tions in capitalism’s movement and 
development from beginning to end, 
from the first signs of commodity pro- 
duction to the culminating point when 
the moment of “expropriating the ex- 
propriators” inevitably arises. Marx 
traces thoroughly and in detail the 
stages in the growth of these contradic- 
tions, the change in their content and 
the methods of resolving them, and 
formulates one of the most important 
and general laws of development of 
socio-economic formations: “... The his- 
torical development of the antagonisms, 
immanent in a given form of produc- 
tion, is the only way in which that form 
of production can be dissolved and 
a new form established.” (Capital, 
Vol. I, p. 488.) C. is also a concrete 
embodiment of the dialectical material- 
ist analysis of concepts and other 
forms of thought, with the help of 
which objective reality is reproduced 
in all its complexity and multiformity. 
The economic concepts used by Marx 
are flexible, mobile, dialectically con- 
tradictory and they reflect the changea- 
bility and contradictoriness of real so- 
cial relations. The method of ascend- 
ing from the abstract to the concrete 
(see Abstract and Concrete) elaborated 
and applied by Marx in C. is parti- 
cularly important. The evolution of con- 
cepts, the logic of their development and 
transitions reflect the history of com- 
modity production, the historical de- 
velopment of the mode of production. 
Marx, however, showed that the con- 
nection between the historical and log- 
ical (q.v.) is not simple and is not 
rectilinear. Since the capitalist mode 
of production subordinates and mod- 
ifies economic categories which exist- 
ed in the past (for example, commercial 
and money capital, rent, etc.), the 
logic of analysis requires that we pro- 
ceed from the main and decisive cate- 
gory, which is industrial capital. This, 
to use Marx’s expression, is the light 
which illumines everything else, and 
it is only thanks to it that the existing 
relations can be understood. That is 
why Marx in a number of cases delib- 





Capitalism 


er 


erately takes as initial the categories 
which historically arose later and exam- 
ines the preceding categories only 
after them. (For example, commercial 
and banking capital and rent are stud- 
ied after industrial capital.) Strictly 
scientific methodology enabled him to 
show how surplus value—the doctrine of 
surplus value is the keystone of Marx’s 
political economy—is concretely em- 
bodied in all the phenomena and proc- 
esses of capitalist production. C. is 
a classical example of the historical 
materialist approach to society and 
social development. Lenin noted that 
thanks to C. historical materialism 
ceased to be a hypothesis and became 
a scientific theory. All the main prop- 
ositions and concepts of historical 
materialism are elaborated in C. Marx 
studied the evolution of capitalism as 
a natural historical process on the basis 
of the development of the productive 
forces, which ultimately are the source 
of all social changes. Marx demonstrat- 
ed the dialectics of the forces and re- 
lations of production, their unity and 
contradictions, the gradual but inevi- 
table conversion of the production 
relations of bourgeois society into a 
factor fettering the free development 
of production and dictating the re- 
placement of bourgeois production re- 
lations by socialist. Present-day ideol- 
ogists of capitalism are trying to prove 
that C. is already obsolete and its 
main ideas are inapplicable to 20th 
century bourgeois coe In reality 
this work of Marx, which was further 
developed in Lenin's theory of impe- 
rialism, remains to this day a powerful 
weapon of the working class in its 
struggle for liberation from the oppres- 
sion of capital and a monument to the 
inexhaustible scientific and revolu- 
tionary power of Marxism. 
Capitalism, the socio-economic for- 
mation (q.v.) which replaced feudalism 
(q.v.). C. is based on private ownership 
of the means of production and the ex- 
ploitation of wage labour. The extrac- 
tion of surplus value is the basic law 
of capitalist production. Anarchy of 
production, periodic crises, chronic 
unemployment, poverty of the masses, 
and competition and wars are character- 


5-1682 


Carlyle 


istic features of C. The basic contra- 
diction of C.—between the social na- 
ture of labour and the private capital- 
ist form of appropriation—is exe 
pressed in the antagonism between the 
main classes of capitalist society, the 
proletariat and the bourgeoisie. The 
class struggle of the proletariat, which 
pervades the entire history of C., ends 
in the socialist revolution (q.v.). Po- 
litical and legal institutions and the 
system of bourgeois ideology are the 
main elements of the superstructure 
tising on the capitalist basis (see Basis 
and Superstructure). Formal political 
equality proclaimed by the ideologists 
of C. is reduced to naught by economic 
inequality, while the entire state 
machine is adapted to barring the wor- 
king people from politics. C. arose in the 
16th century and played a progressive 
role in the development of society, 
ensuring a much higher labour produc- 
tivity as compared with feudalism. 
On the threshold of the 20th century 
C. entered its highest, last stage—im- 
perialism (q.v.), marked by the dom- 
ination of the monopolies and the 
financial oligarchy. At this stage state- 
monopoly capitalism (q.v.) becomes 
widespread. The latter combines the 
strength of the monopolies with the 
power of the state and increases mili- 
tarism on an unprecedented scale. The 
lst World War and the October Revo- 
lution gave rise to the general crisis 
of capitalism (q.v.). The 2nd World 
War and socialist revolutions in a 
number of European and Asian coun- 
tries ushered in the second stage of 
this crisis. A new third stage, which 
is not connected with world war, has 
now set in in the development of the 
general crisis of capitalism. The decay 
of C. is manifested with the greatest 
force in the United States, the princi- 
pal country of contemporary imperial- 
ism, the country with the most mon- 
strous militarised economy and chron- 
ic unemployment. “Contemporary cap- 
italism is inimical to the vital inter- 
ests and progressive aspirations of all 
mankind.” (Programme of the CPSU.) 

Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881), British 
philosopher and historian, pantheist 
(see Pantheism) and agnostic. Advocat- 














Carnap 


=—660-— 


Cassirer 





ed German idealist philosophy and 
reactionary romanticism (q.v-). Ap- 
plied to society Fichte’s (q.v.) doctrine 
of man’s activity as the creative ele- 
ment of the world. Hence the history 
of society is reduced to the biographies 
of great personalities and “hero wor- 
ship”. C. subscribed to the theory of 
the historical cycle (see Historical Cy- 
cle, Theory of). His criticism of capi- 
talism was close to “feudal socialism”. 
After the defeat of the 1848 revolution 
in Europe and the Chartist movement 
in Britain C. sided with the big ;{bour- 
geoisie, supported its dictatorship, and 
justified repressions against the working 
class and Britain’s colonial policy. 
Main works: Sartor Resartus (1834), 
Heroes and Hero Worship, and the He- 
roic in History (1840), Past and Present 
(1843), History of the French Revolution 
(3 vols., 1837), and Latter-Day Pam- 
phlets (1850). 

Carnap, Rudolf (1891- ), philos- 
opher and logician, a leader of neo- 
positivism (q.v.), active member of the 
Vienna circle (q.v.), taught philosophy 
at Vienna and Prague universities. 
Since 1936 has lived in the United 
States, professor of philosophy at the 
University of California. C. denies the 
role of philosophy as a universal science 
and reduces it to a “logical analysis 
of the language” of science based on 
mathematical logic. In his understand- 
ing, the theoretical cognitive princi- 
ples underlying this analysis represent 
a combination of idealist empiricism 
and conventionalism (q.v.) in the in- 
terpretation of logic and mathematics. 
In C.’s works the philosophical concep- 
tion of neo-positivism is intertwined 
with studies of the theory of logic and 
the logico-methodological analysis of 
science. C.’s views of the nature of 
the logical has undergone an evolution 
in which two stages can be singled 
out: (1) syntactic, when the logic of 
science was regarded as the logical 
syntax of the language of science, and (2) 
semantic, when not only the formal but 
also the sense-aspect of the “language” 
of science becomes the subject- 
matter of study. In the second stage C. 
tries, on the basis of the initial con- 
cepts of logical semantics, to build 


up a single system of formal logic. 
His main works are Logische Syntax 
der Sprache (1934), Introduction to 
Semantics (1942-47), Meaning and Ne- 
cessity (1947), and Einführung in die 
symbolische Logik (1954). 

Carneades of Cyrene (214-129 B.C), 
Greek philosopher, head of the so- 
called New Academy (see Academy 
of Plato), a sceptic who deepened the 
sceptic philosophy of his predecessor 
in the Academy, Arcesilaus (q.v.). C. 
himself wrote nothing and his lectures 
have not come down to us. Some 
meagre sources credit him with advo- 
cating sceptical views, typical of the 
Academy, that true knowledge is im- 
possible and that all knowledge is at 
most probable assertion. Different de- 
grees of this probability were analysed, 
but none was regarded as equal to 
truth. C. also criticised teleological 
proof of divine being in connection 
with the doctrine of the imperfection of 
what exists. In ethics C. advocated the 
usual sceptic doctrine of nature’s bless- 
ings and of life conforming to nature 
without any active influence on it. 

Cartesianism (from Cartesius, the 
Latin transcription of Descartes’ 
name), the doctrine of Descartes (q.v.) 
and especially of his followers. The 
Cartesian school became especially wide- 
spread among philosophers of France 
and the Netherlands in the 17th and 
18th centuries. It divided into two 
trends: the progressive, which subscribed 
to Descartes’ mechanistic materi- 
alist understanding of nature (Leroy, 
La Mettrie, and Cabanis, qq.v.) and 
the reactionary, which supported his 
idealistic metaphysics (Delaforge, oc- 
casionalism, q.v., Malebranche, q.v.). 

Cassirer, Ernst (1874-1945), German 
idealist philosopher, member of the 
Marburg school (q.v.) of Neo-Kantian- 
ism. Professor of philosophy at Berlin 
and Hamburg; after the establishment 
of the fascist dictatorship lived in 
Sweden and the United States (profes- 
sor at Yale University). Applied the 
ideas of the Marburg school to the his- 
tory of epistemology and the history 
of philosophy. In his Substanzbegriff 
und Funktionsbegriff (1910), denied the 
view that scientific abstractions are a 











Categorical Imperative 


reflection of reality, dissolved the ma- 
terial world in categories of pure 
thought and substituted for its laws an 
idealistically interpreted functional de- 
pendence; subsequently sought to de- 
pict scientific cognition as a form of 
“symbolic” thinking. C. wrote a num- 
ber of works on the history of philos- 
ophy (antiquity, Renaissance, the 
epoch of Enlightenment) and mono- 
graphs about Leibniz and Kant (qq.v.). 
Main works: Das _ Erkenntnisprob- 
lem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft 
der neueren Zeit (4 vols., 1906-57), and 
Philosophie der symbolischen Formen 
(3 vols., 1923-29). j 

Categorical Imperative, the philosoph- 
ical term denoting a law in the ethics 
of Kant (q.v.). He called an “impera- 
tive? a maxim having the form of a 
dictum. According to Kant, an impera- 
tive can be either hypothetical or ca- 
tegorical. The former expresses a dic- 
tum determined (as a means) by the 
desired aim; the latter'expresses an ab- 
solute dictum. Kant drew this distinc- 
tion between the two types of impera- 
tives in his Grundlegung zur Metaphy- 
sik der Sitten (1785). C.I. orders ev- 
eryone to act according. to the rule 
which they would wish to become a 
universal law of nature. The concept of 
C.I. is metaphysical because in Kant’s 
doctrine it expresses the absolute jux- 
taposition of what should be to what 
exists. This juxtaposition reflects the 
practical weakness of the German burgh- 
erdom of Kant’s time which divorced 
the theoretical principles of ethics 
from the practical class interests un- 
derlying them and regarded these prin- 
ciples as “purely ideological definitions 
of concepts and moral postulates” 
(Marx and Engels). 

Categories (Gk. indication, af firma- 
tion), in philosophy, the main concepts 
reflecting the most general and essen- 
tial properties, sides, and relations of 
phenomena of reality and knowledge. 
C. formed in the process of historical 
development of knowledge on the basis 
of social practice. They enable man to 
gain a profound knowledge of the world 
around him. The process of cognising 
an object is not a simple mechanical 
act of reflecting reality in the mind 


e733 


Categories 


of man, but an intricate process of 
transition from sensory data to abstrac- 
tion, from the singular to the universal, 
and so on. The formation of concepts 
and C. is one of the most essential fea- 
tures of abstract thinking. The roots 
of the doctrine of C. extend into the 
distant past. The doctrine of the Vai- 
Seshika (q.v.), for example, spoke of 
the C. of substance, quality, action, 
etc. Aristotle (q.v.) rendered a great 
service in elaborating the philosophi- 
cal categories. He listed ten C. (sub- 
stance, quality, etc.), regarded C. as 
the main modes of being and highly 
assessed their cognitive importance. 
According to Kant who developed 
the idealist doctrine of C., the latter 
are a priori forms of contemplation 
and reason. Hegel (q.v.) regarded C. in 
their dialectical development, but in 
his system they are ideal forms, stages 
in the development of the Absolute 
Idea, which creates the real world. 
In contemporary idealist, especially 
neo-positivist, philosophy, C. are ig- 
nored or are regarded as purely subjec- 
tive and “convenient” forms of system- 
atising human experience. Other ideal- 
ists (see Hartmann, Neo-Thomism, 
Existentialism, etc.) place C. among 
purely spiritual transcendental forms. 
Dialectical materialism attaches great 
importance to C. as forms of the reflec- 
tion of being and future of knowledge. 
The main C. of dialectical materialism 
are matter, motion, time and space, 
quality and quantity, contradiction, 
causality, necessity and chance, form 
and content, possibility and reality 
(qq.v.), etc. These C. are definitely 
interconnected and represent a system 
in which they are not simply placed 
arbitrarily one beside another, but 
are deduced one from another in ac- 
cordance with the objective laws of 
reality and development of knowledge 
(see Categories; Co-ordination and Sub- 
ordination of). The main principle in 
constructing a system of C. is unity 
of the historical and the logical (q.v.), 
development of knowledge from appear- 
ance (q.v.) to essence (q.v.), from 
the external (q.v.) to the internal, 
from the abstract (q.v.) to the concrete, 
from the simple to the complex. The 








Catharsis 


C. of Marxist philosophy, as of any 
other science, are not a closed, immu- 
table system. With the development 
of objective reality and the progress of 
scientific knowledge, the number and 
content of scientific C. are constantly 
enriched and the system of C. is draw- 
ing increasingly closer to complete and 
all-round reflection of the objective 
world. Expressing essential connections 
of developing reality, C. must also be 
as mobile and flexible as the phe- 
Romena they reflect. 

Catharsis (Gk. purification), a con- 
cept of ancient Greek aesthetics de- 
scribing the influence of art on man. 
According to Aristotle, q.v. (Poetics), 
C. is the purging of the emotions of 
pity and fear effected by a tragedy. In 
Palitics he states that music, too, by 
influencing man, performs a kind of 
purification, i.e., “all are in a manner 
purged and their souls lightened and 
delighted”. The word C. was used by 
Greeks in many senses: religious, ethi- 
cal, physiological, and medical. In 
the extensive literature on C. there is 
no single view concerning its essence. 
C. evidently included physiological 
(relief after a big emotional strain) and 
ethical (ennobling of man’s feelings) 
elements, synthesised in aesthetical 
emotions. 

Catholicism (Gk. universal), a denom- 
ination of Christianity (q.v.) wide- 
spread chiefly in Western Europe and 
Latin America, exists since 1054. The 
dogmatic distinctions of C. are: recog- 
nition of the procession of the Holy 
Spirit not from God theFather alone, but 
from God the Father and God the Son, 
the dogma of purgatory, the suprem- 
acy of the Pope as the vicar of Jesus 
Christ on earth, the infallibility of the 
Pope, etc. Cult and canonical distinc- 
tions of C. are celibacy of the clergy, 
service in Latin, and a developed 
cult of the Holy Virgin, etc. The Vati- 
can is the world centre of C. Catholi- 
cism extends its power to the Catholic 
parties, trade unions, youth and wom- 
en’s organisations, educational estab- 
lishments, the press, publishing houses, 
etc. Neo-Thomism (q.v.) is the official 
philosophy of C. proclaimed in the 
entyclical of Pope Leo XIII in 1891. 


Causality 


Causality, a philosophical category 
denoting the necessary connections be- 
tween phenomena, one of which (called 
cause) determines the other (called the 
effect, or consequence). There is a differ- 
ence between the complete cause and 
the specific cause. The complete cause 
is the sum total of all the circumstances, 
the presence of which necessarily 
gives rise to the effect. The specific 
cause is the sum total of circumstances, 
the presence of which (with the presence 
of many other circumstances already 
present in the given situation even 
before the appearance of the effect and 
providing the conditions for the action 
of the cause) leads to the appearance 
of the effect. The establishment of a 
complete cause is possible only in com- 
paratively simple cases, and usually 
scientific investigation is directed to- 
wards the disclosure of the specific 
causes o: the puenomenon. Another rea- 
son for this is that the most essential 
components of the complete cause in 
a given situation are united into the 
specific cause, and the other compo- 
nents are only the conditions (q.v.) 
for the action of this specific cause. 
The problem of C. is the field of a fierce 
struggle between materialism and ideal- 
ism. Materialism maintains the objec- 
tivity and universality of C., regarding 
causal relations as relations between 
objects themselves, existing outside 
and independent of consciousness. 
Subjective idealism either denies C. 
altogether, seeing in it only the ordi- 
nary sequence of human sensations (see 
Hume), or, recognising C. as a necessary 
relation, considers that it is introduced 
into the world of phenomena by the 
cognising subject (the a priori charac- 
ter of C.—see Kant). Objective ideal- 
ism may recognise the existence of C., 
independent from the cognising subject, 
but it sees its roots in the spirit, in 
the idea, in the concept, which it re- 
gards as independent of the subject. 
Dialectical materialism not only rec- 
ognises the objectivity and universal- 
ity of C., it also rejects a simplified 
view of it, particularly the opposition 
between cause and effect which is 
characteristic of metaphysics, and re- 
gards them as the aspects of interaction 








Cell 


—69 = 


Chaadayev 





by which the effect, determined by the 
cause, in turn influences the cause. 
Causal relations are multiform, and it 
is impossible to reduce them, as met- 
aphysical materialism did (for exam- 
ple, Laplacian determinism, which ab- 
solutised mechanical C.), to any single 
form. The development of contempora- 
ry science, rejecting the absolutisation 
of the early known forms of cause- 
effect relations, confirms, discloses their 
variety, deepens and enriches the dia- 
lectical and materialist understanding 
of C. The category of C. is one of the 
main categories of scientific investiga- 
tion, which in the last analysis always 
leads to the discovery of the basic 
causal dependence. Where cognition 
achieves the level at which a strict 
quantitative analysis of the phenomena 
under study is possible, the causal rela- 
tion is expressed in the form of func- 
tional dependence (q.v.), which, how- 
ever, does not make redundant the 
category of C. (see Determinism and 
Indeterminism). 

Cell, structural element from which 
the organs and tissues of living organ- 
isms are built. Cc. also exist in the 
form of independent organisms (some 
of the tiniest animals and plants). 
The discovery of the cellular structure 
of organisms by Schwann (q.v-) and 
Schleiden (q.v.), together with Dar- 
win’s evolutionary theory (q.v.) sig- 
nified the victory of materialism in 
biology and provided confirmation of 
the material unity of living nature. 

Chaadayev, Pyotr Yakovlevich (1794- 
1856), Russian thinker and public lead- 
er. C. came from a noble family; took 
part in the 1812-14 war against Napo- 
leon. On returning to Russia he joined 
Welfare Union (1819) and then the 
Northern Society (1821). In 1823, 
after resigning from the army, C. went 
abroad, where he studied and met La- 
mennais and Schelling. On returning 
to Russia in 1826, he was arrested 
for his ties with the Decembrists. 
Owing to insufficient evidence, he was 
released but remained under police 
surveillance. In 1829-31 wrote a series 
of famous Filosoficheskiye pisma ( Phil- 
osophical Letters), the first of which 
was published in the journal Teleskop 


in 1836. According to Herzen, it stag- 
gered intellectual Russia and aroused. 
the indignation of monarchic circles, 
Teleskop was closed, its editor Nadezh- 
din was exiled, and C. was declared 
insane, In 1837, C. wrote Apologiya 
sumasshedshego (Apology of a Mad- 
man) and in the 1840s, together with 
Herzen and Granovsky (qq.v.), partic- 
ipated in the struggle of the Wester- 
ners (q.v.) against the Slavophils (q.v.). 
A number of articles written by C. 
were circulated in manuscript form. 
Prior to 1823, C.’s world outlook was 
typical of the progressive-minded Rus- 
sian noblemen of those days, brought 
up on the ideas of the French ertyclo- 
paedists and the Russian 18th century 
Enlighteners opposed to serfdom. Ale- 
xander Pushkin, with whom C. was 
bound by personal friendship, stressed 
the radicalism of C.'s views in those 
days, calling him Brutus and Pericles. 
C. was not satisfied with the theoreti- 
cal positions of the Decembrists, he 
sougnt in history the laws governing 
its development to justify the social 
ideals proclaimed by the Decembrists. 
These explorations ended in the switch 
of C. to the positions of Catholicism 
(q.v.) and renunciation of revolution- 
ary methods of transforming society. 
True, C.'s Catholicism was in effect 
a farm of social utopia. An analysis 
of the Philosophical Letters shows that 
even in that period C. remained an 
enemy of the autocracy, the Russian 
Orthodox Church, and serfdom. His 
criticism of the system which existed 
in Russia was acclaimed by Russian 
progressives. The publication of thefirst 
Philosophical Letter was of great im- 
portance for the country weighed down 
by oppression as the first open protest 
against the autocracy and serfdom after 
December 25, 1825. C.’s philosophy 
claimed that divine law was supreme 
in nature and society. On the whole C. 
adhered to objective idealism capable 
to some extent of assimilating ideas of 
the natural sciences. Man, according 
to C., is incapable of conceiving the 
most general laws of the world without 
revelation from above. Applying this 
principle to the philosophy of history, 
C. arrived at the conclusion that divine 








Chance 


revelation plays the decisive part in 
social development. In this connection 
he regarded the religious education of 
mankind as the main means for achiev- 
ing the “kingdom of God” on earth. C. 
understood the future “kingdom of God” 
as a civilian society in which equality, 
freedom, and democracy prevail. In 
this connection he, like Lamennais and 
St. Simon, advocated the need for mod- 
ernising Catholicism. The religious 
form of his views held him aloof from 
the general advance of the Russian rev- 
olutionary democratic movement, and 
his ideology was inclined towards his- 
torical pessimism. The contradictory 
nature of C.’s world outlook gave the 
Vekhists (see Vekhism) and other fal- 
sifers of Russian social thought a 
pretext for placing C. in the camp of 
mystics, alien to social interests and 
aspirations. 

Chance, see Necessity and Chance. 

Chang Tsai (1020-77), one of the 
founders of Neo-Confucianism. Accord- 
ing to C.T., everything existing in 
the world is formed from primary 
matter, ch'i (q.v.), which possesses the 
property of motion and rest. Nature is 
the “root”, and reason is its product. 
C.T. called the primary state of ch'i 
the Ultimate Vacuity (Tai Hsi). Pri- 
mary matter is scattered in the Ulti- 
mate Vacuity and its accumulation 
is like the conversion of water into ice. 
The concentration or dispersal of ch'i 
determines the birth or death of all 
phenomena and things. C.T.’s philoso- 
phy attached great importance to the 
concept ¢ao (the way) which designat- 
ed the process of change and conversion 
of ch'i (see Tao). The motion and 
change of primary matter are based 
on the interaction of two extreme op- 
posites: the positive yang and negative 
yin. Their unity is tao, which C.T. 
also defined as Great Harmony. Mo- 
tion in nature is not chaotic, it is de- 
termined by law, li (q.v.) inherent in 
ch'i itself. Law does not depend on 
the will of men. In his theory of knowl- 
edge C.T. was not consistent. Sensa- 
tions, he maintained, are the source 
of knowledge, through them man estab- 
lishes contact with the external world. 
But knowledge of tao is not based on 


=e7 N= 


Charron 


sensory perception. His teaching be- 
came widespread among subsequent 
followers of the Neo-Confucian school. 
Change, the most general form of 
being of all objects and phenomena. 
C. embraces every motion (q.v.) and 
interaction (q.v.), the passage from 
one state to another, etc. In philosophy, 
C. has always been contrasted to rela- 
tive stability of properties, the structure 
or the laws of the existence of bod- 
ies. But the structure, properties and 
laws themselves are a result of interac- 
tion, they are determined by the var- 
ious relations between bodies and are, 
therefore, produced by C. of matter. 
Character, the sum total of stable 
mental traits of man which depend 
on his activity and living conditions 
and are displayed in his actions. Know- 
ing a man’s C. it is possible to predict 
how he will behave in given circum- 
stances and consequently to direct his 
behaviour, developing in the indivi- 
dual traits which are useful to society. 
C. is manifested in the way a man re- 
gards himself, other people, the job 
entrusted to him, ete. C. is most fully 
displayed in socially useful labour, in 
man’s actions, and lays its imprint 
on his entire behaviour. C. is socio- 
psychological, i.e., it depends on a 
man’s world outlook, the knowledge 
and experience he has accumulated, 
the moral principles he has assimilated, 
on how he is influenced by other peo- 
ple, and on his relations with them. 
C. is not inborn, it is shaped by the 
surroundings and depends on education. 
Character in Art, an artistic embodi- 
ment of the social, mental, and other 
specific traits which make up a human 
type and are manifested in individual 
behaviour. True portrayal of “typical 
characters in typical circumstances” 
which surround people and make them 
act in a certain way is especially im- 
portant for realistic art. Typical char- 
acters in art are concrete people in 
their multiformity, intricate and con- 
tradictory development. Art demands 
aesthetic precision of each character 
created by the artist. 
Charron, Pierre (1541-1603), French 
philosopher. He started as a lawyer, 
later became a priest. He was known 





Charvaka 


for his sceptical views, close to those 
of Montaigne (q.v.), which were chiefly 
set forth in De la sagesse (1601). He 
believed that it is impossible to guar- 
antee the truth of any form of religion, 
because religion is not inherent in man, 
but is formed under the influence of 
education and the surrounding condi- 
tions. Morality alone is primary in 
man. Hence, religion depends upon 
morality. Consequently, one must live 
according to primary moral laws but 
profess the religion which is upheld 
by the authorities. C. hid his sceptical, 
anti-religious views behind a formal 
recognition of Orthodox religion. Theo- 
logians found in the treatise De la 
sagesse reason to accuse C. of disbelief. 

Charvaka, see Lokayata. 

Chelpanov, Georgi Ivanovich (1862- 
1936), Russian psychologist and ideal- 
ist philosopher, logician; professor of 
psychology and philosophy at Kiev 
University (1892-1906) and Moscow 
University (1907-23). He founded the 
Moscow Psychological Institute in 1912. 
In philosophy C. was close to Neo- 
Kantianism (q.v.) and positivism (q.v.). 
His Mozg i dusha (Brain and Soul), 
published in 1900, and other works 
contained a criticism of materialism. 
In psychology C. developed the theory 
of “empirical parallelism” of the soul 
and body which goes back to the psy- 
cho-physical parallelism of Wundt 
(q.v.). Engaging chiefly in experiment- 
al psychology, C. studied it from er- 
roneous methodological positions (rec- 
ognition of self-observation as the 
sole source of knowledge of mental 
phenomena, assignment of an auxiliary 
role to experiments, etc.). After the 
October Revolution, C. opposed the 
application of Marxism in Soviet psy- 
chology. The reactionary nature of 
C.’s positions was exposed by Marxist 
critics in 1923-25. C. was the author 
of textbooks on psychology and logic. 
His works: Problema vospriyatiya 
prostranstva v svyazi s ucheniyem ob 
apriornosti i vrozhdyonnosti (Problem 
of Perception of Space in Connection 
with the Doctrine of Apriority and 
Innateness), published in two volumes 
in 1896 and 1904, and Vuvedeniye v 
eksperimentalnuyu _psikhologiyu (In- 


et hie 


Chernyshevsky 


troduction to Experimental Psychology), 
1915, etc. 

Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich 
(1828-89), Russian revolutionary 
democrat, materialist philosopher, crit- 
ic, and utopian socialist. He was born 
into a priest’s family in Saratov, 
graduated from St. Petersburg Univer- 
sity in 1850 and taught in a Saratov 
school. From 1853 to 1862, C. was 
contributor to and chief editor of the 
Sovremennik. In 1862, C. was arrested, 
imprisoned in the St. Peter and Paul 
Fortress, and then sentenced to hard 
labour and exiled to Siberia for life. 
In 1883, he was allowed to settle in 
Astrakhan and later to return to Sa- 
tatov, where he died. C. was the leader 
of the revolutionary democratic move- 
ment in Russia in the 1860s, one of the 
outstanding predecessors of the Rus- 
sian Social-Democrats who persistent- 
ly pursued “the idea of the peasant 
revolution, the idea of the struggle of 
the masses for the overthrow of all 
the old authorities”. (Lenin, Vol. 17, 
p. 123.) A generation of Russian revo- 
lutionaries was brought up on his 
writings which, as Lenin put it, exhale 
the spirit of the class struggle. C.’s 
world outlook was moulded under the 
influence of the ideas of Herzen and 
Belinsky (qq.v.) and also German 
classical philosophy, especially Feuer- 
bach (q.v.). But C. went farther than 
Feuerbach in understanding the social 
role of philosophy in general and the 
importance of Hegel’s dialectics in 
particular. He fully subordinated his 
theoretical views to the struggle for 
the emancipation of “ordinary people” 
from serfdom and bourgeois slavery. 
In epistemology, C. adhered to strictly 
materialist positions and sharply crit- 
icised the agnosticism of Kant (q.v.) 
and others. C. saw the source of knowl- 
edge in the objective world, which 
acts on man’s sense-organs. He at- 
tached great importance to practice, 
which he called the touchstone of any 
theory. Unlike Feuerbach, C. sought 
to reshape Hegel’s dialectics in the 
materialist spirit. In a number of 
spheres (political economy, history, 
aesthetics, and art criticism) he fur- 
nished splendid examplesof a dialectical 








Chernyshevsky 


approach to theoretical and practical 
problems. C. lived and worked under 
feudalism and because of this could 
not advance to the materialism of 
Marx. C.’s materialism is not free of 
substantial shortcomings (anthropolo- 
gism, limited understanding of practice 
and the process of knowledge, etc.) 
but revolutionary democracy helped 
him to overcome many weaknesses of 
anthropologism (q.v.). On a number 
of questions he drew close to a mate- 
rialist explanation of social life. This 
was true above all of his understanding 
of the class nature of contemporary 
society, recognition of the class strug- 
gle as a driving force of development, 
etc. C. also saw the connection of 
ideology and consciousness of people 
with the economic conditions of their 
life; he emphasised that in the history 
of society the interests of the working 
people are of primary importance and 
regarded the masses as the chief maker 
of history. He rendered a great service 
by exposing the counter-revolutionary 
essence of Russian and West European 
liberalism. During the peasant reform 
C. fought against the servility of the 
liberals towards the feudal lords. Lenin 
spoke of C. as a man “who saw how 
limited, how poverty-stricken was the 
overadvertised ‘Peasant Reform’, and 
he recognised its true feudal nature”. 
(Vol. 17, p. 122.) C. dreamed of ad- 
vancing to socialism via the old peasant 
commune; he, like Herzen, was a 
founder of Narodism (q.v.). C. did not 
know and could not know that only the 
proletariat is the force capable of 
building socialism. But of all the 
utopians C. drew closest of all in theory 
to scientific socialism, for he placed 
his hopes in revolution. C.’s utopian 
socialism was closely linked with his 
revolutionary democratic views. He 
understood that socialism could be 
created only on the basis of developed 
technology and that only the people 
themselves could build it. C. also 
worked fruitfully in the sphere of 
political economy. Marx said that as 
an economist C. splendidly disclosed 
the bankruptcy of bourgeois economics. 
The main idea of his “political economy 
of the working people” was the idea 


BS 


Ch’i 


of “fully combining the owner and 
worker in one and the same person”. 
Labour, he said, must cease to be a 
“commodity for sale”. In his Este- 
ticheskiye otnosheniya iskusstva k dei- 
stvitelnosti (Aesthetic Relations of Art 
to Reality), 1855, C. profoundly crit- 
icised idealist aesthetics and formu- 
lated the basic principles of realistic 
art. C.’s literary criticism, like the 
works of Belinsky (q.v.) and Dobro- 
lyubov (q.v.), exerted great influence 
on the development of progressive 
Russian literature, painting, and mu- 
sic; they have preserved their signifi- 
cance to this day. Main works: Ocherki 
gogolevskogo perioda russkoi literatury 
{Essays on the Gogol Period in Russian 
Literature), 1855-56; Kritika Filosof- 
skikh predubezhdeny protiv obshchin- 
nogo vladeniya (Critique of Philosoph- 
ical Prejudices Against Communal 
Ownership), 1858; Antropologichesky 
printsip v filisofii (The Anthropological 
Principle in Philosophy), 1860; Kharak- 
ter SE sala A znaniya (Nature of 
Human Knowledge), 1885. C. is also 
known for his What Is To Be Done?, 
1863; Prologue, 1867-69, and other 
works of fiction. 

Ch’i, or Yuan Chi, a basic concept 
of Chinese natural philosophy. Origi- 
nally, it meant “air, “vapour”, 
“breath”. It acquired a very broad 
meaning—primary matter, basic matter 
of nature, the vital force, and so on. 
According to the oldest natural phil- 
osophical concepts, the world is formed 
of C., prime matter, the pure and 
light portion of which rose upward, 
creating the heavens, and the impure 
and heavy settled down, creating the 
earth. The first is called yang ch'i 
and the second yin ch’i. In addition 
there are also five ch'i, five prime 
“elements” of nature: water, fire, wood, 
metal, and earth. The flowering and 
death of yin-yang (q.v.) and the five 
“elements” occur through the suc- 
cession of the year’s four seasons. 
This natural philosophical scheme in 
which yin-yang and the five “elements” 
appear simultaneously as semi-physi- 
cal and semi-metaphysical concepts has 
exerted an exceptional influence on the 
development of Chinese philosophical 








Chicherin 


thought. It has been widely utilised 
in Taoism (q.v.), Confucianism (q.v.), 
and to a certain extent in Buddhism 


(q-v.). 

Chicherin, Boris Nikolayevich (1828- 
1904), Russian expert in the theory 
of law, historian, and idealist phi- 
losopher; professor of Moscow Univer- 
sity (1861-68) and a leader of the liberał 
movement. C. was a Hegelian who 
borrowed from Hegel chiefiv his crit- 
icism of empiricism and his doctrine 
of the absolute idea. C. admitted dia- 
lectics but distorted its meaning and 
adapted it to his sociology designed 
to justify private property. True knowl- 
edge, according to C., is possible 
only by applying speculative princ- 
iples to the objects studied. The source 
of social relations is the individual 
as a kind of “metaphysical being”. 
The main part in society is played 
by law, i.e., the “free will” of the 
individual determined by legal rules. 
The legal and ethical elements merge 
in the state, which C. considered to 
be an “ideal” force uniting people 
into a single whole. He tried to picture 
the bourgeois-landowner state as an 
organisation standing above classes. 
C. founded the so-called legal school 
(in Russian historiography), which 
examined the historical process above 
all as a succession of legal relations. 
C. was an advocate of constitutional 
monarchy and was opposed to the 
revolutionary movement and scientific 
socialism. Main works: Nauka i religiya 
(Science and Religion), 1879; Misti- 
tsism v nauke (Mysticism in Science), 
1880; Sobstvennost i gosudarstvo (Prop- 
erty and the State), two volumes, 
1882-83; Polozhitelnaya filosofiya i yedin- 
stvo nauki (Positive Philosophy and 
the Unity of Science), 1892; Osnovaniya 
logiki i metafiziki (Foundations of Logic 
and Metaphysics), 1894; Filosofiya prava 
(Philosophy of Law), 1900. 

Chiliasm, a religious doctrine of 
“the kingdom of God” on Earth which 
will last a thousand years prior to the 
end of the world. C. was inherent in 
Judaism (q.v.) and early Christianity 
(q.v.) in which it was associated with 
the advent of the Messiah, the Redeem- 
er. The ideas of C. attracted the slaves 


=n 


Chinese Philosophy 


and the poor. On becoming the of- 
ficial religion of the Roman Empire, 
Christianity renounced any change of 
the order of things on Earth, laid 
stress on the idea of reward in the 
other world, and rejected C. as a false 
teaching. In the Middle Ages, C. was 
revived in a number of heretical teach- 
ings which represented the religious 
shell of social protest by the peasantry 
and urban poor against feudal ex- 
ploitation. Today C. is a component 
of the reactionary ideology of some 
religious sects. 

Chinese Philosophy has a long 
history. Its sources date from the begin- 
ning of the first millennium B.C. As 
early as the 8th-5th centuries B.C., 
C.P. had a widespread doctrine of the 
“primary sources”, the Five Elements 
of nature: water, fire, wood, metal, 
and earth. The ancient Chinese think- 
ers taught that combinations of the 
Five Elements create the entire di- 
versity of phenomena and things. There 
was also another system for revealing 
the primary sources of the real world. 
The Yi King (Books of Changes) named 
eight such primary sources, whose 
interaction formed different situations 
of reality. Basically Yi King was 
merely a collection of surmises and 
only somewhat later it was given a 
philosophical interpretation. The im- 
ages and symbolics of Yi King exerted 
exceptional influence on the subse- 
quent development of C.P. At the 
same time, the main principles of the 
doctrine of the opposite and intercon- 
nected yin (passive) and yang (active) 
(g.v.) forces were shaped. The action 
af these forces was regarded as the 
cause of motion and change in nature. 
They were symbols of light and dark- 
ness, positive and negative, male and 
female elements in nature. Ancient 
C.P. was further developed from the 
5th to the 3rd century B.C. It was in 
this period that the main Chinese phil- 
osophical schools emerged. Propo- 
nents of Taoism (q.v.), above all Lao 
Tză and Chuang Tzu, took a great 
interest in philosophical problems. Mo 
Ti (see Mo Tzil) and his followers stud- 
ied questions of epistemology. Many 
ancient Chinese thinkers sought to 














Chinese Philosophy 


solve the logical problem of the rela- 
tionship between concepts “name” and 
reality. Hsiin Tzit (q.v.) and others 
held that concepts are reflections of 
objective phenomena and things. 
Kungsun Luna gave an idealist ex- 
planation of the problem. He was 
known for his statements resembling 
Zeno’s aporias (q.v.) and for absolute 
abstraction of concepts and their di- 
vorce from reality. His doctrine of 
“names” has much in common with 
Plato’s (q.v.) theory of “ideas”. Dur- 
ing this period Tsou Yan elaborated 
the concept of yin and yang and the 
Five Elements of nature. The ethical 
and political constructions of Confu- 
cius and Méng Tzit (q.v.), the state- 
ments of Han Fei Tzit and other mem- 
bers of the Legalist school (see Fa Chia) 
about the state and law became wide- 
spread. That was the Golden Age of 
C.P. On questions of the philosophy 
of nature the struggle centred round 
the concept of tien (sky) regarded 
by some as nature (Hsun Chi), while 
others considered it the supreme, pur- 
poseful force (Confucius, Méng Tzii); 
the concepts tao (q.v.), the way (nat- 
ural law and absolute); fe, virtue, 
power, character; ch'i (q.v.), the 
primary matter; the “elements” of 
nature, etc. In the sphere of ethics, 
attention was devoted to the teaching 
on the essence of man. The views 
of Confucius led to the concept of 
Méng Tzu about the innate goodness 
of human nature and of Hsun Chi 
about the innate evil of human na- 
ture. Yang Chu’s (q.v.) theory of in- 
dividualism and Mo Tzit’s theory of 
altruism were widely known. The an- 
cient Chinese concepts in the philos- 
ophy of nature lacked empirical mate- 
rial. The doctrine of the Five Elements, 
of the polar yin and yang remained 
the basis of numerous natural philo- 
sophical and cosmological constructions 
between the 3rd century B.C. and the 
3rd century A.D. The concept of ch'i 
received a materialist interpretation 
in the deeply argumented system of 
Wang Chung (q.v.). At the same time 
various mystic teachings were devel- 
oped, and religious trends appeared in 
Taoism and Confucianism (q.v.). The 


4 


Chinese Philosophy 


relationship of “being” to “non-being” 
became the central issue of struggle 
between materialism and idealism in 
the first centuries of our era. The conc- 
epts of the Beginning (yuan), the 
Prime Matter (ch’i), tao, and other 
prime sources of being were developed 
during this period as a result of the 
mutual influence and synthesis of Tao- 
ist and Confucianist ideas. Buddhism 
(q-v.) began to spread in China from 
the Ist century. Together with Con- 
fucianism and Taoism it became a 
leading trend in Chinese thought. The 
5th and 6th centuries were stamped 
by Buddhist mysticism. Struggle 
around the Buddhist teaching of the 
unreality of the world developed during 
that period. Many philosophers took 
a great interest in problems of the 
relationship between essence and phe- 
nomenon, being and non-being, body 
and soul. The materialists Ho Chen- 
tien and Fan Chen subjected the belief 
in the immortality of the soul to with- 
ering criticism. Buddhism remained 
the most widespread teaching in the 
7th-10th centuries. Attacks on Bud- 
dhist idealism were waged mainly 
from the positions of Confucianism 
and Taoism. Philosophy flourished in 
China in the 10th-13th centuries as 
a result of the deep socio-economic 
changes. The further development of 
Confucianism, known as Neo-Confu- 
cianism, came as a reaction to Bud- 
dhism and Taoism. Neo-Confucianism 
was not limited to the elaboration of 
ethical and political ideas. Questions 
of ontology, philosophy of nature and 
cosmogony were represented more 
widely in it. The central issue was the 
relation between the ideal element Ji, 
q.v. (law, principle) and the material 
element ch’i (prime matter). Early 
Neo-Confucians approached some ques- 
tions from the standpoint of material- 
ism (Chou Tun-i and Chang Tsai, q.v.). 
Chu Hsi (q.v.) holds an important place 
in the development and generalisa- 
tion of Neo-Confucian constructions. 
Examining the interconnection of ¿i 
and ch’i, Chu Hsi ultimately came to 
regard li as primary and ch’i as second- 
ary. Lu Chiu-yiian (Lu Hsiang-shan) 
and especially Wang Shou-jén (Wang 





Christianity 


Yang-ming) developed subjective ideal- 
ism in Neo-Confucianism. The former 
said: “The world is my reason (heart) 
and my reason is the world.” Neo- 
Confucian idealism was opposed by the 
materialist doctrines of Ch’ien Lung, 
Yeh Shih, Lo Chin-shun, and Wang 
Ting-hsiang. The doctrine of the pro- 
gressive thinker Li Chih played a big 
part in the struggle against the Ortho- 
dox school of Neo-Confucianism. The 
questions of the relationship between 
li and ch'i was further developed in 
the 17th and 18th centuries; its mate- 
tialist solution was offered by Wang 
Fu-chih (Wang Ch’uan-shan) and Tai 
Chen (q.v.). The Opium War in 1840 
marked the beginning of foreign pen- 
etration of China. The Chinese peo- 
ple replied to the oppression of the 
feudal lords and foreign aggression by 
a powerful peasant rebellion, the Tai- 
ping movement. Utopian ideas on the 
social reconstruction of society played 
no small part in it. Subsequently, 
China was turned into a semi-colony. 
The best traditions and materialist 
ideas of C.P. were taken over and 
continued by progressive thinkers (see 
T’an Ssu-t’ung and Sun Yat-sen). The 
anti-imperialist and anti-feudal move- 
ment of May 4, 1919, began under 
the influence of the Great October 
Socialist Revolution. Since then Marx- 
ism has acquired ever greater impor- 
tance as the ideological weapon in the 
struggle for national independence and 
the revolutionary transformation of 
China. But petty-bourgeois ideology 
has continued to play an important 
part in the spiritual life of China, and 
it has inevitably exerted an influence 
on the Chinese Marxists. That is why 
various deviations have repeatedly 
arisen in their ranks. This has also 
been the reason why vulgar materialism 
and elements of voluntarism and subjec- 
tivism have recently assumed a leading 
place in philosophy of China. 
Christianity, one of the world reli- 
gions, alongside Islam (q:v.) and Bud- 
dhism (q.v.). C. arose in the second 
half of the first century in the Eastern 
provinces of the Roman Empire as a 
teligion of the slaves and oppressed 
toilers. In the course of time C. under- 


2375 


Chrysippus 


went many changes and became the 
religion of the ruling classes and the 
state religion of many countries. C. 
triumphed because (1) it gave the 
disinherited classes hope for happiness 
and justice in a future life; (2) the Ro- 
man Empire needed a single religion 
which would appeal to all men irre- 
spective of their class and national 
distinctions; (3) the ruling classes were 
interested in C. because it did not 
affect the class foundations of society 
and gave divine sanction to the exist- 
ing oppression. The Council of Nicaea 
(325) played an important part in the 
development of C. and the creation of 
a church organisation and rites. A 
symbol of faith, a brief exposition of 
the basic Christian dogmas, was for- 
mulated at that Council. At present 
there is no single C. with the same 
dogmas and rites. There are three main 
trends—Catholicism (q.v.), Orthodoxy 
(q.v.), and Protestantism (q.v.) and 
very many different sects (Baptists, 
Adventists, Witnesses of Jehovah, etc.). 
The ideas of Eastern religions (see 
Polytheism and Monotheism) on the 
tedemption and the divine saviour 
formed the basis of C.; it was also 
influenced by the doctrines of the 
stoics (q.v.), particularly Seneca, and 
of Philo. The main thing in C. is the 
teaching of the mythical man-God 
Jesus Christ, the son of God, who de- 
scended from heaven on earth, under- 
went suffering and death, and then 
rose from the dead to redeem people 
from original sin. Earthly life, C. 
teaches, is a temporary abode for man 
in preparation for eternal life in the 
other world. Abolition of the exploit- 
ing system undermines the social 
roots of C., which exists only as a 
survival of the past and will disappear 
in the process of building communist 
society. 

Chrysippus (281/78-208/05 B.C.), the 
most outstanding exponent of the Stoic 
school. In antiquity he was regarded 
as the second leader of that school and 
it was said that “had there been no 
Chrysippus there would have been no 
stoics”. Diogenes Laertius wrote that 
“had the gods engaged in dialectics, 
they would have used the dialectics 








Chu Hsi 


TS 


Clan 





of Chrysippus”. The stoics divided 
logic into rhetoric and dialectics. C. 
provided logic with an exact definition 
of the sentence and the rules of sys- 
tematic division of all sentences into 
simple and complex (see Stoics). 

Chu Hsi (1130-1200), Chinese philos- 
opher and outstanding exponent of 
Neo-Confucianism of the Sung epoch 
(960-1279). Under the influence of 
Buddhism (q.v.) and Taoism (q.v.) 
Neo-Confucianism turned to the elab- 
oration of metaphysical problems. 
C.H.’s doctrine is frankly idealistic. 
It systematised the ideas of Confucian- 
ism (q.v.). The ideal substance, li 
(q.v.) is devoid of form and properties 
and is inaccessible to sensory percep- 
tion. The Great Ultimate gives rise 
to the force of motion, yang and the 
force of rest, yin. There is constant 
alternation of motion and rest, and 
in this process the five material prime 
elements of the world arise—water, 
fire, wood, metal, and earth. C.H. 
considered the ideal element, Ji, as 
primary and the material element, 
ch’i (q.v.), as secondary. C.H. resolute- 
ly upheld the ethical and political 
doctrine of Confucianism. He deduced 
man’s innate nature from the ideal 
element, li. C.H. saw the foundation 
of social life in the strictest observance 
of Confucian ethical and political prin- 
ciples. Subsequently, the doctrine of 
C.H. was officially recognised and be- 
came the basis of the traditional edu- 
cational system. 

Circular Evidence (Lat. circulus in 
demonstrando), or vicious circle (Lat. 
circulus vitiosus), a logical error aris- 
ing out of the adduction of proof or 
evidence involving premisses which 
assume the conclusion which is to be 
established. This error is occasionally 
encountered in scientific works. Thus, 
for example, over the past 2,000 years 
many mathematicians attempted to 
prove Euclid’s fifth (“parallel”) pos- 
tulate by building their proof indirect- 
ly, on the very postulate to be proved. 
Marx demonstrated that A. Smith and 
other bourgeois economists reasoned in 
a “vicious circle’: the value of com- 
modities represents the sum of the 
wages, profit, and rent, while the value 


of the wages, profit, and rent is in turn 
determined by the value of commodi- 
ties, etc. 

Civic Society, the term first used in 
the 18th century by pre-Marxian phi- 
losophers for social and, more narrowly, 
for property relations. A substantial 
shortcoming of the theory of C.S. 
propounded by the French and English 
materialists was that it failed to un- 
derstand the dependence of C.S. on 
the mode of production. It inferred the 
origin of C.S. from the natural prop- 
erties of man, from political tasks, 
forms of government and legislation, 
morality, etc. Hegel (q.v.) used the 
term to imply a “system of require- 
ments” based on private property, on 
property relations and relations of 
social estates, on the system of judici- 
ary relations, etc. Although Hegel’s 
views on C.S. contain a few conjectures 
about the real laws of social develop- 
ment, they are generally wrong. He- 
gel’s idealism comes to the surface in 
that he regards C.S. as dependent on 
the state, which he holds to be the 
true form of the objective spirit, with 
C.S. being only the “ultimate” form 
of the spirit. Marx uses the term and 
concept of C.S. in his early works; 
in particular, he uses it in 1843 in his 
critique of Hegel. By C.S. Marx under- 
stands the family, estate and class 
organisation, property relations, forms 
and methods of distribution, and, in 
general, all the conditions which en- 
sure the existence and functioning of 
society, the conditions of the actual 
life and activity of man. He stresses 
their objective nature and economic 
basis. Subsequently, Marx replaces this 
insufficiently clear term with strictly 
scientific concepts (economic structure 
of society, economic basis, mode of 
production, etc.). 

Clan, a group of men connected by 
ties of consanguinity, the main pro- 
duction cell of the primitive-communal 
system (q.v.). The clan numbered up 
to hundreds of members. Clans were 
united into fraternities (brotherhoods), 
while the union of fraternities made 
up a tribe (q.v.). In the period of the 
appearance and efflorescence of the 
clan system the most important posi- 





l 
y 
{ 
i 
l 
| 





Class 


tion in the clan was held by the woman 
(see Matriarchy), but with the decay 
of the clan it came to be held by the 
man (see Patriarchy). The structure of 
the clan was founded upon social own- 
ership of the means of production, upon 
collective labour. The head of the clan 
was the elder who was elected. All 
affairs were settled by the council of 
the clan, i.e., a meeting of all the adult 
men and women. The absence of pri- 
vate ownership and classes led to the 
absence of class violence in the clan; 
there was no place for domination or 
oppression. With the growth of the 
social division of labour (q.v.), ex- 
change and private ownership, the 
disintegration of the primitive-com- 
munal system, and, consequently, that 
of the clan, began. The appearance of 
a new mode of production, based on 
the class division of society, put an end 
to the clan system. 

Class (in logic), finite or infinite to- 
tality of objects singled out according 
to some property which is taken in 
its entirety. Objects forming a C. are 
called its elements. Not only indivi- 
duals can be elements of a C. but also 
Cc. themselves. Hence there are also 
different types of Cc. Usually a C. 
is determined by the properties com- 
mon to all its elements. This makes 
it possible to treat the concept of C. 
as the concept of a propositional func- 
tion (q.v.), since for an element to 
belong to a given C. it is necessary 
and sufficient that it possess the prop- 
erty forming this C. The theory of 
classes (see Classes, Theory of) provides 
a complete and systematic examination 
of C., their common properties and 
manipulations with them in logic. 

Class Struggle, struggle between 
classes (q.v.) whose interests are incom- 
patible or contradictory. The history 
of all societies, beginning with the 
slave society, was the history of the 
struggle of classes. Marxism-Leninism 
gave a scientific explanation of the 
C.S. as the driving force of the develop- 
ment of society divided into antago- 
nistic classes and showed that in bour- 
geois society the C.S. inevitably leads 
to the dictatorship of the proletariat 
(q.v.), the purpose of which is to abol- 


— 77 — 


Class Struggle 


ish all classes and create a classless 
communist society. The main forms 
of the C.S. of the proletariat are eco- 
nomic, political, and ideological. Polit- 
ical struggle, which in bourgeois so- 
ciety leads to the socialist revolution 
and the dictatorship of the proletariat, 
is the decisive condition for the eman- 
cipation of the working class and the 
whole of society from exploitation. 
The economic and ideological forms 
of struggle are subordinated to the 
tasks of the political struggle. In con- 
temporary capitalist society the C.S. 
of the proletariat is spearheaded 
against the omnipotence of the monop- 
olies. In the course of the struggle 
against the capitalist monopolies all 
the main sections of the nation inter- 
ested in preserving peace and in im- 
plementing broad democratie reforms 
unite around the proletariat. With the 
establishment of the dictatorship of 
the proletariat the C.S. assumes new 
forms. Proceeding from the experience 
of the young Soviet Republic, Lenin 
named five such new forms: (1) sup- 
pression of the resistance of the ex- 
loiters, (2) civil war as the extreme 
orm of the C.S. between the prole- 
tariat and the bourgeoisie, (3) struggle 
for leadership of the peasantry and 
other non-proletarian working masses, 
(4) struggle for the utilisation of bour- 
geois specialists, (5) struggle to educate 
people in a new, socialist labour dis- 
cipline. Depending on the concrete 
historical conditions the C.S. can as- 
sume more or less acute forms. “The 
general trend of class struggle within 
the socialist countries in conditions 
of successful socialist construction leads 
to the consolidation of the position 
of the socialist forces and weakens the 
resistance of the remnants of the hos- 
tile classes. But this development does 
not follow a straight line. Changes in 
the domestic or external situation may 
cause the class struggle to intensify 
in specific periods.» (Programme of 
the CPSU.) The complete and final 
victory of socialism eliminates the 
grounds for the C.S., and promotes 
the socio-political and ideological uni- 
ty (q.v.) of society. The CPSU criticised 
Stalin’s erroneous thesis on the sharp- 











Classes 


IR a 


Classes 





ening of the C.S. after the victory of 
socialism, a thesis which served as a 
pretext for gross violations of socialist 
democracy and legality in conditions 
of the cult of the individual (q.v.). Tran- 
sition from socialism to communism 
is effected in conditions when all so- 
cial groups—workers, peasants, and the 
intelligentsia—are interested in the 
victory of communism and are pur- 
posefully working for it. Hence there 
are no grounds for C.S. within the 
country. But C.S. remains in relations 
with the capitalist world. Peaceful 
coexistence (q.v.) is a specific form 
of the C.S. between socialism and 
capitalism. 

Classes (social) “Classes are large 
groups of people differing from each 
other by the place they occupy in a 
historically determined system of so- 
cial production, by their relation (in 
most cases fixed and formulated in law) 
to the means of production, by their 
role in the social organisation of la- 
bour, and, consequently, by the mode 
and dimensions of acquiring the share 
of social wealth of which they dispose. 
Classes are groups of people one of 
which can appropriate the labour of 
another owing to the different places 
they occupy in a definite system of 
social economy.” (Lenin, Selected 
Works, Vol. 3, p. 248.) The existence 
of C. is associated only with definite 
periods in the development of social 
production. The emergence of C. is 
determined by the development of the 
social division of labour (q.v.) and 
the appearance of private ownership 
of the means of production. In every 
class society, besides the basic C.— 
slave-owners and slaves in slave so- 
ciety, landowners and serfs under feu- 
dalism, capitalists and proletarians in 
bourgeois society—there also exist non- 
basic C.; the latter are associated either 
with remnants of the old mode of 
production (in bourgeois society, the 
peasantry) or with the emergence of 
a new mode (the bourgeoisie which 
arose in feudal society). Abolition of 
society’s division into C. becomes pos- 
sible only as a result of the socialist 
revolution (q.v.), the overthrow of the 
rule of the exploiting C., abolition 


of their private ownership of the means 
of production, and its replacement by 
public ownership. The victory of so- 
cialism radically changes the charac- 
ter of the working class and draws the 
workers and peasants nearer to each 
other. Under socialism the working 
class can no longer be called the pro- 
letariat; it is free of exploitation and, 
together with the entire people, owns 
the means of production and does not 
sell its labour power. From a class 
deprived of all means of production 
and oppressed as it was under capital- 
ism, the proletariat is transformed 
into the working class, the full master 
of the country, which works for itself, 
for the whole of society. As the most 
advanced and most organised class 
connected with public property, it leads 
the other sections of the population. 
Under socialism the peasantry does 
away for ever with farming based on 
private property, with disunity inher- 
ited from capitalism and renounces 
backward and primitive implements 
and farming methods. It farms on the 
basis of collective socialist ownership 
(see State and Collective-Farm and 
Co-operative Forms of Property). The 
intelligentsia, the social stratum of 
intellectual workers, has also radically 
changed. The intelligentsia has never 
been, nor could it be, a separate class, 
since it does not hold an independent 
position in the system of social pro- 
duction. As a social stratum it is in- 
capable of pursuing an independent 
policy, its activity is determined by the 
interests of the classes it serves. After 
the victory of the socialist revolution, 
the working class is confronted with 
the problem of utilising the old and 
developing a new intelligentsia. To- 
gether with the workers and peasants, 
the intelligentsia actively participates 
in the building of communist society. 
The distinctions between the workers, 
peasants, and intelligentsia are effaced 
in the course of building communism. 
This process is based on the gradual 
obliteration of the essential distinctions 
between town and country, between 
physical and mental labour. The socio- 
political and ideological unity (q.v-) 
of the people achieved under socialism 








Classes, Theory of 


is consolidated and the social homogene- 
ity of society is extended. The further 
strengthening of the alliance of the 
working class and the collective-farm 
peasantry, the leading role of the work- 
ing class, are of decisive political and 
socio-economic significance for the 
building of communism in the USSR. 
The division of society into C. and 
social strata will vanish completely 
with the victory of communism. 
Classes, Theory of, a logical theory. 
Main concepts: class (q.v.), an element 
of class. Main propositions: an element 
of class (x) is a member of the class 
(A) (in symbols: x €A); the universal 
class (1) complements the null (or 
empty) class; relations between classes 
are of four types: of two arbitrary 
classes A and B, either A is included 
in B (as its subclass) or vice versa, for 
instance ACB and BcA; or A and B 
coincide partially or have no common 
elements at all. T.C. determines 
the following operations involving 
classes: (1) intersection AB, i.e., the 
formation of a new class out of the 
elements common both to A and B; 
(2) union A~B, i.e., the formation 
of a class, whose elements belong either 
to A or to B, or to both; (3) comple- 
mentation of A, i.e., the formation 
of a class out of all the elements of the 
universal class which are not included 
in A. The laws governing the relations 
between classes and the operations 
involving them are treated in the so- 
called calculus of classes, which is one 
of the interpretations (see Interpreta- 
tion and Model) of algebra of logic 
(q.v.). At the same time the calculus 
of classes is treated as the calculus 
of singular predicates, since the ex- 
pression x€A corresponds to a pro- 
positional function (q.v.). 
Classification, a particular case of 
applying the division of concepts (q.v-), 
Tepresenting a certain sum total of 
divisions (division of concepts into 
species, division of these species, etc.). 
C. is designated for constant use in 
science or practical activity (for exam- 
ple, C. of animals and plants, socio- 
economic formations or C. of books 
in a library). Usually features essential 
to the given objects are taken as a 


=A7 gr 


Classification of Science 


basis for C. In this case, C. (called 
natural) brings out essential similari- 
ties and differences between objects 
and is of cognitive significance. In 
other cases, when the purpose of C. 
is merely to systematise objects, fea- 
tures convenient for this purpose but 
not essential to the objects themselves 
(for example in alphabetical cata- 
logues) are taken as a basis. Such C. 
is called artificial. The most valuable 
are Cc. based on knowledge of the 
laws of connection between types and 
the transition from one type to another 
in the process of development. Such, 
for example, is the C. of chemical 
elements created by Mendeleyev (q.v.). 
Every classification is the result of a 
certain rough demarcation of the real 
boundaries between types, for they 
are always conventional and relative. 
With the development of knowledge 
Cc. are altered and made more precise. 

Classification of Sciences, the inter- 
connection of the sciences, their place 
in the system of knowledge determined 
by definite principles which reflect the 
properties of and the connection be- 
tween the objects studied by different 
sciences. Epistemologically, the prin- 
ciples of C.S. can be objective, con- 
forming to the nature of the subject- 
matter of the sciences, or subjective, 
depending on man’s requirements. In 
his Dialectics of Nature (q.v.) Engels 
elaborated the dialectical materialist 
principles of a C.S. He developed a 
classification which removes the one- 
sidedness of earlier attempts at clas- 
sifying the sciences (Saint-Simon and 
Comte, qq.v., on the one hand, and 
Hegel, q.v., on the other). Engels 
understood the interconnection and 
transitions of the sciences as a reflection 
of the interconnections and transitions 
of the forms of motion of matter stud- 
ied by the particular sciences. For 
the natural sciences Engels suggested 
the following series: mechanics—phys- 
ics—chemistry—biology. Further, the 
labour theory of anthropogenesis (q.v.), 
elaborated by Engels, opens the tran- 
sition from nature to man and, cor- 
tespondingly, from the natural to the 
social sciences (history) and sciences 
of thought. Engels devoted his at 








Classification of Sciences 


tention chiefly to transitions between 
the separate sciences (corresponding to 
the forms of motion), acting on the 
principle that the essence of a higher 
form of motion is revealed through 
cognition of its connection with the 
lower forms from which it historically 
arose and which it contains as sub- 
ordinated ones. The further develop- 
ment of the sciences proceeded so that 
their differentiation made for their 
increasing integration, their combina- 
tion into a single whole through the 
appearance of intermediate sciences 
between the formerly disunited sci- 
ences and sciences of a more general 
nature. The technical sciences (includ- 
ing agricultural and medical) stand 
between the natural and social sci- 
ences; mathematics stands between the 
natural sciences and philosophy, with 
mathematical logic on the boundary 
between them. Psychology is linked 
with all the three spheres of knowledge 
(with nature, through zoopsychology 
and the theory of higher nervous activ- 
ity; with society, through linguistics, 
pedagogy, social psychology, etc.; with 
thinking, through logic and the theory 
of knowledge). Cybernetics holds a 
special place. First of all, it is part 
of the technical and mathematical 
sciences, and at the same time deeply 
penetrates other sciences as well; the 
natural sciences (biology and physiol- 
ogy) and the social sciences (linguis- 
tics, law, and economics) and logic, 
especially mathematical. The contem- 
porary development of science has in- 
troduced raaical changes in Engels’ 
original scheme of C.S: an entirely 
new science of the microworld has 
emerged (subatomic physics—nuclear, 
quantum mechanics, etc.); intermedia- 
ry sciences (biochemistry, biophysics, 
geochemistry, and others) have been 
formed; old sciences have divided (for 
example, into sciences which study the 
macro- and microworld). As a result 
the C.S. can no longer be uniserial 
but must be extremely detailed and 
ramified. The need has arisen for divid- 
ing the sciences into the more general, 
abstract, and the more particular which 
study the forms of motion havinga 
specific material substratum (carrier). 


=e 


Clericalism 


Clausius, Rudolf Julius Emanuel 
(1822-88), German physicist, one of 
the founders of thermodynamics (q.v.-) 
and the kinetic theory of gases. Known 
for attempts to interpret electromag- 
netic phenomena from the standpoint 
of Newton’s (q.v.) mechanics. C. gave 
his formulation of the second law of 
thermodynamics and introduced the 
concept of entropy (q.v.). The unjusti- 
fied extension of the second law of 
thermodynamics to the world as a 
whole offered C. grounds for the con- 
clusion about the inevitable “heat 
death” of the Universe. This conclusion 
(according to Engels) brought C. into 
conflict with the law of conservation 
of energy. 

Clericalism, a socio-political trend in 
capitalist countries seeking to strength- 
en the position of religion and the 
church in different spheres of social 
life. According to its objective class 
role C. serves to reinforce the domina- 
tion of the bourgeoisie, to prevent the 
working people from grasping the com- 
munist world outlook and the ideas 
of communism. C. enjoys the greatest 
influence in France, Italy, West Ger- 
many, Austria, Spain, and a number 
of Latin American countries. The 
growth of C. in present-day conditions 
is caused by the aggravation of the 
general crisis of capitalism (q.v.). The 
greater activity of C. is expressed in 
that the top hierarchy of the church, 
with the utmost support of the mo- 
nopolies, uses its ramified apparatus 
to spread refined social demagogy and 
foster illusions about the possibility 
of “Christianising” capitalism. These il- 
lusions are entertained by backward 
sections of the people, who frequently 
see in religious organisations the de- 
fende.s of their wrongly understood 
interests. C. creates its parties, trade 
unions, peasant, youth, women's, and 
other mass organisations to reinforce 
the influence of the church on the 
masses and thereby undermine the 
revolutionary action of the working 
class, disunite and demoralise the work- 
ing people and prevent them from unit- 
ing in class organisations. Making use 
of these organisations, church leaders 
try ideologically to justify capitalist 











Cognition 


exploitation and advocate reaction- 
ary ideas of “social peace”. Struggle 
for peace, democracy, social progress, 
and a scientific world outlook presup- 
poses the utmost exposure of the reac- 
tionary role of clericalist theory and 
practice. 

Cognition, the process of reflection 
and reproduction of reality in human 
thought, conditioned by the laws of 
social development and inseparably 
linked up with practice. The aim of 
cognition is the achievement of objec- 
tive truth (q.v.). In the process of C. 
man acquires knowledge and concepts 
of the phenomena of reality, realises 
the surrounding world. This knowledge 
is used in practical activity for the 
purpose of transforming the world, 
subordinating nature to human require- 
ments. C. and the practical trans- 
formation of nature and society are 
two mutually conditioned and inter- 
dependent aspects of a single historical 
process. C. itself is a necessary factor 
in the practical activity of society, 
because this activity is carried out by 
people on the basis of C. of the prop- 
erties and functions of things and 
objects. On the other hand, in the 
productive activity of society, practice 
acts as a necessary factor of the proc- 
ess of C. itself. Only the inclusion 
of practice in the theory of knowledge 
transformed it into a real science, dis- 
closing the objective laws of the origin 
and formation of the knowledge about 
the material world. At the source of 
C. there is active practical influence 
upon nature, practical processing of 
natural substance, the utilisation of 
this or that property of things for 
production purposes. Not the out- 
ward appearance of the object, but 
its functions and its objective essence 
are assimilated in practice and become 
the domain of human knowledge, con- 
cepts, and theories. C. is a complicated 
dialectical process, taking place in 
different forms, having its own stages 
and degrees of development, and in- 
volving the participation of man’s 
various powers and abilities. Based 
on experience, practice, C. begins with 
sense-perceptions of things surround- 
ing man. Great therefore is the role 


6-1682 


= sr— 


Cognition 


of “living perception”, of man’s direct 
sensual connection with the objective 
world, in the process of C. Man can 
know nothing about reality without 
sensations. “Living perception” takes 
place in such forms as sensation (q.v.), 
perception (q.v.), notion (q.v.), inves- 
tigation of facts, observation of phe- 
nomena, etc. Sensations bring man 
in touch with the external qualities 
of objects. By distinguishing heat, 
cold, colours, smells, hardness, soft- 
ness, etc., man finds his bearings in 
the objective world, differentiates 
things from one another, and receives 
various information on the changes 
in surrounding reality. The perception 
of the images of objects and their 
storing in the imagination allow man 
to operate freely with those objects, 
to apprehend the relationship between 
the external appearance of the object 
and its functions. But however im- 
portant is the sensual form of C., it 
does not in itself give the possibility 
of penetrating into the essence of ob- 
jects, of discovering the laws of reality. 
Yet precisely this is the main task of 
C. The data of “living perception”, 
experience, are processed and general- 
ised by man’s higher cognitive ability 
—abstract-logical thought (q.v.), which 
is effected in the forms of concepts, 
judgements, ‘conclusions (qq.v.). Con- 
cepts arise in man also as a result of 
his socio-productive activities. The 
properties and functions of objects, 
their objective practical value fixed 
in man’s signal-speech activity, be- 
come the meaning and the sense of the 
words with whose help human thought 
creates definite notions of the objects, 
their properties and manifestations. 
The logical activity of theught is 
effected in various forms: induction 
and deduction, analysis and synthesis, 
the construction of hypotheses and 
theories, etc. Imagination, creative fan- 
tasy, intuition, which make it possible 
to form broad generalised ideas on the 
nature of things from certain data of 
experience, also play a great role in 
C. Thought, however, creates only 
subjective ideas; there still remains 
the question: do such ideas correspond 
to reality itself? This problem may 














Cognition, Object of 


be solved not by theoretical discus- 
sions and proofs alone, but first and 
foremost by socio-historical practice. 
The subjective idea becomes the ob- 
jective truth, completing a separate 
cycle of C., only if practical social 
activity is based directly or indirectly 
upon this idea, and allows men to 
master the natural or social forces (see 
Criterion of Truth). And only when 
social productive practice confirms the 
coincidence of ideas, knowledge, theo- 
ries with reality, can it be said that 
those ideas, that knowledge, those 
theories are true. Lenin wrote: “From 
living perception to abstract thought, 
and from this to practice,—such is the 
dialectical path of the cognition of 
truth, of the cognition of objective 
reality.” (Vol. 38, p. 171.) Scientific 
truth is finally proved in social prac- 
tice, not in one isolated, specially 
catried out experiment. Social produc- 
tive activity as a whole, the whole 
social being in the course of its his- 
tory defines, deepens, and verifies 
knowledge. Truth is a process. Inas- 
much as it is definite enough to dis- 
tinguish objective truth from error, 
to confirm the truth of our knowledge, 
practice itself is at the same time a 
developing process, which is limited 
at every given stage by the potentiali- 
ties of production, its technical level, 
etc. This means that it is also relative, 
as a result of which its development 
does not allow truth to be transformed 
into a dogma, into an immutable ab- 
solute (see Truth, Absolute and Rela- 
tive). 

Cognition, Object of, aspects, prop- 
erties, and relations of objects, fixed 
in experience and included into the 
process of practical human activity, 
and investigated with a definite pur- 
pose in the given circumstances. De- 
pending on the level of the development 
of cognition, it is also possible to 
investigate phenomena whose essence 
is known in some degree. In this case 
knowledge is obtained of the funda- 
mental and more general regularities of 
an object, its essence is more profound- 
ly revealed, and cognition goes from 
the essence of the first order to the 
essence of the second order, etc. Besides, 


— 82 — 


Cohen 


as the knowledge of the object devel- 
ops, its new aspects are disclosed, and 
they also become Oo. C. For one and 
the same object different sciences have 
different Oo. C. (for example, anatomy 
investigates the structure of the organ- 
ism; physiology the functions of its 
organs; medicine its diseases, etc.). 
The O.C. is objective in the sense 
that it belongs to the object of cogni- 
tion, its contents being independent 
of man and mankind. In each individu- 
al case the choice of the O. C. seems 
to be arbitrary and subjective, but in 
the last analysis it is determined by 
the requirements and the level of de- 
velopment of social practice. The O.C. 
may or may not be given directly in 
sensations. In the latter case it is in- 
vestigated by means of its manifesta- 
tions. In its entirety and self-develop- 
ment the object is cognised by the 
thought passing from the abstract to 
the concrete. The process of cognition 
itself can be the O.C. 

Cohen, Hermann (1842-1918), German 
philosopher, founder of the Marburg 
school (q.v.). Beginning with the 1870s 
he undertook to reconstruct Kant's 
(q.v-) theory of experience, his ethics 
and aesthetics in a spirit of idealism 
with greater consistence than Kant 
himself: he rejected the “thing-in-it- 
self” (q.v.) as the real cause of sensa- 
tions and considered it only as the 
limited concept of experience. Proceed- 
ing from Kant, he constructed a system 
of philosophy embracing logic, ethics, 
aesthetics, and the philosophy of re- 
ligion. Philosophy, according to C., 
for the first time matures to be a science 
only when it takes as its subject-matter 
not things and processes, but the facts 
of science. The soul of philosophy 
is the idealist method modelled on 
the mathematical infinitesimal cal- 
culus. Cognising thought is creative; 
its subject is not “given” but “set” 
before it like a problem. Satisfying 
the requirements of knowledge, con- 
cepts give rise to new requirements, 
to which neither philosophy nor sci- 
ence give final answers. Philosophical 
consciousness is cognising conscious- 
ness; even religious belief rests on the 
clarity of systematic knowledge. His 





Coherence, Theory of 


main works are Kants Theorie der 
Erfahrung, 1871, and System der Phi- 
losophie, three volumes, 1902-12. 

Coherence, Theory of (Lat. internal 
connection), a neo-positivist theory 
of truth, founded and developed by 
O. Neurath (q.v.) and R. Carnap (q.v.) 
in the course of their polemic in the 
Vienna circle (q.v.) against Schlick 
(q.v.). While Schlick imparted “real- 
istic” tinge to his idealist understand- 
ing of truth, his opponents, by in- 
troducing the T.C., actually went over 
to positions of open subjectivism. Ac- 
cording to this theory, truth is based 
on internal harmony of propositions 
in a definite system. Any new prop- 
osition is true if it can be introduced 
into the system without upsetting its 
internal non-contradictoriness. To be 
true means to be an element of a non- 
contradictory system. Moreover, a sys- 
tem is understood to mean a language 
structure deductively developed from 
the sum total of arbitrary initial axi- 
oms. Originally, the T.C. was based 
on recognition of “protocol proposi- 
tions”, a special type of propositions 
fixing empirical facts, and thus to some 
extent admitted a connection between 
the system and reality. Subsequently, 
with the adoption of the postulate that 
any proposition can be considered a 
“protocol” one (K. Popper), the T.C. 
assumed a purely conventionalist sub- 
jective idealist character (see Conven- 
tionalism). 

Collectivism, a principle of joint so- 
cial life and activity; diametrically 
opposed to individualism (q.v.). Arose 
in the period of the formation of human 
society and has a number of historical 
forms. In primitive society it was em- 
bodied in the joint struggle for exist- 
ence. Communal ownership formed its 
basis. In slave and feudal societies 
C. was ousted by individualism bred 
by the domination of private owner- 
ship of the means of production. C. is 
preserved only in some residual forms 
(for example, joint communal owner- 
ship of land); under capitalism it is 
fully overpowered by the bourgeois 
individualism. At the same time a 
new form of C. is born, of which the 
proletariat becomes the vehicle. The 


= 836 


Comic 


social nature of production and work 
at factories and in large groups deter- 
mine the formation of proletarian col- 
lectives and the moulding of collectiv- 
ist views, in the ranks of the workers. 
In socialist society C. becomes a prin- 
ciple inherent in all sections of the 
population. The principle of C. is part 
of the moral code of the builder of 
communism (see Moral Code, etc.). 
Expressing socialist relations of pro- 
duction, C. has its social basis in social 
ownership of the means of production 
and absence of exploitation of man by 
man, and its political basis in the 
equality of all citizens. C. is founded 
on the harmonious relationship be- 
tween society and the individual, the 
mutual rights and duties of the collec- 
tive and the individual. The main 
demands on the individual as a result 
of the principles of C. are as follows: 
comradely mutual assistance, social 
awareness and fulfilment of duty to 
society, conscious voluntary subordi- 
nation of personal interests to social, 
equality in the collective, respect for 
the collective and its decisions, aware- 
ness of responsibility to the collective 
for one’s actions and for the behaviour 
of one's comrades, The collective cares 
for man, cares for the satisfaction of 
his requirements and the full develop- 
ment of the gifts and capabilities of 
the individual. The principle of C. 
does not involve the abolition of the 
personality of man. On the contrary, 
it is only in a collective that man de- 
velops and displays his gifts and abil- 
ities to the full. Communism signifies 
the highest form of C. 

Comic, The (Gk. revelry, festival, 
song), an aesthetic concept expressing 
the historically conditioned (complete 
or incomplete) irrelevance of a social 
phenomenon, human action or behav- 
iour, moral standards or customs to 
the objective development of a situa- 
tion and the aesthetic ideal (q.v.) of 
the progressive forces of society. The 
aspects of C. are varied: they may 
reflect incompatibility between the 
new and the old, between form and 
content, or the end and the means, 
the action and the circumstances, a 
man’s real nature and his opinion of 








Common Sense 


himself. Comic incidents and charac- 
ters provoke laughter, disapprobation, 
etc. Its origin, nature and aesthetic func- 
tion confer a social character upon C. 
Its source lies in the objective con- 
tradictions of social life. C. may depict 
the ugly (q.v.), historically doomed and 
inhuman in a hypocritic effort to pass 
for the beautiful, progressive and hu- 
mane. In such a case C. arouses either 
angry laughter or a satirically negative 
reaction. The absurd urge to hoard 
for the sake of hoarding is comic inas- 
much as it contradicts the ideal of a 
harmoniously developed individual. 
Marx saw in laughter a powerful tool 
of revolutionary criticism in the fight 
against all that is withering away. As 
communist society is being built, the 
ideal of a perfect individual developing 
in complete freedom is being realised 
more and more fully. Yet the process 
of moulding the man of the future is 
attended by no few elements of C. 
either in the form of survivals of the 
past (e.g., parasitism, careerism, bu- 
reaucratism, adulation, servility, etc.) 
which are the objects of angry and 
critical satire, or in the form of circum- 
stances arising even in commendable 
situations, in public and private life, 
which need to be ridiculed. The vari- 
ous aspects of C. are satire, humour, 
etc. 

Common Sense, sum total of views, 
habits and forms of thought developed 
by man in his everyday activity. This 
term is used in philosophical literature 
primarily in contrast to abstract spe- 
culative constructions of idealism. In 
this respect, C.S. coincides with the 
position of materialism, so it is not 
without reason that materialists in the 
past frequently cited C.S. arguments. 
But C.S. in this interpretation had sub- 
stantial shortcomings. It did not delve 
into the essense of objects and processes, 
thus reflecting only the limited nature 
of daily practice. For this reason C.S. 
was often counterposed to scientific 
thinking. The broader ties of science 
with production and the spread of 
scientific views are changing the nature 
of everyday experience, bringing C.S. 
to a certain extent closer to scientific 
knowledge. That is why the counter- 


= 


Communism, Scientific 


posing of the two is becoming quite 
relative. 

Communication, a category of ideal- 
istic philosophy denoting intercourse 
in which the self is revealed in another. 
C. finds its fullest expression in the 
existentialism (q.v.) of Jaspers (q.v.) 
and in modern French personalism 
(q.v.). Historically, the doctrine of C. 
originated as a refutation of the teach- 
ing of the social contract (q.v.), which 
has its origins in the age of enlighten- 
ment (q.v.). The adherents of the C. 
theory (K. Jaspers, O. Bollnow, E. Mou- 
nier) emphasise that a social contract 
is essentially a contract or transaction, 
the parties to which are bound by 
mutual obligations; mutual perception 
and cognition is achieved solely in 
the light of such obligations, i.e., in 
an abstract or impersonal manner. The 
contract is a bond based on the practi- 
cal dissociation of individuals. C. is 
considered to be an arbitrarily estab- 
lished interdependence as opposed to the 
contract. “Contact rather than con- 
tract” (F. Kaufmann). C. is stated to 
be established by discussion in the 
course of which individuals become 
convinced that their dissociation is 
caused by the accepted patterns of 
thought, whereas they are brought clos- 
er together by that wherein they differ 
and by that which constitutes their 
unique individuality. The “individu- 
ally unique” are the carefully concealed 
subjective fears, concerns and worries 
in which people, in the final resort, ex- 
perience (each in his particular way) 
merely their own actual membership 
of some group of modern bourgeois so- 
ciety. Seen in this light, discussion is 
merely a means of clarifying this mem- 
bership, and the doctrine of C. as a 
whole is a refined form of protection 
of caste and corporate bonds. Objective- 
ly, the doctrine of C. is counterposed 
to the Marxist conception of the col- 
lective. 

Communism, see Socialism and Com- 
munism. 

Communism, Scientific, a doctrine 
on communism which, in contrast to 
utopian socialism (see Socialism, Uto- 
pian), is based on science, on knowl- 
edge of the laws of historical develop- 








Communism, Scientific 


ment. It was founded by Marx and 
Engels (qq.v.). S.C. is a component of 
Marxism, which also includes the phi- 
losophy of Marxism and its economic 
doctrine, both inseparably interconnect- 
ed. The subject-matter of S.C. is the 
laws governing the birth and develop- 
ment of the communist socio-economic 
formation (q.v.). The historical neces- 
sity of communism is demonstrated by 
the Marxist teaching on the law- 
governed succession of modes of pro- 
duction (q.v.) as a result of the conflict 
between the growing productive forces 
(q.v-) and the obsolete relations of pro- 
duction (q.v.), which retard their de- 
velopment. Marx’s doctrine of the inev- 
itable downfall of capitalism was fur- 
ther developed by Lenin in his doctrine 
of imperialism (q.v.) as the last stage 
of capitalism (q.v.) and the eve of so- 
cialism. The historic necessity of the 
communist reconstruction of society is 
the basic idea of S.C. It is specified 
and developed in the doctrine of the 
two phases of communism: the first 
phase (socialism) and the second, high- 
er phase (communism) (see Socialism 
and Communism). The doctrine of the 
two stages of communism holds good 
for all countries. No country can arrive 
at full communism, skipping the first 
phase, socialism. Transition from so- 
cialism to communism is also a law- 
governed process. The founders of S.C. 
outlined its general features. A concrete, 
more precise description of this 
process can be given in the course of 
building communism by summing up 
the practical experience of this con- 
struction. The laws governing the de- 
velopment of socialism into communism 
are revealed in the new Programme of 
the CPSU, which demonstrates the ob- 
jective necessity of building the ma- 
terial and technical basis of communism 
(see Material, etc.). It outlines the 
entire chain of consequences which fol- 
low from the creation of new productive 
forces for the shaping of communist 
social relations, for the advance of the 
material and cultural standards of peo- 
ple and their all-round development. 
The Programme reveals the importance 
of the material and technical basis of 
communism, above all automation of 


EERS EE 


Communist Education 


production, for the development of so- 
cialist labour into communist labour 
(q.v.). It shows the concrete ways for 
the formation of single ownership by 
the whole people; the complete oblit- 
eration of class distinctions between 
the collective-farm peasantry and the 
working class; the obliteration of dis- 
tinctions between the town and coun- 
try in culture and the way of life; 
obliteration of distinctions between the 
peasantry and the working class and the 
intelligentsia; greater drawing together 
of nations and national cultures, and 
advance towards social homogeneity. 
The CPSU Programme sets the task 
of educating the new man, the all- 
round development of the personality 
(see All-Round Development, etc.) as 
an important component of communist 
construction. It charts concrete ways 
for accomplishing this task: moulding 
a scientific communist world outlook, 
labour education, and the establish- 
ment of the principles of communist 
morality (q.v.). In the course of build- 
ing communism the dictatorship of 
the proletariat (q.v.), cont LOE its 
tasks, develops into a state of the whole 
people (q.v.)—this proposition, for- 
mulated and grounded in the Pro- 
gramme, is an important contribution 
to the theory of S.C. The Programme 
outlines the concrete ways for the 
development of socialist statehood into 
communist public self-administration 
(q.v.). The theory of S.C., enriched 
by the Programme of the CPSU, 
illumines with the light of scientific 
knowledge the true road leading man- 
kind to communism. 

Communist Education, the mould- 
ing of conscientious, full man of social- 
ist and communist society, free of any 
survivals of the past. C.E. is one of 
the most important aspects of the trans- 
formation of society during its transi- 
tion from capitalism to communism. 
Socialism and communism cannot be 
built without a transformation of men’s 
consciousness, mental attitudes and 
morals. A new way of life and partici- 
pation in socialist and communist 
construction are essential elements of 
C.E. The actual practice of communist 
construction provides the best schooling 








Com munist Labour 


for C.E., while the process of moulding 
the new man exercises a great influence 
on the practical transformation of 
society. C.E. is not a spontaneous proc- 
ess subject to objective factors alone: 
it requires systematic, purposeful train- 
ing, the results of which depend on its 
being connected with everyday life, 
with work for the good of society. The 
main aspect of C.E. is the development 
of a communist attitude towards work, 
including an appreciation of its high 
social significance and a realisation of 
one’s duty towards society. For a man 
trained in the spirit of communism 
work becomes a prime necessity of life, 
and high moral virtues become perma- 
nent features of his character and con- 
duct. One of the important aims of 
C.E. is to shape a scientific world out- 
look, an essential pre-condition of which 
is to master the progressive cultural 
legacy of the past and all the wealth 
of knowledge accumulated by mankind. 
A study of Marxist-Leninist theory 
helps people understand the laws of 
social development and the significance 
of their own activity. C.E. implies 
a systematic struggle against the sur- 
vivals of capitalism (q.v.) in man’s 
consciousness, including religious su- 
perstitions and the influence of bour- 
geois ideology. An important aspect of 
C.E. is the development of a sound 
sense of beauty. During the period of 
all-out communist construction in the 
USSR the main accent in C.E. is 
on the affirmation of the principles 
of communist morality as embodied in 
the moral code of the builder of com- 
munism (see Moral Code) contained in 
the Programme of the CPSU (see 
Morality, Communist; All-Round De- 
velopment of the Individual). 
Communist Labour. With the es- 
tablishment of communism all labour 
for the good of society becomes not 
only a duty but also a prime necessity 
of life, a recognised necessity for every- 
one. According to Lenin, “Communist 
labour in the narrower and stricter sense 


of the term is labour performed 
gratis for the benefit of society ... vol- 
untary labour, irrespective of rates, 


labour performed ... without the con- 
dition of reward, labour performed out 


Communist Self-Administration 


of a habit of working for the common 
good, and out of a conscious realisation 
(become a habit) of the necessity of 
working for the common good—labour 
as the requirement of a healthy or- 
ganism”. (Vol. 30, p. 517.) 
Communist Public Self-Administra- 
tion is a form of society’s organisation 
under communism which will replace 
the state of the whole people (q.v.) once 
a developed communist society has 
been established within a country and 
once socialism is victorious and firmly 
established on the international scene. 
A distinguishing feature of C.P.S.A. 
is that its organs and functions will be 
no longer political, and public adminis- 
tration will be no longer carried on as 
a special profession. Pre-conditions of 
the establishment of C.P.S.A. are: 
creation of the material and technical 
basis of communism (q.v.); development 
of communist social relations and for- 
mation of the new man, i.e., attain- 
ment of so high a level of consciousness 
among all members of society that the 
principles of law and morality merge 
into a single code of conduct for all 
members of the communist society. The 
main trend in the emergence of C.P.S.A. 
is the further development of socialist 
democracy and the participation of all 
citizens in social management. This 
requires continuous improvement of 
the material and cultural standards 
of living; perfection of the forms of 
popularrepresentation and the democrat- 
ic principles of the electoral system; 
extension of the practice of nation- 
wide referendums on important problems 
of communist construction and draft 
legislation; the widest possible exten- 
sion of public control over the activi- 
ties of administrative bodies; and grad- 
ual extension of the electivity and 
accountability principles to cover all 
high officials of state and mass organi- 
sations. Involving as it does the trans- 
formation of organs of state power into 
public self-administration bodies, the 
development of C.P.S.A. also implies an 
expansion of the activities of all exist- 
ing mass organisations. “As socialist 
statehood develops, it will gradually be- 
come communist public self-administra- 
tion of the people which will comprise 


on ua 


Da 





Comparative Meihod 


eae) ee 


the Soviets, trade unions, co-operatives, 
and other mass organisations of the 
people.” (Programme of the CPSU.) 

Comparative Method, a method of 
investigating and explaining cultural 
phenomena; infers genetic kinship, that 
is, common origin, by ascertaining sim- 
ilarity in form. C.M. reproduces and 
compares the oldest elements common 
to various spheres of material culture 
and knowledge. Wilhelm von Hum- 
boldt and, particularly, Auguste Comte 
(qq.v.) were chiefly responsible for the 
development of the C.M. The C.M. was 
developed further by the 19th century 
protagonists of comparative philology, 
Jacob Grimm, August Friedrich Pott, 
August Schleicher (Germany), Ferdi- 
nand de Saussure (Switzerland) and 
the Russian linguists I. A. Boduin 
de Courteney, A. N. Veselovsky, 
A. K. Vostokov, F. F. Fortunatov, etc. 
The C.M. advanced linguistics and 
ethnography and prompted deep-going 
studies of myths and legends. However, 
the C.M. concentrated on the outward 
resemblances of cultural and ideologi- 
cal forms, while neglecting the materi- 
al social relations that caused their 
appearance. This is one of the limita- 
tions of the C.M. In modern historical 
research, the C.M. is employed as an 
auxiliary to various methods of sub- 
stantive interpretation of the history 
of culture. 

Comparison, a way of determining 
resemblances and differences between 
objects. It is the key premiss of gener- 
alisation (q.v.). C. is prominent in 
judgements by analogy (q.v.). Judge- 
ments expressing the result of C. serve 
the purpose of determining the content 
of concepts of the objects compared. 
In this sense, C. is a method supple- 
menting, and sometimes replacing, 
detnition (q.v.). 

Complementarity, Principle of, a meth- 
odological principle suggested by 
Bohr (q.v.) to interpret quantum me- 
chanics. It may be formulated as fol- 
lows: to show the wholeness of a phe- 
nomenon, cognition must make use 
of mutually exclusive “complementary” 
classes of concepts. In the works of 
several representatives of the group 
known as the Copenhagen school, q.v. 


Comte 


(Jordan, Frank, q.v., and other advo- 
cates of extreme positivist views) the 
P.C. was used to defend idealist and 
metaphysical views of space, time, 
and causality. Attaching absolute 
importance to the increased role played 
by instruments in the microcosm and 
incorrectly interpreting this as “uncon- 
trolled perturbation”, they regarded 
space and time, on theone hand, and 
causality, on the other, as mutually 
exclusive “complementary” characteris- 
tics of microprocesses. The necessity 
of using “complementary” concepts was 
inferred not from the objective nature of 
microobjects but from the peculiari- 
ties of the cognitional process, and 
was associated with the arbitrary in- 
tervention of the observer. The positiv- 
ist form of P.C. was critically analysed 
by Vavilov (q.v.), Blokhintsev, Fok, 
de Broglie (q.v.), Langevin (q.v.), 
Janossy, and others. , 

Compte, Auguste (1798-1857), French 
philosopher, founder of positivism 
(q.v.). Secretary and associate of Saint- 
Simon, q.v. (1818-24). The basic thesis 
of C.’s “positive philosophy” was his 
demand that science limit itself to a 
description of the outward appearance 
of phenomena. On the strength of this 
thesis C. asserted that “metaphysics”, 
i.e., the teaching of the essence of phe- 
nomena, should be abolished. C. at- 
tempted to synthesise the vast body of 
data provided by natural science, but 
owing to his philosophical outlook 
(subjective idealism and agnosticism) 
his attempt led to a falsification of 
science. C. described the knowledge 
of nature in terms of three stages, 
each of which corresponded to a defi- 
nite type of world outlook: the theo- 
logical, the metaphysical, and the pos- 
itive. In the first, theological, stage 
man attempted to attribute the vari- 
ous phenomena to supernatural powers 
or God. The metaphysical world out- 
look, according to C., is a modification 
of the theological; according to the 
metaphysical conception, the basis 
of all phenomena is to be found in 
abstract metaphysical essences. The 


theological and metaphysical world 
outlooks were followed, according 
to C., by the “positive method”, 








Concept 


which rejected “absolute knowledge” 
(i.e., materialism first of all, and 
also objective idealism). The three- 
stage formula distorted the history 
of science and philosophy. For instance, 
the classification proposed by C. failed 
to take into account an entire period 
in the development of human thought— 
the epoch of antiquity. On balance, 
C.’s formula was an uncouth imitation 
of the dialectical triad borrowed from 
Saint-Simon. C. applied his three-stage 
formula to a classification of sciences 
and a systematisation of civil history. 
In his sociology (a term proposed by C.) 
he used an unscientific biological ap- 
proach in an attempt to explain society. 
The principal reactionary idea of his 
sociological doctrine was the assertion 
that it is useless to seek to change the 
bourgeois system by revolutionary 
means. Capitalism, according to C., 
crowns the history of man’s evolution; 
and social harmony could be achieved 
by propaganda of the “new” religion 
which substituted belief in an abstract 
supreme being (humanity in general) 
for faith in a personal God. C.’s most 
important work is the Cours de philo- 
sophie positive (1830-42). 

Concept, one of the forms of reflec- 
tion of the world in the mind, with 
the help of which it is possible to cog- 
nise the essence of phenomena and 
processes, to generalise their essential 
aspects and attributes. The C. is a 
product of historically developing cog- 
nition, which arises from a lower to 
a higher stage; it summarises, on the 
basis of practice, the results obtained 
in the concepts of increasing depth, 
improves and defines old concepts more 
precisely and formulates new ones. 
That is why Cc. are not static, not 
final, not absolute, but are in the proc- 
ess of development, change, progress- 
ing to the adequate reflection of reali- 
ty. Cc. impart the sense (see Denota- 
tion and Sense) to the words of a lan- 
guage. The main logical function of C. 
is to single out in thought by definite 
attributes the objects which interest 
us from the point of view of practice 
and of cognition. Thanks to this func- 
tion Cc. link up words with definite 
objecis, which makes it possible to 


Sigg 


Concept 


determine the exact meanings of words 
and to operate with them in the proc- 
ess of thought. The differentiation of 
the classes of objects and their genera- 
lisation in C. is an indispensable con- 
dition for the cognition of the laws 
of nature. Every science operates with 
definite Cc., in which the knowledge 
accumulated by science is concentrated. 
The C., as Lenin characterised it, is 
the highest product of the brain, which 
is itself the highest product of matter 
(see Vol. 38, p. 167). The formation 
of C., the transition to it from sensory 
forms of reflection, is. a complicated 
process including the application of 
such methods of cognition as compari- 
son, analysis and synthesis, abstrac- 
tion, idealisation, generalisation, and 
more or less complex forms of deduc- 
tion. At the same time, scientific Cc. 
are often created initially solely on 
the basis of hypothetical assumptions 
concerning the existence of objects and 
their nature (that is how, for example, 
the C. of atoms emerged). On the basis 
of knowing laws and trends of develop- 
ment, the C. of some objects may be 
formed before the emergence of objects 
themselves (C. of communism). Thus, 
the formation of Cc. is a manifestation 
of an active and creative character of 
thought, although the successful use 
of the Cc. created depends entirely on 
the precision with which objective real- 
ity is reflected in them. Every C. is an 
abstraction, which makes it appear to 
be a deviation from reality. As a mat- 
ter of fact, with the help of a C. a more 
profound knowledge of reality is ob- 
tained by the singling out and investiga- 
tion of its essential aspects. Moreover, 
the concrete which is incompletely re- 
flected in particular Cc. may be repro- 
duced to a certain degree of complete- 
ness by an aggregate of Cc. reflecting 
its various aspects. Any scientific C., 
being a reflection of reality, is just as 
mobile and flexible as the objects and 
processes of which it is a generalisation. 
To quote Lenin, a C. “must be hewn, 
treated, flexible, mobile, relative, mu- 
tually connected, united in opposites, 
in order to embrace the world”. (Vol. 
38, p. 146.) The tenet on the flexibility, 
mobility, mutual connection, and trans- 








Concept, Volume and Content of 


formations of C. is one of the most 
essential aspects of the teaching of 
dialectical logic on C. Although only 
the general is singled out in C., this 
does not mean that it is in opposition 
to the individual and the particular. 
What is more, a scientific C. contains 
the richness of the special, the indivi- 
dual. Only on the basis of the general 
is it possible to single out and cognise 
the particular groups (kinds) of objects, 
as well as the individual objects of a 
class. The dialectical-materialist ap- 
proach to the C. is corroborated by the 
development of the whole of modern 
science and serves as a method of scien- 
tific cegnition. 

Concept, Volume and Content of, 
two interconnected sides of a concept 
(q.v.). Volume is a class (q.v.) of objects 
generalised in a concept; content is 
the sum total (usually of essential) 
properties, according to which objects 
are generalised and singled out in the 
given concept. By formulating the con- 
tent of a concept we single out the 
identical (general) in objects of the giv- 
en class; a characteristic of volume, 
i.e., differentiation of elements (objects 
which are carriers of the properties 
comprising the content) and parts (spe- 
cies, subclasses of the given class) 
brings out the difference between objects 
of the given class. There is a connection 
between content and volume expressed 
in formal logic by the law of inverse 
relation (see Inverse Relation, Law of). 

Conceptualism, a theory of scholastic 
philosophy, mainly connected with the 
names of Abélard and Occam (qq.v.). 
In the debate over universals (q.v.) 
the conceptualists denied their real 
existence apart from particular objects, 
as did the nominalists (see Nominal- 
ism), but unlike the latter they ad- 
mitted the existence of general a priori 
concepts, or mental images abstracted 
from actions or things, as a special 
form of knowledge of reality. Locke 
(q.v.) held views close to C. 

Concrete Sociological Investigations, 
Studies of various aspects and elements 
of society (economy, everyday life, fam- 
ily and matrimonial relations, pub- 
lic opinion, cultural level and technical 
education of workers and peasants, 


— g9 — 


Condillac 


etc.). C.S.I. effected by the various 
social sciences (i.e., theory of scientific 
communism, economics, statistics, ju- 
risprudence, etc.) employ the metho- 
dology of historical materialism which 
offers a truly scientific analysis of 
concrete facts. The purposes of C.S.1. 
are: ascertainment and generalisation 
of new phenomena in social life; inves- 
tigation of the practical activities of 
state and mass organisations; generali- 
sation of the experience of socialist 
and communist construction; and the 
discovery of new laws governing the 
economic, political and cultural devel- 
opment of socialism and its growth 
into communism. An example of C.S.1. 
is to be found in Lenin's A Great Begin- 
ning with its profound factual analysis 
of the early communist “subbotniks” 
(voluntary labour performed after work- 
ing hours on weekends) and evaluation 
of their tremendous impact on the pace 
of communist construction in Russia. 
C.S.I. employ such methods and tech- 
niques as the statistical approach, 
questionnaires, interviews or polls, etc. 
C.S.I. differ fundamentally from empir- 
ical sociology (q.v.), which rejects 
the study of the objective laws of social 
development (thus inevitably leading to 
the misrepresentation of concrete facts) 
and gets lost in a trivial description 
and enumeration of facts. 

Concreteness of Truth, an attribute 
of truth, deriving from the considera- 
tion and generalisation of specific condi- 
tions of the existence of some fact; the 
dependence of truth upon definite con- 
ditions of time and space, systems of 
calculation and units of measurement, 
etc. Thus, the truth or falsity of a prop- 
osition cannot be established unless 
the relevant conditions are specified. 
Truth is never abstract, it is always 
concrete. A concrete historical approach 
and consideration of circumstances of 
time and space are particularly impor- 
tant in analysing social development, 
which is characterised by the continu- 
ous emergence of new phenomena which 
lacks uniformity, differs from country 
to country. 

Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de (1715- 
80), French encyclopaedist (see Enlight- 
enment). Born at Grenoble, he became 











Condition 


a Catholic priest, but through his works 
tried to undermine the ideology of the 
church. He was a follower of Locke 
(q.v.) in respect of the theory of knowl- 
edge, but, unlike the latter, denied the 
existence of “reflection” as a source of 
knowledge second to sensation. His 
failure to understand the nature of 
the relationship between sensations and 
external objects, and his exaggeration of 
their subjectivity led C. to subjective 
idealism. Sensations, according to C., 
are produced by external objects, with 
which, however, they have nothing in 
common. Inasmuch as sensation is the 
sole link between the world and the 
intellect, the latter has for its object 
the sum total of sensations, rather than 
the objective world. Nevertheless C.’s 
sensationalism (q.v.) was opposed to 
the idealism of Leibniz (q.v.) and to 
any speculative philosophy. His in- 
fluence on the French materialism of 
the 18th century (qy) was considerable. 
His principal works are: Le Traité des 
systèmes, où L'on en démele les incon- 
venients et les ananan (1749), Le 
Traité des sensations (1754), and others. 
Condition, a philosophical category 
expressing the relationship of an ob- 
ject to phenomena around it, and 
without which it cannot exist. The 
object itself is something determined, 
while C. represents the diversity of 
the objective world external to the 
object. As distinct from the cause, 
which directly engenders phenomena 
or processes, C. is the environment, 
the atmosphere in which they emerge, 
exist, and develop. By learning the 
laws of nature, men are able to create 
Cc. favourable to their activity and 
eliminate unfavourable Cc. While in- 
fluencing phenomena and processes, Cc. 
themselves are also subject to their 
influence. Thus, the socialist revolu- 
tion, arising in definite Cc. subse- 
quently changes the Cc. of society's 
material and spiritual life. 
Conditionalism, a philosophical teach- 
ing which substitutes the concept of 
a concourse of conditions for the con- 
cept of cause. It was founded by M. Ver- 
worn (1863-1921), a German physiolo- 
gist, adherent of idealism in philoso- 
phy. The concepts of C. have supporters 


— 90 — 


Conflict 


among theoreticians in the field of 
medicine. 

Condorcet, Jean Antoine (1743-94), 
French philosopher and encyclopae- 
dist, Girondist sympathiser, member of 
the Academy of Sciences in Paris. In 
economic matters he was a follower 
of physiocracy (see Turgot). His criti- 
cism of religion was based on deism 
(q.v.) and enlightenment (q.v.). He 
called for the abandonment of super- 
stitions and for a development of scien- 
tific knowledge. In his most important 
work, Esquisse d'un tableau historique 
des progres de l’esprit humain (1794), 
C. viewed history as a product of the 
human mind, and declared the bourgeois 
system to be the apex of reasonable- 
ness and “naturalness”. He divided 
history into 10 periods on the basis 
of random attributes, and undertook 
to prove that capitalism implied end- 
less progress. C. opposed the system 
of social estates, fought for political 
equality, and called for the abolition 
of despotic rule and for the free develop- 
ment of the individual. At the same 
time, he considered inequality in regard 
to ownership beneficial for society. 
His views and illusions were typical of 
ideologists of the nascent bourgeoisie. 

Conflict, dramatic, a specifically aes- 
thetic form of expressing the contradic- 
tions occurring in men’s lives, a form 
of reproducing through art the sharp 
clash of conflicting human acts, ideas, 
strivings, and passions. C. has its 
origin and finds its solution against the 
background of struggle between definite 
social forces and trends of social 
development. Realistic art reproduces 
social contradictions in the particular 
form of collision between typical char- 
acters in typical settings, i.e., in the 
form of dramatic Cc. The specific con- 
tent of a dramatic C. is the struggle 
between the beautiful (q.v.) and the 
ugly (q.v.), the outcome of that strug- 
gle, and its evaluation in the light 
of a definite aesthetic ideal (q.v.). 
In the C. reproduced in works of art 
created by the school of socialist real- 
ism (q.v.) the exponents of the new 
and the beautiful are eventually vic- 
torious, although the road to victory 
may lie through setbacks, temporary 





Confucianism 


* ge 


Consciousness 





defeats, and tragic situations. The role 
and form of the C. largely depend on 
the characteristics and means of typi- 
fication peculiar to the various genres 
of art. Thus, open struggle between 
opposites is depicted in rama and 
the novel; collision of various ideas 
and feelings—in painting, lyric poetry, 
and music. In true art, the dramatic 
conflict is marked by the depth and 
importance of its ideological and so- 
cial content, by its poignance and ten- 
sity, and perfection of artistic form, all 
of which endows the given work with 
a powerful aesthetic effect. 
Confucianism, one of the leading 
philosophic schools in ancient China, 
founded by Confucius (551-479 B.C.), 
whose views were expounded by his 
followers in the Lun Yū (Analects). 
According to Confucius, the fate of 
man is ordained by “Heaven”; all men 
are unalterably either “noble” or “base”. 
The younger must humbly submit 
to their seniors, subordinates to their 
superiors. A prominent follower of 
Confucius was Méng Tzi (q.v.), or 
Mencius, who attributed social ine- 
quality to the “will of Heaven”. Anoth- 
er Confucianist of note was Hsiin 
Tzii (q.v-), who propounded a material- 
ist doctrine according to which Heav- 
en formed part of nature and lacked 
consciousness. According to Hsiin Tzt, 
a man who has attained knowledge of 
the laws (tao, q.v.) of things should 
use those laws to advance his own in- 
terests. The central teaching of C., 
however, was a justification of the 
supremacy of the privileged classes and 
glorification of the “will of Heaven”, 
which formed the basis of the orthodox 
Confucian school founded by Tung 
Chung-shu (177-104 B.C.). In the 11th 
and 12th centuries, Chu Hsi (q.v.) and 
others introduced Neo-Confucianism, 
which implied the existence of two fun- 
damentals in the Universe—li (q.v.), 
or the rational creative principle, and 
ch'i (q.v.), or passive matter. Li gene- 
tates virtue in men, whereas ch’i 
produces vice, surrender tosensual temp- 
tation. Wang Yang-ming (1472-1528) 
developed C. on the basis of subjective 
idealism. Together with Buddhism 
(q-v-) and the Taoist religion, C. was 


for many centuries the leading ideology 
in feudal China. 

Conscience, a complex of emotional 
experiences based on man’s understand- 
ing of his moral responsibility for his 
conduct in society, an individual's own 
appraisal of his actions and behaviour. 
C. is not an inborn quality, it is deter- 
mined by man’s position in society, 
his living conditions, education, and 
so on. C. is closely related to duty 
(q.v.). Consciousness of having ful- 
filled one’s duty is felt as a clear C., 
violation of duty is accompanied by 
pangs of remorse. Actively responding 
to the requirements of society, C. is a 
powerful driving force for the indivi- 
dual’s moral improvement. 

Consciousness, the highest form of 
reflection of objective reality inherent 
only in man. C. is the sum total of 
mental processes which actively par- 
ticipate in man’s understanding of the 
objective world and of his personal 
being. It takes its origin in the labour, 
socio-productive activity of people and 
is Steely connected with the appear- 
ance of language, which is as old as C. 
Language has exerted a tremendous in- 
fluence on the development of C., on 
the formation of abstract logical think- 
ing. Only in the process of labour, in 
social relations with one another, do 
people become aware and disclose the 
properties of objects, realise their own 
Telation to the environment, single 
themselves out from it, and exert a 
purposeful action on nature with the 
object of subordinating its forces to 
their needs. C. is, therefore, a product 
of social development and does not exist 
outside society. Thinking, in terms 
of language, in abstract logical terms, 
makes it possible not only to reflect 
the external, sensory appearance of 
objects and phenomena, but also to 
understand their significance, their 
functions, and their essence. Without 
understanding, without knowledge, 
which is a result of man’s socio-histori- 
cal activity and human speech, there 
is no C. either. Any sensory image of 
an object, any sensation or concept, 
is part of C. inasmuch as it possesses 
definite meaning in the system of 
knowledge acquired through social ac- 











Consequence, Logical 


tivity. Knowledge, denotation, and 
sense, preserved in language, direct 
and differentiate man’s sentiments, 
will, attention, and other mental acts, 
combining them into a single C. Know- 
ledge accumulated by history, political 
and legal ideas, the achievements of 
art, morality, religion, and social psy- 
chology constitute the C. of society as 
a whole (see Social Being and Social 
Consciousness). But C. must not be 
identified solely with abstract logical 
thinking. In general, there is no think- 
ing outside man’s vital, mental activi- 
ty, sentiments and will. Were man to 
make only one logical operation after 
another, were he not to feel, sense, 
and experience the constant relation- 
ship between his concepts and his ac- 
tivity and perceptions of reality, he 
would not understand and would not 
be aware either of reality or of himself, 
i.e., would possess neither C. nor self- 
consciousness. On the other hand, the 
concept of C. and psyche must not be 
regarded as identical, i.e., we must 
not consider that all mental processes 
in each given moment are included in 
C. A number of mental emotions can be 
for a definite time “beyond the thresh- 
old” of C. (see Subconscious). Absorb- 
ing historical experience, knowledge, 
and methods of thinking elaborated by 
preceding history, C. perceives reality 
in an ideal way, setting itself new 
aims and tasks, directing all practical 
activity of man. C. is shaped by activ- 
ity and, in its turn, influences this 
activity, determining and regulating it. 
Realising their creative plans, people 
transform nature and society and there- 
by transform themselves. In this sense 
Lenin proved that “man’s conscious- 
ness not only reflects the objective 
world, but creates it”. (Vol. 38, p. 212.) 
The problem of C. and its relation to 
matter (see Philosophy, Fundamental 
Question of) has been the keenest and 
basic issue throughout the ideological 
struggle of philosophies in science. 
A materialist understanding of history 
enabled Marx for the first time to solve 
this problem scientifically and thereby 
create a truly scientific philosophy. 

Consequence, Logical, assertion B 
inferred (see Inference) according to 


90, 





certain rules of logic from statements 
Ai, As ... An (regarded as premisses 
in relation to B). A L.C. must be true 
if its premisses are true. The relation 
between the premisses and the L.C. 
inferred from them is expressed sym- 
bolically as follows: Ay, A, ... AnEB, 
where}-is the sign of inference B from 
the given premisses. 

Conservation Laws, a special class 
of physical laws reflecting the constan- 
cy of the fundamental properties and 
relations in natural processes. The C.L. 
are the essential indispensable element 
of the structure of any physical theory. 
Currently, we know ie following C.L.: 
the law of conservation of mass, the 
law of conservation of energy (q.v.), 
the law of momentum, the law of 
conservation of moment of momentum, 
the laws of conservation of spin, 
electrical charge, baryon charge, 
isotopic spin, parity, strangeness, etc. 
The C.L. may be divided into gen- 
eral and particular, according to their 
degree of common operation. Discove- 
ry of a limit to the operation of a general 
law involves the discovery of a new 
law of conservation. For instance, 
violation of the law of conservation of 
parity in the sphere of weak interac- 
tions led to the discovery of the law 
of conservation of combination parity. 
The C.L. are associated with the proper- 
ties of space and time symmetry, e.g., 
the law of the conservation of energy 
is associated with uniformity of time 
and that of momentum conservation 
with uniformity of space. The C.L. 
reflect the indestructibility of the fun- 
damental properties of material objects 
and confirm in their entirety the prin- 
ciple of the uncreatability and indes- 
tructibility of moving matter. The 
processes of mutual transmutation of 
material objects are controlled by the 
C.L. For this reason the C.L. provide 
a basis for the essential law-governed 
causal relations in nature. Being 
the most general laws in any physical 
theory, they have a great heuristic 
value. The C.L. reflect one of the 
aspects of the dialectical contradic- 
tion inherent in nature, viz., the 
contradiction of conservation and 
change. 


Conservation Laws | 


+ 





Conservation of Energy, Law of 


Conservation of Energy, Law of, 
one of the most important conservation 
laws according to which the total amount 
of energy (q.v.) neither disappears, 
nor is created anew, when changing 
from one kind into another. When a 
material system passes from one state 
into another, the amount of its energy 
changes in strict proportion to the 
increase or decrease in the energy of 
the bodies interacting with the system. 
The processes of conversion from one 
form of energy into another are regulat- 
ed by numerical equivalents. L.C.E. 
was proved by Mayer, Joule, Helm- 
holtz and others in the mid-19th cen- 
tury, its discovery being preceded by 
conjectures propounded by Descartes, 
Leibniz, and Lomonosov (qq.v-) on 
the conservation of matter and motion. 
The L.C.E. has far-reaching philosophi- 
cal implications. It serves as a scien- 
tific proof of the materialist notion of 
the indestructibility of motion. Engels 
regarded the discovery of L.C.E. as one 
of the three great discoveries compris- 
ing the scientific foundation of the 
dialectico-materialist understanding of 
nature. The L.C.E. reflects the unity 
of the material world. With its discov- 
ery, Engels said, “the unity of all 
motion in nature is no longer a simple 
philosophical statement, but a scien- 
tific fact”. 

Constructive (Genetic) Method, one 
of the methods of deductive construc- 
tion of scientific theories (see Deduc- 
tive Method). The idea of C.M. was 
conceived and developed (in the works 
of D. Hilbert, L. Brouwer, A. Hey- 
ting, A.N. Kolmogorov, A. A. Markov, 
P. Lorentsen, and others) in an at- 
tempt to deal with the difficulties of an 
axiomatic rationalisation of mathe- 
matics and logic (for example, to solve 
the paradoxes, q.v., of the theory 
of numbers, etc.). Unlike the axiomat- 
ic method, the constructive method 
of developing a theory strives to reduce 
to a minimum the primary, non-demon- 
strable within the framework of the 
theory statements and undefinable 
terms. The basic purpose which the 
C.M. is to achieve lies in the consecu- 
tive construction (actually effected or 
possible with the available means) of 


= 937 — 


Conta 


the objects taken as a system and the 
statements concerning these objects. 
The task facing the primary objects of 
a theory and the construction of new 
ones are effected by means of a body of 
special rules and definitions. All the 
other statements of the system are drawn 
from the primary basis by means of 
an inference technique characteristic of 
constructive theories and based on the 
principle of mathematical induction 
(q.v.). At present the C.M. is applied 
solely to the formal sciences, to the build- 
ing of constructive mathematics and 
constructive logic. There is no apparent 
teason, however, for denying the pos- 
sibility of using this method in build- 
ing up knowledge in the field of the 
natural sciences as well. 
Constructivism, a school of art, whose 
exponents attach special importance 
to the constructive aspects in artistic 
expression and the materials employed. 
C. originated after the Ist World War 
as a result of developing industrial 
techniques and the appearance of new 
building materials (e.g., reinforced con- 
crete and glass), and found particularly 
wide acceptance in architecture. Seve- 
ral trends are distinguished in C., such 
as functionalism, rationalism, the “mo- 
dernism” in architecture, etc. Expo- 
nents of C. are Le Corbusier (France), 
W. Gropius, E. Mendelsohn, B. Taut 
(Germany), F. Wright (USA), and 
others. C. stresses the functional ele- 
ment in architectural forms, as well as 
conveniences and economy. At the 
same time, it has serious shortcomings: 
oversimplification; insufficient atten- 
tion to national tradition; tendency to 
overaestheticise modern materials and 
various architectural techniques. C. is 
also reflected in literature and music. 
Conta, Basile (1845-82), Rumanian 
materialist philosopher. He drew his 
conclusions from data furnished by 
the natural sciences, largely basing 
them on the theories of C. Lyell, J. La- 
marck, Ch. Darwin and E. Haeckel 
(qq.v.). According to C., nature pre- 
cedes consciousness. Although he re- 
futed the vulgar materialism of Vogt, 
C. failed to reach a scientific interpre- 
tation of thought. C. considered infi- 
nite matter as endlessly developing in 














Contemplation 


time and space. He classified all laws 
according to different forms of matter, 
while refusing to accept the conception 
of chance and asserting that all laws 
operate fatally. He considered the 
cognitive capacity of the human mind 
to be unlimited, just as reality itself. 
Knowledge is verified by practice, by 
which C. meant laboratory experiment 
and personal experience. Being an athe- 
ist, C. attributed the origins of religion 
to the ignorance and fears of primitive 
man. In the field of sociology, C. adhered 
to idealism. His materialistic teach- 
ings had a marked effect on the de- 
velopment of sociological and political 
thought in Rumania in the latter half 
of the 19th century. C.’s most important 
works are The Theory of Fatalism 
(1875-76) and Essays on Materialistic 
Metaphysics (1879). 

Contemplation, the main shortcom- 
ing of pre-Marxist materialism in the 
theory of knowledge. Proceeding from 
the objectivity of the external world, 
the old materialists described conscious- 
ness as a passive process of perception, 
C., when the external world acts on 
man's sense-organs, while man himself 
is regarded only as the perceiving sub- 
ject. Moreover, the objective world and 
human activity were regarded as op- 
posites. Reality was taken only as an 
object and not considered subjectively, 
i.e., depending on the activity of the 
subject, transformed and changed by 
man’s practical activity. Social pro- 
duction, moreover, was understood 
by the old materialists solely as indi- 
vidual activity of people aimed at 
satisfying their narrow personal and 
selfish requirements. They regarded 
practical activity merely as the “dirty 
mercantile form of its manifestation” 
(Marx). That practice is activity which 
creates both man and the world he 
lives in could not be grasped by the 
old materialists. This was determined 
by their idealistic understanding of 
history and by their ignoring of the 
role a production in society’s life. As 
a result, only theoretical activity was 
regarded as truly human, while knowl- 
edge was divorced from practice and 
considered to be its opposite. Actually, 
in the process of cognition man deals 


REY ee 


Contemporary Marxism 


not so much with nature as such as 
with a “humanised” world, i.e., a 
world drawn into the process of pro- 
duction in one way or another. For 
this reason the practical transformation 
of the world reveals to man its laws 
and essence. Characteristic of C. is 
also understanding of the subject of 
knowledge as an abstract individual, 
isolated from society and often regard- 
ed only as a natural being. C. is inher- 
ent both in empiricism and rationalism 
because outside practice it is even im- 
possible correctly to raise the question 
of their relationship. In the theory of 
knowledge C. inevitably leads to met- 
aphysics and makes it impossible fully 
to refute idealism. Marxism overcame 
C. and thereby made a revolution in 
epistemology. 

Comemporary Marxist Philosophical 
Thought Outside the USSR The 
victory of the 1917 Great October So- 
cialist Revolution and the successful 
building of socialism in the former 
backward tsarist Russia aroused inter- 
est in Marxism-Leninism and its phi- 
losophy in many capitalist countries. 
The Communist Parties which emerged 
and united in the Third International 
(1919) considered dialectical and histor- 
ical materialism as their philosophical 
banner. As early as the twenties, 
Lenin’s works were translated into 
the main European languages. The 
revolutionary upsurge in a number 
of European countries (1918-23) led 
in several Communist Parties to the 
strengthening of a Left trend, whose 
features were subjectivism, underesti- 
mation of the role of the masses in 
history, and reduction of the social 
revolution to political conspiracy (the 
Bordiga group in the Italian Commu- 
nist Party). Lenin’s work “Left-Wing” 
Communism—an Infantile Disorder 
(1920) was of decisive importance in 
exposing the Left-wing deviation views. 
The partial stabilisation of capitalism 
(1924-29) and the intensification of 
bourgeois and Right-wing socialist 
ideology which it led to, caused the 
infiltration into the Communist Par- 
ties of the USA, Germany, Italy, 
and other countries of Right-wing op 
portunism and its ideological basis 








Contemporary Marxism 


mechanistic philosophy. The Marxists 
of the Third International joined the 
struggle against the Left and Right 
deviations on philosophical problems 
as well. In the twenties, philosophical 
problems were elaborated by G. Di- 
mitrov, A. Gramsci, P. Togliatti, 
M. Thorez, E. Thalmann, W. Foster, 
and others. They proved the theoretical 
insolvency and practical harmfulness 
of subjectivist ideology and mechanis- 
tic philosophy, upheld the teaching 
of the unity between Marxist theory 
and the revolutionary practice of the 
proletariat. The deepening of the gener- 
al crisis of capitalism caused by the 
successful building of socialism in the 
Soviet Union, on the one hand, and 
the general economic crisis (1929-33), 
on the other, was marked by the estab- 
lishment of fascism in some capitalist 
countries. In the field of ideology 
these events were reflected in intensi- 
fied propaganda of irrationalism, mys- 
ticism, and the like. The Communist 
Parties’ tactics of a united people’s 
front in the fight against fascism con- 
tributed to rallying the progressive 
intelligentsia around the Marxists and 
accelerated the transition of a number 
of its representatives to the positions 
of dialectical-materialist philosophy. 
The Marxist philosophers’ work against 
intuitionism (G. Politzer, France), 
Neo-Hegelianism (Gramsci, Italy), Neo- 
Platonism (H. Selsam, USA), prag- 
matism (W. Foster, USA), Rehm- 
kianism (T. Pavlov, Bulgaria), and 
other idealist trends in the philosophy 
of the thirties enhanced the prestige 
of dialectical materialism, demonstrat- 
ed its role as the methodological foun- 
dation of the sciences and an effective 
weapon against fascist ideology. A 
new stage in Marxist-Leninist philos- 
ophy has begun after the 2nd World 
War as a result of the profound changes 
which have taken place in all spheres 
of modern society, economic, social 
and socio-political. Following the de- 
feat of German fascism and Japanese 
militarism, a number of socialist na- 
tions appeared in Europe and Asia. 
The Communist and Workers’ Parties 
in the European People’s Democracies 
have worked out such a vastly impor- 


c 


Marxism Contemporary 


tant theoretical and practical question 
as the dialectics of the general laws 
of socialist construction and the nation- 
al peculiarities in which they are ma- 
nifested. During the socialist con- 
struction in those countries, a cultural 
revolution is being carried out and 
Marxist-Leninist philosophy has a great 
part to play in it. In this connection 
there has arisen the task of philosophi- 
cal educating the working people, 
freeing their consciousness from sur- 
vivals of capitalist ideology, religious 
superstition and the like. In the Peo- 
ple’s Democracies, new Marxist phi- 
losophers work alongside the older ones. 
All of them are spreading scientific 
philosophy among the people, and are 
also successfully elaborating problems 
of dialectics in social development and 
socialist construction (P. Pavlov in 
Bulgaria, H. Scheler in the German 
Democratic Republic, A. Schaff in 
Poland, and others), philosophical 
questions in the natural sciences 
(L. Jánossy in Hungary, Polikarov in 
Bulgaria and others), problems in eth- 
ics (C. Gulian in Rumania, Beck in 
the GDR, L. Svoboda in Czechoslova- 
kia, and others), in aesthetics (S. Zól- 
kiewski in Poland, A. Abusch in the 
GDR, and others), the history of phi- 
losophy (H. Ley and R. Gropp in the 
GDR), criticism of contemporary ideal- 
ism (G. Mende in the GDR, J. Bodnar 
in Czechoslovakia, Iribajakov in Bul- 
garia, and others), logic (B. Fogarasi 
in Hungary, G. Klaus in the GDR, 
and others). In the capitalist countries, 
Marxist philosophical thought since the 
2nd World War has been aimed at 
working out ways and means of fight- 
ing for democracy and socialism in the 
conditions of the new crisis of capital- 
ism. The speeches and writings of the 
leading figures in the Communist and 
Workers’ Parties stress that the new 
historical conditions demand an anal- 
ysis of the national specifics of each 
country, the search for concrete ways 
of fighting for peace, democracy and 
socialism. The Marxist philosophers 
in the capitalist countries are actively 
defending progressive philosophical 
traditions, exposing anti-communist 
propaganda and the most recent meth 








Contemporary Marxism 


ods of refined idealism. In their works 
/ R. Garaudy and J. Kanapa (France), 
A. Cornu (GDR), E. Sereni and L. 
Longo (Italy), H. Selsam (USA), and 
others, show that communism brings 
with it a new culture and a new hu- 
manism based on the best philosophical 
traditions. The works of M. Cornforth 
(Britain), Harry Wells (USA), G. Bess, 
Garaudy, H. Denis (France), and others 
uncover the essence of the latest ideal- 
ist trends (neo-positivism, existential- 
ism, Neo-Thomism, qq.v.), and show 
that they are hostile to progressive 
culture and humanism. Foremost in- 
tellectuals in the capitalist countries 
support the Marxists and go over to 
the positions of dialectical material- 
ism (J. Bernal, q.v., in Britain, P. 
Langevin, q.v., and J. P. Vigier in 
France, J. B. Furst and B. Dunham 
in the USA, and others). A strong 
impulse to constructive development 
of Marxist philosophy was given by 
the 20th Congress of the CPSU (1956), 
which laid the basis for a new stage 
in the development of the communist 
movement. This Congress made a pro- 
found and all-round criticism of the 
cult of Stalin’s personality and thereby 
cleared the way for creative develop- 
ment of Marxism-Leninism. It also 
drew exceedingly important conclu- 
sions on the possibility of preventing 
world wars in the contemporary epoch, 
on the possibility of a peaceful as well 
as a non-peaceful way of the socialist 
revolution, and on the variety of forms 
the dictatorship of the proletariat may 
take. The Declaration of the Moscow 
Meeting of Representatives of the 
Communist and Workers’ Parties (1957) 
formulated the general laws for the 
transition from capitalism to socialism 
and emphasised the significance of 
dialectical materialism as the science 
of the most general laws of develop- 
ment of nature, society, and thought. 
The Statement of the 1960 Moscow 
Meeting of Representatives of the 
Communist and Workers’ Parties gave 
a Marxist definition of the present 
epoch, charted the ways and means 
for the struggle for peace, democracy 
and socialism in contemporary con- 
ditions. The new Programme adopted 


Contraposition 


by the 22nd Congress of the CPSU 
is of enormous importance for the 
creative development of Marxism-Lenin- 
ism. This development is inseparably 
associated with the fight against re- 
visionism and dogmatism. Prominent 
Marxists-Leninists in many countries 
have criticised revisionism and dog- 
matism and revealed the danger they 
present for the communist movement. 

Contradiction, a category in dialec- 
tics expressing the inner source of all 
motion, the root of vitality, the prin- 
ciple of development. It is the recog- 
nition of C. in the objects and phe- 
nomena of the objective world that 
distinguishes dialectics from metaphys- 
ics. “Dialectics in the proper sense 
is the study of contradiction in the 
very essence of objects....” (Lenin, 
Vol. 38, pp. 253-54.) Dialectical Cc., 
reflected in thought, concepts, theories, 
must be distinguished from so-called 
logical Cc., which are manifestations 
of confusion and inconsistency in 
thinking. 

Contradiction, Law of, a law of 
logic, according to which two prop- 
ositions A and A negating (see Nega- 
tion) each other cannot be simultane- 
ously true. The first formulation of 
the L.C. was given by Aristotle. This 
law may be formulated as follows: 
proposition A cannot be simultaneously 
false and true. In symbolic writing 


A-A, where - is the sign of conjunction 
and the line above the symbols is 
the sign of negation. The L.C. plays 
an important role in thinking and 
cognition. Judgements or scientific 
theories become inconsistent when they 
contain formal contradictions. The 
L.C. is the reflection in the mind of 
the qualitative definiteness of objects, 
of the simple fact that, if abstraction 
is made of a change in the object 
itself, it cannot simultaneously possess 
properties which exclude each other. 

Contraposition, a logical operation 
in which the propositions of an im- 
plication (q.v.), i.e., its antecedent 
and consequent, are replaced by their 
negations (obversion) and change places 
(conversion). Thus, C. of the prop- 
osition “If x is divisible by 4, then 








Conventionalism 


x is divisible by 2” would yield the 
proposition “If x is not divisible by 2, 
then x is not divisible by 4”. C. retains 
the value of truth or falsity of the 
primary proposition. 

Conventionalism, the philosophical 
concept according to which scientific 
theories and concepts are a product of 
arbitrary convention among scientists, 
rather than a reflection of objective 
reality, such convention being deter- 
mined by considerations of utility and 
simplicity. The conventionalist point 
of view is typical of subjective idealism 
inasmuch as it denies the presence of 
objective content in the subject’s knowl- 
edge. The founder of C. was Poincaré 
(q.v.). Elements of C. are found in 
positivism (q.v.), and especially in 
pragmatism and operationism (qq.v.). 
The epistemological basis of C. is the 
real possibility of varied interpreta- 
tions of our theoretical propositions (es- 
pecially in the field of mathematics), 
producing the temptation to regard 
a scientific theory as a purely logical 
construction in respect of which the 
concepts of truth or falsity lose va- 
lidity. The viewpoint of C. is refuted 
by a historical analysis of the process 
of cognition. Our concepts and theo- 
ries are formed in the process of man’s 
activities and reflect particular aspects 
of the world. Once formed, however, 
they may be abstracted from their 
real base to become a tool or instru- 
ment for the description of totally differ- 
ent phenomena. Thus, geometrical prop- 
ositions may be used to solve techni- 
cal problems, construct diagrams, etc. 
However, the “artificial nature” of 
such use, based as it is on the analogy 
of non-identical objects, by no means 
proves the arbitrary nature of the 
theoretical constructions as such. 

Co-ordination and Subordination 
of Categories, two distinct systems 
of concepts, categories, characterised 
by structurally different relationship 
of their elements. The elements of a 
co-ordinate system possess independ- 
ent meaning and external interdepend- 
ence. The elements of a subordinate 
system are not independent units, 
their meaning being determined by 
the meaning of the other elements and 


7=1682 


=o; 


Copenhagen School 


implying an interrelationship among 
them, transitions, and mutual trans- 
formations. Seen as specific systems 
of knowledge, C. & S.C. are the 
Tesults of different processes of cog- 
nition, C. is secured by breaking down 
the object into its components on the 
basis of the characteristic accepted 
for the mp ose. This type of knowledge 
is essential for a survey of the func- 
tionally interdependent parts of a 
single whole, but is abstract and 
limited. It is mainly used by the 
metaphysical, non-dialectical schools. 
S. of categories is based on the move- 
ment of thought from the abstract 
to the concrete (see The Abstract 
and the Concrete), from the simple 
to the complex, in the dialecti- 
cal reproduction of developing objects 
and phenomena. Unlike idealistic S. 
(see Hegel), according to which one 
thought conceives another and the 
transition from one to the other is de- 
termined only by thought, dialectical 
materialism provides a method of 
achieving subordination based on the 
investigation of the objective thing 
and a theoretical development of the 
knowledge thereof, of which Marx’s 
Capital is a classic example. The re- 
sult of the development of knowledge 
is given in it in the form of S. of cat- 
egories. The dialectics of the object 
is reflected in the dialectics of con- 
cepts. An important criterion in the 
S. of dialectical, logic is the unity 
of the historical and the logical (q.v.), 
the interpretation of the system of 
logical categories as a generalised his- 
tory of knowledge. 

Copenhagen School, the name given 
to a group of physicists (Bohr, Heisen- 
berg, qq.v., Weizsäcker, Jordan, and 
others), exponents of a positivist ap- 
proach to the philosophical problems 
of quantum mechanics. This group 
formed in the late 1920s at the Copen- 
hagen Institute of Theoretical Phys- 
ics headed by N. Bohr. Bohr and Hei- 
senberg, together with several other 
physicists, exponents of the Copen- 
hagen school, were largely responsible 
for creating and developing quantum 
mechanics and interpreting its mathe- 
matical structure and experimental data. 








Copernicus 


The philosophic views of this school, 
however, and its subjectivist opinions, 
especially those of its early period, 
fell under strong neo-positivist in- 
fluence. Erroneously attributing to in- 
struments the role of “uncontrolled 
disturbance” in the micro-universe, 
some of its exponents proclaimed 
“disappearance of causality” and “free- 
dom of will” of the electron, etc. These 
views were criticised by some physi- 
cists (S. I. Vavilov, A. Einstein, P. Lan- 
gevin, qq.v., V. A. Fok, D. I. Blo- 
khintsev, and others). The adherents of 
the C.S. are no longer in complete 
accord. Jordan and Weizsäcker con- 
tinue to support the old positivist 
views, whereas Heisenberg leans to- 
wards objective idealism. As for Bohr, 
he drew closer to the materialistic 
understanding of philosophical prob- 
lems of quantum mechanics. 
Copernicus, Nicolaus (1473-1543), Po- 
lish astronomer, founder of the 
heliocentric theory of the Universe. 
His theory of the Earth’s revolution 
round the Sun and its diurnal rotation 
upon its own axis signalled the begin- 
ning of a break with the geocentric 
theory originated by Ptolemy and the 
religious views founded thereon of the 
special favour bestowed upon the Earth 
by God and man’s privileged position 
in the Universe. In the history of 
science C.’s theory was a revolutionary 
act signifying that research in the 
realm of nature would hence be independ- 
ent. It meant that the natural sciences 
were throwing off the yoke of theology. 
His theory further discarded the con- 
traposition of the movement of heav- 
enly bodies to earthly movements ex- 
pounded by Aristotle (q.v.) and adopt- 
ed by scholasticism (q.v.); undermined 
the church’s story of the creation of 
the world by God; and prepared the 
ground for the later appearance of 
theories concerning the natural origin 
and development of the solar system. 
C.’s discoveries became the object of 
a violent struggle. Although they were 
condemned and combated by the 
church, the leading thinkers of his 
age and later times proclaimed their 
truth and developed them further. 
C.’s principal work is De Revolution- 


S 


Correctness and Truth 


To 


ibus Orbium Coelestium, 1543. .(See — 
Heliocentricism and Geocentri- 
cism.) 


Corporate State, the most reactionary 
fascist type of bourgeois dictatorship 
developed after the Ist World War 
amid the general crisis of capitalism 
(q.v.) and characterised by: dissolu- 
tion of workers’ organisations and en- 
forced grouping of the population into 
corporations (e.g., capitalists’, work- 
ers’, and office employees’ corpora- 
tions); dissolution of the elective body, 
i.e. parliament, and substitution 
therefore of “corporate representation”. 
This results in the workers’ depriva- 
tion of all civil rights and in their 
exploitation by the monopolies with 
the aid of the corporations. Italy and 
Portugal were declared C.Ss. The prin- 
cipal purpose of the C.S. is to disguise 
the dictatorship of monopoly capital 
and to create the impression of “class 
partnership” and “harmony of in- 
terests” within the corporate framework 
in the fascist states. 

Correctness and Truth, categories of 
logic and the theory of knowledge: 
C. (Logical) is a quality of iogical 
operations and means their correspond- 
ence to the laws and rules of logic. 
As the forms of logical operations are 
common to processes and thoughts 
with different concrete content, the 
logical C. or non-C. of operations are 
not determined by the peculiarities 
of the concrete content of thought, 
but by the forms of thought. T. is a 
quality of thought and means its 
conformity to objective reality (see 
Truth). In the final analysis, the con- 
cepts of C. and T. characterise the rela- 
tion of thought to the objective world, 
for the logical C. is conformity of the 
operations of thought to certain rela- 
tions of reality, of which the laws of 
logic are the reflection. These concepts 
are closely interrelated in the process 
of cognition. Logical C. is a necessary 
(although not the only) condition of 
T. Idealistic logic and philosophy 
(particularly Kantianism, modern log- 
ical positivism, etc.), denying the 
objective origin of the laws of logic, 
also incorrectly interpret the logical 
C. of thought, considering its 





Correspondence, Law of 


basis to be laid a priori in the mind 
itself, in the consensus of people, 
etc. 

Correspondence of Production Rela- 
tions to Character of Productive Forces, 
Law of, an objective economic law 
discovered by Marx. This law deter- 
mines the interaction of the productive 
forces (q.v.) and relations of production 
(q.v.) in all socio-economic formations 
(q.v.). The productive forces are the 
determining, the most revolutionary 
and mobile element of production. 
They are constantly developing, while 
relations of production are a more 
stable element. That is why at a cer- 
tain stage in society’s development 
a contradiction arises between the new 
productive forces and the obsolete 
relations of production. However much 
the relations of production lag behind 
the development of the productive 
forces, sooner or later they must come 
into correspondence with the level 
of development and the character of 
the productive forces, and they do, 
as is demonstrated by the history of 
society. In asociety divided into antag- 
onistic classes, the contradiction be- 
tween the developed productive forces 
and the old relations of production 
always culminates in a conflict which 
is resolved through a social revolution 
(see Revolution, Social). Under social- 
ism, the relations of production, owing 
to the social character of ownership, 
correspond to the state of the produc- 
tive forces and afford them full scope 
for accelerated and crisis-free develop- 
ment. But in socialist society too, 
contradictions arise between the pro- 
ductive forces and the various aspects 
of the relations of production. Here, 
however, the contradiction does not 
reach the point of conflict, since social 
ownership prevails and there are no 
classes interested in preserving the 
obsolete production relations. The Com- 
munist Party and the socialist government 
notice in time the growing contradic- 
tions and take steps to eliminate them 
by improving the production rela- 
tions. The law of correspondence of the 
relations of production to the character 
of the productive forces furnishes the 
key to understanding the laws govern- 


iad 


— 99 — 


Cosmogony 


ing the replacement of some socio- 
economic formations by others. 
Correspondence Principle, one of the 
basic methodological principles govern- 
ing the development of science. Philo- 
sophically, it expresses the movement 
of knowledge from relative to absolute 
truth, ever more complete truth. This 
principle was formulated by Bohr in 
1913, at a time when concepts of clas- 
sical physics were breaking down. Ac- 
cording to the C.P., whenever scientific 
conceptions are broken down, the basic 
laws of a new theory, created as a re- 
sult of this break-down, are such that 
in the extreme instance, given the ap- 
propriate value of some characteristic 
parameter of the new theory, they 
pass into the laws of the old theory. 
For example, the laws of quantum 
mechanics (q.v.) pass into the laws of 
classical mechanics provided it is pos- 
sible to disregard the magnitude of 
a quantum of action (q.v.). The ope- 
ration of the C.P. may be traced in 
the history of mathematics, physics 
and other sciences. It reflects the law- 
governed concatenation of old and new 
theories, following from the inner unity 
of qualitatively different levels of 
matter. This unity determines not only 
the integrity of science and its history, 
but also the vast heuristic role of the 
C.P. in the penetration of a qualitative- 
ly new realm of phenomena. A scien- 
tific understanding of the C.P. makes 
it possible to grasp the dialectics of 
the process of cognition, to demon- 
strate the insolvency of relativism (q.v.). 
Cosmogony, a branch of astronomy 
(q.v.), treating of the origin and devel- 
opment of heavenly bodies and their 
systems. Theoretically, one may speak 
of astral C. and planetary C., though 
in practice they are mutually inter- 
related. The principles of C. are based 
on data furnished by other branches 
of astronomy, by physics, geology and 
other branches of science dealing with 
the Earth. Like cosmology (q.v.), C. 
is closely related to philosophy and 
has been the venue of a violent struggle 
between materialism and idealism, 
between science and religion. The dif- 
ficulties of cosmogonic problems stem 
from the fact that the process of devel- 











Cosmogony 


opment of the heavenly bodies has 
been going on for thousand millions 
of years, by comparison with which 
astronomical observations and even 
the entire history of astronomy em- 
brace infinitesimal periods of time. 
The difficulties of planetary C. are 
further enhanced by the fact that we 
have thus far been able to observe 
but one planetary system. Scientific 
C. dates back some 200 years, when 
Kant (q.v.) advanced the hypothesis 
of the development of the stars from 
nebulae which at one time surrounded 
the Sun. The hypotheses of Kant (1755) 
and Laplace (1796) (see Nebular Hy- 
pothesis) failed to explain certain sig- 
nificant structural peculiarities of the 
solar system and were therefore aban- 
doned. Several other hypotheses were 
advanced, that of Jeans’ (q.v.), 1916, 
gaining the greatest popularity. Yet 
even Jeans’ hypothesis met with in- 
surmountable obstacles and was, es- 
sentially, a step backward in com- 
parison with the traditional cosmogon- 
ic hypotheses. Factual data are being 
consistently accumulated and studied, 
but no solution of the problem has as 
yet been found. A very substantial 
contribution to planetary C. has been 
made by Soviet scientists (O. Schmidt, 
V. G. Fesenkov, and others). The na- 
ture and interior structure of stars were 
established only in the 20th century. 
The nature of stellar evolution is 
now known in its essentials, but the 
origin of stars can still only be sur- 
mised. The theory was for a long time 
current that they emerged simultane- 
ously several milliard years ago. At 
present, thanks mainly to the research 
of Soviet scientists (V. A. Ambartsu- 
myanet. al.), there is no longer any do- 
ubt that the process of stellar formation 
in the solar system and other galaxies 
is still continuing. Recent research 
has yielded information on the devel- 
opment of star clusters and galaxies. 
The achievements of the Soviet cos- 
mogonists are largely due to the fact 
that their research work is based on 
dialectical materialism, whereas ideal- 
ism in philosophy frequently results 
in arbitrary cosmogonic notions, such 
as the birth of atoms, stars, and even 


== 100" 





Cosmology 


the metagalaxy (q.v.) out of nothing, | 
which signifies a return to the fideistic 
ideas which have been refuted by nat- ` 
ural science. i 

Cosmological Paradoxes, difficulties 
(contradictions) arising out of attempts | 
to extend to the Universe as a whole © 
the physical laws established for finite 
parts thereof. Within the framework 
of Newtonian physics (see Newton) the 
most important C.P. are the Neumann- 
Seeliger gravitational paradox and the 
Chéseaux-Olbers photometrical para- 
dox. The first refers to the insurmount- 
able difficulties of applying Newton’s 
law of universal gravitation to the 
infinite static system of masses with 
non-zero mean density. The second 
refers to the fact that the same system 
of radiating masses (stars, galaxies) 
would produce a glaring luminance 
in the nocturnal sky, comparable with 
the surface luminance of the Sun, 
which, however, is not the case. Both 
these paradoxes are removed within 
the framework of traditional (pre-rela- 
tivist) physics, if it is assumed that 
the distribution of matter in the Uni- 
verse is strictly governed by laws in 
accordance with the so-called hierar- 
chical pattern. In relativist cosmology 
(q.v.) these paradoxes are removed 
practically automatically, but other 
difficulties arise. The existing C.P. 
may be seen as a warning against any 
attempt at a simplified approach to 
the problems of the structure of the 
Universe. 

Cosmology, a branch of astronomy 
(q.v.), a science which views the Uni- 
verse as an integrated whole, and the 
part of the Universe which is under 
astronomical observation as a part of 
that whole. Modern C. has actually 
come to cover the area where astronomy 
merges with physics and philosophy. 
The first naive cosmological ideas ap- 
peared in antiquity as a result of man’s 
efforts to discover his place in the 
Universe. Accumulated observation da- 
ta and the certainty, suggested by 
ancient philosophy, that behind the 
apparently confused movement of the 
planets there must be a real law-gov- 
erned pattern of movements, led to 
the geocentric conception of the Uni- 





Cosmopolitanism 


verse, which was superseded, as a result 
of a violent struggle against the church 
and scholasticism, by the conception 
of a heliocentric system (see Helio- 
centricism and Geocentricism). Fol- 
lowing the discovery of the law of 
universal gravitation by Newton (q.v.), 
the cosmological problem could be 
treated as the physical problem of an 
infinite system of gravitating masses. 
This, it was discovered, gave rise to 
serious difficulties known as cosmo- 
logical paradoxes (q.v.). These dif- 
ficulties are resolved by modern rela- 
tivist C., i.e., by cosmological theories 
based on the theory of relativity. This 
has bred new difficulties, however, 
which have been widely used by both 
the idealists and fideists to “rational- 
ise” their theses concerning the “ex- 
pansion” of the Universe and even 
its “creation”, etc. The real value of 
modern cosmological models lies in 
the fact that they give an idea of the 
general laws that govern the structure 
and development of the metagalaxy 
(q.v.) and thus constitute a necessary 
link in the endless process of knowing 
the spatio-temporally infinite Universe. 

Cosmopolitanism, a reactionary the- 
ory calling for a repudiation of patriot- 
ic sentiments and national culture and 
tradition in the name of the “unity 
of mankind”. As an ideology C. reflects 
the ambition of imperialists to achieve 
world supremacy. The propaganda of 
C. (the idea of a world government, 
etc.) impedes the peoples’ struggle 
for national independence and national 
sovereignty. C. is incompatible with 
proletarian internationalism (q.v.), 
which contains no contradiction be- 
tween the common basic interests of the 
peoples, on the one hand, and love of 
country and national patriotism, on 
the other. 

Cosmos, the Universe as a whole, 
the spatio-temporally infinite matter in 
motion in its entirety, including the 
Earth, the solar system, our galaxy, 
and all other galaxies (q.v.). In prac- 
tice, however, C. is frequently under- 
stood to mean the part of the Universe 
adjacent to but not comprising the 
Earth (in this context the term “cos- 
mic” refers to what is beyond the con- 


— 101 — 


Creationism 


fines of the Earth), in which case the 
dividing line between the Earth and 
the C. as well as that between the C. 
as part of the Universe and the rest 
of the Universe is generally indefinite 
(see Cosmology). 

Cousin, Victor (1792-1867), French 
idealist philosopher, eclectic. C. main- 
tained that any school of philosophy 
could be formed on the basis of the 
“truths” contained in various doc- 
trines. C.’s philosophy is an eclectic 
combination of such “truths”, drawn 
from the idealistic system of Hegel 
(q.v.), Schelling’s (q.v.) “philosophy 
of revelation”, the monadology of 
Leibniz (q.v.), and other idealistic 
doctrines. Being an opponent of ma- 
terialism, C. shared the view that 
God was the creator of the Universe, 
believed in the existence of after-life, 
and urged a reconciliation of philosophy 
and religion. C.’s theories influenced 
the subsequent development of ideal- 
istic philosophy in France. His most 
important work is the Cours d’histoire 
de la philosophie (1815-29) in eight 
volumes. 

Couturat, Louis (1868-1914), French 
philosopher and logician, exponent and 
populariser of Russell’s and White- 
head’s (qq.v-) logical rationalisation of 
the principles of mathematics; did re- 
search work on the preconditions’ of 
logical calculus contained in the logic 
of Leibniz (q.v.); published Leibniz’s 
minor works and fragments dealing 
with the problems of logic. In his 
Algebra of Logic (1905) he was one 
of the first writers on logic to appre- 
ciate and use the results obtained in 
the algebra of logic (q.v.) by the Rus- 
sian scholar Poretsky (q.v.). In an ap- 
pendix to his Principles of Mathematics 
(1905) C. developed further, from the 
standpoint of Russell's logical and 
mathematical formalism, the criticism 
of Kant’s (q.v.) theory of mathematics 
and its logical and epistemological 
principles. In a series of articles C. 
challenged Poincaré’s (q.v.) “semi- 
Kantian” theory of mathematics. 

Creationism, a religious doctrine 
holding that the world and all nature, 
animate and inanimate, were brought 
into being by a single act of creation. 








Creative Work 


The biblical story of the creation of 
every existing thing in the space of 
six days by God is an example of C. 
The view of Linnaeus, Cuvier (qq v.) 
and Agassiz (1807-73) concerning the 
supernatural origin of all species of 
animal and plant life is a modified 
version of C. in the field of biology. 
Modern science furnishes proof of the 
complete fallacy of C. (See Conser- 
vation of Energy, Law of; Darwin; 
Life.) 

Creative Work, the process of human 
activity in which new material and 
spiritual values are created. C.W. is 
a human ability, which appeared in the 
process of labour, to create (from the 
material supplied by nature and on 
the strength of the knowledge of the 
laws of the objective world) new real- 
ity that satisfies the multiform re- 
quirements of society. Any kind of 
labour may become C.W. All types 
of C.W. are determined by the nature 
of creative activity: the C.W. of an 
inventor, organiser, scientist or artist, 
etc. Idealists regard artistic C.W. 
as divine obsession (Plato), as move- 
ment from the conscious to the subcon- 
scious (Schelling), as the life-giving 
breath of the unconscious (E. Hart- 
mann), as a mystic intuition (Bergson), 
and as a manifestation of instincts 
(Freud). According to the Marxist- 
Leninist theory, C.W. is a process in 
which all the spiritual powers of man 
take part, including imagination (q.v.), 
and also the skill which is required 
to realise a creative design and is 
acquired by training and practice. 

Criterion of Truth, any means of 
judging any assertion, hypothesis, the- 
oretical proposition, etc., as to its 
truth or falsity. The C.T. is social 
experience (see Theory and Prac- 
tice). Definitive verification of scien- 
tific theories is furnished by practice, 
i.e., in the field of industrial and agri- 
cultural production, in the revolution- 
ary activities of the masses aimed at 
reorganising society. Successful ap- 
plication of a given theory in practice 
is proof of its correctness. Methods of 
verifying ideas by practice may vary. 
Thus, in the field of natural science a 
proposition may be verified by exper- 


— 102 — 


Critical Realism (in art) 


iment (q.v.) involving observation, 
measurement (qq.v.), and mathemati- 
cal treatment of the results obtained. 
Practical verification frequently im- 
plies an indirect approach. Thus, the 
establishment of the truth of an as- 
sertion by logical proof (q.v.) depends 
basically on the practical verification 
of certain fundamental principles of 
some theory, which are not specifically 
proved within its framework. Veri- 
fication in practice of scientific theo- 
ries does not, nevertheless, transform 
them into absolute truths: they con- 
tinue developing and become enriched, 
gaining in scope and exactitude, some 
of their propositions are dropped in 
favour of new ones (see Truth, Absolute 
and Relative). This is due to the fact 
that social practice is undergoing a 
process of continuous development, 
and therefore the methods of compar- 
ing scientific theories with reality 
through practice are being constantly 
perfected. Only the developing daily 
practice, or experience, of society is 
capable of fully confirming or com- 
pletely refuting the ideas engendered 

y man. Both the C.T. and practice, 
or experience, were first included in 
the theory of knowledge by Marxism. 
Modern idealist philosophy either de- 
nies practice, or experience, as a C.T., 
or else puts a distorted construction 
on it (see Pragmatism). 

Critical Realism (in art), a school 
and method which, since the middle 
of the 19th century, have attracted 
many progressive artists and writers 
of the capitalist epoch. Its main drive, 
directed towards revealing the viles 
of bourgeois society and overcoming 
its contradictions, played an important 
part in developing the idea of man’s 
social and spiritual emancipation and 
in asserting democratic social ideals 
in the minds of men. Stendhal, Balzac, 
Dickens, Hogarth, Daumier, Courbet, 
Meunier, Gogol, Turgenev, Goncharov, 
Saltykov-Shchedrin, Nekrasov, Lev 
Tolstoi, Repin, and others scourged the 
harsh rule of the landowners, the pred- 
atory instincts of the bourgeoisie, the 
bigotry of the clergy, the depravity 
of the bureaucratic oftcialdom, and 
portrayed, directly or indirectly, the 





Critical Realism (in philosophy) 


protest and struggle of the people, 
some in search of their heroes from 
among the working people, the revo- 
jutionary intelligentsia and those gener- 
ally who voiced the interests of the 
people, others holding up these heroes 
as an example to be followed. In the 
present era the tradition of C.R. has 
been carried on by Charles Chaplin, 
Hemingway, G. Greene, Remarque, 
Feuchtwanger, Renato Guttuso, Edu- 
ardo de Filippo, Giuseppe de Santis, 
and others. The masterpieces of C.R. 
have been of great value to the school 
of socialist realism (q.v.). 

Critical Realism (in philosophy), one 
of the schools of modern idealist phi- 
losophy which gained acceptance in the 
1920s and 30s in some of the capitalist 
countries. C.R. combines elements of 
subjective and objective idealism. In 
the USA, C.R. (Santayana, q.v., Lo- 
vejoy, Pratt, and others) originated 
by way of a reaction to neo-realism 
(q.v.). The neo-realist thesis of the 
“immanence” of the object in con- 
scicusness, of the direct “interjection” 
of the object in consciousness is coun- 
tered by the critical realists with the 
theory of the structure of the act of 
cognition, which comprises the three 
elements of subject, object and “da- 
tum” or “essence”. It is this “essence” 
that is alleged to be the content 
of our consciousness. The “essences”, 
according to C.R., unlike the object, 
are conveyed to us with direct 
certitude and unite within themselves 
all the products of our consciousness. 
C.R. attempts to present these essences 
as something objectively existing, like 
the universals (q.v.) of medieval real- 
ism. The “essence” possesses a reality 
of its own, different from physical 
reality; it is not to be measured by a 
spatio-temporal criterion. “Essences”, 
according to C.R., are by no means 
images or copies of things. Like neo- 
realism, C.R. opposes the materialist 
theory of reflection. C.R. recognises 
the existence of reality, this recognition 
being founded on instinct and “animal 
faith” (Santayana) in reality. The 
epistemological source of this alleged 
“realism” lies in its false interpretation 
of the difference between the material 


— 103 — 


Criticism and Self-Criticism 


and ideal, the objective and subjective, 
and in regarding consciousness metap- 
hysically as opposed to the objective 
world. The name “C.R.” is also given 
to a school which formed towards the 
end of the 19th century in Germany 
(Driesch, q.v., E. Becher, A. Wenzl, 
and others). This school specialises 
in a theological interpretation of mod- 
ern natural science, striving to recon- 
cile knowledge with faith and to prove 
the “unsoundness” and “limitations” 
of science. 

Criticism, the term used by Kant 
(q.v.) to designate his idealist philoso- 
phy, whose main purpose he saw in the 
criticism of man's cognitive abilities. 
As a result of his criticism Kant denied 
man’s ability to get to know the es- 
sence of things. The term C. is appli- 
cable to other subjective-idealist doc- 
trines which hold that man’s knowledge 
is limited and that experience in the 
idealistic meaning of the word is the 
only source of knowledge. Seen ob- 
jectively, C. was an attempt to over- 
come the limited nature of empiricism 
and rationalism (qq.v.) through an 
idealistic approach. 

Criticism and Self-Criticism, a meth- 
od of discovering and correcting er- 
rors and removing shortcomings in the 
activities of the Marxist parties and 
other workers’ organisations. It was 
Marx who pointed out that the pro- 
letarian revolution engages in self- 
criticism in the interests of its own 
development, this being its peculiar 
characteristic. Lenin spoke of C. & 
S. as of a most important principle 
in the work of the Communist Party. 
With the victory of the socialist revo- 
lution C. & S. become one of the main- 
springs of -social development. C. & 
S. are a special method of revealing 
and solving the non-antagonistic con- 
tradictions of socialism. The creative 
tole of C. & S. is seen with particular 
clarity in socialist emulation (q.v.), 
which is a form of the people’s active 
participation in building communism. 
In the period of full-scale communist 
construction C. & S. afford the people 
full scope for initiative in building 
the material and technical basis of 
communism, serve to draw the masses 








Critique of the Gotha Programme 


into the work of government, and 
aid in developing men and women 
of communist society. 

“Critique of the Gotha Programme”, 
written by Marx in 1875, published 
in 1891, is a critical analysis of the 
programme of the German Social-Dem- 
ocratic Party. Marx called this pro- 
gramme the capitulation of the German 
Social-Demeocrats before the school of 
Lassalle (q.v.). Marx vigorously crit- 
icised the Lassallean assertion that in 
respect of the working class all the 
other classes are but “one reactionary 
mass”, and demonstrated that such 
an assertion ignores the alliance of 
the proletariat and the peasantry. 
Marx further revealed the reactionary 
nature of the Lassallean “iron law 
of wages” according to which the pro- 
letariat was destined to perpetual pov- 
erty. The C.G.P. developed the main 
problems of scientific communism (q.v.). 
Marx developed the tenet of the inevi- 
tability of the socialist revolution and 
the establishment of the dictatorship 
of the proletariat, and presented a 
scientific analysis of the communist 
society of the future. The C.G.P. was 
the first to advance the tenet of the 
necessity of a transition period in the 
process of capitalism’s development 
into communism and of a revolution- 
ary dictatorship of the proletariat that 
was to be the state during that transi- 
tion period. No less substantial a con- 
tribution to scientific communism was 
Marx’s definition of socialism and 
communism as two phases of the com- 
munist formation, or two stages in the 
“economic maturity of communism”. 
(Lenin.) Marx stated that only at the 
higher phase of communism society 
would be free from the “birthmarks” 
of capitalism; an end would be put 
to man’s subjection to the enslaving 
system of division of labour; the anti- 
thesis between intellectual work and 
manual labour would disappear; work 
would be transformed from a means of 
livelihood into a prime necessity of 
life; productive forces would reach so 
high a level of development that there 
would be an abundance of products 
and society would be able to pro- 
claim the principle “From each ac- 


— 104 — 


Cubism 


cording to his ability, to each ac- 
cording to his needs”. 

Croce, Benedetto (1866-1952), Ital- 
ian philosopher of the Neo-Hegelian 
school (see Neo-Hegelianism), professor 
at Naples (1902-20). Towards the end 
of the 19th century C. came out with 
a criticism of the philosophic and 
economic theories of Marxism. C.’s 
philosophy is that of absolute ideal- 
ism. His philosophic system establishes 
four steps in the “ascendance of the 
world spirit”, i.e., aesthetic (incarna- 
tion of the spirit in the individual); 
logical (sphere of the general); eco- 
nomic (sphere of particular interest); 
and moral (sphere of universal interest). 
C.’s aesthetic theory has exercised 
a strong influence over bourgeois art 
criticism. He contrasted art as intuitive 
cognition of the singular embodied in 
sensory images with logical reasoning 
as a rational process of knowing the 
general. C.’s ethical doctrine strove 
to cover up the social basis and class 
character of morality. C.’s ethics pro- 
pounded the principle of subordinating 
the individual to the “universal”, that 
is, to the dominant exploiter system. 
C. was a prominent ideologist and a 

olitical leader of the Italian liberal 

ourgeoisie, and an opponent of fas- 
cism. His most important work is the 
Philosophy of the Spirit (1902-17). 

Cubism, a school of art which had 
its origin in France. Its founders were 
G. Braque (1881- ) and P. Picasso 
(1881-), who treated as absolute 
the formalistic theory that “everything 
in nature is modelled on the sphere, 
the cone, and the cylinder”, formulated 
by P. Cézanne (1839-1906) towards 
the close of the 19th century. A. De- 
rain (1880-1954), who developed Cé- 
zanne’s theory of the priority of the 
inner structure and construction of 
objects in art, served as a link between 
them. The cubists’ attempt to treat 
in a pseudo-scientific manner a purely 
subjectivist cognition of objects or the 
human body, which is also considered 
to be an object. During the first, “ste- 
reometric” period (1908-12), the cubist 
school was joined by such painters 
as J. Metzinger (author of the first 
cubist portrait), A. Gleizes, R. De- 





heida 








Cult of the Individual 


launay, Le Fauconnier, F. Léger, 
J. Lipschitz, and others. Charac- 
teristic of this period, as well as 
of the following (so-called “scien- 
tific”) period of C., is distortion of na- 
ture, reduction of objects to elementary 
geometric bodies, and schematisation 
of things. Refusal to recognise social 
ideas and to reproduce the beauty of 
the real world have brought the cub- 
ists to complete negation of reproduc- 
tion of the objects visualised. 

Cult of the Individual, unquestion- 
ing deference to the authority (q.v.) 
of a statesman or public figure, an 
exaggerated evaluation of his actual 
merits, fetishistic worship of the name 
of a historic personage. C.I. is theoret- 
ically based on an idealistic interpreta- 
tion of history, according to which the 
course of history is determined by the 
desires, the will of great men (soldiers, 
heroes, outstanding ideologists, etc.), 
rather than by objective laws or the 
activity of the masses. The role of 
outstanding personalities in history 
is transformed into an absolute by the 
various schools of idealistic philosophy 
(see Voluntarism, Carlyle, Young He- 
gelians, Narodism). Marxism views 
the role of the individual, the leader, 
as closely linked with the objective 
course of class struggle, the history- 
making activity of the masses. The 
experience of no matter how great a 
leader cannot be substituted for the 
collective experience of millions. C.I. 
is completely alien to Marxism-Lenin- 
ism, which is by its very nature the 
ideology of the millions and millions 
of working people who are transform- 
ing capitalist society into a communist 
society. It is for this reason that the 
CPSU continues so relentlessly to ex- 
pose the C.I. which reigned during 
Stalin’s life and did so much harm 
to the theory and practice of socialism. 
The cult of Stalin could not change 
the nature of socialism, but, neverthe- 
less, it most seriously retarded the 
development of Soviet society. The 
struggle of the CPSU against the cult 
of Stalin and its consequences facili- 
tated the restoration and further devel- 
opment of the Leninist principles and 
norms of the activities of the Party and 


— 105 — 


Cultural Cycles, Theory of 


Soviet government as well as the fur- 
ther development of socialist democ- 
racy. The Communist Party considers 
that the theory and practice of C.I. 
obstructs the proper education of the 
masses, acts as a brake on their initia- 
tive, weakens men’s sense of respon- 
sibility for the common cause (socialist 
revolution, building of communism), 
and is detrimental to the development 
of communist ideology. In the practical 
field, the C.I. undermines the demo- 
cratic principles of the Communist 
Parties and socialist society. Success 
in the struggle against the C.I. within 
both socialist society and the Com- 
munist Parties requires the fullest pos- 
sible development of democracy and 
the Leninist principles of government 
and Party activities. E 
Cultural Cycles, Theory of, a doctrine 
holding recurrence to be inevitable in 
the process of historic and cultural 
development, evolved out of the crisis 
of the comparative method (q.v.). At 
the turn of the century the problem 
of establishing criteria for comparative 
analysis required urgent solution. It 
was becoming increasingly clear that 
historical comparisons and analogies 
were generally concerned merely with 
the pattern of historical processes 
rather than their content. The T.C.C. 
offered an artificial way of overcom- 
ing these difficulties. The exponents 
of this theory (Spengler, Toynbee, 
qq.v-) maintained that the inner rela- 
tionships of history were reflected 
precisely in the form of historic proc- 
esses and in their “common cultural 
pattern”. They held that historical 
analogies do not require rationalisa- 
tion, being self-evident. Recourse to 
historical analogies was considered to 
be an intuitive insight into the fun- 
damental ontological structure of his- 
tory, rather than an auxiliary method. 
Recurrence, synchronism, and the cy- 
clic nature of historico-cultural proc- 
esses are regarded as the sole evidence 
of the existence of universal historical 
laws. The social bias of this theory 
is revealed in the doctrine of Spengler, 
who urges that historic action be based 
on conscientious imitation of the past. 
What this philosophy means in prac- 











Cultural-Historical Approach 


tice was seen in the ideology of fas- 
cism, which adopted the basic princi- 
ples of Spengler’s “historism”. 

Cultural-Historical Approach, a form 
of idealistic rationalisation of the in- 
ternal indivisibility and unity of the 
historical process. It was suggested to- 
wards the close of the 19th century by 
K. Lamprecht (1856-1915), a German 
historian of liberal views. Lamprecht 
challenged the individualisation meth- 
od prevalent in bourgeois historicity, 
i.e., the reduction of historiography 
to a description of the Jives of out- 
standing personalities (Ranke and his 
school). According to Lamprecht, the 
concept of culture facilitates a synthe- 
sis of the various aspects of social life. 
Culture is seen as a spontaneous con- 
sciousness woven directly into mate- 
rial relationships and reflected in the 
folk ways of a community. C.H.A. 
is a half-hearted attempt at an ideal- 
istic solution of the crisis of bourgeois 
historicity—by a purely eclectic as- 
sociation of individual aspects of so- 
cial life in the conception of culture 
and by recognition of material and 
economic relationships as merely one 
of the factors of spiritual evolution. 
Nevertheless, its insistence on regard- 
ing history as a study of the laws 
of social development was a distinct 
merit of the C.H.A. as compared with 
the other methods of bourgeois histori- 
ography. In contemporaneous Western 
literature on the philosophy of history 
the C.H.A. has been ousted by outright 
subjectivist theories. 

Cultural Revolution, an essential 
element of the socialist revolution, 
Hopi the necessity of reconstruct- 
ing the entire system of education with- 
in a reasonably short time and making 
the highest achievements of culture 
available to the masses, thereby as- 
suring direct participation of the masses 
in managing economic, social, and 
political life, creating a socialist intel- 
ligentsia, and forming a new, socialist 
culture. These main objectives hold 
good for any C.R , whatever may be 
the specific features of socialist con- 
struction in any given country. The 
C.R. in the USSR ended the spiritual 
slavery and ignorance of the Russian 


— 106 — 


Culture 


people: the land where most of the 
population were illiterate achieved a 
tremendous leap towards the summits 
of culture. The Soviet Union is now 
a land of complete literacy, with a 
high level of education, science, tech- 
nique, and culture. During the period 
of gradual transition from socialism to 
communism, cultural development, ac- 
cording to the Programme of the 
CPSU, will constitute the closing stage 
of the cultural revolution. At this stage 
the highest priority is given to the 
communist education (q.v.) of the 
people in the spirit of high moral 
integrity and devotion to communism, 
a communist attitude towards work 
and public property; total elimination 
of the survivals of capitalism (q.v.) 
in people’s consciousness; a universal, 
harmonious development of the indi- 
vidual; creation of a truly rich spiritual 
culture. Upon the solution of these 
problems largely depends the growth 
of the productive forces; the develop- 
ment of the technique and organisa- 
tion of production; the increased public 
activity of the masses; the development 
of the democratic principles of public 
self-administration; and the reorgani- 
sation of daily life along communist 
lines. 

Culture, all the material and spiri- 
tual values and the means of creating, 
utilising and passing them on, created 
by society in the course of history. 
More specifically, it is customary 
to distinguish material Ce (i.e., ma- 
chinery, experience in the field of pro- 
duction, and other material wealth), 
and spiritual C. (i.e., achievements 
in the realm of science, art, literature, 
philosophy, ethics, education, etc.). 
C. is a historic phenomenon, and its 
development is determined by the suc- 
cession of socio-economic formations. 
Unlike idealistic theories, which deny 
the material basis of C. and consider 
it to be the spiritual product of the 
“élité”, Marxism-Leninism sees pro- 
duction of material goods as the basis 
and source of spiritual C. Hence, C. 
is the product of the activities of the 
masses. Although basically determined 
by material circumstances, spiritual C. 
does not automatically follow changes 








Culture 


in material C., being characterised by 
relative independence and continuity 
of development and subject to the 
influence of the cultures of other 
peoples, etc. In any class society 
C. assumes a class character both as 
to its ideological content and its prac- 
tical aims. Under capitalism every 
national C. is split into two cultures, 
comprising the dominant C. of the 
bourgeoisie and the more or less devel- 
oped elements of democratic and so- 
cialist C. of the subjugated masses. 
This implies the necessity of distin- 
guishing the two concepts—“C. of bour- 
geois society” and “bourgeois C.” 
(i.e., the C. of the dominant class). 
Socialist C., assimilating as it does all 
the progressive achievements of the 
past, is radically different from the 
modern bourgeois C. from the stand- 
point of both ideology and social func- 
tion. Socialist C. cannot be created 
without a socialist revolution, an es- 
sential element of which is a cultural 
revolution (q.v.). Characteristic of so- 
cialist C. are: its kinship with the 
people, communist ideology, scientific 
world outlook, socialist humanism, 
collectivism, socialist patriotism, and 
internationalism. The leading role in 
the creation and development of social- 
ist C. belongs to the Communist Party, 
which influences the entire cultural 
and educational function of the social- 
ist state. Socialism implies: the 
fullest development of Cc. which are 
national in form and socialist in 
content; an increasingly intensive in- 
terchange of material and spiritual 
values among nations; increasing en- 
richment of the cultural treasure-house 
of each nation with values of an inter- 
national character; and the develop- 
ment of common communist cultural 
characteristics, which promotes the 
shaping of the common C. of the com- 
munist society of the future. “Absorb- 
ing and developing all the best that 
has been created by world culture, ”— 
says the Programme of the CPSU,— 
“communist culture will be a new, 
higher stage in the cultural progress 
of mankind. It will embody the versa- 
tility and richness of the spiritual 
life of society, and the lofty ideals 


— 107 — 


Custom 


and humanism of the new world. It 
will be the culture of a classless so- 
ciety, a culture of the entire people, 
of all mankind.” 

Cusa, Nicholas of, (1401-64) (his real 
name was Nicholas Crebs or Chrypffs; 
he is named after his birthplace), a 
German philosopher, scientist, and 
theologian of the transitional period 
between scholasticism and humanism 
and the new science of early capitalist 
society. Under the influence of Neo- 
Platonism (q.v.) he re-elaborated the 
concepts of Christian philosophy and 
the teaching of God as the maximum 
being, standing above the opposites in 
which man's limited reason thinks of 
the objects of nature. All opposites 
coincide in God: finite and infinite, 
smallest and greatest, single and mul- 
tiple, etc. Despite its mystic idealist 
content, the teaching of N.C. with its 
basic thesis of the concordance of 
contraries in God (coincidentia opposi- 
torum) contains a number of fruitful 
ideas. These are criticism of the limita- 
tions of speculative opposites; the meth- 
odological importance of mathemat- 
ical concepts for the cognition of na- 
ture; anticipation of the subsequent 
concept of infinitesimals; formulation 
of the question concerning limits of 
applying the law of contradiction in 


mathematics, etc. Main works: De 
Docta Ignorantia, 1440, De Genesi, 
1447. 

Custom, stable rules of behaviour 


established over a long time which 
regulate the people’s way of life in one 
sphere or another (for example, enter- 
tainment of a guest, marriage, festiv- 
ities, and so on). The development of 
Ce. is influenced by the history of a 
people, economic activity, natural cli- 
matic conditions, social position, reli- 
gious views, etc. Socialist society forms 
its own Cc. and preserves some old 
ones. Not all Cc. of the past are pro- 
gressive. Socialist society, for exam- 
ple, has to combat Cc. degrading wom- 
an, which arose in the period of feu- 
dalism. C. has the force of a social habit 
and influences the behaviour of peo- 
ple. Inasmuch as Cc. are of a social 
character, they are subject to moral 
evaluation. 





+ = 


Te 


—— O Sr e a E n 


~= ie 






Cuvier 


Cuvier, Georges (1769-1832), French 
naturalist, member of the Academy 
of Sciences in Paris. C. made a substan- 
tial contribution to the development 
of comparative anatomy and palae- 
ontology. Supported a metaphysical 
approach to natural phenomena; his 
catastrophe “theory” ruled out the 
concept of the evolution of animals 
and plants (see Lamarck, Geoffroy 
Saint-Hilaire). According to Engels, 
“Cuvier’s theory of the revolutions 
of the earth was revolutionary in phrase 
and reactionary in substance. In place 
of a single divine creation he put a 
whole series of repeated acts of crea- 
tion, making the miracle an essential 
natural agent.” (Dialectics of Nature, 
p. 240.) 

Cybernetics, the science of the com- 
mon features of processes and control 
systems in technological devices, living 
organisms and human organisations. 
The principles of C. were first set 
forth by Wiener (q.v.). The emergence 
of C. as a science was prepared by a 
number of technological and scientific 
achievements in the theory of auto- 
matic control; electronics, which made 
possible the construction of fast-ac- 
tion scanning and  programme-con- 
trolled computing devices; the theory of 
probability (q.v), notably its applica- 
tions in investigating problems of 
transmission and processing of infor- 
mation (q.v.); mathematical logic (q.v.) 
and the theory of algorithms (see Al- 
gorism); the physiology of nervous 
activity and homeostasis. As distinct 
from devices that transform energy 
or substance, cybernetic systems engage 
in processing information. In the study 
of control systems C. combines the 
macroscopic with the microscopic ap- 
proach. The macroscopic approach is 
employed when the internal structure 
of the system is not known and the 
only observable is the movement of 
information at its inputs and outputs 
(the information entering the system 
and the reaction of the system). In 
this way the main flows of information 
and the ultimate functions of the con- 
trol system are established. This type 
of problem is known as the “black 
box” problem. The microscopic ap- 


— 108 — 


Cybernetics 


proach assumes a certain knowledge 
of the internal structure of the control 
system and involves the determination 
of its basic elements in their inter- 
telationship, their algorithms of work 
and the possibility of synthetising a 
control system out of these elements. 
One of the central problems of C. is 
that of the structure of self-organising 
(self-adjusting) systems. These are com- 
plex control systems usually compris- 
ing hierarchies of interacting subsys- 
tems capable of maintaining or attain- 
ing certain states (or characteristics of 
their states) against external factors tend- 
ing to disturb or hinder those states. 
The most perfect _ self-organising 
systems have developed as a result 
of evolutionary processes in animate 
nature. That is why C. makes use of 
analogies between control functions 
in living organisms and technological 
devices. The importance of C. is seen 
primarily in the light of the opportuni- 
ties it opens up for the automation 
of production and all types of formal- 
ised human mental activity, the inves- 
tigation of biological contro) and regu- 
lation systems (hormonal, neural, he- 
reditary mechanisms) by the method 
of analogue simulation (q.v.), and the 
development of new types of medical 
apparatus. Another promising domain 
is the application of cybernetic meth- 
ods to economic studies and other 
spheres of organised human activity. 
This great diversity of applications 
of cybernetic methods is not due to 
any subjective whims and wills; its 
objective foundation is the existence 
of certain common features in the 
functions and structures of living or- 
ganisms and man-made devices ca- 
pable of mathematical description and 
investigation. Being in this respect 
a synthetic discipline, C. offers a 
striking example of a new type of in- 
teraction of sciences and provides 
abundant material for the philosophical 
investigation of the forms of motion 
of matter and the classification of sci- 
ences. The development of C. sparked 
debates on a number of methodological 
problems, viz., the analogies between 
human thinking and the workings of 
cybernetic mechanisms, the nature of 











Cynicism 


information and its connection with 
the physical concept of entropy (q.v.), 
the essence of what is called organised, 
purposeful, and living, and other prob- 
Jems of an indubitably philosophical 
nature around which a struggle between 
dialectical materialism and idealism 
has developed. Thus, idealist philos- 
ophy, which rejects the possibility 
of objective investigation of mental 
activity, comes out against the find- 
ings of C. which contribute to an un- 
derstanding of certain important as- 
pects and mechanisms of such activity. 
While recognising the objective sound- 
ness of cybernetic analogies, dialectical 
materialism at the same time empha- 
sises the erroneousness of completely 
identifying man with a machine and 
human intelligence with the function- 
ing of cybernetic systems. 

Cynicism, a trait of character marked 
by open scorn of moral rules. The 
school of cynics which existed in an- 


— 109 — 


Cyrenaics 


cient Greece (4th century B.C.) held 
customs and culture in contempt. Their 
scorn for the rules of conduct led them 
to violations of decency. Subsequently, 
people who shamelessly ignored rules 
of morality and decency came to be 
called cynics. C. is associated with 
insufficient cultural development, sel- 
fishness, and other negative traits. 

Cynics, a school of Greek philosophy 
(4th century B.C.), followers of An- 
tisthenes (q.v.). Diogenes of Sinope was 
the most prominent C. The C. voiced 
the views of the democratic sections 
of slave society. They considered con- 
tempt for social standards, renuncia- 
tion of wealth, glory, and all sensuous 
pleasures as the foundation of happi- 
ness and virtue. 

Cyrenaics, a school of Greek philos- 
ophy (North Africa, 5th century B.C.) 
founded by Aristippus of Cyrene. C. 
expounded the ideology of the slave- 
owning aristocracy. 








D 


Dadaism, a trend initiated in 1915-16 
in bourgeois art and literature by poets 
and artists who emigrated to Switzer- 
land to escape the horrors of the Ist 
World War, specifically the poets Tris- 
tan Tsara, Richard Hiilsenbeck and 
Jean Cocteau, and the artists Hans 
Arp, Marcel Duchamp, Joan Miro, 
Paul Klee, Max Ernst, Francis Picabia, 
and others. The anarchistic rebellion of 
the Dadaists against the inhumanity 
of war betokened the social helplessness 
of petty-bourgeois intellectuals, who 
attempted to explain class conflicts 
and people’s suffering by the alleged 
animal nature of man. The aesthetic 
principles of the Dadaists were pathos, 
more precisely psychosis, of destruction, 
an absurd fortuity of images and plots, 
and cynicism. Hence such unartistic 
Dadaist devices as words printed up- 
side down, senseless combinations of 
sounds, and shreds of paper» and 
crushed glass pasted on canvas. In due 
course, most of the Dadaists became 
exponents of abstract art (q.v.) and 
surrealism (q.v.), of which they were 
the immediate forerunners. 

Dalton, John (1766-1844), English 
chemist and physicist, largely instru- 
mental in establishing a concrete rela- 
tionship between the philosophical no- 
tion of atoms and rudimentary ele- 
ments, on the one hand, and experimen- 
tally obtained facts, on the other. D. 
considered chemical elements to be 
varieties of atoms with a strictly defined 
quantitative characteristic, atomic 
weight, and determined the atomic 
weights of many chemical elements. 
D. assumed that atoms were chemically 
indivisible and that they combined as 
complete units only. He discovered 
the law of simple multiple relations, 
which is one of the main laws in chem- 


istry. His discoveries helped to con- 
vert atomistic notions from a philo- 
sophical conjecture into a scientific 
theory and promoted the materialistic 
approach in natural science. Engels 
described D. as the father of modern 
chemistry. 

Darwin, Charles Robert (1809-82), 
English natural scientist, educated at 
Cambridge University, founded the the- 
ory of the historical development of 
the organic world. He generalised con- 
temporary biological knowledge and 
farming practices, augmented them 
with copious factual material obtained 
on his round-the-world voyage (1831- 
36), and deduced the evolution of liv- 
ing nature. In his The Origin of Species 
by Means of Natural Selection, or the 
Preservation of Favoured Races in the 
Struggle for Life (1859) he set forth 
the basic propositions of the theory 
of evolution (q.v.). In 1868 D. explained 
the origin of domestic animals and 
plants by artificial selection in The 
Variation of Animals and Plants Under 
Domestication. In The Descent of Man 
and Selection in Relation to Sex (1871) 
he offered a scientific exposition of 
the origination of man from animal 
ancestors. However, it was Engels who 
subsequently revealed the social causes 
which set man apart from the animal 
world, these being labour, coherent 
speech and the primitive herd. D.’s 
world outlook was materialistic; he 
was a spontaneous dialectician and 
atheist, but his way of thought had 
distinct bourgeois limitations. His 
works contributed greatly to the 
emergence of scientific biology, the 
struggle against idealism, theology and 
metaphysics, and helped to base 
natural science on dialectical material- 
ism.. 








Davydov 


Davydov, Ivan Ivanovich (1794- 
1863), Russian idealist philosopher and 
linguist, finished Moscow University 
in 1812 and was professor there from 
1822 to 1847. At first he eclectically 
combined different philosophical ideas, 
such as sensationalism (q.v.) and Schel- 
lingian idealism (see Schelling), as 
set out in his Nachalniyé osnovaniya 
logiki (Rudimentary Basis of Logic), 
1819-20. His Vstupitelnaya rech o voz- 
mozhnosti filosofii Rak nauki (Introduc- 
tory Speech on the Possibilities of 
Philosophy as a Science), 1826, also 
espoused Schellingian idealism. Sub- 
sequently, D. devoted his attention 
to literary criticism, linguistics and 
aesthetics. In his article “Could Russia 
Accept German Philosophy?”, 1841, 
D. attacked Hegel from a Rightist’s 
position and expounded the Slavophil 
(q.v.) notion of the national distinc- 
tiveness of Russian philosophy. 

Decembrists, Russian revolutiona- 
ries, mostly aristocrats, who organised 
an uprising against tsarist autocracy 
and serfdom in December 1825. Lenin 
described the D. and Herzen (q.v.) as 
the most outstanding leaders of Rus- 
sia’s liberation movement in its aris- 
tocratic stage. The D. formed secret 
societies (the Northern Society in 1821, 
the Southern Society in 1821 and the 
Society of United Slavs in 1823). But 
the influence of the D. extended beyond 
these organisations and spread to the 
progressive sections of Russian society. 
The armed uprising of the D. was 
crushed. Its most prominent leaders and 
ideologists (P. Pestel, K. Ryleyev, 
S. Muravyov-Apostol, P. Kakhovsky 
and M. Bestuzhev-Ryumin) were execut- 
ed, and more than 100 others were 
sentenced to hard labour. The move- 
ment of the D. was prompted by the 
discontent of the people, who languished 
under serfdom. The D. intended 
to destroy tsarist autocracy, abolish 
oppression and serfdom, and establish 
democratic freedoms. But owing to 
their aristocratic limitations they feared 
a popular revolution. Their tactics 
were hesitant. D. stood aloof from the 
people. Their plans for reorganising 
the Russian state were outlined chiefly 
in Pestel’s Russian Truth, N. Murav- 


= 


Decembrists 


yov’s Draft Constitution, Rules of the 
United Slavs, and other documents. 
Lenin noted the republican tradition 
which the D. introduced in progressive 
Russian social thought. The projects 
and ideas of the D. testified to the 
bourgeois orientation of their move- 
ment. They defined the purpose of 
philosophy as “finding the truth”, en- 
lightening the mind, purifying it of 
prejudice, and animating.love of country 
and humanity. The D. were influenced 
by the materialism of Lomonosov 
and Radishchev (qq.v.), and the ideas 
of the French materialist philosophers. 
The D. opposed the ideology of serf- 
dom, religion, mysticism, and ideal- 
ism. The materialists among the D. 
were I. Yakushkin, N. Kryukov, P. Bo- 
risov, I. Gorbachevsky, V. Rayevsky, 
etc. Their materialism was based on 
natural science. According to the D. 
the material world is governed by 
“immutable” laws, the chief being the 
law of causality. The D. hełd that 
thought is the special property of a 
material substance, the brain. However, 
they did not reduce the concept of 
thought to mere matter, but stressed 
its specific quality, failing, however, 
to grasp its social nature. The D. 
recognised that the world is cognisable 
and postulated two modes of cogni- 
tion—experience (or the senses) and 
intelligence. Under the influence of 
objects the senses yield ideas and sen- 
sations, while intelligence reveals the 
common features, the connection be- 
tween phenomena, the laws of the world. 
Validity of knowledge is verified by 
comparing new concepts with old and 
by removing the contradictions bet- 
ween the two. The materialists among 
the D. attacked Descartes’ dualism 
(q.v.) and the idealist German philos- 
ophers, and opposed the idealists in 
their own ranks (Y. Obolefisky, V. Kyu- 
khelbeker, M. Lunin, and others). 
The materialist outlook and knowledge 
of natural science prompted some D. 
towards atheism. The D. considered 
religion to be rooted in the yearning 
of the oppressed to mitigate their 
misery and their hope of a better life 
in the next world. Although the philos- 
ophy of the D. was progressive for its 





Decidability 


time, it was contemplative and tainted 
with metaphysics. D. approached so- 
cial matters from an idealistic stand- 
point and attributed prime importance 
in the life of society to education. 
Many D. sided with the theories of nat- 
ural law (q.v.) and social contract 
(q.v.). Their movement strongly in- 
fluenced the succeeding generation of 
Russian revolutionaries, the revolution- 
ary democrats, 

Decidability (in logical semantics), 
the relation between propositional func- 
tions (q.v.) and the material objects 
substituted for variables. D. is closely 
associated with the concept of truth- 
value. Assuming that the latter is the 
undefinable (primary) concept, D. may 
be defined by it, provided its substi- 
tution for the variable in the given 
propositional function yields a true 
statement. The object decides the prop- 
ositional function only. Thus, the 
object “sugar” decides the proposition- 
al function “x is sweet”, while “salt” 
does not. On the other hand, D. may 
be assumed as an undefinable concept 
whereby we determine the concept of 
truth in formalised languages (see 
Truth, etc.), as first done by Alfred 
Tarski. In that case, the primary 
(i.e., the simplest and unde finable) 
propositional functions and the ob- 
jects deciding them must be given. D. 
of any propositional function composed 
of premisses by means of logical prop- 
ositiona!l operations and by quantifiers 
(q.v.) depends on the decidability of 
the premisses. Thus, the compound 
propositional function “(x is white) 
and (x is sweet)” is decided for the ob- 
ject “sugar”, inasmuch as this object 
decides each of the component propo- 
sitional functions. 

Decision Problem, one of the basic 
problems which arise in logic in con- 
nection witH’ the construction of for- 
mal! logical systems. A positive or neg- 
ative fdecision for each concrete formal 
logical system is due to the existence 
or non-existence of some general meth- 
od {or algorithm, q.v.), which makes 
it possible to establish by a finite num- 
ber of operations whether a formula of 
the system in question is capable of 
proof or not in a given system. D.P. 


Deductive Theorem 


has a positive solution, e.g., in the 
propositional calculus (q.v.) and in 
formalised Aristotelian  syllogistic 
(q.v.). However in the functional cal- 
culus (q.v.) no general solution of this 
problem is possible. The impossibility 
of finding a general method of deci- 
sion for a formal system does not 
exclude the search for solutions for 
separate classes of formulas in that 
system. 

Deduction, the act of proving or 
inferring a conclusion (effect) with cer- 
tainty and necessity from one or more 
premisses by the laws of logic. A de- 
duced conclusion is a chain of proposi- 
tions, each of which is either a’premiss 
or proposition proceeding immediately 
by the laws of logic from earlier propo- 
sitions in the chain. In a deduced con- 
clusion the effects are concealed in the 
premisses and have to be inferred by 
methods of logical analysis. Exami- 
nations of the problems of mathemati- 
cal logic in the 19th and 20th centuries 
have added precision to notions con- 
nected with D. and shown that the con- 
cept of D. as a deduction from the gener- 
al to the particular is incomplete. 
The modern concept of D. is a far- 
reaching generalisation of the Aristo- 
telian interpretation of a syllogistic 
deduction (from the general to the 
particular). Broadly, D. denotes any 
deduction or inference. 

Deduction Theorem, a key theorem 
in metalogic (q.v.) saying that if prop- 
osition B is inferred (see Inference) 
from many premisses on the assumption 
that premiss A is also true, it is deduc- 
ible without the assumption (A is 
valid) from the given number of prem- 
isses that if A exists, so does B. 
D.T. is applied to many important 
logical systems, such as classical and 
constructive calculi of propositions and 
predicates, formal arithmetic, etc. It 
is not valid for some systems, e.g. 
certain systems of modal logic. D.T. is 
used extensively in non-formalised rea- 
soning. D.T. simplifies the process of 
proof. It was first defined (1928) and 
proved (1930) for a particular system 
by Jacques Herbrand, and formulated 
as a general methodological principle 
by Tarski (q.v.) in 1930. 





Deductive Method 


Deductive Method, a method of 
scientific inference based exclusively 
on deductive techniques (see Deduction 
and Conclusion). Attempts have been 
made in philosophy to draw a line of 
distinction between the D.M. and 
other methods (such as the inductive) 
and to define deductive reasoning 
as excluding experience and laying 
excessive stress on deduction in 
science. However, deduction and 
induction (qq.v.) are interconnected, 
and deductive reasoning is based on 
many centuries of man’s practical and 
cognitive effort. D.M. is one of the val- 
id methods of scientific inference, used, 
as arule, to systematise empirical data 
after they have been accumulated and 
theoretically interpreted, in order to 
infer all pertinent effects more strictly 
and consistently. This yields new knowl- 
edge, among other things, an aggregate 
of possible interpretations of a de- 
ductively formulated theory. The gen- 
eral scheme of the deductive systems 
(theories) includes: (1) basic premisses, 
that is, the aggregate of basic terms 
and propositions; (2) the devices of 
logic (rules of deduction and defini- 
tion) used; (3) the theory obtained 
from (1) by applying (2). Examination 
of such theories involves analysis of 
the interrelation of their specific com- 
ponents abstracted from the genesis 
and development of knowledge. It is, 
therefore, desirable to consider them as 
formalised languages (q.v.), which can 
analyse either syntactically or semanti- 
cally—syntactically when examining 
the relation between symbols and ex- 
pressions entering the language in iso- 
lation from their extra-lingual meaning, 
and semantically when the relations 
between symbols and expressions of 
the system are examined from the stand- 
point of their meaning and validity. 
Deductive systems are divided into 
axiomatic (see Axiomatic Method) and 
constructive (see Constructive, or Ge- 
netic, Method). When applied to knowl- 
edge based on experience and experi- 
ment, D.M. is more precisely termed 
as hypothetico-deductive (q.v.). Anal- 
ysis of the D.M. of inferring scientific 
knowledge began in antique philoso- 
phy (see Aristotle, Euclid, Stoics), and 


8-1682 


— 113 — 


Definition 


was dealt with at length in more recent 
times by Descartes, Pascal, Spinoza, 
Leibniz (qq.v-), and others. However, 
the principles of the deductive organi- 
sation of knowledge were not formulat- 
ed conclusively and definitely until 
the turn of the century (with extensive 
use of mathematical logic). Up to 
the end of the 19th century D.M. was 
applied almost exclusively in mathe- 
matics. It was not until the 20th cen- 
tury that attempts were made to apply 
D.M. (including the axiomatic method) 
to non-mathematical knowledge—phys- 
ics, biology, linguistics, sociology, etc. 

Definition, a logical method making 
it possible to distinguish, find or build 
some kind of object, formulate the 
significance of a newly introduced term 
or specify the significance of a term 
existing in science. The diversity of 
kinds of D. is determined by what is 
defined, the tasks, the logical structure 
of D., etc. With the help of real D. 
objects are singled out by their specific 
characteristics (properties and rela- 
tions). Often they assume the form of 
D. through a genus and specific distinc- 
tion. For example, “oxygen is an ele- 
ment (genus), whose atomic weight is 
equal to 16 (specific distinction)”. With 
the help of nominal Dd. new terms 
are introduced in science, both for 
teducing the more complex expressions 
and explaining the importance of new 
terms, etc. In semantic Dd. the defined 
is some kind of expression in a language 
and the defining is some kind of object 
(for example, the word “pentagon” 
means a polygon with five sides). In 
syntactic Dd the defined object differs 
from other objects by the rules for 
operating with it, the methods and 
purposes of its use (for example, pieces 
in chess are defined by indicating their 
initial positions on the chess board 
and rules for manipulating them in the 
course of the game). In genetic D. the 
defined object is singled out by indi- 
cating the mode of its formation, origin, 
or construction (e.g., “a circle is a 
closed curve formed by rotating in a 
plane a segment AB of a straight line 
around the fixed point A”). Dd. play 
a big role in science, being an essential 
part of any scientific theory. By means 











Deism 


of them new concepts are introduced 
into science, the results of research are 
recorded, intricate descriptions occur- 
ring in science are simplified, and so 
on. At the same time individual Dd. 
are limited because they cannot encom- 
pass the all-round connections of phe- 
nomena in their full development (see 


Operational Definitions, Inductive 
Definition). 
Deism, belief in the existence of 


God as an impersonal prime cause of 
the world. From the deistic point of 
view, the world, having been created, 
was abandoned to the operation of 
its own laws. D. first appeared in Eng- 
land. Herbert of Cherbury (1583-1648) 
was “the Father of Deism”. Where 
feudal religious concepts dominated, D. 
was often a surreptitious form of athe- 
ism and a convenient device of the 
materialists for eradicating religion. 
Exponents of D. in France were Vol- 
taire and Rousseau (qq.v.), in England 
Locke, Newton, Toland (qq.v.) and An- 
thony Ashley Cooper Shaftesbury, and 
in Russia Radishchev (q.v.), I. Pnin, 
I. Yertov, and others. Idealists, such as 
Leibniz and Hume (qq.v.), and dualists 
also donned the garb of D. At present, 
D. represents efforts to justify religion. 

Dembowski, Edward (1822-46), Po- 
lish philosopher, a leader of the revo- 
lutionary democratic group in the Cra- 
cow revolution of 1846. In the Manifesto 
of the Communist Party (q.v.) Marx 
and Engels described D.’s group as 
a party which considered agrarian rev- 
olution as a condition for Poland’s 
national liberation and, therefore, de- 
served communist support. In a speech 
on the Polish question (1848) Engels 
noted the “near proletarian courage” 
of D.’s group. In his philosophical dis- 
courses, D. Eoaunued the finest tradi- 
tions of the late 18th century Polish 
materialists, Hugo Kollataj and Sta- 
nislaw Staszic. He wrestled with He- 
gelian idealism and opposed the met- 
aphysical materialism of the French 
enlighteners, calling for a “philosophy 
of creation” or “philosophy of the fu- 
ture” based on the needs of the people, 
on the facts of practice. He believed 
that dialectics should justify the over- 
throw by the peasants of landowner 


— 114 — 


Democracy 


oppression and the necessity for estab- 
lishing a communist order. D. attacked 
Hegel for “reconciling himself to the 
existing evil”, for trying to press the 
new into the service of the old. D. was 
an atheist and denounced religion and 
the Catholic Church as an instrument 
of feudal reaction. However, his view 
of society was distinctly idealistic. He 
rejected Feuerbach’s naturalism and 
considered human reason the motive 
power of history. D. was a founder 
of the aesthetics of revolutionary de- 
mocracy in Poland and a vigorous op- 
ponent of the theory of “art for art’s 
sake”. D.’s main philosophical works 
are A Few Ideas About Eclecticism 
(1843), Creation as a Principle of Polish 
Philosophy (1843) and Ruminations on 
the Future of Philosophy (1845). 

Demiurge (Gk. démiourgos, lit. mak- 
er, artisan, spec., maker of the world, 
creator), with Plato (q.v.) and the Neo- 
Platonic mystics, the creator of the 
Universe, or deity. Hegel uses the term 
to denote the process of thought, which 
he deifies and describes as an indepen- 
dent power. 

Democracy (Gk. démocratia, the peo- 
ple and power, rule), a form of power 
officially proclaiming subjection of the 
minority to the will of the majority 
and recognising the freedom and equal- 
ity of citizens. Bourgeois science usu- 
ally confines itself in its definition of 
D. to these merely formal attributes 
and considers them in isolation from 
the socio-economic conditions prevail- 
ing in society and from the actual 
state of affairs. As a result, there 
emerges the conception of so-called 
pure democracy, also propounded by 
Te and reformists. As a form 
of political organisation of society ev- 
ery D. “ultimately serves production 
and is ultimately determined by the 
relations of production in a given so- 
ciety”. (Lenin, Vol. 32, p. 81.) It 
is, therefore, essential to weigh the 
historical development of D. and its 
immediate dependence on the change 
of socio-economic formations (q.v.) and 
on the character and acuteness of the 
class struggle. In the class formations, 
D. is a form of dictatorship exercised 
by the dominant class and is, therefore, 








Democracy 


of a class nature, existing in fact solely 
for members of the dominant class. In 
bourgeois society, for example, D. is 
a form of class domination by the 
bourgeoisie. Up to a point, the bourgeoi- 
sie wants D. as an instrument of its 
political rule. It frames a constitution, 
forms a parliament and other represent- 
ative bodies, and introduces (under 
pressure from the people) universal 
suffrage and formal political liberties. 
But the popular masses’ possibilities 
for utilising all these democratic rights 
and institutions are curtailed in every 
way. The democratic machinery of a 
bourgeois republic is so patterned as 
to paralyse the political activity of the 
working people and keep them out of 
political affairs. The formally pro- 
claimed political rights are not guaran- 
teed. The parliamentary system, i.e., the 
separation of legislative and executive 
power, coupled with a distinct relative 
growth of the latter, is typical of bour- 
geois D. Socialist D. is the highest 
form of D., genuine D. for the majority 
of the people, for the working people. 
Economically, it is based on social 
ownership of the means of production. 
Truly universal, direct and equal suf- 
frage by secret ballot was introduced 
for the first time in history in the So- 
viet Union without any of the restric- 
tions stipulated in the constitutions 
of even the most “democratic” of bour- 
geois states. All citizens of the USSR 
irrespective of sex, nationality and 
race, enjoy equal rights in political, 
economic and cultural affairs, and 
participate equally in the government 
of the state. Socialist D. secures the 
rights of citizens legislatively with ma- 
terial guarantees. For es in so- 
cialist society the right to labour is not 
simply proclaimed, but legislatively 
sanctioned and effectively secured by 
the abolition of exploitation, eradica- 
tion of unemployment, absence of crises 
in production, etc. Therein lies the 
basic difference between socialist D. 
and bourgeois D. The further develop- 
ment of socialist D. entails the emergence 
in the USSR of the state of the whole 
people (see State of the Whole People). 
The Programme of the CPSU says that 
in the period of the gradual develop- 


ge 


Sails 


Democritus of Abdera 


ment of socialist society into commu- 
nist society there will be further all- 
round development of socialist D., 
leading in due course to the replace- 
ment of the state by communist public 
self-administration (see Communist 
Public Self-Administration). 

Democratic Socialism, official ideol- 
ogy of modern reformism (q.v.) set 
out in the declaration of the Frankfurt 
Congress of the Socialist International, 
“Goals and Tasks of Democratic Social- 
ism” (1951), in opposition to the ideol- 
ogy of Marxism-Leninism. The theo- 
retical roots of D.S. go back to Neo- 
Kantianism (q.v.) and its notions of 
ethical socialism. Socialism, it says,. 
is not a natural product of historical 
development, but a moral ideal equally 
acceptable to all sections of society. 
D.S. infers that the socialist reconstruc- 
tion of society is basically a morak 
problem, a problem of the re-education 
and education of people in the socialist 
spirit. It rejects class struggle, socialist 
revolution, and dictatorship of the 
proletariat. Socialism, it contends, 
emerges “democratically”, i.e., from an 
aggregate of social and, in particular, 
cultural and educational measures effect- 
ed within the framework of the bour- 
geois state by bourgeois governments, 
and exists as a “democracy”, i.e., as 
a harmonious unity of all social strata 
and groups, the capitalists included. 
Objectively, D.S. is designed to per- 
petuate the foundations of bourgeois 
society. 

Democritus of Abdera (c. 460-370 
B.C.), ancient Greek materialist philos- 
opher, disciple of Leucippus (q.v.), 
“first encyclopaedian mind among the 
Greeks”. (Marx.) Lenin described D. 
as the brightest exponent of material- 
ism in antiquity. A founder of atom- 
istics (q.v.), he believed in two prime 
beginnings: atoms and vacuum, The 
atoms, he contended, being indivisi- 
ble particles of matter, were immuta- 
ble, eternal and in continuous motion, 
differing only in shape, size, position, 
and order. They did not have other 
properties, such as sound, colour, taste, 
etc., and existed conditionally, “not 
by the nature of the things themselves”. 
This point of view contains the embryo. 





Demonstration 


of the teaching on the primary and 
secondary properties (q.v.) of things. 
Combination of atoms produced bodies, 
while their dissolution brought about 
the end of bodies. An infinite multi- 
tude of atoms was eternally in motion 
in infinite vacuum. When moving in 
different directions the atoms some- 
times collided, producing vortices of 
atoms. There was an infinite multitude 
of worlds “born and dying”, created 
not by God, but arising and being 
destroyed of necessity, in a natural 
way. D. identified causality and neces- 
sity and denied accident, which he con- 
sidered the outcome of ignorance. In 
his theory of knowledge he assumed 
that bodies emit thin shells (ideas, or 
images) of things which react on the 
senses. Sensory perception is the main 
source of cognition, but yields no more 
than a “dim” knowledge of things. 
It is transcended by another, “bright”, 
more subtle knowledge, knowledge by 
reason, which leads to the cognition 
of the essence of the world—atoms and 
vacuum. Thereby D. raised the prob- 
lem of the relation of the senses to rea- 
son in cognition. His political views 
gravitated towards antique democracy. 
He opposed the slave-owning aristoc- 
racy. D.’s materialism was continued 
by Epicurus and Lucretius (qq.v.). 

Demonstration, see Proof. 

De Morgan, Augustus (1806-71), Eng- 
lish mathematician and logician; pro- 
fessor of mathematics, University Col- 
lege, London (1828-66); first president 
of the London Mathematical Society. 
Algebra was his main sphere of inter- 
est. He wrote several essays on logic, 
advocating mathematical methods and 
presenting the first results of their use. 
His name has been given in mathemat- 
ical logic to the following fundamen- 
tal laws of the algebra of logic (q.v.): 
denial of conjunction is equiva- 
lent to disjunction (q.v.) from the 
negations, q.v. (A°B is equivalent to 
A VB); negation of disjunction is equiv- 
alent to conjunction from the negations 
(AVB is equivalent to A-B). His main 
work is Formal Logic, or the Calculus of 
Inference, Necessary and Probable (1847). 

Denotation and Designation, see Name. 


— 116 — 


Denotation and Sense 


Denotation and Sense 1. The 
meaning of a thing is its significance 
for society; it depends on the function 
that thing performs in the activity 
of people. It is determined by the real 
objective essence of the thing, which 
performs only the functions that are 
determined by its own nature. People 
convey to one another the significance 
of a thing by means of various language 
signs. In language, the practical sig- 
nificance of things is recorded, consoli- 
dated and preserved in the D. of 
words. S. is a specification of D. in 
relation to other words or an objective 
situation. The relationship and inter- 
connection of Dd., which gives rise 
to their S., is determined either by 
objective factors of reality and the 
objective logic of reasoning or by sub- 
jective factors: the wishes, aspirations, 
social (also class) and personal aims 
and intentions of man, etc. Only social 
practice brings this or that S. of objec- 
tive meanings into conformity with the 
essence of real things and phenomena. 
It casts aside subjective distortions 
and fixes the diversity of senses which 
reproduces the real diversity of concrete 
things or phenomena. 2. In linguis- 
tics, D. (lexical meaning) is understood 
as the sense of the word. Words as 
a rule have different denotations and 
also various senses. Hence, the D. of 
words greatly depends on the context 
and situation in which words are used. 
3. The concepts of D. & S. in linguistic 
expressions which denote objects are 
elaborated in logical semantics. The 
D. of a linguistic expression is usually 
understood as the object or class of 
objects which denotes (names), the giv- 
en expression (nominatum), and the 
sense of the expression is understood 
as its connotation, i.e., the information 
contained in it which makes it possible 
to assign the given expression to one 
abject or another. Thus, “the Evening 
Star” and “the Morning Star” have as 
their meaning (nominatum) one and the 
same object, the planet Venus, but 
their connotation, their sense, differs. 
In contemporary logic, the differentia- 
tion between D. and S. dates to Frege 
(q.v.). Questions related to criteria of 
equality of sense (synonymics) of lin 








Descartes 


guistic expressions are studied by 
logical semantics, q.v. (see Name). 
Descartes, René, latinised as Rena- 
tus Cartesius (1596-1650), French phi- 
losopher, mathematician, physicist,'and 
physiclogist. Educated at the Jesuit 
College at La Flèche. After army ser- 
vice he settled in Holland, the foremost 
capitalist country of his time, where 
for twenty years he devoted himself 
to secluded scientific and philosophical 
research. Persecuted by Dutch theolog- 
ians, he moved to Sweden (1649), 
where he died. D.’s philosophy is linked 
up with his mathematics, cosmog- 
ony, and physics. He is one of the 
founders of analytical geometry. In 
mechanics he noted the relativity of 
motion and rest, formulated the general 
law of action and counteraction and 
the law that the quantity of motion of 
two non-resilient bodies is the same 
during impact as before it. In cosmogo- 
ny he postulated the novel idea of the 
natural development of the solar sys- 
tem. He contended that vortices of par- 
ticles were the main form of motion 
of cosmic matter, and that they deter- 
mined the structure of the world and 
the origin of the heavenly bodies. 
His hypothesis gave impetus to the 
advancement of dialectics, although 
with him development was still a mech- 
anistic concept. D.’s teaching on 
matter, or the corporeal substance 
(q.v.), was based on his mathematical 
and physical investigations. D. iden- 
tified matter with extension, or space. 
Extension, he conjectured, alone did 
not depend on any subjective element 
and was conditioned by the necessary 
properties of the corporeal substance. 
However, dualism (q.v.) invaded D.’s 
materialistic physics. The common cause 
of motion, he averred, is God. God 
created matter together with motion 
and rest, and maintained the same quan- 
tity of motion and rest in matter. 
D.’s doctrine on man was equally 
dualistic. He contended that a soulless 
and lifeless bodily mechanism com- 
bined in man with a volitional and 
tational soul. Body and soul, which 
are heterogeneous, interact by means 
of a special organ, the so-called pineal 
gland. In physiology D. established a 


— W7 — 


Deschamps 


scheme of motor reactions, this being 
one of the earliest descriptions of 
reflex actions. However, D.’s material- 
istic physiology conflicted with his 
ideas of the immaterial soul. In con- 
trast to the body, whose essence lies 
in extension, the essence of the soul 
lies in thought. D. considered animals 
to be no more than elaborate automata 
devoid of soul and mental capacity. 
Like Bacon (q.v.), D. defined the ulti- 
mate end of knowledge as man’s mas- 
tery of the forces of nature, discovery 
and invention of technical devices, 
perception of causes and effects and 
improvement -of the essence of man. 
To attain this end, one must refuse to 
believe anything until it is proved 
completely. This disbelief does not 
imply that all existence is not cognis- 
able; it is a method of finding the un- 
conditionally authentic beginning in 
knowledge, which D. defines as “cogito: 
ergo sum”. D. employed this formula 
to deduce the existence of God and 
then the reality of the outer world. 
In epistemology, D. was the founder 
of rationalism (q.v.), which sprang 
from his one-sided understanding of 
the logical nature of mathematics. D. 
believed that the universal and neces- 
sary character of mathematical knowl- 
edge derived from the nature of the 
brain. He, therefore, attributed exclu- 
sive power in the act of cognition to 
deduction based on valid intuitively 
comprehended axioms. D.’s doctrine 
of the immediate validity of self-con- 
sciousness, of innate ideas (among 
which he included the idea of God, 
and of the spiritual and corporeal 
substances), influenced subsequent ideal- 
istic schools and was strongly attacked 
by materialist philosophers. On the 
other hand, D.’s basically materialistic 
teaching on nature, his theory of the 
development of nature, his materialist 
physiology and his mechanistic meth- 
od, which was inimical to theology, 
influenced the materialist world out- 
look. His main works are Le Discours de 
la méthode (1637) and Principia philo- 
sophiae (1644). 
Deschamps, Léger-Marie (1716-74), 
French materialist philosopher, Bene- 
dictine monk. His main work, La Vé- 











Description 


ritė ou le vrai système, first appeared 
in Russian (1930). In his philosophical 
views D. combined a rationalistic ten- 
dency gravitating towards Spinozism 
with peculiar dialectical ideas. The 
pivotal concept of his system, the “uni- 
versal whole”, postulates unity of all 
physical bodies. He describes the “uni- 
versal whole” as a hypersensual essence 
perceptible to reason, but not to 
the senses. D. contended that the con- 
cept of God is man-made and believed 
atheism to be the privilege of a limited 
circle of enlighteners. 

Description, a stage of scientific study 
which consists in recording the data 
of an experiment or observation with 
the help of a definite system of designa- 
tions accepted in science. D. is made 
both by means of the usual language 
and figures and by ‘special means com- 
prising the language of science (sym- 
bols, matrixes, diagrams, etc.). D. is a 
preparatory stage of transition to a 
theoretical study of an object (see Ex- 
planation) in science. D. and explana- 
tion are closely connected and dialecti- 
cally pass one into the other. Without 
a D. of facts it is impossible to explain 
them; on the other hand, D. without an 
explanation is not enough for science. 
Interpreting the nature of scientific 
study from positions of extreme phe- 
nomenalism (q.v.), the positivists (see 
Comte, Mach, Pearson, and others) 
declared the only task of science to be 
“pure description of facts”. In con- 
temporary positivism (q.v.) this theory 
has assumed quite a veiled form. 

Desnitsky, Semyon Yefimovich (d. 
1789), Russian enlightener, law expert, 
sociologist; educated at Moscow and 
Petersburg universities, later at Glas- 
gow University, where he took his 
master’s degree (1767). On returning 
to Russia he was professor of law at 
Moscow University. His works, Slovo 
o pryamom i blizhaishem sposobe k nau- 
cheniyu yurisprudentsii ( About the Di- 
rect and Closest Method of Teaching 
Jurisprudence), 1768, Yuridicheskoye 
rassuzhdeniye o nachale i proiskhozhde- 
nii supruzhestva (Legal Discourse on 
the Beginning and Origin of Marriage), 
1775, Yuridicheskoye rassuzhdeniye o 
raznykh ponyatiyakh, kakiye imeyut 


— 118 — 


Determinism and Indeterminism 


narody o sobsivennosti (Legal Discourse 
of the Different Concepts of Nations on 
Property), 1781, Yuridicheskoye ras- 
suzhdeniye o veshchakh suyashchennykh, 
svyatykh i prinyatykh . v blagochestiye 
(Legal Discourse of Things Sacred, 
Saintly and Pious), 1772, etc., were 
prominent in the development of Russian 
sociological thinking. D. referred to 
four stages (hunting, animal husband- 
ry, land cultivation, and the “com- 
mercial state”) in the development of 
mankind. He was one of the first men 
in Russia to speak of the historical 
origin and development of property 
and the family. He shared the views 
of Anichkov (q.v.) on the origin of 
religious beliefs, opposed serfdom and 
worked out a draft of a new Russian 
“legislative, juridical, and punitive 
authority”, which was rejected by the 
tsarist government. 

Determinism and Indeterminism, op- 
posite philosophical concepts of the 
place and role of causality (q.v.). D. 
is a doctrine on the universal causative 
origin of all phenomena. Consistent 
D. postulates the objective character 
of causality. This distinguishes it 
from various _pseudo-deter ministic 
trends, which, though they profess to 
recognise universal causality, really 
curtail it by denying its objective na- 
ture (see Kant). I. denies the universal 
nature of causality, while its extreme 
variety goes to the length of denying 
causality as such. Deterministic notions 
first appeared in ancient philosophy 
and were most clearly postulated by 
the antique atomists. The concept of D. 
was substantiated and developed by 
natural science and materialist philos- 
ophy, by Bacon, Galileo, Descartes, 
Newton, Lomonosov, Laplace, Spino- 
za (qq. v.) and the French 18th cen- 
tury materialists (q.v.). Their D. was 
necessarily mechanistic and abstract 
in conformity with the level of con- 
temporary natural science. They be- 
lieved the forms of causality to be abso- 
lute and governed by the strictly dynam- 
ic laws of mechanics, identified cau- 
sality and necessity, and denied the 
objective character of chance. Pierre 
Simon de Laplace defined this point 
of view more conclusively than other 











Development 


philosophers (hence Laplacian D., the 
other name of mechanistic D.). Laplace 
held that the co-ordinates and impulses 
of all particles in the Universe at a 
given instant determine its state at 
any past or future instant. This brand 
of D. leads to fatalism (q.v.), possesses 
a mystical complexion and, in effect, 
merges with belief in divine predesti- 
nation. Scientific developments refuted 
Laplacian D. not only with reference 
to organic nature and social life, but 
also to physics. The discovery of the 
correlation of uncertainties (q.v.) in 
quantum mechanics proved Laplacian 
D. puerile, but it was at once interpret- 
ed by idealist philosophers in the spir- 
it of I. (conclusions about the “free 
will” of the electron, absence of cau- 
sality in micro-processes, etc.). Dialec- 
tical materialism removed the limita- 
tions of mechanistic D. It recognises 
the objective and universal character 
of causality and does not identify it 
with necessity. Neither does it reduce 
its operation to the purely dynamic 
type of laws (see Statistical and Dynam- 
ic Laws). The continuous contro- 
versy between D. and I. has now be- 
come more acute in natural science and 
particularly in social science. In so- 
ciology, I. is presented as voluntarism 
(q.v.). Also, it wears the cloak of em- 
pirical sociology (q.v.) and opposes 
social science, which, it says, merely 
describes individual phenomena (ideo- 
graphic sciences), to natural science, 
which establishes laws (nomothetic sci- 
ences). Though not rejecting D. as such, 
some sociologists view it in a crudely 
vulgar light (biological theories of 
social development, vulgar technicism, 
etc.). It was historical materialism 
which first introduced genuine D. in 
social research. 

Development, the process of self- 
motion from the lower (simple) to the 
higher (complex), revealing the in- 
ternal tendencies and the essence of 
phenomena, and leading to the appear- 
ance of the new (see the New and the 
Old). The D. of inorganic systems, 
the living world, human society, cog- 
nition is governed by the general laws 
of dialectics. D. proceeds in the form 
of a spiral. Each single process of D. 


— 119 — 


Dewey 


has a beginning and an end, the end 
being already contained in a tendency 
at the beginning, and the completion 
of one cycle marking the beginning of 
a new one, in which some features of 
the first may be repeated. D. is an 
immanent process: the transition from 
the lower to the higher takes place be- 
cause the tendency to the higher is con- 
tained in the lower in a concealed form, 
and the higher is but the developed low- 
er. However, it is only ata sufficiently 
high stage of D. that the signs of the 
higher contained in the lower are fully 
revealed. For instance, consciousness is 
the result of the D. of the objective world 
as a whole, and only from this point 
of view is it possible to discover the 
property of reflection underlying mat- 
ter. The reproduction of D. in a theo- 
retical form becomes possible once the 
methods and means of dialectical logic 
are used (see the Historical and the 
Logical). 

“The Development of the Monist 
View of History”, the work written by 
Plekhanov (q.v.) who published it in 
1895 under the pseudonym of N. Bel- 
tov. Lenin described it as “a book 
which has helped to rear a whole gen- 
eration of Russian Marxists”. (Lenin, 
Vol. 16, p. 269.) It thoroughly analyses 
pre-Marxist philosophy and sociology, 
critically examines the views of the 
French 18th century  materialists, 
French bourgeois historians of the Res- 
toration period, utopian socialists; and 
idealist German philosophers. Plekha- 
nov reveals the class limitations of 
these theories and demonstrates that 
it was Marx and Engels who created a 
scientific materialist philosophy, that 
only Marxism furnished a genuine 
science of society and discovered the 
material basis of social development. 
Besides an exposition of Marxist phi- 
losophy the book gives a profound cri- 
tique of Narodism -(q.v.). This criti- 
cism was especially important in Rus- 
sia at that time. Today, too, it is one 
of the best works for studying the phi- 
losophy of Marxism. 

Dewey, John (1859-1952), American 
idealist philosopher, who had a great 
influence on philosophy, sociology, aes- 
thetics, and pedagogics in the United 





branar 


e rae 


per 


me 3 ee eS 


` 
t 
f 
y 

uE 
i} 

H 


w~ 
et 


Ss 


— 





Dézami 


States; founder of the Chicago school 
of pragmatism (q.v.). His new version 
of pragmatism is known as instrumen- 
talism (q.v.), or “humanist natural- 
ism”. D. is at pains to conceal the 
subjective-idealist and agnostic essence 
of his philosophy, which is aimed 
against the materialist theory of re- 
flection (q.v.). In his sociological works 
he is an advocate of bourgeois liberal- 
ism (“regulated freedom”, “equal op- 
portunity”) and of individualism. To 
the class struggle and socialist revolu- 
tion he counterposes class co-operation 
and improvement of society through 
educational reform. His “experimental 
method” of education stresses the incul- 
cation of individual skill, initiative, 
and enterprise at the expense of scien- 
tific knowledge. Main works: School 
and Society (1899), Experience and Na- 
ture (1925), Art as Experience (1934), 
Logic: The Theory of Inquiry (1938), 
etc. 

Dézami, Théodore (1803-50), French 
utopian socialist (q.v.), member of 
secret revolutionary societies (Société 
des Saisons, Société Républicaine Cen- 
trale, and others). In the 1848 revolu- 
tion he championed the demands of 
the workers. D.’s utopian theory drew 
on the ideas of Morelly, Babeuf. and 
Fourier (age He opposed the “peace- 
ful” brand of Etienne Cabet’s (q.v.) 
communism and the Christian Social- 
ism of Hugues Félicité Lamennais. 
Philosophically, D. was a materialist 
and atheist, and a follower of Helvé- 
tius (q.v.). Marx acclaimed D.’s the- 
ory as “realistic humanism” and a 
“logical basis of communism”. D.’s 
main work is Code de la Communaute 


(1842). 
Dialectical Theology, a trend in 
contemporary protestant theology 


which has spread chiefly in West Ger- 
many. Its ideological roots go back to 
the mystical religious teaching of Kier- 
kegaard (q.v.) and to German existen- 
tialism (q.v.). Its founder, the West 
German theologian Karl Barth (b. 1886, 
now resident in Switzerland) called 
for a revival of the original reformation 
theology in the spirit of Calvinism 
(see Calvin), and opposed all rational 
demonstration of religious faith, wheth- 


— 120 — 


Dialectics 


er philosophical proof of the existence 
of God in Catholic philosophy or the 
inference of faith from the “emotions 
of the pious soul” (see Schleiermacher). 
Barth and other exponents of D.T. 
make free use of Hegelian terminology 
in their writings. D.T. appeared in 
Germany after the Ist World War 
(the 1920s) as an attempt to explain 
the crisis of bourgeois society by the 
“spiritual crisis of man”. Politically, 
the exponents of D.T. merge with the 
liberal groups among the West German 
bourgeoisie. 

Dialectics, science of the most gener- 
al laws governing the development of 
nature, society, and thought. The scien- 
tific conception of D. was preceded by 
a long history of development and the 
very concept of D. emerged through 
revision, even defeat, of the original 
meaning of the term. In antiquity 
philosophers strongly stressed the mu- 
tability of all existence and considered 
the world as a process, postulating 
change of every property into its op- 
posite. Take Heraclitus (q.v.), some 
of the Miletus philosophers, and the 
Pythagoreans (q.v.). But the term D. 
was not as yet used. Originally, the 
term (dialektiké téchné—art of dialectic) 
denoted the art of dispute and debate, 
i.e., a) the art of debate by means of 
questions and answers, and b) the art 
of classifying concepts, dividing things 
into genera and species. Aristotle (q.v.), 
who did not understand the D. of Herac- 
litus, believed that it had been invent- 
ed by Zeno of Elea (q.v.), who analysed 
the conflicting aspects in the con- 
cepts of motion and plurality. Aristotle 
differentiated D., the science of prob- 
able opinions, from analytics, the 
science of proofs. On the heels of the 
Eleatics (q.v.), Plato (q.v.) defined 
true being as identical and immutable, 
yet gave credence in his dialogues 
Sophist and Parmenides to the dialecti- 
cal conclusion that the higher genera 
of existence can each be conceived only 
as being and not being, as equal to 
themselves and not equal to them- 
selves, as identical to themselves and as 
passing into “something else”. There- 
fore, being contains contradictions: it 
is single and plural, eternal and tran- 











Dialectics 


sient, immutable and mutable, at 
rest and in motion. Contradiction is 
the necessary condition and prompts 
the soul to reflection. This art, accord- 
ing to Plato, is the art of D. The 
development of D. was continued by 
the Neo-Platonists (see Plotinus and 
Proclus). In scholasticism, the philos- 
ophy of feudal society, the term D. 
was used to denote formal logic as op- 
posed to rhetoric. In the early stage 
of capitalist development, dialectical 
ideas on the “coincidence of oppo- 
sites” were enunciated by Nicholas of 
Cusa and Bruno (qq.v.). Later, despite 
the prevalence of metaphysics (q.v.), 
Descartes (q.v.) and Spinoza (q.v.) 
produced specimens of dialectical 
thought, the former in his cosmogony and 
the latter in his teaching on substance 
as the self-cause. A wealth of dialectical 
ideas was produced by Rousseau and 
Diderot (qq.v.). Rousseau examines 
contradiction as a condition of histori- 
cal development. Diderot goes a step 
further and investigates contradictions 
in the contemporary social conscious- 
ness in Le Neveu de Rameau. The most 
important pre-Marxian stage in the de- 
velopment of D. was German classical 
idealism which, in contrast to meta- 
physical materialism, considered reality 
not merely as an object of cognition, 
but also as an object of activity. How- 
ever, ignorance of the true, material 
basis of cognition and activity of the 
subject, limited and distorted the dia- 
lectical notions of the German idealists. 
The first to make a breach in metaphys- 
ics was Kant (q.v.). He noted the pur- 
port of opposite forces in the physical 
and cosmogonic processes and followed 
Descartes in introducing the idea of 
development into cognition of nature. 
In his epistemology, Kant developed 
dialectical ideas in his teaching of 
antinomies. Yet he described D. of 
reason as an illusion which evaporates 
as soon as thought recedes within it- 
self, bounded by the cognition of phe- 
nomena proper. Later, Fichte (q.v.) 
developed his so-called antithetical 
method of inferring categories in his 
Wissenschaftslehre, and this method 
contained important dialectical ideas. 
After Kant, Schelling (q.v.), too, de- 


— 121 — 


Dialectics 


veloped a dialectical appreciation of 
the phenomena of nature. The idealistic 
D. of Hegel (q.v.) was the summit in 
the development of pre-Marxian D. 
Notwithstanding Hegel’s false concept, 
“for the first time the whole world, 
natural, historical, intellectual, is rep- 
resented as a process, i.e., as in con- 
stant motion, change, transformation, 
development; and the attempt is made 
to trace out the internal connection 
that makes a continuous whole of all 
this movement and development” (En- 
gels, Anti- Dühring, pp. 37-38). Hegel 
contended that D., in contrast to the 
various abstract definitions of reason, 
is the transition of one definition into 
another, revealing that these defini- 
tions are one-sided and limited, i.e., 
that they contain negation of them- 
selves. For this reason, Hegel said, D. is 
“the life and soul of scientific progress, 
the dynamic which alone gives imma- 
nent connection and necessity to the 
body of science”. The result of Hegel’s 
D. transcended by far the significance 
which the author himself ascribed to 
it. Hegel's teaching on the necessity 
with which all things arrive at their 
own negation, contained an element 
which revolutionised life and thought, 
for which reason the foremost thinkers 
of the time regarded his D. as the “al- 
gebra of revolution” (Herzen). A truly 
scientific appreciation of D. was given 
by Marx and Engels. They discarded 
the idealistic content of Hegel’s philos- 
ophy and based D. on their material- 
istic understanding of the historical 
process and the development of knowl- 
edge, on their generalisation of the 
real processes taking place in nature, 
society and thought. Scientific D. or- 
ganically combines the laws governing 
the development of being and the laws 
of cognition, these two being identical 
and differing in form only. For this 
reason, materialist D. is not only an 
“ontological”, but also an epistemolog- 
ical teaching, a logic which regards 
thought and cognition equally as being 
in a state of coming into being and de- 
velopment, inasmuch as things and 
phenomena are what they are becoming 
in the process of development and con- 
tain as a tendency their own future, or 





AD ee + 


ni 
‘ 
oi) 
N 





“Dialectics of Nature” 


what they will become. In this sense 
the theory of knowledge, too, is consid- 
ered by materialist D. as a generalised 
history of cognition; and every concept, 
every category is, therefore, historical 
in nature, despite its extremely gener- 
al character. Contradiction is-the chief 
category of materialist D. In the teach- 
ing on contradiction it reveals the mo- 
tive force and source of all development. 
It contains the key to all the other cat- 
egories and principles of dialectical 
development—development by passage 
of quantitative changes into qualita- 
tive ones, interruption of gradualness, 
leaps, negation of the initial moment 
of development and negation of this 
very negation, and repetition at a 
higher level of some of the features and 
aspects of the original state. Materialist 
D. is a philosophical method of investi- 
gating nature and society. None but 
the correct dialectical approach will 
yield an understanding of the complex 
and contradictory emergence of objec- 
tive truth, the connection, at every 
point in the development of science, 
between elements of the absolute and 
the relative, the stable and the change- 
able, and the transition from one 
set of forms of generalisation to other, 
deeper forms. The revolutionary sub- 
stance of materialist D., which does 
not suffer the slightest stagnation or 
immobility, makes it an instrument for 
the practical reconstruction of society 
and helps to assess the objective his- 
torical requirements of social develop- 
ment, the discrepancy between old 
forms and new content, the necessity 
of transition to higher forms stimulat- 
ing the progress of mankind. The strat- 
egy and tactics of the struggle for 
communism are framed to conform 
fully tọ the dialectico-materialistic 
world outlook (see Logic, Dialectical). 

“Dialectics of Nature”, a book by 
Frederick Engels first published in the 
USSR (1925), consists of notes (1873- 
86) treating the key problems of the 
dialectics of nature. Engels held that 
the philosophy of dialectical material- 
ism should be based on exhaustive 
knowledge of the natural sciences and 
that the natural sciences, in turn, could 
not develop fruitfully, unless based on 


— 122 — 


“Dialectics of Nature” | 


dialectical materialism. D.N. contains 
a profound philosophical investigation 
of history and the most important 
questions in natural science, and crit- 
icises mechanistic materialism, the 
metaphysical method, and idealistic 
concepts in natural science. Deeply | 
versed in contemporary science, Engels 
demonstrated how the metaphysical 
conception of nature is exploded from 
within by scientific progress and com- 
pelled to give place to the dialectical 
method. He showed, too, that natural 
scientists are forced to abandon the 
metaphysical approach and adopt the 
dialectical, with consequent beneficial 
effects on natural science. Engels pro- 
duced an exhaustive substantiation of 
the dialectico-materialistic teaching on 
the forms of motion of matter. In keep- 
ing with this teaching, he worked out 
the principles for classifying the nat- 
ural sciences, suggesting a concrete 
classification, on which he based his 
work. Engels made a detailed philo- 
sophical study of the basic laws of 
natural science and revealed their 
dialectical nature. He showed the true 
purport of the law of the preservation 
and conversion of energy, which he 
described as the absolute law of nature. 
He also dealt with the so-called second 
principle of thermodynamics and dem- 
onstrated the fallacy of the conclu- 
sion that the Universe was steadily 
approaching thermal death (q.v.). En- 
gels made a thorough analysis of Dar- 
win’s (q.v.) teaching on the origin of 
species and showed that its main point, 
the theory of development, agreed in 
full with materialistic dialectics. At 
the same time, he revealed the flaws | 
and gaps in Darwin’s teaching. En- 
gels delved into the role of labour in 
the emergence and development of 
man. He also showed how mathemati- _ 
cal concepts and operations reflect the i 
| 





relation of things and processes in na- 
ture, where they have their real pro- 
totypes, and noted that the introduc- 
tion of variables in higher mathematics | 
signified the spread of dialectics. En- i 
gels investigated the relation between | 
chance and necessity, and revealed — 
with sparkling dialectical skill that the | 
mechanistic and idealistic approaches 





Dichotomy 


to this complex problem were both 
erroneous. He offered a Marxist 
solution and used Darwin’s teaching 
to show how natural science confirmed 
and specified the propositions of dia- 
lectics. To be sure, some particulars 
related to special problems in natural 
science treated by Engels in his book, 
have grown obsolete as a result of the 
immense scientific progress since 
achieved, but his dialectico-materialistic 
approach to analysis of natural science 
and its philosophical generalisation 
is entirely valid to this day. Many 
propositions laid down in D.N. antic- 
ipated scientific developments by de- 
cades. The book is a model of dialecti- 
cal thinking on complex problems of 
natural science. It was not prepared 
for print by Engels himself, and con- 
sists of separate articles, notes, and 
fragments. This should be borne in 
mind when studying it. 

Dichotomy, see Division of the Vol- 
ume of Concepts. 

Dictatorship of the Proletariat, state 
power of the proletariat, established 
after abolition of the capitalist system 
and destruction of the bourgeois ma- 
chinery of state. The D.P. is the main 
content of socialist revolution (q.v.) 
and a necessary condition and the chief 
result of its victory. For this reason, 
the D.P. is the key section of Marxist- 
Leninist theory. The proletariat uses 
its political power to suppress the re- 
sistance of the exploiters, to consoli- 
date the victory of the revolution, to 
frustrate any attempts at restoring 
bourgeois rule, and to combat aggressive 
actions of international reaction. 
However, the D.P. is not only violence, 
and not chiefly violence. Its main func- 
tion is creative and constructive. Dic- 
tatorship serves the proletariat to win 
over the mass of working people and 
to draw them into socialist construction 
for revolutionary reconstruction in all 
spheres of social life—the economy, 
culture, daily life, the communist 
education of working people, and the 
building of new, classless society. The 
D.P. is the chief instrument in the 
building of socialism and the necessary 
condition for its victory. The basis 
and supreme principle of the D.P. is 


— 123 — 


Diderot 


the alliance of the working class and 
the peasants under the leadership of the 
former. In the course of socialist con- 
struction the social basis of the D.P. 
expands and gains endurance, produc- 
ing the socio-political and ideological 
unity (q.v.) of a nation. The Commu- 
nist Party, the vanguard of the working 
class, is the main leader and guiding 
force in the system of the D.P. The 
system of the D.P. comprises various 
mass organisations: representative bod- 
ies of the people, trade unions, co- 
operatives, youth and other associa- 
tions, which serve as the link between 
the socialist state and the masses. The 
Paris Commune (1871) was the first 
D.P. in history. It contributed most 
valuable experience to Marxism and 
enabled Marx to surmise the shape 
of the state in afuture socialist society. 
The Soviets are a new form of the D.P., 
which Lenin discovered by studying the 
experience of the two bourgeois-demo- 
cratic revolutions in Russia—that of 
1905-07 and the February revolution 
of 1917. Lastly, the latest revolutionary 
experience gave rise to one more form 
of the D.P.—People’s Democrac 
(q.v.). The D.P. is not a goal in itself. 
It is the only possible and histori- 
cally necessary mode of transition to 
a society without dictatorship and with- 
out classes. “Having brought about 
the complete and final victory of so- 
cialism—the first phase of communism 
—and the transition of society to full- 
scale construction of communism, ” says 
the Programme of the CPSU, “the 
dictatorship of the proletariat has ful- 
filled its historic mission and has ceased 
to be indispensable in the USSR as 
far as the tasks of internal develop- 
ment are concerned.” The conclusion 
that the dictatorship of the proletariat 
develops into a state of the whole 
people (q.v.) constitutes an important 
contribution to the creative develop- 
ment of Marxism-Leninism, the teach- 
ing on the laws of society’s develop- 
ment from capitalism to communism. 

Diderot, Denis (1713-84), French 
philosopher and Enlightener, editor 
and publisher of the Encyclopaedia, 
man of letters, art critic and theorist. 
Voltaire (q.v.) and D. exercised an 





ee eS ee 


$i 
-E 
f 
1 
Mi 
H 


<= 


Ser i 


ak a 





Diderot 


enormous influence on contemporary 
social thinking. In philosophy, D. 
quickly passed from deism and ethical 
idealism to materialism (in the teach- 
ing on nature, psychology, and the the- 
ory of knowledge) and atheism. To 
his mechanistic materialist outlook on 
nature, which he shared with La Mett- 
rie and Holbach (qq.v.), D. imparted 
some elements of dialectics, such as 
ideas on the connection of matter and 
motion, connection of processes proceed- 
ing in nature, and the eternal change 
of forms in nature. D. dealt with the 
concept of the universal sensibility 
of matter to explain how mechanistic 
motion of material particles may give 
birth to the specific content of sensa- 
tions. In developing this view, D. out- 
lined a materialistic theory of the 
psychic functions, thus anticipating 
the later teaching on reflexes. Accord- 
ing to his theory, men and animals 
are instruments endowed with an abil- 
ity to feel and with memory. In epis- 
temology, D. rejected the idealist no- 
tion of spontaneity (q.v.) of thought. 
All reasoning is rooted in nature, and 
all we do is register phenomena known 
to us from experience, between which 
there is either a necessary or conven- 
tional connection. It does not follow 
with D. that our sensations are mirror- 
perfect copies of things; the resemblance 
between most of the sensations and 
their external causes is never greater 
than between concepts and their de- 
notations in language. D. accepted 
Locke’s (q.v.) view of the primary and 
secondary qualities (q.v.), but stressed 
that the secondary qualities are also 
objective. He developed F. Bacon’s 
(q.v.) belief that knowledge, which 
originates from experience, is not 
prompted by the sole urge of perceiving 
the truth, but by the aim of perfecting 
and increasing man’s might. In so 
doing, D. noted the role of technology 
and industry in developing thought 
and cognition. According to him, ex- 
periment and observation were the 
methods and guides of cognition. It is 
through them that thought is able to 
acquire knowledge which, though not 
entirely authentic, is highly probable. 
Compilation of the Encyclopaedia (see 


— 124 — 


Dietzgen 


Encyclopaedists), designed to combat 
feudal religious ideology, became D.’s 
life-work. Progressive in content, the 
Encyclopaedia was militant in tone. 
Dissemination of new ideas went hand 
in hand in it with criticism of inert 
views, prejudices, and beliefs. Despite 
persecution, D. succeeded in complet- 
ing the_publication of the Encyclopae- 
dia. He was the author of many works 
on art and art criticism, developed a 
new aesthetics of realism, defending 
the unity of the good and beauty. He 
attempted to embody the principles 
of his aesthetics in his novels and 
dramas. Marxists acclaimed the works 
and teachings of D. Engels noted “mas- 
terpieces of dialectics” in D.’s writing, 
referring specifically to Le Neveu de 
Rameau (1762-79). Lenin pointed out 
that D. “came very close to the stand- 
point of contemporary materialism” 
and that he “distinctly opposed the 
main philosophical trends” (Vol. 14, 
p. 35). But for all this, D. was an ideal- 
ist in his views of social phenomena. 
In combating feudal despotism, he 
advocated the political system of- en- 
lightened monarchy. His main works 
are Pensées sur l’interpretation de la 
nature (1754), Entretien entre d’Alem- 
bert et Diderot (1769), Principes philo- 
sophiques sur la matiére et le mouve- 
ment (1770) and Eléments de physio- 
logie (1774-80). 

Dietzgen, Joseph (1828-88), worker, 
tanner, “one of the most eminent Ger- 
man Social-Democratic philosophical 
writers”. (Lenin, Vol. 19, p. 79.) A 
self-educated philosopher, D.was strong- 
ly influenced by Feuerbach’s (q.v.) 
materialism and independently discov- 
ered materialist dialectics. He lived 
and worked in Germany, Russia, and 
the United States. His main works are 
Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit 
(1869) and Das Akquisit der Philoso- 
phie (1887), which are devoted mainly 
to epistemology. According to D., 
consciousness is an ideal product of 
eternally existing and moving matter, 
the “universum”. The brain, which 
is part of the “world whole” is the 
bearer of consciousness. Natural and 
social being is the content of conscious- 
ness: Cognition proceeds in sensory and 








Dilthey 


abstract forms. It is a process of mo- 
tion from relative to absolute truth. 
D. rejected Kant’s (q.v.) agnosticism 
and taught that in both sensory and 
abstract forms man’s cognition is an 
image of the outer world verified by 
experience. He considered the “uni- 
versum” in motion, and saw the source 
of development in contradiction. How- 
ever, D. failed to mould dialectics 
into a scientific system; he did not 
succeed in making an exhaustive ex- 
position of dialectics as a theory of 
knowledge. This led him to make con- 
cessions to relativism (q.v.) and vul- 
gar materialism (q.v.), and to confuse 
the material and the ideal. The follow- 
ers of Mach took advantage of D.’s 
erroneous propositions in their fight 
against dialectical materialism. Lenin 
noted D.’s inconsistencies, but stressed 
that on the whole his teaching developed 
within the Marxist framework. D. 
was a militant atheist, an ardent prop- 
agandist of the teaching of Marx 
and Engels, and championed the pro- 
letarian complexion of the Marxist 
philosophy. 

Dilthey, Wilhelm (1833-1911), Ger- 
man idealist philosopher, professor at 
Berlin University, exponent of the so- 
called philosophy of life (q.v.). D.’s 
ideas pivoted on the notion of a living 
spirit, which develops in historical 
forms. D. rejected the knowability of 
the laws of the historical process, claim- 
ing that philosophy could not be cogni- 
tion of super-sensory essences and 
could only be a “science of sciences”, 
i.e., a “teaching on science”. D. di- 
vides the world of science into sciences 
of nature and sciences of the spirit, 
the subject of the latter being social 
reality. Philosophy should set out to 
analyse consciousness, because con- 
sciousness alone offers the means by 
which we can proceed from the imme- 
diate experiences of the “ego” and 
arrive at the substance of natural and 
spiritual life. Psychology, D. averred, 
is the most fundamental of all the sci- 
ences of the spirit; he meant descriptive, 
not explanatory psychology, which is 
based on causality. In his study of the 
imaginative arts, D. stressed the role 
of fantasy, with whose assistance the 


— 125 — 


Dirac 


poet elevates the accidental to the 
level of the substantial and by which 
he depicts the typical as the basis of 
the individual. According to D., the 
“science of interpretation”, or “her- 
meneutics”, comprises the link between 
philosophy and the science of history. 

Diogenes, Laertius, ancient Greek 
writer of the 3rd century. His volumi- 
nous work, Lives and Opinions of 
Famous Philosophers in ten books, is 
the only existing summary compila- 
tion of the antique epoch in the histo- 
ry of philosophy. li contains biograph- 
ical information and the teachings 
of the Greek philosophers up to Sextus 
Empiricus. D. is noteworthy only 
as a compiler of various statements 
and information, often of a whimsical 
nature. The most interesting of his 
writings are devoted to the Stoics 
(q.v.) in Book VII and Epicurus (q.v.) 
in Book X. The last book contains 
the only extant works of Epicurus, 
three of his letters and a compendium 
of his doctrines. 

Diogenes, The Cynic (404-323 B.C.), 
philosopher of Sinope in Pontus, dis- 
ciple of Antisthenes (q.v.), founder of 
the Cynic school of philosophy (see 
Cynics); carried the notions of his 
teacher to their extreme. Like Antis- 
thenes he rejected everything but the 
particular and criticised the teaching 
of Plato (q.v.) that ideas are general 
substances. He rejected all the accom- 
plishments of civilisation and called 
on men to limit themselves to the 
necessary animal requirements. He also 
disavowed polytheism and all reli- 
gious cults, which he described as super- 
fluous, purely human contrivances. D. 
attacked class differences and advocat- 
ed asceticism. He is said to have been 
bold and independent in confronting 
rulers and potentates and to have 
scorned the accepted standards of so- 
cial behaviour, and is reputed to have 
lived in a barrel. However, this ex- 
cessively colourful description of the 
outspoken cynic is doubtful, all avail- 
able information being highly con- 
flicting. 

Dirac, Pau! (1902- ), English physicist, 
professor at Cambridge (1932), a foreign 
Corresponding Member of the Academy 





| 
| 
H 
! 


= 


ee A e 


$e 





Discontinuity and Continuity 


of Sciences of the USSR, one of 
the founders of quantum mechanics 
(q.v.) and proponent of the relativist 
quantum theory which adduced the 
law of the intermutation of “element- 
ary” particles and anticipated the exist- 
ence of anti-particles (positron, anti- 
proton, anti-neutron). D.’s philosophi- 
cal utterances, in which he professes 
adherence to the Copenhagen school 
(q.v.) and, particularly, the “principle 
of observance” (see Idealism, Physical), 
come into sharp conflict with his works 
in physics, in which he acquits him- 
self as a brilliant master of mathemati- 
cal hypothesis (q.v.) and introduces 
the most unusual “unobservable” enti- 
ties, such as “negative energy”, etc. 

Discontinuity and Continuity, es- 
sential characteristics which reflect the 
antithetical but interconnected prop- 
erties of material objects. D. is an 
attribute of the discrete conditions of 
matter (planets, bodies, crystals, mole- 
cules, atoms, nuclei, etc.), the degree 
of its differentiation in the form of 
separate, stable elements of different 
systems, qualitatively defined struc- 
tures. It also expresses the leap-like na- 
ture of the process of development, 
of changes. C., on the other hand, is 
revealed in the entirety of the systems 
consisting of separate discrete elements, 
in the infinity of their relations, the 
gradualness of change of conditions, 
the smooth transition from one state 
to another. Isolated investigation of 
D. & C. is typical of metaphysical 
materialism, It is based partly on the 
postulates of classical mechanics, which 
considers D. inherent only in certain 
types of material elements (from plan- 
ets to atoms), and C. only in the wave 
processes. Dialectical materialism 
stresses not only the antithesis, but also 
the connection, the unity of these signs, 
confirmed by contemporary physics, 
which has proved, for example, that 
light possesses both wave and cor- 
puscular properties. Alongside with this 
it was experimentally discovered in 
quantum mechanics that elementary 
particles possess not only corpuscular 
but also wave properties. The dialec- 
tics of D. & C. affords the possibility 
of comprehending scientifically the 


— 126 — 


Disparate 


specific features of material objects, 
their properties and relations (space 
and time, motion, interconnection of 
field and matter, etc.). 

Discreteness, see Discontinuity and 
Continuity. 

Discursiveness, a property of reason- 
ing, of mediate logical thought, cogni- 
tion, as distinct from sensory, immediate, 
and intuitive. The differentiation 
between the immediate (intuitive) and 
mediate (based on proof) is made in 
Plato and Aristotle (qq.v.), and the 
term D. occurs in Thomas Aquinas 
(q.v.). Marxist philosophy recognises 
the importance of D. in cognition, 
for its analysis of forms and methods, 
provided chiefly by logic, gains in 
significance in this age of mathematical, 
technological, and scientific progress. 

Disjunction, a logical operation form- 
ing a compound sentence by combin- 
ing two sentences by means of the 
logical sentential connective “or”. 
Symbolically, it is AVB (read A or B). 
Classical mathematical logic differen- 
tiates between two types of D.: the 
inclusive (conjunctive) and exclusive 
(disjunctive). An inclusive D. forms 
a complex sentence, judgement or prop- 
osition which is true if at least one of 
its predicates is true, and false if all its 
component predicates are false. In 
common speech it coincides with the 
non-disjunctive meaning of the con- 
nective “or”. Exclusive D. forms a 
compound statement, judgement or 
proposition which is true only if one 
of its members is true. In common 
speech it coincides with the disjunc- 
tive meaning of the connective “or” 
(in the sense of “either ... or”). 

Disparate, unequal, dissimilar, sep- 
arate, distinct. In 19th and 20th 
century logic the term D. is relatively 
seldom used, and only in relation to 
concepts. Concepts whose objects lack 
general properties, for which reason 
they cannot be further generalised, 
are termed distinct and incomparable 
(e.g., metal and lustre, square and 
ideology). Statements of difference, as 
in Leibniz, q.v. (“heat is not the same 
as colour”, “man and animal are not 
identical, although every man is an 
animal”), are sometimes described as 








Distinction 


— 127-— 


Division of Labour 





D. Some psychologists, such as Her- 
bart (q.v.), use the term D. to describe 
the sensations of different sense-organs, 
e.g., green and loud, sweet and warm. 

Distinction ł. A necessary feature 
of every unity, the peculiarity of every 
thing, phenomenon, process, characte- 
rising the inherent contradictoriness of 
things, their development. D. neces- 
sarily follows from the self-movement 
of matter, the dialectical splitting of 
the single, the appearance of contra- 
dictions. The immanent origin of Dd. 
and their interaction are features of 
the internal objective logic of evolu- 
tion. Internal Dd. should be differen- 
tiated from the external ones, not con- 
nected directly with the development 
of a given concrete thing. External 
D. simply means that the given thing 
is distinguished from all others and 
appears as something independent and 
relatively stable. Internal Dd. signify 
that in the process of its development 
the thing is, as it were, transformed 
into another, at the same time remain- 
ing itself: in this the unity of identity 
and D. is clearly revealed. D. is a 
feature of the initial stage of contra- 
diction, it is a “contradiction in it- 
self”, a non-unfolding, undeveloped 
contradiction. At the same time it is 
impossible to isolate the external and 
internal Dd. from each other. In the 
process of development and isolation 
of the different aspects of a developing 
phenomenon, internal Dd. may be 
transformed into external ones. On the 
other hand, external Dd. serve as a 
necessary supplement to internal ones; 
they may serve as a kind of stimulus 
for the appearance of internal Dd. The 
insolvency of the metaphysical aliena- 
tion and opposition of external and 
internal Dd.; D. and identity are 
proved by the whole development of 
contemporary science. 2. Act of the 
consciousness reflecting the objective 
difference between things~or the ele- 
ments of consciousness itself (sensa- 
tions, concepts, etc.). In logic, D. 
implies a method which replaces the 
definition of concepts, q.v. (e.g., hy- 
drogen differs from oxygen in that it 
burns but does not sustain combustion). 
The term D. was introduced in the 


Middle Ages. The scholastics used it 
to denote an objective difference or 
disparity (real D., essential D., caus- 
ative D., etc.) and differences in thought 
(D. of reason, subjective, formal, 
etc.). The term D. is also used in our 
time. 

Division of Labour, the process of 
disjunction and interdependent exist- 
ence of different kinds of labour activ- 
ities in a single system of social pro- 
duction. The character and forms of 
the D.L. are determined by the devel- 
opment of the productive forces. And 
the D.L. itself, characterising the de- 
gree of this development, calls forth 
the further growth of the productivity 
of labour, thereby promoting improve- 
ment and replacement of the types 
of relations of production. In primitive- 
communal society the D.L. appeared 
in the simplest form of division by 
sex and age; in slave-owning society 
cattle-breeding was singled out, handi- 
crafts were separated from agricul- 
ture, trade became a separate branch; 
territorial, professional, and interna- 
tional D.L. appeared and was devel- 
oped, a division was made between 
mental and physical labour. In the 
period of capitalist manufacture D.L. 
took place inside enterprises, taking 
the form of division according to parts 
or details. The latter was consolidated 
and deepened with the appearance of 
machines. In exploiter social forma- 
tions the process of the D.L. bears a 
contradictory character, is interwoven 
with class antagonisms as is particul- 
arly evident in the example of capital- 
ist D.L., which transforms the producer 
into a partial worker, riveted to one 
labour operation for life. Socialism 
utilises the inherited forms of D.L. 
purposefully and according to a plan, 
but begins at once to create the pre- 
requisites for the subsequent liquida- 
tion of the old and the creation of the 
new, communist D.L. The liquidation 
of the old D.L. becomes a necessary 
condition for the further growth of 
social production and the all-round, 
harmonious development of the in- 
dividual, for the victory of communism. 
The creation of the communist D.L. 
is based upon the rapid development 














Division of Volume of Concepts — 128 — Dobrolyubov 


of the productive forces, on the achieve- 
ment by society of an abundance of 
goods, freeing people from private in- 
terest in any single kind of occupation; 
it is inseparably linked up with the 
dying out of classes and all social 
inequalities. Combination of a high 
degree of specialisation with a broad 
outlook, versatile knowledge and ca- 
pabilities with free choice and periodic 
change of activities—such is the es- 
sence of the communist D.L. (See also 
Antithesis of Town and Country; Anti- 
thesis of Mental and Physical Labour.) 
Division of the Volume of Concepts, 
a logical operation which reveals the 
volume of concepts; the separation and 
enumeration of species forming the 
volume of a concept. The practical 
purpose of D.V.C. is a systematic sur- 
vey of the objects brought together in 
a concept. D.V.C. is based on a specific 
feature (or aggregate of features) known 
as the basis of D.V.C. Choice of the 
basis depends on the purpose for which 
D.V.C. is made. E.g., the concept 
“triangle” may be divided according 
to the nature of the angles into right- 
angled, acute-angled and obtuse-angled. 
There are two basic types of D.V.C.: 
(1) division according to change of 
feature, wherein all species that differ 
with respect to the feature taken as the 
basis for division are listed (as in 
the above example) and (2) dichoto- 
mous division, wherein the volume of 
the concept is divided into two parts— 
the class of objects possessing the fea- 
ture taken as the basis, and the class 
of objects not possessing that feature 
(e.g., juridical and non-juridical rela- 
tions). This method of D.V.C. is used 
whenever objects possessing a common 
feature need to be singled out among 
objects not possessing that feature. 
The main rules of D.V.C. are: complete 
enumeration of species and separation 
of species in division according to one 
basis (the latter preventing intersection 
of species). Classification (q.v.) is a 
particular case of D.V.C. 
Dobrolyubov, Nikolai Aleksandro- 
vich (1836-61), Russian revolutionary 
thinker, materialist, critic, and publi- 
cist, associate of Chernyshevsky (q.v.). 
The son of a clergyman, he finished 


a religious seminary in Nizhny Nov- 
gorod (1853) and the Principal Pedagog- 
ical Institute in St. Petersburg (1857). 
Joining the Sovremennik in 1856, he 
ran the department of criticism and 
bibliography from 1857 to 1861. His 
numerous articles over this period dealt 
with pedagogics, aesthetics, philosophy, 
and art, the most important being: 
“The Importance of Authority in Edu- 
cation” (1857), “The Organic Devel- 
opment of Man in Connection with His 
Mental and Moral Activities” (1858); 
“Russian Civilisation as Conceived 
by Mr. Zherebtsov” (1858); “Literary 
Trivia of the Past Year” (1859); “Rob- 
ert Owen and His Attempts at Social 
Reform” (1859); “What Is Oblomov- 
shchina?” (1859); “Realm of Darkness” 
(1859); “When Will the Day Come?” 
(1860); “Features for Characterisation 
of the Russian Common People” (1860); 
“A Ray of Light in the Realm of 
Darkness” (1860). In his treatment of 
various philosophical problems D. made 
use of the scientific knowledge avail- 
able in his time, defended the principle 
of the genetic universality of nature 
and man, and the materialist idea of 
the unity of mental and physiological 
processes in the human organism, chal- 
lenged the philosophy of dualism (q.v.), 
and opposed agnosticism (q.v.) and 
scepticism (q.v.) in epistemology. In 
this sphere he conducted a polemic 
against separation of “soul” from body, 
a dogma of the Christian religion, 
which the revolutionary Russian think- 
ers of the mid-19th century made one 
of their chief targets of criticism. D. 
considered Feuerbach (q.v.) to have 
originated the study of man as a whole 
and integral being. By referring to 
social problems and showing the social 
limitations of human actions, D. was 
in fact exposing the inadequacy of the 
anthropological principle. He strove 
to achieve historicity and defended 
the principle of development in nature 
and society. Though by comparison 
with Chernyshevsky he paid less at- 
tention to the elaboration of socialist 
theory, he adopted basically the same 
positions as his teacher and worked 
for the development of Russia along 
socialist lines. D. made an important 





Dogmatism 


contribution to aesthetics. Follow- 
ing Belinsky (q.v.) he insisted that 
it was the social duty of literature 
and art to portray the “unnaturalness 
of social relations” in life as it was 
then, to define the “natural aspira- 
tions” of the people and to seek for an 
ideal in life. The writer’s greatest 
virtue, according to D., is the truth 
with which he portrays life. While 
D. developed the proposition of “real- 
ist criticism” as a means of studying 
life and regarded it as his main pur- 
pose to awaken and develop Russian 
social awareness, he also assumed that 
only revolution, only revolutionary 
action by the common people them- 
selves could radically change the exist- 
ing system, break the autocratic ma- 
chine, which was “rotten to the core”, 
and put an end to the “dark reign” 
of serfdom. D. exposed the pseudo- 
radical character of liberal literary 
criticism. His ideal was a society in 
which “a man’s worth would be judged 
by his personal qualities” and in which 
“each man would receive his share of 
material wealth in strict proportion 
to the amount and value of his labour”. 

Dogmatism, in philosophy and sci- 
ence, a term indicating a way of think- 
ing based on unalterable concepts and 
formulae regardless of the specific con- 
ditions of space and time, i.e., ignoring 
the principle that truth must be con- 
crete. The source of dogmatism is to 
be found in the development of reli- 
gious conceptions, the demand for faith 
in church dogmas, which are asserted 
as indisputable truths, above criticism 
and sacred to all believers. The sup- 
porters of classical scepticism (q.v.) 
classed all positive doctrine concerning 
the world as D. Kant (q.v) treated 
all rationalist philosophy from Des- 
cartes (q.v.) to Wolff (q.v.) as “dog- 
matic” and offered his criticism (q.v.) 
as the alternative. In contemporary 
philosophy D. is connected with anti- 
dialectical conceptions which deny the 
mutability and development of the 
world, and also with bourgeois sociol- 
ogy, which opposes the Marxist teach- 
ing on the development of society and 
the revolutionary transformation of 
reality. In the working-class movement 


9-1682 


— 129 — 


Dostoyevsky 


D. leads to sectarianism, the rejection 
of creative Marxism, to subjectivism, 
and to loss of contact with practical 
life. Under present-day conditions D., 
along with revisionism (q.v.), is a 
great danger to the international work- 
ing-class movement. Instead of analys- 
ing the actual processes taking place 
in the socialist countries and in inter- 
national life, the dogmatists use as 
arguments quotations from Marx, En- 
gels, and Lenin, which they take 
out of context and misinterpret. They 
regard Marxism-Leninism not as a 
living, creative theory but as a com- 
pilation of immutable rules and prin- 
ciples laid down for all time. From 
this standpoint they attack Marxists 
who have enriched theory with new 
propositions, conclusions and general- 
isations that accord with the tasks 
advanced by the new age, such as the 
propositions on “peaceful coexistence”, 
“peaceful competition”, “peaceful tran- 
sition”, “dictatorship of the proletari- 
at", “state of the whole people”, etc., 
which define the foreign policy of the 
socialist countries and the nature of 
the state in the period of the transition 
from socialism to communism, and 
also the paths of social revolution. 
The dogmatic rejection of these new 
conclusions indicates not only theoret- 
ical stagnation but also a refusal to 
adopt new forms of struggle against 
imperialism, new ways of achieving 
the revolutionary transformation of the 
world. 

Dostoyevsky, Fyodor Mikhailovich 
(1821-81), Russian writer, one of the 
most outstanding representatives of 
critical realism (q.v.). Of middle-class 
intellectual origin, he became associat- 
ed with Belinsky (q.v.) in the forties 
and was influenced by utopian social- 
ism (q.v.). For taking part in the 
Petrashevsky circle (q.v.) he was sen- 
tenced to death, the sentence afterwards 
being commuted to penal servitude 
with subsequent service as a private 
in the army (1849-59). From the outset 
D. was a humanist, a defender of the 
“humiliated and insulted”. Love for 
the common people and hatred of social 
inequality and amorality were the 
distinctive features of his art. His world 











Driesch 


— 130 — 


Dihring 





outlook contained contradictions. The 
defeat of the revolution of 1848 in 
Europe and his own personal sufferings 
evoked a psychological crisis, and in 
the theory which he developed in the 
sixties and seventies he asserted (in 
the spirit of the Neo-Slavophiles, q.v.) 
the idea that it was the Russian peo- 
ple’s messianic destiny to be saviours 
of humanity and point the way to the 
realisation of the “kingdom of heaven” 
on earth. In this period D. criticised 
materialism and atheism and attacked 
the revolutionary democrats and so- 
cialism (which he envisaged in the 
form of egalitarian petty-bourgeois so- 
cialism). Ethical problems became his 
main concern. Having restricted his 
humanism to the spiritual liberation 
of the personality, D. was unable to 
achieve any higher conception than 
that of moral perfection of the self. 
His enormous talent and sense of art- 
istic truth enabled him to give a mer- 
ciless critical analysis of Russian life 
and show the tragedy of the lower 
classes under the dual oppression of 
the autocracy and capitalist exploita- 
tion (Poor People, The Insulted and 
Humiliated, The Karamazov Broth- 
ers, etc.). As Marxist critics (Gorky, 
Lunacharsky, q.v., and others) have 
shown, this is where the objective 
significance of his work as a writer 
lies. The attempts of bourgeois phi- 
losophers (Berdyayev, Lossky, qq.v., 
A. Maceina, J. Bohatec, etc.) to present 
D. purely as a religious mystic, per- 
sonalist, existentialist, and so on, 
amount to little more than a crude 
distortion of the great legacy which 
he left. 

Driesch, Hans Adolf Eduard (1867- 
1941), German biologist, philosopher, 
founder of neo-vitalism (see Vitalism). 
In opposition to the mechanistic ex- 
planation of life D. put forward the 
thesis that the phenomena of life are 
based on a special immaterial “vital 
force”, or entelechy (q.v.). According 
to D., entelechy determines the whole 
course of the vital processes and ac- 
counts for purpose in the Universe. 
Since the activity of entelechy is sub- 
ject to no material laws, it cannot be 
explained by science. This teaching 


reflected D.’s idealism and agnosti- 
cism. 

Dualism, a philosophical doctrine 
which, in contrast to monism (q.v.), 
regards material and spiritual sub- 
stances as equal principles. D. is often 
invoked in the attempt to reconcile 
materialism and idealism, and the dual- 
istic separation of consciousness from 
matter leads ultimately to idealism. 
D. is a prominent feature of the phi- 
losophies of Descartes and Kant (qq.v.). 
It forms the philosophical basis of the 
Geen of psycho-physical parallelism 
q-v.). 

Duhem, Pierre-Maurice-Marie (1861- 
1916), French physicist, professor at 
Bordeaux University, also studied his- 
tory and the philosophy of science. In 
his physics he embraced energism (q.v.) 
and mathematical formalism. In his 
philosophical works he supported the 
Poincaré conventionalism (q.v.) and 
the principle of economy of thought 
advanced by Mach (q.v.), and claimed 
that the history of science consisted 
only of different, mutually exclusive 
theories possessing no inner continuity. 
His one-sided, metaphysical explana- 
tion of relativism, the relativity of 
knowledge, led him into idealism and 
agnosticism (see Idealism, Physical). 
Main work: Le système du monde, 
published in 10 vols., 1913-59, many 
of them posthumously. 

Dihring, Eugen Karl (1833-1921), 
German philosopher and economist, 
professor of mechanics; son of a gov- 
ernment official; Doctor of Berlin Uni- 
versity (1863-74). In philosophy he was 
an eclectic, who tried to combine posi- 
tivism (q.v.),metaphysical materialism, 
and outspoken idealism; in political 
economy and sociology he expressed 
the ideology of the petty bourgeoisie. 
He opposed Marx and Engels during 
the period when the German Social- 
Democratic Party, which had been 
formed out of two previously independ- 
ent parties (Lassaleans and Eisen- 
achers), was rallying its ranks, and 
when theoretical issues had acquired 
special importance. D.’s muddled and 
harmful views on philosophy, political 
economy, and socialism found support 
among some of the Social-Democrats. 








Duns Scotus 


Realising the danger D.’s writings rep- 
resented for the as yet immature Ger- 
man working-class movement, Engels 
attacked them in his well-known book 
Anti-Duhring (q.v.). D. subsequently 
descended to anti-semitism and racism. 
Main works: Kursus der Philosophie 
(1875), Kursus der National- und So- 
zial-Okonomie (1876), Kritische Ge- 
schichte der National-Okonomie und 
des Sozialismus (1875). 

Duns Scotus, John (c. 1265-1308), 
Franciscan monk, prominent represent- 
ative of medieval scholasticism (q.v.). 
Born in Scotland; taught at Oxford 
and Paris universities. In the words 
of Marx, D.S. “... forced theology it- 
self to preach materialism”. (Marx 
and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 2, 
p. 172.) An opponent of Thomas Aqui- 
nas, he strove to separate philosophy 
and theology, arguing that it is im- 
possible to find rational grounds for 
the idea of creation from nothing and 
admitting that reason is dependent on 
the will. In his view God is absolute 
freedom. In the medieval controversy 
over the universals (q.v.) he advocated 
nominalism (q.v.). To stress the pri- 
macy of singulars he invented the term 
“haecceitas” (“thisness”), that which 
constitutes individual difference. He 
introduced the concept of “intention” 
and “species intelligibiles” and was 
the first to contrast concrete meaning 
(the term is his) with abstract mean- 
ing. He also established the well- 
known postulate of modern mathemat- 
ics “From falsehood anything may 
follow”. In logic, he defined two uni- 
versal quantifiers: (1) “omnis” in the 
sense of “each”, all taken one after 
the other and (2) “unusquisque” in 
the sense of “any”, whichever one 
takes (a higher form of abstraction). 

Durkheim, Emile (1858-1917), French 
sociologist and positivist philosopher, 
disciple of Comte (q.v.), professor 
at the Sorbonne. D. maintained 
that sociology should study society 
as a particular kind of spiritual reality 
whose laws differed from those of the 
individual psychology. Every Tor 
according to D., is based on commonly 
understood collective ideas; the scien- 
tist is concerned with social facts, col- 


— 131 — Duty 


lective ideas (law, morality, religion, 
sentiment, habit, etc.), which are forced 
upon the human consciousness by the 
social environment. D. attributed so- 
cial development to three factors: den- 
sity of population, development of 
means of communication, and collective 
consciousness. Every society is char- 
acterised by social solidarity. In prim- 
itive society, solidarity was “mechan- 
ical”, since it was based on ties of 
blood. In the modern world, solidar- 
ity is “organic”, since it is based on 
the division of labour, i.e., on class 
co-operation for acquisition of the 
necessities of life. D. considered reli- 
gion to be an important factor in the 
life of society. Changing its forms ac- 
cording to the stage of development 
reached by society, religion would 
exist as long as man exists, because in 
religion society deified itself. Main 
works: De la division du travail so- 
cial (1893), Les règles de la méthode 
sociologique (1895), Les formes élémen- 
taires de la vie religieuse (1912). 
Duty, an ethical category denoting 
the moral necessity to perform certain 
obligations. Unlike idealism, which 
seeks the source of D. in the “absolute 
idea” (Hegel), in autonomous “practi- 
cal reason” (Kant), and so on, Marxist 
ethics considers that obligations have 
an objective character. They are deter- 
mined by man’s place in the system 
of social relations, and proceed from 
the course of history and the demands 
of social progress. This accounts for 
various forms of D.: D. to humanity 
as a whole, to the Party, military 
D, civic and family D., etc. By enter- 
ing into certain relations a person 
assumes obligations. His awareness of 
them is his understanding and sense 
of D. In a society divided into antago- 
nistic classes D. is closely connected 
with class interests. In socialist society 
civic D. is based on the interests of the 
struggle for communism. The moral 
code of the builder of communism 
(see Moral Code, etc.) includes a high 
awareness of social D. and refusal 
to tolerate any breach of this D. The 
performance of D. gives meaning to 
the life and work of the individual, 
and provides the highest satisfaction 








Dynamic Stereotype 


of conscience (q.v.). Individualist and 
philistine aspirations impoverish the 
personality. The spiritual richness of 
the personality depends on the rich- 
ness of its actual relations, thus it 
depends on obligations. The fulfilment 
of real (not imaginary) D. is good 
(see Good and Evil). A characteristic 
feature of many modern ethical sys- 
tems is that they are divorced from the 
needs of social development, from the 
interests, the good of society. 
Dynamic Stereotype, a concept in the 
teaching of Pavlov (q.v.) on higher ner- 
vous activity, denoting the mobile, re- 
current, complex system of conditioned 
reflexes developed by the body in 
the process of life. D.S. takes shape 
under the influence of enduring con- 
ditions of life which succeed each 
other in a definite order (wakefulness 
succeeds sleep, one action succeeds 
another, etc.). As a result, a balanced 


— 132 — 


Dynamic Stereotype 


system of interconnected conditioned 
reflexes is formed. The stereotyped 
succession of conditioned reflexes sys- 
tematises and thus eases the work of 
the cerebral cortex, ensuring economy 
in the expenditure of nervous energy 
and facilitating the formation of new 
conditioned reflexes on the basis of 
the already developed D.S. Any sharp 
change in the way of life and in activ- 
ities disarranges the established D.S. 
and adversely affects higher nervous 
activity, leading frequently to the 
development of neuroses. Balanced ope- 
ration of the D.S. is accompanied by 
positive emotions, such as a sense of 
satisfaction, joy, vigour, while vio- 
lation of the D.S. causes reverse emo- 
tions of distress, anxiety, despair, etc. 
From this point of view, success in an 
undertaking depends to a consider- 
able extent on the organisation, regu- 
larity and rhythm of the work. 








E 


Eclecticism, a systemless confusion 
of different, very often diametrically 
opposed points of view, philosophical 
views, theoretical premises, political 
assessments, etc. It is exemplified by 
various attempts to marry materialism 
to idealism, to combine Marxism and 
empirio-criticism, dialectical materi- 
alism and Kantianism, and so on. 
E. is also typical of modern revi- 
sionism. The chief methodological 
mistake of E. is its inability to 
single out the principal connections 
of an object, or of a phenomenon, with 
its environment at a given moment, 
the mechanical combination of differ- 
ent qualities and pe uni of objects 
or phenomena out of the sum total 
of connections and relations of the 
objective world. In practice and polit- 
ics E. leads to errors and miscalcula- 
tions, because it hinders the search 
for the main link in the chain of events 
and the adoption of appropriate meas- 
ures in deciding the most urgent pro- 
blems of a concrete historical period. 

Economism, an opportunist trend in 
Russian Social-Democracy at the end 
of the 19th and beginning of the 20th 
century. The Economists endeavoured 
to limit the tasks of the working-class 
movement to economic struggle (im- 
proving conditions of labour, raising 
wages, etc.). They believed that polit- 
ical struggle should be conducted by 
the liberal bourgeoisie. They denied 
the role of the Party of the working 
class and its revolutionary theory. They 
preached spontaneity in the labour 
movement. Being a variety of revi- 
sionism, E. served as a vehicle of bour- 
geois influence upon the proletariat. The 
dissemination of E. hampered the crea- 
tion of a centralised proletarian party. 


Lenin’s newspaper, /skra, was greatly 
responsible for exposing the unsound- 
ness of E., and Lenin’s What Is to Be 
Done? (1902) routed it ideologically. 
Economics and Politics (their inter- 
action) P. is the most important 
component part of the superstructure, 
the reflection of the economic system 
dominant in a given society. The in- 
terests of this or that class find their 
concentrated expression in politics. 
P., being a reflection of E., in its 
turn exerts great influence upon the 
latter. P. has precedence over E., 
because the given class can neither 
establish nor maintain its economic 
rule without political power. In the 
building of socialism a correct policy 
of the Marxist-Leninist Party is an 
indispensable condition for success. 
Given this condition, i.e., the correct 
policy having been worked out and 
being implemented, the centre of grav- 
ity in the building of the new society 
is shifted to the organisation of econ- 
omy, and the problems of account and 
control and production management 
come into the foreground. In the rough 
copy of his article “The Immediate 
Tasks of the Soviet Power”, Lenin 
wrote: “The task of administering the 
state which has come to the forefront 
in the activity of the Soviet power is 
yet another feature which means that 
at present and perhaps for the first 
time in recent history we have such 
administration in which economics, 
and not politics, acquires priority.” 
The development of economy in social- 
ist society does not proceed sponta- 
neously as in capitalist society, but 
in a planned way, based on the con- 
scious application of economic laws. 
This gives the socialist state new func- 





Economy of Thought 


tions, those of economic organisation 
and cultural development and educa- 
tion. The importance of these functions 
steadily grows in the course of com- 
munist construction. 

Economy of Thought, Principle of, 
a subjective-idealist proposition, ac- 
cording to which the criterion of the 
truth of any knowledge consists in 
achieving the maximum knowledge 
with the minimum means of cognition. 
The term was introduced by E. Mach 
(Das Prinzip herhaltung der Arbeit, 
1872) and by R. Avenarius (Philoso- 
phie als Denken der Welt gemāB dem 
Prinzip des kleinsten Kraf tmaßes, 1876). 
It spread among modern philosophers 
under the names of “principle of sim- 
plicity”, “principle of economy”, and 
others. Lenin in his Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism severely criticised 
P.E.T. as idealistic, because the truth 
of scientific propositions is not deter- 
mined by the economy of thought but 
by the correspondence of concepts with 
the objective world. 

Eddington, Arthur Stanley (1882- 
1944), British physicist and astrophys- 
icist; science populariser; in philosophy 
he was a prominent representative of 
modern “physical” idealism. His main 
interest was the problem of the struc- 
ture and movement of stars, the theory 
of relativity and cosmology (q.v.). 
E. called his philosophical views, which 
developed under the influence of Kant, 
Russell (qq.v.) and logical positivism 
(q.v.), “selective subjectivism” or 
“structuralism”. He held that the laws 
and constants of physics could be de- 
duced from a priori epistemological 
ideas without recourse to experiment. 
This led him to Pythagorean (see Py- 
thagoreans) numeral mystics. 

Effect, see Causality. 

Effectivism (or semi-intuitionism), 
one of the trends in mathematical phi- 
losophy that tries to limit modern 
mathematics to what has received 
effective mathematical proof. All that 
which can be understood without any 
ambiguity by all mathematicians is 
considered by the effectivists as belong- 
ing to mathematics. All the rest they 

regard as being, for the present, out- 
side mathematics (as distinguished 


— 134 — 





Ego 


from intuitionism, q.v., whose expo- 
nents completely discard all this mate- 
rial as extraneous to mathematics). The 
effectivists hold subjective-idealistic 
views on the subject of mathematics 
and on the criterion of the truth-value 
of its concepts, arguments, and theo- 
ries. The noted French mathematicians 
E. Borel, H. Lebesgue, and others, 
shared their views. 

Ego (in philosophy), the central no- 
tion of idealistic systems declaring the 
subject to be the primary active and 
regulating factor. In such systems E. 
is understood to be an absolutely in- 
dependent bearer of spiritual abilities. 
Beginning with Descartes (q.v.), the 
notion of E. was associated with the 
problem of the “origin” in the con- 
struction of philosophical systems. Ac- 
cording to Descartes, E., the intuitive 
principle of rational thought, belongs 
to the thinking substance, Hume (q.v.), 
rejecting any substance, reduced it to 
a bundle of perceptions. Kant (q.v.) 
counterposed the pure E. to the indi- 
vidual empirical E., considering it as 
the transcendental unity of appercep- 
tion and the vehicle of the categorical 
imperative (q.v.). Fichte (q.v.) con- 
sidered E. to be the absolutely creative 
principle which posits itself and all 
existence as its “non-E.”. Hegel (q.v.), 
as an objective idealist, refuted all 
these attempts at taking E. as the 
beginning and tried to explain E. as 
a pure unity of objective self-conscious- 
ness. The absolutisation of E. finds 
its expression in the latest subjective- 
idealist trends (e.g., empirio-criti- 
cism, q.v., neo-positivism, q.v., exis- 
tentialism, q.v.) The extreme form’ 
of the subjective-idealistic view of E. 
is solipcism (q.v.). Freud (see Freud- 
ism) biologises man and divides him 
into “E.” and “super-E.”. Marxism 
opposes the materialistic notion of 
man to the irrationalist explanation 
of E. Marxism sees the essence of the 
human E. exclusively in social rela- 
tions and proves that man (the indi- 
vidual) crowns the development of na- 
ture as a whole, precisely because he 
is the only creator of his social rela- 
tions, of the entire material and spir- 
itual culture. 





Egoism 


Egoism, a mode of behaviour, centr- 
ing on personal interest, but not on 
that of others, or of society. E. is 
intimately connected with individual- 
ism (q.v.) The German philosopher 
Stirner (q.v.), among others, attempt- 
ed to justify E. scientifically. In so- 
cialist society E. is a vice and a sur- 
vival of capitalism. 

Einstein, Albert (1879-1955), Ger- 
man physicist, founder of the theory 
of relativity and a number of other 
physical theories, which led to new 
notions of space, time, motion, sub- 
stance, light, gravity. In 1905, he 
formulated the theory of Brownian 
motion, i.e., the movement of small 
bodies floating in liquid under the 
influence of bombardment by mole- 
cules. This theory was a convincing 
proof of the reality of molecules and 
their movement. In the same year E. 
arrived at the notion of particles of 
light, quanta of light or photons. E.'s 
first work on the special theory of 
relativity (q.v.) was also published 
in 1905. In 1916, E. formulated the 
idea of the general theory of relativ- 
ity. The fascist terror forced him to 
quit Germany. He settled in Princeton 
(USA). In the 30s and 40s, E. tried 
to create a unified theory of field, 
explaining the nature of not only 
gravitational but also of other fields. 
E.’s philosophical views were very 
close to those of Spinoza’s. Absolute 
denial of the existence of God, denial 
of any non-material substance, con- 
viction of the objectivity and knowabil- 
ity of the world and the causal inter- 
dependence of all processes of nature— 
these were the main principles of his 
world outlook. E. opposed Kant’s ap- 
riorism and the views of Poincaré 
(q.v.) and others concerning the “con- 
ditionality” of scientific truth. Initially 
E. sympathised with Mach (q.v.), but 
later completely rejected Machism, 
and in 1920, he called Mach a “poor 
philosopher”. Although E. made ideal- 
istic mistakes in some problems of 
cognition, he nevertheless definitely 
rejected logical positivism (q.v.) and 
the attempts at a positivist treatment 
of quantum mechanics. In his socio- 
political views E. opposed social op- 


— 135 — 


Element 


pression, militarism, and reaction and 
resolutely denounced the use of atomic 
energy for war purposes. 

Eleatics, exponents of an ancient 
Greek philosophical school which 
shaped in the town of Elea (Southern 
Italy), 6th and 5th centuries B.C. The 
idealistic trend inherent in the phi- 
losophy of E.developed with the school. 
Its main representatives were Xeno- 
phanes, Parmenides, Zeno of Elea 
(qq.v.), and Melissus of Samos (5th 
century B.C.). The Eleatic school put 
forward the teaching on the immu- 
table essence of true being and the il- 
lusoriness of all visible changes and 
differences to counter the spontaneous 
dialectical views of the Milesian school 
(q.v.) and Heraclitus (q.v.), on the 
changeable primary basis of things. 
This position involved a certain belit- 
tling of sensual experience as a basis 
of knowledge and served later as one 
of the sources of Plato’s (q.v.) ideal- 
ism. The arguments of the E. against 
dialectics (particularly the aporia, 
q.v., of Zeno), notwithstanding their 
metaphysical conclusions, played a pos- 
itive role in the subsequent develop- 
ment of dialectics. They posed the 
problem of expressing in logical con- 
cepts the contradictoriness of motion. 

Element, a concept denoting pri- 
mary particles of matter, combinations 
of which form the diversity of objects 
of the material world. The concept E. 
inevitably arises in the process of his- 
torical cognition of nature, and it re- 
flects the level of human knowledge 
on the structure of matter. With the 
development of science this concept 
changes and enriches its content. The 
ancient Greek materialists considered 
that the single cosmic element was 
either water (Thales, q.v.) or air (Ana- 
ximenes, q.v.), or fire (Heraclitus, 
q.v.). Democritus (q.v.) and later Epi- 
curus (q.v.) put forward the teaching 
on atoms as the tiniest indivisible par- 
ticles of matter. In the development 
of the science of matter there has always 
been a contradiction between the desire 
of natural scientists to find the sim- 
plest elements of matter and the ab- 
sence of such particles in nature because 
of the infiniteness and inexhaustibility 





Elementary Particles 


of matter. The great natural science 
discoveries at the end of the 19th cen- 
tury undermined the prevalent idea on 
the existence of primary and structure- 
less particles of matter. Modern phys- 
ics has shown the intricacy of the struc- 
ture of electrons, neutrons, and other 
elementary particles, and thus con- 
firmed the dialectical- materialistic 
view, according to which there are no 
absolutely simple and indivisible ele- 
ments in nature (matter). “The electron 
is as inexhaustible as the atom, nature 
is infinite....” (Lenin, Vol. 14, p. 262.) 

Elementary Particles, the simplest 
microobjects known at present, which 
interact as an integral entity in all 
known processes. The stable E.P. in- 
clude gravitons (hypothetical quanta of 
the gravitational field), photons, neu- 
trinos, anti-neutrinos, electrons, posi- 
trons, protons, and anti-protons. The 
mesons of different masses, the neu- 
trons, anti-neutrons, hyperons, anti- 
hyperons disintegrate into stable par- 
ticles when they are in a free state. At 
present over 30 E.P. are known. Al- 
most every particle has its correspond- 
ing anti-particle, possessing the same 
mass, spin and lifetime, but it has 
an opposite electric charge, magnetic 
momentum, strangeness, and other 
qualities. E.P. are not the ultimate 
“bricks” of the Universe; matter is 
inexhaustible, all levels of its organi- 
sation possess a complicated structure 
and none of them can be considered 
as the simplest, indivisible elements 
of the world. Inexhaustible varieties 
of qualities and interactions are in- 
herent in E.P. They are inseparable 
from various material fields which 
are part and parcel of their structure. 
Owing to their inseparable connection 
with the fields E.P. possess at the 
same time corpuscular and wave prop- 
erties. The most important charac- 
teristics of E.P. are their interconvert- 
ibility; the decay of unstable particles, 
the transformation of particles and an- 
ti-particles into photons and other 
elementary particles. All these prove 
their extraordinarily complicated struc- 
ture. The processes of the decay of 
particles must not be considered as a 
disintegration of a mechanical system 


— 136 — 


Elimination 


into its component elements, as if they 
were included in the system ready- 
made. They are qualitative transfor- 
mations of E.P. from one form into 
another, giving rise to new particles 
Possessing the same degree of compli- 
cation. Owing to their interactions 
among themselves and with different 
fields, E.P. undergo uninterrupted in- 
ner transformations and their proper- 
ties are statistically average in time. 
Contemporary theoretical and experi- 
mental studies in the physics of E.P. 
have as their object to elucidate their 
specific structure, to reveal the laws 
by which the values of their properties, 
their interactions and types of trans- 
formation are explained. 
Elida-Eretrean School, one of the 
Socratic schools which existed during 
the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C., found- 
ed, according to Plato, by Phaedo of 
Elida, Socrates’ favourite. Later the 
school was transferred by Menedemus 
(disciple of Stilpo) to Eretrea. No orig- 
inal works of this school are extant. 
We know about it mostly from the 
works of Cicero and Diogenes Laer- 
tius. The E.E.S. was very close to the 
Megarian school (q.v.). Followers of 
the E.E.S. studied mainly ethical 
problems. Menedemus declared that 
all the different virtues are one in 
their foundation and, therefore, can 
all be reduced to one single good, which 
is truth, comprehended by reason. 
Menedemus is also credited with the 
view that the general properties of 
things do not exist independently, but 
only appear in individual concrete 
things. Other exponents of this school 
were Anchipil and Asclepiades. 
Elimination (Ger. Aufhebung), a 
term widely used in Hegel’s philosophy, 
denoting the simultaneous destruction 
and preservation of something. Hegel 
uses the term E. to characterise the 
movement of the abstract categories 
in logic. According to the triad (q.v.), 
the highest category, synthesis, elim- 
inates, i.e., destroys the antithesis in 
the movement of thought. However, 
the higher category preserves all the 
positive content of the preceding cat- 
egories, but in a transformed state. 
With Hegel E. is abstract and logical 





Emergent Evolution 


— 137 — 


Emotions 





and serves as a means for building a 
system of categories. It acts as a form- 
al means of resolving contradictions 
and in fact reconciling them. In dia- 
lectical materialism the term E. is 
used in describing successive continu- 
ity (q.v.) in development and in char- 
acterising the relation of a lower phe- 
nomenon to a higher one. For instance, 
mechanical movement is said to be 
included in the biological form of the 
motion of matter in an “eliminated” 
form. 

Emergent Evolution, an idealistic 
theory of development; it spread in 
modern Anglo-American philosophy, 
particularly among the representatives 
of neo-realism (q.v.). Chief exponents 
of E.E. are: S. Alexander- (q.v.), S. 
Lloyd Morgan, C.D. Broad. E.E. ap- 
peared in the 1920s to counter mate- 
rialistic dialectics. It aims to “explain” 
development by leaps and bounds, 
the emergence of the new, etc. The 
theoreticians of E.E. interpret the 
processes of change as irrational acts, 
logically incomprehensible, and finally 
admit the existence of a deity. This 
theory leads to a denial of natural 
and historical laws. For Lloyd Morgan 
all nature is sublimated: there is no 
physical without psychical. Samuel 
Alexander declares that immaterial 
“space-time” is the prime foundation 
of nature and that matter is its prod- 
uct, According to him, immaterial 
“point-moments” serve as the pri- 
mary elements of nature. Broad openly 
defends vitalism (q.v.) and transmigra- 
tion of souls. 

Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1803-82), 
American philosopher, journalist and 
poet, leader of the transcendentalists 
(q.v.). Born into a family of a unitar- 
ian minister; in 1821, he graduated 
from Harvard College, prepared to take 
holy orders, but broke with the church. 
From 1835, he lived in Concord. His 
views were contradictory. He was great- 
ly influenced by Plato, Carlyle (qq.v.) 
and the English Romantic poet W. 
Wordsworth. According to E., the 
“eternal problem” of philosophy con- 
sists in the relation of spirit and matter. 
He decides this problem as an objective 
idealist: “Nature is the symbol of the 


soul.” (Works, Vol. I, 1901, p. 27.) 
The highest synthetical principle of 
being is the oversoul. In epistemology, 
E. is close to intuitionism (q.v.); con- 
templation, intuition and ecstasy are 
the best means to penetrate to the es- 
sence of things. Beauty is everywhere 
in the world; its fundamental features 
are harmony, perfection, and spiritual- 
ity. “The creation of beauty is an art.” 
(Ibid., p. 26.) Great men play the 
decisive role in history; they promote 
social progress, which consists in the 
moral perfection of the individual. 
E. remarked that the struggle and 
antagonism of interests between the 
rich and the poor on Earth is eternal. 
His sympathies were for the poor. 
He severely criticised the bourgeois 
regime and opposed slavery in the 
USA and predatory wars. Towards the 
end of his life E. turned to mysticism. 


Main works: Nature (1835), Essays 
(1841, 1844), Representative Men 
(1850). 

Emotions, man’s feelings, express- 


ing his attitude towards the surround- 
ing world (towards people, their ac- 
tions, phenomena) and towards himself. 
Brief reelings (joy, sorrow, etc.) are 
at times called E. in the narrow sense 
of the word as distinct from stable 
and lasting feelings of love, hatred, 
etc. E. are a specific form of reflection 
of reality; they mirror the relations 
of people to one another and also 
to the objective world. Man’s E. are 
shaped by society and play a tremen- 
dous part in his behaviour and his 
practical and cognitive activity. With- 
out human emotions, Lenin said, 
there has never been, cannot be, and 
will not be any human search for 
truth. E. are indications of the suc- 
cess or failure of man’s activity, the 
conformity or non-conformity of ob- 
jects or phenomena to his needs and 
interests (q.v.). Hence E. have an 
essential role in regulating the activ- 
ity of people. E. can be active (sthen- 
ic), with a positive emotional tone— 
satisfaction (joy, etc.) or passive (as- 
thenic), with a negative emotional tone 
—dissatisfaction (sorrow, etc.). Sthenic 
E. stimulate man’s vital activity, 
asthenic E. reduce it. E. are divided 














Emotivism 


intospeci fic types: mood, affection(q.v.), 
and passion. A mood is an emotional 
state (joyous, depressive, etc.) which 
lasts longer than an affect and imparts 
a definite emotional tone and colour- 
ing to all feelings and also to man’s 
thoughts and actions. Passion is a 
strong and long-lasting E. A special 
group of E. consists of elevated feel- 
ings: moral (feeling of collectivism, 
sense of duty, sense of honour), aesthet- 
ic (feeling for the beautiful), and 
intellectual (E. associated with the 
satisfaction of cognitive interests or 
with the solution of intellectual prob- 
lems). 

Emotivism, a subjective theory of 
morality, in which the influence of 
logical positivism (q.v.) in ethics is 
most pronounced. The main exponents 
of E. are Ayer, Carnap, Reichenbach 
(qq.v.), and Charles Stevenson. Study- 
ing moral judgements containing 
mere appreciations and demands, the 
emotivists conclude that these judge- 
ments “describe”nothing in reality, that 
they are but an expression of the speak- 
er’s moral emotions, of his approval 
or disapproval of a given act. The 
emotivists hold that moral judgements 
can neither be substantiated nor 
proved, that they are “arbitrary”. They 
consider everybody to be free to choose 
any point of view in morals. Moreover, 
they declare that contradictory moral 
estimates do not logically contradict 
each other, because it is impossible 
to refute estimates which seem to be 
incorrect. E. is an extreme nihilistic 
and sceptical theory of morality. It 
justifies arbitrariness in behaviour and 
in moral convictions. 

Empedocles of Agrigentum (c. 483-423 
B.C.), Greek materialist philosopher 
from Sicily, ideologist of slave-hold- 
ing democracy. In his philosophical 
poem On Nature he reduced the whole 
diversity of things to four elements: 
earth, water, air, and fire. This doctrine 
of the four elements of nature was 
retained for many years in ancient 
and medieval philosophy. The union 
and division of the elements were ex- 
plained by the action of two opposing 
forces: attraction and repulsion (“ami- 
ty and enmity”). E.A. explains the 


— 138 — 


Empiro-Criticism 


different stages of the development of 
the Universe by the prevalence of 
one or the other of these forces. E.’s 
assumption that the law-governed evo- 
lution of living beings is brought about 
by natural selection of the more viable 
combinations had great historic sig- 
nificance. 

Empiricism, a teaching on the theory 
of knowledge which holds that sensory 
experience (q.v.) is the only source of 
knowledge and affirms that all knowl- 
edge is founded on experience and is 
obtained through experience. Idealist- 
ic E. (Berkeley, Hume, Mach, Avena- 
rius, Bogdanov, qq.v., modern logical 
empiricism, q.v. etc.), limits experience 
to the sum total of sensations or notions, 
denying that experience is based on the 
objective world. Materialistic E. (Fran- 
cis Bacon, Hobbes, Locke, qq.v., the 
18th century French materialists) holds 
that the objectively existing outer 
world is the origin of sensory experience. 
However, the basic antithesis be- 
tween E. and rationalism does not 
follow from the origin or source of 
knowledge: some rationalists agree that 
nothing exists in reason which has 
been lacking previously in the senses. 
The main point of disagreement is 
that E. deduces the general and neces- 
sary character of knowledge not from 
reason, but from experience. Under 
the influence of rationalism, some em- 
piricists (like Hobbes and Hume) ar- 
rived at the conclusion that experience 
cannot impart to knowledge any nec- 
essary and general meaning. E.’s short- 
comings are: metaphysical exaggera- 
tion of the role of experience, under- 
estimation of the role of scientific ab- 
stractions and theories in knowledge, 
and denial of the active role and rel- 
ative independence of thought. Marx- 
ist philosophy overcame these short- 
comings by studying all problems of 
the theory of knowledge from the stand- 
point of the dialectics of practice (see 
Knowledge; Theory and Practice; Con- 
templation). 

Empirio-Criticism (“criticism of ex- 
perience”), or Machism, a subjective- 
idealistic trend, founded by Avenarius 
and Mach (qq.v.). Considering “econ- 
omy of thought” (see Economy of 











Empirio-Monism 


Thought, Principle of) as the basic law 
of knowledge, E.C. “purifies” the un- 
derstanding of experience from the 
concepts of matter (substance), neces- 
sity, causality, etc., as “a priori ap- 
perceptions” (rational concepts) which, 
according to E.C. are wrongly intro- 
duced into experience. As a result, 
E.C. advances the concept of the world 
as the sum total of “neutral elements”, 
or sensations. By introducing the doc- 
trine of the “principal co-ordination” 
(q.v.), i.e., the inseverable connection 
between subject and object, E.C. was 
transformed into a system of subjective 
idealism. E.C. is a revival of the doc- 
trines of Berkeley and Hume, dis- 
guised by the demand for neutrality in 
philosophy. E.C. was also connected 
with the crisis in physics, with the 
school of “physical” idealism. Criticis- 
ing E.C. in his Materialism and Em- 
pirio-Criticism (q.v.), Lenin showed the 
connection of this philosophical trend 
with fideism (q.v.). E.C. appears as a 
variety of positivism, q.v. (“second 
positivism”). Proponents of E.C., be- 
sides Avenarius and Mach, were V. 
Petzoldt, F. Carstanjen, R. Willy, 
F. Adler, A. Bogdanov (q.v.), V. Ba- 
zarov, etc. The “anti-metaphysical” 
doctrine of E.C. was continued by neo- 
positivism (q.v.). 

Empirio-Monism, the name given 
by Bogdanov (q.v.) to his philosophy, 
which was a variety of empirio-criti- 
cism (q.v.), or Machism. E.M. is built 
upon Mach’s subjective-idealistic views 
on the neutrality of the elements 
of experience (i.e., sensations) in re- 
gard to the physical and the psychical. 
In Bogdanov’s view, the philosophy 
of Avenarius and Mach is dualistic 
(see Dualism), because it admits that 
the psychical and physical elements 
of experience are independent of each 
other, and experience must be inter- 
preted monistically. This explains the 
name of his theory, “empirio-monism”. 
To E.M. everything is organised ex- 
perience (understood as “neutral” sen- 
sory data, i.e., idealistically).The phys- 
ical world is experience organised 
socially and collectively, and the psy- 
chical world is experience organised 
individually. From these definitions 


— 139 — 


Encyclopaedists 


follows the solution of other problems: 
objectivity, according to E.M., is 
identified with general meaning; cau- 
sality, space and time express the social 
organisation of experience; truth (in 
the understanding of which Bogdanov 
leaned to relativism, q.v.) is the “liv- 
ing, organising form of experience”; 
man is a complex of direct experiences, 
etc. Analysing psyche from the stand- 
point of energism (q.v.), E.M. attri- 
buted essential significance to psychic 
selection (biological adaptation of the 
organism to its surroundings) and the 
method of substitution. The latter 
means that it is always possible to sub- 
stitute a psychical fact for an unknown 
physical or physiological one, or vice 
versa, i.e., to reduce the materia] to 
the ideal. E.M. puts the sign of equal- 
ity between social being and social 
consciousness and defends idealism in 
history. E.M. was criticised by Lenin 
in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, 
and by Plekhanov. 
Empirio-Symbolism, a term used 
by the idealist Yushkevich (q.v.) to 
denote his variety of empirio-criticism 
(q.v.). The main idea in E.S. is that» 
concepts (truth, being, essence, etc.) 
are only symbols, they do not reflect 
anything real. This idea was taken 
from Poincaré (q.v.) and Mach (q.v.), 
who considered, for example, that mat- 
ter is only a logical symbol. In his 
article, “Contemporary Energism”, pub- 
lished in the Machist collection Ocher- 
ki po filosofii marksisma (Essays on 
the Philosophy of Marxism), 1908, and 
in the book Materialism i kritichesky 
realism (Materialism and Critical Real- 
ism), 1908, Yushkevich tried to prove 
that the world is but an aggregate of 
empirio-symbols (i.e., symbols of ex- 
perience), the purpose of which is to 
systematise the data of collective hu- 
man consciousness. In Materialism 
and Empirio-Criticism, Lenin showed 
that E.S. is subjective idealism, in 
which the outside world and its laws 
are regarded only as symbols of man’s 
capacity for knowledge. 
Encyclopaedists, compilers and auth- 
ors of the Encylopédie, ou Dictionnai- 
re Raisonné des Sciences, des Arts et 
des Métiers (1751-80). This work played 








Energism 


a great role in the ideological prepara- 
tion of the French bourgeois revolution. 
It gave a systematic summary of the 
scientific knowledge of the time. Up 
to 1772, Diderot (q.v.), assisted by 
D’Alambert (q.v.), was at the head 
of the Encyclopédie. Other E. were 
Montesquieu, Rousseau, Voltaire, Hel- 
vétius, Holbach (qq.v.). The material- 
ists of the Encyclopédie were the most 
consistent fighters against feudal ide- 
ology; the moderate members of E. 
came out against non-interference of 
the Church in science, declaring them- 
selves to be the defenders of social 
progress, criticised despotism and ad- 
vocated emancipation of man from 
class oppression. 

Energism, a philosophical concep- 
tion which appeared at the end of the 
19th century among some natural sci- 
entists. The followers of E. explain 
all phenomena of nature by changes 
in energy which is devoid of material- 
ity. W. Ostwald, Mach, and other 
followers of E. developed the energet- 
ical interpretation of natural science, 
denied the scientific value of the atom- 
istic theory. Later, influenced by the 
success of the atomistic theory of the 
20th century, they had to recognise 
the existence of the atoms. The ideas 
of atomism penetrated even the phys- 
ical doctrine of energy. It was dis- 
covered that energy could be converted 
into small portions—quanta. The ideas 
of E., however, reappeared but in a 
less systematic form in connection 
with the new data provided by nu- 
clear physics and the physics of ele- 
mentary particles. In particular, the 
discoveries of the mass defect, and of 
the possibility of transforming pairs 
of particles into a field, and vice versa, 
were interpreted as mere transforma- 
tions of matter into energy and vice 
versa. These “energetical” arguments 
were supported by references to the 
law of the interconnection of mass 
and energy (E=mc?), which was ex- 
plained as a theoretical foundation 
of this possibility. The epistemological 
roots of E. are found, on the one hand, 
in the successes achieved by the ener- 
getical method in natural science and, 
on the other, in the difficulties facing 


— 140 — 





Engels 


the contemporary theory on the struc- 
ture of matter. E., as a philosophical 
trend, revives whenever science is 
confronted with the task of penetrating 
deeper into the structural level of 
matter. Ostwald’s E. reflected the 
vacillations of scientific thought in the 
search for the then unknown ways of 
cognising the atomic structure of 
matter. Contemporary E. is beset by 
the difficulties which physics encoun- 
ters in cognising the structure of the 
elementary particles. 

Energy, the common measure of the 
various forms of the motion of matter. 
Qualitatively different forms of the 
physical motion of matter have the 
property of being convertible into each 
other, this process of conversion 
being controlled by strictly defined 
quantitative equivalents. This makes it 
possible to establish the common meas- 
ure of motion—E. as such. In the sys- 
tem of physical theory E. is expressed 
in various forms: mechanical, ther- 
mal, electromagnetic, nuclear, gravita- 
tional, etc. Each form of E. determines 
the essential characteristics of a given 
physical form of motion in terms of 
its convertibility into any other form 
of motion, the o miy of motion 
remaining invariable. 

Engels, Frederick (1820-95), leader 
of the proletariat, who, together with 
Marx, created the Marxist dcctrine, 
the theory of scientific communism, 
the theory of dialectical and historical 
materialism. He was born in the town 
of Barmen (Germany). From his youth 
E. strove to take part in the struggle 
for transforming the existing social 
relations. From the autumn of 1841, 
E. did his military service in Berlin, 
attending the lectures at the university 
in his free time. Then he joined the 
Left wing of the Young Hegelians. 
It was at this time that E. wrote his 
brilliant and profound criticism of 
Schelling’s reactionary-mystical views 
(Schelling und die Offenbarung, 1842, 
and others). At the same time he criti- 
cised Hegel for his conservative con- 
clusions and the contradictions in his 
idealistic dialectics. In England, where 
he went in deference to his father’s 
wish to study commerce, Engels’ views 





Engels 


took a radical turn. There, in the then 
most developed capitalist country, he 
came in contact with the life of the 
working class. This made him think 
deeply on the causes of the unbearable 
economic conditions of the proletari- 
ans, and their deprivation of political 
rights. He began to study the short- 
comings which the Chartist movement 
revealed in its ideology and its utopian 
ideas about the capitalists voluntarily 
abdicating their power. The result of 
this study were his works: A Contri- 
bution to the Critique of Political Econ- 
omy (1844), which Marx called a 
brilliant contribution to the critique of 
economic categories and The Condition 
of the Working Class in England (1845). 
In these works E. demonstrated the 
great future of the proletariat and the 
historic mission it would fulfil. He was 
the first to show that the proletariat was 
not only a suffering class but also a 
class struggling for its emancipation. 
In England he became a socialist. Soon 
he left England, and in 1844, he met 
Marx in Paris. This meeting marked 
the beginning of their deep friendship, 
which was based on their common ideas 
and joint struggle for the emancipation 
of the proletariat from capitalist en- 
slavement. During the years 1844-46 
they jointly wrote The Holy Family 
(q.v.) and The German Ideology (q.v.). 
The aim of these works was a new 
critical approach to the then dominant 
philosophical views of Hegel, Feuer- 
bach, and their followers. Marx and 
Engels elaborated the foundations of 
dialectical and historical materialism. 
At the same time they worked intensely 
for the practical organisation of the 
Communist League which later devel- 
oped into a revolutionary party of the 
proletariat. In 1847, E. wrote the draft 
programme of this League—Principles 
of Communism. On the basis of this 
they wrote the Manifesto of the Com- 
munist Party (1848), proclaiming the 
birth of the integrate teaching of Marx- 
ism, the scientific ideology of the 
working class. The journalistic activity 
of E. played an important role in 
disseminating the theory of the pro- 
letarian struggle and consolidating the 
democratic forces. E. got his baptism 


— 141 — 


Engels 


of fire fighting on the side of the revo- 
lutionary forces in Germany during 
the events of 1848-49. After the defeat 
of the revolution he left Germany. The 
following years, living in emigration, 
he generalised the experiences of the 
German revolution in the works Peas- 
ant War in Germany and Revolution 
and Counter- Revolution in Germany. 
These works disclosed the role of the 
peasantry as the proletariat’s ally and 
exposed the treachery of the bourgeoi- 
sie. Having moved to England, where 
Marx had also settled, E. actively 
joined the workers’ movement in the 
creation of the First International and 
the struggle against petty-bourgeois 
opportunistic and anarchistic views. 
For the next forty years E. helped 
Marx in every way with the latter’s 
work on Capital. E. himself edited 
the second and the third volumes, 
after the death of his friend. For this 
editing work he did a great deal of 
research. While Marx was completely 
occupied with his work on Capital E. 
continued to work hard on the develop- 
ment of dialectical and historical ma- 
terialism. Such works of E. as Ludwig 
Feuerbach and the End of Classical 
German Philosophy (q.v.), Anti-Dih- 
ring (q.v.), The Origin of the Family, 
Private Property and the State (q.v.), 
etc., are a classical presentation 
of the essence and significance of Marx- 
ist philosophy. E. rendered particu- 
larly great service in applying the ideas 
of dialectical materialism to natural 
science (see Dialectics of Nature, 
Ludwig Feuerbach,  Anti-Diihring). 
E. foresighted the many scientific 
discoveries of the 20th century (for 
instance, the notion of the indivis- 
ibility of matter and motion, and 
the consequent teaching on the unity 
of time and space; the inexhaustibility 
of the forms of matter and the complex 
structure of atoms; criticism of the 
theory of “thermal death” of the Uni- 
verse; of life as a form of the motion 
of matter arising at a given stage of 
development of inorganic nature; etc.). 
E.'s versatility enabled him to work 
out a harmonious system for classifying 
the sciences, basing the distinctions 
between disciplines on the objective 











Enlightenment 


forms of motion of matter. Proceeding 
‘from this, E. categorically refused to 
impose upon philosophy the inappro- 
priate role of science of sciences and 
emphasised its methodological value. 
E. provided philosophy with a means 
of orientation among the innumerable 
schools and systems of the past, for- 
mulated the fundamental problem of 
philosophy, and disclosed its class 
character. His contribution to the 
development of the theory of knowledge 
and his criticism of agnosticism are 
of great importance. He raised and 
elaborated a number of problems of 
dialectical logic. In substantiating the 
fundamenta! problems of historical ma- 
terialism he devoted much attention 
to the criticism of vulgar conceptions 
of the materialistic understanding of 
history. E. proved that the decisive 
role of the economic conditions in 
which people live does not in any way 
detract from the role of ideas or the 
role of the individual in history. He 
fought against the mechanistic views 
of the connections and interrelation 
between the basis and the ideological 
superstructure, etc. E. took a great 
interest in the revolutionary movement 
in Russia, foretelling the imminent 
Russian revolution and placing great 
hopes in it. To the very end of his life 
he participated in the political life 
of Europe and, together with Marx, 
was a recognised leader of the working- 
class movement. 

Enlightenment, a socio-political 
trend, the representatives of which 
tried to correct the shortcomings of the 
existing society, to change its morals 
and manners, politics and mode of life 
by spreading the ideas of goodness, 
justice, and scientific knowledge. At 
the base of E. lay the idealistic assump- 
tion that consciousness plays the deci- 
sive role in the development of society, 
the desire to account for social vices 
by men’s ignorance and lack of under- 
standing of their own nature. The 
Enlighteners did not take into account 
the decisive significance of the econom- 
ic conditions of development and 
hence could not reveal the objective 
laws of society. The Enlighteners ad- 
dressed their preachings to all classes 


— 142 — 


Entropy 


and strata of society, but mainly to 
those in power. E. was widespread in 
the period of the preparation of bour- 
geois revolutions. Among the Enlighten- 
ers were Voltaire, Rousseau, Montes- 
quieu, Herder, Lessing, Schiller, Goe- 
the, Desnitsky, Kozelsky (qq. v.), and 
many others. Their activities consider- 
ably helped to undermine the influence 
of the clerical and feudal ideology. 
The Enlighteners struggled resolutely 
not only against the church, but also 
against religious dogmatics, against 
the scholastic methods of thinking. E. 
exerted considerable influence upon the 
formation of the sociological outlook 
of the 18th century. The ideas of E. 
influenced the utopian socialists, Rus- 
sian Narodniks. At the present time E. 
is not an influential trend of social 
thought; its ideas, however, are still 
current among the non-Marxist intelli- 
gentsia. 

Entelechy, in Aristotle's (q.v.) phi- 
losophy and scholasticism (q.v.) a real- 
ised aim (see Teleology) or the active 
principle of converting possibility into 
actuality. The idealistic explanation of 
biological phenomena rests on the 
notion of E. (see Driesch; Vitalism). 

Enthymeme, in traditional formal 
logic, a deductive conclusion (syllo- 
gisms, conditional and disjunctive con- 
clusions), in which one of the parts, 
either a premiss or the conclusion, is 
not explicitly stated. For example, 
in the E. “all Marxists are materialists, 
therefore this man is alsoa materialist”, 
the minor premiss of the syllogism 
(“this man is a Marxist”) is left out. 

Entropy, one of the main notions 
of classical physics, introduced into 
science by R. Clausius. According to 
the macroscopic point of view, E. 
expresses the convertibility of energy: 
the greater the E. of a system the less 
its energy is able to convert. It is the 
notion of E. that allows us to formu- 
late one of the fundamental laws of 
physics, the law of the increase of E., 
or the second principle of thermodynam- 
ics (q.v.), which determines the di- 
rection of the conversion of energy. 
E. cannot decrease in a closed system. 
The achievement of maximum E. is 
marked by a state of balance, in which 








Epicheirema 


no further conversion of energy is pos- 
sible—all the energy has been trans- 
formed into heat and a state of ther- 
mal balance has set in. The authors 
of the second principle, R. Clausius 
and W. Thomson, applied it to the 
Universe as a whole and arrived at the 
erroneous conclusion that “thermal 
death” of the Universe (q.v.) is inevita- 
ble. Subsequent development in physics 
deepened the content of E. and disclosed 
its statistical nature. In terms of 
statistical physics, E. expresses the 
probability of a state of a system and 
the growth of E. implies the transition 
of a system from less probable states to 
more probable ones. The growth of E. 
is not absolute, it only expresses the 
most probable development of proc- 
esses. For macroscopic systems consist- 
ing of a great number of particles, the 
growth of E. is indispensable; but for 
microscopic processes (e.g., for the 
Brownian movement), the second prin- 
ciple is no longer valid. The statistical 
explanation of E. limits the sphere of 
the second principle to macroscopic 
processes, showing that it is inappli- 
cable not only to systems with a small 
number of particles (microsystems), 
but also to systems with an infinitely 
large number of particles (the Universe 
as a whole). For such systems the con- 
cept of the most probable state loses 
its meaning (in infinitely large systems 
all states are equally probable), and 
therefore the law of the transition 
of a system from a less probable state 
to a more probable one loses its mean- 
ing. Modern science shows the complete 
groundlessness of the conclusions on 
the allegedly inevitable thermal 
balance and “thermal death” of 
the Universe. 

Epicheirema, a syllogistic conclu- 
sion whose premisses are enthymemes 
(q.v.). E. is a variety of the complex 
abbreviated syllogism. E. may be exem- 
plified by the following reasoning: P 
is inherent in all M, because N is in- 
herent in all M (it is implied that P 
is inherent in all N). M is inherent in 
some S, because R is inherent in some 
S (it is implied that M is inherent in 
all R). Consequently, P is inherent 
in some S 


— 143 — 


Epicurus 


Epictetus (c. 50-138 A.D.), an ex- 
ponent of Roman stoicism (q.v.). His 
teaching was written down by Arrian 
Flavius, his learned disciple. The 
Discourses of Epictetus and other works 
have come down to us. E.’s teaching 
is divided into physics, logic, and 
ethics. The whole pathos of his teach- 
ing lies in his ethics, particularly his 
preaching of inner freedom. He argues 
that the master can be a slave to his 
passion, and the slave is free in his 
inner spiritual independence; this free- 
dom, however, cannot be obtained by 
changing the world. Not things them- 
selves but the notions a man has of 
them make him happy; the good and 
the bad are not inherent in things, 
but lie in our attitudes toward them. 
That is why to be happy is a matter 
of will. The philosophy of E. expressed 
the passive protest of the oppressed 
against the system of slavery. This 
philosophy influenced Christianity 
(q.v.). In Russia it was preached by 
the Tolstoians. 

Epicurus (341-270 B.C.), Greek ma- 
terialist philosopher and atheist of the 
Hellenic period. E. denied the inter- 
ference of the gods in the affairs of the 
world and proceeded from recognition 
of the eternity of matter, which pos- 
sesses an inner source of motion. E. 
revived the atomism of Leucippus 
(q.v.) and Democritus (q.v.), adding 
his own changes. He introduced the 
idea of spontaneous (internally con- 
ditioned) “deviation” of atoms from 
their course to explain the possibility 
of collisions between atoms moving 
in empty space with equal speed. This 
is the basis of a deeper view of the 
interrelation of necessity and chance, a 
step forward, compared with Democ- 
ritus’ mechanistic determinism. In the 
theory of knowledge E. is a sensualist. 
Sensations are true by themselves, 
because they proceed from objective 
reality; mistakes arise from the inter- 
pretation of sensations. The origin of 
sensations is explained by E. ina naive- 
ly materialistic manner: a contin- 
uous flow of minute particles is emit- 
ted from the surface of bodies to pene- 
trate the sense-organs and produce im- 
ages of things. The object of knowledge 








Epigenesis 


is to free man from ignorance and su- 
perstitions, from the fear of gods and 
death, without which happiness is 
impossible. In ethics E. justifies joys 
of the mind based on the individualistic 
ideal of evading suffering and attaining 
a quiet and joyful state of the soul. The 
most rational state for man is not activ- 
ity but complete peace, ataraxia 
(q.v.). The materialistic doctrine of E. 
was distorted in idealistic philosophy 
(e.g., by Hegel). 

Epigenesis, a conception of embryon- 
ic development of organisms. In con- 
tradistinction to preformation (q.v.), 
E. considers the development of the 
organism to be only a new formation, 
absolutely excluding any kind of pre- 
formation, i.e., the possibility of a 
mature organism’s development being 
predetermined in the embryo. 

Epiphenomenon, a term used to des- 
cribe consciousness as a passive reflec- 
tion of the material (or ideal) contents 
of the world. It is used by the expo- 
nents of natural-scientific materialism 
(A. Huxley, F. Le Dantec) and by 
some idealist philosophers (E. Hart- 
mann, F. Nietzsche, G. Santayana). 

Epistemological and Class Roots of 
Idealism, the causes and conditions 
explaining the origin and existence of 
idealist philosophy. Metaphysical one- 
sidedness and subjective bias in explain- 
ing human cognition are the epistem- 
ological (theoretico-cognitive) roots 
of idealism. Idealism derives from liv- 
ing human knowledge owing to the 
complex and controversial nature of 
the latter. In the process of cognition 
there is always the possibility that 
man’s sensations and concepts may 
become dissociated from real things 
and that fantasy may transcend objec- 
tive reality. This possibility becomes 
reality whenever one of the minor fea- 
tures, aspects or facets of cognition is 
deified or inflated to the proportions 
of an absolute divorced from matter 
and from nature. “Rectilinearity and 
one-sidedness, woodenness and petri- 
fication, subjectivism and subjective 
blindness—voila the epistemological 
roots of idealism.” (Lenin, Vol. 38, 
p. 363.) Objective idealism exaggerates, 
and makes an absolute of, the role 


— 144 — 


Epistemology 


of concepts and abstract reasoning, 
while subjective idealism exaggerates 
the role of perceptions and sensations, 
counterposing them to the objective 
world. The class roots of idealism lie 
in the division of society into antago- 
nistic classes, the domination of the 
exploiting classes and the isolaticn and 
counterposition of mental and physical 
labour. This gives rise to the rift be- 
tween knowledge and the practical 
activity of the working people, and to 
monopolisation of ideological activity 
by the ruling classes, leading to the 
appearance and spread of illusions about 
the absolute independence and special 
creative role of the intellectual, ideal 
side of human activity. All this lies 
behind the incorrect notion that ideas 
and concepts are primary, and also 
behind the idealist approach to matter, 
nature and being. The theoretico-cog- 
nitive roots of idealism are closely 
associated with its class roots, which 
not only give birth to the idealist 
world outlook, but also assert it in 
the interests of the exploiting classes. 

Epistemology, a term used in Eng- 
lish, American and, more rarely, in 
French and in some trends of German 
bourgeois philosophy. The introduction 
of this term is attributed to the Scot- 
tish philosopher J. F. Ferrier (/nsti- 
tutes of Metaphysics, 1854), who di- 
vided philosophy into ontology (q.v.) 
and E. E. is the theory of knowledge, 
an important province of philosophical 
theory, the doctrine on man’s ability 
to cognise reality, on the sources, forms 
and methods of cognition, the truth 
and the ways of attaining it. The ap- 
proach to the fundamental question 
of philosophy (q.v.) is the point of 
departure in E. Materialist E. recog- 
nises that the world is objective and 
cognisable. However, pre-Marxist ma- 
terialism was contemplative; it did 
not grasp the decisive role played by 
the socio-productive activities of peo- 
ple in the development of cognition 
and regarded cognition from a meta- 
physical standpoint. Idealist E. asserts 
that cognition is a reflection of a mys- 
tical idea (see Idealism, Objective) or 
that the world is created in the process 





Episyllogism 


of perception, because things are “com- 
plexes of sensations” (see Idealism, 
Subjective), or else it denies altogether 
that the world is cognisable(see Agnosti- 
cism). Marxist philosophy has produced 
a genuinely scientific E. Material- 
ist dialectics, which goes to the root 
of the most general laws governing 
the development of nature, society and 
thought, offers the only scientific the- 
ory of knowledge. It “includes what is 
now called the theory of knowledge, or 
epistemology, which, too, must regard 
its subject-matter historically, studying 
and generalising the origin and develop- 
ment of knowledge, the transition from 
non-knowledge to knowledge”. (Lenin, 
Vol.21,p.54.) (Also see Cognition; Theo- 
ry and Practice; Reflection, Theory of.) 

Episyllogism, see Polysyllogism. 

Equality 1. A concept denoting 
the identical condition ‘of people in 
society, but having different contents 
in different historical epochs and among 
different classes. In bourgeois under- 
standing E. means the equality of the 
citizens before the law, while the ex- 
ploitation and political inequality of 
the working people remain intact. 
Petty-bourgeois theories of E. proceed 
from the right of every man to own 
private property, though on more or 
less equalitarian principles. In either 
case, the main thing—relation to the 
means of production—is not taken into 
account. Marxism proceeds from the 
fact that economic (in the sphere of 
production, distribution, and consump- 
tion of material wealth), political (in 
the sphere of class, national and inter- 
state relations) and cultural (in the 
sphere of production and distribution 
of spiritual values) E. is impossible 
without abolition of private ownership 
of the means of production and liqui- 
dation of exploiting classes. Hence, 
teal E. appears only as a result of the 
victory of socialism. In view of the 
fact that the socialist system retains 
some elements of social inequality 
owing to the surviving distinctions 
between mental and physical labour, 
the principle of distribution according 
to the quantity and quality of the work 
done, etc., complete E., complete so- 
cial homogeneity is created only under 


10-1682 


— 145 — 


Equilibrium, Theory of 


communism. The Programme of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union 
points out the concrete ways of achiev- 
ing such E. However communism does 
not signify any equalisation of all 
men, but, on the contrary, opens up 
unlimited possibilities for every man 
freely to develop his capabilities and 
needs, according to his individual qual- 
ities and tastes. 2. In logic E. coin- 
cides with identity (q.v.). Any E. pos- 
sesses the properties of symmetrical, 
transitive, and reflective relation. From 
these properties of E. follows, in partic- 
ular, the well-known axiom: two 
quantities, each equal to a third quan- 
tity, are equal to each other. 5 

Equilibrium, Theory of, a vulgar 
mechanistic and anti-dialectical theory 
which holds that equilibrium is a nat- 
ural and “normal” condition, while 
movement, development is a tempor- 
ary, transient condition. This theory 
sees the source of movement in external 
contradictions, denying the existence 
of inner contradictions in general and 
in particular their being the source 
of development. T. E. proceeds from 
the fact that the development of so- 
ciety depends chiefly on its relation 
with the surroundings, with nature; 
that society’s external contradictions 
with nature, not the class struggle, 
are the motive force of development 
of an antagonistic society. T.E. was 
propounded by Comte, Kautsky, Bog- 
danov, Bukharin, and others. Now it is 
shared by many idealists, Right-wing 
Socialists, and revisionists. On the 
strength of T. E. the ideologists of 
opportunism build their anti-Marxist 
dogmas concerning the “peaceful 
growth” of capitalism into socialism, 
the “harmony” of class interests, ultra- 
imperialism, etc. The CPSU severely 
criticised this theory in the period of 
building socialism in the Soviet Union, 
when it was used as a philosophical 
justification of the practice of Right 
opportunism. Defenders of capitalism 
make use of the false assertions of T.E. 
that opposites (for instance, classes) 
must mutually neutralise and bal- 
ance each other, that this is the only 
way of making society stable. In real- 
ity, however, the opposites are in a 








Equivalence 


state of conflict, and this conflict inev- 
itably leads to the removal of the 
antithesis, to the resolution of concrete 
contradictions in society and to the 
transformation of society (see Revolu- 
tion, Socialist). 

Equivalence (identical value), in log- 
ic, a relation between two propositions 
wherein these propositions are either 
both true or both false. The symbolic 
notation is shown by the signs =~. 
For example, the propositions “the 
number is divisible by 6” (A) and “the 
number is divisible by 2 and by 3” 
(B) are equivalent (A=B). This can 
also be expressed by “a number is di- 
visible by 6 if and only if it is divis- 
ible by 2 and by 3”. The negation of 
equivalence is synonymous of exclusive 
disjunction (q.v.). 

Erigena, Johannes Scotus (815-877), 
philosopher of Irish birth and of early 
education; lived in France. On the 
basis of Neo-Platonism (q.v.), E. creat- 
ed his mystic doctrine, the essence of 
which is expounded in his work De 
Divisione naturae. E. divides being 
into four natures: (1) a non-created but 
creating, God being the source of all 
things; it is shapeless and inexpressi- 
ble and can be known only through 
the existence of things; (2) created and 
creating—divine ideas, existing as the 
primary cause; the ideal world was 
created by God, out of himself, and 
exists eternally; (3) created but not 
creating—the world perceptible by 
the senses, manifesting a single ideal 
world in the multiplicity of different 
things; (4) uncreated and uncreating— 
God, perceived as the ultimate end of 
all things. E. associated the creation 
of things with original sin, when man 
fell away from God. After a while, 
however, came the redemption and all 
things returned to God. In its essence 
E.’s system was pantheistic and was 
condemned by the Catholic Church. 

Eschatology, a religious doctrine on 
the ultimate fate of the world, man- 
kind, the end of the world, and dooms- 
day. It is based on the ancient notions 
of occult, active powers in nature, of 
the struggle between good and evil, of 
the punishment of sinners and the re- 
ward of the righteous after death. The 


— 146 — 


Essence 


E. ideas are found in their developed 
form in Christianity (Apocalypse) and 
in Judaism. Since class conflicts gave 
rise to eschatologic moods, the latter 
spread widely during social and polit- 
ical crises, as in Judea in the Ist 
century A.D., in Germany in the 15th 
and 16th centuries, in England in the 
16th and 17th centuries, in Russia at 
the end of the 17th and beginning of 
the 18th centuries. Even at present 
churchmen make use of E. Contempo- 
rary theologians avail themselves of 
the data of the natural sciences inter- 
preted idealistically to strengthen the 
position of E. 

Esoteric and Exoleric (Gk. inner and 
external) The term “esoteric” is used 
to qualify an idea or a theory meant 
only for the initiates, comprehensible 
only by experts. The term “exoteric” 
is used in the meaning of “popular”, 
“understandable even to non-experts”. 
These terms are used also to designate 
inner essential (esoteric) and outward 
(exoteric) connections of phenomena. 

Essence, the meaning of a given 
thing, that which is in itself, in con- 
tradistinction from all other things 
and in contrast to the mutable states of 
a thing under the influence of various 
circumstances. The concept of E. is 
of great importance for any philosophi- 
cal system, and for drawing a distinc- 
tion between systems from the stand- 
point of how they view the E. and 
being relationship and the connection 
between and consciousness and 
thought. Objective idealism takes be- 
ing, reality, and existence as dependent 
on the E. of things, which is regarded 
as something independent, immutable, 
and absolute. In that case, the E. of 
things constitutes a specific ideal 
reality which produces all things and 
guides them (Plato, Hegel). Subjec- 
tive idealists take E. to be the 
product of the subject, who projects E. 
beyond himself and conceives it in 
the form of things. The only correct 
view is in recognising the reality of the 
objective E. of things and its reflection 
in the mind. E. does not exist outside 
of things, but in and through them, 
as their common chief property, as 
their law. Human knowledge gradually 








Essence and Appearance 


delves deeper and deeper into the E. 
of the objective world. This knowledge 
is used for reciprocal action on the 
objective world for the purpose of its 
practical transformation (see Reality, 
Actuality, Essence and Appearance). 

Essence and Appearance, philosophi- 
cal categories reflecting aspects neces- 
sarily inherent in each object of reality. 
E. is the aggregate of the deepest, most 
stable properties and relationships of 
an object which determine its origin, 
character and trends in development. 
A. is the aggregate of the diverse ex- 
ternal, mobile properties and relation- 
ships of an object which are immediate- 
ly revealed to the senses. A. is the mode 
in which the E. reveals itself. The 
idealists take a distorted view of these 
categories, taking either E. to be ideal 
(the “ideas” of Plato, Hegel’s “abso- 
lute idea”) or A. to be subjective and 
E., objective and uncognisable (Kant, 
agnosticism, qq.v.); or declaring as 
subjective the very act of distinguish- 
ing E. & A. in an object (Dewey, 
q.v., Lewis); or, finally, denying E. 
altogether and identifying A. with 
sensation (Mach, phenomenalism, qq.v.). 
E. & A. area unity: just as there can 
be no “pure” unmanifested Ee., so there 
can be no Aa. divested of E.; “the es- 
sence appears. The appearance is essen- 
tial”. (Lenin, Vol. 38, p. 253.) The 
unity of E. & A. is also evident in the 
fact that they pass into each other. That 
which at one time (or in one respect) is 
E., may at another time (or in another 
respect) become A., and vice versa. But 
the unity of E.and A.is internally contra- 
dictory, and the two are sides of the 
contradiction. E. is the determining 
element, and A. the determinant; A. is 
given immediately, whereas E. is con- 
cealed, A. has more aspects than E., but 
E. is deeper than A. The E. of an object 
is always one, but is manifested in a 
variety of Aa.; A. is more mobile than 
E., so that one and the same A. may 
be a manifestation of different and even 
opposite Ee.; A. may express E. in a 
distorted and inadequate manner (see 
Semblance). But there is a contradic- 
tion not only between E. and A. but 
in the essence itself, and these contra- 
dictions are the principal ones in the 


10° 


— 147 — 


Eternal Truth 


object and determine its development 
as a whole. In contrast to metaphysics, 
dialectical materialism recognises that 
E. is mutable. The E.-A. contradiction 
determines the complex, contradictory 
nature of the process of cognition, for 
“all science would be superfluous if 
the outward appearance and the essence 
of things directly coincided”. (Karl 
Marx, Capital, Vol. III, p. 797.) The 
aim of cognition is infinite penetration 
from A. to E., discovery of the E. of 
things beneath their A. and proof of 
why E. is manifested in one way and 
not in another. Immediate contempla- 
tion gives man a knowledge of what 
lies on the surface, Aa. A knowledge 
of E. is attained by means of abstract 
thought. In science, the transition 
from the cognition of A. to that of E. 
assumes the specific form of transition 
from experiment (observation) through 
description (q.v.) to explanation (q.v.). 

Essential and Inessential Properties, 
the properties of things or phenomena 
distinguished according to the part 
they play in these things and phenome- 
na. No thing can exist without its 
E.P., but it can exist without some 
1.P. The E.P. are determined by the 
essence of the object. In philosophy, 
E.P. were known as attributes (q.v.), 
and I.P., as accidents (q.v.). Drawing 
a distinction between properties is im- 
portant for a characteristic of the 
knowledge of things as a definite eval- 
uation flowing from the objective 
existence of objects. By contrast, sub- 
jective idealism explains the distinc- 
tion between the E.P. and the I.P. 
from the standpoint of the subject, 
and fails to find any such distinction 
in nature itself. The difficulty of mak- 
ing a distinction between the two lies 
in the fact that in the initial stages 
of cognition both are brought out by 
means of the same logical method, 
namely, comparison. The actual dis- 
tinction is arrived at later by tracing 
the properties to the essence, and when 
the essential reveals itself as the uni- 
versal. Human practice, in which a 
thing appears in its E.P., is a decisive 
condition for drawing the distinction. 

Eternal Truth, a term denoting the 
irrefutability of certain truths through- 








Eternity 


out the development of knowledge. 
It may be regarded as analogous to 
absolute truth. In the process of cog- 
nition, however, man is mainly con- 
cerned with relative truths, which 
contain only a grain of absolute truth. 
Metaphysics and dogmatism, which 
consider truth without relation to 
conditions, place a vastly exaggerated 
importance on the absolute factor in 
truth, thus providing an epistemologi- 
cal justification for elevating all truths 
to the rank of the eternal and irrefu- 
table. Such was the view held by Diih- 
ring (q.v.) and it was effectively crit- 
icised by Engels in his Anti- Dühring 
(q.v.). Religion, as a form of extreme 
dogmatism, regards all its postulates 
as irrefutable and eternal truths. 

Eternity, infinite duration of the 
existence of the world resulting from 
the uncreatability and indestructibili- 
ty of matter. Eternity is inherent only 
in nature as a whole. Every specific 
form of matter is transient in time. E. 
should not be taken to imply the un- 
changing infinite existence of matter 
in one and the same state but presup- 
poses incessant qualitative transfor- 
mations. 

Ether, a hypothetical material me- 
dium, filling up the space. The concept 
of E. already existed with the ancients 
who considered it as some “prime 
matter” and identified it with space. 
In classical physics E. was understood 
to be a homogeneous, mechanical elas- 
tic medium which fills Newton’s ab- 
solute space. This metaphysical con- 
cept did not stand experimental veri- 
fication and was discarded in the the- 
ory of relativity (q.v.). The concept 
of E. has been replaced in modern 
physics by the concept of a material 
field, irreducible to a mechanical me- 
dium. The field theory has retained 
the rational kernel of the hypothesis 
of E., i.e., the idea that an absolute 
vacuum is impossible and that space 
and matter are inseparable. 

Ethical Relativism, the view that 
the standards of morality are mere 
conventions, that it is not obligatory 
to conform to the general principles 
of behaviour, that it is impossible to 
provide a correct moral explanation of 


— 148 — 





Ethica! Socialism 


an action. E.R. is a product of the met- 
aphysical over-estimation of the rela- 
tivity of moral standards, which are 
supposed to lack any element of abso- 
luteness. Relativism leads to the ne- 
gation of the possibility of creating 
scientific ethics. Among the ancients, 
E.R. was prominent in the doctrine 
of the sceptics (Pyrrho, q.v., and 
others). It is also inherent in certain 
modern trends in philosophy: neo-posi- 
tivism, existentialism, and pragma- 
tism (qq.v.). Ayer and Carnap (qq.v.) 
considered it impossible even to raise 
the question of the correctness or in- 
correctness of a moral judgement. E.R. 
logically results in justifying amorality. 

Ethical Socialism, a Neo-Kantian 
interpretation of socialism on the 
basis of Kant’s ethics. The theorists 
of E.S. (Cohen, q.v.; P. Natorp, 
R. Stammler, K. Vorlander, and others) 
rejected the philosophy of Marxism— 
dialectical materialism and tried to 
combine scientific socialism with the 
Kantian moral philosophy. They re- 
garded ethics as a science whose object 
is to remove contradictions in social 
relations. For them, it was Kant who 
founded this science. They claimed 
that he was the first to formulate, 
in the categorical imperative, q.v. (act 
so that mankind, either in your place 
or in the place of anybody else, be 
always regarded as a goal and never 
as one of the means only), the basic 
idea of socialism, the idea of solidarity. 
The substantiation of the doctrine of so- 
cialist transformation of society through 
the “extra-class” Kantian theory 
of morality meant that this doctrine 
was a purely moral concept. The car- 
dinal problems of Marxism (classes and 
class struggle, social revolution, the 
dictatorship of the proletariat, etc.) 
were discarded, and moral relations 
and the idea of man’s gradual moral 
perfection were given first considera- 
tion. In practice, the propositions of 
E.S. were given a concrete form in 
Bernstein’s (q.v.) formula: “move- 
ment is everything; the final goal— 
nothing”, which meant renunciation 
of the fight for socialism. E.S. was 
propagated by M. Adler (Austria), by 
M. Tugan-Baranovsky (Russia), and 








Ethics 


— 149 — 


Ethics 





others. A detailed exposition of E.S. 
is given in Vorlander’s books, Kant 
und der Sozialismus (1900) and Kant 
und Marx (1911). 

Ethics, the science of morals (q.v.). 
E. includes normative E. and the the- 
ory of morals. The first studies the 
questions of benefit (q.v.), good (q.v.), 
evil (q.v.), etc., elaborating a moral 
code of behaviour, showing what is 
worth striving for, what behaviour is 
good, what gives meaning to life. The 
theory of morals deals with the essence 
of morality, its origin and develop- 
ment, the laws which determine moral 
standards and their historical character. 
Normative E. and the theory of mor- 
als are inseparable. Recent times have 
seen the development of metaethics 
(q.v.), which deals with ethical state- 
ments, their relation to truth, the struc- 
ture and origin of ethical theories. 
Metaethics is a product of the modern 
epoch, when the sciences have turned 
to a logical analysis in their methods. 
E. is not to be identified with the 
current “practical” morality, moral be- 
haviour. E. is a science, the doctrine 
of morality and moral behaviour. Mor- 
als arose before E. The former already 
existed at the time of the primitive- 
communal system, whereas E. appeared 
only in the period of the slave- 
owning society. E. was an element 
of philosophical teachings, it was a 
philosophical theory. As soon as it 
appeared the struggle ensued between 
the materialistic and the idealistic 
understanding of morality. The mate- 
tialists fought against the theological 
views in E. They criticised the theo- 
logical and idealistic interpretation of 
the meaning of life, upholding the idea 
of “earthly” origin and source of mor- 
al standards. A contribution to the 
ethical explanation of reality in an- 
cient times was made by the Charva- 
kas (India), Yang Chu and Lao-tsu 
(China), Democritus, Epicurus, Aris- 
totle (Greece), etc. A considerable 
contribution to the development of 
ethical ideas was made in the period 
when the capitalist system’ was taking 
roots. The ideologists of the then revo- 
lutionary bourgeoisie—Spinoza, Rous- 
seau, Helvétius, Holbach, Diderot, 


and Feuerbach—considered the solu- 
tion of ethical problems most impor- 
tant. Although such philosophers as 
Kant and Hegel were the adherents of 
the idealistic understanding of morali- 
ty, they enunciated a number of val- 
uable ethical views. The Russian rev- 
olutionary democrats, particularly Be- 
linsky, Herzen, Dobrolyubov, and Cher- 
nyshevsky, made important contribu- 
tions to E. Together with the Western 
utopian socialists (Fourier, Saint-Si- 
mon, Owen, and others) they dreamt 
of a just society and tried to foresee 
and portray new moral relations among 
people. Marxist E. imbibed all that 
was valuable in the ethical theories 
of the past, and became a new stage in 
the development of E. The pre-Marxian 
ethical doctrines were idealistic. The 
old philosophers thought that it was 
enough to raise the level of man’s con- 
sciousness, enlighten him or to change a 
form of government to have the moral- 
ity they preached to be disseminated. 
Marx and Engels have shown that mor- 
ality is determined by a nation’s eco- 
nomic and social system, that it is 
a historical product. In their teaching 
of communism Marx and Engels chart- 
ed the true path to happiness, justice, 
and freedom. The next stage in the 
development of E. is associated with 
the name of Lenin. G. Plekhanov, 
P. Lafargue, A. Bebel, N. Krupskaya, 
A. Makarenko, and others also helped 
to enrich Marxist E. The building of 
communism has placed new problems 
before E., which is being more and 
more transformed into an independent 
science. The morał code of the builders 
of communism formulated in the 
CPSU Programme is very important 
for the further development of Marxist 
E. (see Morality, Communist). As dis- 
tinct from Marxist E., bourgeois E. is 
based on metaphysical and idealistic 
theories. The Neo-Thomists and exis- 
tentialists write much about ethical 
problems. The neo-positivists depart 
from the ethical problems proper and 
go back to logical semanties. In capi- 
talist countries, the main trend of E. 
is to raise problems of humanism, jus- 
tice, and good in an abstract and met- 
aphysical way, looking for “absolute” 








Euclid — 


Ethics, Autonomous, Heteronomous — 150 — 


ethical values without considering real 
life. The preaching of individualism 
(q.v.), the struggle against collectivism 
(q.v.) are peculiar to this E. Moral 
relativism, which tries to prove the 
impossibility of scientific E., develops 
alongside the spread of Neo-Thomistic 
moral dogmatism. 

Ethics, Autonomous and Heterono- 
mous A.E. proceeds from the prop- 
osition that moral law has its founda- 
tion in the morally acting subject. Man 
creates his own moral law and is com- 
pletely free of all outside influence. 
A.E. derives morality from the ideal- 
ist conception that moral duty is a 
priori, is internally inherent. The 
claim that morality is absolutely in- 
dependent, autonomous, is unscien- 
tific, since it involves the denial of a 
link between morality and a definite 
historical system of social relations. 
Kant (q.v.) opposed the ethics of the 
French 18th century materialists and 
developed the idea of A.E. in his 
Critique of Practical Reason, where he 

ropounded the principle that moral 

ehaviour is autonomous. H.E., as 
opposed to A.E., derives ethics from 
causes independent of the will of the 
subject involeed. These external causes 
are the laws of the state, religious 
precepts, and such motives as personal 
interest, or wishing other people well. 
Variants of H.E., therefore, are hedon- 
ism (q.v.) which bases its moral prin- 
ciples on the urge to enjoy life, utili- 
tarianism (q.v.) based on the idea that 
worth is determined by utility, and 
a number of other systems. The differ- 
entiaton of A. E. from H.E. is unscien- 
tific and is based on the denial of the 
fact that morality is determined by 
objective social laws, on the idealist 
principle of the autonomy of the will 
and on ignoring the active role of the 
subject in society. 

Ethics, Evolutionary, a vulgar, mech- 
anistic trend in ethics founded by 
Spencer (q.v.). In the 20th century, 
E.E. was upheld by J. Huxley, Wad- 
dington (England), Edwin Holt, Ralph 
Gerard (USA), Teilhard de Chardin 
(France), etc. The main principles of 
E.E. are as follows: the moral behav- 
iour of man should be a function of nat- 


ural surroundings and be adapted to 
them; the biological process (evolution) 
is the criterion of morality; everything 
that promotes it is good, everything 
that opposes it is evil. Moral notions 
and ideas are worked out by man for 
his orientation among the facts of na- 
ture. Society itself is but the highest 
form of the natural association of the 
organisms of the same species. Holt 
even calls for the animal and the bio- 
logical in man to be released from 
social limitations. The other evolu- 
tionists (Huxley and Chardin) do not 
preach such openly anti-social and 
amoral ideas; they'are more circumspect 
in their biological interpretation of 
society. E.E. limits society and mora- 
lity to biology, which makes its trend 
anti-social and, therefore, reactionary 
and unscientific. 

Ethics, Theological, ethics founded 
on some theological system. The most 
influential trends of T.E. were and 
still are the ethical doctrines of the 
three main religions: Christianity(q.v.), 
Islam (q.v.), and Buddhism (q.v.). The 
source of morals in T.E. is ted, God 
is the embodiment of moral good and 
virtue, while the evil and the amorality 
in society are due to the “original sin”. 
Moreover, God is the only criterion 
of what is moral. An action is either 
good or bad depending on whether it 
conforms or does not conform to the 
“essence” or will of God. And, finally, 
God gives a moral sanction, i.e., is 
the only authority in evaluating the 
morality of an action. Thus T.E. is 
anti-social in its aim, since it negates 
the right of society to produce moral 
evaluations. A great place in it belongs 
to the doctrine of the reward of the 
righteous and the punishment of sin- 
ners, which theologians associate with 
the end of the world (see Eschatology). 
The complete triumph of the good and 
the just is ascribed either to life-after- 
death or to the advent of the “kingdom 
of God”. In other words, submission, 
humility, mon-resistance to evil are 
elevated to the rank of virtues. T.E. be- 
comes a moral apology for the society 
of exploitation. 

Euclid (4th century-beginning of the 
3rd century B.C.),Greek mathematician, 








Eudemonism 


— 151 — 


Evolution and Revolution 


author of the famous Elements, in 
which ancient geometry and the theory 
of numbers are given systematically, 
according to the axiomatic method. 
The famous (fifth) postulate of E. is 
logically equivalent to the statement: 
through a given point P not on a giv- 
en line L there passes at most one 
line, in the plane of P and L, which 
does not intersect L. Geometry, based 
on this postulate, is called Euclidean 
geometry. Attempts to prove the par- 
allel postulate led in the 19th century 
to the discovery of non-Euclidean geom- 
etries (see Lobachevsky). ŒE. was 
strongly influenced by Plato’s (q.v.) 
and Aristotle’s (q.v.) philosophy. His 
Elements were a pattern for deductive 
science (see Axiomatic Method, Spino- 
za). Euclidean geometry was the basis 
of the philosophical conclusions on 
the nature of space and our notions 
of real space. For instance, Kant de- 
clared the apriority (see A priori) of 
space, referring to Euclidean geometry. 
The discovery of non-Euclidean geom- 
etries showed that the a priori con- 
cept of space was groundless. 

Eudemonism (Gk. happiness, well- 
being), a trend in ethics created and 
fully developed in antiquity (Democri- 
tus, Socrates, Aristotle, qq.v.). The 
desire for happiness, either personal 
(individual E.) or public (social E.), is 
considered as the chief motive of hu- 
man behaviour. The French materialists 
of the 18th century (Helvétius, Diderot, 
qq.v.), exponents of utilitarianism 
(q.v.), were also followers of E. By 
virtue of its activity and humaneness 
and insofar as it calls for happiness on 
Earth and not in the hereafter eude- 
monistic ethics stands incomparably 
higher than Christian ethics. E., how- 
ever, preaches its standards as com- 
mon to all mankind, extra-historical in 
a society of antagonistic classes, where 
there is not and cannot be any single 
morality. 

Eugenics (Gk. well-born), a false 
doctrine concerning the improvement 
of the human race. The term was first 
used by the British biologist Francis 
Galton (1869). It is based on the idea 
that social inequality is due to the 
psychological and physiological dis- 


parities among human beings. In The 
Facts of Life (1953), Cyril Darlington 
maintains that classes differ from one 
another not economically but genet- 
ically. Distorting Darwin’s (q.v.) teach- 
ing, the eugenists assert that human 
progress ceased with the disappearance 
of natural selection, and advocate the 
introduction of artificial selection by 
means of sterilisation, prohibiting mar- 
riage between people with physical or 
psychological disabilities, etc. A man's 
“inferiority” may be measured by 
such factors as social position, financial 
ability, etc. E. is associated with ra- 
cialism (q.v.) and Malthusianism (q.v.). 
It was widespread in nazi Germany 
and has a considerable following in the 
United States today. 

Event, the basic concept in the 
theory of probability (q.v.) and sta- 
tistics, denoting the realisation of 
some potentiality in a certain set of 
conditions. If, given the set of condi- 
tions in question, the E. happens of 
necessity, it is called authentic. If it 
is known that, given the same condi- 
tions, the E. cannot happen, it is 
called impossible. An event which may 
or may not happen is called chance. 
Single chance events can be character- 
ised only qualitatively. Mass chance 
events may be characterised qualitative- 
ly and also quantitatively by cal- 
culating the probability of a given 
event in a definite set of conditions. 
Thus the probability P of an event A 
is equal to the ratio of the number of 
tests, favourable to the event A (m), 
to the total number of tests n: P (A)= 


=m/n. 
Evolution and Revolution, insepar- 
ably connected aspects of develop- 


ment.E.represents quantitative changes 
accumulated in the development 
of a phenomenon: R. represents a more 
or less quick qualitative change. The 
dialectic-materialistic understanding of 
E. & R. overcame the metaphysical 
one-sidedness of plain evolutionism (see 
Spencer), which limited development 
to gradual quantitative changes, did 
not help in understanding self-motion 
and “catastrophism”, denied that quan- 
titative changes prepare R. and put 
faith in the will of a great personality 








Evolution Theory 


(see Voluntarism), in chance or in 
the creator of nature (see Cuvier). 
Motion includes both quantitative grad- 
ualness (E.) and its interruption (R.). 
R. is not produced by anything ar- 
bitrary but is an objective process, in 
which the old contradictions, having 
come to the boil, are overcome, and 
a new phenomenon, arising on this 
basis, develops by virtue of new con- 
tradictions. Hence the theory of emer- 
gent evolution (q.v.) is untenable. It 
recognises in words the emergence of 
the qualitatively new in the process of 
development, but in the last analysis 
it denies dialectical self-development. 
This theory does not take into account 
the premises of R. in the preceding E. 
The representatives of other trends in 
modern philosophy, as well as the 
revisionists, distort the essence of E. 
& R., because they fear the inevita- 
bility of social R. The concept of E. 
is also used to qualify development in 
the broad sense of the word (for in- 
stance, the E. of the organic world). 
In this case E. is understood to mean 
movement, including both quantita- 
tive and qualitative changes. 
Evolution Theory, the doctrine of 
living nature, elaborated mainly by 
Darwin (q.v.). Darwin summed up the 
results of many centuries of selective 
practice, the achievements of biology, 
geology, and paleonthology, and his 
own observations in a round-the-world 
trip. According to Darwin, the main 
factors in the evolution of living beings 
are mutation, heredity (q.v.), and 
selection (artificial in domestic con- 
ditions, natural in nature). In the 
struggle for existence, under the im- 
pact of the outer environment, only 
the fittest of living beings survive and 
procreate. Natural selection is contin- 
uously improving the structure and 
functions of organisms, evolving their 
adaptability to the outside surround- 
ings. E.T. first provided a scientific 
explanation of the multiplicity of 
biological species, their development, 
and was made the basis of modern 
biology. E.T., together with the natu- 
ral-scientific theories of Kant, Lamarck, 
and Lyell (qq.v.), proved the insolven- 
cy of the metaphysical way of thinking. 


— 152 — 


Existence 


It also dealt a blow to the idealistic 
views of living nature, and became 
the natural-scientific basis of the dia- 
lectical-materialist world outlook. 
Among the adherents and continuers of 
E.T. were Huxley, Haeckel, Ti- 
miryazev, Michurin (qq.v.). 

Excluded Middle, Law of, a law 
of logic, according to which of the two 
propositions, one of which denies what 
the other affirms, one is necessarily 
true. It was first formulated by Aris- 
totle (q.v.). In symbolic notation AVA 
(where A is any proposition, V a sign 
of disjunction, and the line over 
the symbol a sign of negation, q.v.). 
Thus, of the two sentences: “The sun 
is a star” (A is B) and “The sun is 
not a star” (A is not B) one is neces- 
sarily true. Having in view such state- 
ments, traditional formal logic for- 
mulated the L.E.M. as follows: either 
A is B or it is not B. No third is pos- 
sible (tertium non datur). The formula- 
tion given earlier applies to proposi- 
tions of any form. L.E.M. is often used 
in the process of proof, for example, 
by rule of contraries. In modern con- 
structive logic (q.v.) the proposition 
A V A is not regarded as a law of logic 
or aconstructively universal statement. 

Existence 1. The whole diversity 
of mutable things in their concatena- 
tion and interaction. The E. of things 
cannot be reduced either to their inner 
essence or to their being. Philosophical 
theories are wrong to rate the essence, 
foundation of things above their E., 
regarding the latter as something base, 
accidental, and short-lived. But it is 
just as wrong to rate the E. of things 
above their essence, regarding the lat- 
ter either as non-existent, or as some- 
thing unfathomable and beyond hu- 
man cognition and practice. The cor- 
tect view is that just as essence is in- 
conceivable without E. (in which case 
there is a realm of immobility, which 
has nothing in common with real life 
in nature and society), so E. is incon- 
ceivable without essence (in which 
case, only the external, the restless, 
and the accidental are registered). An 
understanding of all existing phenome- 
na can be gained only from a unity of 
E. and essence, being and becoming. 











Existential Aesthetics 


2. The main category of existential- 
ism (q.v.) introduced into philosophy 
by Kierkegaard (q.v.). E. is understood 
to be the unrealised inner “being” of 
man as distinguished from his empiri- 
cal existence, which is not the real 
existence. E. as the potential of being 
is determined by man himself, by his 
will, but it has its roots (for example, 
according to Jaspers, q.v.) in a mys- 
terious “transcendence”, i.e., in God. 
E. cannot be cognised; it can only be 
“illuminated” at “critical moments” 
(ataraxia, q.v., heroic deed, death, 
etc.). The existentialists use this cat- 


egory to justify irrationalism and 
moral relativism. 
Existential Aesthetics, a subjective 


idealist theory of art and art creation. 
It is expounded in the views of German, 
French,and other existentialists (K. Jas- 
pers, Strindberg und van Gogh, 1922; 
G. Marcel, Existence and Human Free- 
dom by J. P. Sartre, 1946; A. Camus, 
Speech in Sweden, 1957). The Austrian 
poet Rilke (1875-1926) was the first 
to express existentialist views in his 
sonnets and elegies; later these views 
penetrated the arts and literature of 
many capitalist countries. They appear 
most clearly of all in Camus’ works 
(L'Etranger, La Peste), in S. de Beau- 
voir’s Tous les Hommes sont mortels, 
Le Sang des Autres, in J.P. Sartre’s 
Les Chemins de la Liberté, Le Diable 
et le Bon Dieu, La Nausée, etc. Ac- 
cording to E.A., the object of artistic 
portrayal should be the “existential 
illumination” (i.e., irrational individ- 
ual experience) and the phenomena 
leading to this “illumination”. The 
“aesthetics” of atheistic existentialists 
merges with naturalism (q.v.) when it 
requires artists to picture man’s vile 
motives and the dark sides of human 
existence. The “religious” existential- 
ists maintain that art is a “cipher”, 
a sign of supernatural powers, the “in- 
termediate kingdom” between the world 
and “divine unity”, the coincidence 
of “religious and aesthetic experi- 
ence”. The existentialists measure the 
talent of the artist according to “how 
he expresses in ciphers the existence, 
the originality of the individual, and 
his border-line situations” (q.v.). To 


— 153 — 


Existentialism 


them, the main purpose of art is to 
awaken the unconscious emotions of 
the individual. The aesthetics of exis- 
tentialism reflects the spiritual degen- 
eration of contemporary capitalist so- 
ciety. 

Existentialism, the philosophy of ex- 
istence, an irrationalistic trend in 
modern philosophy which attempted 
to create a new world outlook corres- 
ponding to the frame of mind of some 
strata of the intellectuals. It appeared 
after the Ist World War in Germany 
and later in France; after the 2nd 
World War in other countries, includ- 
ing the USA. The term “E.” was in- 
troduced by the Neo-Kantian F. Hei- 
nemann in 1929. E. has its sources in 
the philosophy of life (q.v.), Husserl’s 
phenomenology (q.v.), the mystico- 
Teligious teachings of Kierkegaard 
(q.v.). There are two forms of existen- 
tialism, the religious one (Marcel, 
Jaspers, Berdyayev, qq.v., M. Buber 
of Israel) and the atheistic one (Hei- 
degger, Sartre, Camus, qq.v.). E. re- 
flects the crisis of liberalism, which 
is not in a position to answer the 
questions posed by contemporary socio- 
historical practice, or to explain the 
ups and downs of life in capitalist 
society, the feelings of fear, despera- 
tion, and hopelessness inherent in the 
members of that society. E. is an irra- 
tional reaction to the rationalism of 
Enlightenment and German classical 
philosophy. The existentialists main- 
tain that the essential defect of rational 
thought is that it proceeded from the 
principle of antithesis of subject and 
object, i.e., it divided the world into 
two spheres: the objective and the 
subjective. Rational thought considers 
all reality, including man, only as an 
object, as a “substance”, something 
alien to man. Genuine philosophy, 
E. maintains, must proceed from the 
unity of subject and object. This unity 
is incarnated in existence (q.v.), i.e., 
in a certain irrational reality. Accord- 
ing to E., in order to be aware of him- 
self as “existence”, man must find 
himself in a “border-line situation” 
(q.v.), for example, in face of death. 
As a result the world becomes “inti- 
mately near” to man. The true means 





Experience 


of knowledge. or, according to E., of 
penetration cf the world of “existence”, 
is declared to be intuition (“existential 
experience” in the case of Marcel; 
“understanding” in the case of Hei- 
desger; “elucidation of existence” in 
the case of Jaspers). This intuition is 
the phenomenological method of Hus- 
serl, irrationally interpreted. E. de- 
votes much attention to the question of 
freedom,which is defined as the “choice” 
by the individual of one possibility 
among an infinite number of possibili- 
ties. The voluntarism of the explana- 
tion of freedom by E. has its source 
in the divorce of “choice” from cir- 
cumstances, i.e., in the isolation of 
the individual from objective necessity, 
from laws. In the final analysis, the 
existentialists convert the problem 
of freedom into a purely ethical prob- 
lem, and they regard freedom as ex- 
treme individualism, as the individ- 
ual’s freedom from society. E. has 
greatly influenced the modern art and 
literature of capitalist society, and 
thereby the frame of mind of a large 
section of the intellectuals. 
Experience In the traditional phil- 
osophical sense, sensuous empirical 
reflection of the external world. Ac- 
cording to empiricism (q.v.) and sen- 
sationalism (q.v.) is the source 
of all knowledge. Materialism recog- 
nises the external, objective source of 
E., independent of consciousness. Pre- 
Marxist materialism regarded E. mere- 
ly as a result of passive perception 
of the external world. But sensuous 
£. does not by itself give universal 
and necessary knowledge; it merely 
grasps the outward, superficial side of 
phenomena of the objective world. As 
a reaction to the shortcomings of con- 
templative materialism in interpreting 
the concept of E. there arose rational- 
ism (q.v.), on the one hand, and the 
subjective idealist and agnostic un- 
derstanding of E., on the other. The 
latter reduces E. to various states of the 
subject’s consciousness (emotions, sen- 
sations, perceptions, verbal statements, 
theoretical constructions of think- 
ing), while its source is either ignored 
or declared to be unknowable in prin- 
ciple. Kant (q.v.) held a special posi- 


SAES 


Experiment 


tion on this question, considering that 
the chaotic influence of the object 
(thing-in-itself) on consciousness be- 
comes E. only when systematised by 
a priori forms of reason. But in Kant’s 
presentation of the question, notwith- 
standing its idealism, there is rational 
meaning, namely, the idea of active 
thinking by the subject engaged in 
cognition. Contemporary positivism, 
reducing E. to sensations, to sensory 
emotions of man, etc., in effect denies 
the possibility and necessity for raising 
and solving the question of what stands 
behind this E., i.e., the existence of 
a real world, independent of conscious- 
ness, considering this to be a “pseudo- 
question”. Utilising the achievements 
of preceding philosophy and continu- 
ing the traditions of materialism, Marx- 
ism overcame contemplativeness in 
interpreting E. Acknowledging expe- 
rience to be secondary, derivative, in 
relation to objective reality, Marxism 
defines it not as the passive content of 
consciousness but as man’s practical 
action on the external world. In the 
process of this action the necessary con- 
nections, properties and laws of. phe- 
nomena are discovered, rational meth- 
ods and means of activity are explored 
and tested, etc. E. is thus under- 
stood both as an interaction of the so- 
cial subject with the external world 
and as the result of such interaction. 
In such an understanding E. merges 
with the sum total of society's practi- 
cal activity. E. is a primary means of 
enriching science and developing the- 
ory and practice. 

Experiment, an investigation of phe- 
nomena by actively influencing them, 
by creating new conditions meeting 
the aims pursued, or by altering the 
process in the required direction. E. 
is an aspect of human socio-historical 
practice and is, therefore, a source 
of knowledge and a criterion of the 
truth of hypotheses and theories. A 
distinction must be made between 
simple observation and real E. Simple 
observation does not imply active 
influence upon the object. Real E. 
must also be distinguished from what 
is called “mental E.”, which is a logi- 
cal argument on the course this or 











Explanation 


that phenomenon would take if it were 
possible to create certain conditions, 
which cannot be created at the given 
moment owing to technical or other 
reasons. E. includes the creation of 
necessary conditions, the removal of 
interfering influences and factors, the 
fixation of the object by different 
means. It also includes artificially giv- 
ing rise to a phenomenon, observing 
and measuring it with technical in- 
struments. Any E. is based upon the 
analogue simulation (q.v.) of the phe- 
nomena under study. As science and 
technology develop, the sphere of E. 
widens, embracing increasingly com- 
plicated phenomena of the material 
world. Dialectical materialism, in con- 
tradistinction to apriorism, sees in 
E. and in observation the source of 
theoretical concepts. Their connection 
with E. can be direct, if they are de- 
duced immediately from E., or indi- 
rect, if these theoretical concepts are 
deduced on the basis of analysing the 
effect of laws and propositions previ- 
ously deduced by direct E. But a the- 
ory is not only the sum of the data of 
E.; it is a qualitatively new step of 
knowledge, movement from the phenom- 
ena reflected in E. to the essence, to the 
knowledge of more deep-reaching laws. 

Explanation, a stage or form of sci- 
entific study which consists in reveal- 
ing the essence of the object studied. 
According to its epistemological signifi- 
cance E. is divided into a number of 
types: E. through the general (analogy, 
model), causal E., E. through law, 
etc. E. is directly connected with des- 
cription (q.v.) and is based on it. 
Scientific prevision (q.v.) of events 
is possible only on the basis of E. The 
prediction of communism and the proc- 
ess of its practical building are found- 
ed on a deep scientific E. of the laws 
of social development given by Marx- 
ism-Leninism. 

Explication 1. Explanation (q.v.). 
2. Unfolding, a process as a result 
of which the contents of a certain 
unity are discovered, and its com- 
ponents become independent and may 
be differentiated from one another. 
The term E. in this meaning is widely 
employed in idealist philosophy. For 


— 155 — 


Expressionism 


example, Neo-Platonism (q.v.) regard- 
ed the world and individual things 
as E., “self-unfolding” of God, in 
whom originally they exist in unity. 
Hegel (q.v.) held reality to be the 
self-unfolding of a concept into the 
plurality of its definitions. 3. Logico- 
methodological method consisting in 
substituting an exact scientific notion 
for a well-known but inexact notion or 
idea. E. is usually employed in work- 
ing out concepts essential to the de- 
velopment of scientific theory, as 
distinct from pre-scientific or not yet 
definitely scientific knowledge of the 
subject. It is widely used in logical 
semantics (q.v.) where the term “E.” 
assumes the latter meaning. 
Expressionism, a trend in the arts 
and literature. It appeared at the 
beginning of the 20th century (a group 
of German artists united in 1905 around 
the journal Die Briicke) and spread 
after the Ist World War. Exponents of 
E. are M. Pechstein, F. Marc, E. Kirch- 
ner, P. Klee (Germany), O. Ko- 
koschka (Austria), M. Chagall (Russia), 
and others. E. was influenced by P. Cé- 
zanne, V. Van Gogh, E. Munch, F. Hod- 
ler, J. Ensor. As an aesthetic concept 
E. is extreme subjectivism. “We must 
forget all laws...only our sou! is the true 
reflection of the world” (Kokoschka); 
“The expressionist believes only the 
reality created by himself, disregarding 
any other reality of life.” (K. Edsch- 
mid.) The primacy of form over con- 
tent, of the personal over the social, 
of the irrational over the logical char- 
acterises E. as a decadent formalistic 
trend. In their works the expressionists 
completely distort the real world, re- 
garding it only as an occasion for the 
embodiment and objectivisation of 
their unbalanced emotions. This is 
the basis for their inclination towards 
excessive grotesque, displacement of 
planes in images, distortion of objects, 
etc. E. also made its appearance in 
literature (W. Hasenclever, K. Edsch- 
mid, to some extent L. Andreyev, A. 
Strindberg, and others), in sculpture 
(A. Arkhipenko, W. Lehmbruck), in 
the theatre (L. Jessner), in the cinema 
(R. Wiene), in music (A. Schönberg). 








Extent 


E. was not homogeneous. The left 
representatives of E. (G. Kaiser, 
G. Grosz, and others) criticised capi- 
talism and came out against war. 
J. Becher, B. Brecht, O. Nagel joined 
E. at the beginning of their artistic 
work. Today the term “abstract E.” 
is used to denote abstract art (q.v.). 

Extent, one of the main characteris- 
tics of space, expressing its dimensions, 
In the concept “E.” is reflected the 
relative stability and constancy of a 
definite type of relations between ob- 
jects and phenomena. It is precisely 
this stability that makes it possible 
to compare the dimensions of bodies. 
Metaphysical materialism, divorcing 
space from matter in motion, regarded 
it as pure E. Thus, the ancient atom- 
ists, assuming the existence of void 
as a necessary condition of the move- 
ment of atoms, attributed to space the 
only property—that of E. In the phi- 
losophy of modern times the view of 
space as pure E. was more prominently 
expressed by Descartes (q.v.). Leibniz 
(q.v.), criticising the Cartesian con- 
ception of space, correctly showed that 
from E. one may conclude only the 
geometrical properties of space. To 
explain E. we need a body, without 
it E. would be vain abstraction. Fur- 
ther step inthe critique of the metaphys- 
ical identity of space with E. was 
made by Toland (q.v.), who stressed 
that the idea of space being a void 
and pure E. proceeds from the defini- 
tion of matter only in terms of E., 
from the mistaken conception that 
it has no inherent activity. By defining 
space as a form of the existence of 
matter, dialectical materialism at the 
same time affirms that the spatial 
properties of bodies, in particular 
their E., depend upon the properties 
of matter in motion. 


— 156 — 


External World 


External and Internal 1. Aspects 
of an object or process distinguished 
by their place and role in the structure 
of the whole. The category of the 
external reflects the superficial aspect of 
any object immediately perceived by 
the senses,or the existing reality outside 
an object. The category of the internal 
expresses the essential aspect of an 
object. This internal aspect cannot 
be immediately perceived and is known 
through the external, through its man- 
ifestations. The external aspects of 
an object are determined by its inter- 
nal aspects, by law, by the essence, 
through which they are revealed and 
known. Investigation of the internal 
nature of an object leads to an under- 
standing of its contradictions, the 
source of its development, and the ex- 
ternal forms in which it manifests it- 
self. 2. Aspects of reality, which are 
defined as the external and internal 
worlds. In this sense, the internal is 
the spiritual world, while the external 
is the world of nature. The actual con- 
nection between the external and the 
internal, the objective and the sub- 
jective was gradually elucidated in the 
history of science and philosophy 
through the struggle of materialism 
against idealism and agnosticism. 

External World, the totality of the 
material objects, phenomena and their 
relations and interrelations existing 
outside and independently of man and 
his consciousness. The external world 
is the source of knowledge. Man gets 
to know the external world—nature 
and society—in the process of social 
life and production. From the stand- 
point of idealism the E.W. is either 
created by a non-temporal spiritual 
being (objective idealism) or else is 
a product of the individual conscious- 
ness (subjective idealism), 





F 


Fa Chia (legalists, philosophers of 
law), a leading ideological trend in 
ancient China. Shang Chün (4th cen- 
tury B.C.) and Han Fei Tzů (died c. 
233 B.C.) were its most eminent ex- 
ponents. The followers of F.C., ex- 
pressing the interests of the new nobil- 
ity which had become rich with the 
development of exchange relations, 
resolutely fought against the survivals 
of the gentile system and the commun- 
al-patriarchal traditions and stood for 
the unification of the country and his- 
torical progress. Han Fei Tză provided 
the philosophical basis for the eco- 
nomic and political views of F.C. He 
held that natural laws (fao), determine 
the development of things. Human 
society must also have its own laws 
(fa) which would serve as the criterion 
of men’s actions. These laws are the 
chief instrument of the state in the 
struggle against conservative socio- 
political forces, for the consolidation 
of the country’s might and prosperity. 
Han Fei Tzů and other proponents of 
F.C. were opposed to religious mysti- 
cism and superstition. 

Factors, Theory of, a positivist so- 
ciological conception which gained 
wide currency in the West and in Rus- 
sia at the end of the 19th century (Max 
Weber, q.v., Gaetano Mosca, M. Ko- 
valevsky, q.v., and N.I. Kareyev). 
Its principal feature is denial of mon- 
ism (q.v.) in sociology, denial of a 
single basis of history and society 
and recognition of the mechanical 
interaction of many diverse equal fac- 
tors (economy, religion, morality, tech- 
nology, culture, and others). Being 
an expression of pluralism (q.v.) in 
sociology, T.F. denies the unity of the 
historical process and society, the ob- 


jective laws of social development, 
and the internal necessary links be- 
tween social phenomena. T.F. claims 
to stand above materialism and ideal- 
ism, but in reality frequently slides 
to positions of subjective idealism, 
exaggerating the role of subjective 
factors in history. The proponents of 
this theory considered the main task 
of the social and historical sciences to 
be the description of social factors in 
their interaction. Pointing to some 
positive elements in this theory (the 
attempt at a concrete analysis of the 
facts of social reality), Lenin, Plekha- 
nov, and Labriola demonstrated its 
complete theoretical bankruptcy, its 
mechanistic nature, and its inability 
to grasp the essence of social phe- 
nomena. 

Faith, recognition of something as 
true without proof. Blind faith in the 
supernatural (God, angels, devils, etc.) 
is an essential part of any religion 
(q.v.). In this sense there is no differ- 
ence between F. and superstition (q.v.). 
Religious F. stands at the opposite 
pole to knowledge (q.v.). Nevertheless 
many idealist philosophers try to rec- 
oncile F. with knowledge or to pass 
it off as knowledge (see Fideism). 

Falsehood, a statement distorting 
the actual state of affairs. Epistemo- 
logically, F. was defined by Aristotle 
(q.v.) as that which is contradictory 
to reality; if a statement connects 
what is disconnected in reality, or 
disconnects what in reality is con- 
nected, it is false. A distinction must 
be made between F. and absurdity. 
From the psychological and ethical 
point of view the deliberate F. must 
be distinguished from the unintention- 
al F. 





` 


Family 


Family, a nucleus of society based 
on marriage and consanguinity, i.e., 
relations between husband and wife, 
parents and children, brothers and 
sisters, etc. Life of the F. is character- 
ised both by material and spiritual 
processes. The first include biological 
and economic-consumer relations and 


the second, legal, moral, and psycho- 


logical relations. F. is a historical cat- 
egory.Its life and forms are determined 
by the socio-economic order in so- 
ciety and the nature of social relations 
as a whole. In ancient times sexual 
relations were of a haphazard nature 
and no F. existed. F. arises‘in the 
period of the gentile system on the 
basis of the sex and age division of 
labour and the settled mode of life 
when economic ties and interests sup- 
plemented the natural liaison of per- 
sons of different sex. During the matri- 
archy (q.v.) a large maternal F. exist- 
ed—the commune and the group and 
then paired marriage. In the period 
of the patriarchy (q.v.) a large pater- 
nal F. arose, the commune, which, as 
military democracy was established, 
turned into a small paternal family 
based on monogamy. Simultaneously 
woman became property, the slave of 
her husband. Accumulation of wealth 
‘and its transfer to legitimate heirs 
was the main purpose of the F. In 
bourgeois society, private property laid 
a particularly big imprint on the F. 
Here crude material considerations 
and the commercial advantage of mar- 
riage play a tremendous part. The 
victory of socialism opens wide scope 
for the equality of men and women in 
all spheres of social life, in production 
and the family. Love, mutual respect, 
and upbringing the children are the pri- 
mary moral principles of the Soviet 
F. Family relations will improve in 
the period of building communism, as 
the living standard of the people rises 
and the rules of communist morality 
strike deep root in the life of society. 

Fantasy, imagination (q.v.) distin- 
guished for the power, vividness and 
exceptionality of the ideas and images 
it conceives. 

Fascism “is an overt terroristic dic- 
tatorship of the most reactionary, most 


— 158 — 


Fatalism 


chauvinistic and most imperialist ele- 
ments of finance capital”, (Programme 
of the CPSU.) The establishment of 
F. reflects the inability of the ruling 
bourgeoisie to maintain its power by 
the usual “democratic” methods. F. 
heads the forces of anti-communism 
and strikes its main blow against the 
Communist and Workers’ Parties and 
other progressive organisations. The 
fascist system was established for the 
first time in Italy (1922) and then in 
Germany (1933) and in other countries. 
In Germany F. was masked under the 
name of National-Socialism. F. was 
the striking force of international re- 
action; fascist states, Hitlerite Ger- 
many in the first place, unleashed the 
2nd World War. Notwithstanding the 
complete rout of the fascist states in 
the 2nd World War, reactionary ele- 
ments in some imperialist countries are 
trying to revive F, The ideology of 
F. is irrationalism (q.v.), extreme chau- 
vinism and racialism (q.v.), obscur- 
antism, and inhumanity. 

Fatalism, a philosophical concep- 
tion, according to which everything in 
the world and human life is predeter- 
mined by fate (q.v.). The idea that 
fate governs man and even the gods 
was widespread in ancient mythology. 
In the history of philosophy, the con- 
ception of F.was interpreted differently, 
depending on how the question of 
freedom of will was treated. In the 
theory of predestination (see Occasion- 
alism, Pre-Established Harmony), man 
was regarded as a plaything in the 
hands of God or nature and unable to 
change the preordained course of 
events. This variety of F., fully denying 
freedom of will, was opposed by 
another extreme—voluntarism (q.v.). 
Religious F. (see Islam, St. Augustine, 
Luther,Calvin,and others)admitted,with 
some reservations, that man enjoys 
freedom of will, but fails to reconcile 
the “good” will of God with man’s 
“evil” will. F. finds its most com- 
plete expression in philosophical 
teachings which profess the absolute 
repetition of all events in every cosmic 
cycle: “eternal return” of the Pytha- 
goreans, Nietzsche (qq.v.), and others. 
This conception regards chance and 








Fate 


human freedom (see Necessity and 
Chance, Freedom and Necessity) as an 
instrument and prerequisite of fate, 
and thereby recognises that man_is 
the maker of his own destiny. For 
example, in Nietzsche’s philosophy 
which is thoroughly fatalistic and at 
the same time voluntaristic, “will to 
power” followed from “love for fate”. 
Historically, F. has played a reaction- 
ary role. On the one hand, the view 
of destiny as a timetable of man’s life 
given from above develops passivity and 
slavish submission to circumstances. 
On the other, confidence in the 
omnipotence of the supreme will, which 
leads those chosen by fate to inevi- 
table victory and domination, engen- 
ders religious fanaticism. 

Fate, the religious, idealist concept 
of a supernatural force predetermining 
all the events in the life of men. In 
ancient Greek mythology, the fate 
of men and even of gods depended on 
the Moerae (the Parcae among the 
Romans). As time went on, fate came 
to be regarded as a supreme justice 
ruling the world (Dike, Nemesis among 
the Greeks). In Christianity (q.v.), 
F. is a divine providence, a supreme 
being. All modern religions regard 
F. as divine predestination. In Pro- 
testantism (q.v.) it takes a clearly 
expressed fatalistic character (see Fa- 
talism). Some religions (like Cathol- 
icism and the Orthodoxy, qq.v.) try 
to reduce the fatalism of the F. idea 
through an eclectic combination of 
the idea of divine predestination and 
free will. F. is sometimes used to de- 
note the concurrence of circumstances 
in the life of individuals or nations. 

Fauvism (Fr. fawve—wild), a trend 
of bourgeois art which was given its 
name after an exhibition in 1904 in 
which H. Matisse, R. Dufy, A. De- 
rain, A. Marquet, G. Rouault, M. de 
Vlaminck, G. Braque, and Van Don- 
gen took part. They were united by 
a negative attitude not only to aca- 
demic and naturalist art, but also to 
art traditions and laws in general. 
The fauvists tried to express their 
discontent with capitalist reality by 
asserting the right of the artist to 
distort and give a primitive picture 


— 159 — 


Fetishism 





of objects and phenomena, laying ex- 
cessive stress on compositional con- 
structions, angles, etc. The fauvists 
saw the purpose of art in distracting 
man from life's contradictions, in 
bringing alleviation to people des- 
pite the bitter class struggle proceeding 
in the world. At the beginning of the 
1920s, F. was replaced by other trends 
(expressionism, surrealism, qq.v.). 
Feedback, a fundamental characteris- 
tic of diverse control systems employed 
in automatic regulation, communi- 
cations and computer technology, and 
also in animate nature and society. 
A control system, in which information 
about the actual state of the effector 
units of the regulated system, or the 
result of their action on an object, 
is continuously transmitted, is called 
a closed-loop system, or feedback. F. 
may be negative, when the value of 
the control signal and the value of 
the signal about the state of the regu- 
lated object or effector unit are sub- 
tracted in a special device; and posi- 
tive, when the two values are added. 
Negative F. is employed in various 
automatic devices designed to maintain 
a constant state in the regulated sys- 
tem. Positive F. is employed in radio 
engineering (amplifiers, generators), 
automation, and in animate nature 
(the interrelationship of organs in the 
growth of an organism). The concept 
of F. is essential for analysing the 
mechanism of development processes 
in animate nature and in society (e.g., 
extended reproduction diagrams) and 
is helpful in revealing the structure 
of the material unity of the world and 
the dialectics of its development. 
Fetishism, worship of objects and 
phenomena of nature; an early form 
of religion in primitive Bete The 
term “F.” was proposed in 1760 by 
Charles de Brosses, a French historian 
and linguist. Not knowing the essence 
of material objects, people attributed 
to them supernatural properties and 
believed that these objects (fetishes) 
satisfied their wishes. F. is connected 
with totemism (q.v.) and magic (q.v.). 
F. forms part of many contemporary 
religions (worship of images and the 
cross). (See Fetishism of Commodities.) 











Fetishism of Commodities 


Felishism of Commodities, a distort- 
ed, false, and illusory notion held by 
people in respect of things, commodi- 
ties, production relations, which arises 
in conditions of commodity produc- 
tion based on private ownership. es- 
pecially under capitalism. The emerg- 
ence of F.C. is due to the fact that 
production ties between people in so- 
ciety based on private property are 
effected not directly but through the 
exchange of things on the market, 
through the purchase and sale of com- 
modities and, hence, take the form 
of commodities, in consequence of 
which they acquire the nature of re- 
lations between things and become, 
in a manner of speaking, properties 
of things, of commodities. People be- 
gin to be dominated by the things 
and commodities they produce. This 
material form of production relations, 
the dependence of people on the spon- 
taneous movement of things and com- 
modities constitutes the objective basis 
of F.C. People harbour illusions that 
things, commodities by their nature 
possess some secret properties, which 
in actual fact they do not have. F.C. 
conceals the actual situation: the sub- 
ordination of labour to capital, the 
exploitation of the working class. On 
the surface of phenomena the relations 
between the capitalist and the worker 
appear to be relations between equal 
commodity holders. All the illusions 
of equality and freedom engendered 
by capitalism rest on this transmuted 
form of the manifestation of economic 
categories which are inevitable in this 
society. Bourgeois vulgar economics 
utilises F.C. to camouflage the real 
nature of capital and conceal the true 
cause of the exploitation of the work- 
ing class. Marx was the first to reveal 
the secret of F.C., its roots and its 
objective basis. F.C. is historical by 
nature; with the downfall of the capi- 


talist mode of production it disap- 
pears. 
Feudalism, a socio-economic form- 


ation (q.v.) which came into being 
after the disintegration and fall of 
the slave-owning or primitive-com- 
munal systems (qq.v.) and existed 
almost in all countries. The feudal 


— 160 — 


Feuerbach 


lords and the peasants were the main 
classes of feudal society. The ruling 
and exploiting feudal class included 
the nobility and the higher clergy. 
Within the ruling class there was a 
hierarchic division into social estates 
(q.v.) and the subordination of the 
smaller feudals to the bigger ones. 
The church was among the biggest 
feudals. The exploited peasantry was 
deprived of all political rights. In the 
towns the bulk of the population con- 
sisted of masters, journeymen, appren- 
tices, and unskilled workers. The pre- 
vailing production relations were based 
on the feudal lord’s ownership of the 
means of production, on the land in 
the first place, and the workers’ in- 
complete ownership expressed in differ- 
ent forms of personal dependence of the 
peasant on the lord. Under F. the 
productive forces were developed only 
by the labour of the dependent peas- 
ants who had their own household, 
minor implements, and a certain ma- 
terial interest in their work. The feudal 
mode of production was characterised 
by three successive forms of ground 
rent: labour, service, natural rent, 
and money rent. Ground rent was a 
specific form of exploitation in feu- 
dal society. Very frequently rent ex- 
tended to the product of the serfs’ 
surplus labour and also to part of 
their necessary labour. The feudal 
system was marked by natural econ- 
omy and a stagnant, low level of tech- 
nology. The superstructure of feudal 
society had a number of distinctive 
features: the feudal state as a rule 
took the form of an absolute monar- 
chy; religious ideology prevailed in 
society’s spiritual life. Social thought 
developed mainly in a religious form. 
The entire history of feudal society 
was pervaded by the class struggle. 
Peasant uprisings, though taking place 
mostly under a religious banner, un- 
dermined the feudal system and has- 
tened its fall. F. was replaced by capi- 
talism (q.v.), the third and last ex- 
ploiting form of society. 

Feuerbach, Ludwig (1804-72), Ger- 
man materialist philosopher and athe- 
ist, taught at Erlangen University. 
His book Gedanken über Tod und Un- 








Feuerbach 


sterblichkeit, published anonymously 
in 1830, led to his dismissal from the 
university. F. spent the last years 
of his life in a village. He did not 
understand the nature of the revolu- 
tion of 1848 and did not accept Marx- 
ism, although he joined the Social- 
Democratic Party towards the end of 
his life. In his struggle against reli- 
gion F.’s views evolved from the ideas 
of the Young Hegelians (q.v.) to ma- 
terialism. His proclamation and de- 
fence of materialism greatly influenced 
his contemporaries. Engels wrote about 
the impact of his writings: “Enthu- 
siasm was general and we all became 
Feuerbachians at once.” (Marx, En- 
gels, Selected Works, Vol. 2, p. 368.) 
Anthropologism (q.v.) was a char- 
acteristic feature of F.’s materialism, 
which was the consequence of the his- 
torical conditions in pre-revolutionary 
Germany and expressed the ideals 
of revolutionary bourgeois democracy. 
Criticism of Hegel’s idealistic under- 
standing of man’s essence and his 
reducing it to self-consciousness was 
the initial point of F.’s philosophical 
evolution. Renunciation of this view 
inevitably led to renunciation of ideal- 
ism in general. One of F.’s services 
was that he emphasised the connection 
between idealism and religion. He 
sharply criticised the idealist nature 
of Hegelian dialectics. This opened 
the way to utilising the rational con- 
tent of Hegelian philosophy and in 
this: respect facilitated the shaping 
of Marxism. But F. himself in fact 
simply cast aside Hegel’s philosophy 
and that is why he failed to notice 
its main achievement, dialectics. The 
basic content of F.’s philosophy was 
the proclamation and defence of mate- 
rialism. Anthropologism made itself felt 
here in the problem of man’s essence 
and his place in the world being placed 
in the foreground. But F. did not 
pursue a consistently materialist line 
on this question because he took man 
as an abstract individual, as a purely 
biological being. In the theory of 
knowledge F. consistently applied the 
viewpoint of empiricism (q.v.) and 
sensationalism (q.v.), resolutely op- 
posing agnosticism (q.v.). At the same 


11-1682 


Feuerbach 


time he did not deny the importance 
of thought in cognition, tried to exam- 
ine the object in connection with 
the activity of the subject and voiced 
suppositions about the social nature 
of human knowledge and conscious- 
ness, etc. But on the whole F. did not 
overcome the contemplative nature 
of pre-Marxian materialism. In his 
understanding of history F. remained 
entirely on idealist positions, Idealist 
views of social phenomena followed 
from his desire to apply anthropology 
as a universal science to the study of 
social life. F.’s idealism was especially 
evident in the study of religion and 
morality. He regarded religion as the 
alienation and objectification of hu- 
man traits, which are ascribed a super- 
natural substance. Man, as it were, 
is doubled and contemplates his own 
essence in God. Thus religion is man’s 
“unconscious self-consciousness”. F. 
sees the reason for such doubling in 
man’s feeling of dependence on the 
spontaneous forces of nature and so- 
ciety. Of special interest are F.'s 
surmises about the social and histor- 
ical roots of religion. But, owing to 
his anthropologism, F. did not go 
beyond surmises on this question and 
was unable to find effective means 
of combating religion. He sought them 
in replacing unconscious by conscious 
self-consciousness, that is, ultimately, 
in education, and even advocated the 
need for a new religion. Not under- 
standing the real world in which man 
lives, F. deduced the principles of 
morality from man's intrinsic striving 
for happiness. Its achievement is pos- 
sible, provided every man rationally 
limits his requirements and loves other 
men. The morality constructed by F. 
is abstract, eternal, and the same for 
all times and peoples. Notwithstand- 
ing the limitations of his views, F. 
was a direct predecessor of Marxism. 
Some present-day idealists reproduce 
F.'s ideas of anthropologism in a frank- 
ly idealist interpretation. Main works: 
Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Philosophie, 
1839; Das Wesen des Christenthums, 
1841; Vorldufige Thesen zur Reform 
der Philosophie, 1842; Grundsditze der 
Philosophie der Zukunft, 1843. 





Fichte 


— 162 — 


Finitism — 





Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814), 
German philosopher; leader of Ger- 
man classical idealism, second after 
Kant (q.v.), professor of Jena (dis- 
missed on being accused of atheism) 
and Berlin universities. He criticised 
the, estate privileges and advocated 
the unity of Germany and abolition 
of her feudal division; he emphasised 
the importance of “practical” philos- 
ophy, of justifying morality, the state 
and the legal system, but reduced “prac- 
tice” to the mere activity of moral 
consciousness; considered a scientifi- 
cally based system, namely, the science 
of knowledge, a prerequisite for “prac- 
tical” philosophy. Subjective ideal- 
ism (q.v.) underlies his Wissenschafts- 
lehre published in 1794. F. discarded 
Kant’s doctrine of the “thing-in-itself” 
and sought to deduce all the diversity 
of forms of knowledge from only one, 
subjective-idealist element. F. posits 
the existence of some kind of absolute 
subject with boundless activity which 
creates the world. His initial Ego is 
neither an individual Ego nor a sub- 
stance like the substance of Spinoza 
(q.v.), but the moral activity of con- 
sciousness. From this mystical abso- 
lute Ego F. deduces the individual 
Ego. The latter is not an absolute but 
only a limited human subject or em- 
pirical Ego, to which is counterposed 
a likewise empirical nature. From 
this F. concludes that theoretical phi- 
losophy, positing Ego and non-Ego, 
necessarily counterposes them to each 
other within the bounds of the same 
initial absolute Ego, as a result of 
its limitation or division. Following 
this peculiar method of “positing”, 
“contrapositing” and “synthesising”, 
F. elaborated a system of categories 
of being and thinking, both theoretical 
and practical. This method, in which 
some features of idealist dialectics 
are developed, is called “antithetical”, 
because the antithesis as such is not 
deduced by F. from the thesis but is 
placed alongside it as its opposite. 
F. regarded direct contemplation of 
truth by the mind, i.e., “intellectual 
intuition”, as the organ of rational 
knowledge. Besides subjective ideal- 
ism, which was basic to F.’s doctrine, 


his philosophy also evinced a leaning 
towards objective idealism (q.v.) which 
increased in the last years of his life. 
The question of freedom became cen- 
tral tor F. in ethics. Interest in it 
was heightened by the French bour- 
geois revolution. Like Spinoza, F. sees 
in freedom not a causeless act, but 
an action based on the understanding 
of inescapable necessity. In contrast 
to Spinoza, however, F. makes the 
degree of freedom accessible to people 
dependent not on individual wisdom 
but on the historical epoch to which 
an individual belongs. Unable to over- 
come the illusions engendered by Ger- 
many’s backwardness in his day, F. 
elaborated a utopian project of a Ger- 
man bourgeois society in the form of 
der geschlossene Handelsstaat (closed 
merchant state). The project reflected 
specific elements of Germany's bour- 
geois development and was marked by 
a number of reactionary features, in- 
cluding nationalist German exception- 
alism. The founders of Marxism-Lenin- 
ism made a profound assessment of 
the progressive and reactionary fea- 
tures of F.’s doctrine. Engels named 
F. among the philosophers whom Ger- 
man Communists highly respect. 

Fideism, a doctrine which replaces 
knowledge by faith (q.v.) or in 
general assigns dehnite importance to 
faith. F. is inherent to some extent 
in all idealist theories and expresses 
the subordination of science to re- 
ligion. 

Finite, see Infinite and Finite. 

Finitism 1. A philosophical con- 
ception which denies the objectively 
real content of the category of the 
infinite (see Infinite and Finite) and 
proceeds from the assumption that 
there can be no infinity in the Uni- 
verse, in the microcosm, or in man’s 
thinking. F. sees the grounds for this 
in the fact that in his experience man 
always deals with finite things and 
their properties. Metaphysically coun- 
terposing the finite and the infinite, 
F. ignores their dialectics and inter- 
connection in knowledge. 2. In one of 
the trends of formalising mathematics 
(see Formalism) F. bans the use of 
infinity in metamathematics (q.v.). 








Fluids 


Fluids, hypothetical weightless sub- 
stances (light, thermogen, magnetic, 
electric, positive and negative fluids, 
phliogiston, etc.), which were consid- 
ered integral elements of bodies that 
determine their corresponding prop- 
erties. The concept of F. was espe- 
cially widespread in the 18th and 
first half of the 19th centuries. At 
that time the structure and properties 
of bodies were not yet perceived in 
their unity and the diverse properties 
of an object were often considered as 
attributes of special external active 
elements passing from one body to 
another. The doctrine of F. was a 
development of the ancient natural 
philosophical concepts of elements 
(q.v.), of active form and passive mat- 
ter (see Aristotle) and was associated 
with the formation of concepts of chem- 
ical elements. The abstraction of prop- 
erties, qualities, motion, and forces 
from the things in which they are 
objectively inherent, the fact that they 
were considered as something independ- 
ent, was also reflected in dynamism, 
energism (q.v.), and vitalism (q.v.). 
For all its erroneousness and naiveness, 
the doctrine of F. played an impor- 
tant part in natural science by making 
it possible to systematise diverse phys- 
ical and chemical phenomena, pro- 
viding a general basis for their study. 

Flux, a philosophical category denot- 
ing the substantive mutability of 
things and phenomena, and their cease- 
less conversion into something else. 
Heraclitus, the classical proponent of 
F., expressed his conception of reality 
in his famous formula “all things 
flow”. The category of F. is associated 
organically with the dialectical world 
outlook: it is based on the concept 
that all things and phenomena are 
unities of opposites—of being and non- 
being. It is incompatible with the 
metaphysical notion of inception and 
development as simple quantitative 
increase or decrease. The dialectical 
substance of F. was conclusively devel- 
oped by Hegel (q.v.). In his philoso- 
phy, F. is the “primary truth”, consti- 
tuting the “element” of all subsequent 
development of the logical definitions 
of the idea (category). F. as the unity 


11° 


— 163 — 


Form and Content 


of being and nothing expresses the 
universal abstract form of the origi- 
nation, inception and existence of all 
things and phenomena: “there exists 
nothing that is not a mean condition 
between Being and Nothing” (Hegel). 
Lenin stressed the importance of He- 
gel’s proposition in his Philosophical 
Notebooks (q.v.). 

Force, Theory of, an idealist theory 
claiming that social inequality is a 
result of the use of force by some peo- 
ple against others. It gained the 
greatest currency among bourgeois ide- 
ologists. Diihring (q.v.) associated the 
appearance of classes with the employ- 
ment of force by one part of society 
against another (internal force). Gum- 
plowicz, an Austrian sociologist (1838- 
1909), Kautsky (q.v.), and others re- 
garded the enslavement of a weaker 
tribe by a stronger one (external force) 
as the decisive cause of the appearance 
of classes and the state. Marxism, 
without denying the role of force, at 
the same time asserts that force is root- 
ed in economic conditions. T.F. is 
utilised by the ideologists of the im- 
perialist bourgeoisie to defend neo- 
colonialism, justify the policy “from 
strength”, and the cold war. 

Form and Content, philosophical cat- 
egories which serve to bring out the 
internal sources of the unity, integrity, 
and development of material objects. 
C. is the sum total of elements and 
processes which make up the basis of 
objects and determine the existence, 
development, and succession of their 
forms. The category of F. expresses the 
internal connection and method of 
organisation, the interaction of a phe- 
nomenon’s elements and processes both 
among themselves and with the envi- 
ronment. The development of F. & C. 
is the development of the two sides 
of the same phenomenon, the bifur- 
cation of the whole which gives rise to 
contradictions and conflicts and leads 
to the discarding of F. and reshaping 
of C. The unity of F. & C. is relative 
and transient and is upset by changes, 
conflicts, and struggle between them. 
The source of contradictions between 
F. & C. lies in the difference between 
their functions in development: C. is 











Form and Content 


the basis of development, F. is the 
mode of existence of a thing; C. pos- 
sesses its own motion, F. depends on 
it; C. contains the intrinsic possibility 
of boundless development, F. limits 
it; C. plays the leading role in develop- 
ment. F. possesses relative independ- 
ence, for it is able both to promote 
and hamper development, and so on. 
A change of F. occurs as a result of 
a change in C. itself, which deter- 
mines its leading role in development. 
F. as such never remains unchanged. 
But the change, the discarding of F. 
does not always proceed at once, but 
most frequently as a result of the grad- 
ual sharpening of contradictions be- 
tween F. & C. Moreover, external con- 
ditions, factors, and connections not 
related directly to C. also exert a cer- 
tain influence on the change of F. 
F. possesses a relative independence 
which is all the greater as F. is older. 
The stability of F. is a factor which 
ensures progressive development of C. 
But this stability, which at the first 
stages stimulates development, be- 
comes in time a source of conservatism. 
Contradictions between F. & C. are 
not contradictions between passive and 
active sides. The actual process takes 
place as a result of their interaction 
as opposites actively influencing de- 
velopment. The non-conformity of F. 
to C. caused by the lag of F. behind 
C., though of great significance for 
development, characterises only one 
of its contradictions. The resolution 
of the contradictions between F. & C. 
depends on their nature, the degree 
of their development, and the condi- 
tions in which they develop. This 
resolution can be brought about through 
a change of F. in conformity with 
the changes in C., a change of C. in 
conformity with the new F., the dis- 
carding of F., subordination of the 
old F. to the new C., and so on. In 
transition from one qualitative state 
to another, the old form is either abo!- 
ished or transformed. Moreover, the 
old F. cannot be abolished before the 
prerequisites and elements for transi- 
tion to a more improved F. have been 
prepared within it. This is a dialectical 
process of “elimination” (q.v.), in 


— 164 — 


Formalisation 


which the old F. is seldom discarded 
completely or absolutely and the new 
F. does not always at once dominate 
but begins to prevail gradually; the 
old Ff. ensure development to a less- 
er degree than the new Ff., and, there- 
fore, the latter assume an ever great- 
er place in time. This feature of the 
“elimination” of the old F. also creates 
the possibility for regressive devel- 
opment, the restoration of the old Ff. 
The dialectics of C. & F. is strikingly 
displayed in the constant renewal 
and progressive development of society. 

Formal Conclusion, in the formal 
(logical) system S with axioms Au... 
An and rules of inference Ri... Rm, 
F.C. of a proposition (formula) D 
from a multitude of initial premisses 
is the sequence of formulas, each of 
which is either an axiom or a premiss 
of G, or is immediately inferable by 
one of the rules of inference Ri ... 
Rm from the formulas preceding it. 
The last formula of this sequence is 
D. Proposition D is said to be the 
conclusion or finite formula inferred 
from the given premisses G. The infer- 
ence of D is valid in the given system 
only. This is a syntactical conception of 
conclusion. The inferential relation may 
also be considered semantically: D is 
logically inferrable from Aj... An and 
G, provided it is decided for each inter- 
pretation (see Interpretation and Model) 
for which Ai... An and G are decided. 

Formalisation, a method of ascer- 
taining more precisely the content of 
knowledge: objects, phenomena, and 
processes in the given sphere of reality 
are compared in a definite way with 
material constructions of a relatively 
stable nature; this makes it possible 
to bring out and fix the essential and 
natural aspects of the examined ob- 
jects. As an epistemological method 
F. helps to establish and specify con- 
tent by ascertaining and fixing its 
form. That is why every F. necessarily 
gives a rough picture of living, devel- 
oping reality. But this “rough pic- 
ture” is an essential aspect of the proc- 
ess of cognition. Historically, F. arose 
together with thought and language. 
An important step in the development 
of. F. is associated with the appearance 








Formalised Language 


of written language. Subsequently, as 
science, especially mathematics, devel- 
oped, signs of a special nature were 
added to the natural languages. To- 
gether with formal logic the method 
of logical F. appeared. It consists 
in bringing out a logical form for 
conclusions and proof. The creation 
of calculi in mathematics and the 
idea of universal calculus ¢Leibniz) 
was an important stage in developing 
F. methods. The construction of log- 
ical calculi, which began in mathemat- 
ical logic in the mid-19th century, 
made it possible to apply its methods 
to formalising entire branches of sci- 
ence. Spheres of knowledge formalised 
by means of mathematical logic ac- 
quire the character of formal systems. 
F. of knowledge does not eliminate 
the dialectically contradictory rela- 
tionship between content and form, 
characteristic of knowledge as a whole. 
The results of modern logic show that 
if a theory of sufficiently rich content 
is formalised it cannot be fully reflected 
in this formal system: an unascertained 
and unformalised residue always 
remains in a theory. This non-conform- 
ity between F. and the formalised con- 
tent acts as the internal source for 
developing the formal logical means 
of science and is usually manifested 
in the discovery of propositions which 
cannot be solved in the given formal 
system (see Decision Problem). Anoth- 
er form in which this contradiction 
is manifested is the antinomy (q.v.). 
This situation is remedied by con- 
structing new formal systems in which 
the part not covered in the preceding 
Ff. is formalised. Thus, ever deeper 
F. of content is effected but absolute 
completeness is never achieved. 
Formalised Language, a calculus 
(q.v.) to which interpretation is as- 
cribed (see Interpretation and Model). 
The syntactic part of the F.L. (see 
Logical Synthax or the calculus it- 
self is constructed in a purely formal 
way (see Logistic Method). A calculus 
becomes a F.L. by adding the se- 
mantic rules which impart meaning (see 
Denotation and Meaning) to properly 
constructed propositions of a calculus. 
In addition to purely logical axioms, 


— 165 — 


Formalism 


a F.L. may also contain some prop- 
ositions of a non-logical nature (for 
example, some laws of biology, axioms 
of arithmetic, and others); then a F.L. 
deductively describes the correspond- 
ing content. Thanks to its deductive 
means a F.L. makes it possible to 
apply a strict process of reasoning and 
receive a new deductive conclusion 
not contained directly in the accepted 
axioms. Thus, F.L. is an instrument 
for conclusion and proof in formalised 
scientific subjects. The role of F.L. 
has been enhanced by attempts to 
automate scientific reasoning through 
electronic machines (see Cybernetics). 
Formalism 1. A general name for 
an anti-realistic method which in- 
cludes many trends and schools in the 
art and aesthetics of bourgeois society 
in the epoch of imperialism (see Ab- 
stract Art, Cubism, Surrealism, Dada- 
ism, Purism, Primitivism, Fauvism, 
Tachism). All these trends, notwith- 
standing some or other distinctions, 
have common features: they counter- 
pose art to reality, divorce the artistic 
form from the idea-content and pro- 
claim the autonomy and primacy of 
form in works of art. F. stems from the 
idealistic understanding of aesthetic 
leasure, which it alleges to be free 
rom social ideas, vital interests, from 
the aesthetic and social ideals and, 
therefore, entirely dependent on the 
“play of pure forms”. Actually F. 
usually reveals the full dependence of 
the content of works om bourgeois 
ideology. At the same time the di- 
vorce of form from content in art inev- 
itably leads to its destruction, al- 
though this is claimed to be “form-crea- 
tion”. F. is hostile to socialist art. 
2. A trend in mathematics which tries 
to solve the problems of foundations 
of mathematics by means of formal 
axiomatic constructions. F. arose at 
the beginning of the century (the Ger- 
man mathematician D. Hilbert, q.v., 
and his colleagues W. Ackermann, P. 
Bernays, and G. Neyman). In con- 
trast to intuitionism (q.v.), Hilbert 
seeks foundations for mathematics in 
a strictly elaborated formalised axio- 
matic method. The truth of a theory 
obtained by this method is understood 





Formula 


by Hilbert as its non-contradiction 
(q.v.). Thus Hilbert reduces the truth- 
value of mathematics to its non-con- 
tradiction and tries to prove the latter 
in mathematics itself. But such an 
attempt runs counter to the achieve- 
ments of modern mathematics (G6- 
del’s, q.v., second theorem). F. is 
also untenable from the philosophical 
viewpoint, because ultimately a math- 
ematical theory, like any other, finds 
its proof in practice, in its conformity 
to the object. To try and deduce the 
truth of any theory, as Hilbert does 
with regard to mathematics, from the 
internal conformity of thoughts means 
to defend in one way or another the 
positions of idealism. This does not 
negate the positive results achieved 
by exponents of F. in the proof theory. 

Formula, conventional expression by 
a definitely organised system of sym- 
bols of certain relations, processes or 
structures. The following are the exam- 


ples of formulas: XVX (the Law of 
Excluded Middle, q.v.); Ax+By+C=O 
(algebraic equation of a sraight line); 


F=m ap (Newton’s second law); n> 
“ache | (process of beta disintegra- 


tion); H >c=c<i (structural for- 
mula of ethylene). Ff. make it possible 
to express intricate relationships, proc- 
esses, and structures in a compact and 
generalised form. The efficacy of scien- 
tific knowledge largely depends on the 
finding of a productive formalism that 
enables scientists to express in the lan- 
guage of formulas the objects they study 
and their quantitative and qualitative 
relations. 

Fourier, Frangois-Marie-Charles (1772 
-1837), French utopian socialist. He 
came from a middle-class merchant 
family and worked for a long time as 
a clerk and a business employee. F. 
profoundly and lucidly criticised bour- 
geois society, revealing the contradic- 
tions between the ideas voiced by the 
ideologists of the French Revolution 
and reality, the antagonism between 
poverty and wealth, and the moral 
and physical degradation of most peo- 
ple. In justifying the socialist system, 


— 166 — 


Frank | 


he proceeded from the propositions - 
of the French materialists on the de- 
cisive part played by environment and 
education in moulding the personality. 
All human sensations and passions 
(taste, touch, vision, hearing, olfac- 
tion, friendship, ambition, love, fath- 
erhood, predilection for “intrigue”, de- 
sire for diversity, striving to unite in 
groups),«all traits of the human char- 
acter as such are good. There is no 
need to suppress human passions. The 
fault is not with man but with the 
society he lives in. Hence, it is neces- 
sary to create a social system which 
promotes the full satisfaction of human 
passions and their development. The 
phalange, consisting of a few produc- 
tion units, is to be the main cell of 
the future society. Each member of 
the phalange has a right to work. Guid- 
ed by their own interests, people vol- 
untarily join some productive group 
or other. Narrow professionalism, which 
warps man, is eliminated in the phal- 
ange; in the course of a day each mem- 
ber of the phalange passes from one type 
of work to another, engaging !'/,-2 
hours in each. This turns labour into 
a necessity and an object of pleasure. 
As a result, society attains a high level 
of labour productivity and material 
abundance. Distribution in the phal- 
ange is made according to labour and 
talent. F.’s conjectures concerning the 
elimination of the antithesis between 
mental and physical work, between 
town and country are highly valuable. 
Lack of understanding of the historical 
mission of the proletariat and renun- 
ciation of revolution as a means for 
remaking the existing society is char- 
acteristic of F., as of other utopian 
socialists. He expected to achieve 
his aims by peaceful propaganda of 
socialist ideas among the capitalists, 
too. As an inducement to the latter 
he suggested that unearned income, 
amounting to one-third of the total, 
be preserved in the phalange. Main 
works: Théorie des quatre mouvements 
et des destinées générales, 1808; Théorie 
de Vunite universelle, 1822; Le Nou- 
veau Monde industriel, 1829. 

Frank, Philipp (1884-), physicist and 
philosopher, specialising in mathemat- 











Franklin 


ical physics. Began his activity in 
Vienna and then took Einstein’s place 
in the chair of theoretical physics in 
Prague. Emigrated to the USA in 
1938. F. is a neo-positivist. He took 
an active part in the Vienna circle 
(q.v.) and, together with Schlick (q.v.), 
wrote a series. of books, Essays on a 
Scientific World Outlook, which has 
played a big part in shaping contem- 
porary positivism (q.v.). F. is an ac- 
tive opponent of the philosophy of 
dialectical materialism. Eclectic com- 
bination of empiricism with apriorism 
and recognition of the intelligible, 
super-sensory aspect of some categories 
(space, time, and others) is characteris- 
tic of F. as of some other neo-positiv- 
ists (see Neo-Positivism). 

Franklin, Benjamin (1706-90), Amer- 
ican thinker, political leader and 
encyclopaedic scientist. All his activ- 
ities were associated with the struggle 
of the American people for independ- 
ence. He was an ideologist of the bour- 
geois revolution of 1775-83 and called 
for the abolition of slavery. In his 
philosophical views was close to Locke 
(q.v.) and was greatly influenced by 
the works of the French 18th century 
Enlighteners. A deist, he acknowledged 
the objective existence of nature and 
its laws, and developed the idea of 
the indestructibility and uncreatabil- 
ity of matter. F.’s scientific works 
in physics (discovery of the electric 
nature of lightning) received world 
recognition and played an important 
role in the struggle against religious 
superstitions. F. took an interest in 
economic problems, he called man 
a tool-making animal. Problems of 
war and peace held a considerable place 
in his historical works. He advocated 
the establishment of peaceful relations 
among nations. 

Freedom and Necessity, philosophi- 
cal categories expressing the relation- 
ship between the activity of people 
and the objective laws of nature and 
society. Idealists regard F. and N. 
as mutually exclusive concepts and 
comprehend F. as the self-determina- 
tion of the spirit, freedom of will, the 
possibility of acting according to a will 
which is not determinated by external 


— 167 — 


Freedom and Necessity 


conditions. They assert that the idea 
of determinism (q.v.) which posits the 
necessity of human actions fully re- 
moves the responsibility of man and 
makes the moral judgement of his ac- 
tions impossible. Only unlimited and 
absolute F., from their viewpoint, 
is the basis of human responsibil- 
ity and, consequently, of ethics. Sar- 
tre, Jaspers, and other proponents of 
existentialism (q.v.) lapse into ex- 
treme subjectivism in explaining F. 
A diametrically opposed and wrong 
view is held by adherents of mechanis- 
tic determinism. They deny the F. 
of will, motivating it by the claim that 
the action and behaviour of man in all 
cases are determined by external cir- 
cumstances not depending on him. 
This obviously undialectical concep- 
tion elevates to an absolute objective 
N. and leads to fatalism (q.v.). A sci- 
entific explanation of F. and N. is 
based on recognition of their dialectical 
interconnection. The first attempt to 
demonstrate this interconnection was 
made by Spinoza, who defined F. as 
recognised N. Hegel gave an elaborated 
conception of the dialectical unity of 
F. and N. from idealist positions. 
A genuine y scientific, dialectical ma- 
terialist solution of the problem of F. 
and N. is based on the recognition 
of objective N. as primary in the epis- 
temological sense and man’s will and 
consciousness as secondary, derivative. 
N. exists in nature and society in the 
form of objective laws. Uncognised 
laws are manifested as “blind” N. At 
the beginning of his history man, being 
unable to divine the mysteries of na- 
ture, remained the slave of uncog- 
nised N., was unfree. The deeper man 
cognised objective laws, the freer and 
more conscious his activity became. 
Limitation of human F. is determined 
by the dependence of people’s F. not 
only on nature but also on the social 
forces dominating them. In a society 
divided into antagonistic classes, so- 
cial relations stand opposed to people 
and dominate them. The socialist rev- 
olution abolishes the antagonism of 
classes and frees people from social 
oppression. With the socialisation of 
the means of production, the anarchy 








Freedom of the Will 


of social production inherent in capi- 
talism is replaced by planned, purpose- 
ful organisation, while the living con- 
ditions, which so far dominated the 
people in the form of alien, sponta- 
neous forces, come under man’s con- 
trol. A leap is made from the kingdom 
of necessity into the kingdom of free- 
dom (Engels). The experience of build- 
ing socialism shows that socialist so- 
ciety gives people the opportunity 
consciously to apply objective laws 
in their practical activity, to direct 
the development of society purpose- 
fully and in a planned way, to create 
all the necessary material and spiritual 
prerequisites for the comprehensive 
development of society as a whole and 
of each individual, i.e., for the exercise 
of genuine F. 

Freedom of the Will, see Will 

Frege, Gottlob (1848-1925), German 
logician, mathematician, and philoso- 
pher, professor of Jena University from 
1879 to 1918. His works opened a new 
stage in mathematical logic. F. for 
the first time effected the axiomatic 
construction of the logic of propositions 
and predicates and laid the basis 
for proof theory. In his two-volumed 
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, published 
in 1893 and 1903, F. built up a system 
of formalised arithmetic aiming to 
demonstrate the idea that all mathemat- 
ics is reducible to logic (see Logicism). 
The subsequent development of logic 
is largely connected with the develop- 
ment of F.’s legacy, in particular with 
overcoming the contradiction discovered 
in his system. F, was opposed to the 
subjectivist “psychological” trend of 
logic. His views of logic are 
stamped by elements of material- 
ism. At the same time F.’s treatment 
of the problem of the universal con- 
tained features of objective idealism 
in the spirit of Plato (q.v.). F. voiced 
a number of ideas and concepts which 
entered contemporary science: inter- 
pretation of the concept as a logical 
function, the concept of the values 
of truth, introduction of quantifiers 
(q.v.), analysis of the concept of the 
variable, etc. F. is the founder of that 
part of logical semantics (q.v.) which 
is connected with the concepts of deno- 


— 168 — 


Freudism 


tation and meaning, linguistic ex- 
pressions, and the relation of desig- 
nation (or name). 

French Historians of the Restoration, 
A. Thierry, F. Guizot, F. Mignet— 
bourgeois historians of the 1830-40 
period. They went farther than the 
French 18th century materialists in 
explaining social development. They 
considered the history of feudalism 
and bourgeois society as the struggle of 
the third estate against the nobility 
and the clergy, and arrived at the 
conclusion that the causes of the class 
struggle are rooted in different material 
interests of the social classes. Thierry, 
for example, regarded the religious 
struggle between Presbyterians and 
Catholics as a struggle of the political 
parties for the property interests of 
different classes. But, reducing social 
life to property relations, these histor- 
ians did not see their basis—the forces 
and relations of production. On the 
question of origin of classes they held 
to idealist positions, regarding wars 
and violence as the decisive force of 
social development. As ideologists of 
the liberal bourgeoisie, the historians 
of the Restoration epoch denied the 
existence of contradictions within the 
third estate which, in their opinion, 
included the entire people except for 
the nobility and clergy. Viewing the 
class struggle as progressive in the past, 
they denied the need for it in capita- 
list society, calling the struggle of class- 
es madness, advocating class peace and 
claiming that capitalism was eternal. 

Freudism, the theory and method 
of psycho-analysis (q.v.) so named 
after Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), Aus- 
trian physician, neuropathologist, and 
psychiatrist. Studying the causes of 
pathological mental processes, Freud 
resolutely rejected vulgar materialistic 
attempts to explain changes in mental 
acts by physiological causes. At the 
same time he completely deviated 
from the materialist world outlook, 
denied objective methods of studying 
mental activity, and created an arbit- 
rary subjectivist theory. F. divorces 
mental activity from material condi- 
tions and the causes producing it. 
Mental activity is regarded as some- 








Friendship of the Peoples 


thing independent, existing side by side 
with material processes (see Psycho- 
Physical Parallelism), and governed 
by special, unknowable, eternal psy- 
chic forces lying beyond consciousness 
(see Unconscious). Dominating the spir- 
it of man, like fate, are immutable 
mental conflicts between the uncon- 
scious striving for pleasure (above all 
sexual), for aggression and the “prin- 
ciple of reality” to which the mind 
adapts itself. Freud subjects all mental 
conditions, all actions of man, and 
also all historical events and social 
phenomena to psycho-analysis, i.e., 
interprets them as manifestations of 
unconscious, above all sexual, im- 
pulses. Thus, the ideal—the psychic 
(above all the unknowable “Id”—the 
Unconscious) is considered the cause 
of the history of mankind, morality, 
art, science, religion, state, law, wars, 
and so on. Neo-Freudists, exponents 
of the schools of “cultural psycho- 
analysis” (K. Horney, A. Kardiner, 
F. Alexander, and E. Fromm) pre- 
served untouched the main idealist line 
of Freud, renouncing only the tendency 
to see in all phenomena of human life 
a sexual undercurrent and some other 
methodologically inessential features 
of classical F. The Freudist concept 
has exerted and continues to exert great 
influence on various spheres of culture 
in capitalist countries, particularly 
on the theory and works of art. F. has 
now less influence in the sphere in 
which it originated, namely, neurology 
and psychiatry. 

Friendship of the Peoples, fraternal 
co-operation and mutual assistance 
between the nations (q.v.) and nation- 
alities (q.v.) of socialist society, one 
of its characteristic laws and motive 
forces. F.P. is a new type of internation- 
al relationship, based on socialist 
economy, socialist democracy, and the 
Marxist-Leninist ideology of interna- 
tionalism. The relations between the 
peoples of the USSR are an example 
of the F.P. which has developed with 
the establishment of socialist nations. 
It is a natural result of the Great Octo- 
ber Socialist Revolution, the build- 
ing of socialism, and the consistent 
pursuit of the Leninist nationalities 


— 169 — 


Functional Calculus 


policy by the Communist Party. It is 
the source of the strength of the Soviet 
state and accelerates the Soviet peo- 
ple’s progress towards communism. 
In the course of the full-scale construc- 
tion of communism, which marks a 
new stage in the relations between 
peoples, the socialist nations develop 
in every sphere and draw even closer 
together. The peoples of the USSR 
have friendly feelings for the working 
people of all countries. Fraternal 
cooperation and mutual assistance 
is making great strides among the 
peoples of the world socialist 
system, 

Function 1. An outward mani- 
festation of the properties of some 
objects in a given system of relations, 
e.g., the function of the sense-organs, 
the functions of money, the functions 
of the state, etc. A number of idealist 
philosophies seek to reduce science to 
a description of the functions of ob- 
jects, denying not only the possibility 
of cognising the essence and laws of 
things but also their existence (Mach- 
ism, behaviourism, etc.). 2. In the 
mathematical sense, F. is a concept 
expressing the dependence, the rela- 
tions between elements of two sets. 
The mathematical concept of F. is 
utilised in all the exact sciences. 
Following Mach, the neo-positivists 
try to replace the concept of causality 
by that of functional dependence (q.v.). 
Lenin criticised this viewpoint in his 
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism. 
3. The logical or propositional function 
(q.v.) has a special meaning. 

Functional Calculus, an extension 
propositional calculus by formalising 
inferences based on the internal struc- 
ture of the propositions. One of the 
basic concepts of F. C. is the predicate 
(q.v.) of one or several subject variables: 
P (X, ... Xp). where P is the predicate 
and X, X,, are the subject var- 
iables. In functional calculus of the 
first order, predicates of subject var- 
iables are bound by quantifiers (q.v.) 
(universal quantifiers y and existential 
quantifiers q). The axiomatics of F.C. 
is obtained from the axioms and rules 
of inference of propositional calculus 








Functional Dependence 


(q.v.) by the addition of two axioms: 
VxP(x)>P(y), P(y)>g,P(x) and the 
following rules of inference: if formula 
C-»D(x) has been inferred, then C> y, 
D(x) is inferred; if formula D(x)»C 
has been inferred then q,D(x)~C is 
inferred. F.C. is non-contradictory and 
complete in the sense that any equiv- 
alent-true formula can be inferred in it. 
The decision problem (q.v.) is unde- 
cidable (proved by A. Church). Binding 
be quantifiers not only of subject vari- 
ables, but also of predicate variables 
produces F.C. of the second order. 


Functional Dependence, a form of 
stable relation between phenomena or 
magnitudes, in which a change in 
some phenomena causes a definite 
change in others. Objectively, F.D. 
is manifested in a law which has pre- 
cise quantitative definiteness and in 
principle can be expressed as an equa- 
tion uniting the given magnitudes or 
phenomena as a function and an ar- 
gument. F.D. may describe a relation: 
(1) between abstract mathematical mag- 
nitudes or functions regardless of what 
they express; (2) between properties 
or states of material objects and phe- 
nomena; (3) between objects, phenome- 
na or material systems as such within 
the bounds of a harmonious system of 
a higher order. Every F.D. presup- 
poses that the phenomena subordinated 
to it are distinguished by definite 
constants, parameters, concrete con- 
ditions and a quantitatively definite 
law. F.D. is not identical to a causal 
connection. Side by side with phenom- 
ena in which the causal connection is 
subject to an exact functional law, there 
are many singular and chance causal 
connections which are not functional, 
just as there is F.D. between mathema- 
tical magnitudes or properties of bodies 
which js not a causal connection. 

Functional School in Sociology, a 
school in contemporary sociology of 
the USA (R. Merton, T. Parsons, P. 
Sorokin). The F.S. regards society 
as a single, interconnected social sys- 
tem, each element of which performs 
a definite function. The basic feature 
of such a system is the interaction of 
its components and the absence of 


— 170 — 


Futurism 


a single determining basis. But ac- 
tually the determining part of the 
system, according to this school, con- 
sists of “spiritual values”, above all 
religion, as an element of the system 
discharging a necessary social function. 
The ideas of F.S. are a reaction to 
the empiricism of contemporary Amer- 
ican sociology. On the other hand, 
the functional explanation of the social 
system is counterposed to Marxist so- 
cial science. F.S. is metaphysical, 
anti-historical, and idealist. It recog- 
nises equilibrium in the social system, 
denies the concept of the historical 
process, and claims that conflicts in 
capitalist society are ruled out. 

Futurism, a trend in art which arose 
in Italy in 1909-11. It was founded 
by F.T. Marinetti (1876-1944). In his 
book Manifesti del Futurismo he 
wrote: “We shall extol the mounting 
triumph of the machine”; “A racing 
motorcar is more beautiful than the 
statue of Nike of Samothrace.” These 
calls for extolling “industrial dynam- 
ism” could not conceal the real es- 
sence of F. which expressed the ideol- 
ogy of the aggressive Italian bourgeoi- 
sie. The futurists’ idealisation of the 
machine, far from appreciating man’s 
labour, actually boiled down to wor- 
ship of technology and glorification 
of “mechanised” militarism (the poems 
and novels of Marinetti). The distinc- 
tive features of paintings and sculp- 
tures of F. (G. Balla, C. Carrà, U. Boc- 
cioni, L. Russolo, and others) were 
the self-contained images of “rhythms” 
and “motions”, subjectivist symbols, 
distorted moving objects, elements of 
erotics or mysticism. Russian F., which 
originated in 1910, was a contradictory 
movement in literature and art. The 
Russian futurists (the Burlyuk broth- 
ers, Kruchenykh, Khlebnikov, B.Lif- 
shitz, and V. Kamensky) were hostile 
towards the reactionary essence of 
Marinetti’s manifestos, but their own 
works were petty bourgeois and anarch- 
istic. On realising the ideological and 
aesthetic fallacies of the formalistic 
refinements of the futurists, Mayakov- 
sky and others broke with F. and went 
ae to positions of socialist realism 
q-V.). 








G 


Galaxy (Gx. galaxios, -aktos, milky), 
the Milky Way, a cosmic system of 
more than 100,000 million stars, of 
which the Sun is one. The star clus- 
ters, nebulae, etc., of which it is com- 
posed, are knit by gravitation into a 
single complex system with a variety 
ot forms of motion. Distances between 
neighbouring stars of G. are of the 
order of a few light years; the diameter 
of G. is about 100,000 light years. 
Cosmic systems resembling the Milky 
Way and numbering from a few thou- 
sand million to several hundred thou- 
sand million stars each, and including 
gas (chiefly hydrogen) and dust, are 
also known as galaxies. Together, 
they are said to form the Metagalaxy 
(q.v.). It was not until the 1920s that 
the asteroidean nature of galaxies was 
conclusively established, and there- 
fore writers sometimes still use the 
traditional term, “extra-galactical neb- 
ulae”. 

Galich, Alexander Ivanovich (1783- 
1848), Russian philosopher, aestheti- 
cian and psychologist; objective ideal- 
ist. In his lectures (Petersburg Uni- 
versity, 1817-21) and his Kartina che- 
loveka (Picture of Man), i834, G. 
maintained that individual thinking 
was governed by the laws of being. 
He stressed the prominence of sensa- 
tions in the process of cognition, held 
that cognition developed by stages 
(hypothesis-concept-idea) and associat- 
ed thinking with physiology. In his 
Istoriya filosofskikh sistem (History 
of the Philosophical Systems)—books 
1-2, 1818-19—he attempted to formu- 
late objective laws governing the de- 
velopment of philosophy; opposed ma- 
terialism, but commended the metho- 
dology of the experimental sciences. In 


his Opyt nauki izyashchnogo (Experi- 
ence of the Science of Beauty), 1825, he 
was one of the first in Russia to advo- 
cate the aesthetics of romanticism (q.v.) 
and attacked the theory of imitating 
classicism. 

Galileo Galilei (1564-1642), Italian 
physicist and astronomer; proponent 
of scientific world outlook; defied blind 
worship of Aristotle (q.v.) and attacked 
dogmatic scholasticism; discovered 
the law of inertia and the principle 
of relativity, according to which uni- 
form and rectilinear motion of a sys- 
tem of bodies does not reflect on the 
processes within the said system. This 
nullified the sterile scholastic physics 
of his time and paved the way for 
experimental science. G’s astronomi- 
cal discoveries, which corroborated 
the heliocentric system of Copernicus 
(q.v.), delivered a death blow to reli- 
gious dogma; the Roman Inquisition 
compelled him to abjure his “Coper- 
nican heresies”. G.’s world outlook was 
distinctly progressive. He believed the 
world was infinite, matter eternal and 
nature single, and maintained that 
nature was governed by the rigorous 
mechanical causality of immutable 
atoms obeying the laws of mechanics. 
Observation and experience were for 
G. the points of departure in the 
cognition of nature. He considered cog- 
nition of intrinsic necessity to be the 
highest level of knowledge, but was 
unable to shake off the influence of 
religious prejudice and acknowledged 
divine origin. His principal work is 
Dialogo dei due massimi sistemi del 
mondo (1632). 

Gall, Ludwig (1794-1863), early Ger- 
man utopian socialist, influenced by 
French and English communist ideas; 





Gandhi 


was personally acquainted with Fou- 
rier (q.v.), some followers of Saint- 
Simon and Robert Owen (qq.v-). In his 
writings of 1825-28 (My Wishes and 
Actions, and others) G. attacked the 
burgeoning capitalist system. He be- 
lieved that co-operation by land-hun- 
gry peasants and artisans could slow 
down mass impoverishment, but did 
not suggest revolution or the expro- 
priation of capitalists. G.’s ideology is 
the socialism of the petty proprietor 
disgruntled by the proletarisation of 
society and unwilling to renounce the 
system based on private ownership. 
G. founded a society for providing 
jobs and housing for destitutes in 
Trier, Germany. Emigrated to Ameri- 
ca, where he attempted to establish a 
socialist community. On failing, he 
returned to Germany. 

Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand 
(1869-1948), a leader of the Indian 
national liberation movement, founder 
of the ideology and tactics known as 
Gandhism. Philosophically, G. was an 
objective idealist; his system identi fied 
God and Truth. He held that percep- 
tion of the truth derived from moral 
self-improvement. His ethical views 
were based on the Jain (see Jainism) 
principle of ahimsd, the “law of love” 
and “law of suffering”, and the prin- 
ciples of brahmacharya (practice of 
continence), aparigraha (non-covetous- 
ness), etc. Gandhism’s typical feature 
is its ethical treatment of socio-politi- 
cal problems, its “moralisation” of 
political acts. G.’s socio-political ideas 
are embodied in his concept of Satyag- 
raha (literally, persistent seeking of 
truth), of which non-co-operation and 
civil disobedience (to imperialist dom- 
ination) were the main forms. G. 
opposed expropriation of the exploiting 
classes and denied the possibility of 
any radical revolutionary reorganisa- 
tion of society. He held that social 
progress lay not in the growth of 
people’s requirements, but in their 
self-imposed and voluntary restriction. 
He advocated Hindu-Muslim_ unity, 
campaigned against “untouchability”, 
urged the emancipation of women and 
called for a national system of public 
education, etc. Was conferred the title 


— 172 — 


Ghose 


of mahatma (great soul). Gandhism is 
the official ideology of the Indian 
National Congress, the ruling bourgeois 
party of India. 

Gassendi, Pierre (1592-1655), French 
materialist philosopher, physicist, as- 
tronomer, clerical, and professor of 
a number of universities. G. cam- 
aigned strongly against scholasticism 
q.v.) and its perversion of Aristotle’s 
(q.v.) teaching, and against Descar- 
tes’s (q.v.) theory of innate ideas 
(q.v.); revived the materialism of Epi- 
curus (q.v-), on which he based his 
own doctrine. In his basic work, 
Syntagma philosophiae Epicuri (1658), 
he divided philosophy into three parts: 
(1) logic, in which he analysed the 
problem of the authenticity of knowl- 
edge and criticised scepticism and 
dogmatism; (2) physics, in which he 
expound the atomistic theory and 
interred the objectivity, uncreatability 
and indestructibility of time and 
space; (3) ethics, in which he 
attacked the ascetic moral code of 
the church and echoed Epicurus in 
maintaining that every kind of pleas- 
ure is a blessing in itself and every 
kind of virtue is a blessing so long as 
it provides “serenity”. Socially and 
politically, G. advocated unrestricted 
monarchy, reflecting the compromise 
made by the bourgeoisie to absolute 
monarchy. G. made important obser- 
vations and discoveries in astronomy 
and is the author of works on the his- 
tory of science. In the specific environ- 
ment of the 17th century, G. was pro- 
gressive as philosopher and scientist, 
but his materialism was inconsistent, 
for he reconciled himself to religion 
and the church, recognised God as the 
creator of atoms and held that in addi- 
tion to the materialistically conceived 
“animal soul”, man also had a supra- 
sensory “rational soul”. . 

Ghose, Aurobindo (1872-1950), In- 
dian philosopher, founder of the so- 
called integral Vedanta, which osten- 
sibly reconciles materialism and ideal- 
ism, mysticism and rationalism, plu- 
ralism and monism (qq.v.). In the early 
20th century he took an active part in 
the Indian liberation movement. His 
chief philosophical works are The Life 








General Crisis of Capitalism 


Divine, The Human Cycle, and The 
Ideal of Human Unity. In these books 
elements of the different trends of the 
Vedanta interweave with those of ideal- 
istic Western schools, particularly He- 
gel (q.v.), Bradley and Alexander 
(q.v.). G. believed that in the course 
of human history there is a transition 
from “subconsciousness” to conscious- 
ness and “superconsciousness”. He also 
believed that the solution of the riddle 
of history and the achievement of 
man’s aspirations fie in the attain- 
ment of mystical “superconsciousness”. 
G. claimed to have discovered a “third 
way” of social development, as distinct 
from capitalism and socialism, and was 
in effect a bourgeois ideologist. 
General Crisis of Capitalism, all- 
round crisis of the world capitalist 
system which encompasses the eco- 
nomic and the state system, politics, 
ideology, and also all other spheres 
of life in contemporary bourgeois so- 
ciety. The division of the world into 
two opposite systems, capitalist and 
socialist, is the decisive feature of the 
G.C.C. “The breakaway from capitalism 
of more and more countries; the weak- 
ening of imperialist positions in the 
economic competition with socialism; 
the break-up of the imperialist colo- 
nial system; the intensification of im- 
perialist contradictions with the de- 
velopment of state-monopoly capital- 
ism and the growth of militarism; 
the mounting internal instability and 
decay of capitalist economy evidenced 
by the increasing inability of capital- 
ism to make full use of the productive 
forces (low rates of production growth, 
periodic crises, continuous undercapac- 
ity operation of production plant, and 
chronic unemployment); the mounting 
struggle between labour and capital; 
an acute intensification of contradic- 
tions within the world capitalist econo- 
my; an unprecedented growth of po- 
litical reaction in all spheres, rejection 
of bourgeois freedoms and establish- 
ment of fascist and despotic regimes 
in a number of countries; and the pro- 
found crisis of bourgeois policy and 
ideology—all these are manifestations 
of the general crisis of capitalism.” 
(Programme of the CPSU.) Inits devel- 


` 


— 173 — 


General Semantics 


opment the G.C.C. has passed through 
several stages. The first stage began 
during the Ist World War, particularly 
as a result of the victory of the Great 
October Socialist Revolution in Russia 
in 1917. The second stage began during 
the 2nd World War, especially as a re- 
sult of the establishment of people’s 
democracy (q.v.) in a number of Euro- 
pean and Asian countries. The decisive 
feature of this period was the emergence 
of socialism beyond the bounds of one 
country and the formation of the world 
socialist system (q.v.). The third stage 
of the G.C.C. began in the second half 
of the 1950s; its specific feature is 
that it arose not in connection with a 
world war, but in conditions of the 
competition and struggle between the 
two systems, the break-up of imperial- 
ism’s world colonial system and an 
increasing change in the relation of 
world forces in favour of socialism. 

General Semantics, a trend of neo- 
positivism (q.v.) which arose in the 
United States in the 1930s. Alfred 
Korzybski was the founder of G.S. 
At present the International Society 
for General Semantics, founded in 
Chicago in 1942, and also the Institute 
of General Semantics, organised in 
Lakeville (USA) in 1947, serve as 
the organisational centres of G.S. ETC., 
a journal started in Chicago in 1943, 
is the official organ of G.S. In the 
opinion of the journal’s founders, its 
name symbolises the general semantic 
understanding of the world as being 
in the process of eternal and instant 
change and the impossibility of reflect- 
ing it adequately. The main propo- 
nents of G.S., in addition to Korzybski, 
are S. Hayakawa, Anatol Rapoport, 
and Stuart Chase. The main postulates 
of G.S. and also its object of study were 
formulated by Korzybski in his book 
Science and Sanity. In his opinion, 
G.S. is neither philosophy nor psychol- 
ogy, nor logic in the ordinary sense 
of the word. It is a new subject based 
on relations between people, facilitat- 
ing a more effective use of man’s nerv- 
ous system. Korzybski treats the re- 
lationship of man and objective reality 
in an unscientific way, in the spirit of 
subjective idealism. The main princi- 








Generalisation 


ples of G.S. are the principle of non- 
identity, the principle of incomplete- 
ness, and the e of self-reflec- 
tion. These principles must underlie 
man’s new orientation in the external 
world. They signify that in his daily 
life man must not identify words 
with things, must not assume that 
something can be fully knowable and, 
lastly, must take into account the fact 
that language reflects not only external 
objects but also man himself. By ele- 
vating into an absolute the importance 
of language as a means of communica- 
tion, some general semanticists seek 
to explain all vital problems, including 
the origin of wars and international 
tensions, as consequences of the in- 
correct. use of language. They deny 
the objective content of general scien- 
tific concepts which are not accessible 
to direct sensuous verification. In re- 
cent years G.S. has assumed a definite 
anti-Marxist and anti-materialist trend, 
although its proponents . vehemently 
deny that their doctrine constitutes a 
philosophy. 

Generalisation, a logical process of 
transition from the particular to the 
universal, from less general to more 
general knowledge (e.g., the transition 
from the concept of “heat” to the con- 
cept of “energy”, from the geometry 
of Euclid, q.v., to the geometry of 
Lobachevsky, q.v.) and also the result 
of this process; a generalised concept, 
judgement, law of science, and theory. 
The obtaining of generalised knowledge 
signifies deeper reflection of reality 
and penetration of its essence. In for- 
mal logic, generalisation of a concept 
is understood to mean transition from 
a narrow to a broader concept. At the 
same time, the content of a generalised 
concept is narrower, because specific 
features are excluded from it (see Con- 
cept, Volume and Content of). In pro- 
ceeding from the concept “oak” to 
the concept “tree”, for example, the 
specific features of the oak are discard- 
ed. The opposite process of G. is re- 
striction. 

Genetic Method, a method of inves- 
tigation based on analysing the de- 
velopment of phenomena; came into 
existence when the idea of develop- 


— 174 — 


Gentile 


ment took precedence in science (17th 
century), viz., differential calculus in 
mathematics, Lyell’s theory in geol- 
ogy, the Kant-Laplace hypothesis in 
cosmogony, the theory of evolution in 
biology, etc. The G.M. was also adopt- 
ed in philosophy, gradually ousting 
the then prevalent analytic method, 
and became one of the methods of 
contemporary mathematics and logic. 
According to the G.M. we must deter- 
mine (1) the initial conditions of de- 
velopment, (2) the main stages of de- 
velopment, and (3) the basic tendency 
or line of development. The chief pur- 
pose is to establish the connections 
between phenomena in time and to 
examine the transitions from lower to 
higher forms. The G.M. is superior to 
empirical analysis, because it proceeds 
parallel to actual development, the 
latter serving as the criterion of the 
validity of emergent ideas. However, 
despite its advantages, the G.M. does 
not get to the bottom of all the complex- 
ities of the development process. If 
used alone, unsupported by other meth- 
ods, it leads into error, distorts and 
simplifies the facts, and reduces it- 
self to primitive evolutionism. In mod- 
ern science the G.M. has established 
itself as an element of the dialectical 
method. 

Genius, the highest degree of creative 
mental endowment; a person of such 
endowment. Considering the relative 
difference between G. and talent, works 
of genius may be defined as having 
extraordinary novelty, individuality 
and historic importance, for which 
reason they are preserved for all time 
in the memory of mankind. A man of 
genius is one who by virtue of his ex- 
traordinary endowment and labour ex- 
presses and satisfies vitally important 
social demands. 

Gentile, Giovanni (1875-1944), Ital- 
ian philosopher, professor at Rome 
University, Minister of Education in 
Mussolini’s government. He attacked 
Marxism in his work, La filosofia di 
Marx (1899) and revised the doctrine 
of Hegel (q.v.), removing from it the 
concepts of nature and the objective 
idea, and remoulding it into a system 
of “actualism”, a subjective idealistic 











Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire 


variety of Neo-Hegelianism (q.v.). G. 
described all existence as the fruit of 
the thinking mind in motion. Thought, 
he contended, is always actual and 
active, and its creative activity is not 
restricted by space or time. The matter 
which it produces is dead and inert, 
although it is in unity with thought. 
To escape solipsism (q.v.), G. intro- 
duced the concept of the universal “I”. 
Reality, he contended, is not identical 
with the conceptions of the individual 
mind, but is the pure thought of a 
supra-personal transcendental (q.v.) en- 
tity in the Universe, which overcomes 
all opposites in the process of coming 
into being. G.'s socio-political views 
evolved from liberalism to fascism. 
His subjectivism and voluntarism be- 
came the pillar of the ideology of the 
Italian fascists. His main works are 
La riforma della dialettica hegeliana 
(1913) and Sistema di logica come teoria 
del conoscere (1917). 

Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Etienne (1772 
-1844), French zoologist, member of 
the Paris Academy of Sciences. G. 
advanced the idea of a “united plan 


of structure” of the organic world, , 
which was a progressive idea in his 


day. He recognised the influence of 
the environment on the development 
of organisms and the possibility of 
transmitting the changes occurring in 
them by heredity. His researches helped 
to prepare the way for the theory 
of evolution (see Darwin). 
Geographical Determinism, a school 
in sociology which holds that the geo- 
graphical environment (climate, soil, 
rivers, etc.) is the chief factor in social 
development; an essentially natural- 
istic and idealistic approach to histo- 
ty. First advanced by ancient thinkers, 
Plato, Aristotle (qq.v.) and others, in 
opposition to religious and mythologi- 
cal views. G.D., which took shape as 
a distinct school of thought in the 
18th century under the influence of 
Montesquieu (q.v.), was progressive 
so long as it opposed the church-spon- 
sored feudal ideology which construed 
the divine preordination of social phe- 
nomena. But in the mid-19th century 
it was used, as in the case of Buckle 
(q.v.), to prove the alleged immutabil- 


— 175 — 


Geographical Environment 


ity of social inequality and colonialist 
expansion. Lev Mechnikov’s (q.v.) the- 
ory, which considered rivers as the 
root factor in the origin and develop- 
ment of civilisation, is closely related 
to G.D. Mechnikov argued that social 
development leads inevitably from tyr- 
anny to anarchy. The geographical 
school paved the way for the appear- 
ance, in the imperialist epoch, of geopo- 
litics (q.v.). 

Geographical Environment, the ag- 
gregate of things and phenomena of 
animate and inanimate nature (the 
earth’s crust, lower layers of the at- 
mosphere, water, soil, flora and fauna) 
involved at any given time in the proc- 
ess of social production and consti- 
tuting the objectively necessary me- 
dium for the existence and develop- 
ment of any society. The development 
of society also changes and widens the 
G.E. In remote times men used little 
more than the natural sources of 
livelihood (wild plants and animals, 
fertile land, etc.). In the course of 
time, natural wealth comprising means 
of labour, i.e., mineral and power re- 
sources, came into pa more promi- 
nently. G.E. considerably influences 
the life of society, tending to retard 
or accelerate the development of coun- 
tries and nations, and often stimulating 
the growth of specific economic 
branches. In their natural state the 
elements of the G.E. do not necessarily 
satisfy the growing requirements of 
production. For this reason, man trans- 
forms or changes them, and, therefore, 
acts as the most powerful agent in 
the transformation of the G.E. But the 
extent, nature and forms of change 
depend on the social system. The 
anarchy of production and the com- 
petition prevailing in capitalist society 
more often than not cause changes of 
G.E. harmful to society. In none but 
socialist society are men “rationally 
regulating their interchange with na- 
ture, bringing it under their common 
control ... achieving this with the 
least expenditure of energy and under 
conditions most favourable to, and 
worthy of, their human nature.” (Marx, 
Capital, Vol. 3, p. 800.) The building 
of the material and technical basis of 





Geometrical Method in Philosophy 


communism proceeds from effective and 
plan-regulated utilisation of all the 
elements of the G.E. for the good of 
the people. 

Geometrical Method in Philosophy, 
widely used but inaccurate name for 
the axiomatic method (q.v.) of setting 
out philosophical theories; Spinoza 
(q.v.) was its most prominent exponent. 
He modelled his chief work Ethics, on 
Euclid’s (q.v.) geometry, in the sense 
that he first presented the necessary 
definitions and axioms and then pro- 
ceeded to prove the resultant theorems. 
In our time these theorems appear 
artificial, but it was Spinoza’s purpose 
to stress the necessary interconnection 
between parts of the Universe, our 
knowledge of which is capable of proof. 
Descartes (q.v.), whose Discours de la 
méthode is clearly influenced by geom- 
etry, set a high value on the G.M. 
He went so far as to postulate that clar- 
ity and appearance, both notable fea- 
tures of geometrical axioms, are crite- 
ria of the validity of all knowledge. 
In his De la recherche de la vérité, 
Malebranche (q.v.) notes man’s natu- 
ral inclination to error and recommends 
the G.M. for metaphysics, i.e., specu- 
lative philosophy, to make it possible 
to deduce all the consequences from its 
few self-evident propositions. 

Geometry, the branch of mathematics 
which investigates spatial relations and 
forms and their abstractions. Its origin 
may be traced to the antique world 
(Egypt, Babylon, Greece), where it 
resulted from the demands of produc- 
tion (measuring land, surfaces, etc.). 
It was in Greece that geometry was 
first moulded into a deductive theory 
by Euclid (q.v.). In the 17th century 
Descartes introduced the concept of 
co-ordinates, which marked the origin 
of analytical G. Applied to G., methods 
of mathematical analysis discovered in 
the 17th century produced differential 
G. Projective G. and descriptive G. 
were conceived in the 17th-19th cen- 
turies, to meet the need for depicting 
bodies on planes. In the 19th century 
Lobachevsky (q.v-) made the revolu- 
tionary discovery of non-Euclidean 
Gg. (q.v.). In the 20th century, under 
the influence of the theory of plurality, 


— 176 — 


Geopolitics 


topology emerged, becoming a branch 
of mathematics in its own right; topol- 
ogy investigates the most general prop- 
erties of continuous transformations 
in space. At first, data obtained from 
man’s immediate experience were the 
subject of G. Then, as science advanced, 
G. inclined towards a higher degree 
of abstraction. At present, it is usual 
to employ the axiomatic method (q.v.) 
for the logical construction of a geo- 
metrical theory from elements given in 
abstract form. The development of G. 
was stimulated by the needs of natural 
science. Investigations of the logical 
foundations of G., which helped to 
determine the nature of the axiomatic 
method, are of great epistemological 
importance. They have added preci- 
sion to our knowledge of the relation of 
geometrical theories to the real world. 

Geopolitics, a political doctrine jus- 
tifying imperialist expansion with ref- 
erences to economic and political 
geography. G. was propounded by Fried- 
rich Ratzel, a German geographer, 
shortly before the Ist World War; 
he viewed countries as organisms strug- 
gling for Lebensraum. Its other propo- 
nents were Halford Mackinder (Britain) 
and Admiral Alfred Mahan (USA). 
The term G. was first used by Rudolf 
Kjellén, a Swedish scholar, who, in 
his Staten som Lifsform used the ar- 
guments of Malthusianism (q.v.) and 
Social-Darwinism (q.v.) to justify the 
imperialist approach to geographical 
space. In 1923-27 a study group organ- 
ised by the German journal Geopoli- 
tik proclaimed G. a special science dis- 
tinct from conventional political geog- 
raphy. Karl Haushofer and Erich 
Obst, the leaders of this group, applied 
G. to the political objectives of nazism. 
After the 2nd World War, G. won 
adherents in the United States (Nicho- 
las J. Spykman, etc.), Canada (Thomas 
Greenwood), and particularly in Fede- 
ral Germany (Carl Schmitt, Hans 
Grimm, Alfred Hettner, Adolf Grabow- 
ski, etc.). Today, G. argues the need 
for inter-state imperialist blocs and 
seeks to prove the geographical causes 
of the rift between the communist East 
and the bourgeois West (the “conti- 
nental” and “maritime” types of civ- 








“The German Ideology” 


ilisation). Prominent among the con- 
temporary geopolitical concepts is the 
so-called global approach to political 
geography which, as a rule, reflects 
imperialist claims to world domination. 

“The German Ideology”, an early 
philosophical work of Marx and Engels 
written in 1845-46, criticising the ideal- 
ism of the Young Hegelians (q.v.) and 
the limited nature of Feuerbach’s (q.v.) 
materialism. The book was not pub- 
lished during the lifetime of Marx and 
Engels; it appeared for the first time 
in 1932 in the Soviet Union. Develop- 
ing further the ideas expounded in 
The Holy Family, Marx and Engels 
showed that idealism is associated with 
the classes hostile to the proletariat and 
that, in particular, the philosophy of 
the Young Hegelians reflected the cow- 
ardice and impotence of the German 
bourgeoisie. Marx and Engels criticised 
the metaphysical character and the 
contemplative nature of Feuerbach’s 
materialism, they showed that in his 
views of history Feuerbach was an ideal- 
ist and, therefore, like the Young 
Hegelians, was unable to understand 
the driving forces of social develop- 
ment. G.J. presents a profound critique 
of bourgeois individualism and anarch- 
ism (q.v.) of Stirner (q.v.) and also 
of the reactionary, so-called “true so- 
cialism’ of K. Grin, M. Hess, and 
others. Combating the enemies of the 
proletariat, Marx and Engels devel- 
oped in G./. the theory of scientific 
communism and proved that the pro- 
letariat based its activity on the objec- 
tive laws of social development. They 
saw in the proletariat’s struggle against 
the bourgeoisie, in the victorious com- 
munist revolution and the inevitable 
establishment of the communist system 
the necessary result of the operation 
of economic laws which exist inde- 
pendent of man’s will. G.J. gives the 
first detailed exposition of the material- 
ist understanding of history: of the 
question of the socio-economic for- 
mation (q.v.), the productive forces 
(q.v.), and relations of production, 
q.v. (the latter term was not used yet 
in G. J.), the relationship of social 
being (q.v.) to social consciousness 
(q.v.), etc. In G./. Marx and Engels 


12-1682 


— 177 — 


Gnostics 


expounded their world outlook, which 
by that time was, in the main, clearly 
defined. This book is a model of mil- 
itant philosophical critique of ide- 
ology hostile to the proletariat, a model 
of communist partisanship in elab- 
orating philosophical problems. 

Gestalt Psychology (Ger. Gestali— 
shape, form), an idealistic trend in 
modern psychology; originated in Ger- 
many in 1912. The term “G.P.” was 
first introduced by Christian von Eh- 
renfels (1859-1932); its most prominent 
exponents were Max Wertheimer (1880- 
1944), Wolfgang Kohler (b. 1887) and 
Kurt Koffka (1886-1941). Philosophi- 
cally, G.P. is based on the ideas of 
Edmund Husserl (q.v.) and Ernst Mach 
(q.v.). In contrast to associationist psy- 
chology (q.v.), G.P. considers what 
it styles as psychic structures, “organ- 
ised wholes” or “Gestalts”, rather 
than sensations (q.v.), to be primary 
and basic in the workings of the mind. 
Their formation, according to G.P., is 
subject to the intrinsic faculties of 
individuals to create simple, symmetri- 
cal and closed or integral figures. This 
theory assumes the individual’s iso- 
lation from his environment and his 
own practical activities. Ultimately, 
the Gestaltists ascribe the wholeness 
of the psychic structures to immanent 
subjective “laws”; in this they adhere 
to the idealistic standpoint. Subse- 
quently, the ideas of G.P. (particu- 
larly the notion of “Gestalt”) were ap- 
plied to physical, physiological and 
even economic phenomena. Theoreti- 
cally, G.P. was disproved by Ivan 
Pavlov (q.v.) and many other physiol- 
ogists and psychologists. 

Gnostics, adherents of a philosophico- 
religious school in the first centuries 
of Christianity who merged Christian 
theology with the religions of the an- 
cient East, with Neo-Platonism (q.v.) 
and Pythagoreanism (see Pythagore- 
ans); the G. believed in a spiritual un- 
cognisable prime cause which mani- 
fests itself in emanation and is coun- 
terposed to the material world, the 
source of “evil”. The two leading Chris- 
tian G. were Valentinus of Egypt (2nd 
century) and Basilides of Syria (2nd 
century). 














God 


God, imaginary conception of a su- 
pernatural omnipotent being, which 
is supposed to have created the world 
and to be ruling it; in Judaism (q.v.) 
Jehovah, in Islam (q.v.) Allah, in 
Christianity (q.v.) the Holy Trinity 
(God the Father, God the Son and God 
the Holy Ghost), etc. Conceptions of 
a god form the basis of modern forms 
of religion, whereas in the early stages 
of the development of religion this 
conception did not exist (see Totemism, 
Fetishism, and Animism). The concep- 
tions of tribal and national gods came 
into existence with the collapse of the 
primitive-communal system, the de- 
velopment of tribal associations, and 
the rise of classes and the state. The 
conception of a single and omnipotent 
Almighty God, deity, the Lord of Heav- 
en, took shape as a “copy of the sin- 
gle oriental despot”. (Engels.) Theol- 
ogy (q.v.) resorts to idealism to prove 
the existence of God philosophically, 
to embellish and cloak this idea in 
pseudo-scientific terms, to present God 
as an absolute idea, a universal will, 
a kind of impersonal rational princi- 
ple. That the idea of God and ail at- 
tempts to defend it are groundless and 
reactionary was made perfectly clear 
by Marxism and corroborated by the 
whole development of the natural and 
social sciences. “God is,” wrote Lenin, 
“(in history and in real life) first of 
all the complex of ideas generated by 
the brutish subjection of man both by 
external nature and by the class yoke— 
ideas which consolidate that subjection, 
lull to sleep the class struggle”. (Vol. 
35, p. 128.) 

God-Building, a religious-philosoph- 
ical trend in Russia which arose af- 
ter the defeat of the revolution of 
1905-07. Among its leaders were Luna- 
charsky (q.v.), V. Bazarov, Yushke- 
vich (q.v.); Gorky was also associated 
with the God-builders for a time (/spo- 
ved [Confession], 1907, and Razrushe- 
niye lichnosti [Destruction of the Per- 
sonality], 1909), but broke with the 
movement under the influence of Lenin. 
The aim of G., which was closely linked 
with the philosophy of Bogdanov (q.v.) 
was to unite scientific socialism with 
religion and create a so-called religious 


— 178 — 


God-Seeking — 


atheism, i.e., a religion without God. 
The God-builders regarded even Marx- 
ism as primarily a religious system 
that would show men the way to a new 
life. The ideas of the trend were much 
advocated in the school which Bogda- 
nov and others set up on Capri in 1909. 
Although the God-builders belonged 
to the Social-Democratic Labour Party 
and opposed God-seeking (q.v.), their 
theories had nothing in common with 
Marxism; they reflected the ideological 
wavering of the part of the working 
class that was influenced by petty- 
bourgeois ideology. Lenin and Ple- 
khanov (qq.v.) were sharply critical of 
G. #... Both in Europe and in Russia,” 
Lenin wrote, “any, even the most re- 
fined and best-intentioned defence or 
eine of the idea of God is a 
ustification of reaction.” (Vol. 35, 

. 128.) By the outbreak of the Ist 

orid War G. had already ceased to 
exist as a trend. 

God-Seeking, a religious-philosophi- 
cal trend in Russia that set out to “in- 
oculate the people with or strengthen 
the hold of religion on them in new 
forms”. (Lenin.) It originated at the 
beginning of the 20th century in the 
form of religious meetings (St. Peters- 
burg, 1901-03) and in the magazines 
Novy Put (The New Way), and Voprosy 
Zhizni (Problems of Life), etc. The 
ideas of G. became particularly popu- 
lar among bourgeois intellectuals after 
the defeat of the Russian revolution in 
1905-07. They were widely discussed 
in literature and at the Philosophico- 
Religious Society, which was revived 
in 1907. The advocates of G., such 
philosophers and writers as Berdyayev 
(q.v.), D. Merezhkovsky (Ne mir, no 
mech [Not Peace but the Sword], 1908, 
etc.), N. Minsky (O svobode religioznoi 
sovesti) [On Freedom of the Religious 
Conscience}, 1902, and Religiya bu- 
dushchego [Religion of the Future], 
1905), and S. Bulgakov (q.v.), called 
for a “new attitude” to the Christian 
gospel and preached a “religious ref- 
ormation”. They maintained that the 
aim of life was to seek God, that the 
purpose of history was the realisation 
of God in humanity, the creation of 
a divine humanity, i.e., a social or- 








Göde! 


ganisation founded on religious prin- 
ciples. Man could achieve this aim, 
the kingdom of God, only through love, 
humility, and patience. The God-seek- 
ers upheld irrationalism (q.v.) and mys- 
tical knowledge, considering revelation 
the most reliable means of discovering 
the truth. The theory of G. was aimed 
primarily against the Marxist teaching 
on society and was based on the phil- 
osophico-theological theories of So- 
lovyov (q.v.). Lenin, Plekhanov, and 
other Marxists exposed the reactionary 
nature of all philosophic brands of 
religious mysticism, including G. With 
the resurgence of the revolutionary 
movement in 1910-12 the influence of 
G. among intellectuals dwindled and 
disappeared altogether after the Oc- 
tober Revolution of 1917. 

Gödel, Kurt (1906- )}, Austrian logi- 
cian and mathematician; resolved many 
key problems in mathematical logic. 
Associated with the University of Vien- 
na in the 1930s, moved to the United 
States in 1940. G. proved (1931) the 
incompleteness of the formal systems, 
e.g., those assuming the formalisation 
(q.v.) of the arithmetic of natural 
numbers. Such systems, he showed, in- 
variably contained propositions which, 
within their own framework, were both 
unprovable and undeniable. G.’s ex- 
position stimulated research in the 
limitations of the formal systems by 
Alonzo Church, Stephen Cole Kleene, 
Tarski (q.v.), A. Mostovsky, P. Novi- 
kov, and others, which culminated 
in the fundamental philosophical de- 
duction that complete formalisation of 
scientific knowledge is impossible. G. 
also devoted himself to metamathe mat- 
ics (q.v.), constructive logic, the the- 
ory of recursive functions, etc. In the 
1930s, G.’s philosophical views were 
strongly influenced by neo-positivism 
(q.v.); subsequently, he came to op- 
pose subjectivism. 

Godwin, William (1756-1836), Eng- 
lish political thinker and man of let- 
ters; exponent of petty-bourgeois equal- 
itarian utopianism. He was a dissi- 
dent minister as a young man and 
became a consistent rationalist in the 
early 1780s. G. gave primacy to the 
influence on men of the social environ- 


12° 


— 179 — 


Gogotsky 


ment and morals. He advocated aboli- 
tion of the right of property and po- 
litical authority. His ideal was a so- 
ciety of independent producers organ- 
ised in small communities. He favoured 
the communist principle of distribution 
according to requirements. However, 
Engels described G.’s views as anti- 
social. G. influenced anarchistic doc- 
trines. 

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749- 
1832), German poet, naturalist and 
thinker; his philosophical views greatly 
affected the development of European 
theoretical thought. G. championed the 
idea that theory and experience are one. 
“First came the cause” is the basic 
principle of his approach to the world 
and cognition. He was convinced of 
the objectiveness of the laws of nature, 
the mover of the development of which 
is locked within it. G. was eager to 
supplement Spinoza’s (q.v.) concepts, 
which he interpreted pantheistically, 
(see Pantheism) with the idea of devel- 
opment. Interaction of the positive 
and negative (“ascent” and “polari- 
ties”), G. held, is observable in every 
phenomenon; this interaction gives 
rise to new qualities. G.’s ideas about 
the creative character of negation em- 
bodied, in particular, in the image 
of Mephistopheles (Faust) are very 
valuable. G. considered motion the 
basic form of the existence of matter. 
However, unable to explain the mul- 
tiplicity of forms of motion, he arrived 
at hylozoism (q.v.), i.e., acknowledge- 
ment of an eternally vital power, 
entelechy (q.v.). Although G.’s views 
are inconsistent and often contradictory, 
they may be described as close to mate- 
rialistic. G.’s realistic aesthetics and 
his dramatic works and poetry exercise 
a strong influence on the theory and 
practice of world art. 

Gogotsky, Sylvestr Sylvestrovich 
(1813-89), Russian idealist philosopher, 
professor at Kiev Ecclesiastical Acade- 
my (1841-51) and Kiev University 
(from 1851). G. deliberately adapted 
his philosophical views to the Ortho- 
dox faith and political reaction. He 
assailed materialism as a doctrine lead- 
ing to atheism, and considered it the 
purpose of philosophy to represent 





Good 


the ideas of God as the rational and 
creative first cause of the natural and 
spiritual world. G. believed knowledge 
of God to be innate and acquired 
through faith. He held that the idea of 
God is inseparable from human cogni- 
tion, which is secondary and derives 
from internal experience, from immedi- 
ate conviction, that is, faith. Antono- 
vich and Pisarev (qq.v.) demonstrated 
the unscientific essence of G.’s writings. 
G.’s Filosofsky leksikon (4 vols., 1857- 
73) is one of the earliest attempts made 
in Russia to compile an encyclopaedia 
of philosophy. 

Good, The, any object or phenome- 
non that satisfies a definite human 
need, that corresponds to human inter- 
ests or aspirations and in general 
exercises a beneficial effect on society, 
a class or a person. If a given object is 
a G. it means that it has a positive 
value (q.v.). The opposite to G. is 
evil, i.e., anything that has a negative 
social significance. Material Gg. are 
to be distinguished from spiritual Gg. 
Material Gg. satisfy man’s material 
needs for food, clothing, housing, etc. 
Material Gg., or wealth, include the 
means of production—machines, in- 
dustrial buildings, materials, and so 
on. Spiritual Gg. comprise knowledge, 
the achievements of human culture, 
moral good as expressed in man’s moral 
actions, etc. The highest G. is man him- 
self, the creator of all material and 
spiritual values. Many Gg. have a 
class character. What is a G. for the 
exploiters may be an evil for the ex- 
ploited. This is an expression of the 
clash of class interests. 

Good and Evil, ethical categories 
which express a moral appraisal of 
social phenomena and human conduct. 
G. is what society (or a given progres- 
sive class) considers moral and worthy 
of imitation, the reverse being true of 
E. The exploiting classes present their 
conception of G E. as “eternal” 
and universal, basing their claim on the 
commandments of God or metaphysical 
principles. One of the most influential 
idealist systems of morality is that of 
Kant (q.v.). According to the Kantian 
theory, G. is what conforms to the 
moral law, which is inherent in every 


— 180 — 


Gorgias 


rational being and does not depend 
on the conditions in which a man lives 
(see Categorical Imperative). The ma- 
terialist trend in the interpretation of 
the problem of G. & E., of moral 
conduct, was already developed in an- 
cient philosophy. The hedonism (q.v.) 
of Aristippus and Epicurus asserts that 
pleasure alone is intrinsically G. This 
ethical theory was developed by the 
French materialists of the 18th cen- 
tury, particularly Helvétius (q.v.). 
Although pre-Marxist materialism held 
that the source of man’s moral conduct 
lay in human nature, in a man’s con- 
ditions of life and upbringing, it also 
claimed that the notions of G. & E. 
are eternal. The characteristic features 
of present-day bourgeois ethics are its 
attempts, on the one hand, to find 
grounds and justification for exploi- 
tation of the working people and the 
population of the colonies, and, on the 
other hand, to deny the importance of 
moral judgements in general (see Logi- 
cal Positivism in Ethics). Marxist- 
Leninist ethics rejects the metaphysi- 
cal interpretation of G. & E. “The 
conceptions of good and evil have var- 
ied so much from nation to nation and 
from age to age that they have often 
been in direct contradiction to each 
other”. (Engels, Anti-Dihring, p. 131.) 
At the same time the concepts of G. & 
E. have their objective source in the 
development of society. Men's actions 
may be appraised as G. or E., accord- 
ing to whether they promote or hinder 
the satisfaction of the historical needs 
of society (see Morality). 

Gorgias (483-375 B.C.), Greek sophist 
of Leontini, Sicily, a proponent of 
slave-owning democracy. Supplement- 
ed the relativism (q.v.) of Protagoras 
(q.v.) with rationalistic agnosticism 
(q.v-). His postulates have come down 
to us in the rendering of Plato (q.v.) 
and other authors. In his work, On 
Nature or on That Which is Not, 
G. proceeds from the philosophy 
of the Eleatic school (q.v.) to set 
out three propositions: nothing is real; 
if anything were real, it would 
still be uncognisable; if anything 
were cognisable, it would still be inex- 
pressible. 








Gramsci 


Gramsci, Antonio (1891-1937), Marx- 
ist theoretician, founder of the Italian 
Communist Party; sentenced for his 
revolutionary activities by a fascist 
court (in 1928) to 20 years’ imprison- 
ment. G. played a prominent part in 
exposing mechanistic philosophy, the 
ideological basis of Right deviation- 
ism, widespread in some of the Com- 
munist Parties of Europe in the 1920s. 
His main writings are contained in his 
Quaderni del Carcere. He devoted him- 
self to problems of historical materia- 
lism and took an interest in aesthetics, 
sociology, the history of philosophy, 
etc. His studies on the history of Ital- 
ian culture and his criticism of Cathol- 
icism are of considerable interest. He 
dealt with the relation of basis to 
superstructure, of the proletariat to 
the intelligentsia, the cultural revo- 
lution and the role of ideology in so- 
cial development. G. battled against 
idealistic sociological and philosophical 
trends, especially that of Croce (q.v.), 
and propagated Marxism-Leninism. 

Granovsky, Timofei Nikolayevich 
(1813-55), Russian historian and sociol- 
ogist, professor at Moscow University 
(1839-55), a prominent exponent of 
Westernism (see Westerners, Slavo- 
philes). His views were strongly influ- 
enced by Stankevich, Belinsky and Her- 
zen (qq.v.); he also had a good grasp of 
the German classical philosophers. Ac- 
cording to G., the historical process is 
rigorously governed by objective laws. 
He defines objective law as an ideal, a 
moral goal, in the attainment of which 
personalities are likely to play a lead- 
ing role. However, he does not deny 
the masses “a certain historical 
weight”. Hence, he denounces fatalism, 
which he describes as a doctrine that 
relieves individuals of moral respon- 
sibility. G.’s views on historical de- 
velopment (containing elements of dia- 
lectics) evolved from idealism towards 
naturalism. He believed that histor 
should borrow the methods of researc 
employed in natural science. His ex- 
Planations of social phenomena attach 
considerable weight to geographical 
conditions. G. was an advocate of con- 
stitutional monarchy and expounded 
liberal views in opposing serfdom in 


Gurvitch 





Russia. He exercised a beneficial in- 
fluence on Russian society and Russian 
historiography. 

Gravitation, a kind of physical in- 
teraction which is expressed in the mu- 
tual attraction of two bodies. Accord- 
ing to the law of G. first formulated by 
Newton, each mass is attracted toward 
every other mass with a force directly 
proportional to the product of the 
masses and inversely proportional to 
the square of the distance between 
them. The theory of Einstein (q.v.) 
provided a deeper explanation of G. 
The study of immediate action and 
action at a distance (q.v.), which 
caused numerous debates among philos- 
ophers (see Relativity, Theory of), arose 
largely out of research into the nature 
of G. 

Great Numbers, Law of, a general 
principle by which the combined effect 
of a large number of accidental factors 
produces, for a very large class of such 
factors, results almost independent of 
chance. In some conditions this law 
may be quantitatively evaluated (see 
Probability, Theory of). The first accu- 
rate, though limited, formulation of 
these conditions and the quantitative 
evaluation to be deduced from them 
was given by Bernoulli (1713). His 
theorem was generalised by Poisson 
(1837), who was the first to use the 
term “Law of Great Numbers”. The 
theorem was given its most generalised 
form and proved by Chebyshev in 1867. 
The theorems pertaining to this law 
have their greatest practical use in 
statistics and statistical physics. 

Grotius, Hugo (Huig de Groot) (1583- 
1645), Dutch jurist, sociologist and 
statesman; a prominent exponent of the 
bourgeois theories of natural law (q.v.) 
and social contract (q.v.). G. believed 
that the law and the state are of earthly 
rather than divine origin. The state, 
he said, came into being as a result 
of agreement among men. His theories 
helped to free the theory of the state 
and law from the influence of theology 
and medieval scholasticism (q.v.). His 
most celebrated work is De Jure Belli 
et Pacis (1625). 

Gurvitch, Georges (1894- ), French 
sociologist, was born in Russia, emi- 





Gurvitch 


grated to France after 1917. His main 
works are La vocation actuelle de la 
Sociologie (1950) and Déterminismes 
sociaux et Liberté humaine (1955). He 
founded so-called dialectical hyperem- 
piricism (microsociology), which claims 
to examine comprehensively all as- 
pects of social reality in all its “stra- 
ta”, “levels”, “dimensions and as- 


— 182 — 


bs 


Gurvitch 


pects”, and all its “contradictions”. 
G.’s concept is unhistorical, formal 
and idealistic, because it describes as ` 
“pseudo-problems”, and thus rejects, 
the concepts of a single determinative 
basis of society, objective sociological 
laws, and the concepts of society and 
progress. G. is associated with the 
World Peace Movement. 





| 
| 
| 
j 
| 





H 


Habits, actions which as a result of 
prolonged repetition become automat- 
ic. The physiological mechanism of 
H. is represented by the dynamic 
stereotype (q.v.). The H. of ani- 
mals are unconscious. A similar psy- 
chological mechanism of H. is formed 
in man too in the course of adap- 
tation to the environment. These are 
automated actions timed for concrete 
specific situations. Some H. are of 
practical value, but as long as they 
are not conscious they cannot be trans- 
mitted to another person. The higher 
form of H. is the H. of man whose 
components are apprehended in ad- 
vance, consciously divided, and united 
into systems which meet the general 
specific features of the objective situa- 
tion for which the H. are formed. In 
such a case man in the process of auto- 
mating H. and their functioning pre- 
serves the possibility of consciously 
controlling his actions and he can alter 
them with relative ease should the 
need arise. H. are included in all kinds 
of activities both external (e.g., mo- 
tor H.) and internal (e.g., automated 
mental actions). H. are not only a re- 
sult but also a requisite for man’s 
creative activity. 

Haeckel, Ernst (1834-1919), German 
biologist, professor at Jena University; 
known for his defence of Darwin's 
(q.v.) theory of evolution and natural 
historical materialism (q.v.). H. took 
Darwinism a step farther in a number 
of his theoretical proposition, such as 
the biogenetic law (q.v.) and the the- 
ory of phylogenesis (q.v.) which in- 
ferred natural inception of life from 
inorganic matter. H. developed Dar- 
win's conception of natural selection 
as a factor of organic evolution by 


stressing the adaptation of mutation 
of organisms under the influence of 
the environment. H. won popularity 
with his book, Die Weltrdtsel (1899) in 
which he attacked the idealist reli- 
gious outlook and advocated the ma- 
terialist outlook in natural science, 
The book became “a weapon in the 
struggle of the classes" and roused 
opposition from idealist philosophers, 
the church, and such idealist natural- 
ists as Oliver Lodge and Chwolson. 
Progressive scientists ranged themselves 
behind H. Lenin highly commended 
the book (see Vol. 14, p. 334). H. 
publicly renounced religion and the 
church, but was not always consistent 
in his views. He departed in some mat- 
ters from his materialism and atheism, 
and, among other things, suggested 
replacing official religion with belief 
in the divine powers of nature, in the 
ae of Spinoza’s (q.v.) pantheism 
q.v.). 

Hamann, Johann Georg (1730-88), 
German idealist philosopher; exponent 
of the teaching on immediate knowl- 
edge (q.v.); influenced the bourgeois- 
democratic Sturm und Drang literary 
school. H. opposed enlightenment (q.v.) 
and rationalism (q.v.); believed in the 
creative powers of mystic intuition. 
Yet he expressed the notion of the 
unity of opposites as a general law of 
being and thereby influenced the ideal- 
istic dialectics of Fichte, Schelling and 
Hegel (qq.v.). The most notable of his 
writings is Kreuzzige des Philologen 
(1762). 

Hamilton, William (1788-1856), Scot- 
tish idealist philosopher and logician; 
held that cognition was determination 
of the conditions of existence of the 
object investigated; denied objective 





Hartley 


truth and gravitated towards agnosti- 
cism. H. held that “absolute”, i.e., 
material reality, is cognisable through 
supernatural revelation only. He ranged 
himself beside Kant in accepting 
apriorism (q.v.) and moral postulates 
as the foundation of religious faith. 
He introduced into logic the doctrine 
of the quantification (q.v.) of the pred- 
icate, thus attempting to reduce in- 
ference to equation and logic to cal- 
culation. H. was a forerunner of the 
exponents of modern mathematical log- 
ic. Among his best-known works is 
Metaphysics and Logic (lectures edited 
and published posthumously in four 
volumes, 1859-60). 

Hartley, David (1705-57), English 
psig and materialist philosopher; 

nown for his theory of association of 
ideas being the direct result of molecu- 
lar nervous vibrations. His doctrine 
is set out in his work, Observations on 
Man, His Frame, His Duty, and His 
Expectations. According to H., exter- 
nal objects act on the senses by induc- 
ing in the brain vibrations of infinitely 
small particles of matter, These vibra- 
tions, he held, are transmitted from 
one particle to the next through ether 
and constitute the direct cause of sen- 
sations. The sequence and order of the 
sensations reflect the sequence and 
order of the external impulses inducing 
the vibrations. While stressing the 
material origin of ideas, H. does not 
identify mechanical vibrations with 
the ideas themselves because, he 
avers, the vibrations are corporeal, 
while ideas are spiritual. H.’s material- 
ism is mechanistic; what is more, 
it has a deistic complexion. H.’s doc- 
trine strongly in fluenced Priestley (q.v.) 
and James Mill, and served as one 
of the prime movers of associationist 
psychology (q.v.). 

Hartmann, Eduard von (1842-1906), 
German idealist philosopher; forerun- 
ner of the contemporary schools of ir- 
rationalism and voluntarism (qq.v.). 
Of his works, Philosophie des Unbe- 
wuften (1869) has had the greatest 
influence. Like Schopenhauer (q.v.), 
H. believed the unconscious spirit was 
the foundation of being. The idea of 
the unconscious also pervades H.’s 


— 184 — 


Hegel 


ethics. The desire of happiness, H. 
holds, is the source of unhappiness, 
and the rejection of all desires the way 
to painlessness, this being the only 
happiness, or the only substitute for 
happiness. To achieve painlessness, 
H. avers, man has to abandon his three 
dominant illusions—earthly happiness, 
happiness in the hereafter and happi- 
ness attainable by reorganising and 
improving society. H.’s doctrine denies 
happiness attainable through social 
progress and is, therefore, reactionary 
not only in the philosophical, but also 
in the socio-political sense. 

Hartmann, Nikolai (1882-1950), Ger- 
man idealist philosopher, professor at 
Marburg, Berlin and other universities; 
belonged to the Marburg Neo- Kantian 
school (q.v.) until he repugned its 
subjective idealistic rationalism. De- 
veloped an objectively idealist doc- 
trine of being, categories of being and 
categories of cognition. H.'s so-called 
critical ontology pivots on a teaching 
of the strata of being: inorganic, or- 
ganic, soul and spirit. His philosophy 
contains traces of irrationalism and 
agnosticism, proclaiming as myste- 
rious and uncognisable all the funda- 
mental forms of being which are said 
to invade all strata of being. On the 
basis of his ontology, H. built up a 
philosophy of nature, a philosophy 
of the objective spirit, a system of 
ethics and a theory of “values”, aes- 
thetics and a theory of knowledge. 
His best-known works are Ethik (1925), 
Zur Grundlegung der Ontologie (1935), 
Philosophie der Natur (1950), and As- 
thetik (1953). 

Hedonism (Gk. hedone, pleasure), in 
ethics, a theory which defines good as 
that which yields pleasure or relief 
from suffering and evil as that which 
causes suffering. Hedonistic theories 
have been held from the earliest times; 
they reached their peak in the ethics 
of Epicurus (q.v.), and are the pivot 
in the utilitarianism of Mill and Ben- 
tham (qq.v.). The idea that pleasure 
is the ultimate good is, however, a 
crude and vulgar approach to the prob- 
lems of morality. 

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 
(1770-1831), one of the German clas- 











Hegel 


sical philosophers; an objective ideal- 
ist. The young H. was a radical, 
welcomed the 18th century French Rev- 
olution and rebelled against the feu- 
dal order of the Prussian monarchy, 
but the reaction that set in all over 
Europe after the downfall] of the Napo- 
leonic empire affected H.’s way of 
thinking. In 1818, he took a profes- 
sorial chair at Berlin University and 
became an apona the founder even, 
of the official philosophy of monarch- 
ist Prussia. H.’s philosophy reflected 
the contradictory development of Ger- 
many on the eve of the bourgeois rev- 
olution; it was moved by the dualism 
of the rising German bourgeoisie, of 
which H. was an ideologist. Hence, 
the progressive, even revolutionary ten- 
dency of his philosophy, reflecting the 
revolutionary climate of contemporary 
Europe, on the one hand, and his 
conservative reactionary ideas, reflect- 
ing the inconsistency and cowardice 
of the German bourgeoisie and its grav- 
itation towards compromise with Jun- 
kerdom, on the other. H.’s dualism is 
evident in all his writings, including 
Die Phänomenologie des Geistes (1807), 
which Marx described as the “true 
source and secret of Hegelian philoso- 
phy”. In it H. examines the evolution 
of human consciousness from the first 
signs of it to the conscious develop- 
ment of science and scientific methodol- 
ogy (phenomenology—doctrine of the 
phenomena of consciousness from the 
point of view of their development). 
Engels described Die Phänomenologie 
des Geistes as the embryology and pa- 
leontology of the human spirit and the 
origin of the historicity that underlies 
all H.’s thinking. The volume contains 
an analysis of the category of aliena- 
tion (q.v.), in which H. “grasps the 
essence of labour”, albeit in an ideal- 
istic way, and conceives man and 
his history as “the result of his own 
work” (Marx). It also contains the 
basic principles of H.’s dialectics, a 
reasoned exposition of the identity of 
thought and being, which is the point 
of departure in H.'s system, and of the 
self-developing Absolute Idea as the 
basis and essence of the whole world. 
In its elaborate form, the system of 


— 185 — 


_ Hegel 





H.’s absolute (objective) idealism (out- 
lined in Enzyklopädie der philosophi- 
schen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse, 
1817) purports that all natural and 
social phenomena are based on the 
absolute—the spirit and reason, the 
“absolute idea”, “world reason”, or 
“world spirit”. This absolute is active, 
its activity consisting of thought or, 
more precisely, of self-cognition. The 
absolute idea develops in three stages: 
(1) development of the idea in its own 
bosom, in the “element of pure think- 
ing”, i.e., Logic, wherein the idea 
reveals its content in a system of as- 
sociated and contiguous logical cate- 
gories; (2) development of the idea 
in the form of the “other-being”, in 
the form of nature, i.e., Philosophy 
of Nature. Nature, H. avers, does not 
develop: it is merely the external man- 
ifestation of the self-development of 
the logical categories that constitute 
its spiritual essence; (3) development 
of the idea in thought and history (in 
the “spirit”), i.e., Philosophy of the 
Spirit. At this stage the absolute idea 
withdraws within itself and conceives 
its content in the different forms of 
human reasoning and activity. H. held 
that his system completed the self- 
development of the absolute idea and, 
at the same time, its self-cognition. H.’s 
dialectics, set out exhaustively in 
Wissenschaft der Logik (1812-16), has 
been a most valuable contribution to 
philosophy. In Wissenschaft der Logik 
H. formulated the law of quantitative 
changes turning into qualitative ones, 
produced a deep-going exposition of 
contradiction being the motive prin- 
ciple of all development, defined the 
law of “the negation of the negation”, 
the dialectics of form and content, of 
the whole and the part, elucidated 
the categories of reality, necessity and 
chance, and many others, examined 
and criticised the Kantian dualism 
of “things-in-themselves”, etc. How- 
ever, H.’s dialectics is distinctly at odds 
with his idealist philosophy. The ideal- 
ism of his philosophy and his bour- 
geois limitations prompted H. to be- 
tray his own dialectical ideas (claiming 
that the development of the world 
and of cognition had run its course 





Hegelianism 


to completion, injecting mysticism 
into dialectics, applying the principle 
of development solely to phenomena 
in the realm of the idea, and making 
the categories of logic stereotyped and 
artificial). He was unable and reluc- 
tant to draw any consistent social 
conclusions from dialectics and rec- 
onciled himself to the status quo, 
going to the length of proclaiming the 
Prussian monarchy the crowning of 
social development, tolerating na- 
tionalist prejudice, etc. H.'s philosophy 
had a bearing on the development of 
Marxism, which salvaged its most val- 
uable element, dialectics, moulding 
it into a scientifically reasoned teach- 
ing on the development of nature, so- 
ciety and thought. Marxism acclaims 
H.’s opposition to agnosticism, his 
historicity, his faith in the powers 
of human reason, and his science of 
logic, in which he traced the connec- 
tions of the real world and the most 
important objective laws governing cog- 
nition. His works include Grundlinien 
der Philosophie des Rechts (1821), Vor- 
lesungen über die Geschichte der Philo- 
sophie (1833-36), Lectures on Aesthet- 
ics (1835-38), Vorlesungen über die 
Philosophie der Geschichte (1837). 


Hegelianism, see Young Hegelians 
and Old Hegelians. 
Heidegger, Martin (1889- ), one 


of the founders and main exponents 
of German existentialism (q.v.). He 
wrote his thesis under the guidance 
of Rickert (q.v.), was Husserl’s (q.v.) 
assistant, and taught in Marburg and 
Freiburg. His main works are: Sein 
und Zeit, 1927; Kant und das Problem 
der Metaphysik, 1929; Einführung in 
die Metaphysik, 1953. He accepted the 
ideology of National-Socialism in his 
speech when he became rector of Frei- 
burg University in 1933. The main 
category of H.’s idealist philosophy is 
“temporality”, understood by him as 
the internal emotions of men. H. re- 
gards as primary the “mood”, i.e., a 
form of spontaneous, undeveloped con- 
sciousness. Concern, dread, etc., are 
a priori forms of the human personali- 
ty. These forms constitute the subjec- 
tive being of man, which H. calls 
“being in the world”. That is why 


— 186 — 


Heisenberg 


the doctrine of a priori forms becomes 
a doctrine of being (as fundamental 
ontology). To divine “the meaning of 
being” man must get rid of all practi- 
cal aims and be conscious of his “mor- 
tality”, “frailty”. Only by feeling 
that he constantly stands “face to 
face with death” is man, according to 
H., capable of perceiving the impor- 
tance and fulness of each moment in 
life and getting rid of the “idols 
of social being’—aims, “ideals”, “scien- 
tific abstractions”. The philosophy of 
H. combines the irrationalist tenden- 
cies of Kierkegaard (q.v.), the philos- 
ophy of life (q.v.), and Husserl’s phe- 
nomenology (q.v.). Profound pessi- 
mism and hostility for science are in- 
trinsic in H.’s existentialism. 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856), Ger- 
man poet, revolutionary democrat, a 
friend of Marx; he was the first publicly 
to reveal the underlying revolutionary 
complexion of German classical philos- 
ophy and, in particular, the dialec- 
tics of Hegel (q.v.) which, he said, 
paved the way to political revolution. 
H. maintained that the history of 
philosophy was a history of the strug- 
gle between spiritualism (q.v.) and 
sensationalism (q.v.), and declared him- 
self a champion of the latter trend 
(Zur Geschichte der Religion und Phi- 
losophie in Deutschland, 1834). The 
poet associated his criticism of religion 
and idealism with the fight against 
feudalism, monarchy and philistinism. 
He advocated democratic revolution 
and socialism, which he conceived in 
the spirit of Saint-Simon. His sanguine 
hope was that the varied requirements 
of mankind, the birthright of the peo- 
ple, would be satisfied in the future. 
He identified the term “materialism” 
with the mechanistic materialism of 
the 18th century, and opposed it to the 
pantheism (q.v.) of Spinoza (q.v.). 
Heisenberg, Werner (1901- ), Ger- 
man physicist, resides in the Federal 
Republic of Germany; he is one of the 
founders of quantum miechanics. In 
1927, H. defined the correlation of 
uncertainties (q.v.). In the 30s and 
40s, he devoted himself to various 
problems related to quantum mechan- 
ics and nuclear physics, and since 








Heliocentricism 


— 187 — 


Helvétius 





the early 50s he has been working on 
a comprehensive theory of elementary 
particles which infers the origin of 
particles from the interaction with 
itself (“self-action”) of a single material 
substance. In his numerous utterances 
on the philosophical issues of contem- 
porary theoretical physics, H. has gen- 
erally maintained positivistic views, 
denied the independence of physical 
reality from observation, and referred 
to the “indeterminism” of microproc- 
esses. However, as a researcher he 
has in one way or another acknowl- 
edged the objective existence of matter. 
Lately, he has been departing from his 
earlier positivistic views and express- 
ing himself in the spirit of objective 
idealism. 

Heliocentricism and Geocentricism, 
two theories, the first of which main- 
tains that the Earth, while revolving 
round its axis, is one of many plan- 
ets revolving round the Sun. Decla- 
rations in favour of this theory were 
made by Aristarchus of Samos, Nicholas 
of Cusa (qq.v.) and others, but Coper- 
nicus (q.v.) is rightly considered its 
true father, for he produced an ex- 
haustive exposition of H. and substan- 
tiated it mathematically. Subsequent- 
ly, the Copernican system was elab- 
orated upon. The Sun, it was shown, 
was the centre not of all the Universe, 
but only of the solar system. Much 
was done by Galileo, Kepler and New- 
ton (qq.v.) to substantiate H. Progres- 
sive scientists, who championed the 
heliocentric system, defeated the 
church-sponsored geocentric theory that 
the Earth was immobile and consti- 
tuted the centre of the Universe. The 
latter theory contended that the Sun, 
Moon, planets and stars revolved round 
the Earth; based on religious con- 
cepts and the writings of Plato and 
Aristotle (qq.v.), it was expounded in 
its most complete form by Ptolemy, a 
2nd century Greek scholar. 

Helmholtz, Hermann Ludwig Ferdi- 
nand von (1821-94), German natural- 
ist; professor at Königsberg, Bonn, 
Heidelberg and Berlin universities. 
His physico-chemical methods of exam- 
ining living bodies refuted the doc- 
trine of vitalism (q.v.) and stimulated 


the development of materialist views 
in biology. H. made notable physiolog- 
ical discoveries (measurement of the 
speed of excitation in nerve fibres, 
physiological studies of the sense or- 
gans and the laws governing the per- 
ception of space, etc.). In his works 
on the theory of physics and other 
natural sciences H. expounded spon- 
taneously materialist views, but grav- 
itated at times towards Kantianism. 
He inferred erroneously from the theory 
of the “specific energy of sense-organs” 
that sensations were not images or 
copies of real things, but mere symbols, 
conventional signs or “hieroglyphs” 
bearing no resemblance to objectively 
existing things (see Hieroglyphs, The- 
ory of). In his Materialism and Empi- 
rio-Criticism Lenin criticised H. for 
his departures from materialism. 
Helvétius, Claude Adrien (1715-71); 
an exponent of French 18th century 
materialism (q.v.); his basic works 
are De l'Esprit (1758) and De l'homme 
(1773). H.’s philosophy is based on 
Locke’s (q.v.) sensationalism (q.v.), 
which he purged of its idealistic ele- 
ment. According to H. objectively 
existing matter is cognised through 
sensations. H. described the memory 
as “a lasting but weakened sensation” 
and classed it as another instrument 
of cognition. He produced a simpli- 
fied notion of thought, which he con- 
ceived as a combination of sensations, 
He stressed the part played by the 
social environment in developing the 
human character and thereby inferred 
the necessity of substituting capitalist 
for feudal relations, but held that hu- 
man consciousness and passion were 
the motives of social development. 
Marx and Engels gave a deep-going 
description of H.’s philosophy. “Sen- 
suous qualities and self-love, enjoy- 
ment and correctly understood person- 
al interests are the bases’ of morals,” 
they wrote. “The natural equality of 
human intelligence, the unity of pro- 
gress of reason and progress of industry, 
the natural goodness of man and the 
omnipotence of education are the main 
points in his system.” (Marx, Engels, 
The Holy Family, p. 175.) H.’s. ac- 
knowledgement that environment is a 








Heracleides 


decisive factor in moulding the human 
character, his idea of the harmonious 
combination of personal and social 
interests and his conception of the orig- 
inal mental equality of individuals 
cleared the way for utopian socialism 


(q.v.). 

THeractelies Ponticus (400 B.C.), 
Greek philosopher, disciple of Plato 
(q.v.), member of Plato’s Academy 
(q.v.), belonged to the atomistic school. 
H. assumed that atoms were formed by 
a world reason, nous. His conception 
of the soul was atomistic and clearly 
influenced by Pythagoreanism. H.'s 
astronomical views inclined towards 
heliocentricism (q.v.), while his mu- 
sical theories were Aristotelian (q.v.). 
None of his many works have survived. 

Heraclitus of Ephesus (c. 544-c, 
483 B.C.), Greek materialist philoso- 
pher and dialectician, an aristocrat. 
His philosophical work On Nature, 
of which only fragments survive, was 
extolled in the antique world for its 
profundity. The mysterious presenta- 
tion of his views earned him the name 
„of “The Obscure”. Fire, H. held, was 
the prime material in nature, for it 
was the most capable of change and 
motion. The world as a whole, separate 
things and even souls, originated from 
fire. “This one order of all things,” 
H. maintained, “was created by none 
of the gods, nor yet by any of mankind, 
but it ever was, and is, and shall be— 
eternal fire—ignited by measure and 
extinguished by measure.” Lenin de- 
scribed this aphorism as “a very good 
exposition of the principles of dialec- 
tical materialism”. (Vol. 38, p. 349.) 
Alt things derive from fire in accord- 
ance with necessity, which H. names 
“logos”. The world process is cyclical: 
when the “great year” expires all 
things again turn into “fire”. Every- 
thing in nature is in continuous flux. 
All things and all properties change 
into their opposites: cold becomes 
hot, hot becomes cold, etc. Since 
everything is constantly changing and 
is renewed, one cannot step into the 
same river twice because the 
second time one steps into new water. 
In human affairs this conversion of 
everything into its opposite is not a 


— 188 — 


Herder 


simple change, but a struggle. Struggle 
is universal, it is “the father of every- 
thing, the sovereign of everything”. 
But the struggle of opposites reveals 
their identity: the road up and the 
road down, life and death, etc., are 
all one and the same. The universality 
of change and the conversion of every 
property into its opposite make all 
qualities relative. Sensations are the 
basis of knowledge. If something were 
concealed from the light which is sen- 
sory, it would not, all the same, suc- 
ceed in concealing itself from the light 
of reason. H. opposed his outlook to 
that of most of his contemporaries and 
compatriots. His aristocratic concep- 
tions of society blended with a few 
progressive views: he opposed the 
traditional unwritten law championed 
by the aristocrats, and advocated law 
established by the state, which, he 
held, men should guard as closely as 
the walls of their native city. 
Herbart, Johann Friedrich (1776- 
1841), German idealist philosopher, 
psychologist and educator. H. believed 
all existence to be based on reals, 
which are essences eternal, immuta- 
ble, spiritual (like Leibniz’s, q.v., 
monad, q.v.) and uncognisable (like 
Kant’s, q.v., “things-in-themselves”, 
q.v.). The “soul” is the most perfect 
of the reals, giving birth to all psychic 
phenomena. H.’s logic much resembled 
Kant’s. In education, he departed from 
the democratic principles of his teacher, 
Pestalozzi (q.v.). Some of his ideas 
(active and passive attention, experi- 
mental psychology, etc.) are valuable. 
He based religion on teleology. H.’s 
socio-political views were reactionary. 
He rejected constitutionalism and con- 
sidered subordination to the dominant 
classes the greatest virtue of the people. 
Herder, Johann Gottfried (1744- 
1803), German philosopher, enlighten- 
er, man of letters and critic; studied at 
University of Königsberg (1762-64), 
where he heard the lectures of Kant 
(q.v.). He denounced Kant’s “critique” 
of reason and opposed to it the “phys- 
iology” of cognitive faculties and the 
teaching on the primacy of language 
over reason. H. deduced his concepts 
of time and space from experience and 





Heredity 


championed the unity of matter and 
the forms of cognition. Proceeding from 
the concept of progress in nature he 
developed the notion of progress in his- 
tory (/deen zur Philosophie der Geschich- 
te der Menschheit, 1784-91) and so- 
ciety’s advancement towards human- 
ism. H. stressed the originality of the 
spiritual cultures of the various peo- 
ples, in particular the Southern Slavs, 
whose poetry he held in high esteem. 
He voiced a number of conjectures on 
the role of production (the crafts) and 
science in the development of society 
and anticipated the teachings of Schel- 
ling and Hegel (qq.v.) on the disparity 
between the subjective purposes of in- 
dividual human acts and their objective 
historical results. 

Heredity, the ability of living organ- 
isms to transmit characteristics and 
properties to their offspring. This abili- 
ty arose and developed in the process 
of biological evolution. In the case 
of higher animals the transmission 
of hereditary characteristics depends 
only on the sex cells. Changes in H. 
of organisms are caused by the influence 
of the environment. Such changes are 
called mutations. Harmful mutations 
lead to the death of the organism, 
useful mutations are consolidated by 
natural selection. Mutation and nat- 
ural selection are the basic factors of 
biological evolution which produced 
the contemporary species of organisms. 
Modern biology has discovered that 
substances, the molecules of which 
are sufficiently stable, reproduce ther- 
selves and regulate protein synthesis, 
can be the material carriers of H. Mol- 
ecules of nuclear nuclein acids possess 
this range of properties. Discovery 
of the material carriers of H. refutes 
the idealist ideas of supernatural 
causes producing this ability of living 
organisms. Modern genetics has drawn 
near to discovering concrete ways for 
the purposive change of H. This will 
be an important stage in the cognition 
and transformation of living nature. 

Heresy (Gk. sect, choice), a depar- 
ture from orthodox religious doctrine. 
Hh. were the religious form in which 
the common people protested against 
the ruling classes in feudal society, 


— 189 — 


Herzen 


which were supported by the Catholic 
Church. The first Christian Hh.—mon- 
tanism, Judeo-Christianity, gnosticism 
— arose in the 2nd and 3rd centuries 
and opposed the established Christian 
dogmas. Arianism, Nestorianism, and 
Monophysitism date from the 4th and 
Sth centuries, when Christianity (q.v.) 
became the official religion of the 
Roman Empire. H. reached its peak 
in the Middle Ages, when the Catholic 
Church was most closely connected 
with the exploiting classes of feudal 
society and was at the height of its 
power (Bogomils, Waldenses, Albi- 
genses, Lollards, Taborites, etc.). The 
H. movement was of great importance 
because it heralded the collapse of the 
feudal system in Western Europe. The 
peasant-plebeian Hh., which provided 
the slogans of peasant rebellions and 
inspired the common people, played 
a particularly prominent role in this 
respect. With the rise of capitalism 
Hh. lost their militancy and declined 
into religious sectarianism. 

Herzen, Alexander Ivanovich (1812- 
70), Russian revolutionary democrat, 
materialist thinker, man of letters; 
founder of Narodism (q.v.); son of 
a nobleman; completed his studies 
at Moscow University in 1833. Was 
twice exiled by the tsarist authorities, 
first from 1835 to 1840 and then from 
1841 to 1842. In 1847 he emigrated 
from Russia. Witnessed the 1848-49 
revolution in France and Italy. After 
1852 resided mostly in England, where 
he founded the Free Russian Printing 
Press (1853). Published Kolokol (The 
Bell), a revolutionary Russian lan- 
guage newspaper, from 1857 to 1867. 
Died in Paris. His chief works include: 
Diletantism v nauke (Dilettantism in 
Science), 1842-43; Pisma ob izuchenii 
prirody (Letters on the Study of Nature), 
1845-46; S togo berega (From the Other 
Shore), 1847-50; K staromu tovarishchu 
(To an Old Comrade), 1869. H.’s de- 
velopment was complex and contra- 
dictory, but a basic goal was always 
evident in his theoretical search: pro- 
ceeding from the highest accomplish- 
ments of social! and philosophical 
thought, he wanted to create a new, 
“realistic”, scientific theory to serve as 








Herzen 


the groundwork for the coming social 
revolution. H. elaborated on the ideas 
of the French utopian socialists, the 
romantic historiography of the Renais- 
sance and the 19th century German clas- 
sical philosophy, and in the early 1840s 
produced an original atheistic and 
materialistic ontology whose main val- 
ue lay in its materialistic interpreta- 
tion of Hegel’s (q.v.) dialectics. Later, 
he called it “the algebra of revolution”. 
H. “came right up to dialectical ma- 
terialism”. (Lenin, Vol. 18, p. 26.) 
The main accent in his philosophical 
searchings lay on proving the identity 
of being and thinking, practice and 
theory, society and the individual. H. 
wanted to find a method of cognition 
adequate to reality and representing 
unity of experience and speculation. 
In the philosophy of history, H. en- 
gaged in the study of the law of society, 
which he ultimately conceived as a 
combination of the spontaneous proc- 
ess of history (the unconscious life 
of the nations) and the conscious activ- 
ities of individuals (the development 
of science). In social affairs the notion 
of the unity of theory and practice 
prompted H. to work for the revolu- 
tionary enlightenment of the masses, 
to prepare them for socialist revolution. 
He approached this complex but in- 
trinsically connected range of problems 
from different angles at different 
stages of his ideological development. 
The revolution of 1848-49, whose de- 
feat was a personal tragedy to H., did 
much to correct his socio-philosophical 
views. Not finding in West European 
reality any coincidence of the histo- 
rical process with the development 
of human thought, which had advanced 
and elaborated the socialist ideal, H. 
became pessimistic and sceptical of 
the prospects of a social revolution in 
the West. He attempted to overcome 
his pessimism by preaching a “Rus- 
sian” peasant socialism, considering the 
Russian peasant community as the 
real embryo of the socialist future. 
H. pictured the further progress of 
Russian history as liberation of peas- 
ants from all feudal and autocratic 
trammels and fusion of the peasants’ 
patriarchally collective way of life 


— 199 — 


Hieroglyphs, Theory of 





with socialist theory. He not only 
called for a radical solution of the peas- 
ant question in Russia, but postulated 
the possibility of by-passing the capi- 
talist stage of development. But events 
in the mid-1860s convinced him that 
the “bourgeois plague” was spreading 
in Russia. He did not succeed in over- 
coming his pessimism until shortly 
before his death, when he broke rela- 
tions with the anarchist Bakunin (q.v.) 
and acclaimed the reviving working- 
class movement in Western Europe 
led by the First International as an 
earnest of the victory of socialism. 
Heuristic, the art of discourse which 
flourished among the ancient Greek 
sophists. It sprang up as a means of 
discovering truth; it split into dialec- 
tics (q.v.) and sophistry (q.v.). It was 
Socrates (q.v.) who developed dialec- 
tics. Sophistry, which did not aim at 
discovering truth but only at winning 
an argument, reduced H. to a number 
of ways of proving and disproving any 
statement with equal success. For this 
reason, Aristotle (q.v.) saw no distinc- 
tion between H. and sophistry. 
Hieroglyphs (or Symbols), Theory 
of, an epistemological concept which 
claims that sensations create in the 
human mind not images reflecting the 
features of objects and phenomena, 
but symbols, signs, hieroglyphs which 
have nothing in common with things 
and their properties. The T.H. was 
first propounded by Hermann von 
Helmholtz on the basis of the so-called 
law of specific energy of the sense- 
organs formulated by Johannes Miiller 
(according to this law, the specific 
nature of sensations depends not on 
outside influences, but on the proper- 
ties of the sense-organs. For example, 
any influence on the organ of sight 
produces the sensation of light). The 
term “hieroglyph” was introduced into 
philosophy by Plekhanov (q.v.). This 
point of view brings in an element 
of agnosticism in epistemology. Dia- 
lectical materialism does not regard 
sensation as a mere copy of the prop- 
erties of objects. Elementary sensa- 
tions, arising during interaction with 
the objective world, also depend on 
the specific organisation of the sense- 











Higher Nervous Activity 


organs. But the specific nature of the 
sense-organs themselves is ultimately 
determined by such objective and con- 
stant vehicles of information about 
changes in the environment as electro- 
magnetic waves (light), oscillation of 
air (sound), and so on. On the other 
hand, elementary sensations are a 
subjective image of the objective world. 
They are the subjective means with the 
help of which a real image of external 
things is reproduced. That is why sen- 
sations keep us in touch with reality, 
and are not an impassable abyss which 
separates man’s mind from the objec- 
tive world. Lenin gave a criticism of 
Plekhanov’s mistakes on this question 
in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism 
(q.v.). 

Higher Nervous Activity, aggregate 
of the complex processes forming tem- 
porary associations in the cortex of 
the cerebral hemispheres. Pavlov’s 
(q.v.) teaching on H.N.A. reveals the 
specific function of nervous activity, 
which enables highly developed bodies 
to adapt themselves to the changing 
conditions of their environment. H.N.A. 
is based essentially on conditioned 
reflexes acquired by the body in the 
course of individual experience. H.N.A. 
of animals is limited to the immediate 
reflection of external causes through 
the first signal system (q.v.). Man, 
as distinct from other animals, chiefly 
employs the higher second signal sys- 
tem, in which reflex activity is mediat- 
ed by speech. Speech affords man a 
more profound, generalised reflection 
of reality in the form of abstract no- 
tions and complex judgements. H.N.A. 
reveals the physiological basis and 
laws governing psychic activity (q.v.). 
This facilitates cognition of the origin 
and development of human conscious- 
ness and confirms the proposition of 
the materialist philosophers that con- 
sciousness is the function of highly 
organised matter, the brain. 

Higher Nervous Activity, Types of, 
the complexes of the basic properties 
of nervous processes (stimulation and 
inhibition) which determine the in- 
dividual features of the higher nerv- 
ous activity of animals and man. 
The concept T. of H.N.A. was intro- 


— 191 — 


Hilbert 


duced by Ivan Pavlov. According to 
Pavlov, stimulation and inhibition 
operative in the cortex of the cerebral 
hemispheres possess three main prop- 
erties. They are expressed in terms 
of the stages of (1) the power of nerv- 
ous processes which is dependent on 
the efficiency of nervous cells; (2) the 
balance between the various processes; 
(3) the mobility of processes, i.e., 
the velocity of emergence or termina- 
tion of stimulation and replacement 
of stimulation by inhibition and vice 
versa. A combination of these proper- 
ties results in the T. of H.N.A. There 
are four most characteristic types: 
(1) strong, balanced, and mobile; (2) 
strong, balanced, and immobile; (3) 
strong and unbalanced (the process of 
stimulation being obviously predomi- 
nant); (4) weak (both processes are 
weak, with inhibition being somewhat 
predominant). Four temperaments (q.v.) 
correspond to these main T. of H.N. A. 
The afore-mentioned T. of H.N.A. 
are common both to the animals and 
man. Pavlov singles out three T. of 
H.N.A. which are proper to man 
alone and are conditioned by the pe- 
culiarities inherent in the correlation 
of the signal systems: apprehensive 
type (with the relative predominance 
of the second signal system), artistic 
type (with the relative predominance 
of the first signal system), and middle 
type. The peculiar features of the in- 
dividual’s nervous processes are close- 
ly connected with his general talents 
and condition individual differences 
in the formation of capabilities. 
Hilbert, David (1862-1943), German 
mathematician and logician; lecturer 
at Königsberg from 1886 and at Göt- 
tingen from 1895; founder of the Göt- 
tingen mathematical school. H. worked 
on the theory of algebraic invariants, 
algebraic numbers and the foundations 
of ‘mathematics and mathematical log- 
ic. In his Grundlagen der Geometrie 
(1899) he reduced Euclidean geometry 
to a rigid system of axioms, which 
largely predetermined further work on 
the axiomatisation of knowledge (see 
Axiomatic Method). H. produced im- 
portant work on the propositional cal- 
culus (q.v.) and functional calculus 








Hinduism 


(q.v.). In a number of articles which 
appeared in the early 20s, H. formu- 
lated a new approach to the founda- 
tions of mathematics, which led to 
the appearance, on the one hand, of 
the conception of formalism (q.v.) and, 
on the other, of metamathematics (q.v.), 
a new branch of mathematics. 
Hinduism, a system of ideas and 
concepts which has prevailed in the 
religion, ethics and philosophy of In- 
dia from the early Middle Ages to cur- 
rent times. The sphere of H. includes 
most of the Indian cults and religious 
systems based on the worship of the 
gods Vishnu and Siva. H. arose in 
connection with the general crisis of 
the world outlook in India in the 6th- 
4th centuries B.C. The written sources 
of H. include most of the ancient and 
medieval Indian religious, philosophi- 
cal and legal literature in Sanskrit. 
Atman, the individual soul, and Brah- 
man, the world soul, are the most 
important of the general religious phil- 
osophical categories. According to 
the objective idealist concepts of H., 
these categories are not connected with 
space, time or causation; Atman and 
Brahman are counterposed by nature 
(Prakrti) which develops in space and 
time according to the laws of causation. 
The ultimate aim of every progress is 
release of Atman from nature and its 
fusion with Brahman. The soul’s link 
with nature is regulated by the law 
of karma, the essence of which is: 
Atman, on becoming a “living” soul 
lodged in the body of a living being, 
performs actions, good and bad. Kar- 
ma (literally, “action”) is the influence 
of these actions; it leaves the soul in 
a cycle of births and deaths (samsara) 
and dooms it to be born anew. The 
condition (wealth, poverty, honour, 
degradation, etc.) in which the next 
birth takes place is a reward or retri- 
bution for the actions committed dur- 
ing previous births. The ideas and 
concepts of H. reflected and consoli- 
dated the conservative caste system. 
Avatars and manifestation play the 
most important part among the Hin- 
duistic religious mythological ideas. 
Avatars is the incarnation of a god 
in another god, man or animal. The 


— 192 — 


The Historical and the Logical 


new incarnation continues to exist 
alongside the “initial” deity and its 
other incarnations. Manifestation is 
the revelation of the God Siva in any 
image it wishes to assume and whose 
existence might last from a few mo- 
ments to eternity. 

The Historical and the Logical, phil- 
osophical categories characterising the 
process of development and also the 
relationship between the logical de- 
velopment of thought and the history 
of an object, the history of the process 
itself. The H. expresses the real proc- 
ess of origin and formation of the 
given object; the L., the relationship, 
the laws of connection and interaction 
of its aspects which exist in a devel- 
oped state. The H. is related to the L. 
as the process of development to its 
result, in which the connections suc- 
cessively shaped in the course of his- 
tory attain “complete maturity and 
classical form” (Engels). H. and L. are 
in dialectical unity, including an ele- 
ment of contradiction. Their unity 
is expressed, first, in the H. containing 
within it the L. to the extent to which 
every process contains its own objec- 
tive orientation, its own necessity 
which leads to a definite result. Al- 
though at the beginning of the process 
the L., as an expression of the devel- 
oped structure of the object, is still 
absent, the sequence of the phases 
undergone during the process on the 
whole coincides with the relationship 
(logical connection) between the com- 
ponents of the developed system; the 
process is consummated in the emer- 
gence of a definite, specific object. 
Secondly, the unity of the H. and L. 
is expressed in the reproduction by the 
relationship and interdependence be- 
tween the sides of the developed whole 
of the history of this whole, its emer- 
gence and the formation of its specific 
structure. The result contains “pho- 
tographed” in itself the process of its 
emergence: the L. contains within it- 
self the H. Although the unity of the 
H. and L. is of decisive significance 
for understanding the relationship be- 
tween the history of the object and its 
result, the two coincide only in general, 
because all the accidental and tran- 





The Historical and the Logical 


— 193 — 


Hobbes 





sient, all the zigzags of development 
which are inevitable in the historical 
process are obviated and lost in the 
object which has reached “complete 


maturity and classical form”. The 
L. is the “corrected” H. But this 
“correction” is made “according to 


the laws which the actual historical 
process itself provides” (Engels). Hence 
the difference in the logical and 
historical ways of reflecting reality 
in thought. The difference between 
these methods of study is not merely 
and not only a difference in the subjec- 
tive aims of study: it has its objective 
basis. This difference is inevitable, 
because in reality itself the process 
and result of development do not coin- 
cide, although they are in unity, and 
therefore the historical and logical 
methods of study differ in content. 
The purpose of historical study is to 
reveal the concrete conditions and 
prerequisites for the development of 
phenomena, their historical sequence 
and transition from certain histori- 
cally necessary stages to others. The 
purpose of logical study is to reveal 
the role which separate elements of 
the system play in -the developed 
whole. But since the developed whole 
preserves only the conditions and fea- 
tures of its development which express 
its specific nature, the logical repro- 
duction of the developed whole proves 
to be the key to revealing its real 
history. “The anatomy of man is the 
key to the anatomy of the ape” (Marx). 
At the same time the boundaries sep- 
arating these two methods of study 
are arbitrary and mobile, because 
ultimately the L. is the selfsame H. 
released from its concrete form and 
presented in a generalised, theoretical 
way; and vice versa, the H. is the self- 
same L. vested in the flesh and blood 
of concrete historical development. 
The dialectics of H. and L. is of great 
importance for dialectical logic, which 
uncovers the general laws of know- 
ledge, the logic of movement of thought 
in the process of cognising reality. 

Historical Cycle, Theory of, an ide- 
alist theory elaborated by Vico (q.v.), 
according to which society endlessly 
passes through the same stages. In 


13-1682 


the 19th and 20th centuries certain 
philosophers and sociologists rejected 
the positive elements of Vico’s theory— 
the idea of historical progress, law- 
governed social development, etc., and 
highlighted the idea of mankind’s con- 
stant return to its point of origin (see 
Nietzsche and Spengler). The main 
present-day adherent of this theory is 
Toynbee, q.v. (see also Progress and 
Retrogression in Social Development). 
The theory of historical cycles raises 
into an absolute and thereby distorts 
certain aspects of the historical proc- 
ess (idea of repetition, etc.). 
Historism (or Historicity), the prin- 
ciple of cognition of things and phenom- 
ena in the process of their emergence 
and development, in connection with 
the concrete historical conditions de- 
termining them. H. implies an ap- 
proach to phenomena as products of 
definite historical development, which 
considers how they arose, developed, 
and attained their present state. As a 
definite method of theoretical research 
H. is a fixation not of any and every 
(even qualitative) change, but only 
of those which reflect the formation 
of specific properties and connections 
of things, determining their essence, 
their qualitative specifics. H. presup- 
poses recognition of the irreversible 
and successive nature of changes of 
things. H. has become a major princi- 
ple of science, enabling it to give a 
scientific picture of nature and dis- 
cover the laws governing its develop- 
ment (for example, Darwin's theory of 
evolution). Thanks to H., which con- 
stitutes an integral and important side 
of the dialectical method, Marxism 
was able to explain the essence of such 
intricate social phenomena as the 
state, classes, etc., to foresee the 
historically transient nature of capital- 
ism and its inevitable replacement 
by socialism. Denial of the principle 
of H., struggle against it or its inter- 
pretation in a positivist and empi- 
rical spirit, are characteristic features 
of contemporary idealist philosophy. 
Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679), Eng- 
lish materialist philosopher; his phi- 
losophy was influenced by the English 
17th century bourgeois revolution. His 








Hobbes 


chief works are De Cive (1642) and 
Leviathan (1651). H. developed the 
doctrine of mechanistic materialism 
and gave system to Bacon’s (q.v.) 
materialism. Marx pointed out that 
H.’s materialism was one-sided. “Sen- 
suousness,” Marx wrote, “lost its 
bloom and became the abstract sen- 
suousness of the geometrician. Physical 
motion was sacrificed to mechanical 
or mathematical, geometry was pro- 
claimed the principal science.” (Marx 
and Engels, The Holy Family, p. 173.) 
According to H. the world is the sum 
total of bodies governed by the laws 
of mechanical motion, H. also reduces 
to motion and effort the psychic life 
of man and beast. These, he holds, 
are complex mechanisms completely 
governed by outside effects. From this 
H. infers that (1) souls do not exist 
as special substances, (2) material 
bodies are the single substance, and 
(3) God is no more than a figment of 
the imagination. H. denies the objec- 
tiveness of the qualitative multiplic- 
ity of nature, believing that it is a 
property of human perception based 
on the mechanical differences between 
things. In his doctrine on knowledge 
H. attacks Descartes’ (q.v.) theory 
of innate ideas (q.v.). Inferring all 
ideas from sensations, H. develops 
the teaching on the elaboration of 
ideas by comparison, combination and 
division. While H. holds that expe- 
tience or knowledge of isolated facts 
furnishes no more than probable truths 
about the connections of things, he 
admits that valid general knowledge 
is possible, being conditioned by lan- 
guage, that is, the ability of names 
to become symbols of general ideas. 
In his doctrine of law and the state, 
H. rejects the theories of the divine 
origin of society and advances the theo- 
ry of social contract (see Social Con- 
tract, Theory of). H. considers absolute 
monarchy the best form of state, but 
his numerous explanations and reser- 
vations leave room for revolutionary 
principles. His idea centres not on 
the monarchistic principle as such, but 
on the unrestricted character of state 
power. Powers of the state, he points 
out, are compatible with the interests 


— 194 — 


Holism 


of the classes which carried out the 
bourgeois revolution in 17th century 
England. H.’s theory of society and 
the state contains embryos of a mate- 
Tialistic appreciation of social phe- 
nomena. 

Holbach, Paul Henri Dietrich (1723-_ 
89), French materialist philosopher, 
and atheist. Born a German baron, 
he spent most of his life in France. His 
most important book, Le Système de 
la nature (1770) was publicly burned 
by order of the Paris Parliament. His 
other works are Le Christianisme dé- 
voilé (1761), Théologie portative (1768), 
and Bon Sens, ou idées naturelles op- 
posées aux idées surnaturelles (1772). 
H. attacked religion and idealist phi- 
losophy, particularly the doctrines of 
Berkeley (q.v.). He described idealism 
as a chimera opposed to common sense 
(q.v.), and attributed the origin of 
religion to ignorance and to the fear 
of most and the deceit of some. Matter, 
H. held, “is everything that acts in 
one way or another on our senses”, 
it consists of immutable and indivisible 
atoms whose main properties are ex- 
tent, weight, shape and impenetrabil- 
ity. He believed that motion, another 
attribute of matter, was simple me- 
chanical movement of bodies in space. 
Man, H. stated, was part of nature 
and subject to its laws. He advocated 
determinism (q.v.), but interpreted 
causality mechanistically. He denied 
the objective existence of chances and 
defined them as phenomena, the causes 
of which were unknown. In episte- 
mology, H. leaned towards sensation- 
alism (q.v.) and opposed agnosticism. 
In politics, he favoured constitutional 
monarchy, but in specific cases; advo- 
cated enlightened absolutism. An ideal- 
ist in his approach to society, H. said 
that “opinions rule the world”. He 
attributed the decisive role in history 
to legislators. He saw education as 
the means for man’s emancipation. 
Ignorance of their own nature, H. 
averred, put the human race under the 
sway of governments. He believed bour- 
geois society to be a realm of reason. 

Holism, idealist “philosophy of in- 
tegrity”. This concept was introduced 
by: Field Marshal J. Smuts of South 





“The Holy Family” 


Africa in his book Holism and Evolu- 
tion (1926). Idealistically interpreting 
the irreducibility of the whole to the 
sum of its parts, Smuts asserted that 
the world is governed by a holistic 
process—the process of creative evo- 
lution, the creation of new integrities, 
in the course of which the forms of 
matter are constantly increasing. Ac- 
cording to Smuts, the holistic process 
negates the law of preservation of 
matter. He considered the “factor of 
integrity” to be non-material and 
unknowable, attributing to it a mystic 
character. Smuts saw the political em- 
bodiment of the holist principle in the 
Union of South Africa with the regime 
of social oppression and racial discrim- 
ination prevailing in it. 

“The Holy Family or Critique of 
‘Critical Critique’”, an early philo- 
sophical work written by Marx and 
Engels in 1845. “The Holy Family is a 
facetious nickname for the Bauer broth- 
ers, the philosophers, and their 
followers. These gentlemen preached a 
criticism which stood above all reality, 
above parties and politics, which re- 
jected all practical activity, and which 
only ‘critically’ contemplated the sur- 
rounding world and the events going 
on within it. These gentlemen, the 
Bauers, looked down on the proletariat 
as an uncritical mass. Marx and En- 
gels vigorously opposed this absurd 
and harmful tendency.” (Lenin, Works, 
Vol. 2, p. 23.) The H. F. gives a pro- 
found critique of the idealism of Hegel 
and the Young Hegelians (q.v.) and 
continues the elaboration of dialectical 
and historical materialism. In it Marx 
and Engels arrived at a primary idea 
in the materialistic understanding of 
history, the idea of the social relations 
of production. Subjecting the person- 
ality cult upheld by the Young He- 
gelians to sharp criticism, they showed 
that the struggle of the working peo- 
ple against the exploiters is the central 
feature of all history. They declared 
that the proletariat is the grave-digger 
of capitalism. The H.F. presents the 
view of Marx and Engels on the prole- 
tariat’s revolutionary role in an almost 
finished form. The H.F. gives a pro- 
found and interesting outline of the 


13° 


— 19 — 


Honour 


history of philosophy, particularly 
the history of materialism in Britain 
and France. It is an important land- 
mark in the development of scientific 
communism, in the struggle against 
anti-proletarian, petty-bourgeois ide- 
ology and idealism. 

Homoeomeries (Gk. of similar parts), 
a term used by Anaxagoras (q.v.); 
though not used in surviving fragments 
of his works, it was passed down by 
his later commentators. Anaxagoras 
believed that all things were an infinite 
number of particles of different qual- 
ities, each of these being divided into 
an infinite number of like particles. 
According to Anaxagoras, H. are the 
qualitatively like particles or quali- 
tatively original particles containing 
an infinity of smaller particles. This, 
he inferred, is why they bear the name 
of the thing which possesses similar 
or like particles. In modern mathemat- 
ical terms H. may be defined as 
an infinity given in an infinite 
degree. 

Homogeneity and Heterogeneity, ac- 
cording to the principle of homogeneity 
postulated by Kant (q.v.) the special 
concepts must have something in com- 
mon, this common quality classing 
them under a common generic concept. 
The principle of heterogeneity, on the 
other hand, requires that special con- 
cepts classed under the same generic 
concept should differ. The modern 
interpretation of homogeneity forbids 
the classification of heterogeneous prin- 
ciples within the framework of one 
theory. Violation of this principle leads 
to eclecticism. 

Homonymy, a logical mistake con- 
sisting in the identical use of two 
different meanings of one and the same 
word which leads to a violation of the 
law of identity (q.v.). The reason for 
H. is the existence of homonyms (words 
having the same pronunciation but 
different meanings) and polysemy. The 
term H. was introduced by Aristotle 
(q.v.) in his treatise Sophistici E lenchi. 

Honour, a moral category expressing 


‘social recognition of that which merits 


a high appraisal in the activity of an 
individual, group, institution, etc. In 
feudal society, H. was determined by 








Hsiin Tzů 





noble birth and in capitalist society, 
by wealth. In socialist society, H. 
(respect) is determined by services to 
the people in building communism and 
also by man’s behaviour in everyday 
life, his attitude to other people. H. 
obliges one to be honest, morally pure, 
to preserve, cherish, and multiply what 
deserves respect. Unworthy behaviour 
leads to dishonour and disgrace. Ex- 
cessive striving for honours and glory 
is called ambition and is a vice. 

wa Hsiin Tzů (c. 298-238 B.C.), Chinese 
materialist philosopher; took a criti- 
cal view of and used in his teaching 
the ideas of many philosophical schools 
and trends in ancient China. He pro- 
duced a harmonious theory of nature. 
His concept of heaven is not some mys- 
tical supreme ruler but the aggregate 
of natural phenomena; he rejected the 
existence of a universal creator. All 
phenomena and things originate and 
change under the impact of two inter- 
acting forces: the positive yang and 
the negative yin (see Yin and Yang). Ac- 
cording to H.T., the process of cogni- 
tion begins with the testimony of the 
sense-organs, but man can obtain a 
correct and comprehensive picture only 
as a result of cogitation on the data 
of sensory experience. His theory that 
the evil qualities are innate in man’s 
nature enjoyed a wide popularity; 
he held that all the good elements in 
man were created in the course of edu- 
cation. His teaching had a profound 
influence on the subsequent develop- 
ment of Chinese philosophy. 

Human Relations, Theory of, a 
sociological theory which tries to prove 
the humane nature of contemporary 
capitalism by picturing the relations 
between the exploiters and the exploit- 
ed as “human relations” based on 
Christian commandments. T.H.R. is 
a component of the theory of “people’s 
capitalism”. It proposes various meas- 
ures for camouflaging capitalist ex- 
ploitation (participation of workers in 
profits of the monopolies and the buying 
of shares, group insurance, visits of 
workers’ homes by the employers, the 
presentation of holiday gifts, joint 
consultations of workers and manage- 
ment, and so on). 


—- 196 — 


Humanism 





Humanism, a system of views based 
on respect for the dignity of man, con- 
cern for his welfare, his all-round de- 
velopment, and the creation of favour: 
able conditions for social life. Humanis- 
tic ideas originated spontaneously in 
popular struggles against exploitation 
and vice. It grew into a distinct ideo- 
logical movement at the time of the 
Renaissance (q.v.) from the 14th to 
16th century, when it figured promi- 
nently as an element of bourgeois ideol- 
ogy opposed to feudalism and medieval 
theology. H. is closely associated with 
progressive materialistic views; it pro- 
claims freedom of the individual, op- 
poses religious asceticism, vindicates 
man’s right to pleasure and the satis- 
faction of earthly desires and require- 
ments. Some of the most prominent 
humanists of the Renaissance, Petrarch, 
Dante, Boccaccio, Leonardo da Vinci, 
Erasmus of Rotterdam, Bruno (q.v.), 
Rabelais, Montaigne (q.v.), Copernicus 
(q.v.), Shakespeare (q.v.), Francis Ba- 
con ({q.v.), and others, helped to mould 
mundane views, but were far removed 
from the people, from working men, and 
hostile to the revolutionary move- 
ments of the oppressed. Thinkers 
like More and Campanella (qq.v.), on 
the other hand, expressed the interests 
of the working people. Bourgeois H. 
reached its zenith in the works of the 
18th century Enlighteners, who put 
forward the slogans of liberty, 
equality and fraternity and proclaimed 
men’s right freely to develop their 
“natural essence”. However, even the 
finest manifestations of bourgeois H. 
have the shortcoming of, overlooking 
the living conditions of working peo- 
ple, ignoring the question of their 
true freedom and basing humanistic 
ideals on private property and individ- 
ualism. Hence the contradiction be- 
tween the slogans of H. and their reali- 
sation in capitalist society. As for the 
exponents of utopian socialism (q.v.), 
they saw the anti-humanistic nature 
of capitalism and attacked its vices. 
But, not knowing the objective laws 
of history, they were unable to dis- 
cover effective ways and means for 
achieving a just society. Socialist H. 
is fundamentally different. It is based 











Humboldt, Alexander von 


on the Marxist-Leninist philosophy and 
theory of scientific communism, which 
postulate liberation of the working 
people from social oppression and the 
building of communism as an essential 
condition for the harmonious develop- 
ment of all men and genuine freedom 
of the individual. Socialist H. is the 
ideology of the proletariat, because the 
proletariat is the only class that seeks 
to provide the essential conditions for 
the triumph of man’s humanistic ideals 
by its struggle against the exploiting 
classes, for communism. By abolishing 
private ownership and exploitation, 
socialism establishes truly humanistic 
relations, based on the principle that 
man is to man a friend, comrade and 
brother. Communism is the supreme 
embodiment of H., for it eliminates 
all surviving traces of inequality and 
establishes the supreme expression of 
justice, the principle “from each ac- 
cording to his ability, to each accord- 
ing to his needs”, providing the es- 
sential conditions for the harmonious 
development of all individuals. Com- 
munism delivers “all men from social 
inequality, from every form of oppres- 
sion and exploitation, from the hor- 
rors of war, and proclaims Peace, 
Labour, Freedom, Equality, Fratern- 
ity, and Happiness for all peoples of 
the earth”. (Programme of the CPSU.) 
The term H. is also used to describe 
the culture and ideology of the Ren- 
aissance. 

Humboldt, Alexander von (1769- 
1859), German materialist philosopher, 
naturalist, one of the founders of mod- 
ern geography. His most famous phil- 
osophical works are Ansichten der Na- 
tur (1807) and Kosmos (1845-58). He 
considered matter endowed with intrin- 
sic activity to be the only cosmic sub- 
stance. He did not delve into the 
sources of motion, but attempted all the 
same to overcome the mechanistic 
concept of motion. He made a number 
of dialectical conjectures about the 
interconnection of various phenomena 
and their peculiarities. He opposed 
the natural philosophies of Schelling 
and Hegel (qq.v.) and Comte’s (q.v.) 
positivism, and attached importance 
to the alliance of science and material- 


— 197 — 


Hume 


ist philosophy. His ideas on natural 
science helped to refute various meta- 
physical views. He identified sensual- 
ism and rationalism, and advocated 
a poetical appreciation of reality which, 
he averred, makes cognition socially 
useful. H. believed that cognition is 
possible through experimental com- 
munion with nature. This was a strong 
point in his epistemological system. 
He expressed the interests of the radical 
wing of the German bourgeoisie and 
sympathised with the French late 18th 
century bourgeois revolution. 

Humboldt, Karl Wilhelm (1767-1835), 
German philosopher, linguist and 
statesman; brother of Alexander von 
Humboldt (q.v.). His main works are 
Ideen zu einem Versuch, die Grenzen 
der Wirksamkeit des Staates zu bestim- 
men (1792), Ästhetische Versuche über 
Goethes Hermann und Dorothea (1799), 
Uber die Aufgabe des Geschichtsschrei- 
bers (1821) and Uber die Kawisprache 
auf der Insel Java (1836-39). H. ac- 
cepted Kant’s (q.v.) philosophical doc- 
trine and sought to concretise and 
develop it by basing it on social his- 
tory, though he inclined towards ob- 
jective idealism on a number of 
points. According to H.’s theory of his- 
torical cognition, world history is the 
result of the activity of a spiritual 
force which transcends cognition. He 
believed that the history of mankind 
cannot be understood from the causa- 
tive point of view, though it consists 
of a chain of explicable aspirations 
of individuals and appears describable, 
This is why, he said, history as a science 
may to a certain degree be replaced 
by aesthetics. In the field of linguist- 
ics, H. suggested the method of com- 
parative historical investigations of 
languages, which proved highly val- 
uable. He represented the liberal wing 
of the German bourgeoisie. His anti- 
feudal views did not go beyond the 
aim of educational reform and the idea 
of German unity. H. took part in the 
founding of Berlin University. 

Hume, David (1711-76), English 
idealist philosopher, psychologist, his- 
torian. The task of knowledge, accord- 
ing to H., lies not in the understanding 
of being but in its ability to be a 





Hume — 198 — 


Huxley 





guide in practical life. For him, the 
only subject of authentic knowledge 
is that of mathematics. All other ob- 
jects of study concern facts which can- 
not be proved logically and can only 
be deduced from experience. All opin- 
ions on existences also proceed from 
experience, which H., however, under- 
Stood idealistically. Reality, for him, 
is only a stream of “impressions” whose 
causes are unknown and unknowable. 
He considered insoluble the problem 
of the existence or non-existence of the 
objective world. One of the fundamen- 
tal relations established by experience 
is the relation of cause and effect; it 
can be deduced neither by intuition 
nor by analysis and proof. If one phe- 
nomenon precedes another it cannot 
be deduced that the former is the cause 
and the latter the effect. Even the most 
frequent repetitions of events in time 
do not give knowledge of a hidden 
force by which one object produces the 
other. People, however, are inclined 
to infer from the behaviour of a given 
object in the past similar behaviours 
of the same object in the future. They 
make such inference only by force of 
habit. Thus, H. denies the objective 
character of causality. The stream of 
our impressions, according to H., is 
not absolute chaos: some objects ap- 
pear to us as bright, vivid, stable ob- 
jects, and this is quite sufficient for 
practical life. It is only necessary to 
understand that the source of certitude 
is not theoretical knowledge but faith. 
In ethics H. developed the theory 
of utilitarianism (q.v.), and declared 
utility to be the criterion of morality; 
in the philosophy of religion he con- 
fined himself to the admission that the 
causes of the order in the Universe 
have some analogy with reason, but 
denied all the theological and philo- 
sophical doctrines of God, and, turn- 
ing to historical experience, he ack- 
nowledged the evil influence of religion 
on morality and civil life. H.’s scept- 
icism (q.v.) was the theoretical foun- 
dation of the utilitarian and rational 
world outlook of the bourgeoisie. Main 
work: Enquiry Concerning the Human 
Understanding (1748). H.’s agnosti- 
cism greatly influenced contemporary 


idealism. It served as one of the main 
ideological sources of neo-positivism 
(q.v.). 

Taser, Edmund (1859-1938), Ger- 
man idealist philosopher, founder of 
the so-called phenomenological school, 
professor at Göttingen and Freiburg. 
His philosophy is based on the teach- 
ings of Plato, Leibniz, and Brentano 
(qq.v.). H. sought to turn philosophy 
into a strictly defined science and to 
create a pure logic of scientific knowl- 
edge. For this purpose, he believed, 
logical categories and laws had to be 
defined in their pure form. H. professed 
to be neutral in philosophy and at- 
tempted to identify “pure conscious- 
ness” divorced from being and the con- 
sciousness of the concrete subject (the 
individual). This, he maintained, was 
the way to achieve the “pure essences” 
of Plato’s objective idealism. These 
“possess meaning”, but do not possess 
existence in themselves. On the whole, 
H.’s views were subjectively idealistic, 
inasmuch as he held that the object 
of cognition does not exist outside the 
consciousness of the subject focussed 
upon it. The object is discovered 
(and created) as the result of intuition, 
which is concentrated upon it. The per- 
sonal emotions of the individual are 
the criterion of truth. H.’s ideas strong- 
ly influenced the subsequent develop- 
ment of bourgeois philosophy. Ele- 
ments of H.’s objective idealism were 
projected in Nicolai Hartmann’s (q.v.) 
“critical ontology” and the neo-real- 
istic schools in the USA and Britain. 
His subjective idealism became to 
a large extent the foundation of Ger- 
man existentialism (q.v.), particularly 
that of Heidegger (q.v.). His most 
prominent works are Logische Unter- 
suchungen (1900, 1901), Die Krisis 
der Europdischen Wissenschaften und 
die transzendentale Phdnomenologie 
(1954) and Erste Philosophie (1956- 
59). (See Phenomenology.) 

Huxley, Thomas Henry (1825-95), 
English naturalist, friend and follower 
of Darwin (q.v.); author of eminent 
works on biology, comparative anatomy, 
palaeontology and anthropology; 
championed Darwin’s theories. In phi- 
losophy H professed to ke a follower 








Hylozoism — 199 — Hypothetico-Deductive Theory 


of Hume (q.v.), maintaining, as Hume 
did, that we can never conclusively 
cognise the true causes of our sensa- 
tions. He aptly described his attitude 
with the word “agnosticism”. But his 
agnosticism (q.v.) served him as a 
screen for his spontaneously materia- 


list outlook, especially in natural 
science. 
Hylozoism (Gk. hyle, matter and 


zol, life), the doctrine that all matter 
is animated and, therefore, possesses 
sensations. The early Greek material- 
ists, such as Bruno (q.v.) and some 
French materialists, such as Jean-Bap- 
tiste Robinet (q.v.), were hylozoists. 
The term was first employed in the 
17th century. The doctrine attributes 
sensations and mental faculties to all 
forms of matter. In fact, however, 
sensations are a property of only highly 
developed organic matter. 

Hypostatisation 1. In the general 
sense, attribution of the self-subsistent 
reality of an object or substance to 
mere properties or relations. 2. In 
the more common usage, idealist at- 
tribution of self-subsistent reality to 
abstract concepts. 

Hypothesis, an assumption based on 
a series of facts for inferring the exist- 
ence of an object, or the relation or 
cause of phenomena, without actual 
proof. The corresponding judgement, 
conclusion or inference is called hy- 
pothetical. The need for H. arises in 
science when the connection between, 
or the cause of, phenomena is unclear, 
although many of the circumstances 
preceding or accompanying these phe- 
nomena are known; H. is also used 
when a picture of the past has to be 
restored from some characteristics of 
the present or a conclusion has to be 
drawn about the future development 
of a phenomenon on the strength of 
the past and present. But the formula- 
tion of H. on the basis of definite facts 
is only the first step. Being no more 
than probable, H. calls for verification 
and proof. After verification, H. be- 
comes a scientific theory; if the veri- 
fication is negative, H. is either re- 
vised or rejected. The main rules gov- 
erning the formulation and veri- 
fication of H. are: 1. H. must agree or 


at least be compatible with all the 
pertinent facts. 2. Of many conflict- 
ing Hh., formulated to explain a se- 
ries of facts, the H. which explains 
a larger number is preferable. So- 
called working Hh. may be formulated 
to explain individual facts of the se- 
ries. 3. The least possible number of 
Hh. should be formulated to explain 
a connected series of facts, and their 
connection should be as close as pos- 
sible. 4. When formulating H. it should 
be borne in mind that H. is essen- 
tially no more than probable. 5. Hh. 
contradicting each other cannot both 
be true unless they explain different 
aspects and connections of one and the 
same object. Modern positivists, em- 
piricists, “all-inductivists”, etc., be- 
lieve that science should record and 
register the facts and should not 
formulate Hh. on the laws governing 
the objective world. They hold that 
Hh. play no more than a working role 
and are of no real significance. The na- 
ture of modern science, the fact that 
experiments have become more com- 
plex and intricate, compel researchers 
to engage in theoretical conjectures 
and broad Hh. This confirms Engels’ 
proposition that H. is the “form of 
development of natural science, in 
so far as it thinks”. (Dialectics of Na- 


ture, p. 244.) 
Hypothetico-Deductive Method, a 
methodological device whereby cer- 


tain propositions are advanced as 
hypothetical and subjected to veri- 
fication by inferring effects on the 
strength of available valid knowledge 
and comparing these effects to the 
facts. H.D.M. is an important element 
of scientific methodology. It is used 
in association with a number of meth- 
odological operations: comparison of 
the facts; revision of existing concepts; 
formulation of new concepts; agreement 
of hypotheses with other theoretical 
tenets, etc. The neo-positivist “phi- 
losophy of science” is, therefore, wrong 
when it elevates H.D.M. to an abso- 
lute and describes it as the only es- 
sential methodological operation from 
the point of view of logic. 
Hypothetico-Deductive Theory, a 
form of logical arrangement of knowl- 





Hyppolite 


— 200 — 


edge in the natural sciences. H.D.T. 
is an application of the deductive or 
axiomatic theory (employed in mathe- 
matical methodology) to the specific 
problems of natural science based on 
experiments and observations. In ad- 
dition to the rules governing deductive 
systems in general, H.D.T. should 
also meet the requirements of empiri- 
cal interpretation, which facilitates 
empirical verification of propositions. 
Empirical interpretation is achieved 
through so-called interpretative proposi- 
tions, which connect the meaning of 
theoretical concepts with some of the 
immediately observable properties (see 
Operational Definitions). 


Hyppolite 


Hyppolite, Jean (1907-), French exis- 
tentialist philosopher, director of the 
Ecole Normale. His main works are 
devoted to Hegel (q.v.). H. maintains 
that Hegelian philosophy has the same 
importance for our age as the philos- 
ophy of Aristotle (q.v.) had for the 
Middle Ages. He regards the main 
philosophical trends as a continuation 
of the Hegelian system. From his 
point of view, Hegel’s “ontology of 
life” must become the basis for know- 
ing human existence. He thus turns 
Hegel into an existentialist. Proceed- 
ing from his false concept, H. claims 
that Marx is a Hegelian and tries to 
find elements of idealism in Marxism. 














I 


Ibn Roshd, or Ibn Rushd Muhammad 
(Averroés in Latin transcription) (1126- 
98), Arab philosopher and scientist 
who lived in Spain during the caliphate 
of Cordova. Without breaking with the 
Muslim religion, he developed the ma- 
terialist elements of Aristotle’s (q.v.) 
philosophy. He tried to prove the etern- 
ity and uncreatability of matter and 
motion, denied the immortality of the 
individual soul and after-life. Found- 
ed the doctrine of twofold truth 
(q.v.). Sharply criticised the mys- 
ticism of the Muslim theologian al 
Ghazzali. His comments on the works 
of Aristotle played a great part in 
acquainting Europeans with ancient 
philosophy. His teaching (see Aver- 
roism) was persecuted by orthodox 
Muslims. 

Ibn Sina, Abu-ali (Avicenna in Lat. 
transcription) (980-1037), philosopher 
and physician, natural scientist and 
poet of Central Asia; lived in Bokhara 
and Iran. Although faithful to Islam, 
played a considerable role in spreading 
among the Arabs and, through them, 
in Europe, the philosophical and scien- 
tific heritage of the ancient world, 
above all the teachings of Aristotle 
(q.v.). Did much to consolidate ration- 
al thinking and propagate natural 
science and mathematics. In his phi- 
losophy preserved both the materialist 
and idealist tendencies of Aristotle, 
deviating on some questions from 
Aristotelianism towards Neo-Platon- 
ism (q.v.). Developed Aristotle’s logic, 
physics and metaphysics. Recognised 
the eternity of matter, considering 
it the cause of diversity of individual 
things, and opposed astrological and 
other superstitions. His main work, 
Danesh-name (Book of Knowledge), 


gives a concise exposition of his views 
on logic and physics, 

Idea, a philosophical term denoting 
“sense”, “meaning”, “essence”, and 
closely connected with the categories 
of thinking and being. In the history 
of philosophy the category I. is used 
in different senses. When an I. is re- 
garded only as existing in the mind 
it denotes: (1) a sensory image that 
arises in the mind as a reflection of 
sensory objects (see Realism, Naive); 
(2) “sense” or “essence” of things 
reducible to sensations and impres- 
sions of the subject or to the creative 
principle which gives being to the 
Universe (see Idealism, Subjective). 
In some philosophical systems I. also 
denoted the materialist principle. De- 
mocritus (q.v.), for example, called 
his atoms “ideas”. In systems of ob- 
jective idealism (q.v.) the I. is the 
objectively existing essence of all things 
(see Objective Idea). In Hegel’s (q.v.) 
philosophy, for example, the I.—the 
sense and creator of all things—devel- 
oping purely logically, passes through 
three stages: objective, subjective, and 
absolute. Proper understanding of the 
relation of thinking to being helps 
solve the question of I. This question 
has been scientifically and consist- 
ently elaborated only in dialectical 
materialism, which regards I. as a 
reflection of objective reality. At the 
same time it stresses the reverse in- 
fluence of I. on the development of 
material reality with the object of 
transforming it. I. is also understood 
as a form, a method of cognition, the 
purpose of which is to formulate the 
generalised theoretical principle ex- 
plaining the essence, the law of 
phenomena. Such, for example, is 











Ideal 


the idea of the materiality of the world, 
the dual corpuscular-wave nature of 
substance and field, and so on. 

Ideal 1. Social I., a conception 
of a perfect social system correspond- 
ing to the economic and political in- 
terests of a social group, the ultimate 
goal of that group’s aspirations and 
activity. The S.I. is attainable only 
if it reflects the objective tendencies 
of social development. The S.I. of the 
proletariat is the establishment of 
communism, a highly organised so- 
ciety of free and socially conscious 
members, in which the principle “from 
each according to his ability, to each 
according to his needs” will prevail. 
The S.I. of the bourgeoisie—recon- 
ciliation of classes and removal of 
anarchy in production, while preserv- 
ing private ownership, social inequal- 
ity and exploitation—is a utopia. 
2. Ethical I., traits of a character, 
its moral qualities and corresponding 
behaviour considered as a model of 
moral perfection. E.I. reflects the so- 
cio-economic condition of a class and 
conforms to its criterion of morality 
and the social ideal. The E.I. of the 
working class contains such traits as 
collectivism, comradely mutual as- 
sistance, internationalism, humaneness, 
a high sense of social duty, truthful- 
ness, modesty, etc. 3. Aesthetical 1., 
the free, fullest, all-round harmonious 
development of the physical and spir- 
itual capabilities of the individual 
possible in given concrete historical 
conditions. It is reflected in the ideas 
of a given class or people, especially 
synthesised in typical artistic images. 
The A.I. is historical, but in the course 
of man’s aesthetical development it 
acquires the significance of a standard 
and model and is an objective criterion 
in the assessment of the beautiful in 
life and art. Pre-Marxist doctrines 
deduced the A.I. from speculative 
principles, unrelated to work and so- 
cio-political activity. Nevertheless, 
alongside the historical limitations in 
certain aspects, the A.I. of past epochs 
(ancient Greece, the Renaissance), con- 
tained some general human elements 
of the human personality, realised to 
a certain extent in those epochs. The 


— 202 — 


Idealisation 


A.I. of communism is a higher and 
qualitatively new stage in the aesthet- 
ical development of mankind. It is 
based on the all-round integral develop- 
ment of the creative powers of each 
man, who harmoniously combines spir- 
itual wealth, moral purity and phys- 
ical perfection. 

Ideal, The, a characteristic of human 
consciousness based on its epistemo- 
logical contrast to the material, to mat- 
ter. Consciousness, the mind, is ideal 
because it is a reflection of the material 
world in subjective images, concepts, 
ideas. The meaning and sense of images 
and language, with the help of which 
an ideal reflection of reality is achieved, 
are not something material, although 
the mind functions only with the 
help of definite material means and 
processes (practical activity of society, 
physiology of the central nervous sys- 
tem, signal means of communication 
through language, etc.). The mind, 
operating not with things themselves, 
but only with their images, meaning 
and sense which act as “substitutes” 
of things, as their models, can reflect 
the essence of real things, study ob- 
jective Jaws and, basing itself on them, 
create designs of a not yet existent 
future. The mind can also produce 
illusory ideas and concepts which 
distort objective reality. That is why 
scientific cognition must constantly 
counterpose and compare its knowl- 
edge of objects with the objects them- 
selves to ascertain how exactly and 
fully our knowledge reflects objective 
reality, in other words, how true our 
knowledge is. 

Idealisation, an act of thought as- 
sociated with the formation of some 
abstract objects which cannot be real- 
ised or created in practice experiment- 
ally. Idealised objects are cases of 
extremes of certain real objects; they’ 
serve as a means for the scientific analy- 
sis of the real objects and a basis 
for constructing theories about them; 
they ultimately act as reflections of 
objective things, processes and phe- 
nomena. The following concepts are 
examples of idealised objects: “point”, 
“straight line”, “actual infinity” in 
mathematics; “absolutely solid body”, 





Idealism 


— 203 — 


Idealism 





“jdeal gas”, “absolutely black body” 
in physics; “ideal solution” in physical 
chemistry. Together with abstraction 
(q.v.), with which it is closely associat- 
ed, I. is a powerful means of cognis- 
ing the laws of reality. 

Idealism (Gk. image, concept), a 
philosophical trend diametrically op- 
posed to materialism in the solution 
of the fundamental question of phi- 
losophy (see Philosophy, Fundamental 
Question of). I. proceeds from the 
principle that the spiritual, non-ma- 
terial, is primary and the material is 
secondary, which brings it closer to 
the ideas of religion on the finiteness 
of the world in time and space and its 
creation by God. I. regards conscious- 
ness in isolation from nature, as a 
result of which it inevitably misleads 
human consciousness and the cogni- 
tive process and, as a rule, advocates 
scepticism (q.v.) and agnosticism (q.v.). 
To materialist determinism (q.v.) con- 
sistent I. counterposes the teleological 
point of view (see Teleology). Marxism- 
Leninism, in contrast to metaphysical 
and vulgar materialism, which regards 
I. merely as an absurdity and nonsense, 
stresses the existence of epistemologi- 
cal roots in any concrete form of I. (See 
Lenin, Vol. 38, p. 363.) As theoretical 
thinking develops, even the most ele- 
mentary abstraction offers the possi- 
bility of I.—the divorcement of con- 
cepts from their objects. This possi- 
bility turns into reality only in a class 
society where I. arises as a science- 
like continuation of the fantastic con- 
cepts of mythology and religion. In 
contrast to materialism, I. is usually 
rooted socially in the world outlook 
of conservative and reactionary sec- 
tions and classes interested neither in 
the correct reflection of being, nor in 
the development of the productive 
forces, nor in a radical reconstruction 
of social relations. I. turns into an 
absolute the inevitable difficulties in 
the development of human knowledge 
and thereby retards scientific progress. 
At the same time some idealist phi- 
losophers, by raising new epistemologi- 
cal questions and seeking to under- 
stand the cognitive process, gave an 
impulse to the study of a number of 


philosophical problems (for example, 
in the dialectics of concepts Hegel 
“surmised” the dialectics of things). 
Marxism-Leninism divides the va- 
Tieties of I. into two groups: objective 
idealism (q.v.) which takes as the 
basis of reality a personal or imperson- 
al spirit, some kind of superindividual 
mind; subjective idealism (q.v.) which 
construes the world on the basis of the 
distinctions of individual conscious- 
ness. But the difference between sub- 
jective and objective I. is not abso- 
lute. Many objective idealist systems 
contain elements of subjective I.; on 
the other hand, subjective idealists, 
in an effort to get away from solip- 
sism (q.v.) often adopt the position of 
objective I. Objective idealist doctrines 
first arose in the East (see Vedanta, 
Confucianism). The philosophy of Pla- 
to (q.v.) was a classical form of ob- 
jective I. Connection with religious 
and mythological ideas was typical 
of Plato’s objective I., and of ancient 
I. in general. This connection was 
extended at the beginning of our era, 
during the crisis of ancient society, 
when Neo-Platonism (q.v.) developed. 
The latter became closely intertwined 
also with extreme mysticism (q.v.). 
This feature became even more pro- 
nounced during the Middle Ages, when 
philosophy was completely subordi- 
nated to Christian and Muslim theology 
(see St. Augustine and Thomas Aqui- 
nas). After Thomas Aquinas, the main 
concept of objective idealistic and 
scholastic philosophy became the con- 
cept of the non-material form, treated 
as the purposeful element which ful- 
fils the will of preternatural God who 
wisely planned the world, finite in 
space and time. Beginning with Des- 
cartes (q.v.), subjective I. increasingly 
developed in bourgeois philosophy as 
individualistic motives grew stronger. 
The epistemological part of Berke- 
ley’s (q.v.) system and Hume’s (q.v.) 
philosophy became the classical ex- 
pression of subjective I. In the phi- 
losophy of Kant (q.v.), materialist 
assertion of the independence of 
“things-in-themselves” from the sub- 
ject’s consciousness was combined, 
on the one hand, with the subjective 





Idealism 


idealist thesis of a priori forms of con- 
sciousness, a thesis providing a basis 
for agnosticism, and, on the other, 
with the objective idealist recognition 
of the superindividual nature of these 
forms. Subsequently, the subjective 
idealist tendency prevailed in the phi- 
losophy of Fichte (q.v.) while the ob- 
jective idealist tendency, in the phi- 
losophy of Schelling (q.v.) and espe- 
cially Hegel (q.v.), the author of an 
all-embracing system of dialectical I. 
The evolution of I. after the disinte- 
gration of the Hegelian school was a 
result of the bourgeoisie abandoning 
its progressive social role and fighting 
against the philosophy of dialectical 
materialism. There appeared many 
teachings standing “between” or even 
allegedly “above” materialism and I. 
(see Positivism; Neo-Realism). Agnostic 
and irrationalist trends, disbelief in 
human reason and the future of man- 
kind grew stronger. Capitalism’s gener- 
al crisis has led to the spread of such 
forms of I. as existentialism (q.v.) 
and neo-positivism (q.v.). The same 
cause has led to the revival of a num- 
ber of schools of Catholic philosophy, 
Neo-Thomism (q.v.) in the first place. 
These are the three main trends of 
1l., in the mid-1920s, but the fragmen- 
tation of I. into small epigonic schools 
continues to this day. The main social 
causes for the “diversity” of forms 
of contemporary 1. (see Phenomenology; 
Realism, Critical; Personalism; Prag- 
matism; Philosophy of Life) are the dis- 
integration of bourgeois consciousness 
and the desire to consolidate the il- 
lusory “independence” of idealist phi- 
losophy from the political forces of 
imperialism. On the other hand, an 
opposite process is under way, the rap- 
prochement and even “hybridisation” 
of various trends of contemporary I. 
on the basis of their common anti- 
communist stand. The scientific ground- 
work for a critique of the contem- 
porary forms of I. were laid by Lenin 
in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism 
(q.v.), in which he gave a Marxist 
analysis not only of the Machist va- 
riety of positivism, but also of the 
main content of all bourgeois philoso- 
phy in the epoch of imperialism. 


— 204 — 


Idealism, Physical 


Idealism, Objective, one of the main 
varieties of idealism (q.v.). It holds 
that the spirit is primary and matter 
secondary, derivative. As distinct from 
subjective idealism (q.v.), it regards 
as the prime source of being not the 
personal, human mind, but some ob- 
jective other-world consciousness, the 
“absolute spirit”, “universal reason”, 
etc. Plato (q.v.) was the greatest ob- 
jective idealist of antiquity and Hegel 
(q.v.) its classical representative in 
the 19th century. In contemporary 
philosophy O.I. is represented by Neo- 
Thomism (q.v.), personalism (q.v.), 
and other trends. O.I. as a rule merges 
with theology (q.v.) and furnishes a 
peculiar philosophical basis of religion. 

Idealism, Physical, the name given 
by Lenin in his Materialism and Em- 
pirio-Criticism to the subjective-ideal- 
ist views in modern physics. The break- 
up of old physical ideas associated 
with the discoveries at the turn of the 
century (see Radioactivity; Relativ- 
ity, Theory of) led to a crisis in phys- 
ics and brought to the fore two fac- 
tors in the development of this science: 
its mathematisation and the principle 
of relativity of knowledge. Lenin dem- 
onstrated that these factors were 
responsible for the spread of P.I. among 
scientists who, because of their social 
position, did not know dialectical 
materialism. First, the disappearance 
of sensory visuality in studying the 
most simple objects of physics and their 
description in abstract mathematical 
terms led to the erroneous conclusion 
that “matter vanished” and only math- 
ematical equations remained. Second, 
the collapse of customary concepts, 
coupled with ignorance of the dialec- 
tics of absolute and relative truth, 
led scientists to assert the “pure rela- 
tivity” of man’s knowledge, to deny 
objective truth and ultimately, to 
adhere to idealism and agnosticism. 
Contemporary P.I. seeks to explain the 
characteristic features of modern phys- 
ics by the properties of the subject 
(observer) who describes the world 
with the help of a priori mathematics 
and measurements by instruments. 
This explanation ultimately rests on 
the so-called principle of observabil- 








Idealism, Physiological 


ity, according to which a theory must 
contain nothing which does not cor- 
respond to the subject’s direct sensory 
experience. As a result, P.I. denies 
the objectivity of knowledge and there- 
by hampers the development of science. 
But the progress of science refutes 
P.I. and confirms the need for a union 
of physics with the philosophy of 
dialectical materialism. 

Idealism, Physiological, a subjective 
idealist theory current among biolog- 
ists and medical men in the mid-19th 
century. It was founded by Johannes 
Müller. Feuerbach was the first to 
use the term “P.I.”. The untenability 
of this doctrine, revealed by Lenin 
in his Materialism and Empirio-Criti- 
cism (q.v.) arises from its overestimat- 
ing the dependence of the content of 
sensations on the activity of the sense- 
organs. Sensations were regarded not 
as an image of the objectively real 
world, but as a symbol of it. Accord- 
ing to Miller, the colour spectrum, the 
tembre of sound, and the distinctions 
of taste and smell are determined only 
by the structural and functional feat- 
ures of the corresponding sense-organs. 
Supporters of P.I. raised to an absolute 
the relative independence of a number 
of physiological reactions in the organ- 
ism vis-a-vis the intensity and quality 
of the external stimuli. The organism 
was thus put in contrast to the external 
environment, which was considered as 
“the external switch” of the autonom- 
ously acting sense-organs. Theories 
close to P.I. are now current among 
some bourgeois natural scientists. These 
include psycho-somatics (q.v.), the 
so-called stress concept (q.v.), holism 
(q.v.), various doctrines of autogenesis 
(q.v.) and conditionalism (q.v.). 

Idealism, Subjective, a philosophical 
trend, according to which the objective 
world cannot be regarded as existing 
independently of man’s cognitive ac- 
tivity and means of cognition. Con- 
sistent subjective idealists end up in 
solipsism (q.v.). The classical expo- 
nents of S.I. were Berkeley, Fichte, 
Mach (qq.v.). The modern varieties of 
S.I. are pragmatism, operationism, 
neo-positivism, existentialism (qq.v.), 
etc. S.I.’s theory of knowledge is based 


— 205 — 


Identity 


on an absolutisation of the subjective 
sides of the real process of cognition. 
Actually, however, the fact that cog- 
nition is subjective does not deny its 
objective content and source. Practice 
furnishes proof of the objective nature 
of our knowledge. At the same time, 
the subjective and the objective can 
be contraposed only within the frame- 
work of the fundamental question 
(q.v.) of philosophy (see Idealism; 
Idealism, Objective). 

Idealistic Understanding of History, 
a teaching which regards ideas, theo- 
ries, people’s consciousness, etc., as 
the main force of social development. 
Its rule over science was undivided 
prior to Marx. The development of 
society was explained either by the 
activity of an “absolute idea”, “uni- 
versal reason”, superindividual mind 
(for example, Hegel, q.v.) or the activ- 
ity of an outstanding personality (for 
example, Young Hegelians, Narod- 
niks, qq.v.). Pre-Marxist materialist 
cee also did not go beyond the 
ounds of these ideas. The 18th century 
French materialists held that the course 
of history depends on the views of 
people, on the spread of knowledge. 

euerbach (q.v.) associated periods 
in history with changes in religion, 
and so on. Contemporary reactionary 
sociology is completely dominated by 
idealism, denial of the existence of 
objective laws governing the develop- 
ment of society, voluntarism (q.v.), 
different variants of racialism (q.v.) 
and Malthusianism (q.v.). It seeks 
either to spread pessimism and dis- 
belief in historical progress or to divert 
the attention of the people from strug- 
gle for the revolutionary transforma- 
tion of social relations. Historical ma- 
terialism (q.v.) is the scientific theory 
of social development. 

Identically True Statements, prop- 
ositions, expressions or formulas of 
the logical calculi (q.v.), which are 
true given any truth-values of their 
variables, All the laws of formal logic 
are true. Accordingly, identically false 
propositions or formulas are false given 
any truth-values of their variables. 

Identity, a category expressing the 
equality and similarity of an object 








Identity, Law of 


or phenomenon with itself or the equal- 
ity of several objects. Objects A and 
B are identical if and only if all the 
properties (and relations) which char- 
acterise A, also characterise B, and 
vice versa (Leibniz’s law). But since 
material reality undergoes a constant 
change, there cannot be objects abso- 
lutely identified with themselves even 
in their essential, basic properties. I. 
is concrete, not abstract, i.e., it con- 
tains inherent distinctions, contradic- 
tions which are resolved in the process 
of development due to given condi- 
tions. The very identification of objects 
requires that they be distinguished 
beforehand; on the other hand, various 
objects often need to be identified (for 
instance, with a view to classifying 
them). This means that I. is insepar- 
ably connected with distinction and 
is relative. Every I. of things is tem- 
porary and transient, while their de- 
velopment and change are absolute. 
The exact sciences, however, make 
use of the abstract I., i.e., abstracted 
from the development of things, in 
conformity with the afore-mentioned 
Leibniz’s law, since idealisation and 
simplification of reality are possible 
and necessary in certain conditions 
during the process of cognition. The 
logical law of identity is also formu- 
lated with similar limitations. But ex- 
tension of the application of this law 
to reality, which is a feature of meta- 
physics, leads to the conclusion that 
things are invariable, constant. 
Identity, Law of, a law of logic, 
according to which every meaningful 
expression (concept, judgement) must 
be used in reasoning in the same mean- 
ing. The premiss of its implementation 
is the possibility to identify or distin- 
guish between the objects which are 
the subject of judgement. In actual 
fact, however, this identification and 
this distinction are not always possible 
(see Identity). For this reason L.I. 
implies some idealisation of the actual 
character of the objects which are 
discussed in a given judgement (ab- 
straction from their development and 
changes), this being determined by 
the relative stability of things and 
phenomena in the objective world. 


— 206 — 


Ideology 


L.I. as described above must be dis- 
tinguished from the formulas of the 
logical calculi which are a formal 
analogy of L.I. These formulas are 
as follows: ADA and A=A in the 
propositional calculus, q.v. (they read: 
“If A then A”, “A is equivalent to 
A”); wx(F(x)>> F(x)) in the predicate 
calculus, q.v. (it reads: “For every 
object x in the domain in question 
it is correct that if x has the property 
of F, then x has this property”), and 
others. Such formulas are identically 
true statements, or  tautologies 
(q.v.) and are also usually known 
as 


Ideology, a system of views and ideas: 
political, legal, ethical, aesthetical, 
religious, philosophical. I. is part 
of the superstructure (see Basis and 
ar feu ana and as such ultimately 
reflects economic relations. In a so- 
ciety with antagonistic classes ideo- 
logical struggle corresponds to the class 
struggle. I. may be scientific or un- 
scientific, a true or false reflection of 
teality. The interests of reactionary 
classes nurture a false I., the interests 
of progressive, revolutionary classes 
help shape a scientific I. Marxism- 
Leninism is a truly scientific I., ex- 
pressing the vital interests of the work- 
ing class and the overwhelming major- 
ity of mankind striving for peace, 
freedom and progress. The develop- 
ment of I. is determined by the econ- 
omy, but I. possesses a certain relative 
independence. This is expressed in the 
impossibility of directly explaining 
the content of I. by economics and also 
in a certain unevenness in economic 
and ideological development. Moreover, 
the relative independence of 1. is man- 
ifested more in the operation of in- 
ternal laws of ideological development 
which are not directly reducible to 
economics, in the ideological spheres 
most removed from the economic basis. 
The relative independence of I. is 
explained by the fact that ideological 
evolution is affected indirectly by a 
number of extra-economic factors: in- 
ternal continuity in the development 
of I., the personal role of individual 
ideologists, the mutual influence of 
various forms of ideology, etc. 








Illusion 


Illusion, distorted perception of real- 
ity. We distinguish two types of I. 
One is caused by unusual external 
conditions in which the objects are 
perceived; in such cases the physio- 
logical mechanisms function normally. 
The other is determined by the path- 
ological functioning of physiological 
mechanisms taking part in perception. 
Idealist philosophers frequently util- 
ise I. as an argument to prove that our 
perception of the outside world is 
inadequate. But the very fact that we 
are able to single out I. as a separate 
class of phenomena and oppose them 
to adequate perceptions attests to the 
falsity of the agnostic “conclusions”. 
I. should be distinguished from hal- 
lucinations which, unlike I., arise in 
the absence of the external objects. 

Image, Artistic, a specific method 
employed in art for reproducing ob- 
jective reality, in a living, concrete, 
sensuous, directly perceivable form in 
terms of a definite aesthetic ideal (q.v.). 
The Marxist-Leninist theory of reflec- 
tion (q.v.) provides the epistemological 
basis for the correct understanding 
of the essence of A.J. A.I. has a number 
of distinctions which differentiate it 
from scientific concepts, political ideas 
or moral principles. It represents an 
inseverable, interconnected unity of 
the sensuous and logical, concrete and 
abstract, immediate and mediated, 
individual and universal, accidental 
and necessary, external and internal, 
part and whole, appearance and es- 
sence, form and content. The dialec- 
tical unity of these opposite aspects, 
effected by methods proper to each 
art, produces images of characters, 
events and circumstances expressing 
definite aesthetic ideas and sentiments 
and conveying lofty ideas and emotions. 
Imagination plays an exceptional part 
in creating A.I. 

Imagination, the ability to create new 
sensual or thought images in the human 
consciousness on the basis of the con- 
version of impressions gathered from 
reality but not encountered in the real- 
ity given at a particular moment. A 
man acquires I. through work, which 
without I. could be neither purposeful 
nor fruitful. Psychology classifies I. 


— 207 — 


Immanence Philosophy 


according to the degree of pre-intention 
(voluntary and involuntary I.), of 
activity (reproductive and creative 1.), 
and generalisation (scientific, inven- 
tive, artistic, religious, etc.). In Lenin’s 
words, “in the simplest generalisation, 
in the most elementary general idea 
(‘table’ in general) there is a certain 
bit of fantasy”. (Vol. 38, p. 372.) 
The scientist’s I. helps him to know 
the world by evolving hypotheses, 
model concepts, ideas for experiments. 
The function of the I. is particularly 
important in creative art. Here it 
serves not only as a means of generali- 
sation, but as a force that calls to life 
aesthetically significant images, ex- 
pressing the artist’s knowledge of real- 
ity. The ideal, as the image of what 
should be, and the wish, as the image 
of what is desired, are both products 
of the I. Unlike vague dreams that 
lead man away from reality, I. is con- 
nected with the needs of society and 
helps us to know life and change it. 

Immanence (Lat. to remain in), one 
of the central concepts of traditional 
speculative philosophy (q.v.) and the 
modern idealist schools. The term “I” 
in this acception dates back to Aris- 
totle (q.v.); in its literal sense it was 
first used in medieval scholasticism 
(q.v.). The contemporary understand- 
ing of I. was given by Kant (q.v.). 1., 
in contrast to transcendent (q.v.), 
denotes the presence of a “thing-in- 
itself’. Immanent criticism is criti- 
cism of an idea or-system of ideas which 
proceeds from the idea’s or system’s 
own premises. An immanent history 
of philosophy is an idealist interpre- 
tation of philosophy as a process gov- 
erned solely by its own laws and not 
subject to the influence of the economy, 
class struggle and social conscious- 
ness. 

Immanence Philosophy, a subjective 
idealist trend in philosophy at the 
end of the 19th century. Its most 
outstanding proponents were Schuppe, 
Schubert-Soldern, Rehmke and Lec- 
lair. Mach and Avenarius (qq.v.) ad- 
mitted their eH with this trend. 
This school had its followers in Russia 
(see Lossky). The immanentists crit- 
icised Kant’s “thing-in-itself”, q.v., 





Immediate Inference 


— 208 — 


(criticism from the right). They de- 
manded a reversion from Kantianism 
to Berkeley (q.v.) and Hume (q.v.). 
The main postulates of this philosophy 
are: “only that which is the object 
of thought exists”, being is immanent 
in consciousness, the object is insep- 
arably connected with the subject. 
To avoid solipsism (q.v.), the imma- 
nentists (with the exception of Schub- 
ert-Soldern who openly admitted ad- 
herence to the positions of “theoreti- 
cal cognitive solipsism”) introduced 
the concept of “consciousness in gener- 
al” or “generic consciousness” sup- 
posedly existing independently of the 
human brain. In Materialism and Em- 
pirio-Criticism (q.v.) Lenin gave a 
profound criticism of I.P. and its direct 
connection with religion. (Lenin, Vol. 
14, pp. 212-13.) The immanentists’ 
rejection of. the theory of reflection, 
their definition of cognition as the 
“entry of things into consciousness” 
were subsequently taken over by neo- 
Tealism (q.v.). By the beginning of 
the 20th century, this school had broken 
up into many small trends. 
Immediate Inference, in traditional 
logic, a judgement in which the con- 
clusion follows immediately from one 
premiss alone. I.I. includes contra- 
position (q.v.), conclusions in accord- 
ance with the square of opposition 
(q.v.), and others. I.I. is contrasted 
to an implicative inference, which 
consists of two or more premisses. 
Immediate Knowledge, or intuition 
(q.v.), knowledge gained without 
proof, a direct contemplation of truth, 
as distinct from discursive (q.v.) or 
demonstrative knowledge, which is 
always mediated not only by data of 
experience, but also by logical infer- 
ence. As the theory of knowledge 
developed, two kinds of I.K. were 
differentiated: sensory and intellectual 
(sensuous intuition and intellectual 
intuition), which in metaphysical doc- 
trines were sharply opposed to each 
other. Prior to Kant, sensuous I.K. 
was always regarded as knowledge 
arising from experience. Kant (q.v.) 
asserted that in addition to I.K., which 
results from experience, there are also 
a priori forms of sensuous I.K. (space 


Imperialism 


and time). Kant rejected the possi- 
bility of intellectual intuition by the 
human mind, admitting, however, its 
possibility for a mind higher than 
human. Jacobi (q.v.) considered I.K. 
the highest form of knowledge; he con- 
sidered “emotion”, and in later works 
“treason”, to be the organ of such knowl- 
edge. Inteltectual I.K. was recog- 
nised in antiquity by Plato (q.v.) and 
Plotinus (q.v.); in the 17th century by 
the rationalists Descartes, Spinoza, and 
Leibniz (qq.v.); at the turn of the 19th 
century, by the German idealists and 
philosophers of romanticism, Fichte 
(q.v.), Schelling (q.v.), and Schlegel; 
in the 20th century by Husserl (q.v.). 
Under intellectual intuition they un- 
derstood the ability of the mind to 
“see” the truth with the “eyes of the 
mind”, directly, without proof; for 
example, axioms of geometry were 
regarded as such truths. In the 20th 
century, a view arose in the formalist 
trend of geometry, identifying axioms 
with definitions and depriving them 
of the nature of direct proof. Hegel 
(q.v.) criticised the early theories of 
I.K. as undialectical. He saw in I.K. 
the unity of direct and mediated knowl- 
edge. But Hegel wrongly considered 
the self-developing thought itself as 
the basis of this unity. Dialectical 
materialism considers that the unity 
of direct and mediated knowledge is 
based on practice: maxims are mediat- 
ed by practice and thinking conditioned 
by practice, and they, by virtue 
of repeated reproduction, become di- 
rectly truthful. 

Imperialism, the highest, monopo- 
listic and last stage of capitalism which 
began at the turn of the century. In his 
Imperialism, the Highest Stage of 
Capitalism (1916) Lenin gave a sys- 
tematic and detailed exposition of the 
theory of I. He analysed the economy 
of the capitalist countries, singled 
out the economic essence of I. and in- 
dicated its five main features: (1) in 
the epoch of imperialism production 
and capital are concentrated to such 
a degree that they give rise to monop- 
olies, which play the decisive part 
in the economic life of capitalist 
states; (2) monopoly banking capital 








Imperialism 


merges with monopoly industrial cap- 
ital, forming finance capital, the finan- 
cial oligarchy; (3) the export of capital, 
as distinct from the export of goods, 
acquires particularly great importance; 
(4) the process of monopolisation brings 
about the formation of international 
monopolies which divide the world 
among themselves economically; (5) 
the territorial division of the world 
between a handful of the biggest capi- 
talist powers is completed. With the 
transition of capitalism to the monop- 
oly stage it turns into decaying, par- 
asitic capitalism. Lenin character- 
ised the period of I. as the eve of the 
socialist revolution. The October So- 
cialist Revolution, which broke one 
of the weakest links in the chain of 
I., signified the beginning of the down- 
fall of I. The subsequent history of 
world capitalism and the revolution- 
ary struggle of the working class has 
fully confirmed Lenin’s analysis. The 
world imperialist system is torn asun- 
der by extremely acute contradictions, 
economic crises are becoming ever 
deeper, unemployment is rising and, 
moreover, becoming chronic. Militar- 
ism is devouring vast natural and 
manpower resources, it is exhausting 
and ruining the nations and preparing 
new devastating wars. I. is the great- 
est oppressor of nations. At the present 
stage, monopoly capitalism has turned 
into state-monopoly capitalism, which 
combines the power of the monopolies 
with the power of the state to inten- 
sify the exploitation of the people and 
enrich the monopolies. The formation 
of the world socialist system has ag- 
gravated the crisis of I. Anti-imperial- 
ist, national liberation revolutions are 
developing with ever greater force. 
The world colonial system has collapsed. 
Contradictions between labour and 
capital are mounting. Capitalist polit- 
ics and ideology are in the grip of a 
profound crisis. The Programme of 
the CPSU gives a comprehensive 
analysis of contemporary J. “Imperial- 
ism,” the Programme states, “has 
entered the period of decline and col- 
lapse. An inexorable process of decay 
has seized capitalism from top to bot- 
tom—its economic and political sys- 


14-1682 


Impressionism 


tem, its politics and ideology. Imperial- 
ism has for ever lost its power over the 
bulk of mankind. The main content, 
main trend and main features of the 
historical development of mankind 
are being determined by the world 
socialist system, by the forces fighting 
against imperialism, for the socialist 
reorganisation of society.” 
Implication, the logical operation 
which forms a complex proposition 
from two propositions (for example, 
p and q) through a logical connective 
conforming to the conjunctive “if ... 
then”: if p then g. In an implicative 
proposition we distinguish the anteced- 
ent preceded by the word “if” from 
the consequent which follows the word 
“then”. Mathematical logic proceeds 
from the concept of material I. (ex- 
pressed in the form pq or p-4q), 
which is determined through the func- 
tion of truth-value. I. is false only if 
the antecedent (p) is true and the con- 
sequent (q) is false, and true in all 
other cases. This concept proved to be 
quite effective for the logical proof 
of mathematical statements. But log- 
icians, who treat the problem of I. 
as one of formalised logical sequence 
have discerned in it a number of prop- 
erties (for example, “a true proposi- 
tion follows from any proposition”, 
“of any two propositions one implies 
the other”) which sound paradoxical 
if we require I. to express the proper- 
ties of logical sequence in sense, i.e., 
some connection in meaning between 
the antecedent and the consequent, 
as a condition of truth. In view of 
this, C. I. Lewis, utilising the concept 


of modal logic (q.v.), gave a defini- 4 


tion of a strict I. (expressed in the 
form p ~q): it is impossible for p to 
be true and q false (p necessarily im- 
plies q). But Lewis’ system also gives 
rise to its own “paradoxes” similar 
to the case of material I. There are 
other methods of eliminating these 
“paradoxes” (for example, Ackermann’s 
concept of a strong I.). 

Impressionism, a method applied 
in art at the end of the 19th and early 
20th century. Derived its name from 
Monet’s painting “Impression” (1872). 
After the pictorial arts (Sisley, Pis- 














Indeterminism 


sarro, Renoir, Degas, Rodin, Lieber- 
mann, Korovin, and others), I. spread 
to music (Debussy, Ravel), literature 
(Goncourt brothers, Mallarmé, Verlaine, 
Hauptmann, Rilke, Schnitzler, 
Oscar Wilde, Knut Hamsun, and oth- 
ers) and the theatre. In their struggle 
against officially canonised art stand- 
ards, the French impressionists de- 
manded truthful portrayal of the artist’s 
vision of the world and direct contact 
with nature. In their finest works they 
have to a certain extent achieved their 
aim of extending the boundaries of 
portrayal, in particular of vindicating 
plein-air in painting. But their limit- 
ed political and aesthetic outlook led 
to subjectivism in their art. Reproduc- 
tion of the changing effects of air and 
light, the desire to fix constantly 
varying impressions became an end 
in itself and made I. incapable of 
penetrating the essential aspects of 
life, of reflecting processes and con- 
flicts typical of the epoch. It is indic- 
ative that the French impressionists, 
contemporaries of the Paris Commune, 
have almost no paintings of deep social 
content, and the landscape is their 
favourite genre. The best works of 
L, extolling the beauty of the world, 
still have artistic significance in our 
day. 

Indeterminism, see Determinism and 
Indeterminism. 

Indian Philosophy In India phi- 
losophy arose on the basis of one of the 
oldest human civilisations; its tradi- 
tions, dating back to the 10th-15th 
centuries B.C., have been preserved 
to our days. I.P. is usually divided into 
four periods: (1) the Vedic period; (2) 
the classical period or Brahman-Bud- 
dhist period, from the 6th century B.C. 
to the 10th century; (3) post-classical 
or Hinduistic—l0th-18th centuries; (4) 
new and current I.P. The very first 
memorials of Indian thought, the Ve- 
das (q.v.) together with hymns to the 
numerous gods, contain the concept 
of a single world order—the concept 
of Rita. The Upanishads (q.v.), reli- 
gious philosophical commentaries to 
the Vedas, contain ideas which largely 
shaped all subsequent development of 
I.P. (unity of Brahman, the world- 


— 210 — 


Indian Philosophy, 


soul, and Atman, the individual soul; 
immortality of the soul which is rein- 
carnated according to the law of kar- 
ma, or retribution). Besides mystic re- 
ligious idealistic doctrines, the Upani- 
shads reflected the views of the ancient 
materialists and atheists who denied 
the authority of the Vedas and the life 
of the soul after death and regarded 
one of t material elements—fire, 
water, air, space or time—as the pri- 
mary foundation of the world. In 
the classical period, I.P. developed 
under the strong influence of the Vedas 
and Upanishads. Since the days of the 
medieval Indian philosopher Madha- 
vacharya (16th century), it has become 
a tradition to divide all philosophical 
schools into orthodox, which recog- 
nised the authority of the Vedas, and 
non-orthodox, which rejected the in- 
fallibility of the Vedas. The Mimāmsā, 
Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaiseshika, 
and Vedanta (qq. v.) are the principal 
orthodox schools. The non-orthodox 
schools include the Buddhist, Jainist 
and numerous materialist and atheist 
schools, the most widespread being 
the Charvakas (Lokayata, q.v.). Al- 
though this division has historical 
grounds, it conceals the true mainspring 
in the development of philosophy: the 
struggle between materialism and ideal- 
ism. Both Buddhist and Brahman 
sources denounce -above all the ma- 
terialist schools. Samkara, the most 
outstanding Vedanta philosopher, ve- 
hemently attacked both the materialist 
ideas of the Sdamkhya school and the 
empiricism of the Nydya and Vaiée- 
shika. He dissociated himself from the 
common sense of the Nyaya and was 
close to the idealist and mystic schools 
of Buddhism (q.v.). Within the bounds 
of Buddhism the idealist Madhyamika 
and the Yogacara schools fought against 
the materialist teaching of the Therav- 
dins and Sarvastivadins. Bitter conflict 
between different philosophical schools 
brought into being the art of dispute 
and the science of the sources of knowl- 
edge and authentic knowledge—logic. 
First information about Indian logic 
may be gleaned from early Buddhist 
sources (3rd century B.C.); subsequent- 
ly, logic was developed in the Nyaya 





; 





Indirect Proof 


school and tater in the treatises of 
Buddhist logicians Dignāga, Dharma- 
kirti, and others. Towards the end of 
the classical period, Jainism (q.v.) was 
losing its influence, while Buddhism 
was being ousted from India. In the 
Hinduistic period the Vishnu and Siva 
systems of Hinduism (q.v.) were de- 
veloped. They taught that the Brah- 
man of the Upanishads is the God 
Siva, or Vishnu. Tantrism and Shak- 
tism spread in the 5th-7th centuries. 
Under the influence of Islam, various 
monotheistic doctrines (Kabirpanhism 
and Sikhism) arose in the 10th century. 
In recent times philosophy in India 
developed under the influence of the 
people’s national liberation struggle. 
The nature of the new I.P. is deter- 
mined by the fact that the movement 
for national liberation was headed 
by the Indian bourgeoisie, whose ideol- 
ogists followed the road of reviving 
national, religious and philosophical 
traditions. As a result, there arose 
modernised theism, Brahma Samaj 
and Arya Samaj, pantheism and ideal- 
ism, the doctrines of Tagore (q.v.), 
Gandhi (q.v.) and Ghose (q.v.). Con- 
temporary Indian philosophers (Sar- 
vepalli Radhakrishnan and others) ad- 
vocate a merger of Western science and 
technology with the “spiritual values” 
of the East. Gandhi’s doctrine of non- 
violence and so-called democratic so- 
cialism are now the prevailing ideology 
in India. 

Indirect Proof, a form of logic 
proof (q.v.) distinguished by its meth- 
od of rationalising a proposition. 
Unlike direct proof, the truth of the 
proposition to be proved indirectly 
is rationalised by demonstrating the 
falsity of certain premisses. The latter 
stand in such a relationship with the 
proposition to be proved that their 
falsity necessarily implies the truth 
of the proposition. There are several 
types of indirect proof. Divisory I.P. 
has the following pattern. A number 
of assumptions are examined, which, 
taken together, exhaust the number of 
assertions possible in the given case; 
the falsity of all the assumptions is 
demonstrated, save one, the truth of 
which is thus established. Another 


14° 


— 211 — 


Individual 


ae of I.P. is the apagogic proof 
q.v.). 

Individual 1. A human being 
with his socially determined and in- 
dividually expressed qualities, intel- 
lectual, emotional, and volitional. The 
scientific understanding of the I. 
rests on the Marxist definition of man 
as the sum total of social relations. 
Hence, an individual in this sense 
cannot be the vehicle of inherited 
characteristics but is ultimately de- 
termined by the historically given 
system of society. A society based on 
private ownership of the means of 
production cramps and corrupts the 
development of the I. The establishment 
of socialism opens up the road to the 
all-round development of the individ- 
ual (see All-Round Development, etc.). 
A new type of individual harmoniously 
incorporating spiritual richness, moral 

urity, and physical perfection is 
ormed thanks to the creation of the 
material and technical basis of com- 
munism (see Material, etc.), the de- 
velopment of communist social rela- 
tions and the carrying out of a cultur- 
al revolution (q.v.). 2. In psychology, 
each separate human being with his 
inherent individual peculiarities of 
character, intellect, and emotional 
make-up. The psychological qualities of 
the I. include character, tempera- 
ment, abilities, and also the peculiar 
features of his mental processes. 
Though psychological conditions (emo- 
tional experiences, motives of beha- 
viour, etc.) constantly vary, the psycho- 
logical make-up of the I. remains rela- 
tively stable, this being dependent on 
the relative stability of his conditions 
of life and the typological peculiarities 
of his particular nervous system. 
Changes in the psychological make-up of 
the I. are caused by the changes that 
take place in his life, by the process 
of social education. The I. in this 
sense is the sum total of the inherent 
features and peculiarities of a human 
being through which all external in- 
fluences are refracted. The actions of 
the I. are motivated by his persona] and 
social requirements. The subjective 
element in the I. (emotional experi- 
ences, consciousness, requirements) is 


Individual and Society 


inseparable from the objective rela- 
tions formed between the I. and his 
environment. The I.’s level of develop- 
ment depends on how progressive these 
relations are from the historical point 
of view. 

Individual and Society (their inter- 
relation). The interrelation between the 
I. & S. varies from one historical period 
to another because there is no such 
thing as “society in general”, there 
being in reality only socio-economic 
formations (q.v.), nor any such thing 
as the “individual in general”, the I. 
being always the product of a histori- 
cally given social system. The theory 
of an alleged eternal antagonism be- 
tween the individual and the social 
qualifies as “eternal” what is particu- 
larly characteristic of capitalism and is 
historically transient. Under socialism 
the interrelation between the individ- 
ual and the social is characterised 
by the natural combination of indi- 
vidual and social interests and, ulti- 
mately, complete harmony between 
them. Under socialism and commu- 
nism the source of satisfaction and 
the general direction of personal and 
social interests coincide. Both society 
as a whole and each individual in 
society are interested in technical pro- 
gress, in the constant raising of the 
productivity of labour, in the increas- 
ing satisfaction of the material needs 
and cultural requirements of members 
of society. This coincidence of interests 
of the I. & S. on the basic questions of 
their life does not exclude certain par- 
tial and temporary contradictions that 
arise when individual interest must be 
subordinated to the social interest. 
Success in combining social and in- 
dividual interests depends, on the 
one hand, on the increase in social 
wealth, on the activity of the directing 
organisations, on their correct imple- 
mentation of the Party’s slogan “Ev- 
erything for the sake of man, for the 
benefit of man”; on the other hand it 
depends on each member of society, 
on his conscious service of the inter- 
ests of society. The period of the full- 
scale building of communism signi- 
fies a big step forward in the direction 
of combining the interests of the I. & S. 


— 212 — 





Individual and Universal 


Party and government policy for 
creating the material and technical 
basis of communism in the USSR, 
shaping communist social relations, 
extending socialist democracy, and 
raising the material and cultural well- 
being of the people aims at achieving 
harmony between the I. & S. The road 
charted in the Programme of the CPSU 
is the road to the creation of an asso- 
ciation in which, to use the words of 
Marx and Engels, the free develop- 
ment of each is the condition for the 
free development of all. 

Individual, Particular, and Univer- 
sal, philosophical categories formed in 
the course of the development of cog- 
nition and expressing different objec- 
tive relations in the world, and the 
degree to which we know these rela- 
tions. Objects possess individuality, 
which makes them different from other 
objects, and are, therefore, perceived 
as something individual. Practical ex- 
perience, however, shows that these 
individual objects may have certain 
recurrent features in common. In other 
words, the individual possesses general 
features. General features and proper- 
ties may belong either to a restricted 
group of objects, in which case they 
are merely particular, or they may be 
found in all objects and phenomena, in 
which case they are universal. The 
individual, pa ueniar, and universal 
are inseparably bound up with each 
other; the difference between them 
is relative and they overlap (see Lenin, 
Vol. 38, p. 361). The scientific solution 
of the problem of the relation of the 
universal in consciousness, its analogue 
in reality and the individual qualities 
of objects, has given rise to great diffi- 
culties in the history of philosophy. 
Historically speaking, the first notion 
of the universal was a naive conception 
of something similar and recurrent. 
No one had as yet raised the question 
of the origin or cause of this similarity, 
the vital question of the nature of 
the universal, or whether it reflects 
qualities that really exist in the objec- 
tive world, or whether it springs from 
the ability of the consciousness to 
generalise, or from the qualities of 
some spiritual absolute. This early 








Individual 


notion of the universal was shared by the 
materialists of ancient Greece. Thales 
(q.v.) conceived the basis of all things, 
their universal, to be water; Heracli- 
tus (q.v.) conceived it as fire; Democ- 
ritus (q.v.) as atoms. Most of the ideal- 
ist philosophers of the ancient world 
also regarded the universal as objective, 
but in their view it was detached from 
materia] reality and became a special 
world of essences. Plato’s (q.v.) ideal- 
ist doctrine of the universal was crit- 
icised by Aristotle (q.v.), who, how- 
ever, was unable to solve the problem. 
He did not regard the universal as a 
special essence isolated from the in- 
dividual. For him the universal was 
primarily the abstractions of the hu- 
man mind. But he was unwilling to 
pronounce them purely mental essences 
because this would mean denying 
their objectivity. He, therefore, re- 
garded the universal as both the es- 
sence of individual objects and as the 
aim for which they exist. In this he 
is in effect close to Plato's conception. 
Thus, although he failed to find the 
solution, Aristotle placed the problem 
in clear perspective and hence his teach- 
ing became the focal point of the 
controversy between nominalism (q.v.), 
and realism (q.v.). Here the contradic- 
tory propositions in Aristotle’s teach- 
ing developed into the antithesis 
between the schools in philosophy. 
Experimental science, which emerged 
from- the struggle with the abstract 
scholasticism of theology, raised a 
protest against the theological inter- 
pretation of the universal. Once again 
the objectivity of such a universal 
was questioned, this time by Locke 
(q.v.), who interpreted the universal 
as a purely abstract, verbal expres- 
sion of the similarity of phenomena 
and denied that it had anything to do 
with reality. This interpretation was 
in accord with the science of his time, 
particularly with the classification of 
phenomena it had adopted. But scien- 
tific study of the laws of the objective 
world exploded Locke’s interpretation, 
and even in Kant (q.v.) and particu- 
larly in Hegel (q.v.), we find a distinc- 
tion between the “abstract universal”, 
as the verbally expressed sameness of 


— 213 — 


and Universal 


a number of phenomena (the effect of 
mere resemblance) and the real “con- 
crete universal”, understood as the inner 
essence, the law of existence and 
change. According to Hegel, however, 
only the spiritual—the concept, the 
idea—is the real universal. The Marx- 
ist conception of the particular and 
the universal is based on recognition 
of the idea of the universal as a reflec- 
tion of the objective unity of the phe- 
nomena of the world. The essential 
similarity of objects or processes is 
merely the expression of this profound 
objective interconnection. “The form 
of universality in nature,” wrote En- 
gels, “is law” and again ... “the form 
of universality, however, is the form 
of self-completeness, hence of infinity; 
it is the comprehension of the many 
finites in the infinite”. (Dialectics of 
Nature, pp. 238, 237.) The universal, 
therefore, embodies all the richness 
of the particular and the individual. 
The objective connection between the 
individual, particular and universal 
is reflected in language, in the form 
in which a subject is expounded, in 
the ways in which objects are studied. 
The interrelation between the individ- 
ual, particular, and universal lies in 
the fact that they are connected, in 
the fact that the individual cannot 
exist without the universal, and that 
the universal cannot exist without 
the individual, that the individual 
under certain conditions may become 
both particular and universal. An 
analysis of these dialectical relations 
is essential, for instance, for the under- 
standing of the general ways and 
laws of building socialism and their 
manifestation in different countries. 
Thus the categories of the individual, 
the particular and the universal pri- 
marily express the essential relations 
of the objective world and only be- 
cause of this do they also characterise 
the process of its cognition. Practical 
activity, which is always concentrat- 
ed on individual objects, is illuminat- 
ed by knowledge of the universal, of 
the laws, aspects, and qualities that 
recur in these objects and are concret- 
ised by consideration of their particu- 
larities. 












Individualisation 


Individualisation, a specific aspect 
of artistic creation: the ability of art, 
while depicting the essence and typical 
features of the phenomena portrayed, 
to preserve their sensorily concrete 
features, to reproduce all the specific 
nature of these phenomena, the indi- 
vidual aspect of the human characters 
in their originality and harmony. I. is 
a method of reproducing reality inher- 
ent in genuine art. It is an element 
of artistic typification. Attempts to 
contrast I. to typification adversely 
affect artistic creation. The characters 
do not appear as living people, but as 
“mouthpieces of the spirit of the 
time”, resembling lifeless schemes and 
allegories. On the other hand, I. by 
itself is incapable of giving a realisti- 
cally artistic image; it fails to pene- 
trate the essence of what is portrayed, 
it turns into a mere record of single 
and accidental facts. Engels aptiy 
described it as “bad 1.”. Only when 
I. is closely combined with artistic 
generalisation does it become a power- 
ful means for the realistic portrayal 
of the world. 

Individualism, a principle of socio- 
political ideology founded on recog- 
nition of the absolute rights of the 
individual, of the freedom and inde- 
pendence of the individual from so- 
ciety and the state. Theorists of ex- 
ploiting classes hold that I. is inherent 
in “immutable human nature”. In 
actual fact, I., as a principle setting 
the individual in opposition to the 
collective and subordinating the social 
interests to the personal, emerged 
with the appearance of private proper- 
ty and the division of society into 
classes. The social basis out of which 
the tradition of I. grew was the centu- 
ries-old domination of private proper- 
ty. I. was most fully expressed in the 
philosophy of Stirner (q.v.) and par- 
ticularly Nietzsche (q.v.), whose doc- 
trine of the “élite” and “superman” 
was taken over by fascism (q.v.). At 
present I. is actively championed by 
the existentialists (see Existentialism). 
Socialism radically changes the rela- 
tionship between society and the in- 
dividual because it renovates both 
society and the individual. Genuine 


— 214 — 


Induction 


collectivism arises in a society which 
knows no exploitation or political 
oppression and provides conditions for 
the development of man’s personality 
and abilities. 

Induction (Lat. inductio, from in- 
ducere—to lead in), one of the types 
of reasoning and a method of 
study. Questions pertaining to the 
theory of I. are already found in the 
works of Aristotle (q.v.), but they 
began to commend special attention 
with the development of empirical 
natural science in the 17th-18th cen- 
turies. A big contribution to elaborat- 
ing problems of I. was made by Fran- 
cis Bacon, Galileo, Newton, Herschel, 
and Mill (qq.v.). As a form of reason- 
ing conclusion I. makes possible the 
transition from single facts to general 
propositions. Usually three main 
types of inductive conclusions are dis- 
tinguished: complete I.; I. through 
simple enumeration (popular I.); scien- 
tific I. (the latter two types are an 
incomplete I.). A complete I. repre- 
sents a general proposition concerning 
a class as a whole to be concluded on 
the basis of examining all its elements; 
it gives a true conclusion, but its 
sphere is limited because it is applica- 
ble only to classes all the members 
of which can be easily observed. When 
a class is practically unlimited incom- 
plete I. is applied. In a popular I. 
the presence of a feature in some of 
the elements of a class warrants the 
conclusion that all elements of the 
class possess that feature. A popular 
I. has an unlimited sphere of applica- 
tion, but its conclusions form only 
probable propositions needing subse- 
quent proof. A scientific I. also rep- 
resents a conclusion concerning a whole 
class based on a number of the ele- 
ments of that class, but here the 
grounds for conclusion are provided by 
the discovery of essential connections 
between the elements studied which 
show that the given feature must be 
possessed by the whole class. Hence, 
methods of disclosing the essential 
connections are of prime importance 
in scientific I. The disclosure of these 
connections presupposes an intricate 
analysis. Traditional logic formulates 








Inductive Definition 


some of these methods, which are 
known as inductive methods of study 
of causal relations: method of agree- 
ment, method of difference, joint meth- 
od of agreement and difference (meth- 
od of dual agreement), method of 
concomitant variations and method 
of residues. As a method of study, 
I. means a way of experimentally study- 
ing phenomena, in the course of 
which we pass from single facts to 
general propositions; the single facts 
lead to general propositions. I. always 
appears in unity with deduction (q.v.). 
Dialectical materialism regards I. and 
deduction not as universal self-suffi- 
cient methods, but as aspects of dia- 
lectical cognition of reality which are 
inseverably interconnected and de- 
termine each other; it is therefore 
opposed to the one-sided exaggeration of 
any one of them (see Logic, Inductive). 

Inductive Definition, one of the 
ways of defining objects of mathemati- 
cal and logical systems. It indicates: 
a) the primary or elementary objects 
of the system; b) the rules or opera- 
tions by which we can form new objects 
of the system from already available 
objects. This is how a natural number 
(in arithmetic), properly constructed 
and demonstrable formulas (in logical 
calculi) and others are determined. 
1.D. must be complete, i.e., it must 
be used to determine all the objects 
of a given system and only such objects. 

Inference, the process of reasoning 
in the course of which from one or 
several propositions called premisses 
an I., a new proposition, is deduced 
(called conclusion or consequence) 
which logically follows from the prem- 
isses. The transition from the prem- 
isses to the conclusion is always made 
according to some rule of logic (rule 
of inference). A logical analysis of I. 
consists in singling out the premisses 
and conclusion and in ascertaining 
the structure of I. li. made according 
to the same rules of inference and laws 
of logic are of one and the same logical 
form. Thus, an analysis of I. serves to 
bring out its logical form. I. is a form 
of thought in which (alongside a con- 
cept, proposition, and other forms of 
thinking and methods of reasoning) 


— 215 — 


Infinite and Finite 


cognition of the external world is 
effected at the stage of abstract think- 
ing. Every proper I. must meet the 
following condition: if its premisses 
are true, its conclusion too must be 
true. This condition is met if in the 
course of I. the laws of logic and rules 
of inference are not violated. In the 
actual process of thinking some of 
the premisses of I. are often omitted 
and the rules of inference and laws 
of logic underlying it are not formu- 
lated. This makes errors possible in 
I. Logic lays down methods of distin- 
guishing a valid I. from an invalid 
one and thereby helps to prevent and 
correct logical mistakes. Usually, the 
process of reasoning and proof makes 
up a chain of Ii., in which the conclu- 
sion of a preceding I. becomes the prem- 
iss of a subsequent I. For a proof to 
be valid it is necessary for its initial 
premisses—the basis of proof—to be 
true, and each I. within it must be 
correct. The most common division 
of li. is into deductive and inductive 
(see Deduction, Induction). 

Infinite and Finite, categories de- 
noting the two inseparably connected 
opposite aspects of the objective world. 
For example, an unlimitedly increas- 
ing (or decreasing) variable quantity, 
capable of becoming, and in fact be- 
coming, more (or less) than any pre- 
given quantity, however large (or 
small), is called an infinite quantity; 
a definite quantity, in relation to 
which another definite quantity may 
be indicated as larger (or smaller), is 
known as a finite quantity. In its ap- 
plication to the objective world I. 
characterises: (1) the existence of the 
world in space and the essential non- 
isolation of all material systems; (2) 
the existence of the world in time, the 
uncreatability and  indestructibility 
of matter, the eternity of its existence; 
(3) the quantitative inexhaustibility 
of matter in depth, the infinite variety 
of its qualities, interrelations, forms 
of existence, and tendencies of devel- 
opment; (4) the qualitative heteroge- 
neity of the structure of matter, the 
existence of innumerable qualitatively 
different levels of the structural or- 
ganisation of matter, which possesses 








Infinity, Bad 


at each level different specific proper- 
ties and is subject to different laws. 
F. is the negation of I., but at the 
same time every finite object is a form 
of the manifestation of I. As a given, 
definite quality, it exists for a limited 
time. But the matter of which it is 
composed is uncreatable and indestruc- 
tible, exists for eternity, and merely 
changes from one form to another. 
The existence of a given body may be 
discovered in any part of the Universe, 
no matter how distant, to which ma- 
terial rays created by one body inter- 
acting with other bodies can pene- 
trate. Thus F. also includes I., just 
as I. is composed of innumerable finite 
objects and phenomena. The contra- 
dictory unity of I. & F. makesit 
possible to know I., although at every 
step in his practical activity and cog- 
nition man comes into contact with 
only finite objects and processes. But 
since I. is either contained or mani- 
fested in some way or other in every 
finite object, “all true knowledge of 
nature is knowledge of the eternal, the 
infinite....” (Engels, Dialectics of Na- 
ture, p. 238.) (See also Infinity, Real 


and Potential; Infinity, Bad; and 
Eternity.) 
Infinity, Bad, metaphysical con- 


ception of the infinity of the world, 
based on the assumption of a monot- 
onous, unceasing repetition of the 
same specific qualities, processes, and 
laws of motion on any scale of space 
and time. Applied to the structure of 
matter, B.I. implies recognition of 
the unlimited divisibility of matter, 
each smaller particle possessing the 
same qualities and obeying the same 
specific laws of motion as the macro- 
scopic bodies. Applied to the structure 
of the Universe, it assumes an infinite 
hierarchy of mechanical systems with 
identical qualities and laws of exist- 
ence. Applied to the development of 
nature, it implies recognition of in- 
finite cycles of matter constantly re- 
turning to the same starting points. 
The concept of B.I. was introduced 
by Hegel (q.v.). It is disproved by 
the existence of countless numbers of 
qualitatively different levels in the 
structural organisation of matter, which 


— 216 — 


Infinity, Real and Potential 


possesses at each level different quali- 
ties and obeys different specific laws 
of motion, and also by the qualitative 
changes of matter and its general irre- 
versible transformation. 

Infinity, Calculated, a logical argu- 
ment against the application of bad 
infinity (see Infinity, Bad) to what 
actually exists because the fact that 
an actual whole is composed of an 
infinite number of parts leads to the 
contradiction of a calculated, i.e., 
finite infinity. This argument was used 
by Zeno of Elea (q.v.) in his aporia 
(q.v.), Democritus, Aristotle, and Kant 
(qq.v.) in his antinomies (q.v.) against 
the spatial and temporal infinity of 
the world, against infinite divisibility, 
and so on. In modern science these 
problems are treated from the stand- 
point of the concepts of actual and 
potential infinity, q.v. (e.g., para- 
doxes, q.v., in the set theory). The 
argument pole to the dialectical 
character of the infinity of nature, and 
the role of the process in the actualisa- 
tion (realisation) of potential non 
“true infinity was already correctly 
put by Hegel ... in the process of nature 
and in history”. (Engels, Dialectics of 
Nature, p. 240.) As for bad infinity, 
it manifests itself not in actual being 
but in the form of the potential infinity 
of being, e.g., its eternity. 

Infinity, Real and Potential, two ways 
of perceiving the infinite. In mathema- 
tics, R.I. is understood as an infinite 
multitude, complete and_ realised 
(e.g., the multitude of all natural num- 
bers). P.I. is understood as an infinite 
quantity that can increase (decrease) 
endlessly and become greater (small- 
er) than any given, pre-determined 
quantity. The paradoxes of Cantor’s 
theory of sets undermined the instinc- 
tive belief of mathematicians in the 
concept of R.I., and some of them 
asserted that only P.I. is realisable. 
These latter consider R.I. contradic- 
tory because once an infinite quantity 
is realised it is finite and not infinite. 
The struggle between the two concep- 
tions is still going on. The solution to 
it is to be found in the real world. 
The material world is infinite in space 
and time, not potentially but in reali- 








j 
: 
i 
A 





Information 


ty, it is not becoming infinite but has 
always been such. At the same time it 
is constantly developing and contains 
within itself the possibility of unlim- 
ited changes. Its infinity is, therefore, 
also potential. The unity of R.L 
and P.I. is also observed in the struc- 
ture of matter. Research methods, 
to reflect this unity, must be based 
on a dialectic approach to R.I. and 
P.I. (see also Infinite and Finite). 

Information, one of the fundamental 
concepts of cybernetics (q.v.). The 
scientific concept of I. largely detracts 
from the meaning of messages and 
deals with their quantitative aspect. 
Thus, the concept of measurement of 
information is introduced, being de- 
fined as a quantity proportional to 
the degree of probability of the event 
mentioned in the message. The more 
probable the event the less the amount 
of I. that is carried in a message about 
its occurrence, and vice versa. The 
development of the scientific concept 
of I. has made possible a uniform ap- 
proach to many processes that had 
previously been thought to have noth- 
ing whatsoever in common, e.g., the 
transmission of messages along engi- 
neering communication systems, the 
functioning of the nervous system, 
computer operations, various control 
processes, etc. In all of these we deal 
with processes involving the transmis- 
sion, storage, and processing of I. 
Here the concept of I. has played a 
part similar to that of the concept of 
energy in physics by providing an op- 
portunity to describe the most diverse 
physical processes from a common 
point of view. Two aspects should 
be distinguished in the concept of I. 
First, I. is a measure of the organisation 
of a system. The mathematical expres- 
sion of I. is identical with the expres- 
sion for entropy (q.v.), taken with 
the reverse sign. Just as entropy is 
an expression of the disorganisation 
of a system, so I. is the measure of its 
organisation. I. thus understood con- 
stitutes an internal property of a sys- 
tem of process in itself, and as such it 
can be called structural information. 
It is to be distinguished from relative 
information, which is associated with 


— 217 — 


Innate Ideas 


the interrelationship of two processes. 
Let there be processes A and B with 
many different states. If to each state 
of A there corresponds a certain state 
of B, and the relations between the 
states of B are isomorphous (q.v.) 
with the relations between the states 
of A, then we can say that process B 
carries I. about process A. Information 
theory usually deals with relative I. 
From the point of view of this theory 
our brain represents a cybernetic sys- 
tem of extreme complexity which re- 
ceives, stores, and processes I. coming 
in from the outside world. The brain’s 
ability to reflect and perceive the 
outside world is seen as a link in the 
development of processes associated 
with the transmission and processing 
of information. That is why one finds 
in modern information theory an em- 
bodiment of Lenin’s thesis, according 
to which all matter possesses a quality 
akin to perception, namely, reflection. 

Innate Ideas, concepts which, ac- 
cording to idealistic epistemology, are 
primordially inherent in the human 
mind and independent of experience. 
They include axioms in mathematics 
and logic and the primary principles of 
philosophy. Some philosophers, no- 
tably Descartes (q.v.), believed these 
principles to be innate. Others, such 
as Leibniz (q.v.), believed them to be 
inclinations or dispositions of the mind 
developing at the prompting of sen- 
sory experience. Rationalistic theories 
of immediate knowledge (theories of 
intellectual intuition) admit that some 
principles are not innate but are ac- 
quired through the immediate mental 
perception of truth without logical 
deduction or proof (see Intuition). De- 
spite the above difference, the theories 
of I.I. and intellectual intuition con- 
tain an equal element of apriorism, 
i.e., knowledge preceding, and inde- 
pendent of, experience. The apriorism 
of Kant (q.v.) differs from the theories 
of I.I., inasmuch as his a priori knowl- 
edge is applied not to the contents of 
concepts and principles but to univer- 
sal forms of sensation and reason, 
which order the contents of our expe- 
rience. Theories of I.I. originated not 
only from the primary premises of 





/ 
Inspiration 


idealism, but also from an unhistorical, 
undialectical approach to the origin 
of general concepts and principles, 
to the relation between the mediate 
and the immediate, between the sen- 
sory and the rational elements in cog- 
nition and between individual and 
socio-historical experience. 

Inspiration, condition particularly 
conducive to various forms of creative 
activity. It is characterised by total 
concentration of the individual’s spir- 
itual energy on what he is creating, 
and by emotional elevation that makes 
work exceptionally productive. In con- 
tradistinction to the idealist conception 
of I. as “divine madness”, mystical 
intuition and revelation (Plato, Schel- 
ling, Hartmann, qq.v., S. Freud, H. 
Read, and others), materialism denies 
that I. has any supernatural character 
and regards it as a mental phenomenon 
determined by the social and indi- 
vidual incentives to create, and also 
by the process of work itself. 

Inspirationalism, an idealist theory 
of the mystic religious character of 
knowledge, according to which truth 
is revealed not in a rationally logical 
way, not discursively, but suddenly, 
without any connection, solely through 
inspiration, i.e., an idea born by in- 
spiration is prompted to man from 
above in the form of divine suggestion. 
I. in pure form is seldom found, and 
chiefly in theological doctrines, but 
actually this principle is shared by all 
irrational philosophy. 

Instinct, a form of psychic activity 
(see Activity), a type of behaviour. 
In the broad sense, instinct is coun- 
terposed to consciousness. Instinctive 
behaviour is characteristic of animals; 
it is based on biological forms of exist- 
ence developed in the process of adap- 
tation to the environment. On the 
other hand, conscious behaviour is 
expressed in the purposeful changing 
of nature by man and is based on 
knowledge of nature’s laws. In a more 
specific sense, I. is a type of behaviour 
inborn in a given species of animals 
and fixed by biological heredity. Ac- 
cording to Pavlov (q.v.), I. is a chain 
of unconditioned reflexes (q.v.). I. is 
most distinctly expressed in animals 


— 218 — 





Instrumentalism 


of relatively low organisation (insects, 
fishes, birds). With evolutionary de- 
velopment, the role of innate activity 
is reduced and intricate reflectory ac- 
tivity resting on individual experience 
becomes more and more important. 
li. are also a feature of man, but in 
humans they do not play a decisive role 
because specifically human activity 
originates and develops as a conse- 
quence of socio-historical processes and 
is prompted chiefly by social, not 
biological motives. 

Instrument, a means of cognition 
used for registering different kinds of 
measurement (q.v.). The role of Ii. 
in contemporary scientific knowledge 
has greatly increased. They are ampli- 
fiers of human sense-organs, allowing 
the investigation of material objects 
that are inaccessible to direct percep- 
tion. Erroneous interpretation of the 
enhanced role of li. in cognition, their 
subjectivisation, gave rise to so-called 
“instrumental idealism”. Its basis was 
the proposition of the alleged “prin- 
cipal co-ordination” of object and I., 
as well as the “principle of uncontrol- 
lability”, according to which the proc- 
ess of measuring, the determination 
of this or that property of microobjects 
causes “uncontrollable breaches”. The 
exponents of “instrumental idealism” 
(P. Jordan and others) maintain that 
the subject “prepares”, creates the 
physical reality by means of I. 

Instrumentalism, a subjective ideal- 
ist doctrine of the American philos- 
opher John Dewey (q.v.) and his fol- 
lowers, a variety of pragmatism (q.v.). 
The distinctions between subject and 
object, thoughts and facts, psychical 
and physical, are, according to Dewey, 
merely differences within “experience”, 
elements of a “situation”, aspects of 
an “event”. Such ambiguous terms and 
also references to the “social nature” 
of experience are used to disguise the 
idealism of this philosophy. According 
to I. ccncepts, scientific laws and 
theories are merely instruments, tools, 
keys to the situation, “plans of action” 
(hence the name of this form of ideal- 
ism). Recognising cognition as a vital 
function of an organism, I. denies that 
its importance lies in its ability to 








Intellectualism 


— 219 — 


Interest 





reflect the objective world; it regards 
truth as something justified, which 
ensures success in the given situation. 
Dewey and his supporters do not rec- 
ognise the reality of social classes, 
resort to metaphysical abstractions of 
society, individual and the state “in 
general”. The instrumentalist “theory” 
of progress (meliorism) holds that pro- 
gress does not imply the attainment 
of definite aims by society but the 
process of movement itself. In fact, 
Dewey’s meliorism resurrects the old 
opportunist slogan “the movement is 
everything, the final goal is nothing”. 
Dewey, Hook, Childs, and Schlesinger 
are the chief proponents of I. 

Intellectualism, a philosophical ideal- 
ist doctrine which places cognition 
in the foreground through the intellect 
and metaphysically divorces it from 
sensory knowledge and practice. I. is 
akin to rationalism (q.v.). In ancient 
philosophy I. was represented by those 
who denied the truth of sensory knowl- 
edge and considered only intellectual 
knowledge as really truthful (see Eleat- 
ics, Platonists). In modern philosophy 
I. opposed the one-sidedness of sensa- 
tionalism (q.v.) and was represented 
by Descartes (q.v.) and the Cartesians 
and to some extent by Spinozism. In 
our days, with a considerable admix- 
ture of agnosticism (q.v.), I. is advo- 
cated by logical positivism (q.v.). 
Dialectical materialism recognises the 
unity of sensory and intellectual cog- 
nition (see Knowledge; Theory and 
Practice). 

Intelligible, the philosophical term 
denoting an object or phenomenon per- 
ceivable only by reason or intellectual 
intuition (q. v.). The term I. is contrast- 
ed with the term “sensible” denoting 
an object perceived with the help of 
the sense-organs. The concept I. was 
widely used in scholasticism (q.v.) and 
in the philosophy of Kant (q.v.). 

Interaction, process of mutual in- 
fluence of bodies on one another, any 
connection or relation between material 
objects and phenomena. I. determines 
the existence and structural organisa- 
tion of any material system, its union 
with other bodies in a system of a larg- 
er order, and also the properties of 


all bodies, processes, and phenomena. 
Without the capacity for I. matter 
could not exist. In this sense Engels 
defined I. as the final cause of every- 
thing that exists, and beyond which 
nothing exists or can exist. In any 
integral system I, emerges as the rela- 
tion in which cause and effect constant- 
ly change places. Physically, I. is 
immediate action (see Action, Immedi- 
ate and Distant), whose speed is equal 
in the extreme case to the speed of 
light in a vacuum. But there exist in 
nature many other forms of I. that are 
not reduced to physical I. (see Univer- 
sal Connection of Phenomena, Func- 
tional Dependence). 

Interest 1. Purposeful orientation 
of thought and action reflecting the 
material and spiritual needs of indi- 
viduals (personal 1.), social groups 
and historical communities (general I.). 
General li., which correspond to the 
objective needs and tendencies of so- 
cial development, constitute the I. 
of society. In a class society these can 
be only the li. of classes who express 
natural historical necessity. I. is dis- 
played in striving, but, besides subjec- 
tive elements, it always contains ob- 
jective elements. General J., as a rule, 
is objective, inasmuch as it is deter- 
mined by the conditions of life and 
the nature of a given social group or 
historical community. The only ex- 
ception is the I. of voluntary associa- 
tions arising out of certain aspirations 
and aims. But both the I. of such as- 
sociations and personal I. bear the 
imprint of the classes to which the in- 
dividuals belong and the conditions 
in which those classes exist. In a so- 
ciety with private property relations 
and class antagonisms, the. Ii. of 
different social groups, just like the li. 
of individuals, are often diametrically 
opposed. Not only the personal li., 
but also the general li. oł reactionary 
classes come in conflict with the li. 
of society. Only with the transition 
to socialism are conditions created 
for the unity of the fundamental li. 
of all members of society, and an objec- 
tive basis is created for the harmonious 
correspondence of personal li. and 
social li. 2. I. (in psychology) is man- 








Interpretation and Model 


ifested in a positive and emotional 
attitude to an object and in the con- 
centration of attention upon it. A 
temporary, situational interest arises 
in the process of performing a given 
action and vanishes with its completion. 
A stable I. is a relatively constant trait 
of an individual and is an important 
requisite for a creative attitude of 
man to his activity, helping to broaden 
his horizon and enrich his knowledge. 
Interpretation and Model, semantic 
concepts of metamathematics (q.v.) 
and metalogic (q.v.). In a broad sense, 
I. is the assigning of meanings to ini- 
tial propositions of a calculus, as a 
result of which all properly constructed 
propositions of the given calculus ac- 
quire sense (see Denotation and Sense, 
Name, and Logical Semantics). An 
interpreted calculus is therefore a for- 
malised language (q.v.), in which var- 
ious propositions having sense are 
formulated and demonstrated. By uti- 
lising the concept of M. a stricter 
definition of I. can be given. Let us 
take a certain class of propositions K 
calculus L; if we replace all constants 
in these propositions by variables of 
corresponding types (see Types, The- 
ory of) we obtain a class of proposi- 
tional functions (q.v.) K1. Any number 
of objects which decide each of the 
propositional (see Decidability) fun- 
ctions of K! is called M. of the class of 
propositions K of the calculus L. 
The concept M. of calculus helps to 
introduce the concept I. Being either 
extracted or specially constructed M. is 
called the I. of calculus. In its turn, 
I. is used to determine the logical and 
actual truth-value (q.v.) and analytical 
and synthetic propositions. The theory 
of models of logical systems has been 
developed in the works of Alfred Tarski, 
Rudolf Carnap, John Kemeny, the So- 
viet mathematician A. I. Maltsev, and 
others. In the natural sciences, the 
term “model” is used in a different 
sense (see Analogue Simulation). 
Introjection (Lat. intro—within, jace- 
re—to throw), a concept introduced by 
Avenarius (q.v.). According to him 
I. is an impermissible incorporation 
of the image perceived into the con- 
sciousness of the individual and also 


— 220 — 


Intuition 


of the ideal into the thoughts of the 
subject. In contrast to I. he put 
forward his theory of principal co-ordi- 
nation between the ego and the envi- 
ronment (see Principal Co-ordination). 
Dialectical materialism, in contrast to 
anthropological materialism, does not 
lapse into I. because it overcomes the 
viewpoint of the isolated individual in 
epistemology. The essence of I. was 
thoroughly criticised by Lenin (see 
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism). 
Introspection (Lat. intro—inside, 
spectare—look), observation of one’s 
own psychic phenomena, self-obser- 
vation. I. is associated with the de- 
velopment of the higher form of psy- 
chic activity (q.v.), i.e., with man’s 
understanding of reality around him 
and with the crystallisation of man’s 
world of inner emotions and the form- 
ing of his inner plan of action. Only 
that which is perceived by conscious- 
ness can be the object of I. The results 
of I. can be expressed in the form of 
statements by people about their 
thoughts and emotions. Idealist psycho- 
logy holds that I. is the only or the main 
method of studying psychic phenomena, 
and that it enables us to penetrate 
their essence directly. But materialist 
psychology holds that the data of I. 
do not go beyond directly sensory 
knowledge, and that strictly objective 
methods are necessary for the study 
of the essense of these data. For scien- 
tific psychology, the data of I. are 
therefore not a method, but one of the 
objects of psychological study. 
Intuition, ability to understand truth 
directly without preliminary logical 
reasoning. In pre-Marxist philosophy 
I. was considered a special form of 
cognitive activity. Descartes (q.v.), 
for example, held that the deductive 
form of proof rests on axioms; the 
latter are understood purely intui- 
tively, without any proof. According 
to Descartes, I. in combination with the 
deductive method serves as a universal 
criterion of complete truth. I. also 
holds a big place in the philosophy of 
Spinoza (q.v.) who considered it a 
“third kind” of knowledge, the most 
fruitful and important, which grasps 
the essence of things. In contemporary 





Intuitionism, Ethical 


idealist philosophy I. is regarded as a 
mystical ability of cognition, incom- 
patible with logic and practice (see 
Intuitionism, Philosophical; Intuition- 
ism, Mathematical; Intuitionism, Eth- 
ical). Dialectical materialism does 
not consider I. as a special stage in 
cognition and rejects any attempts to 
treat it as a superrational, mystical 
cognitive ability. At the same time, 
I. plays a subsidiary role in the process 
of scientific cognition and aesthetical 
apprehension of reality. I. must not 
be considered as a kind of fundamental 
deviation from the usual ways of know- 
ing the truth, it is a natural form of 
their manifestation based on logical 
thinking and practice. Behind the abil- 
ity “suddenly” to grasp the truth, 
are, in reality, accumulated experience 
and knowledge. The results of intuitive 
cognition do not need any special 
criterion of truth-value (“self-evident 
nature”, etc.), but are also logically 
proved and verified by practice. 
Intuitionism, Ethical, a trend in 
contemporary ethics, especially wide- 
spread in Britain. Its main propo- 
nents are George Moore (q.v.), Charlie 
Broad, David Ross and Alfred Ewing. 
The intuitionists maintain that good 
and moral duty are entirely “unique” 
concepts and that they cannot be de- 
termined by, or deduced from, our 
knowledge of man, society or nature 
{see Naturalism, Ethical) and can be 
cognised only by special intuition; 
the so-called deontological intuition- 
ists hold that moral duty is “self-evi- 
dent”. Intuitionists sever man’s mor- 
al conceptions from his social convic- 
tions, and ethics from the social sci- 
ences, depriving it of its scientific basis. 
This leads them to the assertion that 
moral rules have no roots in history 
and are not associated with society. 
By claiming that ethical rules are “self- 
evident”, they justify, in effect, the 
immutability of bourgeois morality. 
Intuitionism, Mathematical, an ide- 
alistic philosophical school which arose 
in the early 1920s in connection with 
polemics over the theoretical principles 
of mathematics. I. is associated with 
the names of Brower, Weyl, Heyting, 
and others. According to I., the exact 


— 221 — 


Invariance 


part of a thought is based on intuition 
(q.v.), understood as the ability to 
distinguish clearly between objects of 
thought and to identify them. Intui- 
tion gives content to a statement, im- 
parts sense to it and also serves as a 
criterion of truth. Mathematical proof 
is convincing not by its strict logic, 
but by the intuitive clarity of each 
of its links. Trust in Aristotelian logic 
is the source of contradiction (antino- 
my) as soon as we go beyond the 
bounds of finite pluralities, from which 
this logic is abstracted. That is why 
even the applicability of logical rules 
must ultimately be judged by intuition. 
But mathematical intuitionism, as 
distinct from philosophical intuition- 
ism (see Intuitionism, Philosophical), 
does not oppose intuition to logic. 
The philosophical views of the mathe- 
matical intuitionist school were not 
scientific and did not gain wide re- 
cognition, but criticism of the concepts 
of proof and definition by intuitionists 
has played an important part in the 
development of constructive logic (q.v.) 
and constructive mathematics. 

Intuitionism, Philosophical, an ideal- 
istic trend which had gained great 
influence in contemporary philosophy. 
I. counterposes to rational knowledge 
the immediate “perception” of reality 
based on intuition understood as a 
special ability of the mind irreducible 
to sensory experience and discursive 
cognition. I. is directly associated 
with mysticism (q.v.). Bergson (q.v.) 
and Lossky (q.v.) were the main pro- 
ponents of I. 

Invariance, the property of magni- 
tudes, equations and laws to remain 
invariant, unchanged under certain 
transformations of co-ordinates and 
time. For example, the laws of motion 
in classical mechanics are invariant in 
relation of Galileo’s space-temporal 
transformations; the laws of motion 
in the theory of relativity, in relation 
of Lorentz’s transformations; laws of 
motion in theories of elementary parti- 
cles, in relation of transformations re- 
flecting the discrete nature of space- 
time. During the transition from an 
old theory to a new one the old proper- 
ty of I. either remains or is general- 











Inverse Relation, Law of 


ised, not discarded. I. follows from the 
material unity of the world, from 
the fundamental homogeneity of phys- 
ical objects and their properties. 
Inverse Relation, Law of, a law 
of formal logic fixing the dependence 
between the volume and content of 
concepts which are in a stable generic- 
specific co-ordination (see Genus and 
Species). It is formulated as follows: 
the content of the subordinating (ge- 
neric) concept is part of the content 
of the subordinate (specific) concept, 
while the volume of the subordinate 
concept enters as part of the volume 
of the subordinating concept (another 
formulation is: the broader the volume 
of the concept, the narrower its con- 
tent, and vice versa). For example, 
in the case of the concepts “triangle” 
and “isosceles triangle”, the essential 
properties (content) of the first concept 
enter into, but do not exhaust, the 
essential properties (content) of the 
second concept; on the other hand, 
the objects encompassed by the second 
concept (its volume) are only part of 
the objects sompaa by the first 
concept (volume). The processes of gen- 
eralisation (q.v.) and limitation, 
which lead to the formation of generic 
and specific concepts respectively, take 
place according to the L.I.R. 
Irrational, not apprehensible by rea- 
son, by thought, not expressible in 
logical concepts. The term I. is used 
for characterising the philosophical 
trends which deny the role of reason 
in knowledge (see Irrationalism). 
Irrationalism, an idealist trend which 
declares the world to be chaotic, irra- 
tional, and unknowable. Denying the 
cognitive power of reason, irrationalists 
put to the foreground faith (Fideistic 
1.), instinct (see Freudism), unconscious 
will (see Schopenhauer), intuition (see 
Bergson, James), existence (see Kier- 
kegaard). The objective and social 
meaning of I. is denial of the possi- 
bility of adequate knowledge of the 
objective laws of social development. 
Irreversibility, a quality which makes 
reversion to ‘the original state im- 
possible, determining the passage into 
a qualitatively new state. I. is inher- 
ent, to a greater or lesser degree, in 


— 222 — 


all processes in the world. This is de- 
termined: (1) by the infinity of matter, 
the inexhaustible complexity of its 
structure, and its countless potential- 
ities for change, which cannot be fully 
realised in any finite period of time; 
(2) the fact that all the existing mate- 
rial systems are not closed in principle, 
the diversity of their external ties 
which are constantly changing and 
transfer the system into a new state. 
That is why every cyclical process in- 
cludes an element of irreversible chan- 
ge, which is expressed in the general 
irreversible run of time from the past 
to the future. I. of change cannot be 
reduced to some kind of change in one 
direction. Development along an as- 
cending line or, the reverse, the degra- 
dation of a system with its subsequent 
death, are specific cases of I. Change 
in one direction can occur only in finite 
systems. In the infinite Universe I. 
presupposes changes in the most diverse 
directions and never-ending emergence 
of fundamentally new possibilities of 
development. 

Irritability, the quality of living 
matter to react instantly to the influence 
of internal and external environ- 
ments. J. is one of the general biologi- 
cal forms of reflection of matter. The 
most elementary form of I., inherent 
in the protozoa is taxis—the move- 
ment to the source of I. (light, smell, 
etc.) or away from it. In the process 
of phylogenetic (historical) develop- 
ment I. gives rise to excitability. The 
latter is the result of the differentiation 
of tissues. As living creatures become 
more complex and the nervous system 
develops, the biological forms of re- 
flection also become more complicated, 
unconditioned and conditioned reflexes 
appear. The processes of metabolism, 
the functioning of albuminous com- 
ponents form the basis of I. The teach- 
ing of I. provides abundant factual 
materia! in support of the Marxist 
theory of reflection. 

Islam, or Mohammedanism, one of 
the world religions, the other most 
important ones being Christianity (q.v.) 
and Buddhism (q.v.), widespread chief- 
ly in the Middle East, North Africa, 
and South-East Asia. I. arose in the 





E 
i 





Islam 


7th century in Arabia in the period of 
the Arab peoples’ transition from the 
primitive-communal system to a class 
society and their unification in the 
feudal-theocratic state of the Arab 
Caliphate. I. was an ideological reflec- 
tion of these processes and became the 
religion defending the interests of the 
ruling classes. The creed of I. is ex- 
pounded in the “holy” book of the Mos- 
lems, the Koran; it is compounded of 
elements of primitive religions and 
also of Judaism (q.v.), Christianity 
(q.v.) and Zoroastrianism (q.v.). It is 
based on the dogma of the Almighty 
God (Allah). The pivot of I. is the 
doctrine of divine predestination. Ac- 
cording to the Koran, the fate of every 
man is predestined by Allah. Advo- 
cating man’s impotence in face of 
God, the Koran urges the faithful to 
be patient, to submit to Allah and his 
envoys on earth, promising in return 
heavenly bliss in the other world. 
Hostility to infidels (gyawurs), inferi- 
ority of women, and legalisation of 
polygamy are characteristic features 
of Mohammedanism. I. justifies social 


— 223 — 


isomorphism 


inequality and leads people away 
from the revolutionary struggle into 
futile waiting for happiness in the next 
world. 

Isomorphism (Gk. similar, equal in 
form), a relationship between objects 
having an equal, identical structure. 
Two structures (systems or pluralities) 
are isomorphic when every element 
of the first structure corresponds to 
only one element in the other and every 
operation (connection) of the first struc- 
ture corresponds to only one operation 
(connection) of the other, and vice 
versa. As a rule, I. characterises one 
of the relations or properties of the 
objects compared. Full I. is possible 
only between two abstract objects, for 
example, between a geometric figure 
and its analytical expression in a 
mathematical formula. The concept I. 
is widely applied in mathematics and 
also in mathematical logic, theoretical 
physics, cybernetics, and other fields 
of knowledge. The concept I. is con- 
nected with concepts like “model” (see 
Analogue Simulation), “signal” and 
“image” (see Reflection; the Ideal). 








Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (1743- 
1819), German idealist philosopher, 
president of the Munich Academy of 
Sciences. He criticised rationalism (q.v.) 
and founded the so-called “philosophy 
of feeling and faith”. His philosophy 
is an attempt to delimit metaphysi- 
cally immediate knowledge (q.v.) and 
mediate knowledge and to counterpose 
the former to the latter. According to 
J., the only true knowledge is sensory 
experience. The activity of reason 
does not go beyond the limits of sen- 
sory experience. Reason, dealing with 
subjective concepts, is powerless to 
prove the existence of things. Accord- 
ing to J., religious feeling, which forms 
the foundation of philosophy, cannot 
be understood from the standpoint of 
rationalism. This led the philosopher 
to conclude that rational philosophy 
was linked with atheism. Some ele- 
ments of J.’s philosophy were further 
developed in the philosophy of life 
(q.v.) and existentialism (q.v.). 
Jainism 1. A heterodox system 
of Indian philosophy, an idealistic 
system of pluralism (q.v.) which 
emerged at the beginning of our era. J. 
is based on the doctrine of fattva, the 
essence. Tattva is the primary material 
of which the world is built; it is at 
once the fundamental truth of which 
knowledge is built. The two chief 
tattvas are jīva (the soul), whose basis 
is consciousness, and ajiva (all that 
is not soul). Matter is a variety of ajiva 
possessing the properties of tactility, 
sound, smell, colour, and taste. Matter 
is atomistic, perceptible to the sense- 
organs, subject to change, has no begin- 
ning and no end, and constitutes the 
result of divine creation. In addition, 
there is also the delicate, so-called 





karma, which conditions the connec- 
tion between soul and body. There is 
no single soul or supreme God; there are 
as many souls in the world as there are 
creatures. Every soul is potentially 
omniscient, all-permeating, and om- 
nipotent, but its possibilities are lim- 
ited by the concrete body in which 
it lives. The ethical side of J. is based 
on the doctrine of refraining}from doing 
injury to any living being (ahimsd). 
2. An Indian religion, believed to 
have been founded by a mythical sage 
Mahavira (great hero), who is said 
to have lived in the 9th-8th centu- 
ries B.C. 

James, William (1842-1910), US psy- 
chologist and idealist philosopher, 
prominent exponent of pragmatism 
(q.v.), professor at Harvard (1889-1907). 
Opposed the materialistic world out- 
look. Conscious of the fallacies of the 
metaphysical method, J. also rejected 
dialectics and professed irrationalism 
(q.v.). His analysis of the mind, which 
J. described as “stream of conscience”, 
laid emphasis on the volitional and 
emotional elements. J. substituted 
the pragmatic principle of utility for 
objective understanding of the truth 
and paved the way to fideism (q.v.), 
advocating the right to believe what 
cannot be proved or reasoned. J.’s 
“radical empiricism” is, in effect, a 
subjective reduction of reality to “pure 
experience”, to consciousness. His “neu- 
tral monism” defines the material and 
the spiritual as two different aspects 
of one and the same “experience”. J. 
championed religion and was active in 
a special organisation he founded in 
New York for the examination of mysti- 
cal “experience”. His main works are 
The Principles of Psychology (1890), 








Japanese Philosophy 


The Varieties of Religious Experience 
(1902), and Pragmatism (1907). 
Japanese Philosophy The forma- 
tion of the first philosophical doctrines 
in Japan beganin the epoch of feudal- 
ism. Japanese philosophy developed 
under the influence of the natural phil- 
osophical ideas of ancient China, the 
ethico-political teachings of Confucian- 
ism (q.v.), Buddhism (q.v.) and later 
of Neo-Confucianism (q.v.). The found- 
ers of Neo-Confucianist idealism in 
Japan were Fujiwara Seika (1561-1619) 
and Hayashi Razan (1583-1657). Their 
school (“suse gakuha”) propagated 
the doctrine of the Chinese philosopher 
Chu Hsi (q.v.). The Japanese Neo-Con- 
fucianists thought that fai keku or 
mu keku—the “Great Ultimate”— 
rules the Universe. It is a universal 
transcendental force, without qualities 
and forms, and beyond man’s percep- 
tion. The mystical absolute tai keku, 
the foundation of the ideal principle 
ri (li, q.v.), connected with the mate- 
rial principle ki (ch'i, q.v.), is able to 
create the physical nature of things 
and man. The Neo-Confucianists elab- 
orated upon the dogmas of Confucian- 
ism on the eternal relations of sub- 
jection (the son to the father, the sub- 
ject to the emperor, the wife to the 
husband, and so on). The schools of 
classical Confucianism led by Yamaga 
Soko (1622-85), Butsu (Ogiyu) Sorai 
(1666-1728) and those of the followers 
of subjective idealism of the Chinese 
philosopher Wang Shou-jén (Wang 
Yang-ming)— “Oyomeigakuha”—led by 
Nakae Toju (1608-48) were also ac- 
tive during this period. Materialistic 
views were formed in defiance of the 
then dominant idealistic trends in 
Japanese philosophy. The acquain- 
tance of the Japanese philosophers with 
the doctrines of West European think- 
ers (Bacon, Gassendi, Hobbes, Coper- 
nicus, Galileo, Newton, qq.v.) was of 
great importance for the development 
of materialistic philosophy in Japan 
and for the undermining of the role 
of Confucianist and Neo-Confucianist 
idealism and of Buddhist mysticism. 
The works of Kaibara Ekiken (1630- 
1714), Muro Kyiso (1658-1734), Ito 
Jinsai (1627-1705), Yamagata Shūnan 


15-1682 


— 225 — 


Japanese Philosophy 





(1687-1752) played a great role in de- 
veloping the anti-feudal social thought 
and materialist and atheist ideas. The 
materialist philosopher and atheist 
Ando Shoeki was active in the epoch 
of feudalism (end of the 17th and be- 
ginning of the 18th century). He dis- 
carded the Neo-Confucian idea of the 
“limitless” ideal principle and defend- 
ed the principle that “uninterrupted 
formation” is the real law of nature. 
There are some elements of dialectics 
in his statements on nature and its 
laws. According to Ando Shoeki, the 
world consists of five infinite material 
elements, which act of their own will. 
He was a resolute enemy of the feudal 
regime, and propagated the advanced 
ideas of Enlightenment. He denied 
the idea of the inborn inequality of 
men and considered private ownership 
the source of social evil; his demands 
in the social sphere, however, were uto- 
pian. In order to achieve equality peo- 
ple should pass on to collective culti- 
vation of land, which would lead to 
social equality, to the flourishing of 
the arts and handicrafts. The prominent 
materialist elements in the works 
of the natural philosopher Miura 
Baien (1723-89) are a testimony to the 
de finite rejection of Confucian scholasti- 
cism. The exponents of materialism and 
atheism in Japanese philosophy were 
Minagawa Wakein (1716-1804), Hiraga 
Gensai (1726-79), Yamagata Bantu (1761- 
180!), Kamada Ryuku (1754-1821). 
The incomplete bourgeois revolution 
of 1867-68 was an important factor 
influencing the development of Japa- 
nese philosophy in the second half of 
the 19th century. Philosophical ideas 
during this period developed in the 
struggle between the philosophers of 
“kanryO gakusha” (“scientists of the 
bureaucracy”) and of “minkan gaku- 
sha” (“scientists of the people”). 
The representatives of the “kanryo ga- 
kusha” were Nishi Amane (1826-94) 
and Kato Hiroyuki (1836-1916). They 
thought their mission was to “develop 
culture according to the plans, tastes, 
and efforts of the top layers”. They 
attempted to combine the elements 
of Confucianism and the ideas of West 
European idealist philosophy (Mill, 





A 


Jaspers — 226 — Jeans 


Bentham, Comte, Spencer, qq.v.). Ni- 
shi was the first to introduce the term 
“tetsugaku”, or “philosophy”. A prom- 
inent exponent of “minkan gakusha” 
was Fukuzawa Yukuchi (1830-1901). 
He denied the social-Darwinist ideas 
of Katō Hiroyuki and preached social 
equality. An ideologist of the Japanese 
monarchical regime was the idealist 
and eclectic Inoue Tetsujirð (1855- 
1944). He opposed English empiricism 
and tried to synthesise the ideas of 
Confucianism, Neo-Confucianism, Shin- 
toism (q.v.), Buddhism with those 
of German classical philosophy (espe- 
cially Hegel and E. Hartmann) and 
empirio-criticism (q.v.). His eclectical 
doctrine became the philosophical ba- 
sis of the ideology of “Japanism”. 
The opponent of Inoue’s philosophy 
and of all idealism in general was the 
materialist and atheist philosopher 
Nakae (1847-1901), who had a great 
influence upon the development of 
Japanese progressive scientific and so- 
cial thought. At that time chairs spe- 
cially instituted in the universities 
spread the ideas of German classical 
philosophy and the latest idealism 
(phenomenology, q.v.; philosophy of 
life, q.v.; pragmatism, q.v.; and exis- 
tentialism, q.v.). The most widespread 
was the philosophy of Nishida Kitaro 
(1870-1945), who tried to express the 
ideas of Zen-Buddhism (gq.v.) in the 
concepts and principles of West Euro- 
pean idealist philosophy. The ideas of 
the German classical philosophy of 
Neo-Kantianism, intuitionism, prag- 
matism, and existentialism were eclec- 
tically bound together in Nishida’s 
teachings. The scientific Marxist world 
outlook in Japan was actively spread 
by Tosaka Gen (1900-45); Kawakami 
Hajime (1879-1946), translator of 
Marx’s Capital; and Nagata Hiroshi 
(1904-47), author of a new and improved 
translation of Lenin’s Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism. 

Jaspers, Karl (1883- ), a leading 
exponent of German existentialism 
(q.v.), professor at Basle University. 
He started as a psychiatrist, and this 
determined in many ways his concep- 
tion of philosophical problems. J. sees 
in psycho-pathological phenomena (A ll- 


gemeine Psychopathologie, 1913) not 
the expression of individual disinte- 
gration, but man’s intensified search 
for his individuality. Considering this 
morbid search as the core of real phil- 
osophising, J. comes to the conclusion 
that any rational picture of the world 
is still not knowledge. It can be only 
the “Chiffre fiir das Sein” (the cipher 
for being), which always needs inter- 
pretation. According to J., the inner 
content of philosophy is disclosed 
only by intimate “understanding” of 
the “cipher” and the task of philoso- 
phy is nothing but to comprehend the 
irrational that is dominating the world, 
and to understand it as the source of 
the highest wisdom (Vernunft und 
Existenz, 1935). The peculiarities 
of J.’s existentialism are most promi- 
nently seen in his doctrine of “border- 
line situations”. According to J., the 
teal meaning of existence becomes clear 
to men during periods of deepest shock 
(illness, death, unatonable guilt, etc.). 
rera at this moment “Scheitern 
der Chifre” (“the downfall of cipher”) 
takes place. Man becomes free from the 
burden of everyday cares (“Vorhanden- 
sein in der Welt”) and of his ideal 
interests and scientific views of real- 
ity (“das transzendentale An-sich-sein”). 
He faces a profoundly intimate exist- 
ence (“Existenzerhellung”) and his true 
experience of (a transcendental) God 
(Philosophie, 1932). The doctrine of 
“border-line situation” served J. to 
defend the “cultural psychological val- 
ue” of the cold war (Die Atombombe 
und die Zukunft des Menschen, 1958). 

Jeans, James Hopwood (1877-1946), 
English physicist and astrophysicist; 
a prominent exponent of modern 
“physical” idealism (q.v.); author of 
investigations in theoretical physics, 
astrophysics, and cosmogony. His hy- 
pothesis of the solar system originat- 
ing from a collision between the Sun 
and another star was popular in the 
20s and 30s. In the light of this hy- 
pothesis (which proved fallacious) plan- 
etary systems are a very rare and 
accidental phenomenon. J. sought to 
use the theory of relativity and the 
quanto theory to substantiate idea- 
ism. 








Jevons 


Jevons, William Stanley (1835-82), 
English logician and economist, pro- 
fessor at Manchester and London uni- 
versities, one of the first to employ 
the mathematical method in economic 
analysis. This did not free him from 
a crudely materialistic understanding 
of economics (e.g., of crises). In logic 
he was a follower of George Boole 
(q.v.), though he pointed out the flaws 
in Boole’s logical calculations. J. was 
the author of the first and simplest 
logical machine. His theory of knowl- 
edge gravitated towards agnosticism. 
His most prominent works are Theory 
of Political Economy, Elementary Les- 
sons in Logic: Deductive and Inductive, 
and The Principles of Science. 

Joliot-Curie, Frédéric (1900-58), 
French physicist, Communist, Chair- 
man of the World Peace Council (1949- 
58), member of the Paris Academy 
of Sciences, corresponding member of 
the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. 
His chief discovery was the phenome- 
non of artificial radioactivity; he also 
investigated the conversion of electron- 
positron pairs; and when the neutron 
was discovered he was one of the first 
to indicate the possibility of making 
practical use of atomic energy. He was 
an adherent of dialectical materialism. 

Judaism, religion of the Jews. It 
arose out of the pagan polytheism 
(q.v.) of the ancient Jewish tribes and 
became a monotheistic religion in the 
7th century B.C. The characteristic 
features of J. are: belief in one god, 
Jehovah, belief in the Messiah (sav- 
iour) and the dogma that the Jews 
are the chosen people. The sources of 
J. are the Old Testament (also recog- 
nised by Christianity) and the Talmud 
(an intricate scholastic system of com- 
mentaries on the Old Testament). 
Despite the assertions of modern Ju- 
daistic theologians about the special, 
“purifying” role of J., it is no less 
anti-scientific and reactionary than 
other religions. J. is the state religion 
of Israel and the religious basis of 
Jewish bourgeois nationalism (Zion- 
ism). 

Judgement, an idea expressed in the 
form of a declarative sentence, which 
makes some assertion about objects 


15° 


Justice and Injustice 


and which is objectively either true 
or false. Examples of J.: “All planets 
rotate around the Sun”, “If a number 
is divisible by 10, it is also divisible 
by 5”, “Smith will pass his exam 
with excellent marks”. The first two 
Jj. are true, whereas the third may 
prove to be true or false (depending 
on Smith’s marks), although the speak- 
er may have assumed that he was 
expressing a truth. A hypothesis (q.v.) 
is also a J. and may be objectively 
either true or false, although it is not 
yet proved or disproved. The laws 
of science are Jj. the truth of which 
has been proved. Ideas which cannot 
be characterised as true or false are 
not Jj. (questions, orders, requests, 
etc.). Jj. may be divided into simple 
and complex. Simple Jj. are those 
which within the limits of a system 
cannot be reduced to other Jj. Com- 
plex Jj. are made up of simple ones 
through various logical connectives, 
e.g., conjunctions “and” (conjunction, 
q.v.), “or” (disjunction, q.v.), “if ... 
then (implication, q.v.). The truth 
or falsity of complex Jj. is a function 
of the truth or falsity of simple Jj.: 
by knowing the value of simple Jj., 
we can determine the value (truth or 
falsity) of complex Jj. Four types of 
Jj. are usually regarded as simple 
in traditional formal logic (Aristotle 
formulated his syllogistic, q.v., in 
respect to these four): (1) General as- 
sertions: their structure is expressed 
in the formula “All S. are P.”, where 
S. is subject; P.—predicate, and “are” 
—connective. Example of such J.: 
“All liquids are resilient”; (2) genera} 
negations; their structure: “No S. is 
P.”, e.g., “No whale is a fish”; (3) 
particular assertions; their structure: 

Some S. are P.”, e.g., “Some metals 
are fluid”; (4) particular negations; 
their structure: “Some S. are not P.”, 
e.g., “Some metals do not oxidise”. 
The theory of Jj. was worked out in 
detail by Aristotle in his treatises 
De Interpretatione and Prior Analytics 
(see Statement). 

Justice and Injustice, ethical con- 
cepts expressing diverse moral quali- 
fications of social phenomena: the 
vindication and sanctioning of a social 





Justice and Injustice 


phenomenon by recognising it as just, 
or its condemnation and negation by 
qualifying it as unjust. The concepts 
of J. & I. are usually set out in philo- 
sophical, ethical, political, and other 
theories. As a rule, their interpreta- 
tion of J. & I. was considered as ab- 
solute and valid for all historical 
periods. In fact, however, these con- 
cepts change from one epoch to the next 
due to changes in social relations. 
Furthermore, in a class society mem- 
bers of the different classes interpret 
them differently. The ruling class 
vindicates the existing economic re- 


— 228 — 





Justice and Injustice 


lations, while the revolutionary class 
criticises and negates them. Marxism 
elucidated the concept of J. and meas- 
ured it in relation to the vital needs 
of natural social development. Marxist 
ethics associates the concept of J. with 
the idea of liberating society from 
exploitation. Socialism alone creates 
genuinely just relations of equality, 
fraternal friendship, and co-operation 
between all peoples. Social J. attains 
its summit in communist society, in 
which all traces of social and eco- 
nomic distinctions disappear. 





K 


Kant, Immanuel! (1724-1804), Ger- 
man philosopher and scientist, founder 
of German classical idealism. Was 
born, studied, and worked in Königs- 
berg where he was docent (1755-70) 
and professor (1770-96) of the Univer- 
sity. Founder of “critical” or “tran- 
scendental” idealism (q.v.). In the so- 
called “pre-critical” period (prior to 
1770) K. formulated his “nebular” 
cosmogonic hypothesis, according to 
which the planetary system arose and 
developed out of a prime “nebula”. 
At the same time K. advanced the 
hypothesis about the existence of a 
Great Universe of galaxies outside 
our Galaxy, developed the theories 
of the retardation of the Earth’s rota- 
tion by tidal friction and the relativity 
of motion and rest. These studies, unit- 
ed by the materialist idea of natural 
development of the Universe and the 
Earth, played an important part in 
the shaping of dialectics. In the phil- 
osophical works of the “pre-critical” 
period K. designated, under the in- 
fluence of the empiricism and scepti- 
cism of Hume (q.v.), the difference be- 
tween real grounds and logical grounds, 
introduced in philosophy the con- 
cept of negative magnitudes and ridi- 
culed the predilection of his contem- 
poraries for mysticism and “spiritual- 
ism”. In all these works the role of the 
formal deductive methods of thinking 
is restricted in favour of experience. 
In 1770, K. went over to the view of 
the “critical” period. His Kritik der 
reinen Vernunft appeared in 1781 and 
was followed by Kritik der praktischen 
Vernunft in 1788 and Kritik der Ur- 
teilskraft in 1790. In them K. consist- 
ently expounded: the “critical” theory 
of knowledge, ethics, aesthetics, and 


the doctrine of the expediency of na- 
ture. In his works of the “critical” 
period K. proved the impossibility 
of constructing a system of speculative 
philosophy (“metaphysics” in the ter- 
minology of those days), without a 
preliminary study of the forms of 
cognition and the boundaries of man’s 
cognitive abilities. Their study led 
K. to agnosticism (q.v.), to the asser- 
tion that the nature of things as they 
exist of themselves (“things-in-them- 
selves”) in principle is inaccessible 
to human knowledge. Knowledge is 
possible only of “phenomena”, i.e., 
the way through which things reveal 
themselves in our experience. True 
theoretical knowledge is available only 
in mathematics and natural science. 
This is determined, according to K., 
by the fact that in man’s mind there 
are a priori forms of sensuous contem- 
plation, like the a priori forms, or con- 
cepts, of reason and the a priori forms 
of the connection, or synthesis, between 
the sensuous multiformity and the 
concepts of reason. These, for example, 
are the basis for the law of constancy 
of substances, the law of causality, and 
the law of interaction of substances. 
According to K. an irrepressible striv- 
ing for absolute knowledge stemming 
from higher ethical requirements is 
inherent in reason. Under the pres- 
sure of this striving, man’s reason 
seeks to solve the problem of the finite- 
ness or infinity of the world in time 
and space, the possibility of the exist- 
ence of indivisible elements of the 
world, the nature of the processes tak- 
ing place in the world, and of God as 
an absolutely essential being. K. held 
that opposite solutions are equally 
demonstrable: the world is finite and 








Kant 


is infinite; indivisible particles (atoms) 
exist and there are no such particles, 
all processes are causally conditioned, 
and there are processes (actions) that 
occur freely; an absolutely essential 
being exists and does not exist. Thus, 
reason is by its nature antinomic, 
i.e., is divided by contradictions. But 
these contradictions are merely seem- 
ing. A solution of the enigma is fur- 
nished by limiting knowledge in favour 
of faith, by differentiating between 
“things-in-themselves” and  “phe- 
nomena”, recognising that “things-in- 
themselves” are unknowable. Thus, 
man is simultaneously not free (as a 
being in a world of phenomena) and 
free (as a subject of the unknowable 
supersensual world); the existence of 
God is undemonstrable (for knowledge), 
and at the same time there is the neces- 
sary postulate of faith, on which our 
conviction of the existence of moral 
order in the world rests, etc. This teach- 
ing on the antinomic nature of reason, 
which served K. as the basis for the 
dualism of the “things-in-themselves” 
and “phenomena” and for agnosticism, 
gave an impetus to the development 
of positive dialectics in German clas- 
sical idealism. On the other hand, 
in the understanding of knowledge, be- 
haviour, and creative effort this teach- 
ing remained a captive of dualism, 
agnosticism, and formalism. For exam- 
ple, K. proclaimed as the basic law 
the categorical imperative (q.v.) which 
demands that man be guided by a rule 
which, being absolutely independent 
of the moral content of an action, could 
become a universal rule of behavi- 
our. In aesthetics he reduced beauty 
to a “disinterested” pleasure which 
does not depend on whether the object 
depicted in a work of art exists or 
not and is determined solely by form. 
But K. was unable to apply his form- 
alism consistently: in ethics, contrary 
to the formal nature of the categorical 
imperative, he put forward the prin- 
ciple of the self-value of each individ- 
ual, which must not be sacrificed 
even for the good of society as a whole; 
in aesthetics, contrary to the formalism 
in understanding the beautiful, he 
declared poetry the highest form of 


= 230 — 


Karinsky 





art because it is able to portray the 
ideal, etc. K.’s doctrine of the role 
of antagonisms in the historical proc- 
ess of social life and the need for eter- 
nal peace were progressive. K. consi- 
dered international trade and contacts 
with their mutual benefit for different 
states as a means for establishing and 
maintaining peace. Though abound- 
ing in contradictions, Kantianism con- 
siderably influenced the subsequent 
development of scientific and philo- 
sophical thought. In their criticism of 
K. the founders of Marxism-Leninism 
demonstrated that the social causes 
of his delusions, contradictions, and 
inconsistency were rooted in the back- 
wardness and weakness of the German 
bourgeoisie of that period. Idealist 
philosophers of the end of the 19th 
and the first half of the 20th century, 
discarding the materialist element in 
K.’s_ philosophy and his “thing-in- 
itself”, exploited his inconsistencies 
and borrowed his erroneous theories 
to justify their own reactionary doc- 
trines (see Neo-Kantianism; Socialism, 
Ethical; Marburg School; Baden 


School). 

Karinsky, Mikhail Ivanovich (1840- 
1917), Russian logician and philoso- 
pher. In 1869-94 taught philosophy 
at the Petersburg Ecclesiastical Acad- 
emy and other educational establish- 
ments. In his Kritichesky obzor posled- 
nego perioda nemetskoi filosofii (Critical 
Review of Recent German Philosophy), 
1873, K. attacked German idealism. 
Gravitated in his views towards mate- 
rialism Yavleniye i deistvitelnost (Phe- 
nomenon and Reality), 1878; Razno- 
glasiye v shkole novogo empirizma po 
voprosu ob istinakh samoochevidnykh 
(Differences in the School of New Em- 
piricism on the Question of Self-E vid- 
ent Truths), 1914; Logika (Logic), 
1884-85; and others. In his Doctor’s 
thesis Klassifikatsiya vyvodov (Clas- 
sification of Inferences), 1880, K. ana- 
lysed syllogistic and inductive trends 
in logic and expressed original views 
on this question. In his Ob istinakh 
samoochevidnykh (Self-Evident Truths), 
1893, criticised the dogmatism and ap- 
Tiorism (q.v.) of Kant’s (q.v.) theory 
of knowledge. K. repeatedly attacked 








Kautsky 


Neo-Kantians (q.v.) including Vve- 
densky (q.v.) and also subjective ideal- 
ists of the Berkeley type. K. is the 
author of original works on the his- 
tory of ancient philosophy: Tyemnoye 
suidetelstuo Ippolita o filosofe Anak- 
simene (Obscure Testimony of Hyppo- 
lite about the Philosopher Anaximenes), 
1881; Lektsii po istorii drevnei filosofii 
(Lectures on the History of Ancient 
Philosophy), 1885; Lektsii po istorii 
novoi filosofii (Lectures on the History 
of New Philosophy), 1884, etc. 
Kautsky, Karl (1854-1938), German 
historian and economist; Social-Dem- 
ocratic theoretician of the Second 
International, opportunist. Born in 
Prague, after 1880 lived in Germany. 
In 1881, met Marx and Engels. Actively 
contributed to the Social-Democratic 
press after the 1870s. In the 1890s 
became the recognised theoretician of 
German Social-Democracy. K. wrote 
a number of works—Karl Marx kono- 
mische Lehren, 1887; Vorläufer des 
neueren Sozialismus, 1895; Die Ag- 
rarfrage, 1899, Der Ursprung des Christ- 
entums, 1885; and others, which played 
a big part in spreading the ideas of 
Marxism. But in these works, K. made 
crass errors and distorted Marxism, 
for which he was criticised by Engels. 
K.’s pamphlet Der Weg zur Macht, 
published in 1909, was described by 
Lenin as K.’s best work. That pamphlet 
examined questions of a political rev- 
olution but did not say “a word 
about the revolutionary use of any 
and every revolutionary situation” 
(Lenin). Speaking about the proletarian 
revolution K. avoids the question of 
demolishing the bourgeois state ma- 
chine and putting in its place organs 
of proletarian power. In 1910, K. formed 
a “central group” in the German 
Social-Democratic Party and after that 
openly came out against revolutionary 
Marxism. His work Die Diktatur des 
Proletariats, published in 1918, was 
called by Lenin a model of philistine 
distortion of Marxism and foul betrayal 
of it in deeds, while hypocritically 
Tecognising it in words. K. did not 
understand the tasks of the dictator- 
ship of the proletariat (q.v.). In his 
philosophical views he was an eclectic, 


— 231 — 


Khomyakov 


combining elements of materialism 
and idealism. In his Die materialisti- 
sche Geschichtsauffassung in two vo- 
lumes, 1927-29, K. completely dis- 
torts the theory of dialectical and his- 
torical materialism. Thus, starting with 
deviations from some major proposi- 
tions of Marxism and ignoring its crea- 
tive application, K. lapsed into oppor- 
tunism and renegacy. 

Kavelin, Konstantin Dmitriyevich 
(1818-85), Russian idealist philosopher, 
historian, and political leader, profes- 
sor at Petersburg and Moscow univer- 
sities. In his youth was a Westerner 
and an admirer of Belinsky (q.v.) and 
Herzen (q.v.). In the 1850s became a 
liberal, which led to his break with 
the Sovremennik (Contemporary) and 
Herzen. Turned to philosóphy in the 
1860s to substantiate his political and 
ethical views. In his Zadacha Psikho- 
logii (Aim of Psychology), 1872, and 
Zadachi Etiki (Aims of Ethics), 1885, 
tried to adapt psychology in order 
to justify Christian ethics. Philosophy, 
in his opinion, should become the 
science of the individual human soul, 
the psychology which explains the 
moral, spiritual world regardless of the 
material substratum. To the “abstract- 
ness” of materialism and idealism, 
which study the general, K. counter- 
posed the “concrete” knowledge of the 
individual soul. This supposedly elim- 
inates the one-sidedness of philosoph- 
ical systems. K. supported the idea 
of freedom of will (q.v.). The insol- 
vency of K.’s theory was demonstrated 
by Sechenov (q.v.) in his remarks on 
K.’s Aim of Psychology. 

Khomyakov, Alexei Stepanovich 
(1804-60), Russian writer and idealist 
philosopher, one of the founders of 
Slavophilism; graduated from Moscow 
University in 1820. In his works K. 
opposed materialism and criticised 
German classical idealism. He ad- 
hered to objective-idealist views which 
assumed the form of religious mystical 
voluntarism (q.v.). He regarded the 
ideal, rational, and free element as 
the first principle of all that exists. 
This element could not be cognised 
with man’s usual means of knowledge, 
sensations and reason, but through 





Kierkegaard 


some “inner knowledge”, “rational 
vision”, i.e., with the help of religion. 
As regards society, K. adhered to the 
doctrine of providence. An ideologist 
of the Russian nobility, K., though 
criticising to some extent the Russian 
social order, proposed economic and 
political reforms to enable the Russian 
nobility to preserve its privileges in the 
period of historically inevitable changes 
—Russia’s transition to the road of 
capitalist development. 

Kierkegaard, Sören (1813-55), Danish 
mystic thinker and precursor of exis- 
tentialism (q.v.). Principal works are 
Either/Or (1843), The Concept of Fear 
(1844), The Sickness Unto Death (1849). 
The subject of the first are “musical- 
erotic” problems, that of the other 
two—-the concept of “original sin” 
and a description of the various kinds 
of doubt and despair. K. criticised the 
philosophy of Hegel (q.v.) from the 
standpoint of extreme subjectivism. 
Truth, for K., is always subjective. 
In ethics K, supported individualism 
(q.v.) and moral relativism, and 
preached despondency, fear, and hatred 
of the masses. Of the three types of 
human “existence” (aesthetic, ethical, 
and religious) he held religious exist- 
ence to be the highest. K. originated 
the concept of existence (q.v.) as a 
“synthesis of the finite and infinite, 
the temporary and the eternal”. In 
the late years of his life K. criticised 
the official church for “insufficient 
piety”. 

Kinship with the People in Art, an 
aesthetic category which expresses and 
summarises the totality of diverse 
relationships between art and the peo- 
ple, manifested above all in the fact 
that true art directly or indirectly 
embodies the aesthetical ideals of the 
people, their understanding of justice 
and beauty and the fervour of the 
people’s revolutionary struggle for free- 
dom and happiness. It is a historical 
concept and its content is determined 
by the specific conditions and stages 
of social development, the place and 
role of art in society. The people, as 
Gorky put it, are the first artists in 
point of time, beauty and genius, the 
true creators of world culture. Artistic 


— 232 — 


Kireyevsky 





endeavour is an important sphere of 
the people’s activity. The collective 
creative endeavour of the people is the 
basis and steady source of professional 
art, from which the subjects, ideas, 
and images of the finest works of art 
are drawn. In contrast to formalist 
and naturalist trends, realistic art is 
marked by kinship with the people, 
which is its main distinctive feature. 
This stems from the wisdom of the 
people and reflects their struggle for 
emancipation. All the great artists 
are part and parcel of the people, be- 
cause by their creative work they help 
the people in their struggle often with- 
out being aware of it. “Art belongs 
to the people, it must extend its roots 
into the very depth of the working 
masses, it must be understandable by ... 
the masses and be loved by them.” 
This statement by Lenin is one of the 
fundamental principles of socialist art. 

Kireyevsky, Ivan Vasilyevich (1806- 
56), Russian publicist and idealist 
philosopher, one of the founders of 
Slavophilism (see Slavophiles). Edited 
the journals Yevuropeyets (European), 
1832, and Moskvityanin (Muscovite), 
1845. According to K., who adhered 
to an anti-rationalist, religious, and 
intuitive theory of knowledge, the life 
of individuals, nations, and groups of 
nations, for example, the Slavs, West 
Europeans, etc., is founded on religion, 
which determines the education and 
the entire life of a nation. Since the 
Orthodox religion professed by the 
Slavs, chiefly the Russians, is the true 
religion, the future belongs only to the 
Slavs. The other peoples could make 
progress only if they accepted the Or- 
thodox Christian civilisation. Other- 
wise civilisation will disintegrate (in 
K.’s opinion, this is what happened 
in Western Europe). K. regarded non- 
resistance to evil, the absence of class 
stratification, and communal life in 
the village (which he idealised) as 
distinctive features of the Russian 
people. Though he expressed some cor- 
rect ideas about the fallacies of meta- 
physical thinking and the negative 
sides of bourgeois society, on the whole 
K.’s views were reactionary both in 
sociology and politics. 








Knowledge 


— 233 — 


Kovalevsky 





Knowledge, a product of the social 
labour and thinking of men, an ideal 
reproduction, in language form of ob- 
jective, law-governed relations in the 
objective world that undergoes changes. 
The essence of K. cannot be under- 
stood without revealing the social na- 
ture of man’s practical activity. Man’s 
social power is concentrated and crys- 
tallised in K. In the history of phi- 
losophy, this furnished the basis for 
the ideas of objective idealist systems 
about the self-sufficient and self-de- 
termining significance of ideal products 
of man’s social activity (Plato, Hegel). 
In the epistemology of pre-Marxist ma- 
terialism K. was understood, con- 
trariwise, as a product of the individual 
cognitive effort, of individual experi- 
ence. But such a view, upholding the 
sensualistic principle, could not ex- 
plain the fact that man begins the proc- 
ess of cognition possessing a “ready- 
made” apparatus of concepts and cate- 
gories elaborated by society. It is a 
direct function of K. to convert scat- 
tered concept into a universal form, 
retaining in them that which may be 
passed on to others as a stable basis 
for practical action. From this angle 
K. is contrasted to opinion, the vulgar 
notions expressing empirical, change- 
able properties of things. 

Komensky, Jan Amos, or Comenius 
(1592-1670), Czech pedagogue, human- 
ist, and philosopher, opponent of the 
scholastic system of education, leader 
of a group of the Moravian Brothers, 
a sect formed in the course of the anti- 
feudal movement and national strug- 
gle against the German feudal lords 
and the Catholic Church. He was a 
Protestant close to pantheism (q.v.). 
There were considerable materialist 
tendencies in his sensualist theory of 
knowledge and didactics. Cognition, 
according to K., is an active process 
closely connected with rational edu- 
cation. All people, he asserted, are 
capable of knowledge and education. 
The ordinary people should be given 
access to knowledge. For the first 
time in the history of pedagogics K. 
created a system of didactics as a spe- 
cial science. His didactic principles 
(visual, presentation, gradation, imi- 


tation, exercise) demanded deep knowl- 
edge of the laws of nature and a ration- 
ally organised assimilation of knowl- 
edge. K.’s progressive views exerted 
great influence on the subsequent 
development of pedagogics. His 
main works are Januas linguarum 
reserata, 1631, and Didactica Magna, 
1657. 

Kovalevsky, Maxim Maximovich 
(1851-1916), Russian sociologist, histo- 
rian, jurist, and political leader, acad- 
emician (since 1914). Taught law at 
Moscow University (was dismissed for 
progressive ideas) and Petersburg Uni- 
versity and also at a number of univer- 
‘sities in Europe and America. K. was 
a supporter of classical positivism 
(q.v.) and one of the organisers of the 
Moscow Psychological Society (1884). 
K. was familiar with the ideas of Marx 
and Engels, as shown by his interest 
in the history of landownership and the 
economic development of Europe: Ob- 
shchinnoye zemlevladeniye. Prichiny, 
khod i posledstviya yego razlozheniya 
(Communal Landownership. Causes, 
Course and Consequences of Its Disinte- 
gration), 1879; Ekonomichesky rost Yev- 
ropy do vozniknoveniya kapitalistiches- 
kogo khozyaistva (Economic Growth 
of Europe up to the Rise of the Capital- 
ist Economy), 1898-1903. Engels posi- 
tively assessed K.’s studies on the his- 
tory of the family. In his historical 
works which contained extensive_ fac- 
tual material, K. elaborated the com- 
parative historical method (q.v.). He 
analysed sociological doctrines in his 
books: Sovremenniye sotsiologi (Con- 
temporary Sociologists), 1905; So- 
tsiologiya (Sociology), 2 volumes, 1910. 
K. was a proponent of the theory of 
social progress, which he perceived 
in the development of solidarity be- 
tween peoples, classes and groups. 
This solidarity, according to K., arises 
by virtue of numerous causes (economic, 
social, political), among which it 
is impossible to single out the main and 
determining factor. A historian should 
limit himself to registering the inter- 
action and co-relationship in the de- 
velopment of social phenomena. K. 
was influenced by theories which biol- 
ogised social progress and also by bour- 





Kozelsky 


geois economism and Socialism of the 
Chair (q.v.). Denial of revolutionary 
methods of reconstructing society was 
their common feature. In his sociologi- 
cal writings K. sought to justify Russian 
liberalism and reconciliation of democ- 
\racy with the monarchy. His political 
activities were criticised by Lenin. 
Kozelsky, Yakov Pavlovich (1728- 
94), Russian enlightener and philos- 
opher. Taught mathematics and me- 
chanics in the Artillery and Engineering 
schools. Later served in the Senate. 
Kozelsky is the author of Filosofiches- 
kiye predlozheniya (Philosophical Pro- 
positions), 1768; Rassuzhdeniya o chelo- 
vecheskom poznanii (Discourse on Hu- 
man Knowledge), 1788; Arifmetiches- 
kiye predlozheniya (Arithmetical Pro- 
positions), 1764; Mekhanicheskiye pre- 
dlozheniya (Mechanical Propositions), 
1764. He advocated materialist ideas 
and criticised medieval scholasticism 
and mysticism, separated philos- 
ophy from theology and considered 
that philosophy should give “general 
knowledge of things and human deeds”, 
i.e., is the “science of testing causes 
by truths”. In his views of nature 
developed the ideas of 18th century 
mechanistic materialism. Declaring na- 
ture the “universal mother of all 
things”, K. proved that nature con- 
sists of four material elements and 
that matter and motion are indestruct- 
ible. The influence of C. Wolff and his 
followers is felt in some of K.’s logical 
categories. He considered sensory per- 
ceptions the initial element in the 
theory of knowledge, assigning a big 
role to experience and the activity of 
reason. He divided all knowledge into 
historical, philosophical, and mathe- 
matical, and the truths obtained by 


— 234 — 


Kropotkin 


people into natural, ethical, and log- 
ical. K. criticised the religious mysti- 
cal aspects of the Wolffian theory of 
monads (q.v.), predestined harmony, 
and non-resistance to evil. He criti- 
cised the feudal system, idleness, and 
parasitism and extolled labour, a mod- 
est mode of life, and a humane at- 
titude to people. 

Kropotkin, Pyotr Alexeyevich (1842- 
1921), Russian theoretician of anarch- 
ism (q.v.) and geographer, member of 
a princely family. Took part in ex- 
plorations (mainly in Siberia) and 
collected interesting material on phys- 
ical geography. K. rationalised the 
theory of continental glaciation 7s- 
sledovaniye o lednikovom periodye (The 
Ice Age, an Enquiry), 1876. In the 
1870s, K. joined the Narodnik move- 
ment (see Narodism), was imprisoned 
in 1874, and escaped abroad two years 
later. In 1917, K. returned to Russia. 
In his works Khleb i Volya (Bread and 
Freedom), 1892; Sovremennaya nauka i 
anarkhism (Modern Science and Anarch- 
ism), 1913; etc., he developed the 
theory of so-called communist anarch- 
ism. For K., the society of the future 
was to be a federation of free productive 
communities, formed as a result of 
a social revolution. K.’s philosophic 
views were a blending of positivism 
(q.v.) and mechanistic materialism. 
Contrary to the Marxist concept of 
history, K. proclaimed the concept 
of abstract mutual aid, which he con- 
sidered to be the corner-stone of social 
development. Repudiating dialectics, 
K. considered the inducto-deductive 
method of natural science to be the 
only scientific method of thinking. 
He was considerably influenced by the 
positivism of Comte and Spencer (qq.v.). 








first 


Labour 
place, a process in which both man and 
nature participate, and in which man 
of his own accord starts, regulates, and 


“Labour is, in the 


controls the material reactions be- 
tween himself and nature.” (Marx, 
Capital, Vol. 1, p. 177.) By acting on 
external nature, man changes both na- 
ture and himself. In changing nature he 
achieves his conscious purpose, adapts 
natural objects to his requirements. 
The L. process includes three things: 
(1) man’s purposeful activity, or L. 
proper; (2) the object of L.; (3) the in- 
struments of production with which 
man acts on this object. L. is the pri- 
mary condition of human existence. L. 
supplies man with the necessary means 
of subsistence and, moreover, it created 
man himself. It was thanks to L. that 
man raised himself out of the animal 
world. One of the essential distinctions 
between man and the animal is that the 
animal makes use of ready products 
of nature, whereas man makes nature 
serve his purposes thanks to his la- 
bour, changes it and subordinates it 
to his needs. In different socio-economic 
formations (q.v.) L. appears in differ- 
ent forms which indicate the level 
of the development of the social re- 
lations at the given epoch. In the 
primitive-communal system (q.v.) L. 
is common, collective by its nature, 
and ownership of the means of produc- 
tion and its fruits is also common. 
Under this system there is no exploita- 
tion of the labour of others. In all the 
subsequent antagonistic socio-econom- 
ic formations man’s L. is subjected 
to exploitation: the slave’s L. in slave 
society, the serf’s L. under feudalism 
(q.v.), and the worker’s under capital- 
ism (q.v.). Only the socialist revolu- 


tion (q.v.) releases the worker from 
exploitation. Under socialism (q.v.) and 
especially under communism L. has 
genuine purpose—to serve not only 
as the source of existence, but also 
as the source of creative inspiration 
and enjoyment (see Communist La- 
bour; Antithesis of Mental and Physical 
Labour; Socialism and Communism). 

Labriola, Antonio (1843-1904), first 
Italian Marxist; writer, and philoso- 
pher. L. became a Marxist after having 
rejected bourgeois democratism and 
the idealism of Hegel (q.v.). L. assert- 
ed that with the advent of historical 
materialism communism had ceased to 
be a “doubtful hypothesis” and could 
now be regarded as the inevitable 
“final result and outcome of the class 
struggle of our times”. L. regarded the 
publication of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party (q.v.) as a revolution 
in the social sciences. Referring to 
the derived character of the super- 
structure, L. nevertheless refuted eco- 
nomic materialism (q.v.), and held that 
only in the final count the economic 
element is instrumental in determining 
the trend of thinking in art, religion, 
and the various fields of human knowl- 
edge. He criticised the theories of 
Nietzsche, E. Hartmann, Croce, and 
Neo-Kantianism (qq.v.). His evalua- 
tion of colonialism was erroneous in 
certain respects. His best work, Saggi 
intorno alla concepzione materialistica 
della storia (1895-98; 1925—posthu- 
mous edition), greatly influenced the 
thinking of Gramsci (q-v.) and To- 
gliatti. 

Lafargue, Paul (1842-1911), French 
socialist, active in the international 
working-class movement, disciple of 
Marx and Engels. His main work was 





Lamarck 


in philosophy and political economy, 
the history of religion and morals, 
literature and language. Lenin said 
that L. was one of the most gifted prop- 
agators of the ideas of Marxism. Hav- 
ing become a member of the First 
International in 1866, L. freed him- 
self of Proudhonist and positivist 
views. He took an active part in the 
affairs of the Paris Commune; later 
associated with Jules Guesde; both of 
them became leaders of the French 
Workers’ Party. L. fought anarchism 
and the opportunist theory of capital- 
ism “growing peacefully” into social- 
ism, and criticised the reformist and 
nationalist mistakes committed by 
Guesde. In his major philosophical 
work Le déterminisme économique de 
Karl Marx (1909) L. stressed the ob- 
jective nature of the laws of history 
and revealed the interconnection be- 
tween economics and the superstructure 
of society. He opposed revisionist at- 
tempts to “synthesise” Marxism with 
the doctrine of Kant and reconcile 
materialism with idealism. He also 
opposed Social-Darwinism and other 
unscientific theories. His book Prob- 
lems of Cognition (1910) was a pro- 
found and witty repudiation of agnos- 
ticism. L.’s anti-religious pamphlets 
Pius IX in Heaven, The Myth of Adam 
and Eve, and La religion du capital 
exposed religion as a defender of capi- 
talism. His reminiscences of Marx, 
giving a picture of the great fighter 
and thinker, are of considerable inter- 
est. L.’s works, despite a number of 
defects (oversimplification of certain 
problems, underestimation of the ac- 
tive part played by the superstructure, 
failure to fully comprehend the specific 
features of the imperialist stage of 
capitalism, etc.) played an important 
part in the struggle against reactionary 
ideology. 

Lamarck, Jean Baptiste (1744-1829), 
French naturalist. In his Philosophie 
Zoologique (1809) he expounded the 
first comprehensive theory of the evo- 
lutionary development of the living 
world, Having summed up the results 
achieved by natural science in his day, 
L. advanced the proposition that 
changes in the environment cause orga- 


— 236 — 


La Mettrie 


nisms to acquire new qualities, which 
are transmitted by heredity. He thus at- 
tacked the metaphysical theory of the 
permanence of species and also the 
Cuvier (q.v.) catastrophe theory. Ac- 
cording to L., the animate arises from 
the inanimate with the aid of special 
material “fluids”. At first the simplest 
forms are evolved and from these more 
complex forms gradually develop. L. 
held, however, that matter is incapable 
of self-propulsion and that the develop- 
ment of both the animate and the inan- 
imate is guided by a “divine innate 
purpose”. The teleological side of La- 
marck’s doctrine was taken up by the 
Neo-Lamarckists, who maintained that 
the mind plays a predominant part in 
the process of evolution. L.’s idea of 
the role of environment and heredity 
in evolution was used by Darwin (q.v.) 
in his theory of evolution (q.v.). 

La Mettrie, Julien Offroy de (1709- 
51), French materialist philosopher 
and doctor. His chief works were 
L’homme machine (1747) and Le Systéme 
d’Epicure (1750). He was victimised 
by both the clergy and the secular 
authorities. L.'s teaching is based on 
the physics of Descartes (q.v.) and 
the sensualism of Locke (q.v.). L. 
recognised an internally active mate- 
rial substance possessing extension and 
sensation. The forms of matter were 
the organic, vegetable and animal 
kingdoms (man being included in the 
animal kingdom), between which, ac- 
cording to L., there were no qualita- 
tive differences. L. denied the univer- 
sality of thought, the ability to think 
being common only to man and aris- 
ing as the result of a complex organisa- 
tion of matter. L. understood the abil- 
ity to think as the comparison and 
combination of conceptions arising on 
the basis of sensation and memory. 
A representative of the school of mech- 
anistic materialism, L. gradually 
moved nearer to the theory of evolu- 
tion. He held that the enlightenment 
and the actions of outstanding individ- 
uals are the main causes of historical 
development and advocated enlight- 
ened absolutism. His atheism was lim- 
ited and he was in favour of preserving 
religion for the common people. 








Langevin 


— 237° w 


Lassalle 








Langevin, Paul (1872-1946), French 
physicist, active in public life, Com- 
munist, advocate of dialectical mate- 
rialism, professor of Paris University, 
member of the Paris Academy of Sci- 
ences, and foreign member of the Aca- 
demy of Sciences of the USSR. Author 
of several major researches on the ioni- 
sation of gases, the theory of para- 
and dia-magnetism, etc., L. gave a 
scientific interpretation of the trans- 
formations propounded by Lorentz 
(q.v.), of the defect of mass, of the 
wave-corpuscular dualism (q.v.), of 
the statistical laws appertaining to 
microphenomena and other matters. 
He also criticised positivist theories, 
indeterminism, and subjectivist inter- 
pretations of the uncertainty principle 
(q.v.). Towards the end of his life he 
became acquainted with Marxism-Le- 
ninism and valued it as being of great 
importance to natural science. Accord- 
ing to L., dialectical materialism 
makes it possible to widen and enrich 
the experimental method itself. 

Language, sign-system of any phys- 
ical nature, fulfilling the cognitive and 
communicative functions in the process 
of human activity. L. can be both 
natural and artificial. Natural L. is 
the L. of everyday life, serving asa 
form of thought expression and as a 
means of communication among men. 
Artificial L. is a L. created by men 
for some exclusive needs (the L. of 
mathematical symbols, the L. of 
physical theories, the different systems 
of signalling, etc.). L. is a social phe- 
nomenon. It, arises in the course of 
development of social production, of 
which it is an indispensable aspect—a 
means .of co-ordinating human activ- 
ity. Physiologically, L. acts as a sec- 
ond signal system, which Pavlov (q.v.) 
called a specific addition to the human 
psyche. L. is a form of existence of 
thought and a form of its expression. 
At the same time it plays an impor- 
tant role in the formation of conscious- 
ness. Consciousness does not and can- 
not exist outside of L. The L. sign, 
conventional in relation to what it 
designates by virtue of its physical 
nature, is nevertheless socially con- 
ditioned by the content of conscious- 





ness, which in L. is the linguistic con- 
tent (the lexical and grammatical mean- 
ing of the L. sign). L. is a means of 
fixing and preserving the accumulated 
knowledge and passing it on from 
generation to generation. Only L. 
makes possible the existence of abstract 
thought. The presence of L. is a neces- 
sary condition for the thought’s gener- 
alising activity (see Generalisation). 
“Every word (speech) generalises” 
(Lenin). And yet L. and thought are 
not identical. After it has arisen, L. 
becomes relatively independent, obey- 
ing specific laws differing from those 
of thought. For this reason there is 
no identity between concept and word, 
judgement and sentence. L., moreover, 
is a definite system, which has an inner 
“structure” outside which the nature 
and the meaning of a L. sign cannot 
be understood. In connection with the 
growing role of theoretical studies in 
recent decades, more interest is shown 
in the study of the laws of artificial, 
formal languages, of their logical syn- 
tax and logical semantics. Contempo- 
rary neo-positivism absolutises the role 
and significance of these studies and 
tries, incorrectly, to reduce the prob- 
lems involved in philosophical studies 
to a logical analysis of L. 

Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-64), op- 
portunist figure in the German work- 
ing-class movement, who supported 
Bismarck. Born into a rich merchant 
family, he took part in the revolution 
of 1848. As one of the organisers of the 
All-German Workers’ Union, he re- 
pudiated the class struggle and com- 
promised with the Prussian reaction- 
aries. His philosophy was idealist and 
eclectic. He interpreted Hegel (q.v.) 
scholastically and used his philosophy 
to justify his own conciliatory political 
line. In sociology L. held Malthusian 
views (see Malthusianism) and was 
one of the authors of the anti-scientific 
and reactionary “iron law of wages”, 
according to which any struggle on the 
part of the workers for wage increases 
was considered futile. He regarded the 
state as an organisation standing above 
classes. L.’s views were criticised by 
Marx in his Criticism of the Gotha Pro- 
gramme (q.v.) and by Lenin in the 





Lavrov 


Philosophical Notebooks (q.v.). Their 
estimation of L. ’s work as an agitator, 
however, was favourable. 

Lavrov, Pyotr Lavrovich (1823-1900), 
theoretician of Narodism (q.v.), creator 
of the Russian “subjectivist school” 
in sociology, and writer. Son of a land- 
owner. Participated in the work of 
such illegal revolutionary organisa- 
tions as Zemlya i Volya (Land and 
Freedom) and Narodnaya Volya (Peo- 
ple’s Will). Member of the First 
International. While in London, be- 
came acquainted with Marx and En- 
gels. Wrote and spoke on problems 
of philosophy, sociology, ethics, his- 
tory of public opinion, and art. L.’s 
chief interest lay in the ways of the 
revolution in Russia. Admitting the 
validity of the theory of socialist revo- 
lution for the developed capitalist 
countries of Europe, L. was sceptical 
about its applicability to the condi- 
tions prevailing in Russia. His socio- 
political doctrine (influenced by Her- 
zen, q.v.) rested on two interdependent 
concepts: (1) the socialist nature of 
the Russian peaa community, and 
(2) the special role of the intelligentsia 
in the Russian liberation movement. 
These concepts determined L.’s whole 
philosophico-historical conception. Re- 
ferring to the characteristic features 
of history “as a process”, L. distin- 
guished the concept of culture and the 
concept of civilisation. Culture is of 
community origin and is reflected in 
a people’s psychology and the charac- 
teristic features of its daily life and so- 
cial relations. The degree of receptiv- 
ity to reasoning rather than the nature 
of thinking is the criterion of culture. 
According to L., the culture of society 
is environment given by history for 
thinking. Civilisation is a conscious 
developing principle; it is manifested 
in a progressive replacement of cultural 
forms. “The critically thinking individ- 
uals” are the vehicles of civilisation. 
The measure of the critical enlighten- 
ment of human consciousness (primar- 
ily moral consciousness) is the crite- 
rion of progress. Social development 
implies the growth of the individual’s 
consciousness and of the solidarity 
between individuals. Philosophically, 


— 238 — 









Law — 


L. was eclectic, combining material- 
ism and idealism. Influenced by pos- 
itivism and agnosticism (qq.v.), he 
gravitated to subjective idealism. Main 
works: /storicheskiye pisma (Historical 
Letters), 1869; Tsel i znacheniye klas- 
sifikatsii nauk (The Purpose and Im- 
portance of the Classification of Sciences), 
1886; Zadachi positivisma i ikh resheniye 
(Tasks of Positivism and Their Solu- 
tion), 1886; Vazhneishiye momenty v 
istorii mysli (Essential Moments in 
the History of Thought), 1899. 

Law 1. An inner essential connection 
of phenomena which determines their 
necessary, natural development. L. 
expresses a definite order of causal, 
necessary and stable connections be- 
tween phenomena or properties of ma- 
terial objects, of recurring essential 
relations, in which the change of some 
phenomena causes a definite change 
in others. The concept of L. is close 
to the concept of essence, which con- 
stitutes the sum total of inner con- 
nections and processes determining the 
major features and tendencies in the 
development of objects. Knowledge of 
a L. presupposes transition from ap- 
pearance to essence (see Essence and 
Appearance) and always proceeds 
through abstract thinking, abstraction 
from many purely individual and non- 
essential features of phenomena. There 
are three main groups of L: (1) specific 
or particular; (2) general, for large 
groups of phenomena; (3) universal. 
The first group expresses relations be- 
tween specific phenomena, or particular 
properties of matter. The second group 
is displayed in a wide range of con- 
ditions and characterises relations be- 
tween general properties of large ag- 
gregates of objects and phenomena 
(for example, in physics, laws of the 
conservation of mass or the electric 
charge and in biology, L. of natural 
selection, etc.). The third group 
represents the main dialectical Li. of 
the world which express the relations 
between universal properties or trends 
of development of matter. They act 
as the universal principles of all being, 
as the common elements which are 
manifested in many LI. of the first 
and second group. But the distinctions 





Law — 239 — 


between these L1. are relative and mo- 
bile. The operation of general L1. 
is manifested in particular, specific L1. 
and the general Ll. are cognised 
through the generalisation of concrete 
phenomena, including specific LI. 
Another distinction between LI. is that 
some operate differentially in time, 
in such a way that the ensuing conse- 
quences are ful filled in each, sufficiently 
small, span of time, while others 
operate integrally, i.e., their conse- 
quences are fulfilled not at each given 
moment, but only over a sufficiently 
big span of time or when the system 
changes as a whole. Such are statis- 
tical Ll. Operation of L. depends 
on the existence of the corresponding 
conditions. The creation of the latter 
helps to turn the consequences of L. 
from possibility into reality. In society, 
application of L1. presupposes the ac- 
tivity of people who are capable of 
creating or destroying—consciously or 
unconsciously—the conditions for the 
operation of L1. People, however, do 
not create L1., they only restrict or 
extend the scope of their operation 
according to their needs and interests. 
As for LI. as such, they exist objective- 
ly, independent of the consciousness 
of people, as an expression of the rela- 
tions between properties of bodies or 
different tendencies of development. 
2. The will of the ruling class as 
embodied in its own specific system 
of jurisprudence and determined by the 
material conditions and interests of 
that class. L. is drawn up as a system 
of rules and standards of behaviour, 
established or sanctioned by the state 
power. The specific feature of legal 
rules is that their fulfllment is forcibly 
ensured by the state power. Being 
part of the superstructure, L. is deter- 
mined by the given society’s dominant 
relations of production, which it sanc- 
tions together with the social relations 
based on them. The historical type of 
L. corresponds to the appropriate so- 
cio-economic formation (q.v.). The 
common feature of the slave-owning, 
feudal and bourgeois L. is the consol- 
idation of the master and subordinate 
Telations, the relations of exploita- 
tion, based on private property. A 


Laws, Statistical and Dynamic 


qualitatively new legal system is 
found in socialist L., which legally em- 
bodies production relations as charac- 
terised by friendly collaboration and 
mutual aid and which, based on so- 
cialist ownership, provides a firm 
foundation for the building of commu- 
nism. Socialist L. is the will of the peo- 
ple given the statutory force; for the 
first time in history it establishes and 
really guarantees truly democratic 
liberties. It differs from bourgeois L. 
in that it provides the working peo- 
ple with genuine rights guaranteed 
by all the means at the disposal of the 
state. 

Laws, Statistical and Dynamic, forms 
of regular causal connection between 
phenomena. D.L. are a form of causal 
connection in which a given condition 
of a system determines unequivocally 
all its subsequent conditions, knowl- 
edge of the initial conditions allowing 
an accurate prediction of the further 
development of the system. D.L. oper- 
ate in all autonomous systems which 
are but insignificantly dependent on 
outside influences and consist of a 
relatively small number of elements. 
For example, they determine the char- 
acter of the motion of planets in the 
solar system. S.L. are a form of causal 
connection in which a given state of a 
system determines all its subsequent 
conditions not unequivocally but with 
a definite degree of probability, which 
is the objective measure of the possible 
realisation of the tendencies of change 
implanted in the system in the past. 
S.L. operate in all non-autonomous 
systems consisting of a large number 
of elements dependent on continuously 
changing external conditions. Strictly 
speaking, every law is statistical, since 
matter is inexhaustible and every 
system consists of a countless number 
of elements. Besides, every system is 
not closed and interacts with the sur- 
rounding medium. This is why every 
D.L. is statistical with a probability 
of realisation approaching 1, because 
external influences and many intrinsic 
connections in the system do not exert 
any substantial influence on it. S.L. 
cannot in principle be reduced to D.L., 
due to (1) the inexhaustibility of mat- 








Leap 


ter and the systems being not closed, 
(2) the impossibility of realising many 
of the tendencies of development, and 
(3) the emergence in the process of 
development of possibilities and ten- 
dencies of qualitatively new states. 
This is why every complex process 
of development is governed by S.L., 
whereas D.L. are no more than an 
approximate expression of separate 
stages of this process. 

Leap, a stage in the radical changes in 
a thing or phenomenon, the moment or 
period when the old quality is changed 
into the new as a result of quantita- 
tive changes. In comparison with the 
preceding, evolutionary stage of de- 
velopment, the L. represents more or 
less apparent, relatively quick changes. 
The destruction of an old and the 
coming into being of a new quality, 
as also every possible qualitative 
change, can be accomplished only by a 
L. But the L. may take exceptionally 
diverse forms, depending on the char- 
acter of a phenomenon and on the 
conditions in which it develops. Essen- 
tially, every phenomenon assumes a 
new quality in a way of its own. But 
all these developments can be divided 
into two relatively definite types: 
sudden and gradual Ll. The former 
take place in such a manner that the 
old quality is fully changed at once 
(e.g., the change-over of certain ele- 
mentary particles into others; in social 
life, the October Revolution in Russia 
was an example of such a sudden and 
tempestuous leap). The latter takes 
place in such a way that the existing 
thing or phenomenon changes by parts, 
by individual elements, until, as a re- 
sult of gradual mutation, it is trans- 
formed as whole. In social life, the first 
type of L. is characteristic of antago- 
nistic formations, in which the domi- 
nant class is an obstacle to the histo- 
rically urgent transition from the old 
to a new system. Such a transition 
(for instance, from capitalism to social- 
ism) can be accomplished only by a 
political revolution. The second type 
of L. is typical of non-antagonistic 
systems, in which all the basic social 
forces are interested in society's 
progressive development. This is what 


— 240 — 


“Legal Marxism” 


Marx had in mind when he foretold 
that in a classless society social evo- 
lution would cease to be a political 
revolution. The Programme of the Com- 
munist Party of the Soviet Union pro- 
ceeds from the fact that gradual qual- 
itative change is a law of communist 
construction. The creation of the ma- 
terial and technical basis of commu- 
nism, the obliteration of class and other 
distinctions, the withering away of 
the state, the education of the new 
man, are all decisive revolutionary 
turns in the development of socialist 
society, which do not take place at 
once and all of a sudden, but gradually 
and continuously. Communism grows 
out of socialism, is its direct continua- 
tion. It would be incorrect and erron- 
eous to think that communism will 
appear all of a sudden. The transition 
from socialism to communism takes 
place continuously. Nevertheless the 
gradual transition from socialism to 
communism must not be considered 
as a kind of slow motion. On the con- 
trary, it is a period in which all aspects 
of social life develop rapidly. Besides, 
such a form of development does not 
preclude quick, sudden Ll. in some 
fields, for instance, in technology and 
science. 

Lebedev, Pyotr Nikolayevich (1866- 
1912), Russian scientist, founder of 
the first Russian school of physicists. 
He conducted important researches in 
various fields of physics such as acous- 
tics, electricity, and optics. His 
greatest achievement, which brought 
him world renown, was the discovery 
and measurement of the pressure of 
light on solid bodies and gases, which 
furthered the development of the elec- 
tromagnetic theory of light. He showed 
that light is one of the forms of exist- 
ence of matter. L.’s researches helped 
to reveal the falseness of energism 
(q.v.) and Machism (q.v.). 

Left Hegelians, see Young Hegelians. 

“Legal Marxism”, the reflection of 
Marxism to be found in bourgeois liter- 
ature, the liberal-bourgeois distortion 
of the actual doctrine. It arose in the 
1890s, when Narodism (q.v.) had been 
ideologically routed by Lenin, Plekha- 
nov (qq.v.), and other Marxists and 











Leibniz 


— 241 — 


Leibniz 





Marxism was becoming widespread in 
Russia. Certain bourgeois intellectuals 
became temporary “fellow travellers” 
of the working-class movement. Their 
writings were published in legal news- 
papers and journals, i.e., publications 
appearing with the sanction of the 
government, and they thus became 
known as “legal Marxists”. They op- 
posed the Narodniks in the name of 
Marxism. Lenin, however, said that for 
the “legal Marxists” the break with 
Narodism meant going over from petty- 
bourgeois or peasant socialism not to 
proletarian socialism but to bourgeois 
liberalism. Struve (q.v.), M. Tugan- 
Baranovsky, and Berdyayev (q.v.) 
were prominent representatives of 
“L.M.”. They attempted to adapt 
the workers’ movement to the interests 
of the bourgeoisie, lavished praises 
on the capitalist system, and instead 
of calling for revolutionary struggle 
advocated learning from capitalism. 
“L.M.” repudiated the principal Marx- 
ist tenets (the doctrine of proletarian 
revolution and the dictatorship of the 
proletariat). Lenin conducted an ir- 
reconcilable struggle against “L.M.”, 
though in order to hasten the down- 
fall of Narodism he allowed a tem- 
porary agreement with the “legal 
Marxists”. In his book The Economic 
Content of Narodism and the Criticism 
of It in Mr. Struve’s Book (1894-95), 
Lenin showed the anti-Marxist essence 
of “L.M.” and made a profound crit- 
icism of bourgeois objectivism, to 
which he counterposed the Party spirit 
of revolutionary Marxism. In philos- 
ophy the “legal Marxists” usually 
adopted the Kantian positions (see 
Vekhism). 

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646- 
1716), German philosopher, an ob- 
jective idealist. The first president 
of the Berlin Academy of Sciences. 
From 1676 till his death in 1716, he 
was librarian at Hanover. Combining 
a profound knowledge of both mathe- 
matics (he was one of the inventors 
of the differential calculus) and phys- 
ics (he anticipated the law of the 
preservation of energy), he was also 
a geologist, biologist, and historian. 
The philosophy of |. should be regard- 


16-1682 


ed as an attempt to achieve a synthesis 
between the ideas of mechanistic mate- 
Tialism (see Descartes and Hobbes) and 
the Aristotelian scholastic doctrine of 
active substantial forms. In explain- 
ing reality he strove to unite the mech- 
anistic principle with the theory 
of monads (q.v.), which he propounded 
in his Monadologie (1714). The mo- 
nads, according to L., are the indivis- 
ible, spiritual substances, of which 
the whole Universe is composed. In- 
finite in number, all monads are per- 
cipient and self-active. L. was one of 
the founders of German idealist dia- 
lectics. As Lenin observed, L. “through 
theology arrived at the principle of 
inseparable ... connection of matter 
and motion”. (Vol. 38, p. 379.) In ex- 
plaining motion, however, L. came up 
against a contradiction. The monads, 
in his view, cannot have any causal 
relation with each other and yet they 
form a harmonious developing and 
moving world, which is regulated by a 
“pre-established harmony” (q.v.) de- 
pending on the supreme monad (the 
absolute, God). The concept of pre- 
established harmony formed the most 
reactionary part of L.’s philosophy, 
as expounded in his Théodicée (1710). 
L.’s theory of knowledge—idealist 
rationalism—is aimed against the sen- 
sualism and empiricism of Locke. To 
Locke’s postulate “There is nothing 
in the mind which has not been in the 
senses”, L. added: “Except the intellect 
itself”. Not sharing Locke’s view that 
the mind is but a blank sheet (tabula 
rasa) and renouncing sensory experi- 
ence as the source of the universality 
and necessity of knowledge, L. con- 
tends that only reason can provide 
this source, and that the soul has 
from time immemorial possessed the 
principles of the various concepts 
and postulates, which are only awak- 
ened, by external objects (Nouveaux 
Essais sur l'entendement humain, 1704, 
published in 1765). In effect, L. mod- 
ified the Cartesian doctrine on in- 
nate ideas (q.v.), which he described 
as residing in the mind like the veins 
of rock in a slab of marble. L. held 
that the criteria of truth are clarity 
and absence of contradiction. Thus to 











Lemma 


test the truths of reason it was enough 
to apply the logic of Aristotle, q.v. 
(the laws of identity, contradiction, 
and the excluded middle); while the 
law of sufficient reason (q.v.) was 
needed to test “truths of fact”. L. is 
considered (by Bertrand Russell, q.v., 
and others) to have been the founder 
of mathematical logic. His view of the 
world expressed the ideology of the 
compromise between the German 
bourgeoisie and feudalism. 

Lemma (Gk. proposition), in mathe- 
matics, a theorem proved for the sake 
of its use in proving another theorem, 
in logic, a conditional conclusion (prem- 
iss of a syllogism). Depending on 
the number of consequences involved 
in the larger premiss (according to 
the members of disjunctive proposi- 
tions in the smaller), L. becomes a 
dilemma, trilemma or multilemma. 
The most common form of L. is the 
dilemma, implying the need to choose 
between two alternatives. 

Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich (1870-1924), 
continuator of Marx and Engels, leader 
of the Russian and international prole- 
tariat, founder of the Communist Party 
of the Soviet Union and the Soviet 
state. Born in Simbirsk (now Ulya- 
novsk). After finishing the gymnasium 
(secondary school) in 1887, he entered 
the law faculty of Kazan University, 
but was arrested for his activities in 
the student movement, banished from 
the city and placed under police sur- 
veillance in the village of Kokushkino. 
In 1891, he graduated as an external 
student at St. Petersburg University. 
In Kazan (1888-89) and Samara (1889- 
93) L. studied Marxism and became a 
Marxist, organising the first Marxist 
circle in Samara. Arriving in St. Pe- 
tersburg in 1893, he became leader of 
the St. Petersburg Marxists and was 
active in propagating Marxist teaching 
among the workers. In 1894, he wrote 
his first major work What the “Friends 
of the People” Are and How They Fight 
the Social-Democrats, in which he de- 
molished the false theory and tactics 
of Narodism (q.v.) and showed the 
working class of Russia the true path 
of struggle. In 1895, he united the Marx- 
ist groups of St. Petersburg in the 


— 242 — 


Lenin 


League of Struggle for the Emancipa- 
tion of the Working Class. Soon after- 
wards L. was arrested and imprisoned, 
then exiled to Siberia. Early in 1900, 
he emigrated. Abroad he founded /skra 
(The Spark), the first Marxist newspa- 
per to be widely circulated in Russia, 
which played an endérmous part in 
forming a Marxist party of a new type 
and in working out its first programme, 
and in the struggle against reformists 
and opportunists. The Second Congress 
of the RSDLP in 1903 saw the inaug- 
uration of the Bolshevik Party, which 
under Lenin’s leadership guided the 
proletariat and the toiling peasantry 
in the struggle to overthrow the tsar- 
ist autocracy and replace it by a 
socialist system. The milestones in 
this struggle were the bourgeois-dem- 
ocratic revolution of 1905, the Feb- 
ruary bourgeois-democratic revolu- 
tion of 1917, and the October Socialist 
Revolution in 1917. The great service 
Lenin rendered was that he developed 
Marxist teaching creatively, with ref- 
erence to the new historical condi- 
tions, and gave it concrete form on the 
basis of the practical experience of 
the Russian revolutions and the in- 
ternational revolutionary movement af- 
ter the death of Marx and Engels. In 
Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Cap- 
italism (1916) Lenin continued the 
analysis of the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction which Marx had made in Cap- 
ital (q.v.) and discovered the laws 
governing the economic and political 
development of capitalism in the era 
of imperialism. The creative spirit of 
Leninism was expressed in his theory 
of the socialist revolution. He proved 
that under conditions of the uneven 
development of capitalism in the im- 
perialist stage socialism could be vic- 
torious in one or several countries to 
start with, but not in all countries 
simultaneously. He evolved the doc- 
trine of the party of the proletariat as 
the leading and organising force with- 
out which there could be no dictator- 
ship of the proletariat or building of 
communist society. L. became head of 
the first proletarian state, which was 
able to survive the struggle against 
internal and foreign enemies and to 





Lenin 


launch the peaceful building of social- 
ism. Developing the ideas of Marx 
and Engels, L. drew up a concrete 
programme of socialist construction in 
the USSR, which became a working 
guide for the Party and the whole 
Soviet people. L.’s mame is as- 
sociated with the development of all 
aspects of Marxism, including its phi- 
losophy. From the outset he paid 
great attention to the further develop- 
ment of dialectical and historical ma- 
terialism, Marxist philosophy was his 
means of solving every problem that 
confronted the working class and its 
Party in the new age, and he enriched 
that philosophy with many new ideas. 
In 1908, he wrote his fundamental 
philosophical work Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism, in which he gave a 
profound analysis of the latest achieve- 
ments of natural science in the 
light of dialectical materialism and 
developed the basic principles of Marx- 
ist philosophy, particularly its theory 
of knowledge. In Machism L. per- 
ceived the trend in contemporary phi- 
losophy that attempts by new methods 
to undermine the influence of mate- 
rialism and to defend idealism by con- 
centrating on epistemology and logic. 
His criticism of Machism has lost none 
of its significance today and teaches 
Marxists how to fight reactionary phi- 
losophy. With an urgency unprecedent- 
ed in this field L. posed the question 
of partisanship in philosophy and de- 
manded that Marxists fight consistent- 
ly against any and every type of ideal- 
ism or metaphysics. He worked partic- 
ularly hard to develop and perfect 
materialist dialectics, which he called 
the “soul of Marxism”, its “fundamen- 
tal theoretical basis”. He showed the 
versatility of dialectics as a theory 
of development and substantiated the 
extremely important and fruitful pos- 
tulate on the unity of dialectics, logic, 
and the theory of knowledge. Point- 
ing to Marx's Capital as a model of 
such unity, L. put forward a host 
of valuable ideas on this subject (see 
Philosophical Notebooks), which may 
be regarded as a programme of further 
work on dialectics. His works covering 
the miost diverse fields of economics, 


16° 


— 243 — 


Lenin 


politics, strategy, and tactics provide 
unsurpassed models of the application 
of dialectics to real life. In his article 
“On the Significance of Militant Ma- 
terialism” (1922) L. outlined impor- 
tant tasks that must be undertaken for 
the further development of Marxist 
philosophy, including the struggle 
against the religious view of the world. 
These directions retain their impor- 
tance today. L. considered the mate- 
tialist understanding of history the 
greatest achievement of Marxist phi- 
losophy. He regarded the theory of 
historical materialism as a scientific 
basis for getting to know the laws of 
social development and for revolu- 
tionary struggle for the socialist trans- 
formation of society. His creative study 
of the economic, political, and spiri- 
tual development of society in the new 
age developed all aspects of Marxist 
sociology. Of particular importance 
is his investigation of the problems 
of the classes and the class struggle, 
the state and revolution (see The State 
and Revolution), the role of the masses 
in the epoch of socialist revolution and 
the building of communist society, 
on the relationship between the 
masses, the Party and the leaders, his 
ideas concerning the new forms taken 
by the economic laws of social develop- 
ment during socialist construction, 
on the relationship between economics 
and politics, on culture and the cul- 
tural revolution, and on socialist mor- 
als and the principles of socialist art. 
L. also had valuable ideas in the field 
of Marxist historico-philosophical sci- 
ence and gave us penetratingly accurate 
assessments of many philosophers of 
the past (the philosophers of the an- 
cient world, the French materialists, 
Kant, Hegel, qq.v., and others). He 
valued the work of the Russian revo- 
lutionary-democratic thinkers (Belin- 
sky, Herzen, Chernyshevsky, qq.v.), 
and what he had to say about them 
and the processes of the development 
of the revolutionary movement and 
social thought in Russia, form a theo- 
retical basis for the scientific history 
of Russian materialist philosophy. Le- 
ninism, as the continuation and devel- 
opment of Marxism, Marxism-Lenin- 











Lesevich 


ism as a single and undissoluble en- 
tity, has become in our day the watch- 
word of progressive people all over 
the world who are fighting for peace. 
democracy, and socialism. 

Lesevich, Viadimir Viktorovich 
(1837-1905), Russian positivist philos- 
opher. Lenin called him the first and 
most outstanding Russian empirio- 
criticist (Vol. 14, p. 56). Till 1877, 
he was a supporter of Comte, q.v. 
{see his Ocherk o razvitii idei progressa 
{Essay on the Development of the Idea 
of Progress], 1868). He then moved 
to the position of the neo-critical Ger- 
man school (Carl Göring, Alois Riehl, 
Richard Avenarius, q.v., Joseph Pet- 
zoldt, etc.), which he considered the 
highest stage of positivism. According 
to L., this school supplemented Comte’s 
philosophy with a fully elaborated 
theory of knowledge constructed on 
the basis of “pure experience”. Deny- 
ing that philosophy could be a world 
outlook, L. declared that its task was 
merely to “unite” concepts produced by 
‘the specialised sciences. He explained 
the life of society from an idealist 
standpoint (see Subjective Method in 
Sociology). Main works: Opyt kriti- 
cheskogo issledovaniya osnovonachal po- 
zitivnoi filosofii (Critical Investigation 
of the Basic Principles of Positivist 
Philosophy), 1876; Pisma o nauchnoi 
filosofii (Letters on Scientific Philos- 
ophy), 1878, and Chto takoye nauchnaya 
filosofiya? (What Is Scientific Phi- 
losophy?), 1890. 

Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (1729- 
$1), German Enlightener and philoso- 
pher, publicist, playwright, critic, and 
cart theorist. He was an active opponent 
of feudal policy and ideology and 
worked for the free and democratic 
development of the German people 
and their culture. In his philosophical 
work Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts 
41780) L. envisaged a future society 
free of all coercion, in which religion 
would give place entirely to enlight- 
ened reason. In his philosophical play 
Nathan der Weise L. proclaims not 
only the idea of religious toleration 
but also the right of free thought, as- 
serting the equality of nations and ap- 
pealing for friendship among them. 


— 244 — 


Levy-Briihl 


L. expressed the contradictions in 
the German movement for enlighten- 
ment and his world outlook remained - 
idealistic, though it contained some 
materialist features as well. In his 
Laokoon (1766) and Hamburgische Dra- 
maturgie (1767-69), which constitute a 
landmark in the development of world 
aesthetic thought, L. upholds the prin- 
ciples of realism in poetry, drama, and 
acting and demolishes the classicist 
theory and practice of the nobility. 
L. limited the sphere of the fine arts 
to the beautiful. He strove to define 
the objective laws of composition in 
various types and genres of art, but 
could not see the historical character 
of these laws. Always opposed to dull 
moralising, L. attached enormous im- 
portance to the moral and educative 
function of art, particularly in the 
theatre. His writing for the theatre 
heralded the emergence of German 
classical literature, and his aesthetic 
views exercised a beneficial effect on 
its development. 

Leucippus (c. 500-440 B.C.), a con- 
temporary of Democritus (q.v.), with 
whom he founded the system known as 
atomistics (q.v.). Owing to the almost 
complete lack of texts and of infor- 
mation concerning the man himself, 
it was at one time suggested that L. 
was a literary myth (Erwin Rohde 
and Paul Tannery). Further data in 
the papyri discovered at Herculaneum 
exploded this assumption. L. contrib- 
uted three new concepts to science: 
(1) absolute vacuum; (2) atoms moving 
in this absolute vacuum; and (3) the 
concept of mechanical necessity. On 
the basis of the one text that has 
been preserved it may be stated that 
L. was the first to establish both the 
law of causality (q.v.) and the law of 
sufficient reason (q.v.). “Nothing 
arises without cause, but everything 
arises on some grounds and by force 
of necessity.” 

Levy-Briihl, Lucien (1857-1939), 
French sociologist and ethnologist; 
professor at the Sorbonne from 1899. 
His sociological views were formed 
under the influence of Durkheim 
(q.v.). While studying primitive peo- 
ples, L.-B. arrived at the conclusion 





<9 


— 


| 
. 





Li — 245 — 


Lilburne 





that various social types had their 
corresponding patterns of thought. The 
thinking of the primitive man differed 
from the logical thinking of modern 
man in that it ignored the law of con- 
tradiction and made no distinction 
between the natural and the superna- 
tural. L.-B. maintained that primitive 
man sees only the connection between 
first cause and final effect while failing 
to perceive the intervening relation- 
ships. This process he described as 
the operation of the law of participa- 
tion. Some of L.-B.’s conclusions and 
the extensive ethnographical material 
he collected are of considerable interest. 
His basic postulate on the qualitative 
difference between primitive thinking 
and the thinking of the cultured man 
does not, however, stand up to scien- 
tific criticism. His main works are Les 
fonctions mentales dans les sociétés 
inférieures (1910) and La mentalité 
primitive (1922). 

Li, the basic concept of Chinese phi- 
losophy signifying law, the order of 
things, form, and so on. The idealists 
interpreted it as the spiritual, immate- 
rial principle in contrast to the mate- 
rial principle, ch’i (q.v.). In Confucian- 
ism (q.v.), another conception of L. 
was to be found, signifying the code 
of conduct of various social groups. 

Life, a form of the motion of matter, 
the highest of the physical and chemi- 
cal forms. Its specific features are 
expressed in Engels’ famous defini- 
tion: “Life is the mode of existence 
of protein bodies, the essential element 
of which consists in continual meta- 
bolic interchange with the natural en- 
vironment outside them.” (Dialectics 
of Nature, p. 396.) “Protein body” or 
“protoplasm” is nowadays understood 
to mean the system of a series of sub- 
stances specific to L. such as proteins, 
nucleic acids, phosphoric compounds, 
etc. L. exists in the form of separate 
living organisms, each of which arises 
from its own kind, passes through a 
cycle of individual development, rep- 
roduces its own kind, and dies. Or- 
ganisms, by entering into relations 
with inanimate nature and with one 
another create systems of more com- 
plex orders and, ultimately, the uni- 


fied system of life on earth, which. 
has developed from the simplest forms. 
to that of man. An essential feature 
of all living bodies is metabolism: 
(q.v.), the destruction and rebuilding 
of organic structures, dissimilation and 
assimilation. The correct philosophical 
interpretation of the Jaws of L., in- 
cluding those which science has not 
yet discovered, plays an important 
part in determining the methods to 
be followed in investigating them. The 
vitalists (see Vitalism) attribute the 
specific features of L. (organisation, 
purposefulness, regulation, etc.) to the 
influence of a non-material life force, 
which is supposed to control “inert” 
matter. The mechanists regard L. mere- 
ly as a more complicated system of 
physico-chemical processes and deny 
its specific features. From the point 
of view of dialectical materialism, 
physical and chemical laws play a 
subordinate part in L. Besides these, 
L. has its own specific biological laws. 
The study of L. involves a number of 
general theoretical, philosophical prob- 
lems such as the relation of the part 
to the whole, form to content, the cor- 
relation of preformation and directed 
complication, the problem of the spe- 
cific nature of biological determination, 
and the principles of self-constructing 
systems, the problems of evolution, etc. 

Lilburne, John (1614-57), ideologist 
and leader of the petty-bourgeois dem- 
ocratic wing of the English revolution 
(the Levellers) in the middle of the 
17th century. He was the son of a coun- 
try gentleman. As a pamphleteer and 
orator he fought for the fulfilment of 
the bourgeois revolution in the polit- 
ical and social spheres. With his sup- 
porters Walwyn, Overton, and others, 
he pressed for bourgeois-democratic 
reforms and was the first to formulate 
the fundamentals of bourgeois-radical 
political doctrine, which he’ strove to 
put into practice by revolutionary 
means. He advocated popular sovereign- 
ty (on the basis of the theory of na- 
tural law, q.v.), universal franchise and 
referenda, republican government, the 
separation of legislation, administra- 
tion, and judiciary, etc., and also peas- 
ant ownership of the land. 





Linnaeus 


Linnaeus, Carolus (1707-78), Swedish 
naturalist, professor at Uppsala Uni- 
versity. The historical service rendered 
by L. was his classification of the veg- 
etable and animal world. He took as 
the basic unit for his classification the 
species. His system was artificial be- 
cause it was based on the similarity 
of a small number of arbitrarily select- 
ed outward characteristics. His out- 
look was metaphysical. He denied the 
mutability of species and held that 
their number remained unchanged from 
the day of their “creation”. 

Lobachevsky, Nikolai Ivanovich 
(1792-1856), Russian mathematician 
who pioneered a new geometry known 
as the geometry of Lobachevsky. He 
graduated at the University of Kazan 
in 1811 and at the age of 23 became 
a professor. For 19 years he was Rector 
of Kazan University. His basic works 
are O nachalakh geometrii (Principles 
of Geometry), 1829, and Noviye nachala 
geometrii s polnoi teoriyei parallelnykh 
(New Principles of Geometry with a 
Complete Theory of Parallels), 1835-38. 
L.’s geometry was based on the idea 
of the close dependence of geometrical 
relations on the actual nature of mate- 
rial bodies. His discovery consisted, 
first, in proving the independence of 
the fifth postulate of Euclidean geom- 
etry (see Euclid) from its other pos- 
tulates and, secondly, in constructing 
a new geometry free of logical contra- 


` dictions, whose fifth postulate states: 


through a point lying outside a straight 
line not one but at least two parallel 
lines may be drawn. L. sought to prove 
the postulate on parallels by recourse 
to reality itself, to the nature of things. 
Developing modern geometry, L. 
showed that denial of the dependence 
between segments and angles in Euclid- 
ean geometry does not fully describe 
the qualities of space, and suggested 
that in reality there must be such a 
dependence. This is seen, for example, 
in the fact that there is a connection 
between the lateral dimensions of a 
triangle and its angles. For this reason, 
according to L., the sum of the angles 
of a triangle is actually less than two 
right angles. L. assumed that new 
geometrical relations could be discov- 


— 246 — 


Locke 


ered either through astronomical re- 
search or in the field of microphenome- 
na. The geometrical relations common- 
ly used, however, are those existing 
within the limits of earthly dimen- 
sions for which Euclidean geometry re- 
mains valid. L.’s geometry was a 
convincing argument against Kant’s 
a priori (q.v.) theory. Philosophically, 
L. was a materialist and considered 
our conceptions of the world the result 
of the impact of reality on the human 
consciousness. After L.’s discovery of 
the new geometry it was no longer pos- 
sible to treat Euclidean geometry as 
proof of the apriority of spatial forms. 
Criticising the a priori theory, L. con- 
tended that knowledge is acquired 
through sense perception, and that 
innate concepts do not exist. By dis- 
covering and defending new ideas that 
revolutionised geometry L. rendered a 
great service to philosophy. 

Locke, John (1632-1704), English 
materialist philosopher. The works of 
L. belong to the age of the Restoration. 
He joined the struggle of classes and 
parties as a philosopher, economist, 
and political writer. In his major 
work Essay Concerning Human Under- 
standing (1690) he developed the theory 
of knowledge of materialist empiri- 
cism (q.v.), which had been complicat- 
ed by the nominalism (q.v.) of Hobbes 
and the rationalism (q.v.) of Descartes. 
Rejecting the Cartesian doctrine 
of innate ideas (q.v.), L. declared ex- 
perience to be the sole source of all 
ideas. Ideas come into being either 
through the influence of external ob- 
jects on the sense-organs (ideas of sen- 
sation) or through attention being di- 
rected on the condition and activity 
of the soul (the idea of reflection). The 
latter alternative was a concession to 
idealism. Through the ideas of sensa- 
tion we apprehend in things either 
primary or secondary qualities (see 
Primary and Secondary Qualities). 
Ideas acquired through experience are 
only the material of knowledge, not 
knowledge itself. To become knowledge 
the material of ideas must undergo the 
process of reasoning, which differs 
both from sensation and from reflec- 
tion and is a matter of comparing. 








i 


Locke 


combining, and abstracting. Through 
this activity simple ideas are trans- 
formed into complex ones. Following 
Hobbes, L. considers that universal 
knowledge depends entirely on lan- 
guage. Having defined knowledge as 
apprehension of the correspondence (or 
non-correspondence) between two ideas, 
L. considers all speculative knowledge, 
i.e., perception of the correspondence 
of ideas by means of the reason, as 
valid. On the other hand, experimental 
knowledge is only probable, for here 
perception of the correspondence of 
ideas is achieved by reference to the 
facts of experience. Our faith in the 
existence of external objects rests on 
the senses. L. places this type of knowl- 
edge (“sensitive knowledge”) above 
simple probability but below the vali- 
dity of speculative knowledge. Though 
convinced of certain limitations 
in our ability to know material and 
particularly spiritual substances, L. 
should not be considered an agnostic. 
According to L., our task is to know 
not everything but only what matters 
as far as our conduct and practical 
life are concerned, and for the attain- 
ment of such knowledge our abilities 
are ample. In his doctrine on state 
power and law L. develops the idea of 
transition from the natural to the 
civil condition and various forms of 
government. The purpose of the state, 
according to L., is to preserve freedom 
and property acquired through labour. 
Government cannot, therefore, be ar- 
bitrary. He divides it into (1) legisla- 
tive, (2) executive, and (3) federative. 
L.’s doctrine of the state was an at- 
tempt to adapt theory to the political 
form of government that was adopted 
in England as a result of the bourgeois 
revolution of 1688 and the compromise 
between the bourgeoisie and the 
section of the aristocracy that had be- 
come bourgeois. His philosophy has 
had a great influence on many genera- 
tions of thinkers. The idea that people 
themselves should change the exist- 
ing social system if it does not provide 
the individual with proper opportu- 
nities for education and development 
was of great importance in justifying 
the bourgeois revolution. One of the 


— 247 — 


Logic, Constructive 


trends in French materialism takes 
its origin from L. His distinction be- 
tween primary and secondary qualities 
was used by Berkeley (q.v.), the ideal- 
ist, and Hume (q.v.), the agnostic. 

Logic, see Logic, Dialectical; Logic, 
Mathematical; Logic, Formal. 

Logic, Combinatory, a branch in 
mathematical logic (q.v.) analysing 
concepts which, within the framework 
of classical mathematical logic, are 
accepted without further study. Among 
them are the concepts: variable, func- 
tion, rule of substitution, etc. In clas- 
sical mathematical logic rules of two 
kinds are used. The first are formulated 
simply and are applied without any 
restrictions. Such, for instance, is the 
rule of modus ponens. It is formulated 
as follows: “Given A and A B to infer 
B.” This rule is accessible for a one- 
act automatic performance. Other rules 
(for example, the rule of substitution) 
are very intricately formulated and 


presuppose a number of restrictions 


and reservations (without which they 
cannot be applied purely. formally). 
One of the purposes of C.L. is to con- 
struct a formal system having no rules 
like the rule of substitution. The be- 
ginning of C.L. was laid by the Soviet 
mathematician M.I. Sheinfinkel (his 
main results were published in 1924). 
Independent of him, A. Church also 
constructed a lambda conversion cal- 
culus closely linked with C.L. Impor- 
tant results were also obtained by the 
American logician H. Curry. Problems 
of C.L. are studied by J.B. Rosser, W. 
Craig, R. Feys, and others. 

Logic, Constructive, a trend in math- 
ematical logic. C.L. derives from the 
intuitionist school, though it is not 
connected with philosophical intui- 
tionism (q.v.). It was first propounded 
in the works of L. Brouwer, H. Weyl, 
and A. Heyting. The central concept 
of C.L. is the impermissibility of ex- 
tending to infinite numbers the prin- 
ciples valid for finite numbers (see 
Numbers, Theory of), such as the prin- 
ciple that the whole is greater than its 
parts, the law of the excluded middle, 
etc. Traditional logic and C.L. differ 
in their views of the concept of infinity: 
the former considers it as actual, com- 





Logic, Dialectical 


pleted, whereas the latter sees it as 
potential, becoming (see Infinity, 
Real and Potential). Characteristic of 
C.L. is the inductive construction of 
objects. The principles of C.L. are 
used in attempts to revise the princi- 
pal results of modern mathematical 
logic and mathematics. Such Soviet 
scientists as A.N. Kolmogorov, 
A.A. Markov, and P.S. Novikov, 
have made notable contributions to 
the development of C.L. 

Logic, Dialectical, the logical teach- 
ing of dialectical materialism, science 
of the laws and forms of the mental 
reflection of the development and 
change of the objective world, and of 
the laws governing the cognition of 
truth. Scientifically, D.L. arose as 
part of Marxist philosophy. However, 
elements of it were already in evidence 
in antique philosophy, particularly 
the doctrines of Heraclitus, Plato, 
Aristotle (qq.v.), and others. For his- 
torical reasons, formal logic (q.v.) 
reigned for a long time as the sole 
teaching on the laws and forms of 
thought. Approximately in the 17th 
century the requirements of developing 
natural science and philosophy re- 
vealed its insufficiencies and the need 
for a truer teaching on the general prin- 
ciples and methods of thought and cog- 
nition (see Francis Bacon, Descartes, 
Leibniz, and others). This tendency 
emerged most clearly in classical Ger- 
man philosophy. Kant, for instance, 
distinguished between general and tran- 
scendental logic, the latter differing 
from the former, i.e., formal logic, in 
that it examined the development 
of knowledge and did not abstract it- 
self, as the former, from the content. 
Special credit in the development of 
D.L. goes to Hegel (q.v.), who produced 
the earliest comprehensive system which 
was, however, permeated with his ideal- 
istic outlook. The Marxist teaching 
on logic absorbed all the valuable ele- 
ments of the preceding development, 
moulding the vast experience of human 
knowledge into a harmonious science 
of cognition. D.L. does not reject 
formal logic, but demonstrates its lim- 
its as a necessary though inexhaus- 
tive form of logical thinking. D.L. 


— 248 — 


Logic, Dialectical 


combines the teaching’ on being with 
the teaching on its reflection in the 
mind. It is a substantive logic. Inas- 
much as the world is in constant 
motion and development, the forms of 
thought, and the concepts and catego- 
ties, too, should be based on the 
principle of development, for other- 
wise they cannot be ideal forms of 
objective content. The cardinal task 
of D.L. is, therefore, to investigate 
how best to express in human concepts 
motion, development, the internal con- 
tradictions of phenomena, their quali- 
tative change, and the passage of one 
into another; it is to investigate the 
dialectical essence of the logical cate- 
gories, their mobility and flexibility, 
“reaching to the identity of opposites”. 
(Lenin, Vol. 38, p. 110.) The reason 
why dialectics is a logical teaching is 
that it investigates the logical, cogni- 
tive functions of general laws and 
categories of development. With this 
is linked also the other basic task 
of D.L., examination of the process 
of coming into being and the develop- 
ment of cognition itself. D.L. is based 
on the history of cognition. It is a 
generalised history of human thought 
and of the historical practice of society. 
From the standpoint of D.L., the 
laws of cognition are laws govern- 
ing the development of thought from 
the external to the internal, from ap- 
pearance to essence, from less profound 
to more profound essence, from the 
immediate to the mediate, from the 
abstract to the concrete, and from rel- 
ative truth to absolute truth. Every 
proposition of D.L. is, like all science, 
permeated with this historicity. D.L. 
overcomes the division of analysis and 
synthesis, induction and deduction, 
and empirical and theoretical into in- 
dependent forms of cognition typical 
of the preceding theories of knowledge. 
These, like all other forms of cognition, 
are examined by D.L. in the highest 
synthesis, as interpenetrating opposites. 
The method of ascent from abstract 
to concrete (see the Abstract and the 
Concrete) is prominent as the general 
logical principle of D.L., completely 
embodying the unity of the historical 
and the logical (q.v.). D.L. is a system 











Logic, Formal 


of logical categories which synthesise 
the fruits of man’s cognitive and prac- 
tical activity. This system, in which 
categories are arranged in their order 
of subordination and co-subordination, 
has not yet been studied exhaustively 
enough, but the approach based on 
the principles of unity of the logical 
and the historical, and of the develop- 
ment of knowledge from appearance 
to essence, from the simple to the 
complex, and so on, appears to be the 
most probable and fruitful. Lenin, 
who contributed very greatly to the 
development of D.L., laid a strong ac- 
cent on this aspect of the matter. In 
contemporary science a big part is 
played by formalised logical systems 
and formal substantive logical theories 
which study the various aspects and 
tasks of thought. D.L. is the general 
logical basis of human cognition, the 
general logical theory which can and 
must be employed to explain all the 
particular and concrete logical theories, 
their significance and role. 

Logic, Formal, a science which stud- 
ies acts of thinking (see Concepts, 
Propositions, Inferences, and Proof) 
as regards their logical structure or 
form, i.e., by abstraction of the con- 
crete content of thoughts and singling 
out only the general means by which 
the parts of that content are linked. 
The main task of F.L. is to formulate 
laws and principles whose observance 
is a réquisite for achieving valid re- 
sults in obtaining knowledge by de- 
duction. The foundation of F.L. was 
provided by the works of Aristotle, 
who elaborated syllogistic (q.v.). Con- 
tributions to its development were 
made by the early stoics (q.v.) and the 
scholastics in the Middle Ages— 
Duns Scotus (q.v.), William of Occam 
(q.v.), Albert von Sachsen, Raymond 
Lulle, and others. The departure from 
the long-standing tradition of study- 
ing problems of deductive logic was 
connected with the study of induction 
(q.v.) and attempts to formulate rules 
of inductive inferences (Francis Ba- 
con, q.v., and later John St. Mill, q.v.). 
But a turning point took place only 
in the second half of the 19th century, 
when the mathematical (symbolic) 


— 249 — 


Logic, Many-Valued 


logic (q.v.) received its modern 
orm. 

Logic, Inductive, that part of tra- 
ditional logic concerned with logical 
processes of conclusions from the par- 
ticular to the general (see Induction). 
Traditional inductivists saw the task 
of I.L. in analysing the process of 
obtaining general theoretical knowl- 
edge from the single, empirical. There 
were also other concepts of the subject- 
matter of I.L., limiting its tasks to 
analysing logical criteria for verifying 
universal laws. William Whewell, a 
19th century British logician, was the 
first to formulate such an understand- 
ing of I.L. The hypothetical deductive 
method (q.v.) was considered as the 
means of such verification. This con- 
cept is now shared by neo-positivist 
logicians and many other specialists 
in I.L. It stems from the inadequacy 
of the inductive method for obtaining 
theoretical propositions, which require 
the singling out of new thought-content 
and the formation of new scientific 
abstractions. The shortcoming of this 
concept is its unjustified renunciation 
of logical study of the processes for 
obtaining scientific knowledge in gen- 
eral, i.e., their analysis as socially 
necessary processes independent of in- 
dividual consciousness and determined 
by the objective content of the cogni- 
tive processes. Modern I.L. widens 
the sphere of its application and exam- 
ines not only conclusions from the 
particular to the general, but all logi- 
cal relationships in general when the 
truth-value of the knowledge we want 
to verify cannot be reliably established 
on the basis of the knowledge whose 
truth-value is known to us, when we 
can only determine whether it is con- 
firmed by further knowledge, and if 
so, to what extent. Therefore, one of 
the central concepts of modern I.L. is 
the degree of confirmation which is 
usually interpreted as the probability 
of the hypothesis with available empir- 
ical knowledge. Modern I.L. thereby 
utilises methods of calculating proba- 
bilities and the logic of probability 
(q.v.). 

TE Many-Valued, a formal logi- 
cal system whose propositions in 





Logic, Mathematical 


interpretation assume more than two 
meanings (in the case of only two mean- 
ings—“true” or “false”—we have clas- 
sical two-valued logic), but in the 
general case we have any finite or in- 
finite multitude of meanings. The 
first such systems—the tri-valued logic 
of propositions and the n-valued logic 
of propositions—were built by J. Lu- 
kasiewicz (q.v.) in 1920 and E. Post 
in 1921. Today there is a series of differ- 
ent systems of M.V.L. and a general 
theory of such systems. Among the 
works on the general theory of M.V.L. 
the most important are those by 
J. B. Rosser and A. R. Turquett, and 
also the investigations by S. V. Yablon- 
sky, dealing with functional construc- 
tions in n-valued logic. These systems 
of M.V.L. have been elaborated with 
a view to solving concrete problems 
of scientific research, both general log- 
ical ones and specifically scientific 
ones. For instance, the tri-valued and 
four-valued logic of propositions elab- 
orated by Lukasiewicz were construct- 
ed with a view to creating a modal 
logic (q.v.), while the tri-valued cal- 
culus by D. A. Boévar was aimed at 
solving the paradoxes of classical math- 
ematical logic. Other most important 
applications of M.V.L. include the 
attempts to study it in order to explain 
quantum mechanics (works by G. Birk- 
hoff, J. Neumann, H. Reichenbach) 
and also the attempts in the sphere 
of technology and the theory of relay- 
schemes (works by V. I. Shestakov, G. 
Moisil, T. D. Maistrova). 

Logic, Mathematical (or symbolic 
logic) appeared as a result of the ap- 
plication of mathematical methods in 
the realm of formal logic, of the use 
of a special language of symbols and 
formulas. M.L. investigates logical 
thinking (reasoning and proof) as re- 
flected in the systems of formal logic 
or calculi (q.v.). Thus M.L. has for 
its subject-matter logic and for its 
method mathematics; it contains far- 
reaching generalisations. Typical of 
the present stage of formal logic is 
the development of the ideas and meth- 
ods of traditional formal logic. Con- 
temporary M.L. includes a whole 
series of logical calculi, and is the the- 


— 250 — 


Logic, Mathematical 


ory of such calculi, their premisses, 
properiies, and applications. Besides 
its study of the formal structure of 
lugicai calculi (see Logical Syntax) M.L. 
also examines the relations between 
calculi and those substantive fields 
which serve as interpretations (q.v.) 
and models (q.v.). This task reflects 
the problems of logical semantics (q.v.). 
Logical syntax and semantics belong 
to metalogic (q.v.), the theory of the 
means of describing the premisses 
and properties of logical calculi. The 
discovery of the formal investigation 
of logic is attributed to Aristotle (see 
Syllogistic). The Megarian school of 
stoics (8rd century B.C.) already knew 
some of the initial concepts of M.L., 
whereas the idea of logical calculi was 
first formulated by Leibniz (q.v.). As 
an independent branch of science M.L. 
established itself only in the mid- 
19th century, thanks to the works of 
Boole (q.v.), who founded the algebra 
of logic (q.v.). Later Ernst Schröder 
summed up and systematised the re- 
sults of such development in his A lgeb- 
ra der Logik (1890-95). Another trend 
in M.L. appeared at the end of the 
19th century, arising from the need 
of mathematics to provide a foundation 
for its concepts and methods of proof. 
The sources of this trend are to be 
found in the works of Frege (q.v.). 
The main contribution to its develop- 
ment was made by Russell and White- 
head, qq.v. (Principia Mathematica, 
1910-13), and Hilbert (q.v.). Two fun- 
damental logical systems—the classi- 
cal propositional calculus (q.v.) and 
functional calculus (q.v.)—were elab- 
orated at the time. Today M.L. in- 
vestigates the various types of logical 
calculi and takes interest in semantical 
problems and metalogic in general, as 
well as in the problems of special scien- 
tific and technical application of logic. 
Alongside the studies by classical log- 
ic, constructive logic (q.v.) was creat- 
ed in order to substantiate mathemat- 
ics. An analysis of the foundations 
of logic promoted the research into 
combinatory logic (q.v.). The theory of 
many-valued logic (q.v.) was also creat- 
ed. Attempts to solve the problem 
of formalising logical thinking led to 








Logic, Modal 


the formation of the calculations of 
strict and material implication (q.v.). 
The foundations of modal logic (q.v.) 
were laid as well. At the same time 
M.L. exerted great influence upon 
contemporary mathematics itself. The 
essential sections of contemporary 
mathematics sprang up from M.L., e.g., 


the theories of algorythms (q.v.) and, 


recursive functions (q.v.). M.L. is 
applied in electrical engineering (the 
study of relay-contacts and electronic 
systems), in computers (programming), 
in cybernetics (theory of automatic 
devices), in neurophysiology (simula- 
tion of the neuronic nets), and linguis- 
tics (in structural] linguistics and se- 
miotic). Such close interlacing of logi- 
cal problems with the solution of. spe- 
cial scientific problems and use of logic 
in concrete scientific studies were un- 
known to formal logic. 

Logic, Modal, a logical system which 
formulates such relations as “neces- 
sity”, “reality”, “possibility”, “chan- 
ce”, and their negations (see Modali- 
ty). The first attempt to construct M.L. 
was undertaken by Aristotle (see Syl- 
logistic), who formulated a number 
of important definitions and principles. 
The development of mathematical logic 
(q.v.) gave a new stimulus to the ela- 
boration of M.L. The result was the 
construction of a number of M.L. sys- 
tems, the best known of which are: 
the tri-valued and four-valued systems 
of Lukasiewicz, the axiomatic systems 
of strict implication (q.v.) of C. Lewis, 
and the systems of relative modality 
of G.H. Wright. In the systems of 
Lukasiewicz and Lewis the modalities 
are absolute, i.e., they are assigned 
to one proposition independently of 
any others. In Wright’s systems the 
modalities are relative, i.e., they are 
assigned to one of the propositions under 
certain conditions, which are expres- 
sed in other propositions. At the same 
time there is not yet any satisfacto- 
ry general theory of M.L., although the 
demand for its elaboration is obviously 
felt in some branches of knowledge 
(e.g., mathematics, linguistics). 

Logic of Relations, department of 
mathematical logic dealing with re- 
lations (q.v.). 


— 251 — 


Logical Atomism 


Logical and Factual Truth, logical 
concepts dating from Leibniz (q.v.), 
who distinguished between necessary 
truth, or “truths of reason”, and in- 
cidental truths, or “truths of fact”. 
The truth of the former is derived 
from the laws of logic, the truth of 
the latter, from correspondence with 
the actual state of affairs. Leibniz, 
who regarded the laws of logic as ab- 
solute, held that “truths of reason” 
are true in all possible worlds (i.e., 
worlds that are not contradictory to 
logic), whereas truths of fact are true 
only in some worlds (including the 
world we live in). A similar distinction 
was made by Hume and Kant, qq.v. 
(see Synthetic and Analytic). Modern 
logic maintains this distinction with- 
out regarding it as absolute. Thus, 
the Carnap-Kemeny logical semantics 
(q.v.) considers statements to be log- 
ically true that are true in all admis- 
sible interpretations (see Interpreta- 
tion and Model) of the given formal- 
ised language (q.v.), while statements 
that are true in a particular interpreta- 
tion but not in all admissible interpre- 
tations are only factually true. 

The Logical and the Historical, see 
the Historical and the Logical. 

Logical Atomism, a conception for- 
mulated by Russell (q.v.) in Our Knowl- 
edge of the External World (1914), 
The Philosophy of Logical Atomism 
(1918), and other works, and by Witt: 
genstein in Tractatus logico-philoso- 
phicus. According to L.A., the whole 
world is a totality of atomic facts 
(q.v.). The philosophy of logical atom- 
ism, as Russell himself has admitted, 
is an extreme pluralism (q.v.), because 
it asserts the existence of a multipli- 
city of individual things and denies 
them any unity or integrity. To some 
extent L.A. was a reaction to the ab- 
solute idealism of F. Bradley, who held 
that only the absolute, the whole was 
real and that individual things were 
merely apparent. In Wittgenstein’s 
Tractatus L.A. forms a kind of onto- 
logical argument for a definite logico- 
epistemological conception which re- 
gards all knowledge as a totality of 
“atomic” propositions connected by 
logical operations and infers the struc- 














Logical Empiricism 


ture of the world by analogy with the 
logical pattern of knowledge. L.A. 
absolutises the discrete and the indi- 
vidual. The unsoundness of the theory 
was ultimately acknowledged even by 
its advocates. 

Logical Empiricism, a trend in con- 
temporary idealist philosophy stem- 
ming directly from the logical positi- 
vism (q.v.) of the late twenties and early 
thirties and forming one of the varie- 
ties of analytical philosophy (q.v.). 
The main exponents of L.E. are Carnap, 
Reichenbach (qq.v.), Feigl, Hempel, 
Bergman, and Frank (q.v.). L.E. pre- 
serves the basic ideas of logical positi- 
vism—reduction of philosophy to the 
logical analysis of language (now not 
only syntactical, as in the early thir- 
ties, but also semantic—see Logical 
Semantics) and the proposition that 
it is impossible to provide theoretical 
proof of the existence of objective rea- 
lity, etc.; but it has been slightly mo- 
dified in comparison with the earlier 
logical positivism. The logical empiri- 
cists have repudiated the extreme sub- 
jectivism of the Vienna circle (q.v.). 
As an “empirical language of science” 
they offer a so-called physical-object 
language expressing sensually percep- 
tible physical phenomena instead of a 
language of the personal experience of 
the subject. This does not mean, how- 
ever, the adoption of materialist 
positions, since for L.E. the acceptance 
of a physical-object language does not 
involve recognition of the theoretical 
assertion of the objective existence of 
the world of things. L.E. also rejects 
the principle advanced during the 
period of the Vienna circle that scien- 
tific knowledge may be reduced to 
what is empirically given. In scientific 
concepts, however, L.E. sees only 
“purposive” forms of organising the 
data obtained by the senses, not the 
reflection of objective reality. Recog- 
nition of the fact that besides the data 
scientific knowledge has its own spe- 
cific content is essentially at variance 
with the basic epistemological ideas 
of the Vienna circle, i.e., the princi- 
ple of verification (q.v.), etc., to which 
L.E. seeks to remain loyal. This gives 
rise to internal contradictions and 


— 252 — 


Logical Forms 


eclecticism in its epistemological doc- 
trine. As a philosophical trend L.E. 
is undergoing a profound internal cri- 
sis, as is shown by its abandonment of 
the widely proclaimed programmes 
characteristic of the early logical pos- 
itivism, by its acceptance of watered- 
down versions, and by its gravitating 
away from the broad philosophical 
problems to specifically logical and 
specifically methodologial researches 
in which representatives of L.E. have 
performed good service. 

Logical Fallacies, mistakes caused by 
an incorrect step in the process of reason- 
ing. L.F. are of various kinds. They 
may arise through an erroneous inter- 
pretation of a proposition or through 
its incorrect use as a premiss (e.g., 
a proposition which~-is true under 
certain circumstances is taken to be 
unconditionally true); or through vio- 
lation of the rules of logic in the proc- 
ess of reasoning (e.g., the quaternio 
terminorum or four-term fallacy in 
syllogisms, when the premisses ap- 
pear to be connected by a common 
term, the middle term, which is in 
fact ambiguous); or through drawing 
a conclusion from a proposition that 
cannot, in fact, be drawn (e.g., igno- 
ratio elenchi, etc.). L.F. may be divid- 
ed into the unintentional (paralo- 
gisms, q.v.) and the deliberate (soph- 
isms, q.v.). 

Logical Forms, ways of constructing, 
expressing, and connecting ideas (and 
partial ideas) in the process of cogni- 
tion, irrespective of their concrete 
meaning. These forms have taken shape 
in the course of man’s socio-historical 
development and have a universally 
human character; they are forms of 
the reflection of reality in thought 
and themselves reflect the most general 
features of reality (e.g., the fact that 
every object has certain qualities, exists 
in certain relations to other objects, 
that objects form classes, that certain 
phenomena cause other phenomena, 
etc.). L.F., such as concepts, judge- 
ments, inferences, proofs and defini- 
tions (qq.v.), are studied in formal log- 
ic (q.v.). In cognition, the use of one 
or another L.F. is determined by the 
character of the content reflected in 








Logical Positivism 


thought. In language, L.F. are ex- 
pressed by the grammatical structure of 
the expressions involved and also by 
the use of particular words (“all”, 
“no”. “certaine “or”, “iae then”; 
“only”, ete.), which indicate a corre- 
sponding logical structure of thought. 
In mathematical logic, L.F. are ex- 
pressed by constructing logical calculi 
(q.v.) whose formulas correspond to 
expressions in the natural language; 
the structure formulas and the rules 
for operating them in a calculus rep- 
roduce L.F., so that these calculi act 
as special logical, or formalised lan- 
guages (see Formalisation, Logical Syn- 
tax). In dialectical logic, L.F. are 
studied from the point of view of how 
the changing and developing reality 
and the development of cognition it- 
self are reflected in thought. 

Logical Positivism, a variety of neo- 
positivism (q.v.). Originating in the 
1920s with the Vienna circle (q.v.), 
its leading figures were R. Carnap 
(q.v.) and Otto Neurath, who were 
closely associated with the Berlin So- 
ciety for Scientific Philosophy (H. Rei- 
chenbach, q.v., C. G. Hempel, and 
others). By the early thirties it had 
become widespread as the ideological 
basis of the neo-positivist “scientific 
philosophy”. Since the łate thirties 
the stronghold of L.P. has been in 
the USA, where it is found in a consi- 
derably modified form as compared 
with the days of the Vienna Circle 
and is known as logical empiricism 
(q.v.). L.P. takes its successions from 
Machism (q.v.) and the generally 
subjective-idealist tradition originat- 
ing from Berkeley and Hume. Logical 
positivists, however, repudiate the 
old and discredited psychological and 
biological approach to knowledge that 
was adopted by positivism (q.v.) and 
try to combine  subjective-idealist 
empiricism with a method of logical 
analysis. According to L.P., a genui- 
nely scientific philosophy is possible 
only through the logical analysis of 
science. The function of this logical 
analysis is, first, to get rid of “metaphy- 
sics” (i.e., philosophy, in the tradi- 
tional sense), and on the other hand, 
to investigate the logical structure of 


— 253 — 


Logical Positivism in Ethics 


scientific knowledge in order to deter- 
mine the “protocol-statement”, or the 
empirically verifiable meaning of scien- 
tific concepts and assertions. The ulti- 
mate aim of this investigation was 
held to be the reorganisation of scien- 
tific knowledge within a system known 
as “the unity of science”, which would 
describe the “protocol-statement” and 
eliminate the distinctions between the 
separate sciences—physics, biology, 
psychology, sociology, etc.—both as 
tegards the concept and the method 
of their formation. Logic and mathe- 
matics are regarded as “formal sci- 
ences”, not as knowledge of the world, 
but as a collection of “analytical” as- 
sertions which formulate the agreed 
rules of formal transformation. In the 
early thirties, L.P. attempted to free 
itself of some of the more unpleasant 
consequences of the principle of the 
“protocol-statement”. It accepted the 
concept of physicalism (q.v.), but this 
did not change the subjective nature 
of the philosophy. The enforced repu- 
diation of consistent subjective-idealist 
sensationalism (q.v.) brought the logi- 
cal positivists to equally untenable 
conventional concepts (Neurath and 
Carnap’s coherence theory, q.v.). The 
subjective-idealist essence of L.P. dis- 
poses of its claim to be a “philosophy 
of science”. Nevertheless, some repre- 
sentatives of L.P. (Carnap, Reichen- 
bach, and others) have achieved valu- 
able results in the field of logical re- 
search. 

Logical Positivism in Ethics, a neo- 
positivist interpretation of morality. 
Widespread since the twenties in the 
United States, Britain, Austria, Scan- 
dinavia, and Latin America. There are 
a number of schools of L.P. in ethics 
(emotivism, q.v., the Oxford school, 
etc.). The neo-positivists ignore the 
fact that morality is a social relation- 
ship and a special form of social con- 
sciousness; they regard it merely as a 
“moral language”. Ethics is replaced 
by a purely logical analysis of moral 
judgements and “terms”. The “meta- 
ethics” of the neo-positivists is an ab- 
stract and scholastic theory divorced 
from life and may be treated as a depart- 
ment of logic rather than a theory of 








Logical Semantics 


morality. Instead of an objective in- 
vestigation of the categories of ethics 
the neo-positivists seek to elucidate 
how and in what sense moral judge- 
ments and such terms as “good” and 
“evil” and “duty” are used. The neo- 
positivists approach morality from the 
standpoint of the natural sciences and 
frequently draw the wrong conclusions. 
For example, assuming that good and 
evil are not characteristics of any phe- 
nomena that can be perceived by the 
sense-organs or determined by exper- 
iment, they infer that these concepts 
have, therefore, no meaning at all 
and are merely “pseudo-concepts”. The 
neo-positivists fail to realise that good 
and evil are not natural but social 
characteristics of actions, and that 
these characteristics are determined by 
the social import of the latter. They 
cannot, therefore, be seen or “touched”, 
and can be determined only by rational 
means. In general, logical positivism 
has a destructive influence on ethics 
(see Neo-Positivism). 

Logical Semantics, the department 
of logic that studies the meaning of 
linguistic expressions, or more pre- 
cisely, a department of metalogic (q.v.) 
which studies interpretations (see In- 
terpretation and Model) or logical cal- 
culations (see Formalised Language). 
The basic concepts of L.S. can be 
divided into two groups: (1) concepts 
included in what is called the theory 
of the designation, their application to 
the expressions of the given language 
depending to a great extent on choice 
of interpretation (concepts of truth, 
designation, decidability, q.v., name, 
q.v., extension, synthetic truth, etc.); 
(2) concepts belonging to what is known 
as the theory of meaning (see Denota- 
tion and Sense) synonymy, analytical 
truth, etc., are determined in relation 
to all the possible interpretations of 
the given language. Semantic analysis 
must be used when considering formal- 
ised languages from the standpoint 
of metatheory (q.v.) because many 
essential facts (e.g., those regarding 
the completeness and non-contradiction 
of the language) cannot be established 
within the framework of a purely syn- 
tactical examination (see Logical Syn- 


= 254 — 


Logical Symbols 


tax). As Tarski (q.v.) has shown, the 
description of the semantic properties 
of a language within the framework of 
the language itself leads to semantic 
antinomies (q.v.) of the “liar” type. 
The semantic properties of any lan- 
guage must, therefore, be analysed in 
the logically richer metalanguage (see 
Metalanguage and Object Language). 
The problems of L.S. were pioneered by 
Frege (q.v.), significant contributions 
in this field being made by the Lvov- 
Warsaw school (q.v.) of Polish logi- 
cians, and by R. Carnap (q.v.), W. 
Quine, A. Church, and J. Kemeny. In- 
vestigation of the semantic properties 
of the language of science and the natu- 
ral languages is increasingly applied in 
connection with the development of 
mathematical linguistics, machine 
translation, and the automatic process- 
ing of information, etc. 

Logical Symbols, modern formal 
logic makes extensive use of a language 
of symbols to achieve a precise and sim- 
ple interpretation of the object and to 
enable the investigator to apply the 
formal mathematical method. The sym- 
bols used for constructing, according to 
definite rules, the formulas of a system 
in formal logic are of three basic types: 
(1) those denoting the elementary log- 
ical objects of the system; (2) those 
denoting logical connections or opera- 
tions; (3) auxiliary symbols, e.g., brack- 
ets and stops. Several systems of 
symbolic notation are accepted in 
modern logic, as aresult of which differ- 
ent symbols may represent the same 
logical concepts. The meanings of the 
most important of these symbols are 
given below: 

1. A, B,C... X, Y, Z ... (also used 
with indices) denote variable proposi- 
tions (q.v.). 

a, b,c... X, y, Z... (also used with 
indices) denote variable objects. 

P(.), R(.,.), S(.,.,.) (also used with 
indices) denote variable predicates (q.v.) 
2.—, |,-- —symbols of negation; 

q.v. (“no” 

\VV,.—symbols of disjunction,q.v. (“or”) 


.,A—symbols of conjunction, q.v. 
(“and”) 
2,~+—symbols of implication, q.v. 


(“if ... then”) 





Logical Syntax 


~,—+-—-— symbols of equivalence, q.v. 

(“if and only if ... then”) 
a,E—symbols of the existential quan- 
tifier (q.v.) 

y.( )—symbols of the universal quan- 
tifier. 

Logical Syntax 1. Set of rules 
governing the construction and trans- 
formation of the expressions of a calcu- 
lus (q.v.). 2. Branch of metalogic (q.v.) 
concerned with studying the structure 
and properties of uninterpreted ¢alcu- 
li. The main problems arising from 
the syntactical examination of logical 
calculi are the problems of non-contra- 
diction, completeness (see Non-Contra- 
diction and also Axiomatic Theory, 
Completeness of), independence (see Axi- 
omatic System, Independence of), de- 
cision (see Decision Problem), and prov- 
ability. The problem of provability 
is to find the algorithm (q.v.) which 
provides the proof for any demonstra- 
ble. L.S. thus includes the theory of 
proof. The concept of L.S. was intro- 
duced by Wittgenstein in 1919, al- 
though the problems of L.S. had been 
considered by many representatives 
of mathematical logic (q.v.) by the 
end of the 19th century (Frege, Rus- 
sell, qq.v., Hilbert, Gödel, q.v., Church, 
Kleene, and others). Carnap (q.v.) gave 
a systematic exposition of the problems 
and concepts of L.S. in The Logical 
Syntax of Language (1934), which 
shows the fertility of the syntactical 
investigation of the languages that 
formalise the various branches of the 
natural sciences (see Formalised Lan- 
guage). 

Logicism, the thesis that mathemat- 
ics is reducible to logic. Although this 
idea was originally advanced by Leib- 
niz (q.v.), it was only at the end of 
the last century that Frege (q.v.) at- 
tempted to put it into practice. Frege 
set himself the aim of (1) defining the 
basic concepts of mathematics in terms 
of pure logic, and (2) proving its prin- 
ciples while restricting himself entirely 
to the principles of logic and employ- 
ing only logical proofs. Further work 
in this direction (Russell and White- 
head, q.v., 1910-13, Ramsey, 1926, 
Quine, 1940) failed to produce the de- 
sired results, due to the fundamentally 


— 255 — 


Logistic Method 


incorrect methodological assumption 
of L. that mathematics is independent 
of the real world and the objects of its 
investigation. The development of 
mathematical logic (q.v.) has, on the 
contrary, led to the conclusion, as in 
Gédel’s (q.v.) theorem, that even the 
comparatively elementary departments 
of mathematics cannot be reduced to 
logic. 

Logistic, originally applied to the 
art of arithmetical calculation. Leib- 
niz (q.v.) occasionaly spoke of mathe- 
matical logic as “logistica”. The use 
of L. as a synonym for symbolic or 
mathematical logic (q.v.) was accepted 
at the Geneva International Congress 
of Philosophy of 1904, where it was 
proposed by lItelson, Lalande, and 
Couturat, q.v. (see Logicism). 

Logistic .Method, in modern math- 
ematics and logic, a method of build- 
ing formalised systems (see Formali- 
sation) and calculations (q.v.). In 
logical syntax (q.v.), the term “syn- 
tactical system” is used. Such systems 
are built on a purely formal basis with- 
out reference to the meaning of the 
expressions involved. The construction 
of a logistic system requires: (1) a list 
of primitive symbols of the system; 
(2) a determination of what kind of 
sequence of primitive symbols forms 
the correctly constructed formulas of 
the system, the first two requirements 
being regarded as rules of formation; 
(3) a determination of what correctly 
constructed formulas can be classed 
as axioms; (4) a determination of the 
rules of inference (or rules of conver- 
sion) by which a correctly constructed 
formula is immediately inferred from 
the set of formulas taken as premisses. 
A finite sequence consisting of one or 
more correctly constructed formulas 
is regarded as a proof (q.v.) if each for- 
mula in the sequénce is either an 
axiom (primitive formula) or can be 
immediately inferred according to the 
rules of inference from the preceding 
formulas of the sequence. The correct- 
ly constructed formulas for- which 
proofs exist are called theorems of the 
system. Sometimes the L.M. includes 
interpretation as well as construction 
of a formal system (see Logical Seman- 








Logos 


tics). This purely formal construction 
of a system does not, of course, imply 
complete disregard for content, par- 
ticularly the class of logical laws em- 
ployed, which must always be taken 
into account when constructing a cal- 
culus, 

Logos (Gk. discourse, reason), a 
term whose original meaning in philos- 
ophy was universal law, the basis of 
the world. Heraclitus (q.v.) speaks of 
L. in this sense when he says that 
everything proceeds according to L., 
which is eternal, universal, and es- 
sential. The idealists (Hegel, Windel- 
band, Trubetskoi, qq.v., etc.) wrongly 
regarded the L. of Heraclitus as univer- 
sal reason. Among the stoics (q.v.) the 
term L. denotes the law of the physical 
and spiritual worlds insofar as they 
merge in a pantheistic unity (see Pan- 
theism). Philo of the Alexandrian school 
(ist century A.D.), developed the doc- 
trine of the L. as the totality of pla- 
tonic ideas and also as a creative force 
acting as mediator between God and 
the created world. We find a similar 
interpretation of L. in Neo-Platonism 
(q.v.), among the gnostics (q.v.), and 
later in Christian literature and scho- 
lasticism (see Erigena, for example). 
Hegel in his philosophy described L. 
as an absolute concept. An attempt 
was made by representatives of reli- 
gious idealist philosophy in Russia 
(Trubetskoi, V. Ern, 1881-1915, 
and others) to revive the idea of a 
divine L. In oriental philosophy 
concepts analogous to L. are tao (q.v.) 
and, in a certain sense, dharma. The 
term L. is not used in Marxist liter- 
ature. 

Lokayata, a materialist doctrine in 
ancient India. The earliest informa- 
tion on L. is to be found in the Bud- 
dhist canonical texts known as the Ve- 
das (q.v.) and in’ the Sanskrit epics. 
Traditionally, the origin of the L. 
is supposed to have been connected 
with the mythical sage Brihaspati. 
Certain atheistic attacks on the Vedas 
are attributed to the legendary Char- 
vaka, and in a number of ancient texts 
this materialism is known as the Char- 
vaka. The teaching of L. on the nature 
of being is founded on the idea that 


— 256 — 


Lomonosov 


everything in the Universe consists 
of four elements—earth, fire, water, 
and air (in some texts the fifth ele- 
ment of ether is added). Every ele- 
ment has its particular type of atoms, 
which are immutable, indestructible, 
and have existed from the beginning 
of time. The properties of an object 
depend on the types of atoms it con- 
sists of and in what proportion they 
are combined. The consciousness and 
sense-organs are also the result of a 
certain combination of atoms; after 
the death of a living being this com- 
bination disintegrates into elements 
which join up with the atoms of the 
corresponding type existing in inani- 
mate nature. Some texts contain a 
notion of evolution, treating certain 
elements as originating from others 
with earth as primordial. The episte- - 
mology of L. is sensory, the sole valid 
source of knowledge being sense per- 
ception. The sense-organs can appre- 
hend objects to the extent that they 
themselves are composed of the same 
elements (“like is known by like”). 
L. completely denies the validity of 
any indirect knowledge. Inference and 
conclusion are considered as false in- 
struments of cognition, as is evidence 
offered by the Vedas. L. denies the 
existence of God, the soul, karma, and 
the transmigration of souls. The pre- 
dominant feature of the ethics of L. is 
hedonism (q.v.). L. evidently exer- 
cised a certain influence on ancient In- 
dian methods of government. Not a 
single text written by the followers of 
L. has come down to us in modern 
times. L. is most fully expounded 
in the philosophical treatises and 
compendiums (darsana) written by the 
idealist opponents of L., who upheld 
the Vedas between the 9th and 16th 
centuries. 

Lomonosov, Mikhail Vasilyevich 
(1711-65), Russian encyclopaedist, 
founder of materialist philosophy in 
Russia. Son of a peasant. As the best 
pupil of the Slavonic-Greco-Latin Acad- 
emy in Moscow, which he entered 
in 1731, he was sent to the St. Peters- ` 
burg Academy of Sciences in 1736, 
then abroad, to Marburg University. 
In 1741, L. returned to Russia. A think- 











Lomonosov 


— 257 — 


Lorentz 





er of immense versatility, L. made a 
great contribution to the development 
of physics and chemistry. He also 
did much for Russian philology, his- 
tory, and poetry. The materialist tra- 
dition of Russian philosophy stems 
from L. As a materialist, he contested 
the various speculative views that 
dominated science in his day. In op- 
position to idealist theories he insisted 
on the natural origin of natural bodies. 
In his treatise O sloyakh zemnykh 
(On the Strata of the Earth), 1763, 
he anticipated the theory of the evo- 
lution of the vegetable and animal 
worlds, stressing the need to study 
the causes of change in nature. Basing 
his explanation of natural phenomena 
on the transformation of matter, which, 
he held, consisted of minute particles 
or “elements” (atoms) united in “cor- 
puscles” (molecules), L. always re- 
garded matter as being in motion. 
He expressed this idea in his law of 
the conservation of matter and mo- 
tion, which he formulated in a letter 
to Eiler of July 5, 1748 (see Conser- 
vation of Energy, Law of). L. firmly 
opposed the unscientific views dominat- 
ing natural science in the 18th century. 
In Razmyshleniya o prichine teploty 
i Rholoda (Reflections on the Cause 
of Heat and Cold), 1749, he rejects 
the concept of heat as being caused 
by a special type of heat-giving ma- 
terial (the thermogen) and shows that 
the cause of heat processes is to be 
found in the movement of particles 
of matter. This leads him to the as- 
sumption that the variety of natural 
phenomena is due to the various forms 
of the motion of matter. The basic 
properties of matter, according to L., 
are: extension, power of inertia, shape, 
imperviousness, and mechanical mo- 
tion. L. considered a “first push” to 
be one of the causes of the development 
of nature; in this respect, too, he was 
following the interpretation given by 
mechanistic materialism. In epistemol- 
ogy L. was a materialist. Considering 
the effect of the external world on the 
sense-organs to be the source of knowl- 
edge, he opposed the theory of innate 
ideas (q.v.), and the doctrine of sec- 
ondary qualities (see Primary and 


17-1682 


Secondary Qualities). Though he at- 
tached great importance to experience 
as a source of knowledge, L. postulated 
that only the combination of empirical 
methods and theoretical generalisations 
could reveal the truth. L. was the found- 
er of physical chemistry. He was 
the first to provide evidence of the 
existence of an atmosphere surround- 
ing the planet Venus, and introduced 
quantitative analysis as a systematic 
method of research in chemistry. He 
also played a great part in the geolog- 
ical and geographical study of Russia 
and in setting up the mining and 
porcelain industries. As the founder 
of Moscow University (1755), L. was 
responsible for the emergence of the 
eminent Russian scientists and schol- 
ars who carried forward the develop- 
ment of the natural sciences and ma- 
terialist philosophy in Russia. In the 
field of social studies L. advocated 
enlightenment and moral improve- 
ment as the sole means of improving 
the life of society and pointed to the 
ignorance of the priests as one of the 
causes of the widespread ignorance 
of the people. In his struggle against 
the clergy he adopted rationalist posi- 
tions, with a tendency towards deism 
(q.v.). His poetry and historical writ- 
ing have a strong patriotic vein. In 
his Drevnyaya rossiiskaya istoriya 
(History of Ancient Russia), published 
in 1766, he proved the falsity of the 
theory, held by some historians, that 
the Russians were descended from the 
Scandinavian peoples. 

Lorentz, Hendrik Antoon (1853- 
1928), Dutch mathematical physicist, 
professor at Leyden University. L. pio- 
neered electronic theory, evolved the 
hypothesis of ether (q.v.) at rest and 
anticipated the theory of relativity 
(q.v.). His ideas constituted a tre- 
mendous step forward in the develop- 
ment of the electromagnetic theory 
and led directly to the modern physics 
of the 20th century. He was the first 
to show the invariance (q.v.) of the 
laws of electromagnetic phenomena, 
their independence of various systems 
of measurement moving with uniform 
velocity and rectilinearly. His trans- 
formations connecting spatial co-ord- 








Lossky 


inates and time in moving systems, 
being a generalisation of the trans- 
formations of Galileo (q.v.), have be- 
come a permanent fact in the mathe- 
matical apparatus of the theory of 
relativity. L. held materialist views 
and opposed the denial of causality 
and other idealist conclusions concern- 
ing quantum mechanics and the theory 
of relativity. 

Lossky, Nikolai Onufriyevich (1870- ), 
Russian idealist philosopher; pro- 
fessor at the Russian Orthodox Semi- 
nary in New York, once a professor 
at St. Petersburg University. Emigrat- 
ed in 1922. In co-operation with anoth- 
er Russian philosopher, S. L. Frank 
(1877-1950) he attempted to create 
a system of “integral” intuitionism 
(q.v.). This system is an eclectical com- 
bination of the ideas of Plato and 
Bergson (qq.v.), of the immanentists, 
and the mysticism of Solovyov (q.v.). 
L. holds that philosophy should evolve 
a theory of the world as a single whole. 
He attempts to build this “theory” 
on the basis of religious experience and 
a doctrine of God as a kind of supratem- 
poral substantial agent. Epistemologi- 
cally, L. is close to immanence philos- 
ophy (q.v.). Objects are to be appre- 
hended by means of intellectual or mys- 
tical intuition. Though he distinguishes 
between the content of knowledge 
and the act of knowing, L. never 
emerges from the framework of sub- 
jective idealism. His History of Rus- 
sian Philosophy (1951), besides being a 
complete distortion of the history of 
materialism, aims many false charges 
at Soviet Government. His works in- 
clude: Obosnovaniye intuitivizma (The 
Intuitive Bases of Knowledge), 1906; 
Mir kak organicheskoye tseloye (The 
World as an Organic Whole), 1917; 
Dostoyevsky i yego Rhristianskoye miro- 
vozzreniye (Dostoyevsky and his Chris- 
tian Outlook), 1945. 

Lotze, Rudolf Hermann (1817-81), 
German philosopher, professor at Göt- 
tingen University. L.’s philosophy is 
a compromise between materialism 
and idealism, in which the latter pre- 
dominates. His knowledge of the na- 
tural sciences, including medicine, is 
combined with idealism in the vein 


— 258 — 


“Ludwig Feuerbach” 


of Leibniz (q.v.). His best known work 
was Mikrokosmus (1856-64). L.’s ideas 
paved the way for the “phenomenology” 
(q.v.) of Husserl (q.v.). His Logik 
influenced Karinsky (q.v.). 

Lucretius, Carus (c. 99-55 B.C.), 
Roman poet and materialist philos- 
opher, continued the work of Epicurus 
(q.v.), author of De Rerum Natura. 
L. set out to reveal the path to happi- 
ness for the individual thrust into the 
vortex of social conflict and disaster 
and haunted by fear of the gods, death, 
and punishment after death. Release 
from fear was to be had through accept- 
ance of the philosophy of Epicurus 
regarding the nature of things, man, 
and society. The soul, L. maintains, 
is mortal, for it is merely a temporary 
combination of particles and, when 
the body dies, it disintegrates into 
atoms. Realisation of the mortality 
of the soul eliminates not only belief 
in the after-life but also in punishment 
after death. It releases man from 
his fear of hell. The fear of death is 
similarly dismissed. While we are 
alive there is no death, when death 
comes we no longer exist. Lastly, even 
fear of the gods disappears as soon 
as we realise that the gods live not in 
this world but in the empty spaces 
between worlds; living a life of bliss 
in these regions, they can have no 
influence on the life of man. L. gave 
a vivid materialist picture and inter- 
pretation of the world and the nature 
of man, the development of material 
culture and technology. He was a 
great Enlightener of the Roman world 
and his poem had an immense influence 
on the development of the materialist 
philosophy of the Rennaissance (q.v.). 

“Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of 
Classical German Philosophy” (1886), 
a philosophical work by Engels, which 
played a prominent role in the sub- 
stantiation and development of dia- 
lectical and historical materialism. 
The author appended to it Marx’s 
“Theses on Feuerbach”. Engels begins 
with an analysis of the essence of He- 
gel’s philosophy and the contradictions 
inherent therein and shows that Marx- 
ist dialectics and Hegelian dialec- 
tics are opposites. Engels gives a clas- 











Lukasiewicz 


sical definition of the fundamental 
question of philosophy (q.v.), its two 


aspects, and criticises agnosticism, 
q.v. (above all that of Hume and 
Kant, qq.v.), showing that practice 


is the most decisive refutation of it. 
Giving a scientific definition of mate- 
rialism and idealism, Engels analyses 
the views of the 17th-18th century 
English and French materialists and 
of Feuerbach (q.v.), and proves that 
the old mechanical, metaphysical ma- 
terialism is limited and that its under- 
standing of social phenomena is ideal- 
istic. Engels underscores the signifi- 
cance of Feuerbach’s criticism of ideal- 
ism, but at the same time criticises 
his attempt to create a new religion 
and his idealistic views on ethics. 
Having established the fundamental 
difference between dialectical material- 
ism and all previous philosophies, 
Engels, in the latter part of his work, 
expounds in a concise form the ma- 
terialist conception of history. De- 
veloping the theory of historical ma- 
terialism, he emphasises the idea that 
the superstructure is relatively inde- 
pendent. This was of great impor- 
tance for the critique of economic 
materialism (q.v.), which sprang up 
at the time. Engels’ analysis of the 
causes, content, and significance of 
the radical revolution wrought in phi- 
losophy by Marxism and his popular 
exposition of the essence of dialectical 
and historical materialism make this 
work (which Lenin placed on the same 
level as The Manifesto of the Com- 
munist Party) an indispensable man- 
ual for the study of the origin and 
history of the basic ideas of Marxist 
philosophy. 
Lukasiewicz, Jan (1878-1956), Pol- 
ish logician, professor at Lvov and 
Warsaw universities, and towards the 
end of his life at the Royal Irish Acad- 
emy. In his philosophical views L. 
aligns positivist tendencies with Cath- 
olic ideas. He is one of the most emi- 
nent representatives of the Lvov-War- 
saw school (q.v.) of logic. 
Lunacharsky, Anatoly Vasilyevich 
(1875-1933), Soviet statesman and pub- 
lic figure, writer on the theory of art, 
and journalist. Joined the working- 


17° 


— 259 — 


Lunacharsky 


class movement in the 1890s, became 
a Bolshevik in 1903. In the years of 
reaction following the defeat of the 
Russian revolution of 1905-07 he turned 
away from Bolshevism and professed 
Machism (q.v.) and  god-building, 
q.v. (Sotsialism i religiya [Socialism 
and Religion], Part 1, 1908; Part 2, 
1911). In 1917, he was readmitted to 
the Bolshevik Party, and from 1917 
to 1929 was People’s Commissar for 
Education. In 1930, he was elected 
to the Academy of Sciences. L.'s early 
works Osnovy pozitivnoi estetiki (Fun- 
damentals of Positivist Aesthetics), 
1904, etc., showed the influence of 
positivism, q.v. (Spencer, Avenarius, 
Bogdanov, qq.v.). But in his best 
pre-revolutionary writings, Dialog ob 
iskusstve (Dialogue on Art), 1905; 
Zadachi s.-d. khudozhestvennogo tvor- 
chestva (Tasks of Social-Democracy in 
the Arts), 1907; Pismu o proletarskoi 
literature (Letters on Proletarian Liter- 
ature), 1914, he criticises decadence 
and attempts to elaborate from a pro- 
letarian standpoint such problems as 
partisanship in art (q.v.), the influence 
of the revolution on the development 
of culture, the significance of art in 
the class struggle of the proletariat, 
the connection between the artist’s 
world outlook and his art, etc. After 
the revolution, as a large-scale organ- 
iser of socialist culture, L. displayed 
his talent to the full in the theory of 
art. Adopting the standpoint of dia- 
lectical materialism, he contributed to 
the history of literature (his writings 
on the Russian and Soviet classics, 
on the revolutionary democrats, on 
West European writers, and so on), 
to aesthetics, e.g., Kultura na Zapade 
i u nas (Culture in the West and in 
Our Country), 1928; Klassovaya borba 
v iskusstve (The Class Struggle in 
Art), 1929; Lenin i literaturovedeniye 
(Lenin and Literary Studies), 1932, 
and to theatrical and musical criticism. 
He paid particular attention to the 
elucidation of problems that were of 
great importance to the theory of 
art and creative work: Lenin’s ideo- 
logical legacy, scientific aesthetics, the 
Party’s guidance of the arts, the task 
of Marxist criticism, socialist realism 





Luther 


(q.v.), the connection between prole- 
tarian art and the classical heritage, 
and the struggle against bourgeois 
modernism and vulgar sociologism 
(q.v.) in the study of art. He also wrote 
a number of dramatic works. 


Luther, Martin (1483-1546), eminent 
leader of the Reformation (q.v.) and 
founder of Protestantism (q.v.). He 
influenced all spheres of spiritual life 
of Germany in the 16th-17th centuries. 
His translation of the Bible played 
an important role in the formation 
of the German language. L. was a 
supporter of moderate burgher refor- 
mation. He denied that the church 
and the clergy were mediators between 
man and God. He affirmed that the 
“salvation” of man does not depend 
upon the performance of “good deeds”, 
mysteries, and rituals, but upon man’s 
sincere belief. According to him, reli- 
gious truth is based not on the “sac- 
red tradition” (decrees of oecumenical 
councils, papal judgements, etc.), but 
on the Gospel itself. These demands 
reflected the conflict between the 
early bourgeois world outlook, on the 
one hand, and the feudal ideology and 
the church, on the other. At the same 
time L. opposed the doctrines which 
expressed the material interests of the 
German burghers, criticised the theory 
of natural law (q.v.), the ideas of early 
bourgeois humanism, and the princ- 
iples of free trade. L. stood on the side 
of the ruling classes during the Great 
Peasant War (1525). “Luther,” Marx 
wrote, “has conquered slavery based 
on belief in God only by substituting 
for it slavery based on conviction”. 
(Marx and Engels, Works, Russ. ed., 
Vol. 1, p. 422.) 


Lvov-Warsaw School, group of Pol- 
ish logicians and philosophers (J. Lu- 
kasiewicz, q.v., T. Kotarbinski, K. Aj- 
dukiewicz, S. Lesniewski, L. Chwistek, 
Tarski, q.v., and others), who worked 
in the inter-war period mainly in 
Warsaw, Lvov, and Cracow. Its 
founder was K. Twardowski. Philo- 
sophically, the school was representative 
of widely varying trends (from the 
materialism of Kotarbiński to the Neo- 
Thomism, q.v., of Salamuja and Bo- 


— 260 — Lyell 


cheński, q.v.). Characteristic of the 
majority of its representatives were: 
(a) rejection of irrationalism (q.v.), 
concrete enumeration through mathe- 
matical logic (q.v.) of the basic ideas 
and principles of traditional ration- 
alism (q.v.); (b) stress on precise re- 
search into the logic of scientific rea- 
soning; (c) interest in logical semantics 
(q.v.). Representatives of the school 
made a considerable contribution to the 
development of mathematical logic, 
the fundamentals of mathematics, the 
methodology of the deductive sci- 
ences and the history of logic and 
logical semantics. J. Lukasiewicz, 
M. Wajsberg, and J. Slupecki, pioneered 
many-valued and modal logic (q.v.), 
and Chwistek, Leśniewski, Sobocinski, 
Lukasiewicz, Tarski, and others in- 
vestigated the fundamental concepts 
of metalogic (q.v.). The logicians of 
this school also dealt with the prob- 
lems of the logic of relations (q.v.), 
axiomatisation, the set theory (q.v.), 
the name theory, etc. The philosophers 
and logicians of People’s Poland base 
much of their work on the progressive 
ideas of the L.W.S. 

Lyceum, the name applied to the 
sacred garden adjoining the temple 
of Appollo near Athens and to the 
gymnasium erected there in the 5th 
century B.C. It was there in 335 B.C. 
that Aristotle (q.v.) founded his school 
of philosophy, which was to exist 
for nearly eight centuries. After Aris- 
totle the L. was taken over by his 
pupil Theophrastus. The most outstand- 
ing representatives of the school were 
Eudemus of Rhodes, Dicaearchus, and 
Strato. By the Ist century B.C., how- 
ever, the L. had ceased to be a creative 
centre of philosophy and was merely 
publishing and commenting on the 
works of Aristotle. With the collapse 
of the slave-owning system the L. 
also ceased to exist. 

Lyell, Charles (1797-1895), British 
geologist and naturalist. In his Prin- 
ciples of Geology (3 vols., 1830-33) he 
opposed Cuvier’s (q.v.) catastrophe 
theory. L. attributed geological changes 
to the slow transformation of the 
Earth under the influence of constantly 
operating causes (atmospheric precipi- 








tation, earthquakes, etc.). Though es- 
sentially a materialistic theory, it had 
the defect of reducing the whole de- 
velopment of the Earth to changes of 
only one kind. On the other hand, 
it had a damaging effect on the teleo- 
logical view of the absolute immuta- 


Lyell — 261 — Lyell 


bility of nature and paved the way 
for the collapse of the metaphysical 
way of thinking. In later life L. ac- 
knowledged Darwin’s theory of 
evolution (q.v.), which he had 
Tejected in earlier editions of his 
Principles. 








M 


Mably, Gabriel Bonnet de (1709-85), 
French historian and political thinker. 
He was a passionate defender of the 
system based on common property. 
He left a great literary heritage. M. 
expressed his approbation of the com- 
munist system which, in his opinion, 
existed at the dawn of human history. 
Before long, however, society witnessed 
the rise of private ownership, the cause 
of all the depravities, lies, and delu- 
sions in the world. Humanity strayed 
so far that it could not return again 
to the communistic order. This state- 
ment did not prevent M. from de- 
claring that the system founded on 
private ownership contradicts natural 
equality and man’s social instinct. 
Only equal status for man in society 
permits him to live in happiness. M. 
favoured measures directed towards the 
equalisation of fortunes. He recognised 
the right of the people to revolution 
whenever they realise that they are 
subject to unjust and irrational laws. 
He did not consider revolution, how- 
ever, a prerequisite to the achieve- 
ment of the communist ideal, believing 
that it was only a means for achieving 
more limited aims. M. was not a con- 
sistent utopian socialist; but many 
aspects of his social philosophy pro- 
moted the dissemination of socialist 
ideas. 

Mach, Ernst (1838-1916), Austrian 
physicist and philosopher, subjective 
idealist and one of the founders of 
empirio-criticism (q.v.). By acknowl- 
edging a thing to be a “complex of 
sensations”, M. counterpoised his teach- 
ing to philosophical materialism. 
Proceeding from the philosophy of 
Hume (q.v.), he rejected the idea of 


causality, necessity and substance, 
since these are not given in “experi- 
ence”. In line with the Machian “prin- 
ciple of the economy of thought”, the 
description of the world, in M.’s opin- 
ion, should include only the “neutral 
elements of experience”; only these 
“elements” (which M. identified with 
sensations) and their functional con- 
nections are real. The distinction 
between the physical and the psychical 
was reduced to what he calls “function- 
al relation”, in which the “elements” 
are investigated: physical investiga- 
tion, according to him, involves an 
analysis of the interrelation of the 
“elements”; and psychological inves- 
tigation, an analysis of the relations 
of the human organism with their 
“elements”. M. regards concepts as 
symbols denoting “complexes of sen- 
sations” (“things”), and science in 
general as the totality of hypotheses 
which can be replaced by direct ob- 
servation. Lenin’s Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism (q.v.) exposed and 
refuted the subjective idealism of M.’s 
philosophy. Main works: Die Analyse 
der Empfindungen und das Verhältnis 
des Physischen zum Psychischen (1886), 
and Erkenntnis und Irrtum (1905). 
His philosophy influenced the shaping 
of neo-positivism (q.v.) as well as the 
basic Machian revision of Marxism 
(F. Adler, Bazarov, Bogdanov, Yush- 
kevich, qq.v.). 

Machiavelli, Niccolo di Bernardo 
(1469-1527), Italian thinker and ideol- 
ogist of the rising bourgeoisie. Society, 
according to M., develops not by the 
will of God but by natural causes. The 
driving forces of history are “material 
interest” and power. He noted the con- 





Machine 


flict of interests between the masses 
of the people and the ruling classes. 
M. demanded the creation of a strong 
national state, free from feudal inter- 
necine conflicts and able to suppress 
popular riots. He considered permis- 
sible the employment of all means 
in political struggle, justifying cruelty 
and treachery in the struggle of rulers 
for power, The historical merit of 
M., to use Marx’s words, was that he 
was one of the first to see the state 
through the human eyes and to deduce 
its laws from reason and experience 
and not from theology. Main work: 
Zl Principe (1531). 

Machine, in the narrow sense of the 
word, a system created by man’s 
effort to transform one form of energy 
into another for the purpose of deriving 
useful effect in production. Alongside 
the employment of M. in the field 
of material production to replace the 
physical labour of man, it was also 
employed as early as the 17th century 
to replace mental work (mechanical 
computers). With the development 
of automation, particularly with the 
advent of cybernetics (q.v.) the con- 
cept of M. was extended to a wider range 
of phenomena: the term of M. is ap- 
plied not only to systems created by 
man, but also to living organisms; 
and cybernetics as a science of con- 
trol and communication is, in essence, 
a science of machines. Such an under- 
standing’ of M. has nothing in com- 
mon with the mechanism of the 17th- 
18th centuries. If Descartes (q.v.) 
regarded the animals as M., devoid 
of soul, and La Mettrie included man 
in the category of M., this distorted 
not the concept of M. but the concept 
of man and animals, because these 
were likened to a system working on 
the basis of the laws of mechanical 
motion. In contemporary science, the 
concept of M. is undergoing changes 
which has no more connection with 
any concrete form of the motion of 
matter; science, in studying the laws 
of M., investigates the structures of 
the systems of operation, the proper- 
ties and functions of these structures, 
leaving aside their material substrata. 
Hence, the scientific knowledge of M. 


— 263 — 


Macrocosm and Microcosm 





can be used in the study of the func- 
tioning of the human organism, but 
only where man has “machine-like” 


motions. The concept of M. must 
be analysed as an economic category 
as well, and this was done. by 
Marx. 3 


Machism, see Mach, Empirio-Criti- 
cism. 

Macrocosm and Microcosm, two spe- 
cific spheres of objective reality. The 
sphere of macrophenomena is the world 
in which man lives and acts (planets, 
terrestrial bodies, crystals, large mole- 
cules, etc.). Here the length of objects 
is measured in centimetres, metres or 
kilometres, and time intervals are meas- 
ured in seconds, hours, years, that is, 
they are directly observable. The mi- 
crocosm (atoms, nuclei, elementary par- 
ticles, etc.) is qualitatively different. 
Here the measurements of objects are 
less than a thousand-millionth part 
of a centimetre, and time intervals are 
measured in thousand-millionths of 
a second. Both M. & M. are character- 
ised by their peculiar structure of 
matter, spatio-temporal relations, and 
law-governed movement. Thus macro- 
cosm material objects have a clearly 
discernible discontinuous, corpuscular 
structure, or a continuous wave struc- 
ture, and their movement is subject 
to the dynamic laws of classical me- 
chanics. Microcosm phenomena, on the 


other hand, are characterised by a 
close-knit connection between cor- 
puscular and wave properties, this 


being expressed in the statistical laws 
of quantum mechanics (q.v.). A border 
dividing the macrocosm and microcosm 
has been established with the discov- 
ery of Planck’s constant (see Planck). 
Modern “physical idealism” (q.v.) 
makes absolute the distinctions between 
the macrocosm and the microcosm, 
the peculiarities of their cognition and 
denies the objectivity and knowability 
of the microworld. The penetration of 
physics into the world of atoms, and 
then into the atomic nuclei and ele- 
mentary particles, was brilliant proof of 
Lenin’s conclusion on the “infiniteness 
of matter in depth”, a confirmation 
and enrichment of the principles of 
dialectical materialism. 








Magic 


Magic (Gk. sorcery, witchcraft), one 
of the forms of primitive religion; a 
set of rituals which aim to affect peo- 
ple, animals, and imaginary spirits 
in order to obtain definite results. 
M. is based on the belief in a super- 
natural relation between man and the 
surrounding world. There is M. for la- 
bour, for doing harm, and for treating 
ailments, etc. The belief in M. persisted 
up to the latter part of the Middle Ages 
(see Alchemy). In our days it reappears 
in occultism (q.v.). Elements of M. 
can be found in such world religions 
as Christianity (q.v.), Islam, q.v. 
(prayers, anointing of the living or the 
dead, etc.). 

Magnitude, in mathematics, a basic 
concept originating as an abstraction 
of the numerical designations of phys- 
ical qualities. The concept of M. is 
used for the exact definition of quan- 
titative relations between the objects 
and processes of reality. It may, there- 
fore, be regarded, like the concepts 
of number, continuity, etc., as a closer 
definition of the category of quantity. 
A distinction is made between Mm. of 
scale (characterised by number alone, 
e.g., length, area, volume, etc.) and 
vector Mm. (embracing, besides num- 
ber, direction, e.g., force, speed, etc.). 
M. is also divided into constants and 
variables. The concept of variable was 
introduced into mathematics by Des- 
cartes (q.v.) and played an important 
part in the development of modern 
mathematics and science. 

Maimonides or Moses ben Maimon 
(1135-1204), Jewish philosopher, ad- 
herent of the teachings of Aristotle 
(q.v.) and one of the leaders of the ra- 
tionalistic school of Judaism (q.v.). 
M.’s philosophy is a synthesis of Ju- 
daistic theology and Aristotelianism; 
he tried to reconcile religion with 
philosophy by way of a “sublimated” 
(allegorical) interpretation of the Bible 
and isolated dogmas of Judaism. Ac- 
cording to the theory of knowledge of 
M., man’s ultimate aim was to pro- 
vide a rational basis for the supreme 
truth. M. was persecuted by religious 
fanatics for his rationalistic ideas. His 
main work Moreh Nebouchim (Guide 
for the Perplexed) gained wide pop- 


— 264 — 


Malthusianism 


ularity in Western Europe and exert- . 
ed considerable influence upon later 
scholasticism (q.v.). His ideas were 
also spread in old Russia. 

Malebranche, Nicolas de (1638-1715), 
French idealist and adherent to oc- 
casionalism (q.v.). From an idealistic 
position he attempted to eliminate 
dualism in Descartes’ (q.v.) system. 
M.'s philosophy attributes an exclu- 
sive role to God, who not only creates 
all existing things but also contains 
all of them within himself. The per- 
manent interference of God is the only 
cause of all changes; there are no so- 
called “natural causes” and “interac- 
tions” between spatial and thinking 
substances. In the theory of knowl- 
edge, too, Malebranche adheres to the 
idealistic position: man gets to know 
things not through their effect on the 
sense-organs; cognition is human con- 
templation of ideas about all existing 
things, while God is the source of 
these ideas. Main work: Recherche de 
la vérité (1674-75). 

Malthusianism, an unscientific theory 
founded by the English clergyman 
Malthus (1766-1834), who claimed that 
the population (q.v.) increases in ge- 
ometrical progression, while the means 
of subsistence grow only in arithmetical 
progression. According to Malthus, 
the discrepancy arising between the 
amount of the means of livelihood and 
the size of the population is regulated 
by means of wars, epidemics, limitation 
of marriages, and other means of con- 
trolling the growth of the population. 
Relative overpopulation is a biolog- 
ical law. Some contemporary Malthu- 
sians (G.F. McCleary and others) 
consider that the reason for the grow- 
ing discrepancy is that the prices of 
foodstuffs are “too low”, while the 
wages of the workers are “high”. M. 
serves to justify capitalist exploitation 
and the policies of imperialism. Where- 
as “classical” M. considered exces- 
sive birth rates to be the cause of over- 
population, Neo-Malthusianism sees 
that cause in “insufficiently low” 
death rates, resulting from the achieve- 
ments of medical science. Marx and 
Engels said that overpopulation and 
the attendant poverty of the masses 








Man 


are caused by the capitalist system 
and showed that Malthus’ theory is 
completely untenable and reactionary. 
The progress of science and technology 
leads to an enormous growth of pro- 
ductive forces, so that the output of 
social production grows considerably 
faster than the population. The ex- 
perience of the socialist countries has 
shown the historically transient char- 
acter of overpopulation. Increase in 
food production is attained on the 
basis of technological and agronomical 
progress, which affords the possibility 
of creating not only sufficiency but 
an abundance of foodstuffs for the fast- 
growing population. 

Man, a social being. From the bio- 
logical viewpoint M. is regarded as the 
highest stage in the development of 
animals on Earth. He differs from the 
most developed animals by his mind 
and articulate speech. While the be- 
haviour of an animal is fully deter- 
mined by instincts, reactions to the 
environment, the behaviour of M. is 
directly determined by thinking, emo- 
tions, will, degree of knowledge of 
the laws governing nature, society, 
and himself. By raising this distinc- 
tion to an absolute, idealists see the 
essence of M. in reason, in subjective, 
conscious aspirations, religious be- 
lief, etc. Actually, the fundamental 
difference between M. and animal 
consists above all in that M. produces 
instruments of labour with the object 
of acting on nature and transforming 
it. While the animal adapts itself to 
natural conditions, M. adapts nature 
to himself in his productive activity. 
M. cannot exist in isolation from 
other people, he is moulded in definite 
social conditions. “... The human es- 
sence,” Marx wrote, “is no abstraction 
inherent in each single individual. 
In its reality it is the ensemble of the 
social relations.” (Marx, Engels, Se- 
lected Works, Vol. II, p. 404.) Marxism 
for the first time explained that the 
real objective motives determining 
M.’s activity are ultimately rooted in 
the material conditions of his life. 
The specific features of M., expressing 
his essence as “man”—consciousness, 
Spiritual life, ability to use the most 


— 265 — 


Man 


diverse instruments of labour, 'etc.— 
are a product of social labour. Marx 
replaced the old philosophical doc- 
trines of “human nature” in general 
by the teaching on man’s concrete na- 
ture, determined by a definite histo- 
rical system of society. At the same 
time, at any stage of society M. is a 
product of development of all mankind; 
he assimilates and processes the knowl- 
edge gained throughout history. The 
forms of assimilating all preceding 
culture and the specific way in which 
M. is influenced by the historically 
given social conditions, are ultimately 
determined by the nature of produc- 
tion. In conditions of the division of 
labour, inherent in antagonistic class 
formations, M. could not freely develop 
his physical and spiritual capabili- 
ties; he inevitably developed one- 
sidedly, which was expressed above 
all in the antithesis between mental 


„and physical work. M. turned, as under 


capitalism, into an appendage of the 
machine, and so on; the majority of 
people, represented by the working 
masses, were subjected to exploita- 
tion and were barred from active social 
life, from the cultural treasures accu- 
mulated by mankind. Only under 
socialism and especially under com- 
munism will M. receive every oppor- 
tunity for all-round development, for 
the maximum display and develop- 
ment of his individual gifts and incli- 
nations. 

Man (Ger. Man, an indefinite per- 
sonal pronoun), one of the main con- 
cepts of existentialism (q.v.) introduced 
by Heidegger (q.v.). The concept of 
M. denotes “social reality”, and is 
manifested in laws, moral standards, 
cultural traditions, and public opin- 
ion. M., according to Heidegger, is 
always inimical to the concrete human 
being, obstructs his freedom of action 
and deprives him of his individuality. 
In order to break away from the power 
of M. and become free, the human 
being, according to existentialism, 
should isolate himself from society 
and place himself in a“border-line situ- 
ation” (q.v.) between life and death. 
The individual is able to break away 
from “day-to-day existence” only by 





“Manifesto” 


fear of death; then he becomes free and 
can be responsible for his actions. The 
concept of M. reflects the irrational 
solution to the problem of the interre- 
lation between the individual and 
bourgeois society—the antagonism be- 
tween the individual and society inher- 
ent in the capitalist system. By hold- 
ing that the human being is only an 
“individual”, by denying that man 
is essentially a sum total of social 
relations, the adherents of existential- 
ism inevitably arrive at unscientific 
and reactionary conclusions. 
“Manifesto of the Communist Party”, 
the first programmatic document of 
scientific communism, expounding the 
foundations of Marxism, written by 
Marx and Engels and published at the 
beginning of 1848. The first chapter— 
“Bourgeois and  Proletarians”—dis- 
closes the laws of social development, 
proves the inevitable and law-gov- 
erned nature of the replacement of one 
mode of production by another. Pro- 
ceeding from the fact that the history 
of all hitherto developing society, 
except the primitive-communal sys- 
tem, was the history of class struggle, 
Marx and Engels proved that the fall 
of capitalism was inevitable and point- 
ed the way to the formation of a 
new social system—communism. In 
this same chapter they elucidated the 
historic mission of the proletariat as 
the revolutionary transformer of the 
old society and the builder of the new, 
the champion of the interests of all 
toiling masses. In the second chapter— 
“Proletarians and Communists”—Marx 
and Engels highlighted the historic 
“role of the Party of Communists as 
part of the working class and as its 
vanguard. The immediate aim of the 
Communists is the “formation of the 
proletariat into a class, overthrow of 
the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of 
political power by the proletariat”. 
(Marx and Engels, Selected Works, 
Vol. I, p. 46.) In this chapter Marx 
and Engels advanced the idea of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat, explained 
the relation of the Communist to 
the family, property, and the mother- 
land and outlined the economic meas- 
ures which the proletariat must take 


— 266 — 


Marburg School 


upon coming to power. In the third 
chapter— “Socialist and Communist Lit- 
erature”—they made a profound crit- 
icism of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
trends masquerading under the ban- 
ner of socialism and defined their 
own attitude to the systems of utopian 
socialism and communism. In the 
fourth chapter— “Position of the Com- 
munists in Relation to the Various 
Existing Opposition Parties”—Marx 
and Engels set forth the tactics of the 
Communists regarding various opposi- 
tion parties. Manifesto of the Commu- 
nist Party concludes with the immortal 
slogan: “Working Men of all Countries, 
Unite!” Of the invaluable historic 
significance of the work Lenin wrote: 
“This booklet is worth whole volumes: 
to this day its spirit inspires and 
guides the entire organised and fighting 
proletariat of the civilised world.” 
(Vol. 2, p. 24.) 

Marburg School, one of the trends 
in Neo-Kantianism (q.v.). The main 
exponents of this schoo] were Hermann 
Cohen (q.v.), Paul Natorp, Ernst Cas- 
sirer (q.v.) and Rudolf Stammler. Hav- 
ing discarded the materialistic tend- 
ency in Kant’s (q.v.) teaching, these 
thinkers subscribed to consistent sub- 
jective idealism. The exponents of the 
M.S. held that philosophy does not 
provide knowledge of the: world, but 
consists only of the methodology and 
logic similar to those of special sci- 
ences. They denied objective reality, 
tried to separate knowledge from sense 
data and considered cognition a pure 
logical process of producing concepts. 
This methodology is but the insipidity 
in general principles, whch are as- 
cribed to special sciences. The most 
important of these principles is the 
so-called principle of obligation, which 
the school spread to sociology as well. 
The adherents of M.S. denied that 
the laws of social development were 
objective and considered socialism ex- 
clusively as a moral phenomenon, as 
an “ethical ideal” standing above the 
classes. The theorists of the M.S. de- 
manded that Marxism be “supplement- 
ed” with Kantianism, emasculated 
scientific communism of its economic 
and political content and denied the 





Marcel 


revolutionary struggle and the dic- 
tatorship of the proletariat. The socio- 
logical ideas of this school influenced 
“legal Marxism” (q.v.) in Russia and 
later served as the basis for the revi- 
sion of Marxism by the opportunists 
of the Second International (Bern- 
stein, Kautsky, qq.v., M. Adler, and 
others). In our days these ideas are 
being used by the Right Socialists to 
combat Marxism-Leninism. 

Marcel, Gabriel (1889- ), French phi- 
losopher and writer, professor at Sor- 
bonne; chief exponent of the so-called 
Catholic existentialism (q.v.). His main 
works are Journal Métaphysique (1925), 
Etre et Avoir (1935), and Les hommes 
contre l'humain (1951). Among the 
existentialists M. stands closest to the 
teaching of Kierkegaard (q.v.). He be- 
lieves that philosophy is at variance 
with science, which studies the world 
of objects but does not touch upon 
existential experience, i.e., the inner 
spiritual life of the individual. Exist- 
ential experience is irrational in its 
essence, contains “secrets” in which 
the individual is involved and serves 
as an object of belief. For M., it is 
precisely through existential experi- 
ence that one can comprehend 
God; for this reason it is necessary 
to renounce rational proof of 
God’s existence. M.’s ethics is 
built upon the Catholic doctrine of 
pre R enor and the freedom of the 
will. 

Marcus Aurelius (121-180 A.D.), 
philosopher-stoic (q.v.) and Roman 
Emperor. His only work Meditations 
expresses his philosophy in the form 
of aphorisms. The impending crisis 
of the Roman Empire dominated M.A.’s 
philosophy. In his interpretation of 
stoicism, M.A. ultimately abandoned 
all materialistic features and became 
a religious mystic. For him God, the 
prime basis of all that is living, is 
universal reason, in which all forms 
of individual consciousness are dis- 
solved after physical death. His ethics 
was permeated with fatalism (q.v.), 
preaching of humility and asceticism. 
He appealed for moral perfection and 
purification, for self-consolation through 
the cognition of the fatalistic 


— 267 — 


Markovitch 


necessity which rules the world. M.A.’s 
philosophy greatly influenced Christ- 
ianity (q.v.), despite his harsh treat- 
ment of Christians. 

Maréchal, Pierre-Sylvain (1750-1803), 
representative of the plebeian-demo- 
cratic wing of French materialism and 
atheism. M. recognised that existing 
nature was eternal, believing that 
only its concrete expressions, i.e., 
“forms” appeared or disappeared. M.'s 
theory of knowledge is based on sen- 
sationalism (q.v.), while materialism 
is the theoretical basis for his atheism. 
God, to him, is synonymous with na- 
ture. Out of fear man invented a su- 
preme being and endowed that being 
with the properties of nature. M. 
joined the Babouvist movement (see 
Babouvism) and became a_ utopian 
communist. M.’s main work: Manifeste 
des égaux (1794). M. stood above the 
Encyclopaedists (q.v.) in his atheistic 
outlook. He associated the final 
removal of religion with a revo- 
lution, the overthrow of the exploiting 
system and the establishment of 
communism. 

Maritain, Jacques (1882-), leader 
of Neo-Thomism (q.v.), French am- 
bassador to the Vatican from 1945 
to 1948; in his later years he taught 
at Princeton University (USA). Ini- 
tially M.’s outlook was closely related 
to the philosophy of Bergson (q.v.) 
and vitalism (q.v.). In 1906, he went 
over to Catholic philosophy. For M., 
science, metaphysics, and mysticism 
are independent forms of knowledge 
which complement each other. In his 
various works he elucidated problems 
of psychology, sociology, aesthetics, 
ethics, and pedagogics from the stand- 
point of orthodox Thomism. 

Markovitch, Svétozar (1846-75), Ser- 
bian revolutionary democrat, material- 
ist philosopher and utopian socialist, 
who studied in Russia. M.’s world 
outlook was developed at a time when 
Serbia was faced with the critical 
problem of completing her bourgeois- 
democratic revolution. He was greatly 
influenced by the ideas of the Russian 
revolutionary democrats. Basing himself 
on Marx’s works, he severely criticised 
the capitalist system and came out 








Marx 


openly in the defence of the Paris 
Commune. M., however, did not reach 
the level of dialectical and historical 
materialism and scientific socialism 
in spite of his knowledge of the main 
works of Marx and Engels and his 
participation in the work of the First 
International. He held the mistaken 
notion that after the victory of a 
popular revolution, based on the za- 
druga (a big patriarchal family) and 
the rural commune, it was possible 
to pass on to socialism, bypassing capi- 
talism. His philosophical ideas formed 
the theoretical foundation of his rev- 
olutionary democratic programme. In 
his work, The Real Trend in Science 
and Life (1871-72), M. upheld his 
materialistic line in philosophy, eth- 
ics, and aesthetics. He popularised 
Darwin’s theory; in his understanding 
of society remained an idealist. 
Marx, Karl (1818-83), founder of 
scientific communism, the philosophy 
of dialectical and historical material- 
ism, and scientific political economy, 
the leader and teacher of the world 
proletariat. He was born in Trier where 
in 1835 he finished the secondary 
school. Later he enrolled at the Uni- 
versity of Bonn and the University of 
Berlin; by that time his world outlook 
had begun to take shape. The Left 
trend (see Young Hegelians) in Hegel’s 
philosophy made its imprint on Marx's 
spiritual evolution. Adhering to revo- 
lutionary democratic ideas, M. took 
an extreme left position among the 
Young Hegelians. In his early work, 
his Ph.D. thesis on Differenz der de- 
mokritischen und epikureischen Natur- 
philosophie (1841), M. draws, in spite 
of his idealism, very radical and athe- 
istic deductions from Hegel’s phi- 
losophy. In 1842, Marx became a staff 
member of Rheinische Zeitung, and 
later its chief editor. M. converted 
the newspaper into an organ of revo- 
lutionary democracy. In the course 
of his practical activities and theoret- 
ical investigations M. clashed head-on 
with Hegelian philosophy, because of 
its conciliatory tendencies, conserv- 
ative political conclusions, and of the 
discrepancy between its principles and 
the actual social relations and the 


— 268 — 


ioe abe et ae eh able ee inet. 


à y P k 


tasks of transforming those relations. 
In this clash with Hegel and the Young 
Hegelians M. switched to the material- 
ist position, his knowledge of real 
economic developments, and the phi- 
losophy of Feuerbach (q.v.) playing 
the decisive role in the process. A final 
revolution in M.’s world outlook was 
wrought by the change in his class 
stand and his passage from revolution- 
ary democracy to proletarian com- 
munism (1844). This transition was 
brought about by the development 
of the class struggle in Europe (M. was 
greatly influenced by the Silesian up- 
rising of 1844 in Germany), by his 
participation in the revolutionary 
struggle in Paris, where he had emi- 
grated after the Rheinische Zeitung 
was closed down (1843), and by his 
study of political economy, utopian 
socialism, and history. His new stand 
found expression in two articles pub- 
lished in the Deutsch- Französische Jahr- 
biicher (1844), entitled “Zur Kritik der 
Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie” and 
“Zur Judenfrage”. Here M. for the 
first time discloses the historic role 
of the proletariat and arrives at the 
conclusion of the inevitability of the 
social revolution and the necessity 
of uniting the working-class movement 
with a scientific world outlook. M. 
and Engels had been drawn to- 
gether by that time, and they began 
systematically elaborating a new world 
outlook. The results of scientific re- 
search and the main principles of the 
new theory were generalised in the 
following works: Okonomischphiloso- 
phische Manuskripte (1844), The Holy 
Family (1845), q.v., and The German 
Ideology (1845-46), q.v., written in 
collaboration with Engels, Theses on 
Feuerbach (1845), q.v., and the first 
work of mature Marxism—-The Poverty 
of Philosophy (1847), q.v. Marxism 
was formed as an integral science, 
reflecting as it did the unity of all its 
component parts. In 1847, M. lived in 
Brussels, where he joined a secret 
propaganda society called the Com- 
munist League and took an active 
part in the 2nd Congress of the League. 
At the Congress’ request M. and En- 
gels drew up the famous Manifesto 


Marx — 











EYE 2. aiii q Te y 


Marx 


of the Communist Party (1848), q.v., 
in which they completed the elabora- 
tion of Marxism. This work “outlines 
a new world-conception, consistent 
materialism, which also embraces the 
realm of social life; dialectics, as the 
most comprehensive and profound doc- 
trine of development; the theory of 
the class struggle and of the world- 
historic revolutionary role of the pro- 
letariat—the creator of a new, com- 
munist society”. (Lenin, Works, 
Vol. 21, p. 48.) Dialectical and histo- 
rical materialism is a truly scientific 
philosophy, in which materialism and 
dialectics, the materialist understand- 
ing of nature and society, the teach- 
ing about being and knowledge, the- 
ory and practice are fused organi- 
cally. This made it possible to over- 
come the metaphysic nature of pre- 
Marxian materialism, with its inher- 
ent contemplation (q.v.), anthropol- 
ogism (q.v.), and the idealistic under- 
standing of history. M.’s philosophy 
is the most adequate method of cog- 
nition and transformation of the world. 
The development of practice and sci- 
ence in the 19th-20th centuries have 
convincingly proved the superiority 
of Marxism over all forms of idealism 
and metaphysical materialism. M.’s 
doctrine as the only form of proletar- 
ian ideology was steeled in the fight 
against all sorts of unscientific, anti- 
proletarian and petty-bourgeois cur- 
rents. Marx’s activities are character- 
ised by partisanship and irreconcil- 
ability with any digression from sci- 
entific theory. Being a revolutionary 
in science, M. took an active part in 
the liberation struggle of the prole- 
tariat. During the revolution of 1848- 
49 in Germany he was at the fore- 
front of the political struggle. He res- 
olutely defended the proletarian stand 
in his capacity as chief editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which he 
founded. Banished from Germany in 
1849 he scttled permanently in Lon- 
don. After the Communist League was 
dissolved (1852), M. continued his 
activities in the proletarian move- 
ment, working for the creation of the 
First International (1864). He was 
active in this organisation, followed 


— 269 — 


Marx 


closely the progress of the revolution- 
ary movement in all countries, and 
took particular interest in Russia. 
To the very last day of his life M. was 
in the thick of contemporary events. 
This afforded him the indispensable 
material for the development of his 
theory. The experience of the bour- 
geois revolutions of 1848-49 in Europe 
was of great importance for the devel- 
opment by Marx of the theory of so- 
cialist revolution and class struggle, 
of the idea of the dictatorship of the 
proletariat, the tactics of the prole- 
tariat in the bourgeois revolution, the 
necessity of worker and peasant al- 
liance (The Class Struggles in France, 
1850, q.v.), the inevitable destruc- 
tion of the bourgeois state machine 
(The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bona- 
parte, 1852, q.v.). On examining the 
experience of the Paris Commune 
(The Civil War in France, 1871, q.v.), 
M. discovered a state form of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat and 
profoundly analysed the measures adopt- 
ed by the first proletarian state power. 
In his Critique of the Gotha Programme 
(1875), q.v., M. further developed the 
theory of scientific communism. His 
main interest lay in the sphere of po- 
litical economy, and he devoted all 
his life to his basic work Capital 
(q.v.): Volume I was published in 
1867; Volume II was published by 
Engels in 1885, and Volume III, in 
1894. The creation of political econ- 
omy laid a scientific basis of com- 
munism. The philosophical impor- 
tance of Capital is unequalled. It em- 
bodies the dialectical method of in- 
vestigation in a brilliant form. In his 
preface to Zur Kritik der politischen 
Okonomie (1859), one of his earlier 
works in economics, M. set forth, in 
a concise form, the essence of the ma- 
terialist understanding of history. In 
Capital this understanding was trans- 
muted from a hypothesis into a sci- 
ence. M.’s correspondence contains 
much of what characterises his phi- 
losophy. Never before has any other 
doctrine been so confirmed in practice 
as that created by Marx. Lenin, to- 
gether with his disciples and follow- 
ers, developed Marxism further under 








Marxism-Leninism 


new historical conditions. It was em- 
bodied in the victory of socialist revo- 
lutions in a number of countries, and 
it now furnishes the scientific foun- 
dation for the activities of the parties 
of the proletariat and all international 
communist and working-class move- 
ment, 

Marxism-Leninism, the revolution- 
ary doctrine of Marx, Engels, and 
Lenin, which represents an integrated 
and harmonious system of philosoph- 
ical, economic, and socio-political 
views. Marxism was born of the libera- 
tion struggle of the working class in the 
40s of the 19th century, and it became 
the theoretical expression of the fun- 
damental interests of that class, the 
programme of its struggle for socialism 
and communism. The appearance of 
Marxism signified a great revolution 
in the science of nature and society. 
The founders of Marxism have accom- 
plished an unprecedented scientific feat 
in such fields of human knowledge as 
philosophy, political economy, sci- 
entific socialism, etc., and formulated 
a truly revolutionary science whose 
object is not only to explain the world 
correctly but also to change it. Lenin 
pointed out that Marx’s teachings are 
comprehensive and integrated; they 
give people a purposeful world out- 
look. It is omnipotent, because it is 
true. The main feature of Marxism 
is that it substantiates the historic 
role of the working class as the builder 
of a classless, communist society. Sci- 
entific communism, which is an es- 
sential component part of M.L., has 
its profound economic foundation in 
Marx’s political economy, which dis- 
closed the laws of the capitalist mode 
of production and proved that social- 
ism must replace capitalism. Phil- 
osophically, M.L. is based upon 
dialectical and historical materialism. 
It develops as a living and crea- 
tive science, and is incompatible with 
any form of dogmatism; it draws its 
creative power from life, from the revo- 
lutionary practice. A feature of M.L. 
is a close link between theory and 
practice, distinguishing it from all 
reformist and revisionist theories. 
Marx and Engels were untiring in 


— 270 — 


Marxism-Leninism 


their striving to develop their teaching, 
to enrich it with new propositions and 
conclusions, testing their value 
through the revolutionary experience of 
the masses and the new achievements 
of science. A new stage in the creative 
development of Marxism is inseparably 
associated with the name of Lenin, 
the true continuator of Marx’s teach- 
ing. The contribution of Lenin to the 
Marxist teaching is so great that it is 
rightfully called now the doctrine of 
Marxism-Leninism. A new historical 
epoch which set in towards the begin- 
ning of the 20th century—the era of 
imperialism and socialist revolutions— 
confronted the international communist 
movement with new problems in the 
theory and practice of the revolution- 
ary struggle. Lenin expertly applied 
Marxist dialectics to an analysis of 
the developments of that epoch and 
continued Marx's analysis of capital- 
ism. He produced a scientific theory 
of the imperialist stage of capitalism 
and developed the theory of the so- 
cialist revolution. He drew the con- 
clusion that initially socialism could 
win in one individual country. Lenin’s 
theory was translated into reality after 
the victory of the socialist revolution 
in Russia. The Communist Party of 
the Soviet Union drew up a plan for 
the building of socialist society and 
ensured its practical realisation. The 
further development of M.L. is in- 
separably linked up with the experi- 
ence of building socialism in the 
USSR and other countries and the 
formation of a world socialist system, 
and with the entry of the USSR in the 
period of full-scale communist con- 
struction. The M.L. doctrine was fur- 
ther advanced in the decisions of the 
20th, 2Qist, 22nd, and 28rd CPSU 
Congresses, of the Communist and 
Workers’ Parties of other countries, 
and in the decisions of the Moscow 
Meetings of the Representatives of 
Communist and Workers’ Parties con- 
cerning the problems of contempo- 
rary world development and the strug- 
gle for peace, democracy and social- 
ism. One of the main conditions for 
the creative development of the M.L. 
theory in 1956-66 was the overcoming 








Marxism-Leninism 


of the harmful consequences of the cult 
of Stalin’s personality and the restora- 
tion of the Leninist standards of Party, 
government, and public life. The 
CPSU Programme as worked out and 
adopted by the 22nd Congress signifies 
a new landmark in the development 
of M.L. The Programme synthesises 
the Marxist-Leninist knowledge of all 
fundamental contemporary problems. 
While taking stock of the new phenom- 
ena in modern capitalism, it general- 
ises the experience of the class and 
national liberation struggles at their 
present stage and constructively de- 
cides the problems of the socialist revo- 
lution, the issue of war and peace, 
and the fundamental problems of build- 
ing communism. All the spirit and all 
the contents of the CPSU Programme 
reflect the unity of the theory of Marx- 
ism-Leninism and the practice of 
communist construction. Such prob- 
lems as the creation of the material 
and technical basis of communism, 
the formation of communist social 
relations and the education of the 
new man are, indeed, the main prob- 
lems of both the theory of M.L. and 
the practice of communist construction. 
For the first time in the history of 
M.L. the Programme outlines the con- 
crete ways of building communism, 
the tasks in industry and agriculture, 
and the development of the state, 
science, culture, and communist edu- 
cation. Today M.L. is not only the 
theory but also the practice of the 
hundreds of millions of people building 
socialism and communism. The role 
and significance of the theory of M.L. 
immeasurably grows under socialism 
and in the period of building commu- 
nism, because socialism and communism 
are built consciously and in a planned 
way. The CPSU Programme stresses 
that the Party’s prime duty is to de- 
velop further M.L. on the basis of a 
study and generalisation of new phe- 
nomena in the life of Soviet society 
and the experience of the international 
working-class and liberation move- 
ments, and creatively to combine theory 
with the practice of communist con- 
struction. Today, as in the past, one 
of the main conditions for the further 


— 271 — 


Material and Technical Basis 


development of M.L, is the fight against 
revisionism (q.v.), dogmatism (q.v.) 
and sectarianism, against any distor- 
tion of the revolutionary theory of 
Marx, Engels, and Lenin and for a 
creative application of this theory in 
practice. 

Material and Technical Basis of 
Communism, the level of the produc- 
tive forces indispensable for the tran- 
sition from socialism to communism, 
the material basis for the existence and 
the development of communist society. 
Every social formation has its corre- 
sponding M.T.B. Thus under capital- 
ism it is represented by large-scale 
industrial production, based on private 
ownership of the means of production 
and the exploitation of man by man. 
The M.T.B. of socialism, which is the 
first and lower phase of communism, 
is distinguished by planned large-scale 
industrial production in all branches 
of the economy, based on social own- 
ership of the means of production 
and freed from the exploitation of 
labour. In the process of building com- 
munism the M.T.B. of socialism is grad- 
ually transformed into the M.T.B. 
of communism. The creation of the 
M.T.B. of communism implies the 
complete electrification of the coun- 
try; the comprehensive mechanisation 
of the production processes and their 
progressive automation; the widespread 
use of chemistry in the national econ- 
omy; a vigorous development of new, 
economically effective branches of pro- 
duction, new sources of power and 
new materials; all-round and rational 
utilisation of natural, material and 
labour resources; organic fusion of sci- 
ence and production, and rapid sci- 
entific and technical progress; a high 
cultural and technical level for the 
working people. The most important 
condition for the victory of the com- 
munist system is a substantial superior- 
ity over the more developed capital- 
ist countries in the productivity of 
labour. The M.T.B. of communism 
will be created in the USSR by 1980, 
as planned and stipulated in the Pro- 
gramme of the CPSU. This constitutes 
the chief economic task for Soviet 
society. In the course of building the 





Material Incentive 


M.T.B. of communism, the USSR 
will occupy first place in the world 
in per capita production and will 
emerge victorious in the economic com- 
petition with capitalism. The creation 
of the M.T.B. of communism will 
be the basis for the transformation of 
the socialist social relations into com- 
munist social relations, for a radical 
change in people’s mode of life, the 
moulding of the new man—full man 
of communist society. With the crea- 
tion of the M.T.B. of communism the 
production of material goods will rise 
to such a level as will allow gradual 
transition to the communist principle 
of distribution according to needs. 

Material Incentive, the basic prin- 
ciple of the socialist economy, in accord- 
ance with which the level of material 
prosperity of the members of socialist 
society depends upon the quantity and 
quality of their work. Material interest 
under capitalism leads to the growth of 
selfishness among individual proprietors 
and to fierce competition. Socialism, 
on the other hand, brings forth new 
stimuli for the development of pro- 
duction, far more powerful than those 
existing under capitalism. The M.I. 
of the workers under socialism lies 
in the fact that they work for them- 
selves and for their society. This en- 
courages them to improve working 
methods, eliminate shortcomings in 
the organisation of production, and 
do all in their power to raise labour 
productivity. At the same time M.I. 
is combined with moral stimuli (q.v.) 
to labour, since only in this case does 
it become a genuine means for acceler- 
ating the growth of socialist produc- 
tion. This principle will remain in 
force until the building of communist 
society is completed. The CPSU Pro- 
gramme points out that “communist 
construction must be based upon the 
principle of material incentive. In the 
coming twenty years payment accord- 
ing to one’s work will remain the prin- 
cipal source for satisfying the material 
ane cultural needs of the working peo- 
p e”. 

Materialism, the only scientific phil- 
osophical trend, opposed to idealism. 
We distinguish two kinds of M., the 


— 272 — 


Materialism 


spontaneous belief of all mankind in 
the objective existence of the external 
world, and the philosophical world 
outlook, which scientifically deepens 
and develops spontaneous M. Philo- 
sophical M. maintains that matter is 
primary and mind, consciousness, sec- 
ondary. This implies that the world 
is eternal, not created by God, and is 
infinite in time and space. Maintaining 
that consciousness is a product of 
matter, M. considers it as the reflection 
of the external world, and thereby 
asserts the knowability of the world. 
In the history of philosophy M. was, 
as a rule, the world outlook of the pro- 
gressive classes and strata in society, 
who were interested in correctly un- 
derstanding the world and in increas- 
ing man’s power over nature. In sum- 
ming up achievements of science, M. 
promoted the growth of scientific knowl- 
edge, the improvement of scientific 
methods; this, in its turn, favourably 
influenced man’s practical activity and 
the development of the productive 
forces. In the process of the interaction 
between M. and the concrete sciences 
M. itself underwent changes. The first 
materialist theories made their appear- 
ance with the rise of philosophy as 
a result of the progress of scientific 
knowledge in astronomy, mathematics 
and other fields in the slave-owning 
societies of ancient India, China and 
Greece. The general feature of ancient 
M., which for the most part was naive 
(Lao Tsi, Wan Chung, the Charvaka 
school, Heraclitus, Anaxagoras, Em- 
pedocles, Epicurus, qq. v., and others), 
was recognition of the materiality of 
the world and its independent existence 
outside of man’s consciousness. Repre- 
sentatives of M. tried to find in the 
diversity of natural phenomena the 
common source of origin of all that ex- 
ists or takes place (see Element). It 
was the merit of ancient M. to create a 
hypothesis on the atomic structure of 
matter (Leucippus, Democritus, qq.v.). 
Many of the ancient materialists were 
spontaneous dialecticians, but some of 
them did not make a clear-cut distinc- 
tion between the physical and the psy- 
chic, attributing all the properties of 
the latter to nature (see Hylozoism). 








Materialism 


— 273 — 


Materialism 





In the development of materialistic 
and dialectical principles in ancient 
M. there was still an admixture of the 
influence of mythological ideology. In 
the Middle Ages and during the Renais- 
sance, materialistic trends appeared in 
the form of nominalism (q.v.), panthe- 
istic doctrines (see Pantheism) and the 
teaching that nature and God are co- 
eternal. M. developed in Europe in the 
{7th-18th centuries (see Bacon, Gali- 
leo, Hobbes, Gassendi, Spinoza, and 
Locke). This form of M. developed on 
the basis of nascent capitalism, and 
the attendant growth of production, 
technology and science. Speaking for 
the then progressive bourgeoisie, the 
materialists combated medieval scho- 
lasticism and ecclesiastical authority, 
looking to experience as their tutor 
and to nature as the object of philos- 
ophy. The M. of the 17th-18th centu- 
ries developed in conjunction with 
the then rapidly progressing mechanics 
and mathematics, as a result of which 
it was mechanistic. Another of its fea- 
tures was a desire to analyse, to divide 
nature into more or less isolated and 
mutually unrelated fields and objects 
of investigation, and to. study these 
without regard for their development. 
French M. of the 18th century occupied 
a special place in the materialist philos- 
ophy of this period (La Mettrie, Di- 
derot, Helvetius, and Holbach, qq.v.). 
The French materialists maintained on 
the whole the mechanistic conception 
of motion, considering it, like Toland 
(q.v.), as a universal and inalienable 
property of nature, and completely 
rejecting the deistic inconsistencies 
characteristic of most 17th century ma- 
terialists. The organic link existing 
between all kinds of M. and atheism 
was particularly apparent in the French 
materialists of the 18th century. The 
peak in the development of this form 
of M. in the West was the “anthropo- 
logical” M. of Feuerbach (q.v.). At 
the same time contemplation (q.v.) 
characteristic of all pre-Marxist M. was 
more manifest in Feuerbach then in 
any of his contemporaries. A further 
step in the development of M. was 
made in the second half of the 19th 
century in Russia and other countries 


18-1682 


of Eastern Europe by the philosophy 
of the revolutionary democrats (Belin- 
sky, Herzen, Chernyshevsky, Dobro- 
lyubov, Markovitch, Botev, qq.v., and 
others), a philosophy which rested upon 
the traditions of Lomonosov (q.v.), 
Radishchev (q.v.), and others. In some 
respects the revolutionary democrats 
rose above the limited horizon of an- 
thropologism and the metaphysical 
method. The highest and most consistent 
form of M. was dialectical materialism 
(q.v.) created by Marx and Engels in 
the middle of the 19th century. It over- 
came not only the aforementioned short- 
comings of the old M. but also the 
idealistic understanding of history com- 
mon to all its representatives. In its 
later development M. split into two 
main trends: dialectical and histori- 
cal materialism (q.v.), on the one 
hand, and a number of simplified and 
vulgarised varieties of M., on the 
other. The most typical variety was 
vulgar M. (q.v.) which gravitated to 
positivism; and to this latter gravitat- 
ed those varieties of vulgar M. which 
appeared at the turn of the century as 
a distortion of dialectical M. (mechan- 
ical revision of Marxism, and others). 
During the second half of the 19th 
century the mature forms of M. proved 
to be incompatible with the narrow 
class interests of the bourgeoisie. Bour- 
geois philosophers hold that adherents 
of M. are immoral, that they fail to 
comprehend the nature of conscious- 
ness, and identify M. with its primi- 
tive varieties. While repudiating mil- 
itant atheism and _ theoretico-cogni- 
tive optimism, some of these philoso- 
phers were compelled to admit some 
elements of materialistic world out- 
look in order to meet the interests of 
the development of production and 
natural science. On the other hand, 
not a few of them, who had made 
declarations in favour of idealism or 
eschewed “all philosophies” in a posi- 
tivist way, took the M. position in the 
study of special scientific research (e.g., 
the natural-historical M. of Haeckel, 
and Boltzmann, qq.v.). Some leading 
scientists turn from natural-scientific 
to conscious M., and in the last analy- 
sis to dialectical M. (Langevin, q.v., 














“Materialism & Empirio-Criticism’’ — 274 — “Materialism & Empirio-Criticism’’ 


Joliot-Curie, q.v., Kotarbinski, Ya- 
nagida, Lamont, and others). An im- 
portant peculiarity of the development 
of dialectical M. is its enrichment with 
new ideas on the strength of the criti- 
cism of the contemporary forms of 
idealism and many weak points in the 
theories of the naturalist materialists. 
The contemporary development of sci- 
ence demands that the natural scientist 
become a conscious adherent of dialec- 
tical materialism. At the same time 
socio-historical practice and science 
call for continued progress in M. phi- 
losophy. 

“Materialism and Empirio-Criti- 
cism. Critical Comments on a Reac- 
tionary Philosophy”, Lenin’s funda- 
mental philosophical work, written in 
1908 and published in May 1909. The 
book was written during the period 
of reaction brought about by the de- 
feat of the 1905-07 Russian revolu- 
tion. At that time the Marxists were 
confronted with the urgent political and 
theoretical task of defending dialectical 
and historical materialism against the 
onslaught of revisionism (q.v.) and 
of refuting the reactionary philosophy 
of empirio-criticism (q.v.) which was 
being vigorously propagated by the 
revisionists, M.& E. criticises exhaus- 
tively the subjective-idealistic philos- 
ophy of empirio-criticism and shows 
that dialectical and historical materi- 
alism is entirely opposed to the for- 
mer in all problems of philosophy. 
Lenin points out that the Russian Mach- 
ists, in their desire to “supplement 
and develop” Marxism through Machi- 
an philosophy, were in fact only echo- 
ing the reactionary ideas of subjective 
idealism (q.v.) and agnosticism (q.v.). 
The experience of all mankind, together 
with the data of natural science, com- 
pletely refutes all the “latest” concoc- 
tions of the idealists. Lenin criticised 
in detail the idealistic theories of 
Mach (q.v.), Avenarius, q.v. (see 
Principal Co-ordination), Pearson (q.v.), 
Petzoldt, and others, as well as the 
Russian Machists—Bazarov, Bogdanov, 
q.v. (see Empirio-Monism), Yush- 
kevich, q.v. (see Empirio-Symbolism), 
and the like. Lenin’s book shows the 
sources of empirio-criticism and its 


place in the development of bourgeois 
philosophy: beginning with Kant (q.v.), 
the Machists went from him to Hume 
and Berkeley (qq.v.) and were unable 
to go beyond their views. A typical 
feature of Machism was its closeness 
to the most reactionary philosophies 
of the type of the immanence school 
(q.v.). For the first time in Marxist 
philosophy Lenin discovered the true 
interrelation between empirio-criticism 
and natural science. Claiming the role 
of philosophy in contemporary natural 
science, empirio-criticism in fact ad- 
versely influenced the development of 
science, using and amplifying the ideal- 
ist vacillations of some physicists 
brought about by the crisis in physics 
at the turn of the century. Lenin’s 
discovery of the social roots and 
the class role of Machian philosophy 
is of exceptional importance. Resolute- 
ly and persistently pursuing the line 
of partisanship (q.v.) in philosophy, 
Lenin gave the lie to the “stupid claims” 
of the Machists and of the whole 
trend of positivism (q.v.), to be above 
materialism and idealism, and pointed 
out that empirio-criticism served the 
forces of reaction, religion, and was 
hostile to science and progress. Apart 
from his exhaustive criticism of Mach- 
ism and its Russian followers and 
fellow-thinkers, Lenin substantiated 
and developed further the most im- 
portant tenets of dialectical and his- 
torical materialism. Lenin gave an 
all-round analysis of the fundamental 
question of philosophy (see Funda- 
mental Question), and the most im- 
portant categories of Marxist philos- 
ophy (e.g., matter; experience; time 
and space; causality; freedom and ne- 
cessity, qq.v.), creatively developed 
the Marxist theory of knowledge, q.v., 
especially the theory of reflection, q.v., 
the role of practice in cognition, the 
place and role of sensations in cogni- 
tion, objective truth, q.v., the inter- 
relation between absolute and relative 
truth, q.v., and the basic problems of 
historical materialism (q.v.}. Lenin’s 
generalisation of the new data accu- 
mulated by natural science is of par- 
ticular importance. The outstanding 
discoveries in physics at the end of 





Materialism, Dialectical 


the 19th and the beginning of the 20th 
century marked the beginning of a 
revolution in natural science. These 
discoveries, however, gave birth to 
an acute crisis in the development of 
natural science, which was intimately 
connected with “physical” idealism 
(q.v.). Exposing the class and episte- 
mological roots of “physical” idealism, 
Lenin proved that the new discoveries 
in physics, far from refuting material- 
ism, supplied, on the contrary, fur- 
ther confirmation of dialectical mate- 
rialism. Lenin’s dialectical-materialis- 
tic generalisation of the great achieve- 
ments of science outlined the way 
out of the crisis in natural science and 
convincingly proved that the only 
method in that science was the dialecti- 
cal-materialistic method. The signifi- 
cance of Lenin’s book lies in the fact that 
in it materialism is given a new form, 
corresponding to the new level achieved 
in the development of science. Even 
today Lenin’s M. & E. serves as an 
ideological weapon in the fight against 
idealist philosophy and revisionism, 
in the philosophical generalisation of 
contemporary progress. in natural sci- 
ence. Lenin’s work is a masterpiece of 
the creative development of Marxist 
philosophy and a model of devotion 
to communist principles in theoretical 
questions. 

Materialism, Dialectical, the scien- 
tific philosophical world outlook, com- 
ponent of the Marxist doctrine, its 
philosophical basis. D.M. was evolved 
by Marx and Engels and further de- 
veloped by Lenin and other Marxists. 
It originated in the 1840s and devel- 
oped in intimate association with scien- 
tific progress and the practice of the 
revolutionary labour movement. Its 
emergence was a revolution in the 
history of human thought, the history 
of philosophy. But this revolution 
included continuity and critical accept- 
ance of all the advanced, progressive 
elements already attained by human 
thought. The two mainstreams of pre- 
ceding philosophical development 
merged in D.M. and were fructified by 
the new approach, the new, profoundly 
scientific outlook. There was the de- 
velopment, on the one hand, of mate- 


18° 


— 275 — 


Materialism, Dialectical 





rialist philgsophy, which went back 
to the remote past, and, on the other, 
of the dialectical outlook, which also 
had deep-rooted traditions in the his- 
tory of philosophy. The development 
of philosophical thought in close as- 
sociation with science and the histori- 
cal practice of mankind led inevitably 
to the triumph of the materialistic 
outlook. But despite glimmers of dia- 
lectics, the doctrines of the old mate- 
rialists were metaphysical or mechanis- 
tic, and combined materialism in 
their view of nature with idealism in 
their explanation of social phenomena. 
The philosophers who developed the 
dialectical outlook were essentially 
idealists, as is shown by Hegel’s sys- 
tem. Marx and Engels did not merely 
borrow the teaching of the old material- 
ists and the dialectics of the idealists. 
They did not merely synthesise the 
two, but proceeding from the latest 
discoveries in natural science and from 
the historical experience of mankind 
they proved that materialism can be 
scientitic and consistent only if it is 
dialectical, and that dialectics, in 
turn, can be genuinely scientific only 
if it is materialistic. The development 
of a scientific outlook on social develop- 
ment and its laws (see Materialism, 
Historical) was a most essentia] element 
in the formation of D.M. It was im- 
possible to defeat idealism in its last 
retreat, in the explanation of the essence 
of human society, without the dialec- 
tical materialistic outlook, and just 
as impossible to create a consistent 
philosophical world outlook and ex- 
plain the laws of human cognition with- 
out a materialistic approach to so- 
ciety, without an analysis of socio- 
historical practice and, above all, of 
social production as the basis of being. 
The founders of Marxism solved this 
problem. D.M. emerged, therefore, as 
an imposing philosophical synthesis, 
embracing the intricate complexity of 
natural phenomena, the phenomena of 
human society and thought, and com- 
bining its philosophical method of 
explaining and analysing reality with 
the idea of a practical revolutionary 
reconstruction of the world. The lat- 
ter fact distinguished D.M. from old 





Materialism, Dialectical 





philosophy, which confinad itself es- 
sentially to explaining the world. This 
reflected the class roots of Marxist 
philosophy as the world outlook of the 
most revolutionary class, the working 
class, with its mission of building 
classless, communist society. The emer- 
gence of D.M. essentially was the cul- 
minating point in the historical proc- 
ess by which philosophy became a 
separate science with a specific object 
of research. This object comprises the 
most general laws governing the de- 
velopment of nature, society, and 
thought, the general principles and 
foundations of the objective world and 
its reflection in human consciousness, 
which yield the correct scientific ap- 
proach to phenomena and processes, a 
method of explaining, cognising, and 
reconstructing reality. The teaching 
that the world is material, that there 
is nothing in the world besides matter 
and the laws of its motion and change, 
is the corner-stone of D.M. It is a de- 
termined and irreconcilable enemy of 
all conceptions of supernatural essences, 
no matter what garb they are clothed 
in by religion or idealist philosophy. 
Nature develops, attaining its highest 
forms, including life and thinking 
matter, through causes inherent in 
itself and in its laws, and not by any 
supernatural power. The dialectical 
theory of development (see Dialectics), 
which is part of D.M., defines the gen- 
eral laws governing the processes of 
motion and mutation of matter, the 
passage from lower to higher forms of 
matter. Contemporary physical theo- 
Ties concerning matter, space, and time, 
which recognise the mutability of all 
matter and the inexhaustible capacity 
of material particles for qualitative 
transformations, are in complete agree- 
ment with D.M. More than that, 
D.M. is the only possible source of 
the philosophical ideas and method- 
ological principles which these phys- 
ical theories require. The same applies 
to the sciences investigating other 
phenomena of nature. Contemporary 
historical practice confirms the prin- 
ciples of D.M., for the world is turning 
sharply from the old, outmoded forms 
of social life to new, socialist forms. 


— 276 — 


Materialism, Economic 





D.M. combines the teaching on being, 
on the objective world, and the teach- 
ing on its reflection in the human 
mind, thus constituting a theory of 
knowledge and logic. The fundamen- 
tally new advance made by D.M. in this 
field, which provided the teaching on 
cognition with an enduring scientific 
foundation, consisted in practice being 
included in the theory of knowledge. 
“All the mysteries which’ lead theory 
to mysticism are rationally resolved in 
human practice and in the understand- 
ing of this practice” (Marx). D.M. has 
applied the dialectical theory of de- 
velopment to cognition, established the 
historical nature of human concepts; 
it revealed the interconnection be- 
tween the relative and the absolute in 
scientific truths, and elaborated the 
question of the objective logic of cogni- 
tion (see Logic, Dialectical; Cognition). 
D.M. is a developing science. Every 
major discovery in natural science and 
the changes in social life serve to con- 
cretise and develop the principles and 
propositions of D.M., which absorbs 
the new scientific evidence and the 
historica! experience of mankind. D.M. 
is the philosophical basis of the pro- 
gramme, strategy, and tactics, and all 
activities of the Communist Parties. 

Materialism, Economic, a one-sided 
conception of history, according to 
which economics is the only force in 
social development. It does not rec- 
ognise the significance of politics and 
political institutions, ideas, and theo- 
Ties in the historical process. E.M. 
arose as a result of vulgarising the ma- 
terialist understanding of history. Ex- 
ponents of E.M. were E. Bernstein 
(q.v.) in the West, and the “legal 
Marxists” (q.v.), the Economists (q.v.) 
in Russia. Historical materialism is 
basically different from E.M. Histo- 
rical materialism holds that material 
production is the main motive force 
of social progress and explains the 
genesis of political institutions, ideas, 
theories in terms of the economic 
structure of society and the conditions 
of its material life. At the same time 
historical materialism stresses the im- 
mense importance of political institu- 
tions, ideas, and theories in social de- 








Materialism, French 18th Century 


— 277 — 


Materialism, Historical 





velopment (see Economics and Po- 
litics). 

Materialism, French 18th Century, 
an ideological movement representing 
a new and higher stage in the develop- 
ment of materialist thought on a na- 
tional, and also a world scale as com- 
pared with 17th century materialism. 
In contrast to English 17th century ma- 
terialism, which largely reflected a 
compromise between the bourgeoisie 
and the nobility, F.M. was the out- 
look of the progressive French bourgeoi- 
sie; their doctrine aimed to enlighten 
and arm ideologically a broad section 
of society—the bourgeoisie, artisans, 
bourgeois intellectuals, and the pro- 
gressive part of the aristocratic in- 
telligentsia. The leading French mate- 
rialists—La Mettrie, Helvétius, Di- 
derot, and Holbach (qq.v.)—expound- 
ed their philosophical views not in 
Latin treatises but in widely accessible 
publications written in French—dic- 
tionaries, encyclopaedias, pamphlets, 
polemic articles, and so on. The ideo- 
logical sources of F.M. were the na- 
tional materialist tradition represented 
in the 17th century by Gassendi (q.v.) 
and mainly by the mechanistic mate- 
rialism of Descartes (q.v.) and English 
materialism, Of particular importance 
were the doctrine of Locke (q.v.) on 
experience as a source of knowledge, 
criticism of the Cartesian doctrine of 
innate ideas (q.v.), and also an under- 
standing of experience as such, which 
was materialist on the whole. Locke’s 
pedagogical and political ideas exerted 
no less influence. He held that the per- 
fection of the individual is determined 
by education and the political struc- 
ture of society. But F.M. did not 
simply assimilate Locke’s theory of 
materialist sensualism and empiri- 
cism but discarded vacillations towards 
Cartesian rationalism. Medicine, phys- 
iology, and biology, side by side 
with mechanics, which retained its 
leading significance, became the scien- 
tific basis for the French materialists. 
Because of this, the doctrines of the 
French materialists contained many 
new ideas as compared with 17th cen- 
tury materialism. Elements of dialec- 
tics in Diderot’s teaching on nature 





were the most important of them. The 
ethical and socio-political theories of 
F.M. were highly original. Develop- 
ing the ideas of Hobbes, Spinoza, and 
Locke (qq.v.) in this sphere, F.M. 
largely cleared their ethical doctrines 
and their socio-political views from 
their abstract, naturalist limitations: 
in contrast to Hobbes, who deduced 
man’s striving for  self-preservation 
from an analogy with the mechanical 
inertia of a physical body, Helvétius 
and Holbach regarded this “interest” 
as a specifically human motive of be- 
haviour. F.M. rejected the compro- 
mhise forms of pantheism and deism and 
openly preached atheism based on the 
conclusions of the natural and gocial 
sciences. The French materialists’ lu- 
cid and witty criticism of religion was 
highly assessed by Lenin, who advised 
the use of specimens of this criticism 
in contemporary atheistic propaganda. 
A concise and meaningful essay of the 
history of F.M. was given by Marx in 
the Holy Family. In Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism Lenin showed how 
great was the role of F.M. in elaborat- 
ing philosophical principles for any 
materialism. He also demonstrated its 
theoretical limitations, its metaphysi- 
cal nature and idealism in explaining 
phenomena of social development. 
Materialism, Historical, a component 
part of Marxist-Leninist philosophy, 
the science which studies the general 
laws of social development and the 
forms of their realisation in the histo- 
rical activity of people. H.M. is scien- 
tific sociology (q.v.) which constitutes 
the theoretical and methodological basis 
of concrete sociological investigations 
(q.v.) and all the social sciences. All the 
pre-Marxist philosophers, including 
materialists, were idealists in their 
understanding of social life, inasmuch as 
they did not go beyond noting the fact 
that, whereas in nature blind forces 
are in operation, in society people, 
intelligent beings, act guided by ideal 
motives. In this connection Lenin noted 
that the very idea of materialism in 
sociology was a stroke of genius (see 
Lenin, Vol. 1, p. 139). The develop- 
ment of H.M. caused a fundamental 
revolution in social thought. It made 














Materialism, Historical 


it possible, on the one hand, to for- 
mulate a consistently materialistic view 
of the world as a whole, society as 
well as nature, and, on the other, to 
reveal the material basis of social life 
and the laws governing its development 
and, consequently, also the develop- 
ment of all the other aspects of social 
life determined by this material basis. 
Lenin stressed (Vol. 1, p. 138) that 
Marx elaborated his main idea of the 
law-governed historical process of so- 
cial development by singling out the 
economic sphere from all the different 
spheres of social life and the relations 
of production from all social relations 
as the main ones which determine all 
others. Marxism takes its point of depar- 
ture in what lies at the basis of every 
human society, namely, the method of 
obtaining the means of livelihood and 
establishes the connection between that 
method and the relations into which 
people enter in the process of produc- 
tion. In the system of these relations 
of production las it sees the founda- 
tion, the real basis of every society, on 
which there rises a political and legal 
superstructure and different trends of 
social thought (see Basis and Super- 
structure). Each system of production 
relations, arising at a definite stage 
in the development of the productive 
forces (q.v.), is subordinated both to 
general laws common to all formations 
and to particular laws inherent only 
in one formation, which determine 
how that system arises, functions, and 
passes on into a higher form. The ac- 
tions of people within each socio-eco- 
nomic formation (q.v.)—infinitely di- 
verse and individualised and seemingly 
not susceptible of calculation and sys- 
tematisation—were summed up and 
reduced to actions of big masses, and 
in a class society — to actions of 
classes (q.v.) who express the pressing 
requirements of social development. 
The discovery of H.M. removed the 
two main shortcomings of all pre-Marx- 
ist sociological theories. In the first 
place, these theories were idealist, i.e., 
they limited themselves to examining 
the ideological motives of human activ- 
ity but did not study what material 
causes engendered these motives. Sec- 


— 278 — 


Materialism, Historical 





ond, they studied only the role of 
outstanding personalities in history, 
but did not examine the actions of the 
masses, the real makers of history. 
H.M. demonstrated that socio-histori- 
cal process is determined by material 
factors. In contrast to vulgar material- 
ist theories which deny the role of 
ideas, political and other institutions 
and organisations, H.M. stresses their 
retroactive influence on the material 
basis which produced them. H.M. con- 
stitutes the scientific historical foun- 
dation of Marxism, which equips the 
Marxist-Leninist parties, the working 
class and all the working people with 
knowledge of the objective laws govern- 
ing society’s development and an un- 
derstanding of the role of the subjective 
factor, the consciousness and organisa- 
tion of the masses, without which the 
realisation of historical laws is impos- 
sible. The main features of H.M. were 
expounded for the first time by Marx 
and Engels in The German Ideology 
(q.v.). A classical formulation of the 
essence of H.M. was given by Marx 
in the preface to the Critique of Polit- 
ical Economy (1859). But H.M. became 
a “synonym for social science” only 
with the publication of Capital (see 
Lenin, Vol. 1, p. 142). As history de- 
velops and new experience is accumu- 
lated, H.M., like Marxism as a whole, 
is necessarily developed and enriched. 
Lenin quoted a remarkable example 
of such development in the epoch of 
imperialism and proletarian revolu- 
tions. In the present epoch, that of tran- 
sition from capitalism to socialism, 
when the full-scale building of com- 
munist society in the Soviet Union 
becomes a practical matter, the new 
experience of the world communist 
movement, particularly the experience 
of building communism in the Soviet 
Union, was summed up in the new 
Programme adopted by the 22nd Con- 
gress of the CPSU. The Programme 
develops the doctrine of the socio- 
economic formation by giving a con- 
crete characteristic of the communist 
formation, the laws of its emergence 
and development; it also develops 
the teaching on the state, Party, and 
many other questions. The Programme 








Materialism, Natural-Historical 


provides the Soviet people with a 
precise plan for building communist 
society, which includes a triple task: 
building communism’s material and 
technical basis (q.v.), shaping com- 
munist social relations, and educating 
the members of communist society. 
Materialism, Natural-Historical, or 
scientific materialism, the concepts 
used by Lenin to define the spontane- 
ous “philosophically unconscious con- 
viction shared by the overwhelming 
majority of scientists regarding the 
objective reality of the external world”. 
(Vol. 14, p. 346.) The general accept- 
ance of N.H.M. by scientists shows 
that cognition of mature leads to rec- 
ognition of the materiality of the 
world. If N.H.M. is not formulated 
as a consistent theory, however, it 
cannot escape the limitations of a one- 
sided mechanistic, metaphysical ma- 
terialism and declines into vulgar em- 
pa (q.v.) and positivism (q.v.). 
ts limitations become most apparent 
in periods when scientific theories are 
revolutionised. At such times it is 
unable to explain the new facts of 
knowledge that contradict established 
notions. For this reason the difficulties 
of interpreting new scientific facts of- 
ten lead scientists to abandon their 
spontaneous materialist convictions in 
favour of idealism (see Idealism, Phys- 
ical). True philosophical generalisa- 
tion of the conclusions arrived at by 
specialised sciences can be achieved 
only from the standpoint of dialecti- 
cal-materialist philosophy. 
Materialism, Vulgar, a trend in mid- 
19th century philosophy; it oversim- 
plified the basic principles of material- 
ism. Stimulated by the rapid develop- 
ment of natural science, each new 
discovery destroying the prevailing 
idealistic and religious conceptions, 
V.M. arose as a positivist reaction to 
idealist, especially the classical Ger- 
man, philosophy by the spontaneous 
materialism of natural science. Expo- 
nents of V.M., such as Vogt, Büchner 
and Moleschott, took pains to dissem- 
inate current natural science theo- 
ries, which they opposed to what they 
styled as philosophical “chicanery”. 
They rejected philosophy in general 


— 279 — 


Mathematical! Hypothesis 


and set out to resolve all philosophical 
problems by concrete scientific inves- 
tigations. Like the exponents of met- 
aphysical materialism, they believed 
that consciousness (q.v.) and other 
social phenomena were the effect of 
exclusively physiological processes, that 
they depended on diet, climate, etc. 
The vulgar materialists considered phys- 
iological processes the cause of con- 
sciousness and identified conscious- 
ness and matter, inferring that thought 
was a material secretion of the brain. 
Later, too, vulgar materialist inter- 
pretations appeared in different forms, 
especially in some philosophical gener- 
alisations of natural science, mostly 
in the field of physiology. Some philos- 
ophers and natural scientists, who do 
not understand that man’s conscious- 
ness is a social product and that the 
content of all psychical processes is 
causally governed by social being, 
look for the specific physiological proc- 
esses determining our thoughts, 
senses and conceptions. 

Materialist Understanding of History, 
see Historical Materialism. 

Mathematical Hypothesis, an essen- 
tial method of cognition in contempo- 
tary physics. The development of those 
branches of physics which study the 
microcosm (q.v.) came up against the 
loss of “rough” sensual visuality by 
physical objects. In consequence, the 
chief means of describing the results 
of experiments in physics and making 
heuristic, prophetical generalisations 
became possible above all in mathe- 
matical form. Accordingly, M.H. be- 
gan to play a leading role in the pro- 
gress of the physical theory in the shape 
of extrapolation, generalised mathe- 
matical schemes, and juxtaposition of 
mathematical theories with reality. 
New physical objects or their new prop- 
erties are cognised by M.H. by com- 
paring the known empirical and certain 
theoretical data concerning a deeper 
level of matter with the generalised 
and supplemented mathematical scheme 
of the previous level. M.H. is pos- 
sible in principle, because the mathe- 
matical apparatus of any physical the- 
ory is an adequate reflection of the 
corresponding level of matter and 








Mathematics 


because there is an inner interdependence 
and unity between the different levels 
of matter. 

Mathematics, the science of mathe- 
matical structures (sets between whose 
elements there are some relations). 
Engels gave the following definition: 
“Pure mathematics deals with the 
space forms and quantity relations of 
the real world.” (Anti-Ddhring, 
p. 58.) M. arose in the remote past to 
meet the requirements of practice. Ini- 
tially, it had as its subject-matter the 
simple numbers and geometrical fig- 
ures. This situation basically prevailed 
up to the 17th century, and right up 
to the second half of the 19th century 
M. developed mainly as mathematical 
analysis, discovered in the 17th cen- 
tury. M. was completely reconstructed 
with the discovery of non-Euclidean 
geometries (q.v.) and the creation of 
the set theory (q.v.). As a result of 
this, new branches of M. came into 
being. Mathematical logic (q.v.) as- 
sumed great importance in contempo- 
rary M. The mathematical methods are 
extensively used in the exact natural 
science. Until now the application of 
M. in biology and the social sciences 
was quite accidental. The develop- 
ment of such branches as linear pro- 
gramming, game theory, information 
theory under the impact of practice 
and the appearance of electronic com- 
puters have opened up entirely new 
prospects. The philosophical problems 
of M., the origin of mathematical ab- 
straction and its peculiarities, have 
always been the venue of struggle be- 
tween materialism and idealism. Of 
great importance are the philosophical 
problems that arose in the 20th century 
in connection with the problems of 
foundations in M. (see Formalism, In- 
tuitionism). 

Matriarchy, a historical stage in 
the development of the primitive-com- 
munal system (q.v.), where woman oc- 
cupied the dominant role in social 
economy. M. existed among all peoples 
without exception. During the lowest 
stages of social development where the 
group marriage was the rule it was 
not known who was the father of chil- 
dren; only the mother was known. 


— 280 — 


Matter _ 


Thus descent could be ascertained only 
on the mother’s side; only the female 
lineage was acknowledged. The whole 
tribal economy was in the hands of 
women. Hunting, the occupation of 
the men, did not always provide a 
reliable means of livelihood. Initially 
it was generally the women who did 
the more productive agricultural work. 
Care of the children and the home, the 
laying in of provisions, work in the 
garden, cooking, etc., were women’s 
functions. With the development of 
cattle-breeding the role of the woman 
began to decline. The man became the 
main productive power in society, the 
owner of the means of production, of 
livestock and, later, of slaves. Hence, 
he became the head of the gentile com- 
mune (see Patriarchy). 

Matter, a philosophical category de- 
noting the objective reality, which 
exists independent of, and is reflected 
in, consciousness (see Lenin, Vol. 14, 
p. 130). M. is the infinite plurality of 
existing phenomena, objects and sys- 
tems; it is the substratum of all diverse 
properties, relations, interactions, and 
forms of motion. Matter exists only in 
the infinite variety of concrete forms 
of structural organisation, each of 
which possesses diverse properties and 
interactions and complexity of struc- 
ture and is an element of some more 
general system. Hence, it would be in- 
correct to look for “M. as such”, as some 
immutable primary substance (q.v.) 
outside its concrete iorms. The inherent 
essence of M. is revealed through 
its diverse properties and interac- 
tions, to know which is to know M. 
itself. The more complex. M. is, the 
more diverse and differentiated are its 
interconnections and properties. At 
the highest level of complexity, to 
which corresponds the appearance of 
reasonable beings, some of the proper- 
ties of M., e.g., consciousness, seem 
so unusual, so unlike M. that at first 
glance they appear to be something 
having no relation at all with M. The 
carrying of this concept to the absolute, 
the inability to disclose the relation 
between consciousness and M. has led 
to the various idealistic and dualistic 
doctrines. From the point of view of 





Matter 


dialectical materialism the opposition 
between consciousness and M. is rela- 
tive and conditional. It assumes mean- 
ing only in the light of the funda- 
mental problem of philosophy (q.v.) 
being raised and solved, and outside 
that problem it loses all its absolute 
significance. The active transforming 
influence of society results in certain 
groups of material objects in the sur- 
rounding world (such as means and 
instruments of production, buildings, 
products of chemical synthesis, con- 
sumer goods, and the like, because 
of their origin and of the organisational 
form of the matter they are composed 
of) depending to a certain degree upon 
man’s consciousness, insofar as they 
embody man’s designs. As science and 
technique develop, the quantity of ma- 
terial objects will go increasing, their 
properties and forms of organisation and 
even origin being dependent upon the 
transforming conscious activity of man 
acting upon natural materials. It was 
in the sense that Lenin remarked that 
“man’s consciousness not only reflects 
the objective world but creates it”. 
(Vol. 38, p. 212.) The philosophical 
understanding of M. as objective real- 
ity (q.v.) is concretised and comple- 
mented by the views of natural science 
on its structure and properties. It 
would be incorrect, however, to iden- 
tify M. as a philosophical category 
with this or that viewpoint on the struc- 
ture of M., since these viewpoints change 
in the light of new scientific discov- 
eries, while the philosophical defini- 
tion of M. remains unchanged. It is 
just as erroneous to identify M. as a 
philosophical category with any of 
its concrete forms, e.g., substance, 
field (see Substance and Field), or 
with any of its properties, e.g., mass, 
energy (q.v.), etc. The dialectical ma- 
terialistic understanding of M. differs 
from the metaphysical one in that ac- 
cording to the former M. is considered 
not only as existing objectively, as 
independent of man’s consciousness, 
but also as inseparably connected with 
motion (q.v.), time (q.v.), and space 
(q.v.), as capable of self-development, 
as infinite both quantitatively and 
qualitatively in all scales of its existence 


— 281 — 





Matter, Forms of Motion of 


(see Unity and Diversity of the 
World; Matter, Forms of Motion of). 

Matter, Forms of Motion of, main 
types of motion and interaction of 
material objects. In a scientific clas- 
sification of F.M.M., one must consid- 
er: (1) the specific features of material 
objects, in which the motion takes 
place; (2) the existence of general laws 
for the given form of motion; (3) the 
laws governing the historical develop- 
ment of matter and motion from the 
simplest to the most intricate forms. 
In accordance with these demands and 
the data of modern science three main 
groups of F.M.M. are distinguished: 
(1) inorganic nature; (2) organic nature; 
(3) society. In each of these groups 
there are many F.M.M. owing to the 
inexhaustibility of matter. The F.M.M. 
of inorganic nature include: spatial 
displacement of various bodies; move- 
ment of elementary particles and 
fields (electromagnetic, gravitational), 
nuclear interaction, processes of trans- 
mutation of elementary particles, etc.; 
motion and transformation of atoms 
and molecules, including chemical 
F.M.M.; changes in the structure of 
microscopic bodies—thermal processes, 
changes in aggregate states, sound 
oscillations, etc.; changes in cosmic 
systems of various orders—planeis, 
stars, galaxies, etc. In animate nature 
the F.M.M. include the diverse mani- 
festations of life; metabolism, func- 
tional links within organisms, processes 
of reflection of external conditions, 
intra-species and inter-species rela- 
tions, interaction of the entire bio- 
sphere (q.v.) with inorganic nature. In 
animate nature there are integral sys- 
tems of various complexity: viruses and 
bacteria, monocellular organisms, mul- 
ticellular organisms, diverse species of 
plants and animals, and, lastly, the 
entire biosphere. Within the framework 
of the general manifestations of life 
each group has its specific F.M.M., 
the laws of which are determined by 
the structure and functioning of the 
systems. Social F.M.M. include diverse 
manifestations of man’s activity: de- 
velopment of the productive forces and 
production, class, state, national and 
other relations, the process of cognition 





Means of Production 


of the world, and so on. Historically, 
higher F.M.M. arise on the basis of 
relatively lower ones, embodying them 
in a transformed way—in conformity 
with the structure and laws of develop- 
ment of a more intricate system. 
Unity and reciprocal influence exist 
between them. But the higher F.M.M. 
qualitatively differ from the lower 
and are not reducible to them. Dis- 
closure of the relationship between 
F.M.M. is of great importance for un- 
derstanding the development of nature, 
getting to know the essence of intri- 
cate phenomena, and for practically 
controlling them. 

Means of Production, the aggre- 
gate of objects and means of la- 
bour employed in material production. 
The objetts of labour are things and 
elements of nature which are processed 
in production and serve as objects for 
the application of human labour. The 
means of labour are all the things and 
sets of things whereby man acts on the 
object of his labour and alters it with 
the purpose of producing material val- 
ues (the stick and stone axe in the 
case of primitive man, and the instru- 
ments, tools, benches, machines, etc., 
of our time). The means of labour also 
include land, production premises, 
roads, canals, warehouses, pipes, ves- 
sels, and the like. The determinative 
role in M.P. belongs to the instruments 
of production (machines, lathes, equip- 
ment, etc.), which Marx described as 
the bone and sinew of production. The 
level and development of the instru- 
ments of production serve as a measure 
of the productive forces (q.v.). At the 
same time, means of labour are an in- 
dication of the social relations in which 
the labour is performed. It is not the 
articles made, Marx showed, but how 
they are made, and by what instru- 
ments, that enables us to distinguish 
different economic epochs. 

Measure, a philosophical category 
expressing the organic unity of quality 
and quantity (q.v.) of a given object 
or phenomenon. Every qualitatively 
distinct object has its own quantita- 
tive attributes, which are mobile and 
mutable. This very mutation, how- 
ever, is of necessity bound by certain 


— 282 — 


Mechnikov, Ilya 


limits, beyond which quantitative 
changes lead to qualitative changes (see 
Transition, etc.). These limits are M. 
itself. In its turn the qualitative 
change of a given object leads to a 
change of its quantitative attributes 
and M. The connection and unity of 
quantity and quality is conditioned 
by the nature of a given object. Once 
the development of this object is ap- 
proached, the points of transition from 
one qualitatively different stage of 
this process to another appear as nodal 
points in the change of M. Usually 
such a system of the nodal points 
is called the nodal line of measures. 
Hegel (q.v.) was the first to elaborate 
M. as a philosophical category. 
Measurement, a cognitive process 
aimed at determining characteristics 
(weight, length,co-ordinates,speed, etc.) 
of material objects by means of the ap- 
propriate measuring instruments (q.v.). 
In the final count, M. amounts to com- 
paring the measured magnitude with 
some similar magnitude accepted as 
a unit. By means of one system of 
units or another M. gives quantita- 
tive expression to the properties of bod- 
ies, which is an important element 
of knowledge. M. makes our knowledge 
more exact. Positivists wrongly inter- 
pret the increasing role of M. in the 
study of microphenomena and regard 
it as “preparation of the object by the 
subject” (“instrumental idealism”) or 
reduce the content of physical concepts 
to separate operations of M. (see Op- 
erationism). 
Mechnikov, Ilya yich (1845-1916), 
Russian biologist and physician, public 
figure and thinker. From 1888 on he 
lived abroad. He upheld the materialist 
line in biology and firmly defended 
and popularised Darwinism. M. crit- 
icised the Malthusian errors of Darwin 
(q.v.). The studies of M. in the fields 
of zoology, embryology, microbiology, 
pathology, and anthropology bear the 
raark of spontaneous dialectical 
thought; they developed Darwinism in 
some directions and helped disclose 
the dialectics of animate nature. His 
works in evolutionary embryology fa- 
cilitated the establishment of the gen- 
eral laws of the embryonic develop- 








ae 


Mechnikov, Lev 


— 283 — 


Medieva! Philosophy 





ment of different animal groups, proved 
their genetic kinship and the unity of 
origin of the organic world. His works 
initiated the study of evolutionary pa- 
thology and immunology in contradis- 
tinction with the metaphysical con- 
ceptions of J. Cohnheim and R. Vir- 
chow which were dominant at the time. 
M.’s idea that advantage must be taken 
of the antagonism of microbes was sub- 
sequently realised in antibiotic medi- 
cine. His materialist views of nature 
combined with the idealistic concep- 
tion of history. In combating social 
evils he based his hopes on scientific 
progress, which he considered the deci- 
sive force in the development of so- 
ciety and the key to the solution of all 
social problems. Main works: Etyudy 
o prirode cheloveka (Studies in Human 
Nature), 1903; Etyudy optimisma (S tud- 
ies in Optimism), 1907; Sorok let 
iskaniya ratsionalnogo mirovozzreniya 
(Forty Years’ Quest for a Rational 
World Outlook), 1913. 

Mechnikov, Lev Ilyich (1838-88), 
Russian sociologist, geographer, and 
publicist; brother of J. Mechnikov 
ya M. took part in the national 
liberation movement in Italy and was 
a volunteer in Giuseppe Garibaldi’s 
“Thousand”. He contributed to Her- 
zen’s (q.v.) Kolokol and Chernyshev- 
sky’s (q.v.) Sovremennik. From 1883 
to 1888 M. headed the chair of compar- 
ative geography and statistics at the 
Academy of Neufchâtel (Switzerland). 
He planned a sociological work devoted 
to the history of the world civilisation, 
but had only time to write the intro- 
duction, which was published in 1889 
under the title Tsivilisatsiya i velikiye 
istoricheskiye reki (Civilisation and the 
Great Historical Rivers). He was a 
partisan of geographical determinism 
(q.v.). Social development, he held, 
was determined by the physico-geo- 
graphic, principally hydrospheric, en- 
vironment. River, sea, and ocean 
routes created, in their time, ancient, 
medieval, and modern civilisations. 
M. came forward against Spenser (q.v.) 
who extended the laws of biology to 
society. He considered the free co-oper- 
ation of people as a specific characteris- 
tic of society and the growth of soli- 


darity and freedom in a society devel- 
oping from oppression to anarchy as 
the criterion of social progress. He was 
influenced by Bakunin (q.v.); fought 
against tsarism. 

Mediation, a definition of a thing 
(concept) by revealing its relation to 
another thing (concept). The properties 
of things are revealed in their inter- 
connection with other things. Only 
through its relation to another thing 
can a thing be what it is, can it be de- 
fined as the given concrete thing. M. is a 
basic category in the philosophy of 
Hegel (q.v.) The profound dialectical 
surmise contained in the Hegelian 
treatment of the unity of the mediat- 
ed and the immediate was highly as- 
sessed by Lenin (see Vol. 38, p. 103). 
The category of M., in unity with the 
category of the immediate, expresses 
the universal interconnection of things 
as a requisite for their concrete definite- 
ness and their very existence as the 
given finite things. 

Medieval Philosophy in Western Eu- 
rope, philosophy of the West Euro- 
pean feudal society which developed 
rom the fall of the Roman Empire 
(5th century) to the emergence of the 
early forms of capitalist society (14th- 
15th centuries). The collapse of an- 
tique slave society was attended by a 
decline of philosophy. The antique 
philosophical heritage was lost and 
was unknown to West European schol- 
ars until the latter half of the 12th 
century. Religion was the dominant 
ideology--the Muslim in the Near 
East, Arabia, and the Arab-speaking 
countries, and two varieties of Christian- 
ity (Roman Catholicism and Greek 
Orthodoxy) in Europe. The school 
and education fell into the hands of 
the church, whose dogmas formed the 
basis of all notions about nature, the 
world, and man. The development of 
lay and clerical schools, and the es- 
tablishment of the first universities 
in the mid-12th century (in Italy, Eng- 
land, Bohemia, and France) prompted 
philosophers to devise philosophical 
explanations, even justifications, for 
the religious dogmas. For a number of 
centuries, philosophy was thus the 
“handmaiden of theology”. This is 











Medieval Philosophy 


the role it played in the hands of the 
apologists, the champions of Christian- 
ity against heathens, and then in the 
writings of the “Fathers of the Church”, 
The most prominent of these, St. Au- 
gustine (354-430), q.v., introduced Neo- 
Platonism (q.v.) into the system of 
Christian philosophical doctrines. East- 
ern Neo-Platonists, such as Pseudo- 
Dionysius the Areopagite (5th century), 
were another Western source of Neo- 
Platonic influence adapted to the 
needs of the Christian ideology. Johan- 
nes Scotus Erigena (q.v.), was promi- 
nent in formulating M.P. In elucidat- 
ing religious dogma, the medieval phi- 
losophers had to tackle the complex 
problems concerning the relation of 
the individual to the general, and 
the reality of the general. According 
to the way these problems, were solved, 
scholasticism (q.v.) developed several 
points of views, the most prominent 
of which were the antagonistic doct- 
rines of realism (see Realism, Medieval) 
and of nominalism (q.v.). In the 12th 
century, Pierre Abélard (q.v.) opposed 
the extremism of both these schools of 
thought. From the mid-12th century 
onward, the main writings of Aristotle 
were translated into Latin. The church 
received them with hostility at first, 
but soon the Aristotelian doctrines 
were recognised as the philosophical 
foundation of Christianity. The scholas- 
tics became interpreters and protago- 
nists of Aristotle. They adapted Aris- 
totelian ideas to, their own religious 
and philosophical concepts, turned 
outworn aspects of the Aristotelian 
doctrine into dogma (e.g., the geocen- 
tric system, the principles of Aristo- 
telian physics) and rejected all search 
for the new in science. The chief pro- 
tagonists of scholasticism in the 13th 
century were St. Albert the Great, Thom- 
as Aquinas and John Duns Scotus 
(qq.v.). Thomas Aquinas was cannon- 
ised by the church which declared his 
teaching its official philosophical doc- 
trine (see Neo-Thomism) in the latter 
half of the 19th century. A prominent 
contemporary of the three 13th century 
scholastics was Roger Bacon (q.v.), who 
objected to the social basis of feudal 
society. The development in the 13th 


— 284 — 


Medieval Philosophy 


century of medieval towns, the arts 
and crafts, commerce and trade routes, 
and the contacts with the East extend- 
ed by the crusades, stimulated a 
certain uplift of philosophy, partic- 
ularly of nominalism (q.v.), whose 
most prominent protagonists were Wil- 
liam of Occam and his followers of the 
Parisian school of Occamism. The ideo- 
logical struggle proceeded not only 
within scholasticism. Opposed to the 
latter was mysticism, which placed 
the authority of the church and its 
doctrines beneath the testimony of 
man’s senses and subjective conscious- 
ness. In the spiritual life of feudal 
society, mysticism was often a form 
of opposition to the official and oblig- 
atory religion: the personal attitude 
of the believer to God grew into criti- 
cism of, and even struggle against, the 
feudal ideology and the feudal social 
system. But there was also a reaction- 
ary wing of mystics, such as Bernard of 
Clairvaux and Bonaventure (q.v.). A 
strong anti-scholastic movement 
emerged in the 13th century, fructified 
by the teaching of Averroés (q.v.) on the 
mortality of man’s soul and of a reason 
common to all. These notions were 
courageously developed in the Univer- 
sity of Paris by Siger of Brabant, a 
fighter against scholasticism, who was 
assassinated in 1282. The Dominican 
and Franciscan orders were founded in 
the early 12th century to fight against 
heresies, anti-clericalism, and the new 
philosophical ideas. In the 12th cen- 
tury, the scholars of these two orders 
carried out the project of Pope Gregory 
1X, “correcting” the teaching of Aris- 
totle to suit the Catholic ideology. 
Despite the relative uplift of M.P. in 
the 13th century, the results of its 
more than one thousand years of de- 
velopment were meagre both for phi- 
losophy and for science, because even 
the great thinkers were less concerned 
with the truth than with ways and 
means of justifying religion; the cler- 
ical regime of medieval society fet- 
tered the initiative and thought of 
those who were audacious enough to 
go beyond its hidebound framework. 
It was not until the appearance of the 
new, capitalist mode of production and 





Megarian School 


the new appreciation of the practical 
and theoretical tasks of science that 
the thinking of the foremost men of 
Western Europe was gradually freed 
from the bonds of M.P. 

Megarian School, a philosophical 
trend which existed in Greece in the 
4th century B.C. Euclid of Megara 
(450-380 B.C.), disciple and friend of 
Socrates (q.v.), founded this school. 
After the death of Socrates the Megar- 
ians tried to synthesise the teaching 
of Parmenides (q.v.) on the eternal 
and immutable One being and the 
supreme concept of Socratian ethics 
and theology—the idea of the good. 
Euclid asserted that there exists only 
one good, which is immutable and is 
identical to itself, and known also 
under the names of truth, reason, god, 
etc. The one and only virtue, of which 
the others are only forms, is the knowl- 
edge of the good. A plurality and di- 
versity of things are opposed to the 
one good, and are, therefore, non-exist- 
ent and unreal. The exponents of the 
M.S. continued the traditions of Zeno 
of Elea (q.v.) and the sophists by using 
dialectics and the heuristic method 
(q.v.) as their main method of philos- 
ophising. The later Megarians (Stilpo 
and others) were very close to the cynics 
(q.v.) in their ethical views. Together 
with the cynics Zeno the Stoic (q.v.), 
a disciple of Stilpo, transformed the 
M.S. into the Stoic school (see Stoics). 

Mehring, Franz (1846-1919), leader 
of the working-class movement in Ger- 
many and a Left-winger of German 
Social-Democracy, and one of the found- 
ers of the German Communist Party 
(end of 1918); historian, literary critic, 
and publicist. M.’s outlook took shape 
under the influence of German classical 
philosophy and some of Lassalle’s 
(q.v.) ideas. The class struggle of the 
late 1880s and his study of the works 
of Marx and Engels made him take the 
proletarian stand. In the words of 
Lenin, M. not only wished but was 
able to be a Marxist. He denounced 
the revisionist and reformist critics 
of Marxism (Bernstein, q.v., P. Kampfi- 
meyer, and others); his tireless fight 
against bourgeois sociology (L. Bren- 
tano, P. Bart, and others), against 


— 285 — 


Mellier 


Neo-Kantianism, q.v. (see Ethical So- 
cialism) played a big role in the de- 
fence of Marxist philosophy from the 
attacks of the ideologists of capital 
(Ober den historischen Materialismus, 
1893; Kant und Sozialismus, 1900; 
Kant, Dietzgen, Mach and Historical 
Materialism, 1910; and many others). 
He exposed the reactionary essence of 
the ideas of Schopenhauer (q.v.), Nietz- 
sche (q.v.) and E. Hartmann (q.v.) 
faschionable at the turn of the century. 
The historical works of M. (like Ge- 
schichte der deutsche Sozialdemokratie, 
in 4 vols., 1897-98; Karl Marx, 1918), 
while containing some incorrect prop- 
ositions, are of great scientific value. 
Engels called M.’s Lessing-Legende 
(1892) the best of all available accounts 
of the origin of the Prussian state. M. 
published the earlier works of Marx 
and Engels. Asa literary critic (Aesthet- 
ical Search, 1898-99; Schiller, 1905; 
and others), he Jampooned Kantian 
aesthetics, the theory of “art for art’s 
sake”, and naturalism. But M made 
some serious mistakes: he underesti- 
mated, for instance, the role of the 
Marxist party as the political leader 
and the tutor of the masses; and he 
could not understand the importance 
of a principled break with opportun- 
ism. In philosophy, he was wrong 
in maintaining that the mechanical 
materialist outlook suffices for under- 
standing nature. Under the influence 
of the October Revolution of 1917, 
which he welcomed, he overcame many 
of his mistakes. 

Mellier (Meslier), Jean (1664-1729), 
materialist philosopher, founder of a 
revolutionary trend in French utopian 
socialism (q.v.). Le Testament by M., 
a village curé from Champagne, rep- 
resents the first example of a teach- 
ing about society and its future. His 
exposure of religion and the church 
led him to consistently materialistic 
and atheistic deductions; he addressed 
himself to the “residents of town 
and country”, criticising social injus- 
tices and appealing for the building 
of a society based on collective own- 
ership. For him, insurrection by the 
united labouring people against their 
oppressors is the affair of the people 








| 
j 
| 








Memory 


themselves; it is_the prerequisite of 
transition to a new society wherein 
there will be neither rich nor poor, 
neither oppressors nor oppressed, nei- 
ther idlers nor people exhausted by 
backbreaking labour. Although Le Tes- 
tament was published in full only in 
1864, it was widely read in manuscript 
form in 18th century France. Many 
representatives of French social thought 
from the deists of the first half 
of the 18th century, from Voltaire 
(q.v.) to the materialist Enlighteners 
and the Babouvist C. Maréchal (q.v.) 
spread his ideas. They each took from 
M. what suited their ideas and class 
interests. M.’s world outlook became 
one of the ideological sources of French 
materialism and socialism in the 18th 
century. 

Memory (in psychology), preserva- 
tion by the subject of the results of 
his interaction with the world, which 
makes it possible to reproduce and uti- 
lise these results in subsequent activ- 
ity, process them and combine them 
into systems, sum total of mental 
models of reality constructed by the 
given subject. The forming, fixing, 
and inhibiting of temporary nervous 
connections comprises the physio- 
logical mechanism of man’s M. M. is 
connected with thinking and deriva- 
tive forms of activity as a product 
is with a process. The content of ele- 
mentary non-speech memory consists of 
mental models of reality formed during 
the direct relation of the subject and 
the object. Their formation depends 
on contiguity of the influence of the 
objects in point of time and on the type 
of requirement that determines the 
nature of the interaction. In higher 
speech M., which is superimposed 
on elementary M., the models of ob- 
jective relations of things are fixed. 
Speech enables man to reproduce the 
formations of this type of M. without 
direct influence of the modelled ob- 
jects, under the impact of a definite 
aim, which ultimately leads to the 
subordination of M. to the objective 
logic of things, to meaningful memoris- 
ing and reproduction. 

Mendeleyev, Dmitry Ivanovich 
(1834-1907), Russian scientist, chemist, 


— 286 — 


Méng Tzit 


founder of the periodic system of chem- 
ical elements. M. actively cham- 
pioned the integration of science and 
practice and did much for the 
development of industry in Rus- 
sia. His outlook was materialism com- 
bined with spontaneous dialectics. He 
combated spiritualism and energism 
(q.v.). His great achievement was the 
discovery of the periodic law of chemi- 
cal elements in 1869. This was a great 
contribution to the development of 
chemical atomism and to the practical 
application of the law of the transition 
from quantity to quality (see Law of 
Transition, etc.) to the chemical ele- 
ments. The modern formulation of M.’s 
law reads: the properties of elements 
are periodically dependent upon the 
ordinal number, or charge, of atoms. 
The mass of the atom is closely con- 
nected with the charge of the nucleus, 
and by using the atomic scale M. was 
able to discover his law. The M. sys- 
tem confirms both the relations between 
the chemical elements and their actual 
transmutation. The periodic law gov- 
erns the development of non-organic 
substances and serves to substantiate 
the dialectical and materialistic view 
of nature. Main work: Osnovy Khimii 
ile Foundations of Chemistry), 1869- 
I 


Méng Tzu (c. 372-289 B.C.), promi- 
nent follower of Confucius. His teach- 
ings are contained in Méng Tzu. His 
philosophical theories are based on 
idealism. For him, the testimony of 
reason, rather than sensory perception 
and sensations, forms the basis of 
the process of cognition. Morals and 
ethics, according to him, originate in 
man’s inborn qualities, which he con- 
siders to be innately good. The ethical 
and moral principles peculiar to human 
nature derive from “Heaven”, which 
is the highest guiding power. He also 
recognises the existence of “innate 
abilities” and “innate knowledge”. 
In his socio-political views he advances 
certain progressive propositions, em- 
phasising the idea of the paramount 
role of the people and the subordinate 
tole of the ruler, whom the people 
have the right to depose if he fails 
to meet their requirements. He called 








Merleau-Ponty 


— 287 — 


Metalanguage 





for a unification of the country. His 
teachings had a serious impact on the 
ideology of feudal China. 

Merleau-Ponty, Maurice (1908-61), 
French existentialist and phenomenol- 
ogist (see Existentialism, Phenomenol- 
ogy), professor at the College de France. 
His main works are: La Structure du 
Comportement (1942), Phénoménologie 
de la perception (1947), and Les Aven- 
tures de la dialectique (1953). Defending 
the idea of the indissoluble link be- 
tween the subject and the object (the 
world is the projection of the subject, 
the subject objectivises the world and 
man, and attributes them existence in 
themselves), M. attempted to draw 
a “third line” in philosophy. In fact 
his assertion that the immediate data 
of perception are true reality means 
subjective idealism. Moreover, M.P.’s 
philosophy is eclectic, for he tried 
to synthesise existentialism and Marx- 
ism. 

Meta (Gk. after, beyond), a prefix 
used in forming derivatives and mean- 
ing following something, or transition 
to something else. For instance, Aris- 
totle (q.v.)} called metaphysics so because 
its main problems were expounded in 
treatises placed after the teachings 
on physics by the systematisers of 
Aristotle’s works. Some contemporary 
scientific theories are named accord- 
ingly, e.g., metatheory (q.v.), metalog- 
ic (q.v.), metamathematics (q.v.), 
metaethics (q.v.), etc. 

Metabolism, a requisite for the exist- 
ence of living organisms. The con- 
cept of M. covers all energy connections 
of an organism with the environment 
and the intricate chains of consecutive 
transformations of substances and ener- 
gy within it. Plants build their body 
out of water, carbon dioxide, and 
mineral substances with the help of 
the energy of light they trap (photo- 
synthesis), while animals build it out 
of substances already enriched with 
energy. In contrast to organisms, bod- 
ies of inanimate nature do not accu- 
mulate energy but only yield it in 
accordance with the second law of 
thermodynamics (q.v.). Failure to un- 
derstand this fundamental difference 
between organic and inorganic nature 


in terms of energy was one of the rea- 
sons for the belief in a non-material 
element supposedly imparting vital- 
ity and activity to organisms (see Vital- 
ism). The essence of M. is the dialec- 
tical unity of the processes of creation 
and destruction of organic substances. 

Metaethics, the section of ethics 
which elaborates problems of logical 
analysis of moral judgements. The 
term was introduced in ethics by the 
logical positivists, for whom M. (by 
analogy with metaphysics) is a sci- 
ence standing above and preceding 
normative ethics. Strictly speaking, 
there is nothing wrong in studying the 
logic of ethical judgements, but the 
positivists understand M. to be a 
study of the logical structure of “the 
language of ethics”, of the signification 
of judgements and terms in ethics, 
drawing no conclusions as to what 
is good and what is bad or whether 
the behaviour of man depends upon 
social conditions, etc. Such an inter- 
pretation of M. is a claim on the part 
of bourgeois ethicians to create a sci- 
ence which is to be above parties and 
“neutral” in its attitude towards hu- 
man behaviour (see Logical Positivism 
in Eth s). 

Metagalaxy (Gk. literally, “that 
which is beyond a galaxy”), a cosmic 
system composed of milliards of gal- 
axies (q.v.). The term was introduced 
by the American astronomer H. Shap- 
ley. In the past the term “Big Uni- 
verse” (as distinct from the “Small 
Universe”, which is our galaxy) and 
others were used, but they cannot be 
considered a happy choice. A M. is 
the largest material system which can 
be observed by modern apparatuses, 
but it is by no means the whole Univ- 
erse. Our galaxy, its two companion- 
galaxies, and the galaxy next to us, 
which is visible in the constellation 
of Andromeda, together with a num- 
ber of other galaxies form the so-called 
Local Group, one of the various sub- 
systems of the M. The Red Displace- 
ment (q.v.) testifies to large-scale move- 
ments within the M. 

Metalanguage and Object-Language, 
concepts in modern logic. If the given 
object of study is a natural or an 





terete 


SS epe e 





Metalogic 


artificial language (for instance, a logical 
calculus, q.v., or the language of a 
concrete scientific theory), it is neces- 
sary to distinguish the language under 
study, called the object-language, from 
the language used for its study. The 
latter is called metalanguage in rela- 
tion to the given object-language. In 
particular, a metalanguage is one in 
which a metatheory (q.v.) is formulat- 
ed. Failure to distinguish between the 
metalanguage and the object-language 
leads to various kinds of paradoxes. 
As arule, the metalanguage must con- 
tain, first, names for all the expressions 
in the object-language, and, secondly, 
terms expressing the various syntactic 
and semantic characteristics of the 
object-language. It must, therefore, 
be richer than the object-language. 
As a metalanguage we may use either 
the natural (ordinary conversational) 
language or a formalised language 
(q.v.). In the latter case, the formalisa- 
tion (q.v.) of the metalanguage must 
be achieved in a metalanguage of the 
second order. In the final resort, the 
natural language is always the meta- 
language of the highest order. 
Metalogic, a theory studying the 
systems of propositions and concepts 
(see Metatheory) of contemporary for- 
mal logic. It elaborates the theoretical 
problems of proof, the definability of 
concepts and truth in formalised lan- 
guages, interpretation, sense, etc. M. 
is divided into two parts: logical syn- 
tax (q.v.) and logical semantics (q.v.). 
The development of M. is associated 
with the construction and study of 
formalised languages (q.v.). The main 
works in this sphere are by Frege 
(q.v.), by the Polish logicians of the 
Lvov-Warsaw school (q.v.), Hilbert 
Gödel, Tarski (qq.v.), A. Church, Car- 
nap (q.v.), J. Kemeny, and others. 
Metamathematics, a concept denot- 
ing the theory which studies the differ- 
ent properties of formal systems and 
calculi (non-contradiction, complete- 
ness, etc.). Hilbert (q.v.) introduced 
the term M. in connection with his 
conception of the foundations of mathe- 
matics (see Formalism). In the past 
a number of important results was 
obtained (Gédel’s, q.v., theorem on 


— 288 — 


Metaphysics 


the incompleteness of formal arithmet- 
ic and on the impossibility to demon- 
strate the non-contradiction of a sys- 
tem by the means which are formalised 
in such systems). 

Metaphysics (Gk. meta ta physika— 
the works after physics) 1. The term 
M. came into usage in the Ist century 
B.C. to denote part of the philosophical 
heritage of Aristotle (q.v.). He called 
this most important part of his phil- 
osophical doctrine the “First Phi- 
losophy”, that which studies the “high- 
est” principles of all that exists, which 
are inaccessible to the senses, com- 
prehensible only to speculative reason, 
and indispensable for all sciences. In 
this sense the term M. was current 
in'subsequent philosophy. In the phi- 
losophy of the Middle Ages M. was 
subordinated to theology. Approxi- 
mately from the !6th century on the 
term M. was used in the same sense 
as the term ontology (q.v.). With 
Descartes, Leibniz, Spinoza (qq.v.) 
and other philosophers of the 17th 
century M. was still closely connected 
with the natural and humanitarian 
sciences. This connection was broken 
only in the 18th century, particularly 
by such philosophers as Wolff (q.v.). 
2. In modern times there has arisen 
the understanding of M. as an anti- 
dialectical method of thinking, owing 
to its one-sidedness and subjectivism 
in cognition; it regards things and phe- 
nomena as final and immutable, inde- 
pendent of one another; denies that 
inherent contradictions are the source 
of the development of nature and so- 
ciety. Historically, this was explained 
by the fact that in ancient times and 
during the Renaissance scientific and 
philosophical knowledge regarded na- 
ture as a whole, in movement leading 
to development; subsequently, due to 
the deepening and differentiation of 
scientific knowledge, the latter divided 
nature into a number of isolated 
spheres, each being investigated without 
any connection with the others. Hegel 
(q.v.) was the first to use the term 
M. in its anti-dialectical sense, but 
he neither explained nor justified it. 
This was done by Marx and Engels, 
who, generalising the data of science 





Metatheory 


and social progress, demonstrated the 
scientific bankruptcy of metaphysical 
thinking and counterpoised to it the 
method of materialistic dialectics. 

Metatheory, a theory whose subject- 
matter is some other theory. It studies 
the system of propositions and con- 
cepts of a given theory, designates its 
limits and the means of introducing 
new concepts and proof of its proposi- 
tions, etc.; it gives a possibility of 
constructing a given theory in a more 
rational way. M. is formulated in 
metalanguage (see Metalanguage and 
Object-Language). In our days the 
most developed are the M. of logic 
(see Metalogic) and the M. of mathemat- 
ics (see Metamathematics), in the de- 
velopment of which the works of Hil- 
bert, Gödel (qq.v.) and S. Kleene 
played an exceptional role. Creation 
of M. for non-mathematical disciplines 
has just begun. The central task of 
M. is to study the conditions for for- 
malising scientific theories, and the 
syntactical (see Logical Syntax) and 
semantic (see Logical Semantics) prop- 
erties of formalised languages (q.v.). 
Such studies are of particular signifi- 
cance in connection with the develop- 
ment of cybernetics (q.v.) and com- 
puter technology. 

Method, in its most general meaning, 
a means of achieving an aim, a definite 
way of ordering activity. In the spe- 
cial philosophical sense, as a means 
of cognition, M. is a way of getting 
a mental reproduction of the subject un- 
der study. The most essential condition 
for the successful development of knowl- 
edge lies in the conscious application 
of a scientific M. A M. is objective and 
correct when it conforms to the object 
under study. At the base of all Mm. 
of cognition lie the objective laws of 
reality. That is why M. is inseparably 
linked with theory. There are special 
Mm. for the concrete sciences, since 
these have their specific objects of 
study. As distinct from the concrete 
sciences, philosophy works out the 
general M. of cognition: materialist 
dialectics. The most general laws of 
the development of the material world 
form the objective basis of the dialec- 
tical M. This M. does not replace the 


19-1682 


— 289 — 


Methodology 


Mm. of other sciences, but is their 
common philosophical foundation and 
serves as an instrument of cognition 
in all spheres. Dialectics is at the same 
time the M. for transforming the world. 
The dialectical M. is opposed to ideal- 
ist dialectics and metaphysics. 
Methodology 1. The aggregate of 
the ways of investigating a given 
science. 2. The doctrine on the methods 
of scientific cognition and the transfor- 
mation of the world. The need for a 
theoretical foundation of the methods 
of scientific cognition arose from the 
rapid advance of science, and this 
theoretical foundation was developed 
mostly in philosophy beginning with 
Francis Bacon and Descartes (qq.v.). 
Pre-Marxian materialist philosophers 
sought to lay the foundation for the 
methods of EVDE the laws of the 
objective world. The idealist systems 
attempted to found these methods on 
the laws of the spirit and ideas, or 
regarded them as an aggregate of rules 
arbitrarily created by human reason. 
At the same time the general method 
of cognition was often related to the 
laws of one of the concrete fields of 
knowledge (mechanics, mathematics, 
biology, etc.) and reduced to the meth- 
od of a particular science. An impor- 
tant contribution to M. was made by 
Hegel (q.v.), who was the first to em- 
phasise the specific character of the 
philosophical method, its distinction 
from the methods of the concrete sci- 
ences and its irreducibility to them. 
He also stressed that method is the mo- 
tion of the content itself, and that is 
why it cannot be examined in isola- 
tion from the content. However, ' the 
idealism of Hegel’s philosophy led 
fo the absolutisation of the role of 
method and reduced the laws of the 
objective world to the laws of cognition. 
The Marxist-Leninist M. is material- 
ist dialectics, which fulfils the role 
of both the general method of cogni- 
tion and of the scientific theory ap- 
plicable in the cognizance of methods. 
It proceeds from the fact that the meth- 
ods of cognition are based on the 
objective laws of nature and society. 
A method of cognition can be scien- 
tific only when it reflects the objective 








Se 





Michurin 


laws of reality itself. For this reason 
the principles of the scientific method, 
its categories and concepts are not the 
sum total of arbitrary rules created 
by human reason, are “not an auxiliary 
tool of man, but an expression of laws 
both of nature and of man...”. (Lenin, 
Vol. 38, p. 91.) At the same time, 
Marxist M. relies on the dialectics of 
the subject-matter and the peculiari- 
ties of its reflection in the mind. In 
this it differs radically from the M. 
or pre-Marxist materialism. Marxist 
M. takes into account the specific laws 
of the activities of the mind and, 
what is particularly important, it 
connects these laws with the practical 
and theoretical action of the social 
subject upon the objective world. 
The significance of the M. of scientific 
knowledge is growing im modern con- 
ditions, as a result of the tremendous 
advance of science, particularly of such 
branches as physics, mathematics, biol- 
ogy, cybernetics, etc. The great inter- 
est in problems of M. is borne out by 
the extensive development of metatheo- 
retical investigations (see Metatheory), 
by the close link between research in 
the concrete sciences and problems 
of M. 

Michurin, Ivan Vladimirovich (1855- 
1935), Soviet biologist, honorary mem- 
ber of the USSR Academy of Sciences. 
M.’s activity developed especially after 
the October Socialist Revolution of 
1917. Basing himself on Darwin (q.v.) 
and his own experiments, M. studied 
the biological theory of control over 
heredity and the variability of organ- 
isms (genetics). His doctrine is based 
on the dialectical understanding of 
living nature, on the recognition of the 
unity between the organism and the 
surrounding, the dependence of em- 
bryonic cells and the entire process 
of fertilisation upon the conditions of 
life of organisms. He worked out meth- 
ods of evolving new forms of plants 
(hybridisation of geographically 
removed species, interspecific and 
intergeneric hybridisation, etc.). With 
the help of these methods M. created 
over 300 new varieties of fruit and berry 
plants. The theoretical foundations of 
the Michurin doctrine are set forth in 


— 290 — 


Mikhailovsky 


his work Vyvedeniye novykh kultur- 
nykh sortov plodovykh derevyev i kus- 
tarnikov iz semyan (The Cultivation 
of New Kinds of Fruit-Trees and Bush- 
es from Seeds), 1911. M. attempted 
to explain the laws of development of 
organisms, and also to work out a 
teaching on the methods of transform- 
ing them. “We cannot wait for fa- 
vours from nature,” he said; “we must 
wrest them from her.” The ideas of 
M. on the controlled change of the 
heredity of the organism, on the unity 
of the organism and the surrounding, 
and others, became the foundation 
of the Michurin trend in biology. 

Microsociology, the positivist theory 
which sprang up in the 1930s and 
spread in the USA (J. Moreno, q.v.), 
France (G. Gurvitch, q.v.) and Fed- 
eral Germany (R. Konig). The USA 
has a special institute of M., the Mo- 
reno Institute, and the journal Socio- 
metry. M. uses the terminology of the 
natural sciences (microelements, elec- 
trons, atoms, molecules, etc.). In anal- 
ysing social phenomena, the micro- 
sociologists proceed from the concepts 
of microstructure (the psychological 
relations between people: their desire, 
sympathy and antipathy) and macro- 
structure (the union of people in any 
given space during working hours, 
study, and rest; in everyday life, in the 
workshop, the classroom, the volley- 
ball ground, the apartment, etc.). Their 
conformity or non-conformity to each 
other is said to determine their “social 
tenseness”, the stability of social life. 
According to M., social harmony can 
be achieved on the basis of special 
measurements (see Sociometry) by way 
of regrouping in the macrostructures 
(“sociometrical revolution”), as a re- 
sult of which unity is established in the 
desires and feelings of people. M. is a 
reactionary utopia aimed at recon- 
structing society without affecting its 
economic and political foundations, 
thus glossing over the social antago- 
nisms of the present-day capitalist 
society. 

Mikhailovsky, Nikolai Konstanti- 
novich (1842-1904), Russian sociolo- 
gist, publicist, ideologist of liberal Na- 
Todism (q.v.). In 1868, he became a 











Milesian (lonic) School 





— 291 — 


Mill 





staff member and later editor of the 
journal Ofechestvenniye Zapiski. From 
1892 he was one of the leading editors 
of the Russkoye Bogatstvo journal, 
which led the fight of liberal Narodism 
against Marxism. In Russian democrat- 
ic journalism, M. claimed to have 
played the role of preserving and con- 
tinuing the traditions of Chernyshevsky 
(q.v.). In philosophy, however, M. 
took a step backward from Cherny- 
shevsky. M. was a positivist (q.v.); 
he made serious concessions to agnosti- 
cism (q.v.). His sociology was the 
foundation of one of the main Narodnik 
dogmas concerning the leading role 
played by the raznochintsy (Russian 
intellectuals of the 19th century not 
belonging to the gentry) in social de- 
velopment. In M.’s opinion, the his- 
tory of society (as opposed to evolution 
in nature) is not a natural-historical 
process. It is moral consciousness 
and the will of individuals that play 
the decisive role here. M. closely com- 
bined the idealistic understanding of 
history with the theory of “the hero 
and the crowd”. The conditions of 
life in society, according to him, doom 
the people to destitution and spiritual 
frustration, That is why the masses 
are transformed into the “crowd” 
while the “hero” can, by his example, 
carry away the “crowd” either to great 
deeds or criminal actions. The individ- 
ual (“hero”) was declared to be the 
chief maker of history. Following Lav- 
rov (q.v.), M. gave reasons for the neces- 
sity of applying “different methods 
in the two great spheres of human 
knowledge”: the objective method in 
the study of natural phenomena and 
the subjective in the study of society. 
According to M., the essence of the 
subjective method (q.v.) in sociology 
lay in the moral appreciation of de- 
velopments. He declared the individu- 
al to be the starting point of historical 
investigation and the highest crite- 
rion of the value and progressive na- 
ture of all social relations. M.’s views 
were subjected to criticism by Lenin 
and Plekhanov (qq.v.). 

Milesian (Ionic) School, the most 
ancient philosophical school in Greece; 
the first of its exponents date back to 


19° 


the 6th century B.C. Miletus was then 
a major centre of commerce, naviga- 
tion, and culture, this determining 
the broad horizon and scientific inter- 
ests of prominent Milesians. Among 
them were Thales, Anaximander, Anax- 
imenes (qq.v.). The Milesians made 
the first scientific discoveries in the 
field of mathematics, geography, and 
astronomy; they were all spontaneous 
materialists. According to them, the 
only basis of the infinite multiformity 
of nature was something material, 
corporeal, specific—water, air, etc. 
These philosophers were also sponta- 
neous dialecticians. Hippo and Diog- 
enes of Apollonius (5th century B.C.) 
were among the later and lesser rep- 
resentatives of the M.S. 

Military Democracy, an early form 
of political organisation of society 
that originated during the decline of 
the gentile order and the formation 
of the state. The term was invented 
by Morgan (q.v.). M.D. was practised 
by the Greeks in the Homeric age 
(12-9th centuries B.C.) and by the 
Romans in the period of the kings 
(8-6th centuries B.C.). It was also 
practised by the Scythians, the Celts, 
the ancient German tribes, and the 
Normans. Its characteristic feature 
is the increasing concentration of 
power in the hands of the leaders, 
generals, and high priests, and its 
gradual conversion into a hereditary 
institution. Wars become a permanent 
industry, waged for the sake of plun- 
der, and a military caste enjoying 
various privileges comes into being. 
The organs of the gentile order are 
thus “transformed from instruments 
of the will of the people into independ- 
ent organs for ruling and oppressing 
their own people”. (Marx, Engels, 
Selected Works, Vol. Il, p. 314.) 

Mill, John Stuart (1806-73), English 
philosopher, logician, and economist, 
exponent of positivism (q.v.). Main 
works: System of Logic (1843), Prin- 
ciples of Political Economy (in two 
vols., 1848), Utilitarianism (1864). In 
philosophy he was a follower of Hume, 
Berkeley and Comte (qq.v.). Exam- 
ining materialism and idealism as 
two “metaphysical” poles, M. 











Mills 


considered matter as permanent potency 
of sensation, while spirit as permanent 
potency of feeling. Things do not 
exist outside their perception. Man 
perceives only “phenomena” (sensa- 
tions) and cannot go beyond them. 
In logic M. was a most typical expo- 


nent of pure inductivism. Denying 
deduction (q.v.) as a method of 
acquiring new knowledge, he one- 


sidedly and metaphysically exag- 
gerated the role of induction (q.v.). 
He elaborated the method of induc- 
tive investigation of causal connec- 
tions. In ethics M. was influenced by 
Bentham’s (q.v.) utilitarianism. In 
political economy, he replaced Ri- 
cardo’s labour theory of value by the 
vulgar theory of cost-price; he also 
defended Malthus’ (q.v.) theory of 
population. 

Mills, C. Wright (1916-62), sociolo- 
gist and publicist. His works, written 
in the spirit of bourgeois liberalism, 
drew a clear picture of the decadence 
of bourgeois democracy in the USA, 
uncovered the all-powerful oligarchy 
of corporations, government bureauc- 
tacy, and the military, highlighted 
the militarisation of the USA and its 
preparation for war. He severely crit- 
icised the various trends of contem- 
porary sociology in the USA, showing 
its methodological weakness, formal- 
ism, and subordination to monopoly 
interests. Main works: The Power Elite 
(1956), The Causes of World War 
Three (1958), and The Sociological 
Imagination (1959). 

Milyutin, Vladimir Alexeyevich 
(1826-55), Russian economist, exponent 
of socialist thought in Russia in the 
1840s. He graduated at the law fac- 
ulty of St. Petersburg University 
(1847). He was a member of the Pet- 
rashevsky group (q.v.). At the end of 
the 1840s he published a series of 
articles (“Malthus and His Enemies”, 
etc.) in the journals Otechestvenniye 
Zapiski and Sovremennik, in which 
he said that bourgeois economics was 
in a state of crisis. According to M., 
“only the exact sciences can lead to 
the discovery of the laws of human and 
social development”. Hence it is nec- 
essary, on the one hand, that economic 


— 292 — 


Mimansa 


and social doctrines should master 
the methods of the natural “positive” 
sciences; and, on the other, that eco- 
nomic doctrines should be brought near- 
er to socialism. An adept at criticism 
and formulating the essential problems 
of social sciences, M. in defining his 
positive ideal leaned towards the so- 
ciology of Comte (q.v.) in the field 
of scientific philosophy. In the socio- 
political sphere he inclined towards 
reformistic hopes of peacefully trans- 
forming the whole land into indivis- 
ible means of labour and of maintain- 
ing the class of smali proprietors 
(peasants) united for profit in producer 
associations. 

Mimansa (short for Purva-mimansa), 
one of the major orthodox systems of 
Indian philosophy. The exponents of 
M. think that the vedas (q.v.) are not 
a revelation in the full sense of the 
word; the religious and philosophical 
pronouncements in them require a 
logical substantiation. This system 
attaches great significance to the Brah- 
manas—books setting forth and in- 
terpreting the vedic ritual. Under- 
lying the foundation of the M. doctrine 
is the belief that the final salvation 
from the state of incarnation—moksa— 
cannot be rationally explained and 
achieved by science or any conscious 
effort. Attention must be chiefly di- 
rected to the strict observance of public 
and religious duty—dharma—which 
consists in the fulfilment of rituals and 
in obedience to all kinds of limitations 
and prohibitions imposed upon the In- 
dian by his caste. M. holds that the ob- 
servance of dharma itself, independently 
of the desire of the individual, can lead 
him to final salvation. Like sdnkhya 
(q.v.) M. admitted the existence of the 
spiritual and material principles in the 
world. The doctrine of M. was for the 
first time set forth in the M. sitras, 
ascribed to Jaimini, who lived in the 3rd 
century. Later commentators strength- 
ened the theological aspect of M. 
and developed the idea of a personal 
godship, apparently as a result of the 
growing influence of the puranic myth- 
ology (vedas). Basically, M. is an ideal- 
istic doctrine and much more closely 
Telated with religion than sdnkhya. 





Minkowsky 


Minkowsky, Hermann (1864-1909), 
German mathematician and physicist. 
Known, together with the Russian 
scientist G.F. Voronoi, as the founder 
of the geometry of numbers. Applica- 
tion of geometrical methods to the 
theory of numbers indicates the pro- 
found dialectical connection between 
spatial forms and discrete aggregates 
of numbers. In his works on the theory 
of relativity (e.g., Raum und Zeit, 
1909) M. gave a geometrical inter- 
pretation of the special theory of rela- 
tivity (q.v.). Every occurrence, accord- 
ing to him, has four coordinates: three 
common spatial ones and one temporal 
(the momentum of time, which is 
counted off from some initial moment). 
The distance between two points in this 
four-dimensional space is introduced 
by a means analogous to the meas- 
urement of distance in space by Lo- 


bachevsky, q.v. (see Non-Euclidean 
Beonietricas Space, Multi-Dimension- 
a 


Mobility, Social, a concept in bour- 
geois sociology denoting a property 
of the social structure (see Social 
Stratification). S.M. is the movement 
of people from one stratum of society 
to another, the changing of their so- 
cial status. There is a “horizontal 
S.M.” (i.e., the transfer of an individ- 
ual from one social group into anoth- 
er at the same social level) and a 
“vertical S.M.” (i.e., the transfer of 
an individual into another social 
stratum or class). The theory of S.M. 
is but a variety of the reformist con- 
ception of “class collaboration”. Ac- 
cording to this theory, the “vertical 
S.M.” affords the possibility to a man 
in the “lower class” to rise up the 
social ladder to join the “highest 
class”, or to be a millionaire. The 
fact is, that the “road upward” in 
bourgeois society, i.e., the change in 
the social status of individuals and 
families is an exception and does not 
alter the position of the class as a 
whole in the system of production. 
The main direction of S.M. in bourgeois 
society is not “upward” but “down- 
ward”. It reflects the impoverishment 
of the petty bourgeoisie in town and 
country, leading not to the softening 


— 293 ~ 


Mode of Life 


but to the sharpening of the class 
contradictions of capitalism. 

Modality (in logic), a characteristic 
of a proposition according to the thing 
asserted: a proposition can be neces- 
sary, possible, accidental, impossible, 
etc. In traditional logic propositions 
are divided into necessary (apodeictic), 
possible (problematic), and real (as- 
sertoric) propositions. Modern logic 
provides the possibility of analysing 
the properties of M., considering it as 
a certain “metalogic” appraisal of an 
assertion. Logical M. of statements 
is determined from purely logical and 
not factual considerations. For instance, 
P is logically necessary if and only 
if it is true according to purely log- 
ical grounds, i.e., if the acceptance 
of non-P leads to a logical contradic- 
tion. Statements can also be distin- 
guished according to descriptive Mm., 
mainly the physical (causal) ones. 
The latter depend upon whether the 
statement is necessary, possible or 
accidental because of some physical 
laws. Thus, the statement “all planets 
move in ellipses” is physically neces- 
sary, whereas “the number of plan- 
ets is nine” is physically accidental. 
In contemporary logic, particularly 
in the nomological statements of 
Hans Reichenbach (q.v.), attempts are 
made to determine the strict logical 
criteria of physical M. (see Logic, 
Modal). 

Mode of Life, a term used by the 
social sciences denoting the material 
and cultural conditions in which people 
live outside their actual productive and 
socio-political activity, the conditions 
for satisfying their needs for food, cloth- 
ing, housing, rest, recreation, and pre- 
servation of health, etc. The character of 
the M.L. and the means of satisfying peo- 
ple’s requirements depend on the mode 
of production and the changes to which 
it is subject. At the same time the 
M.L. is deeply influenced by customs, 


national traditions, class differences, 
distinctions between town and 
country, the status of women in 


society, national characteristics, and 
the ideology and culture of society in 
question. The family is a very impor- 
tant form of organisation of the mode 





EPET ENA 


Mode of Production 


of life. In socialist society the everyday 
life of the working people improves 
as the ievel of material and spiritual 
production rises. The new Programme 
of the CPSU pays great attention to 
further improving the material well- 
being and cultural level of the Soviet 
people. It states: “The CPSU sets the 
historically important task of achiev- 
ing in the Soviet Union a living stand- 
ard higher than that of any of the 
capitalist countries.” 

Mode of Production, a historically 
conditioned manner of obtaining the 
necessities of life (food, clothing, hous- 
ing, tools of labour, and the like). M.P. 
is the determinative basis of a social 
system. Society, its dominant ideas, 
political views and institutions de- 
pend on the M.P. If the M.P. changes, 
the entire social system changes as 
well. Every new and higher M.P. sig- 
nifies a new and higher level in the 
history of man’s development. There 
has been a succession of M.P.s since 
the inception of human society: prim- 
itive-communal system, slave-own- 
ing system, feudalism, and capitalism 
(qq.v.). In the present historical epoch 
the moribund capitalist M.P. is being 
replaced by the new, socialist M.P. 
(see Socialism). A world socialist sys- 
tem (q.v.) has come into being. The 
M.P. has two indivisible sides: the 
productive forces (q.v.) and the rela- 
tions of production (q.v.). The produc- 
tive forces are the determinative and 
most revolutionary factor of the M.P. 
Development of social production be- 
gins with changes in the productive 
forces, followed by changes in the re- 
lations of production (see Law of Cor- 
respondence of Production Relations, 
etc.). Though their development de- 
pends on the productive forces, relations 
of production, too, exercise an active 
influence on the former. Production 
relations accelerate the development 
of the productive forces, being the chief 
motive power of their development if 
they conform to the productive forces, 
and, conversely, retard their develop- 
ment, act as the chief brake on their 
development, if they cease to con- 
form. An acute conflict and contradic- 
tion arises between new productive 


= 294 = 


Monad 


forces and old relations of production, 
leading inevitably to social revolution 
in antagonistic socio-economic for- 
mations. Under socialism, since owner- 
ship is public, contradictions that may 
appear between aspects of production 
relations and the growing productive 
forces do not create a conflict. The 
socialist state and the Communist 
Party are able to take account of the 
operation of objective laws of social 
development and remove these con- 
tradictions in good time by bringing 
the relations of production into line 
with the new character and level of 
the productive forces. 

Model, a philosophical term current 
in pre-Marxist philosophy to denote 
a property of an object proper to it 
only in certain conditions as distinct 
from an attribute (q.v.). In Spinoza’s 
(q.v.) philosophy the name M. is given 
to all transient states of substance 
(q.v.), the cause of whose being does 
not lie in themselves but in the sub- 
stance and its attributes. Mm. repre- 
sent an infinite plurality of things 
and their transient qualities in which 
the sole eternal and infinite material 
substance is manifested. 

Monad (Gk. monds—a unit), a phil- 
osophical term denoting the structural, 
substantial unit of being. It is inter- 
preted in different ways by different 
philosophical systems. According to 
the Pythagoreans (q.v.), for instance, 
the M. (a mathematical unit) is the 
basis of the Universe. According to 
Giordano Bruno (De Monade, Numero, 
et Figura, 1591), the M. is the sole 
source of being, which is but spiritual- 
ised matter (see Pantheism). In this 
source, he held, the opposites coin- 
cide—the finite and the infinite, the 
even and the odd, etc. The M. is one of 
the main concepts of Leibniz’s (q.v.) 
philosophy (Monadology, 1714). He 
regarded the M. as a simple, closed 
and changeable substance. The Mm., 
endowed with the ability of clear per- 
ception are called souls. The rational 
soul of man, Leibniz held, is a spirit— 
M. Taking note of Leibniz’s view that 
the whole world is reflected in the Mm., 
that it, as an individuality, contains 
infinity in itself as in embryo, Lenin 





Monism 


— 295 — 


Moore 





wrote: “Here is dialectics of a kind, 
and very profound despite idealism 
and clericalism.” (Vol. 38, p. 383.) 
Lomonosov (q.v.) employs the term 
“physical M.” to designate a particle 
(corpuscule) of matter. As a spiritual 
principle, the M. plays a certain role 
in the hylozoism (q.v.) of Goethe (q.v.). 
The concept of M. is applied in mod- 
ern idealistic systems of pluralism 
{q.v.) and personalism (q.v.). 

Monism, a philosophical doctrine 
which holds that the underlying basis 
of all existence is one source. There 
are both materialistic and idealistic 
M. The materialists consider matter 
{q.v.) to be the foundation of the 
world; while the idealists consider the 
spirit (q.v.), the idea (q.v.). Hegel’s 
({q.v.) philosophy is the most system- 
atic trend of idealistic M. A scientific 
and consistent materialist M. is typ- 
ical of dialectical materialism, which 
proceeds from the fact that the world 
is by its nature material, that all 
phenomena in the world are but var- 
ious forms of moving matter. In Marx- 
ist philosophy, materialism is extend- 
ed also to social phenomena. The 
opposite of M. is dualism (q.v.). 

Monotheism, see Polytheism and 
Monotheism. 

Montaigne, Michel de (1533-92), 
French philosopher of the Renaissance. 
Main work: Essais (1580). A point 
of departure of M.’s philosophy is 
scepticism (q.v.). According to him, 
man has the right to doubt anything. 
He doubts the scholasticism (q.v.) 
of the Middle Ages, the dogmas of 
Catholicism and the Christian idea of 
God himself. As distinct from agnosti- 
cism (q.v.) the scepticism of M. does 
not deny the knowability of the world. 
His main moral principle is that man 
should not passively wait for his hap- 
piness, which religion promises him 
in heaven; he has a right to strive for 
happiness on earth. 

Montesquieu, Charles de (1689-1755), 
French sociologist. Main works: Lettres 
persanes (1721), Considérations sur les 
causes de la grandeur et de la décadence 
des Romains (1734), L’Esprit des Lois 
(1748). These works were very popular 
with the leaders of the French bour- 


geois revolution of 1789. M. severely 
criticised the regime of absolutism, 
tried to explain the origin of the state, 
the nature of laws, and to draw up a 
plan of social reforms on this “natural” 
basis. Objectively, his identification 
of society with nature was contrary to 
the medieval theory of providential- 
ism. M. was one of the founders of 
geographical determinism (q.v.). Ac- 
cording to him, the moral physiognomy 
of peoples, the character of their laws 
and the forms of government are con- 
ditioned by climate, soil, and the size 
of territory. These views were criti- 
cised by the French materialists. M. 
considered constitutional monarchy to 
be the best form of government. He 
introduced the theory of the separation 
of powers (q.v.). Although he was not 
an atheist, he severely criticised the 
church and the clergy. 

Moore, George Edward (1873-1958), 
English idealistic philosopher, exponent 
of neo-realism (q.v.). Criticising subjec- 
tive idealism, M. propounded in refuta- 
tion the thesis: “Perception includes 
consciousness and the object which is 
independent of consciousness.” To 
M. the statu of the object is un- 
clear: it may be regarded both as a 
physical object and as a “sensory da- 
tum”; it is common sense alone that 
induces us to recognise the objectivity 
of the surrounding world. According 
to this philosophy of “common sense” 
there exist in the Universe material 
objects and conscientious actions as- 
sociated with only certain material 
objects. At the same time “common 
sense” does not preclude the possible 
spiritual nature of the Universe, and 
the existence of a divine wisdom, its 
actions, and an after-life. M. developed 
a method of logical analysis. His 
theory of analysis influenced neo- 
positivism, q.v. (the “linguistic anal- 
ysis” of J. Rile, A. Wisdom, and oth- 
ers). His ethics is based on the rec- 
ognition that- good and evil are un- 
definable concepts. Ethical proposi- 
tions reveal the emotions of the speaker 
and arouse emotions in the listener 
or in concealed form express commands. 
Hence, the two trends in contemporary 
positivist ethics, “emotivism” (q.v). 





wey 


Moral Code 


— 296 — 


Moral Stimuli to Labour 


and ethics as “analysis of ethical 
opinions”. His most important 
works are A Defence of Common Sense 
(1925) and A Reply to My Critics 
(1942). 

Moral Code of the Builder of Com- 
munism, a collection of scientific prin- 
ciples of communist morality, formu- 
lated in the Programme of the CPSU 
and adopted at its 22nd Congress in 
October 1961. The code is a product of 
life itself, of the epoch of building 
communism, when the sphere of action 
of morality in society is widening and 
that of the administrative regulation 
of human relations is narrowing. First, 
it embodies the moral principles which 
have been worked out by the progres- 
sive social forces, particularly by the 
working class; secondly, it reflects 
all the best achievements of socialist 
society in the struggle for moral! pro- 
gress; thirdly, it points to the path 
for the further moral improvement of 
the builder of communism. The code 
comprises the following principles: 
devotion to the cause of communism; 
love of the socialist motherland and 
of the other socialist countries; con- 
scientious labour for the good of society 
—he who does not work, neither shall 
he eat; concern on the part of every- 
one for the preservation and growth 
of public wealth; a high sense of 
public duty; intolerance of actions 
harmful to the public interest; collec- 
tivism and comradely mutual assist- 
ance: one for all and all for one; hu- 
mane relations and mutual respect be- 
tween individuals—man is to man a 
friend, comrade, and brother; honesty 
and truthfulness, moral purity, mod- 
esty, and unpretentiousness in social 
and private life; mutual respect in the 
family, and concern for the upbring- 
ing of children; an uncompromising 
attitude to injustice, parasitism, dis- 
honesty, careerism, and cupidity; 
friendship and brotherhood among all 
peoples of the USSR; intolerance of 
national and racial hatred; an uncom- 
promising attitude to the enemies of 
communism, peace, and the freedom of 
nations; fraternal solidarity with the 
working people of all countries and 
with all peoples. 


Moral Judgement, assessment of the 
moral merits of actions and behaviour 
of individuals, organisations, people, 
etc. A general M.J. is made in categories 
of good and evil (q.v.). M.J. is based 
on the objective criterion of morality 
which is historical and changes accord- 
ing to the social system, class struggle, 
etc. The M.J. of people’s actions and 
behaviour by scientific ethics is based 
on the unity of the moral impulse 
and social usefulness of the result, 
from the unity of word and action. 
In socialist society, the criterion of 
M.J. is the interests of the people, 
progressive development of the mate- 
rial and spiritual conditions of man’s 
life, and purposeful labour for the good 
and happiness of man. 

Moral Law, an ethical principle of 
idealist philosophy designed to serve 
as a basis for the behaviour of any man. 
Voltaire (q.v.) formulated M.L. as a 
law of natural morality: “Treat others 
as you would want them to treat you.” 
Kant (q.v.) presented M.L. as an un- 
conditional moral injunction not need- 
ing an empirical justification, eter- 
nally inherent in human nature, and 
called it the categorical impera- 
tive (q.v.). Fichte (q.v.) associated 
M.L. with the necessary creative 
activity of the individual. Everything 
associated with this activity is moral. 
Marxist ethics rejects the doctrine of 
M.L. as a category outside the classes 
and history. 

Moral Stimuli to Labour, deep-seated 
inner forces inciting man to work, 
which arise from his sense of moral, 
ideological, political, and scientific 
convictions, man’s unselfish incentive 
to work for the sake of an idea. The 
M.S.L. are closely connected with the 
material interest in labour, which 
plays a considerable role in the first 
phase of communism. The essence and 
forms of all stimuli to labour are de- 
termined by social conditions. Under- 
lying the M.S.L. under socialism are 
the profound social transformations 
(abolition of private ownership of the 
means of production and establish- 
ment of social ownership, elimination 
of the exploitation of man by man, 
introduction of comradely co-operation 





CE ——— —— —  ———e 





Morality 


and mutual help among free workers, 
enjoying equal rights) and radical 
changes in the spiritual world of man. 
In socialist society the M.S.L. include 
the worker’s realisation of the social 
usefulness of his work, his striving 
for moral satisfaction from work and 
from the creative application of his 
spiritual and physical abilities, his 
desire to win the respect of his fellow 
workers and of society, and to come 
out victorious in labour emulation. 
The effects of the M.S.L. under social- 
ism are the worker’s conscientiousness, 
initiative, selfless and creative labour. 
The survivals of bourgeois M.S.L. 
(vanity, careerism, love of power, etc.) 
hamper the progress of socialism. 
The development of the socialist M.S.L. 
constitutes an important condition for 
the transition to labour as a prime 
necessity of life. 

Morality, a form of social conscious- 
ness in which the ethical qualities of 
social reality (good, welfare, justice, 
etc.) are reflected and fixed. M. is 
the aggregate of regulations, standards 
of community life, of behaviour of 
men, defining their duties to each other 
and to society. The character of M. 
is determined by the economic and so- 
cial order; its standards reflect class 
interests, the interests of a social stra- 
tum or of the people. Different Mm. 
exist in a class society because class 
interests are at variance with each 
other. If a class becomes reactionary, 
then its M. loses its justification and 
becomes completely egoistical, ceases 
to keep pace with history. If, on the 
other hand, M. voices the demands 
of historical development, it is pro- 
gressive. M. is not only a system of 
standards of behaviour; it is also a 
specific feature of the spiritual physiog- 
nomy of men, of the ideology and 
psychology of a class, of a social stra- 
tum or a people. Behaviour is moral 
when it is objectively good and just; 
if it is bad or unjust, then it is immoral. 
However, man can go astray, taking 
good for bad, and vice versa. For 
this reason M. includes evaluation. 
The gist of evaluation is seen not 
only in judgements (ideology) but also 
in emotional and volitional reactions 


— 297 — 


Morality, Christian 


and affectations. The relations between 
men expressed in ethical evaluation 
of behaviour, of the way of life, are 
moral relations. M. appeared with 
the emergence of human society, i.e., 
before the advent of the state and 
law, and it has undergone a long his- 
torical process of development, chang- 
ing its character with changes in the 
mode of production and the social 
system. The struggle between antago- 
nistic classes in class formations also 
found their expression in the realm of 
M. Hence, moral standards and rela- 
tions are not something given once and 
for all, as the metaphysicians hold, and 
M. is not a pure creation of reason, 
spirit, as the idealists and theologians 
assert. Religion defends the M. of the 
exploiters. Bourgeois M. is permeated 
with a spirit of private ownership; 
its principles and manners reflect ego- 
ism and individualism. The behav- 
iour and way of life of the imperialist 
bourgeoisie is immoral because it runs 
counter to the common interests of 
humanity, the march of history. The 
M. of imperialism found its most 
consistent and reactionary expression 
in fascism. With the victory of social- 
ism, bourgeois M. was replaced by 
socialist M., which has for its source 
the M. of the proletariat, already creat- 
ed under the old regime, and the pro- 
gressive moral principles accumulated 
by the working people in the course 
of their struggle against social oppres- 
sion and injustice. In the period of 
transition from socialism to commu- 
nism, M. and moral principles assume 
paramount importance, the relations 
between men and the relations of men 
to society become more and more re- 
gulated by ethical principles, while 
the role of administrative regulation 
gradually decreases. The fundamental 
principles of the M. of the people 
of socialist and communist society are 
formulated in the CPSU Programme— 
in the moral code of the builder of 
communism (see Moral Code). 
Morality, Christian, the morality 
preached by the Christian religion. 
Theologians try to present the stand- 
ards of C.M. as common to all man- 
kind, and C.M. itself as the loftiest and 








| 
i 
i: 
i 





eS 


Morality, Communist 


most humane, putting in the forefront 
the commandment of love. But in real- 
ity the church monopolised and sanc- 
tified definite secular standards, plac- 
ing them at the service of the exploit- 
ing classes. Christianity (q.v.), which 
arose historically as a religion of the 
oppressed, reflected the aspirations of 
the masses (particularly the idea of 
brotherhood of all the destitute, love 
of one’s neighbour, etc.). The church, 
while preaching universal love and 
forgiveness, turned these command- 
ments against the masses themselves. 
Herein lies the hypocrisy and bigotry 
of C.M. The church links the reward 
of the oppressed for their suffering 
and the triumph of justice with the 
“kingdom of God”, the advent of 
which depends upon God’s and not 
man's will. In doing so the church 
declares amoral the struggle of the 
masses for the reorganisation of so- 
ciety. C.M. is reactionary insofar as 
it preaches humility and submission. 

Morality, Communist, the aggregate 
of principles and standards of conduct 
of the builders of communist society. 
The objective criterion of C.M. is the 
fight for the victory of communist so- 
ciety. Its fundamental principles as 
stipulated in the CPSU Programme 
are as follows: devotion to the cause 
of communism; increase of social 
wealth by labour; a high sense of public 
duty; collectivism; humanism; inter- 
nationalism; an uncompromising at- 
titude to violations of communist moral 
standards, etc. (see Moral Code of the 
Builder of Communism). The histor- 
ical and theoretical basis of C.M. is 
the world outlook (q.v.) and morality 
of the working class, which include 
the simple and high moral standards 
handed down by the progressive classes 
of the past. At the same time the 
working class has put forward its own 
ethical standards, such as class soli- 
darity, internationalism and collectiv- 
ism, striving for the emancipation of 
the working people. Through the work- 
ing class C.M. inherits all the pro- 
gressive standards of human morality. 
Thus, C.M. is the highest degree of 
moral progress of humanity. The stand- 
ards of C.M. are not confined to peo- 


— 298 — More 


ple’s behaviour; they are active fac- 
tors in transforming society, in educat- 
ing and re-educating man, in the sense 
that through people’s conduct they 
influence the formation of communist 
social institutions and the whole 
course of social development. When the 
standards of C.M. become universal, 
they will gradually make superfluous 
many links in the legislative and ad- 
ministrative regulation. of the rela- 
tions between the individual and so- 
ciety. Human behaviour dictated by 
consciousness of public duty will ex- 
clude all forms of external compulsion 
and will lead to genuine freedom of 
the individual. The natural replace- 
ment of the code of laws and forms of 
the administration by the standards of 
C.M. will be a revolution in the his- 
tory of morality. It will also lead to the 
abrogation of the principle of compul- 
sion. At present the maturing stand- 
ards of C.M. are confronted with non- 
communist morality along two lines: 
inside socialist society, where the old 
and obsolete standards exist as sur- 
vivals of the past, resulting from non- 
compliance with, and violation of, 
the laws obtaining in society, this 
giving birth to amoral actions and 
crime; outside socialist society, where 
C.M. is opposed to the morality of 
bourgeois society. C.M. is being formed 
in this complicated struggle and 
construction as the future morality 
of the whole of humanity (see Moral- 
ity, Ethics). 

More, Thomas (1478-1535), one of 
the founders of utopian socialism (q.v.), 
humanist-rationalist of the Renais- 
sance. He was brought up in a bour- 
geois family; between 1529 and 1532 M. 
held an important post—Lord Chancel- 
lor of England. He was beheaded by 
order of the king for his refusal to rec- 
ognise the king as the head of the 
church. M. described a journey into 
Utopia, the unknown land (literally, 
a non-existent place) in his book A 
fruteful and Pleasaunt Worke of the 
best State of a Publyque Weale, and 
of the newe Yle called Utopia (1516). 
Till the very end of the 18th century 
it was a most important writing of 
socialist thought. M. was the first 








Morelly 


to criticise extensively the system based 
on private property, the socio-political 
relations in England at his time. He 
portrayed a system in which public 
property dominates. He gave the first 
systematical enunciation of the idea 
of socialisation of production, linking 
it with the idea of a communist organ- 
isation of labour and distribution. The 
chief economic unit in the ideal, free 
state of Utopia is the family; produc- 
tion is based on handicrafts. The Uto- 
pians live under democratic adminis- 
tration, enjoy equality in labour and 
freedom from antagonism between town 
and country or between mental and 
physical labour. People work six hours 
a day, the rest of the time being de- 
voted to science and the arts. Great 
importance is attached to the all- 
round development of the individual, 
to the fusion of theoretical education 
with labour. This idea is a rudiment 
of the socialist view of education. M. 
did not understand that realisation 
of the socialist ideal necessitated a high 
development of technology. He dreamed 
of a peaceful! transition to a new order. 

Morelly, French utopian communist 
of the 18th century. His main work 
Le Code de la nature (1755) is a treatise 
which substantiates the principles of 
a society where collective ownership 
dominates. In his theory M. proceeded 
from rationalism, contrasting the ra- 
tional social order to the irrational 
one. According to him, the contem- 
porary system was irrational, it was 
the outcome of errors. Theory should 
“discover” a new, rational order, con- 
forming to human nature, and its prin- 
ciples must become known to the peo- 
ple. By the rational system M. has 
in mind a centralised economic com- 
munity managed on the basis of a 
single economic plan which regulates 
production and distribution of goods. 
M. formulated three basic laws of 
society, meeting the demands of na- 
ture and reason: (1) abolition of pri- 
vate property, (2) the “right to exist- 
ence” and the “right to labour”, and 
(3) the obligation for all citizens to 
work. M. was a typical representative 
of the so-called “rationalistic”, vulgar 
egalitarian communism. He advo- 


— 299 — 


Morgan 


cated moderation in food and prohibi- 
tion of adornments. He provided for 
petty regulation of life, including 
marital relations. M. exerted consider- 
able influence upon many utopian 
socialists of the 18th and 19th centuries: 
Babouvists (see Babouvism), Cabet 
(q.v.), Blanqui (q.v.), and others. 
Moreno, Jacob (1892- ), American 
psychiatrist and sociologist, founder 
of sociometry (q.v.), or microsociology 
(q.v.). Main works: Who Shall Survive? 
(1936), Foundations of Sociometry 
(1954). As a sociologist M. studies the 
psychological aspects of the behaviour 
of small social groups: children up to 
school age, apartment neighbours, of- 
fice employees, air crews, etc. By con- 
centrating attention on emotional re- 
lations among people, for instance, 
on the feelings of sympathy, antipathy, 
or indifference to one another, M. tries 
to present these emotions and inclina- 
tions of men as the primary and de- 
cisive factor of social progress. Ac- 
knowledging the crisis of capitalism 
in the USA, M. considers the regula- 
tion of relations among people and 
their organisation into groups accord- 
ing to their inclinations and sympathies 
to be the basic means of solving all 
social problems. The measures sug- 
gested by M. to “rally” American so- 
ciety do not affect the main pillars 
of capitalism: private ownership, the 
undivided rule of monopolies, and the 
exploitation of the working people. 
Morgan, Lewis Henry (1818-81), Amer- 
ican scientist, ethnographer, and ar- 
cheologist. He studied the American 
Indian’s way of life and collected an 
enormous amount of factual material 
on the history of primitive-communal 
society. He generalised these facts in 
his book Ancient Society (1877). M. 
attempted at making the periodisation 
of the history of pre-class society by 
linking each of the historical periods 
with the development of production 
techniques. The factual side of his 
periodisation is, however, obsolete now. 
M. was among the first to establish 
that the family (q.v.) is a historical 
phenomenon which changes with the 
development of society. He was highly 
appraised by Marx and Engels. Engels 














Morris, Charles — 300 — Motion 
wrote that M. rediscovered “in his M. of matter is absolute, while the state 
own way”, the “materialist con- of rest is relative and just a moment 
ception of history that had been of M. A body at rest in relation to the 


discovered by Marx” (K. Marx and 
F. Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 2, 
p. 170). Engels used M.’s investiga- 
tions in his work The Origin of the 
Family, Private Property and the State 
(q.v.). He, however, not only enunciat- 
ed M.’s materials, but interpreted them 
along Marxist lines. 

Morris, Charles (190!- ), American 
philosopher, who combines the ideas 
of pragmatism (q.v.), especially the 
doctrines of the American philosopher 
George Mead, with concepts of logical 
empiricism (q.v.). His main works, 
based on the tenets of behaviourism 
(q.v.), analyse man’s social and bio- 
logical behaviour. While developing 
the views of C. S. Peirce (q.v.), he for- 
mulated the fundamental concepts and 
principles of a new science—semiotic 
(q.v.). Main works: Foundations of 
the Theory of Signs (1938), Signs, 
Language and Behaviour (1946), Varie- 
ties of Human Values (1956). 

Morris, William (1834-96), English 
socialist, poet, fiction writer, and 
artist. Though he came from a bour- 
geois family, he hated and severely 
criticised the bourgeois system. Ini- 
tially, he shared the utopian views 
on art, which he regarded as the prin- 
cipal means for the peaceful transfor- 
mation of society. He took an active 
part in the labour and socialist move- 
ments since the beginning of the 1880s 
and was acquainted with Marxism, 
but he was mainly “socialist by his 
emotions” (Engels). The description 
of a future communist society (News 
from Nowhere, a utopian novel, 1891) 
was idyllic and therefore not scien- 
tific. In his creative and political activ- 
ity M. championed revolutionary prin- 
ciples. He made a valuable contribu- 
tion to English democratic literature. 

Motion, the key attribute and mode 
of existence of matter (q.v.). M. de- 
notes all processes occurring in nature 
and society. Loosely, M. is change 
(q.v.) in general, any kind of interac- 
tion (q.v.) of material objects. No more 
can there be matter in the world with- 
out M. than M. without matter. The 


Earth moves with the Earth round 
the Sun, and with the Sun round the 
centre of the galaxy, etc. Since the 
world is infinite, every body partic- 
ipates in an infinite number of forms 
of M. Qualitative stability of bodies 
and of their properties is also a state 
of relative rest. But it is a stability 
that derives from a special type of 
interaction by microparticles in the 
body. It is, therefore, the result of 
the M. of microparticles. Thereby M. 
predicates the properties and structure 
of matter and the nature of its existence. 
M. of matter is diverse in its mani- 
festations and multiple in form (see 
Matter, Forms of Motion of). Quali- 
tatively new and more complex forms 
of M. appear in the process of the de- 
velopment of matter. Yet, even me- 
chanical M. is not absolutely simple. 
A body in motion interacts all the time 
with other bodies through the electro- 
magnetic and gravitational fields, and 
changes in so doing. The theory of 
relativity (q.v.) indicates that any 
increase in velocity of M. causes an 
increase in the mass of a body, while 
linear dimensions decrease in the di- 
rection of M. and the rhythm of proc- 
esses occurring in the body becomes 
more rapid. At velocities approaching 
that of light, electrons and other par- 
ticles are able to radiate electromagnet- 
ic quanta in the direction of M. 
(so-called spinning electrons). Thus, 
all M. includes the interaction of differ- 
ent forms of M. and their mutual 
transformations. M. is just as inex- 
haustible as matter. The M. of matter 
is a process of the interaction of oppo- 
sites. Mechanistic M., for example, 
is unity of the intermittence and non- 
intermittence of space and time. Elec- 
tromagnetic, nuclear and gravitational 
M. is based on the unity of the opposite 
processes of absorption and radiation 
by microparticles of quanta of the elec- 
tromagnetic, nuclear and gravitational 
fields. Chemical M. implies, among 
other things, association and dissocia- 
tion of atoms. Vital processes are based 
on the unity of the assimilation and 











Mo Tzu 


dissimilation of substances, stimula- 
tion and inhibition of cells, etc. The 
endless self-motion of matter in the 
Universe is also the result of the unity 
of the opposite processes of the dis- 
persion of matter and energy (in the 
evolution of stars) and their reverse 
concentration which, in the ultimate, 
leads to the origination of stars, gal- 
axies and other forms of matter. If 
the M. of a material system obeys a 
single law and includes the overall 
change of the system, it represents, 
in effect, the process of the system’s 
development. In ascendant develop- 
ment the connections, structure and 
forms of M. of material objects become 
more complex, constituting progres- 
sive transformations from lower to high- 
er states. Descendant development, 
on the other hand, constitutes degra- 
dation and the disintegration of the 
system, a simplification of its forms 
of M. M. is a more general concept 
than development, because it connotes 
all changes, including external and 
accidental, which do not conform to 
the internal law governing the develop- 
ment of the system. 

Mo Tzu, or Mo Ti: (479-38! B.C.), 
founder of a school of philosophy (Mo- 
ism) in ancient China which drew nu- 
merous followers. An opponent of 
Confucianism (q.v.), he considered pre- 
determined fate non-existent, a man’s 
fate depending on the manner in which 
he practised the principles of “univer- 
sal love” (tsan-ai), which are based 
on the “will of Heaven”. He exorted 
people to help one another, follow a 
useful occupation, reject the use of 
force and war, and appoint the wise 
and worthy to govern the country re- 
gardless of the position they occupy in 
society. Though leaning towards mys- 
ticism, his teachings contained some 
elements of materialism. Thus, he main- 
tained that our knowledge was a direct 
product of our investigation of reality. 
His followers subsequently developed 
his rational ideas into a naive mate- 
tialistic theory of knowledge, which 
was destined to play an important 
role in the evolution of philosophy in 
ancient China. The school of M.T. 
ceased to exist as an independent phil- 


— 301 — 


Mutakallimins 


osophical trend 
B.C. 

Miinzer, Thomas (c. 1490-1525), ana- 
baptist and preacher, one of the lead- 
ers of the great peasant war in Ger- 
many (1525), ideologist of the radical 
peasant-plebeian wing of the Refor- 
mation (q.v.). Unlike Luther (q.v.), 
the moderate reformer, M. energeti- 
cally opposed not only the Catholic 
Church but Christianity and feudalism 
as a whole. For M., the basic task of 
the Reformation was a socio-economic 
revolution of the peasants and the city 
poor, rather than a reformation of 
the church and its teachings. M.’s 
philosophy, which was formed under 
the influence of medieval peasant-ple- 
beian heresy and mysticism (qq.v.), 
was pantheistic. For him, religious 
faith was the result of the awakening 
of reason in man, and the chasm be- 
tween heavenly and earthly existence 
had to be bridged. His pantheism (q.v.) 
largely anticipated later philosophic 
criticism of religion (D. Strauss, L. 
Feuerbach, q.v., and others). M. used 
Christian slogans to announce a far- 
reaching revolutionary programme. He 
urged the revolutionary peasants to 
establish “God’s kingdom on earth”, 
i.e., a society without classes, private 
ownership or government. M.’s reli- 
gious philosophy was close to atheism, 
and his political programme greatly 
resembled equalitarian utopian com- 
munism. M.'s ideals went far beyond 
the interests of the peasant-plebeian 
masses, anticipating, according to En- 
gels, “the conditions for the emanci- 
pation of the nascent proletarian ele- 
ments”. 

Mutakallimins, proponents of me- 
dieval Muslim scholastic theology (ka- 
lam). Earlier M. were members of 
a Shiite sect of Islam dating from the 
8th and 9th centuries and were known 
as the Mutazilites (Ar. seceders). Wasil 
bnu Ata, Jahiz, Muammar bnu-Abbad 
and other members of the Mutazilite 
school who introduced rationalism into 
Muslim theology, denied the multi- 
plicity of God’s attributes, the doctrine 
of the eternity of Koran and upheld 
the idea of free will. They regarded 
reason as the chief criterion of the 


in the 2nd century 





Mysticism 


truthfulness of knowledge and morals. 
Their philosophy relied on atomistic 
conceptions. The later M. (al-Ashari) 
used atomism to prove the vali- 
dity of the Muslim dogmas, to deny the 
operation of the objective laws and the 
possibility of their cognition. Ibn-Roshd 
(q.v.) criticised this idealist teaching 
in his work Tahdfut al-Tahdfut (Incohe- 
rence of the Incoherence). 

Mysticism, a___ religious-idealistic 
view of the world. M. owes its origin 
to secret rites (mysteries) conducted 
by the religious societies of ancient 
Orient and Occident. The underlying 
feature of these rituals was contact 
between man and God, or some other 
mysterious being, and belief in the 
supernatural. Communion with God 
is supposedly achieved through ecsta- 
sy or revelation. Elements of M. are 
peculiar to many ancient philosophico- 
religious doctrines (e.g., Confucianism, 
Brahmanism, Orphism, Pythagorean- 
ism, Platonism, and Neo-Platonism, 
qq.v.). The mystical philosophy of 
the Middle Ages was developed by 
Bernard of Clairvaux (1091-1153), 
J. Eckhart (1260-1327), J. Tauler 
(1300-1361), and others. It was also 
associated with sufism (q.v.). Later 
mystics were Böhme and Swedenborg 
(qq.v.). To a greater or lesser degree M. 
is a feature of practically all idealist 
philosophies of modern times (partic- 
ularly personalism, q.v., and some 
forms of existentialism, q.v.). In Rus- 
sia, religious-mystical philosophy was 
developed by the Slavophiles (q.v.), 
Solovyov (q.v.) and his adherents 


(Berdyayev, Trubetskoi, qq.v.), and 


— 302 — 


Mythology 





others. Mystic philosophers consider 
revelation, a kind of mystical intuition, 
(q.v.) as the highest form of cognition, 
in which being is perceived by the 
subject immediately. M., as a rule, is 
preached by the ideologists of the 
reactionary classes, although there were 
cases (in feudal times) when progres- 
sive ideas (for instance, Eckhart’s) or 
revolutionary opposition appeared in 
the form of M. 

Mythology, one of the oral forms of 
folklore, characteristic of the antiq- 
uity. Myths were narratives born 
in the early stages of history, whose 
fantastic images (gods, legendary heroes, 
big events, etc.) were but attempts 
to generalise and explain different phe- 
nomena of nature and society. “All 
mythology surmounts, subordinates, 
and forms the powers of nature in the 
imagination and with the help of the 
imagination. Hence, mythology disap- 
pears with the onset of a real dominance 
over these powers of nature.” (K. Marx 
and F. Engels, Works, 2nd Russ. ed., 
Vol. 12, p. 737.) Many aspects of the 
world outlook of ancient society found 
their expression in M. It has elements 
of religion insofar as it contains the 
concepts of the supernatural. But at 
the same time it reflected moral views 
and man’s aesthetic attitude to reality. 
In the words of Marx, M. “is the un- 
consciously artistic reproduction of 
nature (by nature is understood al} 
and everything material, including 
society)”. That is why images of M. 
have been often employed in the arts 
in various interpretations. 





N 


Naigeon, Jacques-André (1738-1810), 
French materialist philosopher and 
atheist, opponent of the CatholicChurch. 
N.’s world outlook was shaped under 
the direct influence of Diderot (q.v.), 
whom he met in 1756. Diderot enlisted 
him to work on the Encyclopédie, and 
subsequently he became one of its 
editors. N. adhered to materialist sen- 
sualism in the theory of knowledge. In 
1768, published Le militaire philosophie, 
in which he proved that all religions 
are false and that any search of God 
should be abandoned. N. took part in 
editing Holbach’s (q.v.) System of 
Nature and jointly with him wrote a 
Théologie portative, a dictionary giv- 
ing a witty criticism of religion. N. 
devoted the last years of his life to pub- 
lishing the works of Diderot. 

Nalbandyan, Mikael _Lazarevich 
(1829-66), Armenian materialist think- 
er, revolutionary democrat, utopian 
socialist, enlightener, eminent poet, 
and publicist. Graduated from the de- 
partment of natural sciences of Mos- 
cow University, was a contributor to 
the progressive Armenian journal North- 
ern Lights. Took an active part in 
the Russian people’s struggle for lib- 
eration. Was imprisoned in the Peter 
and Paul Fortress and died in exile. 
In his activities N. sought to strengthen 
Armenian-Russian friendship; he as- 
sociated the liberation of the Armenian 
people with the victory of the Russian 
anti-serfdom revolution and fought 
against bourgeois nationalists and liber- 
als. In his philosophical views N. was 
a materialist who tried to combine ma- 
terialism with dialectics. In the theory 
of knowledge he proceeded from the 
unity of the sensory and rational, de- 


duction and induction, and criticised 
the idealist understanding of the na- 
ture of general concepts and ideas. 
N. criticised the philosophy of Kant, 
Fichte, and Hegel (qq.v.), especially 
their political views. In aesthetics he 
highly valued the realism and views 
of the Russian revolutionary demo- 
crats; he embodied these ideas in his 
artistic efforts. N.’s ideas became one 
of the well-springs of progressive Ar- 
menian culture in the 19th century. His 
main works: Two Lines (1861), Agricul- 
ture as the True Road (1862), Hegel and 
His Time (1868). 

Name, in logic, a linguistic expres- 
sion denoting some object understood 
in the broadest sense, as everything 
we can name and not only as a material 
object. Logical semantics (q.v.) usu- 
ally deals with the so-called “semantic 
triangle”: (1) name; (2) object designa- 
ted by it (denotation or designation); 
(3) sense of name (see Denotation and 
Sense). As distinct from the ordinary 
word usage, contemporary logic re- 
gards as names not only terms (words) 
but also sentences. The denotation of 
a term is the object it denotes, the sense 
of the term is the property it expresses. 
The denotation of a sentence is its truth- 
value (i.e., truth or lie) and the sense 
is the judgement (q.v.) it expresses. 

Narodism, an ideology of petty-bour- 
geois peasant democracy in Russia. 
The specific features of N. as a variety 
of democratic ideology are: (1) social- 
ist dreams, the hope of avoiding the 
capitalist road, and of preventing 
capitalism; (2) advocacy of a radical 
change of agrarian relations. N. is of 
international significance, being char- 
acteristic of countries which have tak- 








Narodism 


en the road of the bourgeois demo- 
cratic revolution at a relatively late 
period, when capitalism in Western 
Europe and North America has already 
revealed its intrinsic contradictions and 
has given rise to the socialist move- 
ment of the proletariat. The social 
source of the ideology of N. in Russia 
was the struggle of the peasants for 
the abolition of the feudal estates and 
a radical redistribution of the land 
which belonged to the landowners. Her- 
zen and Chernyshevsky (qq.v.) were 
the founders of the Narodnik ideolo- 
gy in Russia. They first raised the ques- 
tion of the possible direct transition 
from the peasant commune to the high- 
er, communist form of society. So- 
called active N. developed in the 1870s. 
Its characteristic feature was the de- 
sire to apply the political programme of 
N., to awaken the peasantry, and rally 
it to the socialist revolution. Bakunin, 
Lavrov (qq.v.) and P. N. Tkachov 
were the most prominent ideologists 
of this N. Being the ideology of mili- 
tant revolutionary democracy, the N. 
of the 1870s theoretically made a step 
backward as compared with Cherny- 
shevsky. Opposing “socialism” to “po- 
litics” the Narodniks held that struggle 
for political freedoms was of benefit 
only to the bourgeoisie. They denied 
that capitalism was in any way pro- 
gressive. In philosophy the Narodnik 
theoreticians of the subjective school 
preached agnosticism (q.v.), eclecti- 
cally combined fragments of various 
idealist systems—positivism, Neo-Kant- 
ianism, Machism (qq.v.), and others. 
In contrast to Chernyshevsky who 
regarded social development from the 
viewpoint of historical necessity, the 
Narodniks approached social phenome- 
na from positions of an abstract ideal. 
They tried to prove the possibility of 
non-capitalist development by means 
of the subjective method (q.v.) in so- 
ciology. Formally N. did not deny 
the importance of the masses in his- 
tory, but it held that the movement 
of the masses and, correspondingly, 
the direction of the historical process 
depended on the activity of the intel- 
lectual minority. The main thesis of 
the economic theory of N. was that 


=— "304" — 





small peasant farming (“people’s pro- 
duction”) was the antithesis of capital- 
ism. In the mid-1880s, a liberal, re- 
formist trend (V. P. Vorontsov, Mikhail- 
ovsky, q.v., S. N. Krivenko, S. N. Yu- 
zhakov, and others) prevailed in N. 
Under the influence of reality some 
Narodniks had to admit Russia's cap- 
italist evolution and the process of 
differentiation among the peasantry. 
But admission of capitalist develop- 
ment in Russia was accompanied by 
all kinds of utopian and reactionary 
schemes concerning aid to “people’s 
production”. The liberal Narodniks 
actively fought against Marxism, and 
this struggle ended in their complete 
ideological defeat. The advance of the 
peasant movement early in the 20th 
century and the Russian revolution 
of 1905-07 determined the appearance 
of a number of Narodnik groups and 
parties, of which the most leftward 
was the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. 
Its ideology was of an eclectic nature, 
combining the old dogmas of N. with 
some distorted propositions of Marx- 
ism. In the course of the revolution 
the Socialist-Revolutionaries constant- 
ly vacillated between submission to 
the leadership of the liberals and 
a determined struggle against the 
landowners. Lenin and Plekhanov 
O presented a profound critique 
of N. 


Nation, a historically formed com- 
munity of people. A N. is distinguished 
first of all by common material condi- 
tions of life: territory and economic 
life; community of language, psycholog- 
ical make-up and also certain traits 
of national character, manifested in 
the national specifics of its culture. 
N. is the broadest form of human com- 
munity which comes into being with 
the appearance of the capitalist for- 
mation. The abolition of feudal disu- 
nity and the consolidation of economic 
ties between regions within a country 
and the merging of local markets into 
a national market serve as the econom- 
ic basis for the crystallisation of N. 
The bourgeoisie was the leading force 
of Nn. during that period, which laid 
a definite imprint on their socio- 
political and spiritual aspects. As these 


Nation ~ 





National Democracy 


bourgeois Nn. develop social anti- 
theses within them grow sharper and 
the antithesis between the classes be- 
comes apparent. The bourgeoisie seeks 
to cover up these contradictions and 
fan antagonisms between nations. It 
advocates the ideology of nationalism 
and national selfishness. Discord and 
hatred between nations, national con- 
flicts are an inevitable consequence of 
capitalism. In opposition to bourgeois 
nationalism (q.v.) the proletariat puts 
forward the ideology and policy of 
proletarian internationalism (q.v.). 
With the abolition of capitalism the 
aspect of a N. radically changes. The 
old, bourgeois Nn. are transformed into 
new, socialist Nn. with the alliance 
of the working class and working 
peasantry forming its class basis. So- 
cialist Nn. are free of class antagonisms, 
the remnants of the former distrust 
between them vanishing and friendship 
of the peoples (q.v.) developing. The 
abolition of national oppression and 
the establishment of equality between 
the peoples, their mutual assistance, 
and the elimination of economic and 
cultural backwardness. of peoples who 
had been retarded in their develop- 
ment have created all the requisites 
for the thriving of socialist Nn. in the 
Soviet Union. In socialist society, on 
the one hand, Nn. develop and flour- 
ish and, on the other, they draw 
closer together. In future, after the 
complete victory of communism, the 
all-round drawing together of nations 
will ultimately bring about the grad- 
ual disappearance of national distinc- 
tions. A new form of social community 
of people, broader than the N. and 
uniting all mankind into one family, 
will arise in a fully developed commu- 
nist society. But such a community 
will come into being only as a result 
of prolonged social progress and, more- 
over, much later than full social 
homogeneity is attained. 

National Democracy, a form of po- 
litical organisation of society which 
arises in the course of the development 
and deepening of the revolution. The 
basic features of a national democratic 
state are consistent struggle for polit- 
ical and the economic independence, 


20-1682 


— 305 — 


National Question 


against imperialism and neo-colonial- 
ism, the existence of broad democratic 
tights and freedoms, the participation 
of the people in determining the gov- 
ernment’s policy and revolutionary 
social changes, a land reform in the 
first place. “The political basis of 
the state of national democracy is the 
bloc of all the progressive, patriotic 
forces fighting to win complete national 
independence and broad democracy and 
to consummate the anti-imperialist, 
anti-feudal, democratic revolution.” 
(Programme of the CPSU.) The forma- 
tion of N.D. is ensured by the active 
participation of the working class in 
the national liberation revolution. 
Socially, N.D. is not a socialist state, 
but under certain conditions it can 
become a political form of transition 
of individual countries to socialism, 
bypassing the capitalist road of 
development. 

National Form in Art, specific fea- 
tures of artistic form introduced in 
art by each people. Marxist-Leninist 
aesthetics, considering art a reflection 
of reality, notes that the forms of this 
reflection are associated with the spe- 
cific features of a people’s life, its 
socio-economic system, traditions, char- 
acter, and psychology. All this im- 
parts a national colouring to art. Lan- 
guage is an important element of na- 
tional form. The interaction of national 
cultures enriches the forms of art. So- 
viet art is socialist in content, i.e., 
it asserts socialist ideology; at the 
same time it is extremely diverse in 
form, which is explained by the wealth 
of life itself and the free, all-round 
development of nations in socialist 
society. True national art is always 
international because art, reflecting 
the depths of a people’s soul, carries 
general human elements. The organic 
blending of the national and the inter- 
national in socialist art is determined 
by the very nature of socialism and the 
Marxist ideology of friendship and 
brotherhood of peoples. ; 

National Question, the question of 
liberation and the conditions for the 
free development of nations (q.v.). 
The N.Q. should be approached his- 
torically, because its content and im- 





National Question 


portance are not the same in different 
epochs. In the period of the emergence 
of nations, the N.Q. involved the over- 
throw of feudalism and liberation from 
foreign national oppression. In the 
epoch of imperialism, the N.Q. has 
become an inter-state problem, has 
merged with the general problem of 
liberating the colonial peoples, and 
has developed into the national colo- 
nial question. It is also closely linked 
with the peasant question, because 
the majority of participants in the na- 
tional movements are peasants. The 
epoch of socialist and national libera- 
tion revolutions, the epoch of abolition 
of the colonial system was ushered in 
by the October Revolution. In the pres- 
ent epoch the N.Q. has again arisen 
in a number of developed capitalist 
countries in view of the striving of 
the imperialist states (nazi Germany 
and Japan during the 2nd World War, 
the United States in the post-war 
period) for world domination. The 
proletariat and the Communist Parties 
in a number of countries are faced with 
a historical task—to rebuff the preda- 
tory plans of the imperialists, to as- 
sume leadership in upholding national 
independence and sovereignty, rallying 
round themselves all the democratic 
and patriotic forces of the nation. While 
the ideologists of imperialism hold 
that the only way to solve the N.Q. 
is to isolate nations, which actually 
leads to greater hostility between them 
and to the subordination of some na- 
tions by others, the October Socialist 
Revolution demonstrated the possibil- 
ity and expediency of a different, rev- 
olutionary way. This is to destroy 
capitalism, completely abolish na- 
tional oppression, and establish friend- 
ship of the peoples (q.v.). The Soviet 
system has not limited itself to proclaim- 
ing the legal equality of nations, but 
has done everything to eliminate in 
the shortest possible time their actual 
economic and cultural inequality in- 
herited from the old system. Drawing 
on fraternal assistance and above all 
the assistance of the Russian people, 
all Soviet non-Russian republics built 
up a modern industry, trained their 
own skilled workers and intellectuals, 


— 306 — 


Nationalism 


and developed culture, national in 
form and socialist in content. It is 
pointed out in the Programme of the 
CPSU that the building of communism 
leads to still greater unity of the So- 
viet peoples; obliteration of the dis- 
tinctions between classes and the de- 
velopment of communist social rela- 
tions make for a greater social homoge- 
neity of nations and contribute to the 
development of common communist 
traits in their culture, morals, and way 
of life and to a further strengthening of 
their mutual trust and friendship. 

Nationalism, a principle of bour- 
geois ideology and politics expressed in 
national isolation, the advocacy of 
mistrust of other nations (q.v.) and 
enmity among nations. N. has its 
roots in capitalism’s specific features 
of development. Reflecting the charac- 
ter of relations among nations under 
capitalism, N. appears in two forms: 
Great-Power chauvinism of a dominat- 
ing nation, marked by contempt for 
other nations, and local N. of an op- 
pressed nation stamped by the striv- 
ing for national seclusion and mistrust 
of other nations. N. developed in the 
process of formation of nations which 
was accompanied by the emergence 
of national languages and cultures and 
the moulding of a special national psy- 
chology and national sentiments. Spec- 
ulating on the slogans of “nation- 
wide” interests, bourgeois and reform- 
ist ideologists and revisionists utilise 
N. as a refined means for stifling the 
class consciousness of the working 
people, splitting the international work- 
ing-class movement, and justifying co- 
lonialism and wars between nations. 
N. is inacceptable in any form to the 
working people, whose interests are 
expressed only by proletarian inter- 
nationalism (q.v.). But at a definite 
stage of the national liberation move- 
ment, Communists consider it histor- 
ically justified to support the N. of 
the oppressed nation, which has a 
general democratic content (anti-im- 
perialism, striving for political and 
economic independence). This variety 
of N., however, also has another side, 
expressing the ideology and interests 
of the reactionary exploiting top group, 





Í 
f 
| 
| 





Natural Law 


which leans towards compromise with 
imperialism. 

N. is most widespread and tena- 
cious in a petty-bourgeois envi- 
ronment. Under socialism, which 
establishes real equality of nations, 
the social roots of N. are removed 
and its manifestations are preserved 
only as survivals (q.v.) of capitalism 
in the minds and behaviour of 
people. 

Natural Law, a doctrine of an ideal 
law which is independent of the state 
and is held to be derived from the rea- 
son and “nature” of man. Ideas of 
N.L. were put forward in ancient times 
(by Socrates, Plato, qq.v., etc.). In 
the Middle Ages N.L. was considered 
a variety of the law of God (see Thomas 
Aquinas). The idea was taken up wide- 
ly in the period of Western bourgeois 
revolutions (17th-18th centuries) and 
its chief advocates (Grotius, Spinoza, 
Locke, Rousseau, Montesquieu, Hol- 
bach, Kant, Radishchev, qq.v., etc.) 
used it to criticise feudalism and af- 
firm the “naturalness” and “reasonable- 
ness” of bourgeois society. A very 
much distorted version of N.L. is 
to be found in the contemporary 
“social doctrine” of Catholicism 
q.v.). 

Natural Philosophy, the name given 
to philosophy distinguished by the pre- 
dominantly speculative interpretation 
of nature taken in its entirety. The 
boundaries between natural science and 
N.P. and also the place of N.P. itself 
in the system of other philosophical 
sciences have undergone changes in 
the course of the history of philosophy. 
In antiquity, N.P. merged with natu- 
ral science and in ancient Greek philos- 
ophy was usually called physics. An- 
cient N.P. gave a spontaneous and 
naive dialectical interpretation of na- 
ture as an integral and living whole, 
and asserted the identity of the micro- 
cosm (man) and macrocosm (nature) 
(see Hylozoism). Cosmology and cos- 
mogony (qq.v.) were also an organic 
part of N.P. Elements of N.P. were 
present even in medieval scholasticism. 
They consisted chiefly in the adapta- 
tion of some principles of Aristotelean 
N.P. and cosmology to the geocentric 


20° 


— 307 — 


Natural Philosophy 


picture of the world. N.P. became wide- 
spread in the Renaissance. The N.P. 
of that epoch, preserving in the main 
the concepts and principles of ancient 
N.P., was based on a higher level of 
natural science. In the course of strug- 
gle against the scholastic picture of 
nature the Renaissance N.P. developed 
a number of profound materialistic 
and dialectic ideas, e.g., the idea of 
the infinity of nature and the countless 
number of its worlds (see Bruno) and 
the idea of the coincidence of the op- 
posites in the boundlessly great and 
boundlessly small (see Nicholas of 
Cusa, Bruno). A number of natural 
sciences, first of all mechanics and 
mathematics, were singled out from 
N.P. in the 17th century but the latter 
was still regarded as closely connected 
with them. It was no accident that 
Newton’s (q.v.) main work, which for- 
mulated the principles of mechanics 
and mathematics, was called Philo- 
sophiae naturalis principa mathema- 
tica. In the 18th century philosophy 
of the French and European Enlighten- 
ment and materialism, N.P. put for- 
ward the idea of the encyclopaedic 
connection of all the sciences, which 
had been extended and deepened as 
compared with the preceding century. 
Schelling’s (q.v.) N.P. played a big 
part at the end of the 18th and the 
beginning of the 19th centuries. Al- 
though it rested on an idealist foun- 
dation, it formulated the idea of the 
unity of nature’s forces and summed 
up a number of important natural 
science discoveries of that epoch. Oken, 
a follower of Schelling, voiced the 
idea of the development of the organic 
world. Characterising N.P., Engels 
wrote that “it could do this only by 
putting in place of the real but as yet 
unknown interconnections ideal, fan- 
cied ones, filling in the missing facts 
by figments of the mind and bridging 
the actual gaps merely in imagina tion 
In the course of this procedure it con- 
ceived many brilliant ideas and fore- 
shadowed many later discoveries, but 
it also produced a considerable amount 
of nonsense, which indeed could 
not have been otherwise. Today, when 
one needs to comprehend the results 








Natural Science 


of natural scientific investigation only 
dialectically, that is, in the sense of 
their own interconnection, in order 
to arrive at a ‘system of nature’ suffi- 
cient for our time; when the dialecti- 
cal character of this interconnection 
is forcing itself against their will even 
into the metaphysically-trained minds 
of the natural scientists, today natural 
philosophy is finally disposed off. Ev- 
ery attempt at resurrecting it would 
be not only superfluous, but a step 
backwards”. (Marx, Engels, Selected 
Works, Vol. II, pp. 389-90.) Subsequent- 
ly, at the turn of the 20th century such 
a step backwards was taken by Ost- 
wald, Avenarius (qq.v.), Lipps, Dri- 
esch (q.v.), and some other idealist 
philosophers who tried to overcome the 
crisis in contemporary natural science 
by means of N.P. 

Natural Science, science of nature, 
the natural sciences taken as a whole; 
one of the three basic divisions of 
human knowledge (the other two be- 
ing the social sciences and the sciences 
concerned with thought). N.S. forms 
the theoretical basis of industrial and 
agricultural technology and of medi- 
cine; it is the scientific foundation of 
philosophical materialism and the di- 
alectical comprehension of nature. It 
studies the various forms of matter 
and forms of their motion, how they 
operate and manifest themselves in 
nature, their connections and laws, 
and the basic forms of being. N.S. 
may be either empirical or theoretical 
depending on its content, methods of 
investigation and approach; it may 
also be either non-organic, i.e., study- 
ing forms of motion in inanimate 
nature (the mechanical, physical, and 
chemical, etc., forms of motion), or 
organic, where the subject studied 
are the phenomena of life (biological 
form of motion). These subdivisions 
indicate the structure of N.S. (the 
classification of the sciences, q.v.). 
Since it helps to provide a natural 
scientific or “physical” picture of the 
world, N.S. is closely associated with 
philosophy, mainly with its theoreti- 
cal part (concepts, categories, laws, 
theories, hypotheses) and also with 
the elaboration of devices and methods 


— 308 — 


Naturalism 


of scientific research; it has a direct 
influence on the development of philos- 
ophy and determines changes in the 
forms of materialism brought about 
by great scientific discoveries. On the 
other hand, N.S. is closely linked with 
technology, with the process of produc- 
tion. Since it is the “spiritual poten- 
tial of production” (Marx), N.S. acts 
as a kind of direct productive force; 
moreover, in the process of building 
communist society this social function 
of N.S. shows itself to the full, as is 
pointed out in the Programme of the 
CPSU. In the course of its develop- 
ment N.S. has passed from the imme- 
diate contemplation of nature (among 
the ancients) through the period of 
analytical dissection (15th to 18th 
centuries), which in its absolute form 
became the metaphysical view of na- 
ture, to the synthetic reconstruction 
of nature in its universality, whole- 
ness and concreteness that has been 
achieved in the 19th-20th centuries. 
The spontaneous penetration of N.S. 
by dialectics in the 19th century was 
complicated in the 20th by the crisis 
of N.S., the causes of which were 
revealed by Lenin in his Materialism 
and Empirio-Criticism. In the same 
work Lenin indicated ways of overcom- 
ing the crisis in physics which, with its 
discovery of the uses of atomic energy 
and pioneering of the microcosm, the 
world of elementary particles, is lead- 
ing the way in contemporary N.S. and 
stimulating the development of its 
other branches—astronomy, cosmonaut- 
ics, cybernetics, chemistry, biology, 
etc. Physics in company with chemis- 
try, mathematics and cybernetics is 
helping microbiology to solve the 
theoretical and experimental task of 
biosynthesis (artificial preparation of 
living protein); it is also contributing 
to the discovery of the material nature 
of heredity and the solution of other 
important problems. 

Naturalism i. In philosophy, the 
desire to explain the development of 
society by the laws of nature (climatic 
conditions, geographical environment, 
biological and racial distinctions be- 
tween people, etc.). N. is close to an- 
thropologism (q.v.) which also fails to 





Naturalism, Ethical 


— 309 — 


Nature 





see the specific laws governing social 
life. While in the 17th and 18th cen- 
turies N. played a positive part in the 
struggle against spiritualism (q.v.); 
subsequently, it degenerated into a 
reactionary idealist theory. It includ- 
ed Malthusianism (q.v.), Spencer’s 
organic theory of society (q.v.), and 
the theory of Social-Darwinism (q.v.). 
2. A system of aesthetic views on art 
and a corresponding artistic method 
which took shape in the second half 
of the 19th century. Positivism (q.v.) 
tepresented by Comte (q.v.), Spencer, 
H. A. Taine, and others, formed the 
philosophical foundation of N. N. does 
not try to fathom the essential, deep- 
going processes of reality and reduces 
artistic portrayal to copying acciden- 
tal, singular objects and phenomena. 
The contradictory nature of the aesthet- 
ic concept of N. was strikingly dis- 
played in the works of Emile Zola, 
which often clashed with his theoreti- 
cal views (Le Roman expérimental, 
1880; Le Naturalisme au théâtre, 1881) 
on the identity of social and biologi- 
cal phenomena, the independence of 
art from politics and morality, etc. 
Concentration on the physiological 
side of life, striving for primitive en- 
tertainment, sentimentality and melo- 
drama are characteristic features of 
modern naturalistic art expressed in 
diverse genres: in pulp novels and com- 
ics, gangster films, detective stories, 
pornographic drawings and naturalis- 
tic painting, in jazz rhythms of rock ’n’ 
rolls and twists. The ideas of passiv- 
ity, renunciation of social struggle, 
indifference to the joys and suffering 
of the people, concentration on the 
base sides of human life, preached 
(directly or indirectly) by proponents 
of N., bring them close to the for- 
malists, e.g., surrealists. 

Naturalism, Ethical, a general name 
given to theories (see Hedonism, Evo- 
lutionary Ethics, and others) united by 
the principle that the concept of good 
(q.v.) is determined through some kind 
of “natural”, i.e., “extra-moral” con- 
cept, for example, pleasure, biological 
evolution, etc. (logical positivists and 
intuitionists consider this a “naturalis- 
tic mistake”), Marxism has proved 


that from naturalistic positions it is 
impossible to give a consistently ma- 
terialistic account of the essence of 
moral categories or to trace the origin 
of morality. In the 1940s and 1950s 
naturalism became a trend whose pro- 
ponents defended some scientific prin- 
ciples of ethics against the frankly 
idealist criticism of the neo-positivists 
and intuitionists. These principles are: 
(1) moral good is objective, it is con- 
nected with the social system, the 
interests and requirements of people; 
(2) the concept of good can be deter- 
mined and moral standards objectively 
justified; (3) moral judgements have 
objective importance, their truth can 
be verified and demonstrated; (4) ethics 
and moral principles can be scientific 
if they are based on data of other so- 
cial sciences. The criticism levelled by 
naturalists against idealism in ethics 
and the elements of materialism con- 
tained in their theories are progressive 
on the whole. Mention should be made 
of the works of Mario Bunge (Argenti- 
na) and Abraham Edel (USA). 
Nature 1. The world surrounding 
us in the endless diversity of its mani- 
festations. N. is the objective reality 
(q.v.) existing outside consciousness 
and independently of it. It has neither 
beginning nor end, it is endless in 
time and space, and it is in a constant 
state of movement and change. Accord- 
ing to the laws of its development, 
inorganic N. engenders organic N. (see 
Biosphere), and the latter prepares all 
the necessary biological conditions for 
the appearance of man. However, the 
decisive factor in the process of the 
appearance of man is the formation 
of society. The emergence of society 
considerably changes N. itself (see Noo- 
sphere). Cognising the objective laws 
of N., acting on it by means of spe- 
cially created tools and implements of 
labour, -people utilise the substances 
and energy of N. for creating the mate- 
rial wealth necessary for mankind. 
In this way the natural habitat is 
supplemented by an artificial one, the 
so-called “second nature”, i.e., the 
sum total of things not found in nature 
in ready form and created in the proc- 
ess of social production. That is why 








Nebular Hypothesis 


man’s attitude towards N. always 
bears a social character and reflects 
a definite stage in the development 
of the productive forces and the 
relations of production. This applies 
entirely to the theoretical attitude of 
man to N» But, in acquiring greater 
power over N., in actively reforming 
it, people do not cease to belong to it, 
to be an integral part of it. 2. The true 
essence, the internal regularity, the 
specific character of objects and phe- 
nomena (e.g., the N. of the state, the 
N. of psychology, etc.). 

Nebular Hypothesis, a cosmogonic 
hypothesis, according to which the 
solar system (or celestial bodies in gen- 
eral) arose from a rarefied nebula. 
The term was applied to the hypothe- 
sis voiced by Laplace, who assumed 
that planets arose from an incandescent 
gas nebula, and more seldom to the 
hypothesis of Kant (q.v.), who assumed 
that planets originated from a dust 
nebula; at times it is also applied to 
modern hypotheses. The idea underly- 
ing the N.H., the natural origination 
of cosmic bodies from other forms of 
cosmic substance (gas, dust), has not 
lost its importance to this day. 

Necessity and Chance, philosophi- 
cal categories which reflect two kinds of 
objective connections in the material 
world. N. follows from the inner es- 
sence of phenomena and denotes their 
regularity, order, and structure. N. 
is that which necessarily must occur 
in the given conditions. On the con- 
trary, C. is rooted not in the essence 
of phenomena, but in the influence of 
other phenomena on the given phenom- 
enon; C. might or might not occur. 
The dialectical materialist understand- 
ing of the relationship of N. & C. stands 
in contrast to two other concepts, one 
of which denies N. and reduces every- 
thing to C., to a chance concurrence of 
circumstances, while the second, on 
the contrary, denies all C. whatsoever 
and reduces it to N. The first concept 
found its expression in numerous sub- 
jective idealist theories (e.g., Naro- 
dism, q.v., in Russia). Both Laplacian 
determinism (q.v.) and religious fa- 
talism (q.v.) adhered to the second con- 
cept. But fatalism, considering every 


— 310 — 


Necessity and Chance 


chance deviation from the norm as 
eternally necessary, as the fundamen- 
tal law of nature, actually did not 
raise C. to the level of N.; on the con- 
trary, it reduced N. to the level of C. 
Hegel (q.v.) was the first to overcome 
both metaphysical extremes from ideal- 
ist positions. But only dialectical 
materialism provided a scientific un- 
derstanding of the essence and rela- 
tionship of N. & C. Because of the uni- 
versal interconnection and interpene- 
tration of all phenomena, every phe- 
nomenon can be regarded as being in 
an essential or inessential relation to 
any other phenomenon and, therefore, 
in each phenomenon or complex of 
phenomena, in each process, it is al- 
ways possible to single out the essen- 
tial (necessary) and inessential (chance) 
properties. N. & C. are dialectical 
opposites which are mutually connect- 
ed and do not exist without each other. 
In view of the material unity of the 
world, each event has its cause and is 
part of the universal causal connection, 
N. is an expression of this connection 
owing to which N. is inseparable from 
the universal, is “universal in being” 
and constitutes an absolute, universal 
connection. Each phenomenon emerges 
by virtue of internal N., but the emer- 
gence of this phenomenon is associated 
with a plurality of external conditions 
which, because of their specific nature 
and infinite diversity, serve as a source 
of C., of accidental features and as- 
pects of the given phenomenon. Any phe- 
nomenon is inconceivable both without 
its‘ internal N. and also without its 
external “chance” prerequisites. That 
is why internal N. is inevitably supple- 
mented by external C. The latter has 
N. as its basis, is a form of its mani- 
festation. Behind chance there is al- 
ways N. which determines the course 
of development in nature and society. 
“But where on the surface accident 
holds sway, there actually it is always 
governed by inner, hidden laws and 
it is only a matter of discovering these 
laws.” (Marx, Engels, Selected Works, 
Vol. II, p. 391.) The dialectical ma- 
terialist understanding of the rela- 
tionship of N. & C. makes it possible to 
trace the causal, law-governed natural 








Negation 


chain of phenomena. Thereby this 
understanding corresponds to the task 
of science to reveal the necessity of 
phenomena behind chance connec- 
tions. Science, including dialectical ma- 
terialism, is the enemy of fundamental 
unknowability. Science, Marx said, 
ends where the necessary connection 
loses its force. However intricate a 
given phenomenon (e.g., the develop- 
ment of society), however numerous 
the seeming chances on which it de- 
pends, it is ultimately governed by 
objective laws, by objective N. Dia- 
lectical materialism helps to see not 
only the connection but also the in- 
terpenetration of N. & C. Darwin's 
theory of the evolution of the organic 
world is based on consideration of 
such interpenetration., Marx revealed 
this important aspect of the dialectics 
of N. & C. in his teaching on the de- 
velopment of value forms. Contempo- 
rary natural science enriches the dia- 
lectical materialist conclusions con- 
cerning the essence of N. & C. and 
their connections (see Laws, Statisti- 
cal and Dynamic). 

Negation 1. In materialist dialec- 
tics N. is regarded as a necessary mo- 
ment of development, a condition for 
qualitative change of things (see Nega- 
tion of the Negation, Law of). 2. A 
logical operation with the help of 
which a new proposition is inferred 
from a given proposition (so-called 
negation of the initial proposition). 
If the initial proposition was true, its 
N. is faise, and vice versa. The N. oper- 
ation is usually performed by intro- 
ducing the particle “not” and at times 
with the help of turns like “it is wrong”, 
“it is false”. Propositions resulting 
from a N. operation are usually desig- 
nated in logic through A, JA or ~ A. 
N. is one of the main operations in 
propositional calculus (q.v.) and func- 
tional calculus (q.v.). 

Negation of the Negation, Law of, 
a basic law of dialectics first formulat- 
ed and interpreted from idealist posi- 
tions by Hegel (q.v.). L.N.N. ex- 
presses continuity of development, the 
connection of the new and the old 
in the process of the law-gov- 
erned replacement of some qualitative 


— 3il — 


Negation of Negation 


changes by others, relative repetition, 
at a higher stage of development, of 
some properties of the lower stage. 
It also proves the progressive character 
of development and determines the 
tendency, the chief trend of the general 
course of development. This law is 
organically bound up with the law of 
the unity and conflict of opposites (see 
Unity and Conflict of Opposites, Law 
of), inasmuch as negation of the old 
by the new in the process of develop- 
ment is nothing else than the solving 
of contradictions. The specific fea- 
tures of the manifestation and operation 
of L.N.N. are determined by the es- 
sence of the object negated, the nature 
of its contradictions and the concrete 
historical conditions. Dialectical ne- 
gation is an objective moment, the 
motive element of every development. 
The relationship of the old and the 
new in development, the character of 
the negation of the old are explained 
in directly opposed ways by metaphys- 
ics and by materialist dialectics. 
Metaphysical negation signifies the 
simple discarding, destruction of the 
old. The other metaphysical extreme 
is the view that development proceeds 
along a closed circle, that development 
is merely a simple return to the old. 
According to materialist dialectics, 
negation is a condition, a moment 
of development, retaining in the old 
everything which is positive and nec- 
essary for further advance. Without 
this there would be no continuity 
in development. At the same time 
breaks in continuity, too, are char- 
acteristic of forward movement, 
because negation means a transition 
from the old to the new, the birth of 
a qualitatively new phenomenon. Ne- 
gation of the initial point does not end 
development because the new is in 
turn subject to negation. At one stage 
in the course of development there 
occurs, as it were, a return to the 
starting point, some features and pec- 
uliarities are repeated, but on a new, 
higher basis. It is this that is expressed 
in the concept of “negation of the 
negation”. Development proceeds not 
in a straight line and not in a closed 
circle, but in an ascending line, a 








Neo-Classicism 


spiral. Transition from the lower to 
the higher follows intricate ways, is 
contradictory, passes through many 
deviations, including regressive move- 
ment at individual stages. Pointing 
to this distinction of development as 
applied to human history, Lenin wrote: 
“It is  undialectical, unscientific 
and theoretically wrong to regard the 
cause of world history as smooth and 
always in a forward direction, without 
occasional gigantic leaps back.” (Vol. 
22, p. 310.) But in general, society is 
constantly progressing. The entire course 
of world history shows how one socio- 
economic formation arises on the basis 
of negating the preceding one and in 
its turn is replaced by a more progres- 
sive one. Capitalism, which arose 
through the negation of feudalism, 
has now outlived itself and has ripened 
for revolutionary negation by a more 
progressive socio-economic formation, 
communism. The specifics of dialecti- 
cal negation in the development of 
socialist society are determined by 
the non-antagonistic nature of the 
contradictions of socialism, i.e., the 
processes of negation of the old do not 
bear the character of political revolu- 
tions, conflicts of classes, etc. During 
the transition to communism, nega- 
tion of the principles of socialism will 
proceed through their full develop- 
ment, which will prepare the condi- 
tions for their growing over into com- 
munist principles. 

Neo-Classicism, a trend in art of the 
second half of the 19th and the 20th 
centuries marked by the use of forms 
taken from some earlier styles in art 
(ancient, Renaissance, classicism). N. 
utilises the images and subjects of 
classical art for idealising capitalist 
reality and glossing over its contradic- 
tions. A reversion of N. to the past 
and its worship of the traditional stand- 
ards of life and art have been utilised 
by bourgeois ideologists to consolidate 
their ideological and aesthetic posi- 
tions. The Italian painter G. Severeni 
(born 1883) is the theoretician of N. 
In his book Du Cubisme au Classicisme 
he put forward a programme of “aesthet- 
ics of harmony of numbers and the 
dividers”. Divorcement from life, un- 


— 312 — 


Neo-Darwinism 


willingness to reflect contemporary 
ideas and subjects, a predilection for 
stylisation, and other strictly formal- 
istic methods are characteristic of the 
work of such painters and sculptors as 
Pierre Puvis de Chavannes and M. De- 
nis (France), A. Hildebrand and H. Ma- 
rées (Germany), and others. N. became 
the official art trend in Italy and Ger- 
many during the period of the fascist 
dictatorship. 

Neo-Darwinism, a mechanistic trend 
in the doctrine of evolution founded 
by the German biologist A. Weismann 
(1834-1914). The pivot of his doctrine 
is the idea of continuity of the “germ- 
plasma”. He differentiated in the organ- 
ism the sexual “germs” (plasma) and 
the organic elements (soma). The lat- 
ter, according to Weismann, change 
under the influence of the environment 
and are of a correlational character, 
i.e., are interconnected with the other 
parts of the organism. But these changes 
are not heritable and, consequently, 
play no part in the process of the his- 
torical development of organisms. At 
the same time accidental influences 
of external factors may cause stable 
hereditary changes in the germ-plas- 
ma, where selection takes place at the 
level of individual germs (material par- 
ticles or “determinants”). Weismann 
thus distorted Darwin’s principle of 
natural selection in the spirit of auto- 
genesis (q.v.), applying this principle 
to the processes within the organism. 
Weismann’s followers (the Dutch biol- 
ogist H. de Vries, the Swedish scien- 
tist Johannsen, and others) drew ideal- 
ist conclusions from his theories, tak- 
ing to positions of anti-Darwinism. 
At the same time, at a definite stage 
in the development of biology, the 
works of some Neo-Darwinists served 
as a working hypothesis, facilitating 
the study of the laws of heredity. 
At present molecules of nuclear nucle- 
onic acids are regarded in biology as 
the material carriers of heredity (q.v.). 
As for the ideas of the Neo-Darwinists, 
they are supported in a somewhat modi- 
fied form by a number of biologists 
(J. Huxley in Britain, J. Simpson in 
the United States, and others). Mod- 
ern Neo-Darwinists in contrast to 








Neo-Hegelianism 


— 313 — 


Neo-Kantianism 





various neo-vitalist and teleological 
concepts are trying to give a causal 
explanation to the processes of biolog- 
ical evolution. Philosophically, these 
attempts, however, do not go beyond 
the bounds of metaphysical materialism. 

Neo-Hegelianism, an idealistic phil- 
osophical trend which arose in Brit- 
ain and the United States in the sec- 
ond half of the 19th century as a reac- 
tion to natural historical materialism 
(q.v.) and positivism (q.v.) and for 
the defence of religion and specutative 
philosophy, q.v. (Green, Bradley, 
Royce, M’Taggart, and others). At the 
turn of the century N. assumed an 
anti-Marxist trend and spread in Italy 
(see Croce, Gentile), in Russia (A.I. Ily- 
in and others) and Holland (G. Bol- 
land). German N. (Kroner, Glockner, 
Litt) came to the fore on the eve of, 
and after, the Ist World War. After 
the 2nd World War N. spread in France, 
largely merging with existentialism, 
q.v. (J. Wahl, J. Hyppolite, q.v., 
Kozhev). N. in general renounces dia- 
lectics or limits its application only 
to the sphere of consciousness, and ir- 
rationally interprets Hegel (q.v.) in 
the spirit of philosophy of life (q.v.). 
A solution of the problem of contra- 
diction in N. varies from “reconcilia- 
tion” (Bradley, Haering) to denial of 
any possibility of resolving contra- 
dictions (Wahl, Croce). In sociology, N. 
utilises the reactionary aspects of He- 
gelian philosophy of the spirit for 
“justifying” the imperialist state (Bo- 
sanquet) and also the fascist “corporate 
state” (Gentile, Haering) as a means 
of reconciling classes in society. In 
1930, a N. centre was set up under 
the name of International Hegelian 
Union. 

Neo-Impressionism, or Pointillism, 
or Divisionism, an artistic trend in 
France in the 1880s resulting from 
one-sided development of some methods 
of impressionism (q.v.). G. Seurat 
(1859-91), P. Signac (1863-1935), and 
other artists who joined them (C. and 
L. Pissaro, H. Cross, M. Luce, T. van 
Rysselberghe, G. Previati), turned the 
formal methods, supposedly discovered 
on the basis of the knowledge of the 
optical laws of light, into an aim in 





itself. These methods consisted in the 
mechanical division of shades into 
basic pure colours and laying them 
evenly on the canvas in small points 
or strokes of pure colour, which merged 
into a whole when viewed from a defi- 
nite distance. N. is marked by sub- 
jectivism in the selection of objects 
for painting, which often serve merely 
as a pretext for constructing pre-con- 
ceived colour combinations, for a me- 
chanical “arrangement” of colour 
patches usually lacking definiteness 
and precision of form. 
Neo-Kantianism, an idealist trend 
which sprang up in Germany in the 
second half of the 19th century under 
the slogan “Back to Kant!” (O. Lieb- 
mann, F. Lange). It also spread in 
France (Ch. Renouvier, Amlen), Italy 
(C. Cantoni, Tocco) and Russia (see 
Vvedensky, Chelpanov, and “Legal 
Marxism”). N. reproduces and develops 
the idealist and metaphysical elements 
in the philosophy of Kant (q.v.), ignor- 
ing its materialist and dialectical 
elements. The thing-in-itself (q. v.) is 
either discarded or interpreted in a 
subjective idealist way as an “extreme” 
concept. N. received full expres- 
sion in two German schools: the Mar- 
burg school, q.v. (Cohen, q.v., P.G. Na- 
torp, Cassirer, q.v.) and the Freiburg, 
or Baden school, q.v. (Windelband, 
q.v., Rickert, q.v.). The former paid 
particular attention to an idealist in- 
terpretation of the objective, scientific 
concepts and to philosophical catego- 
ries, regarding them as logical con- 
structions. The second school focussed 
attention on justifying the antithesis 
of the natural and the social sciences 
on the basis of the Kantian doctrine 
of practical and theoretical reason and 
on striving to demonstrate the impos- 
sibility of scientific cognition of so- 
cial phenomena. N. was utilised by 
revisionism in its struggle against 
Marxism and practically became the 
official philosophical dogma of oppor- 
tunists in the Second International 
(Bernstein, q.v., M. Adler, K. Vorlan- 
der). Lenin and Plekhanov (qq.v.) 
struck crushing blows at Neo-Kantian 
revisionism. At present N. enjoys in- 
fluence in some trends of axiology 





Neo-Lamarckism 


(q.v.) and in a special branch of 
Kantianism (initiated by Hugo de Vries) 
advocated by W. Kraft. 
Neo-Lamarckism, an unscientific 
trend in the theory of evolution which 
became widespread at the end of the 
19th century. The characteristics of 
N. are an explanation of evolution only 
as a result of physiological processes, 
denial of the creative role of selection, 
recognition of primary purposefulness 
of organisms. One of the varieties of 
N. was so-called mechanical Lamarck- 
ism. It was most consistently elab- 
orated by Spencer (q.v.) in his equi- 
librium theory, according to which the 
interaction of the organism and the 
environment led to their equilibrium. 
Evolution, on the other hand, is a 
result of the continuous disturbance 
of this equilibrium. The inability of 
mechanistic Lamarckists to give a 
scientific explanation of the relative 
purposefulness of organisms led them 
to idealism. So-called Psycho-Lamarck- 
ism, founded by the paleontologist 
E. Cope (1840-1907), is an extreme 
idealist variety of N. According to 
Psycho-Lamarckism, the source of evo- 
lution lies in primitive forms of con- 
sciousness and will, in some kind 
of “creative principle” interpreted in 
the spirit of vitalism (q.v.). 
Neo-Platonism, a reactionary mystic 
philosophy in the epoch of the decline 
of the Roman Empire (3rd-6th cen- 
turies). Plato’s (q.v.) idealist theory 
of ideas assumed the form of a doctrine 
of mystic emanation of the material 
world from the spiritual primary ele- 
ment. Matter is only the lowest link in 
the hierarchy of the Universe, an ema- 
nation of the “world soul”, over which 
rises the “spirit” and still higher the 
“prime essence” or the “One”. The 
highest stage of philosophy is attained 
not through experience and reason, 
but through mystic ecstasy. In this 
philosophy, idealism degenarated into 
theosophy (q.v.). The Neo-Platonic 
school first arose in Egypt, in Alexan- 
dria (Ammonius Saccas and later Hy- 
patia). Plotinus (q.v.) founded a Neo- 
Platonic school in Rome. The school 
of Jamblicus (died c. 330) existed in 
Syria and elements of Pythagorean- 


— 314 — 


Neo-Positivism 


ism were strong in it. The last Neo- 
Platonic school was organised by 
Proclus (q.v.) in Athens and existed 
until 529. N. originally was hostile 
to Christianity and contained numer- 
ous elements of Oriental magic and 
mythology.. Nevertheless it exerted a 
great influence on Christian patristics 
(q.v.) and on the development of phi- 
losophy in feudal society both in Chris- 
tian and Moslem countries. 
Neo-Positivism, a subjective idealist 
trend of philosophy in the 20th cen- 
tury, the contemporary form of positiv- 
ism (q.v.). According to N., knowledge 
of reality is given only in everyday 
or concrete scientific thinking, while 
philosophy is possible only as an anal- 
ysis of language, in which the results 
of these forms of thinking are ex- 
pressed (see Philosophy, Analytical). 
Philosophical analysis, in the opinion 
of neo-positivists, does not extend 
to objectively real things, it must be 
limited only to the “given”, ie., 
direct experience or language. The 
extreme, consistent forms of neo-pos- 
itivism, for example, the early neo- 
positivist Vienna circle (q.v.), by limit- 
ing “the given” to individual emotions, 
arrived directly at solipsism (q.v.). 
Logical positivism (q.v.) is the most 
influential variety of N. The British 
analytical philosophers, followers of 
Moore, q.v. (Stebbing, Wisdom) ad- 
here to the general platform of N. Some 
members of the Lvov-Warsaw logical 
school (K. Aidukewicz) were also neo- 
positivists. An ideological and scien- 
tific organisational merger of various 
groups and individual philosophers 
who adhered to neo-positivist views 
took place in the 1930s. These were 
the Austro-German logical positivists 
of the Vienna circle (Carnap, q.v., 
M. Schlick, q.v., O. Neurath) and the 
Berlin Society of Scientific Philosophy 
(H. Reichenbach, q.v., C. Hempel), 
the British analysists, a number of 
Americans of the “philosophy of sci- 
ence” who adhered to the positivist 
pragmatic trend (E. Nagel, H. Mar- 
genau, Morris, W. Quine, Bridgman, 
q.v., and others), the Uppsala school 
in Sweden, the Minster logical group 
in Germany headed by Scholz, and 





Neo-Realism 


others. Since then international 
congresses have been regularly held and 
the ideas of N. are widely advocated 
in the press. Calling itself “scientific 
empiricism”, N. is exerting influence 
on scientific circles. Idealist concepts 
in interpreting the discoveries of con- 
temporary science are shaped under 
its influence. Mention should be made, 
however, of the positive significance 
of concrete results of studies in formal 
logic and methodology of science 
achieved both by the neo-positivists 
themselves and by scientists who are 
not neo-positivists but participate in 
congresses and discussions they arrange 
and periodicals they issue. Since the 
end of the 1930s the United States 
has become the main centre of N. At 
present this philosophy is represented 
above all by logical empiricism (q.v.). 
Linguistic philosophy (q.v.) is a spe- 
cific variety of N. in Britain. Ayer 
(q.v.) and K. Popper are representa- 
tives of N. in Britain. Contemporary 
N. is undergoing a deep ideological 
crisis, displayed in its inability to 
solve basic philosophical problems, in 
their avoidance, and concentration on 
concrete logical studies. 

Neo-Realism, a trend in Anglo- 
American philosophy of the 20th cen- 
tury. Its main representatives are Moore 
and Russell (qq.v.) in the early period 
of his activity, and others. The neo- 
realistic theory of knowledge is based 
on the idea of the “immanence of the 
independent”, recognition that the 
cognised thing can directly enter the 
mind, but at the same time does not 
depend on knowledge as regards its 
existence and nature. One of the names 
given by N. to the theory of knowl- 
edge, epistemological monism, is con- 
nected with the Machist concept of 
“neutral elements” of experience and 
the “functional” difference between the 
physical and the psychical. In ontol- 
ogy, N. recognises that general con- 
cepts which possess “ideal existence” 
are real and that things are independ- 
ent of relations into which they enter 
(theory of external relations). Episte- 
mologically, the neo-realistic theory 
of knowledge results from turning 
into an absolute the fact that the con- 


— 315 — 


Neo-Slavophiles 


tent of knowledge is independent of 
the process of cognition; ontology— 
from divorcing the universal from 
individual things and also from the 
ontologisation of logical connections 
and concepts as results of the cognitive 
process. N. also has a “cosmologic” 
trend, which develops, on the basis 
of an idealistically understood theory 
of development, all-embracing phil- 
osophical systems—Alexander’s theory 
of emergent evolution (q.v.), White- 
head’s (q.v.) philosophy of the process, 
and holism (q.v.) of Jan Christian 
Smuts. 

Neo-Slavophiles, followers of the 
early Slavophiles (q.v.) in the second 
half of the 19th century; hence also 
called “late Slavophiles”. N. Y. Da- 
nilevsky (1822-85), K. N. Leontyev 
(1831-91), and N. N. Strakhov (1828- 
96) were the main exponents of N. 
The socio-political views of the N. 
were extremely reactionary: they de- 
nied the law-governed development 
of history, opposed Russia to Europe, 
and spoke about a special road of 
Slavdom (associating this with the 
ideas of religion, autocracy, etc.), des- 
tined to “save” mankind from doom. 
They saw in the monarchy a force 
capable of resisting the destructive 
influence of the West on the countries 
of the East. (Danilevsky, Rossiya i 
Evropa {Russia and Europe), 1869; 
Leontyev, Vostok, Rossiya i slavyan- 
stvo [The East, Russia, and Slavdom], 
2 vols., 1885-86; Strakhov, Borba s 
zapadom v nashei literature [Struggle 
Against the West in Our Literature}, 
3 vols., 1882-96, and others.) Deny- 
ing class contradictions in Russian 
society, the N. came out against the 
ideology of the revolutionary demo- 
crats, against socialism. Strakhov (to- 
gether with Dostoyevsky, q.v., 
A. F. Pisemsky, A. A. Grigoryev, 
and others) elaborated the unscientific 
theory of rapprochement between the 
people (the “soil”) and the “upper 
classes” (the so-called soil theory). 
N. denied the scientific value of Dar- 
winism; in philosophy they adhered 
to religious idealist positions. The ide- 
ology of N. reflected the interests of 
the exploiting classes. 








Neo-Thomism 


Neo-Thomism, the official philosophi- 
cal doctrine of the Catholic Church 
based on the teaching of Thomas 
Aquinas (q.v.). An encyclical of Pope 
Leo XIII (1879) recognised N. the 
only true philosophy conforming to 
the Christian dogmas. In 1889, a higher 
institute of philosophy was established 
in Louvain, Belgium. Now it is the 
international centre of N. This doc- 
trine is widespread in countries with 
a large number of Catholics (France, 
Italy, West Germany, the United 
States, and Latin American countries). 
Outstanding Neo-Thomists are Mari- 
tain (q.v.) and E. Gilson (France), 
de Raeymeker (Belgium), Lotze de 
Fries (West Germany), G. Wetter 
(Austria), Bochensky (qq.v.). Neo-Thom- 
ist philosophy serves as the ideolog- 
ical mainstay of clericalism (q.v.). 
Neo-Thomists hold leading positions 
among the ideologists of anti-com- 
munism (q.v.). The scholastic princi- 
ple: “philosophy is the handmaiden of 
theology” is the basis of N. N. is a 
theological form of contemporary ob- 
jective idealism. Neo-Thomists regard 
“pure being”, understood as the spir- 
itual, divine prime element, as the 
highest reality. The material world 
is declared secondary and derivative. 
Neo-Thomists widely utilise as rational 
proof of religious dogmas the falsified 
Aristotelian categories of form and 
matter, potential, and action (possibil- 
ity and reality) and also the categories 
of existence and essence. The Neo- 
Thomist speculative constructions re- 
sult in recognising God as the prime 
cause of being and the prime founda- 
tion of all philosophical categories. 
Falsification of contemporary natural 
scientific theories holds a big place 
in N. Taken as a whole, the philos- 
ophy of N. is a widely ramified system 
of metaphysics (q.v.), whose main 
parts are ontology, epistemology, and 
natural philosophy. In the presenta- 
tion of problems and terminology Neo- 
Thomist metaphysics differs notice- 
ably from medieval Thomism (q.v.). 
It eclectically combines the basic 
elements of the doctrine of Thomas 
Aquinas (the principle of harmony 
of faith and reason, and others) with 


— 316 — 


Newton 


propositions of the 18th and 19th 
centuries idealist systems of Kant, 
Schelling, and Hegel (qq.v.). In their 
views of the historical process, Neo- 
Thomists adhere to providentialism. 
Neo-Thomist sociology is based on the 
reactionary utopian idea of a “third” 
society, more progressive and just than 
capitalism and socialism, in which 
the church will rule. 

New and Old, The, two opposite 
forces and tendencies, whose struggle, 
especially in society, is the driving 
force of development. Everything that 
drives, directs development in defi- 
nite historical conditions is N., while 
everything that hampers and prevents 
it is O. In the process of development, 
the N. & O. are in dialectical inter- 
connection. The N. grows out of the 
O., is contained in it in embryo; every- 
thing positive and valuable in the 
O. remains in the N. The emergence 
of the N. is always a leap, the end of 
all contradictions and the beginning 
of new ones. But the appearance of 
the qualitatively new as such is pre- 
pared in the process of development 
of the contradictions of the O. At first 
the O. is stronger than the N. But the 
N. is irrepressible, in one way or anoth- 
er it ultimately ousts the O. The 
N. carries within itself fresh contradic- 
tions and thereby the embryos of fur- 
ther development. At the next stage 
of development the N. as a whole or 
its separate aspects and features grow 
old. Not everything that arises is 
genuinely N., but only that which 
manifests itself as a more progressive 
form facilitating further development. 
The N. displays itself as such in strug- 
gle, in victory over the O., in de- 
velopment. The appearance of the N. 
is an objective process and does not 
depend on subjective arbitrary will. 
But in socialist society the struggle 
of the O. and the N., the moribund 
and the incipient, the backward and 


progressive becomes purposeful and 
planned. 
Newton, Isaac (1643-1727), English 


physicist, founder of classical mechan- 
ics, who formulated the law of univer- 
sal gravitation and exerted great in- 
fluence on the development of mecha- 














Newton 


— 317 — 


Nietzsche 





nistic materialism. In 1669, became 
professor of Cambridge University and 
in 1703, President of the Royal So- 
ciety. Newton’s main work Philos- 
ophiae Naturalis Principia Mathemat- 
ica (1687) contains three laws of mo- 
tion (ław of inertia, law of proportion- 
ality of force and velocity, law of 
equality of action and counteraction), 
from which many conclusions are 
deducted, forming the foundation of 
classical mechanics and classical phys- 
ics. The Principles substantiate the 
concepts of absolute motion, related 
not to material bodies but to a void, 
absolute space and absolute time. 
From the mutual gravitation of bod- 
ies proportional to their mass and 
inversely proportional to the square 
of the distance between them, N. de- 
duced in the Principles the laws of 
motion of planets established by Kep- 
ler. The law of universal gravitation 
completed the heliocentric concept of 
the solar system and, moreover, laid 
a scientific foundation for explaining 
many processes in the entire Universe, 
including physical and chemical proc- 
esses. It became the foundation of an 
integral physical picture of the world. 
But Newton’s theory of gravitation 
encountered objections because it ad- 
mitted the influence (moreover, in- 
stantaneous) of one body on another 
without an intermediary material en- 
vironment undergoing this influence 
(see Action, Immediate and at a Dis- 
tance). In Optics N. proved that 
light when refracted is divided into 
rays of different colours, and put 
forward the corpuscular theory of 
light, the concept of light as special 
particles. In mathematics N. created 
the method of fluxions, which in the 
main coincides with the methods of 
differentiation and integration dis- 
covered in the same period by Leibniz 
(q.v.), and laid the foundation for 
an analysis of infinitesimals. Philo- 
sophically, N. adhered to positions 
recognising objective reality and the 
knowability of the world, but combined 
them with defence of religion. In N.’s 
system inertia and gravitation ex- 
plain the endless repetition of elliptical 
movements of celestial bodies but the 


“prime impulse” is attributed to God. 
N.’s theological views and interests 
and also his unwillingness to analyse 
the internal causes of the phenomena 
described (his words—hypothesis non 
fingo—1 do not make hypotheses— 
became the slogan of empiricism in 
18th century science), did not pre- 
vent his system of a uniform and exact 
explanation of nature from exerting 
great influence on the development 
of materialism, especially in Europe. 

Nietzsche, Friedrich (1844-1900), 
German idealist philosopher, fore- 
runner of the ideology of fascism; pro- 
fessor of philology in Basle, Switzer- 
land, in 1869-79. N.’s views were shaped 
in the period when capitalism entered 
the stage of imperialism and were a 
reaction of bourgeois ideology to the 
aggravation of class contradictions. 
His world outlook was pervaded with 
hatred for the “spirit of the revolu- 
tion” and the masses. Slavery, accord- 
ing to N., belongs to the “essence of 
culture”, while exploitation is “as- 
sociated with the essence of every- 
thing living”. N.’s ideas were concen- 
trated on “retarding the stream of the 
evidently inevitable revolution”. It 
is from this angle that N. reassessed 
the principles and standards of liberal 
bourgeois ideology: rationalist phi- 
losophy, traditional ethics, and the 
Christian religion. He considered that 
they weakened the will to struggle 
and were incapable of crushing the 
mounting revolutionary movement and 
frankly proposed instead of them in- 
humane and undemocratic principles. 
N. drew a sharp distinction between 
the ideology, designated to foster a 
spirit of submission among the work- 
ing people (“morality of slaves”) from 
the ideology intended to educate a 
“caste of masters” (“morality of mas- 
ters”), advocating for the latter un- 
curbed individualism in law and mor- 
ality. The philosophy of N. is volun- 
tarism (q.v.): he opposed the will to 
reason. “Struggle for existence” which 
grows over into the “will to power” 
is considered the universal driving 
force of development. N. put forward 
the myth of the “eternal return of all 
things” in opposition to the scientific 








i el Ee 


Nihilism 


theory of progress. Main works: Also 
sprach Zarathustra, 1883-91; Beyond 
Good and Evil, 1886; The Will to 
Power, 1906. 

Nihilism, absolute denial, a view- 
point rejecting any positive ideas. 
The term N. was first used by Jacobi 
(q.v.) and gained popularity thanks 
to Turgenev’s novel Fathers and Sons. 
In Russia reactionaries called the 
tevolutionary democrats nihilists, as- 
cribing to the supporters of Cherny- 
shevsky (q.v.) unconditional denial 
of all past culture. Actually, the rev- 
olutionary democrats, while rejecting 
serfdom and the bourgeois system, 
put forward their own positive pro- 
gramme with socialist ideals. Lenin 
differentiated between revolutionary 
N. as a natural negative attitude to 
reactionary social orders (Vol. 4, p. 
275) and anarchism of intellectualist 
N. (Vol. 17, p. 187). The reactionary 
essence of N. is expressed, for exam- 
ple, in the philosophy of Nietzsche, 
who proclaimed the “re-evaluation of 
values”, i.e., denial of the standards 
of morality and justice elaborated by 
human culture. 

Nominalism, a trend in medieval 
philosophy which regarded universal 
concepts only as names of individual 
objects. In contrast to medieval real- 
ism (see Realism, Medieval) nominal- 
ists asserted that only individual things 
with their individual properties really 
exist. General concepts created by 
our thoughts of these things, far from 
existing independently of things, do 
not even reflect their properties and 
qualities. N. was inseparably connect- 
ed with materialist tendencies to rec- 
ognise the primacy of things and the 
secondary character of concepts. N., 
according to Marx, was the first ex- 
pression of materialism in the Middle 
Ages. But the nominalists did not un- 
derstand that general concepts reflect 
real qualities of objectively existing 
things and that individual things are 
not separate from the general but 
contain it within themselves. Ros- 
cellin, John Duns Scotus, and William 
of Occam (qq.v.) were the most out- 
standing nominalists in the 11th-14th 
centuries. The ideas of N. were devel- 


— 318 — 


Non-Euclidean Geometries 


oped on an idealistic basis in the doc- 
trines of Berkeley and Hume (qq.v.) 
and more recently in semantic philos- 
ophy (see General Semantics). 
Non-Contradiction, a basic condi- 
tion which knowledge must fulfil, and 
according to which a proposition P and 
its negation P cannot be simultaneously 
deduced within the bounds of every 
theory. Failure to fulfil this condition 
makes a theory invalid, because it 
could prove any proposition. The 
dialectical law of the unity and con- 
flict of opposites, which demands the 
disclosure of objective contradictions 
of every development, and the demand 
of the N. of knowledge are not mutually 
exclusive. The proposition of logical 
N. applies to the method of presenting 
knowledge and implies that our 
thoughts and arguments must be consist- 
ent and free from contradictions (see 
Contradiction, Law of; Axiomatic The- 
ory, Non-Contradiction of). 
Non-Euclidean Geometries, literally 
all geometric systems differing from 
the Euclidean. Usually, however, N.G. 
are understood as the geometries of 
Lobachevsky (q.v.) and Bernard Rie- 
mann. From the viewpoint of logical 
structure, Lobachevsky’s geometry has 
the same axioms as that of Euclid (q.v.), 
except the axiom on parallels. It is 
accepted in Lobachevsky’s geometry 
that through a given point not on a 
straight line a not less than two straight 
lines can be drawn parallel to a in a 
given plane (from this it follows that 
there is an infinity of such lines). The 
theorems of this geometry differ from 
the Euclidean; the sum of angles of 
a triangle is less than two right angles 
(180°). Riemann’s N.G. assumes that 
any straight line on a plane inter- 
sects any other straight line in the 
same plane (there are no parallel 
straight lines). N.G. play an impor- 
tant part in contemporary theoretical 
physics (see Relativity, Theory of; 
Quantum Mechanics). Its discovery is 
also of philosophical significance, be- 
cause it refutes Kant’s proposition 
about the a priori nature of the con- 
cept of space and the metaphysical view 
of space as an immutable essence. 
N.G. prove the dialectical view of 





Noosphere 


— 319 — 


/ 
Number 





space as a form of existence of matter 
capable of changing together with it. 

Noosphere (Gk.—the sphere of reas- 
on), the sphere of the planet embraced 
by rational human activity, a concept 
introduced in science by Le Roy and 
developed by Vernadsky (q.v.). With 
the development of human society the 
biosphere (q.v.) naturally turns into 
N. because mankind, as it masters 
the laws of nature and develops tech- 
nology, increasingly transforms nature 
in line with its requirements. N. has a 
tendency continuously to expand as 
man penetrates outer space and 
reaches deep into the planet. 

Notion, sensory, generalised image 
of objects and phenomena of the real- 
ity, retained and reproduced in the 
consciousness without immediate ac- 
tion of the objects and phenomena 
upon the sense-organs. What objective- 
ly becomes the property of individu- 
als, thanks to their practice, takes 
shape and is retained in man’s N. Al- 
though N. is a form of individual 
sensory reflection, in man it is insep- 
arably linked up with socially-evolved 
values through the medium of language, 
is of social significance and always 
comprehended and realised. N. is a 
necessary element of consciousness, 
since it permanently connects the deno- 
tation and sense (q.v.) of the concepts 
with the images of things and at the 
same time enables our consciousness 
to operate freely with sensual images 
of objects. 

Noumenon (Gk. noumenon, that 
which is conceived, thought), a term 
signifying, in contrast to phenomenon 
(q.v.), the essence conceived only by 
reason. Plato (q.v.) first used this 
term in the Thimeo Dialogue. He un- 
derstood N. to mean reality as it exists 
in itself and an object of speculative 
knowledge. Kant examines N. in two 
aspects: being a negative, problematic 
concept (in his Critique of Pure Reason), 
N. is an object of reason, of intellec- 
tual intuition; in his Critique of Prac- 
tical Reason Kant points to the pos- 
sibility of a positive concept of N. 
as an object of non-sensuous intui- 
tion. In this sense N. is inaccessible 
to man, because the latter’s contem- 


plation, according to Kant, can be 
only sensuous. 

Nous (Gk.—mind, reason), a basic 
concept of ancient philosophy denoting 
the concentration of all existing acts 
of consciousness and thinking in gener- 
al. This concept appeared in a clear 
form for the first time in the philos- 
ophy of Anaxagoras (q.v.) where it 
is treated as the principle shaping 
and ordering formless matter. This 
concept was given an idealist inter- 
pretation by Plato (q.v.) and especially 
Aristotle (q.v.) who considered it the 
form of all forms in a state of eternal 
self-contemplation. This concept ac- 
quired great importance with the Neo- 
Platonists who, on the ground of Aris- 
totelianism, treated it as a special 
kind of supersensory being which im- 
parts meaning and definite form to 
the world. Materialists also used this 
concept. Democritus (q.v.) understood 
N. as fire in a spherical shape. Thales 
(q.v.) also attached cosmological im- 
portance to N. Apparently, with an- 
cient materialists N. is the sum total 
of the laws of nature or their source 
which they conceived in a sensory- 
material form. In epistemology De- 
mocritus sharply contrasted N. as 
the principle of precision to hazy 
sensations, which introduce confusion 
and disorder in knowledge. Ancient 
N. is always extra-personal and even 
impersonal in contrast to medieval | 
doctrines which found a personal ele- 
ment in it. 

Number, one of the main concepts 
in mathematics; it serves to designate 
the quantitative definiteness of ob- 
jects and processes. Originally, the 
concept “N.” arose as an immediate 
abstraction from the properties of the 
aggregate of objects people encoun- 
tered with in their daily practical 
activity. The first stage in abstraction 
was the concept of the natural number 
(i, 2, 3, and so on). In the process 
of development of science and practical 
activity, fractions, negative numbers, 
and the zero appeared. As mathematics 
developed there appeared complex num- 
bers (at first in the 16th century and 
finally in the 19th century) and their 
generalisations (hypercomplex num- 











Nyaya 


bers and others in the 19th and 20th 
centuries), In the history of philos- 
ophy, the concept “N.” was the object 
of various mystical speculations (for 
example, in the Plato, Pythagorean, 
and other schools). 

Nyaya, an orthodox idealist system 
of Indian philosophy. Logic and epis- 
temology played a particularly big part 
in the doctrine of N. The origin of N. 
is associated with the name of the an- 
cient mythical sage Gotama. Nydya 
sitras were recorded in the second 
century A.D. According to the doctrine 
of N., a material universe exists con- 
sisting of atoms, the combinations of 
which form all objects. In addition, 
a countless number of souls exist in 
the Universe. They can be either in 


— 320 — 


Nydya 


a free state or bound with the material 
atoms. The supreme spirit or God 
Ishwara is not the creator of the souls 
and atoms, but of the combinations 
of atoms, and links the souls with 
the atoms or releases the souls from 
the atoms. A syllogism theory, differ- 
ent from that of the ancient Greeks, 
was developed in India for the first 
time in N. The five members of the 
syllogism are premiss, proof, illustra- 
tion, application of proof, and conclu- 
sion. N. recognises four modes of knowl- 
edge: perception, inference, compari- 
son, and testimony of other people 
and books. N. also elaborated a de- 
tailed classification of the main cate- 
gories of knowledge (padarth) and a 
classification of objects of knowledge. 





O 


Objectification and Deobjectification, 
terms which designate characteristic 
distinctions of human labour. O. 
means the creation of a definite 
object by the passage of human active 
forces and capabilities from a form of 
motion to the form of an object; deob- 
jectification means the transition of 
an object from its own sphere into 
the sphere and form of human activity, 
i.e., the use of an object in the process 
of Jabour. These concepts were applied 
in Hegel’s (q.v.) philosophy to the 
extent that he “grasped the essence of la- 
bour” (Marx). But Hegel (q.v.) ideal- 
istically reduced man’s labour activ- 
ity solely to abstract spiritual labour, 
to thinking, and identified O. with 
alienation (q.v.). These concepts have 
a fundamentally different meaning in 
the description of labour given in 
Marx’s early works. Examining O. 
and D. in their unity as necessary as- 
pects of labour activity, Marx revealed 
the place of labour in man’s life, 
the fact that by his labour man actively 
remakes, humanises, the objective 
world (as a result of O., which ex- 
presses the active side of labour). At the 
same time man depends on the objec- 
tive world, utilising it in his activity 
and co-ordinating this activity with 
objective laws (as a result of D., which 
expresses the dependence of man on 
the object). All this enabled Marx 
scientifically to characterise the proc- 
ess of labour, to open a way to the 
dialectical materialist understanding 
of the relationship between the subject 
and the object and to solve problems 
of the theory of knowledge from posi- 
tions of experience. One of the aspects 
of O. and D.—description of the la- 
bour process from the viewpoint of 


21-1682 


the interaction of human activity with 
its object and product—is preserved 
in developed Marxism and is reflected 
in terminology (e.g., in Capital). 
Objective, pertaining to an object 
or determined by it. As applied to 
real objects, this concept means that 
objects, their properties and relations, 
exist outside and independent of man. 
As applied to ideas, concepts or judge- 
ments, it indicates the source of 
our knowledge, its material basis. 
Subjective dialectics reflects objective 
dialectics. Recognition of objective 
truth (q.v.) underlies the materialist 
theory of knowledge. Proof of objective 
significance is obtained by comparing 
the idea or theory with the object of 
thought in the process of practical use 
of the object or of changing reality 
in conformity with the idea or theory. 
Objective and Subjective Factors 
of History, two kinds of conditions 
of social development. O.F. are con- 
ditions which are independent of peo- 
ple and determine the direction, the 
bounds of their activity. Such, for 
example, are natural conditions, a 
given level of production, the histor- 
ically urgent tasks and requirements 
of material, political, and spiritual de- 
velopment. S.F. are the activity of 
the masses, classes, parties, states, 
and individuals; their consciousness, 
will, ability to act, etc. O.F. always 
play a determining part, but their 
action is manifested only through 
the operation of S.F. The latter can 
play a decisive role only when the 
objective conditions for them have 
been prepared. The influence of S.F. 
on social development rises with the 
transition from one socio-economic 
formation to another, more progressive 





A 


Ta 


SF de 


ence a Saas 





en | ae 


se 


Sere 


ee oe een 


Fa 








Objective Idea 


formation. The importance of S.F. 
particularly increases in socialist so- 
ciety when, for the first time in his- 
tory, the possibility is created for 
planned development in all spheres of so- 
cial life and the mass of the people 
are drawn into the building of social- 
ism and communism. 

Objective Idea, the highest generic 
concept in idealism which not only 
possesses objective reality but also 
determines sensory being. According 
to how the relationship between the 
O.I. and objective reality is interpret- 
ed we distinguish: (1) the dualistic 
theory of the O.I., most consistently 
represented in the Megarian school 
(q.v.) which asserts that the essence of 
things is special ideal reality, in no 
way related to sensory being; (2) the 
monistic theory of the O.I. which uses 
such concepts as the “imitation” of 
things by ideas, the “presence” of ideas 
in things, stressing the determining 
influence of the ideal world on the 
sensory world. In one form this monism 
(see Plato) speaks of the influence of 
the independent ideal world on real- 
ity. In another form (see Hegel) this 
monism denies any difference at all 
between ideas and things, and objective 
things are conceived as logical cate- 
gories in their development; (3) the 
emanation theory (see Stoics, and Neo- 
Platonism) which teaches that the pri- 
mary substance (primary fire of the 
stoics, Primary One of the Neo-Platon- 
ics) emanates into the entire sensory 
world, which arises and takes shape 
with the help of the objectively ideal 
primary principle. Dialectical mate- 
rialism denies the primacy of the ideal 
principle. The idea is a reflection of 
matter, i.e., it has an objective con- 
tent. Therefore, it is possible to speak 
of the real existence of ideas, which 
are recorded in different forms of social 
consciousness and are objective as 
regards their content and also in relation 
to the mind of the individual. But 
in this case, too, the O.I. is a sub- 
jective reflection of material reality, 
although it actively influences this 
material reality itself for the purpose 
of transforming and developing it. 

Objective Reality, the material world 


= 322 — 


Objectiveness 


in its entirety, in all its forms and 
manifestations. The concept O.R. is 
relative. It is everything that exists 
outside the individual’s mind and is 
reflected by it. But the individual 
himself with his mind will be O.R. 
in relation to other people, and so on. 
If abstraction is made of the individ- 
ual view of the world, it may be said 
that O.R. coincides with reality (q.v.) 
in general. The latter includes diverse 
material objects, their properties, 
space, time, motion, laws; diverse so- 
cial phenomena—relations of produc- 
tion, the state, art, etc. All these are 
reflected by the human mind but exist 
independent of the mind. From this, 
however, we must not conclude that 
the concept of O.R. is broader than 
the concept of matter (q.v.). Such 
an idea can arise if matter is divorced 
from its multifarious properties and 
forms of manifestation, without which 
it does not exist. Motion, space, time, 
life, etc., are all properties or mani- 
festations of properties and interac- 
tions of various kinds of matter differ- 
ing in degree of complexity, which in 
their sum total forms the world as a 
whole or the entire O.R. (see Being), 

Objectiveness, a concept denoting 
a phenomenon, action, state, etc., is 
connected with objects or is (becomes) 
itself an object; the being of something 
as an object, i.e., real existence. For 
example, it is possible to speak of 
the objective (or material, which in 
this case is the same) characteristic 
of practical activity, since in this 
process men are engaged with objects 
and create objects as a result of that 
activity; one may speak of the ob- 
jectiveness of the reflection of reality 
by man, i.e., of the presence in the 
human mind of an objective content, 
inasmuch as that content is the re- 
flection of objects of the material world, 
etc. Recognition of man’s O., his ac- 
tivity, the content of his conscious- 
ness, etc., distinguishes materialist 
from idealist philosophy. True, Hegel 
used the term “O.” But with him O. 
was merely the product (alienation) 
of the absolute spirit at certain stages 
of its development and must be re- 
moved, set aside, by the recognition 











Objectivism 


— 323 — 





of the fact that every O. is the other 
being of the spirit, the concept, the 
idea, 

Objectivism, a specific principle of 
approach to phenomena of reality which 
calls for abstention from critical ap- 
praisals and partisan conclusions on 
the alleged grounds that science is in- 
capable of drawing such conclusions. 
A characteristic of O. is the refusal 
to analyse theoretical events from a 
class viewpoint. In the ideological 
struggle O. claims that class forces 
stand “above classes”, represent the 
“entire nation”, and are “non-parti- 
san”. Exposing “narrow” bourgeois 
O., Lenin demonstrated that Marxism 
abhors it, just as subjectivism, because 
Marxism deduces its partisan view- 
point in a scientific way, that is, leads 
scientific study to partisan conclu- 
sions and appraisals which correspond 
to the actual state of affairs (see Par- 
tisanship in Philosophy). 

Occam, William of (d. 1349), medie- 
val English theologian, scholastic phi- 
losopher, tutor at Oxford University and 
prominent nominalist (see Nominalism). 
An ideologist of the secular feudal lords 
who fought against the claims of the 
Catholic Church and papacy to world 
domination. Alongside Duns Scotus 
(q.v.), a leader of the scholastic op- 
position to Thomism (q.v.), O. assert- 
ed that the existence of God and other 
religious dogmas could not be proved 
by reason and were founded solely 
on faith. Hence philosophy must get 
rid of theology. 

Occasion, external, often casual 
event, circumstance, providing an im- 
pulse for other events. O. differs from 
cause in that it may be a fact of var- 
ious kinds, not connected of necessity 
with other events, effects (see Causal- 
ity). O. may give rise to one or another 
phenomenon only because the latter 
has been prepared by a regular and 
necessary course of development. By 
O. we also understand a pretext, some- 
times specially chosen, for any be- 
haviour or action. 

Occasionalism, a religious idealist 
doctrine of the 17th century (Cor- 
demois, A. Gaulincx) trying to provide 
an explanation of the interaction of 


21° 


Ogaryov 





soul and body, to which the dualism 
of Descartes (q.v.) inevitably led by 
considering all psychic and physical 
phenomena and their interaction a 
result of the direct intervention of 
God. The French spiritualist Male- 
branche (q.v.) carried O. so far as to 
see a divine act in every causality. 

Occultism (Lat. occultus—hidden), 
a mystic doctrine of the existence of 
mysterious other-world forces with 
which chosen people supposedly estab- 
lish contact. By its content O. is close 
to theosophy (q.v.). 

Ogaryov, Nikolai Platonovich 
(1813-77), Russian revolutionary dem- 
ocrat, philosopher, publicist, and 
poet. With Herzen (q.v.) opposed 
tsarism and serfdom, the reactionary 
ideology of the Orthodox Church, autoc- 
racy and liberalism of the landown- 
ers and bourgeoisie. The ideological 
co-operation of O. with Herzen which 
began during their youth continued 
to the end of their life. As students 
of Moscow University Herzen and O. 
organised a clandestine circle whose 
members studied political literature, 
including socialist writings. In 1834, 
O., Herzen and other members of the 
circle were arrested and exiled. In 
1850, O. was arrested a second time, 
in 1856, he emigrated and, together 
with Herzen, organised the publica- 
tion of Russian revolutionary periodi- 
cals—Polyarnaya Zvezda (Polar Star), 
Kolokol (Bell), Obshcheye Veche (Gen- 
eral Assembly), Russkaya Potayonnaya 
Literatura (Russian Secret Literature). 
O. and Herzen were the founders of 
Russian peasant utopian socialism, of 
Narodism (q.v.), whose theory O. 
elaborated in detail. The theory of 
communal socialism of O. and Herzen 
expressed the revolutionary demands 
of the peasant masses who strove for 
the complete abolition of big landown- 
ership and the overthrow of the rule 
of the landowners. O. was one of the 
founders of the underground revolu- 
tionary organisation Zemlya i Volya 
(Land and Freedom) in the 1860s, 
whose ideas he expounded in the ar- 
ticle “What Do the People Need?” 
(1861) and other works. Prior to 1840, 
O. adhered to idealist positions. 











Old Hegelians 


Knowledge of the achievements of 19th- 
century natural science and the phi- 
losophy of French materialism, espe- 
cially Feuerbach’s (q.v.) Essence of 
Christianity enabled him to adopt 
philosophical materialism and athe- 
ism. Although O. paid tribute to an- 
thropologism (q.v.), the speculative 
character of Feuerbach’s philosophy 
did not satisfy him. Together with 
Herzen he critically assimilated the 
philosophy of Hegel (q.v.), especially 
his dialectics, drawing from it revo- 
lutionary conclusions and utilising it 
to justify a revolution in Russia. O. 
voiced many profound ideas on the 
origin and development of conscious- 
ness, the relationship between absolute 
and relative truth (q.v.) and problems 
of contradiction in the development 
of nature and society. He elaborated 
the principles of materialist aesthet- 
ics, emphasising the social role of art 
and its kinship with the people (q.v.), 
advocating lofty idea-content and res- 
olutely rejecting the idealist theory 
of “pure art”. O. was one of the pred- 
ecessors of Russian Social-Democracy. 
His main works are Russkiye Voprosy 
(Russian Questions), 1856-58; Yeshcho 
ob Osvobozhdenii Krestyan (More about 
the Emancipation of the Peasantry), 
1858; Pamyati Khudozhnika (In Memo- 
ry of an Artist), 1859; Chastniye Pisma 
ob Obshchem Voprose (Private Letters 
on a General Question), 1866-67. 
Old Hegelians, the conservative wing 
of the school of Hegel (q.v.) in Germany 
in the 1830s and 1840s; they endeav- 
oured to interpret his teaching in an 
orthodox Christian spirit. At first, 
the O.H. (K. Hoschel, F. Hinrichs, 
G. Gabler) took advantage of the con- 
flicting and inconsistent delineation 
between philosophy and religion in the 
Hegelian system to infer the synthesis 
of reason and faith. The later O.H. 
(Ch. Weisse and I. Fichte, Jr.) devel- 
oped their doctrine as a counterweight 
to radical Young Hegelians (q.v.). 
They insisted on the need for “cor- 
recting” Hegel in the spirit of Schel- 
ling’s “philosophy of identity” and 
the theodicy of Leibniz (q.v.). 
Ontology 1. In pre-Marxist phi- 
losophy Q., or the “First Philosophy”, 


— 324 — 


Ontology 


was the doctrine of being in general, 
being as such, independent of its par- 
ticular forms. In this sense O. is equi- 
valent to metaphysics (q.v.), a system 
of speculative universal definitions of 
being. Aristotle (q.v.) was the first 
to introduce the concept of such a 
doctrine. In the late Middle Ages, 
Catholic philosophers utilised the Aris- 
totelian idea of metaphysics to con- 
struct a doctrine of being which would 
serve as philosophical proof of the 
truths of religion. This tendency was 
most fully elaborated in the philo- 
sophical theological system of Thomas 
Aquinas (q.v.). Since the 16th century 
O. has been understood as a special 
part of metaphysics, the doctrine of the 
supersensuous, non-material structure 
of everything existing. The term O. was 
coined by the German philosopher Ru- 
dolf Goclenius (1613). The idea of 
O. received its final shape in the phi- 
losophy of Wolff (q.v.) which lost all 
connection with the content of the 
specific sciences and constructed O. 
largely through abstract deductive and 
grammatical analysis of its concepts 
(being, possibility and reality, quantity 
and quality, substance and accident, 
cause and effect, etc.). An opposite 
tendency was displayed in the material- 
ist doctrines of Hobbes, Spinoza, and 
Locke (qq.v.) and the French 18th 
century materialists, inasmuch as the 
positive content of these doctrines, 
which were based on the experimental 
sciences, objectively undermined the 
concept of O. as a philosophical sub- 
ject of the highest rank, as “First Phi- 
losophy”. Criticism of O. by the Ger- 
man classical idealists (Kant, Hegel, 
qq.v., and others) was dual: on the 
one hand, O. was declared to be mean- 
ingless and tautological and, on the 
other, this criticism ended in the de- 
mand for a new, more perfect O. (me- 
taphysics) or its replacement by tran- 
scendental philosophy (Kant), a system 
of transcendental idealism (Schelling, 
q.v.) or by logic (Hegel). Hegel’s sys- 
tem anticipated in an idealist form the 
idea of the unity of O. (dialectics), log- 
ic, and the theory of knowledge and 
indicated a way out of the framework 
of speculative philosophical construc- 








Operational Definitions 


tions to real positive knowledge of the 
world (Engels). 2. Attempts to cons- 
truct a “new ontology” on an objective 
idealist basis have been made in the 
20th century as a reaction to the spread 
of subjective idealist trends (see Neo- 
Kantianism, Positivism). In the new 
ontological doctrines (“transcendental 
ontology” of Husserl, q.v.; “critical 
ontology” of N. Hartmann, q.v., and 
“fundamental ontology” of Heideg- 
ger, q.v.), O. is regarded as a system 
of universal concepts of being conceived 
with the help of supersensuous and 
superrational intuition. The idea of 
the “new ontology” has been taken up 
by a number of Catholic philosophers, 
who are trying to “synthesise” the 
“traditional” O. coming from Aris- 
totle with Kantian transcendental phi- 
losophy and to pit their own O. against 
the philosophy of dialectical material- 
ism. 

Operational Definitions, definitions 
(q.v.) which indicate experimentally 
reproduced operations, the objective 
results of which are accessible to direct 
empirical observation or measurement 
(q.v.). Most often O.D. are used as a 
means for partial empirical interpreta- 
tion of scientific concepts. Here is 
a simple example. “If a litmus-paper 
is placed in a liquid, that liquid is an 
alkali only if the paper turns blue.” 
One and the same scientific concept 
can be given several O.D., indicating 
different empirical situations of ap- 
plying the given concept (see Hypo- 
thetico-Deductive Theory). An exag- 
geration of the role of O.D. and their 
elevation into an absolute are charac- 
teristic of operationism (q.v.). 

Operationism, a subjective idealist 
trend in contemporary philosophy 
which is a synthesis of logical positiv- 
ism (q.v.) and pragmatism (q.v.). It 
was founded by Bridgman (q.v.). The 
main thing in O. is the idea of opera- 
tional analysis, according to which 
the meaning of any concept can be 
determined only through a description 
of the operations employed in using 
and testing this concept; the latter 
is identical] to a corresponding set of 
operations. Concepts not connected 
with any operations are considered 


— 325 — 


Opposite 


meaningless. O. includes among them 
many concepts of materialism. Opera- 
tions are “instrumental” or thinking 
(“paper and pencil” operations and 
“verbal” operations). Sentences are 
formed by combining operationally 
defined concepts, and sentences are 
combined to form theories. O. inevi- 
tably arrives at subjective idealist con- 
clusions; if in concepts we cognise only 
our operations of measurement, then 
recognition of the objects themselves 
independent of the measurement pro- 
cedures will be meaningless. P. W. 
Bridgman says explicitly: “Things are 
a construction of ours.” 

Opinion, in ancient philosophy, im- 
perfect, subjective knowledge, as dis- 
tinct from authentic, objective knowl- 
edge, truth. Already the Eleatics 
(q.v.) sharply differentiated between 
truth based on rational knowledge and 
O. based on sensory perception and 
the appearance of things. With the 
atomists, O. is the result of “images” 
projected to man; phenomena perceived 
through senses exist in O., whereas 
atoms and the vacuum exist in reality. 
The sophists (q.v.) erased the boundary 
between O. and truth (“everything is 
as anybody believes it to be”), which 
led them to the extreme subjectivism 
and relativism. According to Plato 
(q.v.), O. is divided into conjecture 
and belief and applies to sensory things, 
whereas knowledge has spiritual en- 
tities for its own subject. For Aristotle 
(q.v.), O. is the empirical method of 
knowledge, whose subject-matter can 
change and become false, since it is 
classed among the accidental and 
individual. Aristotle distinguished O. 
from scientific knowledge, which has 
for its subject the essential and the 
universal. : 

Opposite, a category expressing either 
of the sides of contradiction. The unity 
of Oo., the diametrically opposed 
sides or tendencies, makes up a contra- 
diction which is the motive force, the 
source of development of things. The 
concept “O.” is used also to characterise 
the degree of development, growth 
and ripeness of a contradiction. In 
contrast to differences, in which con- 
tradiction is not yet matured and still 





+s FS +4 


Oem 


í 
i 





Optimism and Pessimism 


exists largely “by itself”, O. means 
a developed contradiction which has 
come to a head, has reached a higher 
stage of its development, when the 
conflict of opposites and tendencies 
arrives at the final place of its develop- 
ment and solution. 

Optimism and Pessimism, two op- 
posite attitudes to the course of events. 
Optimism is manifested in belief in a 
better future. Extreme metaphysical 
O. was advocated by Leibniz (q.v.) 
who held that the existing world is 
the best of all possible worlds. Such 
a view leads to denial and, ultimately, 
to the justification, of evil, misfor- 
tune, and calamities in life. Scientific 
O., based on Marxism-Leninism, fol- 
lows from the knowledge of the ob- 
jective laws of social development. 
Meliorism, a view that the world 
could be improved by human effort, 
is a type of O. This term was coined 
in the 19th century by the French 
philosopher J. Sully and the English 
novelist George Eliot. But meliorists 
think that the world can be improved 
only through individual perfection, 
through enlightenment. In contrast 
to meliorism, Marxist theory proceeds 
from the principle that revolutionary 
activity of the people in conformity 
with the cognised laws of social devel- 
opment is the determining factor in so- 
ciety’s progressive development. P. 
is a view that events go from bad 
to worse, it is expressed in depressed 
moods, lack of faith in the triumph 
of good and justice. P. was posited by 
the German reactionary philosophers 
Schopenhauer (q.v.) and E. Hartmann 
(q.v.) and the Italian poet Giacomo 
Leopardi. P. is inherent in existen- 
tialism (q.v.). As a rule, classes out- 
living their age turn to P. 

“The Origin of the Family, Private 
Property and the State”, the work 
written by F. Engels in 1884. Basing 
himself on the data of Morgan’s book, 
Ancient Society, as well as on other 
data of science, Engels investigates 
in this work the essential features of 
the development of the primitive-com- 
munal system (q.v.). He shows the 
changes in the forms of marriage and 
the family (q.v.) in relation to the eco- 


— 326 — 


Ortega Y. Gasset 


nomic progress of society, analyses 
the process of the decay of the tribal 
system (quoting as examples the 
Greeks, Romans, and Teutons) and the 
economic causes. The growth of the 
productivity of labour and the divi- 
sion of labour (q.v.) underlying this 
process led to exchange, private prop- 
erty, the disintegration of the tribal 
system, and the formation of classes 
(q.v.). The appearance of class con- 
tradictions called into life the state 
(q.v.) as an instrument for defending 
the interests of the ruling class. En- 
gels’ book demonstrated that: (1) pri- 
vate property, classes, and the state 
did not always exist. but appeared at 
a certain stage of economic develop- 
ment; (2) the state, in the hands of 
the exploiter classes, is only an in- 
strument of coercion and oppression 
of the people; (3) the classes will dis- 
appear as inevitably as they appeared in 
the past. With the disappearance of 
classes the state inevitably disappears. 
Engels’ book is a valuable contribution 
to the Marxist teaching on society 
and is still an important manual for 
the study of historical materialism. 

Orphism, a trend in ancient Greek 
mythology which arose in the 8th 
century B.C. and was associated with 
the worship of the mythical poet Or- 
pheus and the God Dionysus. The 
teaching of O. was the world outlook 
of the ruined peasants and slaves op- 
posed to mythology, the world outlook 
of the aristocracy. In mythology, life 
in the other world was considered a 
continuation of life on earth and the 
soul was regarded as a kind of corpo- 
real being. O., however, associated 
life in the other world with bliss, and 
life on earth with suffering; the so- 
journ of the soul in the body was viewed 
as its fall from the other world. The 
ideas of O. expressed a protest against 
man’s conversion into a slave, into 
a speaking tool. The slave associated 
his liberation with the soul leaving 
the body which belonged to the master. 
O. exerted great influence on emerging 
philosophy, particularly ancient Greek 
idealism. 

Ortega Y. Gasset, José (1883-1955), 
Spanish philosopher, subjective ideal- 








Orthodoxy 


ist}(held an intermediate position bet- 
ween Nietzschean philosophy of life, 
q.v., and contemporary existentialism). 
He focussed attention on social prob- 
lems. In his works, La deshumaniza- 
ción del arte, 1925, and La rebellion 
de la masas, 1929, O. expounded the 
main principles of the doctrine of 
“mass society”. O. gave the name of 
“mass society” to the spiritual atmos- 
phere which formed in the West as 
a result of the degeneration of bour- 
geois democracy, bureaucratisation of 
social institutions, and the spread of 
money-exchange relations to all forms 
of contacts between individuals. A 
system of social ties arises in which 
each man feels himself to be an in- 
significant actor performing a role 
imposed on him from the outside, a 
particle of an impersonal element 
called the mob. O. criticises this spir- 
itual situation “from the right”. He 
considers it to be the inevitable result 
of the released democratic activity 
of the masses and sees a way out in the 
creation of a new aristocratic elite 
of men capable of making a voluntary 
“choice”, guided solely by the direct 
“life impulse”, a category close to the 
Nietzschean “will to power”. O. re- 
gards rationalism as an intellectual 
style of “mass society”. He advocates 
a return to pre-scientific forms of ori- 
entation in the world, to the ancient 
uncorrupted “love of wisdom”. 
Orthodoxy, a variety of Christianity, 
q.v. (cf. Catholicism, Protestantism) 
which spread mainly in the countries 
of Eastern Europe, the Middle East, 
and the Balkans. O. was finally formed 
as an independent trend in the lith 
century as a result of the difference 
between the ways of development of 
feudalism in the West and in the East 
of Europe. The differences in dogmas 
are the following: recognition of the 
procession of the Holy Spirit from the 
Father alone, infallibility of the Church 
as a whole (but not of the head of the 
Church), immutability of dogmas, de- 
nial of purgatory, etc. Cult and ca- 
nonical differences include the wor- 
ship of icons. obligatory marriage for 
the secular clergy, a special (Byzan- 
tine) form of church hymn, etc. O. has 


— 327 — 


Owen 


no single centre, but consists of four- 
teen independent (autocephalous) or- 
thodox churches. Principled conservat- 
ism is highly characteristic of O. Rus- 
sian O. served the autocracy with 
faith and truth, was one of its pillars 
and completely dependent upon it. 
From the time of Peter the Great to 
1917 the Russian Orthodox Church 
was part of the state machinery. It 
was hostile to the revolutionary move- 
ment. After the October Revolution 
(particularly since the 1930s and 1940s) 
this counter-revolutionary policy of the 
Russian O. changed, under the pres- 
sure of the believers, into loyalty to 
Soviet government. Contemporary O. 
has completely preserved all its anti- 
scientific ideas and concepts. Reli- 
gious mystical philosophy (Khomya- 
kov, Berdyayey, Lossky, qq.v., V. V. 


Zenkovsky, etc.) is the theoretical 
basis of O. 
Osipovsky, Timofei Fyodorovich 


(1765-1832). Russian materialist think- 
er, professor of mathematics, and 
rector of Kharkov University, from 
which he was dismissed by reaction- 
aries for his progressive views (1820). 
As a materialist philosopher he criti- 
cised Kant’s philosophy and his asser- 
tion about the a priori origin of the 
truths of geometry. On the whole, his 
materialist views do not go beyond 
metaphysical mechanistic materialism. 
The scientist was infiuenced by Car- 
tesian ideas which made him exag- 
gerate the methodological role of 
mathematics and overestimate the im- 
portance of the analytical method in 
cognition. O. actively fought against 
mysticism and highly valued the role 
of education and science. However, 
in his views on religion he remained 
a deist. His main philosophical works: 
O prostranstve i vremeni (On Space 
and Time), 1807; Rassuzhdeniya o di- 
namicheskoi sisteme Kanta (A Discourse 
on the Dynamic System of Kant), 1813. 

Owen, Robert (1771-1858), utopian 
socialist, exponent of English social- 
ist thought. Was born into the family 
of an artisan and earned his own liv- 
ing from the age of ten. From 1791 to 
1828 participated in capitalist enter- 
prise and managed large factories. 








Owen 


He knew the negative aspects of the 
capitalist system better than other 
utopian socialists and sharply criti- 
cised them under the conditions of the 
industrial revolution. O. engaged in 
philanthropic activity and was the 
father of factory legislation. Subse- 
quently, his criticism was spearheaded 
against private property, religion which 
sanctifies it, and bourgeois marriage. 
He was a rationalist and atheist with 
some deviations towards deism. O. 
held that the social system exerts 
decisive influence on man; interpreted 
history in an idealist way as gradual 
progress of human self-knowledge; saw 
the root of social evil in people’s 
ignorance. O. attached exceptional im- 
portance to education as one of the 
measures preparing a “new moral (i.e., 
socialist) world”. He introduced many 
valuable ideas in the theory and prac- 
tice of pedagogy. By 1820, his main 
ideas had been shaped into a system 
which O. began to call socialist. Its 
principles were common ownership and 
labour, a combination of mental and 
physical labour, all-round develop- 
ment of the individual, equality of 
rights. His socialist teachings combined 
industrial and agricultural labour, 
the latter being given preference. He 
conceived the future classless society 
as a free federation of self-governing 
communities, each uniting from 300 
to 2,000 people. O. laid the main em- 
phasis on distribution. Failing to un- 
derstand the need for a social revolu- 
tion, he relied on bourgeois govern- 
ments to transform society. He organised 
labour communes (New Harmony 
in the United States from 1825 to 
1829 and Harmony Hall in Britain 
from 1839 to 1845) and also exchange 
markets, all of which failed. O. was 
the only great utopian who associated 
his activity with the destinies of the 
working class. Early in the 1830s he 
actively participated in the British 
trade union and co-operative move- 
ments; his ideas at that time anticipated 
syndicalism to a certain extent. O. 
was always a supporter of the working 
class, although he did not understand 
its historical role. 


— 328 — 


Ownership, Personat 


Ownership, a historically conditioned 
form of appropriation of material 
wealth, expressing the relationships 
between people in the process of social 
production. The form of O. is a mani- 
festation of the relationship of classes 
and groups to the means of production. 
The development of the forms of O. 
is determined by the development of 
the productive forces. A change in the 
mode of production leads to a change 
in the form of O. At the same time, 
the various forms of O. constitute 
stages in the growth of the division ‘of 
labour. Historically, society has known 
two basic forms of O., public and pri- 
vate. The primitive-communal system 
(q.v.) and socialism (q.v.) are charac- 
terised by public O. Private O., which 
arises with the development of ex- 
change, dominates the slave-owning 
system, feudalism, and capitalism 
(qq.v.). The nature of private O. va- 
Ties in these three formations. Asso- 
ciated with private O. are the division 
of society into classes and the appear- 
ance of class and national antagonisms. 
The dominant form of O. predetermines 
the domination of a definite class. The 
abolition of private O. and the organ- 
isation of society on the basis of public 
O. lead to the elimination of the antag- 
onisms and the obliteration of class 
distinctions. 

Ownership, Personal, the owning 
of articles of personal use. As distinct 
from private ownership of the means 
of production, P.O. will always exist. 
Recognition of P.O. does not, however, 
imply recognition of its unlimited ex- 
tension. Under socialist conditions the 
extension of the sphere of P.O. pre- 
sents a certain danger because this 
extension may become a brake on 
social progress by fostering the private- 
ownership mentality, and may lead 
to the petty-bourgeois corruption of 
individuals. Under complete commu- 
nism the extension of P.O. will become 
entirely meaningless, since the prin- 
cipal source for the satisfaction of per- 
sonal requirements will be the public 
consumption funds and everyone will 
receive from society according to his 
needs. 











p 


Pacifism, a bourgeois liberal trend 
advocating peace. Pacifists preach pas- 
sive methods of preserving peace, they 
reject revolutionary action of the 
masses as a means of defending peace 
and consider that the chief means of 
preventing war is to denounce it as 
being “sinful” and immoral. The fun- 
damental fallacy of P. (the theoretical 
basis of which is idealist explanation 
of war) is failure to understand the 
deep material causes which give rise 
to war in bourgeois society. By re- 
nouncing all wars, including just ones, 
the pacifists hamper the development 
of the liberation struggle in the depen- 
dent countries. The bourgeoisie often 
utilises pacifist ideas for deceiving 
the working people, camouflaging the 
predatory wars it is preparing, and 
for preventing revolution. In present- 
day conditions, when the imperialists 
threaten mankind with devastating 
thermonuclear war, many pacifists are 
taking to more active struggle for 
peace. The Programme of the CPSU 
stresses that a world war can be pre- 
vented by the combined efforts of 
the peace-loving peoples. Unity of all 
parties and organisations, including 
pacifists, in struggle for the preven- 
tion of war, disarmament, and peace- 
ful coexistence is a cardinal task 
of our time. Pacifism must not be iden- 
tified with the struggle for peace con- 
ducted by the socialist countries and 
the progressive forces of the world. 
For this struggle is based on a pro- 
found knowledge of social and politi- 
cal changes under way in the life of 
peoples and states and in international 
relations. The present world-wide peace 
movement proceeds from the possibil- 
ity of preventing another world war, 
from the fact that world war has ceased 


to be inevitable as a result of the change 
in the relationship of world forces 
in favour of peace and against impe- 
tialism which is no longer able to in- 
fluence world economic and political 
affairs as it did in the past. The posi- 
tion of the progressive forces, too, 
has changed: socialism has gained in 
strength, the struggle of the workers, of 
the democratic and peace-loving forces, 
and of the peoples fighting for na- 
tional liberation has grown in intensity. 
Work for peace and disarmament helps 
the people better to understand their 
fundamental interests. 

Panlogism, an objective idealist teach- 
ing on the identity of being and think- 
ing according to which all develop- 
ment in nature and society is the 
realisation of the logical activity of the 
idea. Considering the laws of logic 
to be the only laws of motion of the 
material world, P. turns the true re- 
lationship between being and conscious- 
ness upside down. At the same time 
one could discern in this view the 
true idea that everything existing can 
be rationally, logically cognised. P. 
hie most fully developed by Hegel 

EVs); 

Tshneyetiieta, an idealist view that 
all nature possesses life and psychic 
activity, it is a philosophical repro- 
duction of animism (q.v.). Many mod- 
ern idealist philosophers (personal- 
ists, Whitehead, q.v., the critical real- 
ist Strong, etc.) are open proponents 
of P. The scientific understanding 
of psychic activity as a special prop- 
erty inherent only in highly organised 
matter rejects any kind of P. (see Hy- 
lozoism). 

Pantheism, a philosophical teaching 
according to which God is an imper- 
sonal principle which is not out- 


co — 





— 


= 


Paradoxes 


side of nature but identical with it. 
P. dissolves God in nature, rejecting 
the supernatural element. The term 
was introduced by Toland (q.v.). 
Whereas earlier P., often enough 
included essentially materialist views 
of nature (e.g., Bruno and especially 
Spinoza, qq.v.), it has now been 
transformed into an idealist theory of 
the existence of the world in God and 
is an attempt to reconcile science 
with religion. 

Paradoxes (in logic and the set 
theory), formal logical contradictions 
which arise in the set theory and in 
formal logic, while preserving the cor- 
rect line of reasoning; they are akin 
to Zeno’s aporias (q.v.) and semantic 
antinomies (q.v.) known since antiq- 
uity. In modern science P. were 
discovered in the 19th century in 
some branches of the set theory (for 
example, by George Cantor in 1895 
and Cesare Burali-Forti in 1897). One 
of the best known P. was discovered 
by Bertrand Russell in 1902 when two 
mutually exclusive (contradictory) prop- 
ositions are equally demonstrable. 
They can appear both in a scientific 
theory and in ordinary arguments (e.g., 
Russell’s rewording of his paradox 
about a set in all normal sets: “... Bar- 
ber in a certain village who shaves 
all and only those persons in the vil- 
lage who do not shave themselves. 
Does he shave himself?”). Since a 
formal logical contradiction destroys 
inference as a means of finding and 
demonstrating truth (in a theory in 
which P. appears, any proposition both 
true and false is equally demonstra- 
ble), the task arises of revealing the 
sources of P. and finding ways of elimi- 
nating them. A dialectical materialist 
analysis shows that P. are an expres- 
sion of profoundly dialectical and epis- 
temological difficulties associated with 
concepts of an object and the objective 
sphere in formal logic, of a set (class) 
in logic and in the set theory, with the 
employment of the principle of ab- 
straction which makes it possible to 
introduce new (abstract) objects, and 
with methods of defining abstract ob- 
jects in science, etc. That is why here 
can be no universal method of remov- 


— 330 — 


Parmenides 


ing all P. Various ways are possible 
for solving the problem of removing 
P. from scientific theories: construc- 
tion of the theory of types (q.v.), or 
hierarchy of types, restriction of the 
principle of abstraction, etc. Thus, 
to remove P. from the set theory, axi- 
omatic set theories were created in 
which restrictions were introduced suf- 
ficient for excluding the known P. 
(the first system was proposed by 
E. Zermelo in 1908). The problem of 
philosophical understanding and find- 
ing concrete solution of P. is an im- 
ortant methodological problem of 
ormal logic and the logical principle 
of mathematics (see Antinomy). 

Paralogism, unpremeditated viola- 
tion of the laws and rules of logic, which 
deprives an argument of the force 
of proof and usually leads to false 
conclusions. A distinction must be 
made between P. and a deliberate 
violation of the rules of logic (see 
Sophistry). 

Parmenides, Greek philosopher (6th- 
5th century B.C.) from Elea (Southern 
Italy), head of the Eleatic school. P. 
conceived the world as an immobile 
and completely filled sphere. He vigor- 
ously opposed the “doctrine of truth” 
(true being is single, eternal, immo- 
bile, indivisible, and free from void) 
to the “doctrine of opinion” (there 
exists a plurality of things—arising 
and transitory, moving, divisible into 
parts, and separated from each other 
by a void). The “doctrine of truth” is 
authentic, the “doctrine of opinion” 
is only seemingly true. P. deliberate- 
ly directed the “doctrine of truth” 
against the dialectics of Heraclitus 
and his followers. In the “doctrine 
of opinion” P. expounded his astronom- 
ical, physical, and physiological hy- 
potheses. His naive materialist “phys- 
ics” proceeds from the assumption 
that there are two elements: an active 
one—fiery and bright, and an inert 
one—dark. Mistrust of the evidence 
of the senses and high appraisal of 
speculative knowledge introduce an 
element of idealism and even rational- 
ism (q.v.) into his teaching, while the 
denial of motion makes P. the father 
of ancient Greek metaphysics. 





Part and Whole 


Part and Whole, philosophical cate- 
gories reflecting relations between differ- 
ent objects and their aspects and ele- 
ments and also their connection. This 
connection bears the nature of a whole, 
while objects in relation to it appear as 
its parts. The difference between the 
whole and the simple quantitative sum 
of its parts is met for the first time in 
the works of Aristotle (q.v:). In pre- 
Marxian philosophy, two opposite solu- 
tions of the problem of the whole 
were offered: the summative metaphys- 
ical one—a whole is the sum of its 
parts; there is nothing in a whole 
which is not in the parts; and a mysti- 
cal idealist one—a whole is more than 
a sum of parts; it is an unknowable 
spiritual essence. German classical phi- 
losophy (see Schelling, Hegel) differ- 
entiates between the inorganic whole 
and the organic self-developing whole, 
but the latter is associated with the 
development of the spirit, and not 
of matter. In the 19th century, specu- 
lation on the problem of the whole was 
widely exploited by many idealist 
schools (neo-vitalism, q.v., holism, 
q.v., Gestalt psychology, q.v., struc- 
turalism, universalism, intuitionism, 
q.v., etc.). The real objective “part- 
whole” relationship is expressed in 
the two most general types: inorganic 
and organic. The inorganic whole is 
a form of unification of objects within 
which the elements comprising it are 
in a close, stable interconnection. The 
properties of the inorganic whole can- 
not be reduced to a mechanical sum 
of the properties of its parts. Atoms, 
molecules, crystals, etc., are examples 
of such whole formations. On the 
other hand, the organic whole (living 
organism, society, etc.) is a form of 
connection of objects in which 
the given association as a whole re- 
alises its ability for self-develop- 
ment, passing through consecutive 
stages of progressing intricacy. Com- 
ponents of the organic whole stand 
in relations not only to co-ordination 
but also to subordination, determined 
by the origin of some elements from 
others in the course of the differentia- 
tion of the whole. Outside of the whole 
they not only lose a number of their 


— 331 — 


“Part Played by Labour...” 


properties (as is the case in the inor- 
ganic whole), but cannot exist at all. 
It is of great importance to the proc- 
ess of cognition to take into account 
the dialectical interaction of the part 
and the whole. In cases of complex 
phenomena it is especially necessary 
to consider: (1) that it is incorrect to 
reduce the whole to its parts, because 
this can lead to a misunderstanding 
of the whole as a qualitatively definite- 
ness subject to specific laws; (2) the 
need to examine the whole in all its 
complexity and the relative independ- 
ence of the aspects, elements, and 
parts of which it consists, inasmuch 
as the latter can have their concrete 
features which do not coincide directly 
with the whole; (3) that examination 
of individual aspects and parts must 
be based on knowledge (at least pre- 
liminary, hypothetical) of the nature 
of the whole and, on the contrary, 
study of the whole must rest on the 
knowledge of the properties of its com- 
ponents, its elements. 

“The Part Played by Labour in 
the Transition From Ape to Man”, a 
work by Engels (1876) studying the 
social laws of the origin of man and 
society. Generalising the material ac- 
cumulated by biology, paleontology, 
and anthropology, Engels shows that 
the prerequisites for labour (erect gait, 
freeing of the upper limbs, higher de- 
velopment of the psyche of the an- 
thropoid apes, the ancestors of man) 
were created in the process of biologi- 
cal evolution. Labour acquires the 
features of specific human activity 
with the beginning of instrument- 
making, and this led to the appearance 
of speech and thought, which developed 
as social forms of life asserted them- 
selves. Man masters the forces of na- 
ture. He does not only use It as a 
consumer, as is the case with animals, 
but also makes it serve his pre-estab- 
lished purposes. Labour, speech, 
thought, and corporal organisation in- 
fluence each other mutually. The Part 
Played by Labour ... is an unfinished 
manuscript originally written as an 
introduction to Engels’ big projected 
work, Three Main Forms of Slavery. 
This essay was first published in 1896 








= a 


-ea 


E> 


oF Aa D 





amem ey Sp en te 


Partisanship in Art 


in German. Later it was included in 
Dialectics of Nature. 

Partisanship in Art, the fullest ex- 
pression of the ideological trend of 
art, defence in artistic works of the 
interests of a definite social class. 
Lenin, in his article “Party Organisa- 
tion and Party Literature” (1905) and 
other works, rejecting the theories of 
“pure art”, put forward and substan- 
tiated the principle of P.A., accord- 
ing to which art in contemporary con- 
ditions can develop only by linking 
itself with the most progressive move- 
ments, above all the struggle and 
ideology of the proletariat. The slo- 
gan of “impartiality” of art is a form 
of camouflaging bourgeois partisan- 
ship. Some present-day theoreticians 
of aesthetics counterpose freedom of 
creative endeavour to P.A. and declare 
them to be incompatible. In bour- 
geois society, so-called “freedom of 
creation” is intended to hide the fact 
that the creative endeavour of most 
artists in bourgeois society depends on 
the interests of capital. Only progres- 
sive artists realise what adverse effect 
this dependence of art on the exploit- 
ing classes has, and side with the peo- 
ple. The principle of communist par- 
tisanship implies that the artist free- 
ly and consciously serves mankind’s 
most elevated and noble aims. The 
artists of socialist realism are guided 
by the Leninist understanding of free 
creative endeavour, which consists 
in siding with the people and creating 
aesthetical values for them. 

Partisanship in Philosophy, a cardi- 
nal principle of the Marxist-Leninist 
world outlook. The principle of par- 
tisanship was formulated and ground- 
ed by Marx, Engels, and Lenin. In 
a class society, philosophy, like any 
ideology, cannot be non-partisan: it 
reflects and serves the interests of 
definite classes. In the history of phi- 
losophy, materialism and idealism 
were the main opposite trends and con- 
tending parties in philosophy. The 
contemporary ideological struggle is a 
reflection in the consciousness of man- 
kind of the historical process of tran- 
sition from capitalism to communism. 
The partisanship of bourgeois ideolo- 


— 332 — 


Patriarchy 


gists is displayed in their anti-com- 
munism, their striving to discredit 
socialism and Marxism-Leninism, in at- 
tempts to gloss over the antagonisms 
of bourgeois society, to picture the 
bourgeois state as a welfare state (q.v.} 
and present the interests of the capital- 
ists as the universal ideals of mankind. 
Marxism consistently acts on the prin- 
ciple of partisanship in philosophy and 
regards dialectical and historical ma- 
terialism as a scientific weapon of 
the proletariat in its struggle against 
capitalism, for the victory of commu- 
nism. In contrast to bourgeois parti- 
sanship, disguised as objectivism (q.v.), 
the partisanship of Marxist-Leninist 
philosophy is openly militant. It is 
distinguished by an uncompromising 
attitude towards idealism and meta- 
physics, revisionism and dogmatism, 
by a scientific approach, i.e., genuine 
objectivity in analysing reality, an, 
organic tie-up of theory and practice, 
philosophy and politics, and a creative 
approach to problems of Marxist the- 
ory, and the building of communism. 

Pascal, Blaise (1623-62), French math- 
ematician and physicist, one of the 
founders of the theory of probability 
(q.v.). The evolution of his views was 
contradictory. He combined outstand- 
ing discoveries in the natural sciences 
with religious fanaticism and scepti- 
cism (q.v.) directed against science and 
rational knowledge. His logical views 
continued Descartes’ (q.v.) teaching 
on method and exerted influence on 
the logic of Port Royal (q.v.). P.’s 
struggle against the spiritual tyranny 
of the Jesuits was supported by ad- 
vanced sections of French society. His 
main work was Pensées (published post- 
humously in 1669). 

Pasteur, Louis (1822-95), French sci- 
entist, founder of scientific microbiol- 
ogy. His experiments refuted the 
unscientific ideas of autogenesis of 
living organisms from inorganic sub- 
stances and played a positive part in 
developing the scientific theory of 
the origin of life. 

Patriarchy, a historical level in the 
development of the primitive-com- 
munal system (q.v.) at the stage of 
its disintegration; P. arose after 





Patriotism | 


— 333 — 


Paviov, Ivan 





matriarchy (q.v.) and its specific feature 
was the domination of the man in the 
economy and the entire way of life 
in the clan community. P. arose in 
the period when the first large-scale 
social division of labour (q.v.)—the 
separation of stock breeding from 
agriculture—led to the relatively fast 
development of the productive forces, 
regular exchange, private property, 
and slavery. As stock breeding and 
farming developed the men gradually 
assumed ownership of cattle and of 
the slaves received in exchange for 
cattle. Under P. group marriage was 
replaced by pairing marriage; the hus- 
band is recognised as the father of the 
children; the wife and children belong 
to him by right of ownership. The pa- 
triarchal family, numbering up to a 
100 and more people, was above all 
an economic unit (see Clan). Further 
development of the productive forces, 
private property, and exchange led 
to the break-up of the patriarchal fam- 
ily into separate small monogamous 
families. 

Patriotism, love for one’s country, 
“one of the most deeply ingrained sen- 
timents inculcated by the-existence of 
separate fatherlands for hundreds and 
thousands of years”. (Lenin, Vol. 28, p. 
187.) P. is a result not of a mysterious 
“national spirit” or “racial soul”, as 
asserted by idealist sociologists, but 
of definite socio-economic conditions. 
It is a historical phenomenon which 
has different content in different epochs. 
Being an element of social conscious- 
ness P. acquired special importance in 
the epoch of emerging capitalism as 
nations and national states were formed. 
But the further development and 
aggravation of the antagonism of 
classes increasingly revealed the falsity 
and hypocrisy of the P. of the bourgeoi- 
sie who places profit and “the safe- 
guarding of the alliance of the capi- 
talists of all countries against the work- 
ing class” (Lenin, Vol. 27, p. 366) above 
the interests of its country. Only the 
class connected with progressive ten- 
dencies of society’s development can 
truly express the national interests. 
In bourgeois society, the working 
masses and above all the proletariat, are 


such classes and, therefore, real pa- 
triots. The working class fighting for 
the revolutionary remaking of society 
and the building of socialism expresses 
the deepest national interest of its 
country, of the entire people. Only as 
a result of a socialist revolution does 
P. merge with the devotion to the new 
social system, the new state created 
by the people themselves under the 
leadership of the working class. It is 
only in socialist society that the work- 
ing people for the first time gain a 
true fatherland. This gives rise to 
new, socialist P. which becomes one of 
the driving forces of the new society. 
Socialist P. is inseverably bound up with 
proletarian internationalism and ab- 
hors both nationalism and cosmopoli- 
tanism, 

Patristics, Christian theology of the 
Ist-8th centuries, apologetics of the 
“Church fathers” who at first upheld 
the dogmas of Christian religion against 
paganism and asserted the incompatibili- 
ty of the religious faith with ancient 
philosophy; from the 3rd. century, P. 
tried to adapt the philosophy of Hel- 
lenism (see Neo-Platonism) to Chris- 
tianity. P. was represented mainly 
by Tertullian (150-222), Clement of 
Alexandria (150-215), Origen (185-254), 
and St. Augustine (q.v.). 

Paviov, Ivan Petrovich (1849-1936), 
Russian natural scientist. Professor of 
the Military Medical Academy (up 
to 1925), member of the Academy of 
Sciences (from 1907), Nobel Prize win- 
ner. Founder of objective experimental 
study of higher nervous activity (q.v.) 
in animals and man by the method of 
conditioned reflexes (see Reflexes, Con- 
ditioned and Unconditioned). He de- 
veloped the teaching of Sechenov (q.v.) 
on the reflectory nature of mental 
activity. The method of conditioned 
reflexes enabled P. to discover the 
basic laws and mechanisms of the activ- 
ity of the brain. Studies of the phys- 
iology of digestion led P. to the idea 
that the method of conditioned re- 
flexes could be used for investigating the 
behaviour and mental activity of ani- 
mals. The phenomenon of “psychic sa- 
liva secretion” and numerous experi- 
mental investigations served as the 








Paviov, Mikhail 


basis for his conclusion about the signal 
function of the psychic activity and 
for the elaboration of his teaching on 
the two signal systems. Pavlov’s doc- 
trine as a whole provides the natural- 
science foundation of materialist psy- 
chology and the dialectical material- 
ist theory of reflection (proposition 
of the connection between language 
and thinking, sensuous reflection and 
logical cognition, etc.). The works by 
P. and his school now serve as a basis 
for developing cybernetic devices which 
imitate individual sides of mental ac- 
tivity. Main works: “Dvadtsatiletny 
opyt obyektivnogo izucheniya vysshei 
nervnoi deyatelnosti (povedeniya) zhivot- 
nykh. Uslovniye refleksy (Twenty Years 
of Objective Study of the Higher Nerv- 
ous Activity [Behaviour] of Animals), 
1923; Lektsii o rabote bolshikh polusha- 
ry golounogo mozga (Lectures on the 
Work of the Large Hemispheres of the 
Cerebrum), 1927. 

Pavlov, Mikhail Grigoryevich (1793- 
1840), Russian natural philosopher. 
As professor of Moscow University 
(1820-40) he taught a number of sub- 
jects in natural science, including phys- 
ics and agronomy. Not finding an 
answer to many questions in metaphy- 
sical materialism, P. became a follow- 
er of Schelling’s natural philosophy. 
His main work in natural philosophy 
is Osnovaniya fiziki (Basic Principles 
of Physics), in two volumes, published 
in 1833-36. Thanks to the dialectical 
nature of his world outlook and his 
close ties with science P., though re- 
maining an idealist, worked fruitfully 
on problems of the relationship between 
empirics and speculation, science and 
practice, and the classification of the 
sciences. 

Peaceful Coexistence, a principle of 
the foreign policy carried out by the 
USSR and other socialist countries 
with a view to preventing a new world 
war. The idea of the coexistence of 


states with differing social systems was ` 


for the first time put forward by Lenin, 
who based himself on the law of the 
uneven economic and political devel- 
opment of capitalism. On the strength 
of this ‘law the transition to 
socialism is not accomplished simul- 


— 334 — 


Peaceful Coexistence 


taneously in all countries; it comprises 
a whole historical epoch, starting with 
the triumph of socialism in one coun- 
try, or some countries, and ending 
with the triumph of socialism and com- 
munism all over the world. Herein lies. 
the objective necessity for the protract- 
ed coexistence of socialist and capital- 
ist states. P.C. implies renunciation 
of war as a means of settling interna- 
tional disputes, and their solution by 
negotiation, mutual understanding and 
trust between nations, non-interference 
in internal affairs, strict respect for 
the sovereignty of all countries, pro- 
motion of economie and cultural co- 
operation on the basis of complete 
equality and mutual benefit. Lenin’s 


’ 


¢ 


idea of P.C. is embodied and creatively “ 


developed in the activities of the CPSU 
and fraternal Communist Parties. The 
coexistence of socialist and capitalist 
states does not mean, as the revision- 
ists maintain, the relaxation of the 
class struggle or conciliation with the 
bourgeois ideology. P.C. is a specific 
form of the class struggle waged with 
peaceful means. This being the case, 
the main field of struggle between so- 
cialism and capitalism is economic 
competition, where socialism, thanks 
to its inherent advantages, shall tri- 
umph. Not war with other countries, 
but setting the example of a more 
perfect social organisation, the rapid 
advance of productive forces, the crea- 
tion of all conditions for human hap- 
piness and prosperity, help the ideas 
of communism capture the minds and 
hearts of the people. This form of 
struggle was brought to life by the 
tremendous changes in the world. 
War, which in the past too was con- 
sidered undesirable by the people as 
a means of settling conflicts, is now 
fraught with dangers of a world conflict, 
which could mean a tremendous disas- 
ter for humanity as a whole. This is 
seen at present even by the enemies of 
socialism. Big changes have taken 
place in the relation of forces in the 
international arena (the increased 
might of socialism, of the working- 
class and the democratic movements 
in the capitalist countries, and of 
the- national liberation struggle). 





Pearson 


The imperialists cannot but reckon 
with these changes. All this creates the 
possibility and necessity of settling 
international conflicts by peaceful 
means. P.C. does not mean giving up the 
national liberation movement; on the 
contrary, it creates the most favourable 
conditions for it. Moreover, since the 
struggle for peace, for peaceful coexist- 
ence, is conducted against imperial- 
ism—the source of military danger— 
this brings the masses to a better un- 
derstanding of their vital interests. 

Pearson, Karl (1857-1936), English 
mathematician, idealist philosopher, 
Machist. He is well known for his 
works in the field of the mathematical 
theory of statistics and biometry. He 
was director of the biometrical and 
eugenic laboratories at London Uni- 
versity. His main philosophical work 
The Grammar of Science is devoted to 
the methodological problems of science. 
The task of science, in his opinion, is 
not to explain but to classify and de- 
scribe facts. Like all other Machists 
he regarded material objects as a 
group of sensual perceptions, and the 
natural laws, space and time as the 
products of the human mind. At the 
same time the subjective idealism of 
P. is distinguishable from Machism as 
a whole by its frankness and consist- 
ency as well as by the absence of any 
attempt to pass off as materialism. 
Comprehensive criticism of P. is given 
by Lenin in his Materialism and Em- 
ptrio-Criticism (q.v.). 

Peirce, Charles Sanders (1839-1914), 
American philosopher and logician, 
founder of pragmatism (q.v.), profes- 
sor at Cambridge, Baltimore, and Bos- 
ton universities. In his article “How 
to Make Our Ideas Clear” (1878) he 
introduced the so-called “P.’s law”: 
the value of an idea lies in its practi- 
cal results. Having identified the lat- 
ter with sensations, P. adopted the 
position of Berkeley. Understanding 
science as the “strengthening of faith”, 
P. worked out three methods of prag- 
matism: the “method of persistence”, 
the “method of authority” and the 
“scientific method” reducible to “P.’s 
principle”. Contrary to the subjective- 
idealist theory of knowledge, P. worked 


— 335 — 


People 


out an objective-idealist theory of 
development, based upon the principle 
of “chance” and “love” as the guiding 
force of development. His works on 
logic, which he understood as a “gener- 
al theory of signs”, have significantly 
influenced mathematical logic and mod- 
ern positivism (q.v.). His main works 
are in the field of the theory of proba- 
bility (q.v.) and the logic of relations. 

People, in the usual sense, the popu- 
lation of a state, of a country; in the 
strictly scientific sense, a historically 
changing community of people includ- 
ing those sections and classes which, 
owing to their objective position, are 
capable of jointly participating in 
the development of the given country 
in the given period. “In using the word 
‘people’ Marx did not thereby gloss 
over class distinctions, but united 
definite elements capable of bringing 
the revolution to completion.” (Lenin, 
Vol. 9, p. 133.) The concept P. as a 
sociological category reflects the change 
in the social composition of society: 
for the primitive-communal society 
the difference in the terms “population” 
and “people” was of no essential signifi- 
cance; but in antagonistic societies 
this difference is very important, be- 
cause there is an increasingly deeper 
chasm between the dominating, exploit- 
ing groups and the mass of the people. 
Only with the abolition of exploita- 
tion of man by man in socialist society, 
does the concept P. again cover the 
entire population, all its social groups. 
The major criterion for considering 
definite groups of the population a 
part of the P. is their objectively 
determined interest in society’s pro- 
gress and ability to participate in ac- 
complishing its tasks. In the course 
of social development, as revolutionary 
changes are effected, the objective tasks 
themselves and the content of the 
revolution change, and, therefore, the 
social composition of the sections which 
at the given stage make up the P. is 
also inevitably altered. In his works 
Lenin carefully traced these changes. 
At the beginning of the 20th century, 
when Russia was confronted with the 
task of overthrowing the autocracy, 
Lenin wrote: “Any worker who is at all 








People’s Democracy 


class-conscious knows full well that 
the people struggling against the autoc- 
racy consists of the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat.” (Vol. 8, p. 503.) Later 
on, when Russia was faced with social- 
ist tasks, Lenin stressed that in the 
all-out struggle for socialism and against 
the bourgeoisie, the P. at the given 
stage included only the workers and 
the poor peasantry. Consequently, the 
concept of P. includes the direct pro- 
ducers—working people and non-ex- 
ploiting groups of the population, but 
cannot always be reduced to these 
classes and sections. This should be 
especially borne in mind in present- 
day conditions, when wide popular 
movements against imperialism, for 
peace, democracy, and socialism are 
under way. Marxism for the first time 
established that P., the masses, are 
the decisive force in history, that it 
is they who create all the material and 
the bulk of the spiritual wealth, there- 
by ensuring the decisive conditions 
for society’s existence. They develop 
production, which leads to change 
and development in all social life; 
they make revolutions, thanks to which 
there is social progress. Thus, it is the 
P. who are the real makers of history. 

People’s Democracy, one of the forms 
of the dictatorship of the proletariat 
(q.v.) reflecting the distinctive devel- 
opment of socialist revolution at a 
time when imperialism is weakened 
and the balance of forces has tilted 
in favour of socialism. It also reflects 
the distinctive historical and national 
features of the various countries. (Pro- 
gramme of the CPSU.) P.D. arose in the 
course of people’s democratic revolu- 
tions in a number of East European and 
Asian countries. These revolutions re- 
solved the contradictions between the 
foreign imperialists, internal big bour- 
geoisie and landowners, on the one hand, 
and a wide coalition of the other classes, 
on the other, and were carried out 
under the leadership of the proletariat 
and its vanguard, the Communist Par- 
ty. The successful development of peo- 
ple’s democratic revolutions led to 
the establishment of P.D. in East 
European and some Asian countries. 
As the revolution deepened, it in- 


— 336 — 


Perception 


creasingly invaded the capitalist econ- 
omy (nationalisation of means of 
production) and at the same time re- 
stricted the political influence of the 
bourgeoisie. Land reforms, which put 
an end to the feudal survivals and 
strengthened the alliance of the prole- 
tariat with the working peasantry, 
were of great importance for the de- 
velopment of people's democratic rev- 
olutions. Deep-going democratic re- 
forms ensured the development of these 
revolutions into a socialist revolution. 
Accordingly, P.D., which at first acted 
as the democratic dictatorship of the 
people, began to discharge the func- 
tions of proletarian dictatorship. This 
general course of the revolution had 
its specific features in various coun- 
tries. The form of P.D. is determined 
by the broad class basis of the people’s 
democratic revolution (not only the 
proletariat and the peasantry, but 
also definite sections of the bourgeoisie), 
and the peaceful development of peo- 
ple’s democratic revolution into a so- 
cialist revolution, which made it pos- 
sible to utilise some old forms of the 
representative system (parliament). The 
characteristic features of P.D. are: 
the existence of a multi-party system 
(except in a few European countries); 
in addition to the Communist Party, 
there are other democratic parties 
which adhere to the positions of social- 
ism and recognise the leading role of 
the working class; the existence of a 
specific form of the people's front which 
unites political parties and mass or- 
ganisations. Other characteristics of 
the period in which P.D. is formed 
are the absence of restrictions in po- 
litical rights, a longer period for the 
break-up of the old state machinery, 
etc. Experience has shown that P.D. 
is a powerful instrument in build- 
ing socialism. At present “in the 
People’s Democracies socialist produc- 
tion relations are dominant and the 
socio-economic possibility of capitalist 
restoration has been eliminated”. (Pro- 
gramme of the CPSU). 

Perception 1. Reflection of an ob- 
ject arising in the consciousness owing 
to the effect of the objective world on 
the senses. The sensations (q.v.) are 


4 








Peripatetics 


elements of P., which may be visual, 
tactile or auditory. Visual perceptions 
are the most important from the stand- 
point of epistemology. They are 
formed out of the visual sensations a 
person experiences in his relations with 
the environment, the effect of the shape 
of an object determining the move- 
ments of the hand that touches it, and 
the movements of the hand in their 
turn determining the structure of the 
visual image. True perception of the 
objective world depends on the struc- 
ture of the image of the external object 
and the structure of the object itself 
being isomorphic (see Isomorphism). 
The role of P. in the process of cogni- 
tion is as follows: (1) it forms the basis 
of general conceptions such as “island”, 
“plant”, “man”, which do not reveal 
the essence of the objects; (2) it pro- 
vides the primary material for the for- 
mation of scientific concepts, certain 
separate connections and relations 
which form the primary elements of 
theory being abstracted from the struc- 
ture of the image acquired through 
perception. 2. P. as understood by 
Leibniz (q.v.), is a lower (uncon- 
scious) form of spirituality, as distinct 
from apperception (q.v.). 

Peripatetics (Gk. peripatétikos—per- 
formed or performing while moving 
about), the followers of the philosophy 
of Aristotle (q.v.). The name derives 
from the fact that in the philosophical 
school of Aristotle (Lyceum), founded 
in Athens in 335 B.C., teaching usu- 
ally took place during walks. The per- 
ipatetic school existed for nearly one 
thousand years (up to 529 A.D.) and 
was a great centre of antique science. 
The most prominent leaders of this 
school (scholarchs) after Aristotle's 
death were Theophrastus of Ephesus 
(c. 371-286 B.C.), particularly famous 
for his works in botany; Strato of 
Lampsacus (c. 305-270 B.C.), who de- 
veloped the materialist trend in Aris- 
totle’s philosophy; Andronicus of Rhodes 
(Ist century B.C.), who published 
Aristotle’s works; Alexander of Aph- 
rodisias (end of 2nd century A.D.-be- 
ginning of 3rd century A.D.), who 
wrote materialistically inspire com- 
mentaries on Aristotle’s philosophy. 


22-1682 


— 337 — 


Petrashevsky's Group 


Personalism, a religious idealistic 
trend which spread in American philos- 
ophy at the turn of the century, as 
well as in contemporary French philos- 
ophy. The term was first used in the 
USA by Bronson Alcott (1863) and in 
France by Charles Renouvier (1901). 
The main features of P. are: (1) recog- 
nition of the “individual” as the pri- 
mary reality and the supreme spiritual 
value, the “individual” being regarded 
as the spiritual primary element of 
being; (2) intimate connection with 
theism. To the materialistic world 
outlook P. opposes the conception that 
nature is the sum total of “individual” 
spirits (see Pluralism). A great number 
of “individuals”, being at various 
levels of evolution and constituting 
the world, are governed by the “su- 
preme being”—God. The founder of P. 
in the USA was B. P. Bowne (1847- 
1910). G. W. Howison (1834-1916), 
M. W. Calkins (1863-1930), A. K. Knud- 
son (1873-1954) had views close to P. 
The chief exponents of P. in contem- 
porary American philosophy are: 
Bowne’s disciple, the leader of the 
Californian school R. T. Flewelling 
(b. 1871) and the leader of the Bostonian 
school E. S. Brightman (1884-1953). All 
of them associate P. with Protestant 
theology. In Britain the most promi- 
nent representative of P. was 
H. W. Carr (1857-1931), in Germany the 
psychologist W. Stern (1871-1938). 
In their teachings, however, there is no 
direct connection with theology, as is 
the case with the American personalists. 
According to P., the main social task 
is not to change the world but to change 
the individual, i.e., to promote his 
“spiritual self-perfection”. A group 
of French personalists occupies a spe- 
cial place; it was headed by E. Mounier 
(1905-1950). This group of intellec- 
tuals, united round the journal Esprit 
(founded in 1932), represents the left 
Catholic circles who took part in the 
French Resistance and now advocate 
world peace and bourgeois democracy. 

Petrashevsky’s Group, members of 
a political circle which existed in 
Petersburg in 1845-49 and was organ- 
ised by M. V. Butashevich-Petrashevsky 
(1821-66). Most prominent among them 








Petrashevsky’s Group 


were N. A. Speshnev, A.V. Khanykov, 
P. N. Filippov, N. P. Grigoryev, 
N. A. Mombelli, I. M. Debu, D. D. Akh- 
sharumov, V. A. Golovinsky, P.A. Kuz- 
min, A. P. Balasoglo, F. M. Dostoyev- 
sky (q.v.), S. F. Durov, and others. 
In Aprii 1849, the circle was de- 
stroyed by the tsarist government. 
P.G. was not homogeneous in com- 
position. Besides the revolutionary 
democrats (Petrashevsky, Speshnev, Fi- 
lippov, Akhsharumov, Grigoryev, Kha- 
nykov, and some others) it includ- 
ed supporters of a liberal trend 
(N. Y. Danilevsky, A. P. Beklemeshev, 
V. N. Maikov, etc.). The revolutionary- 
minded members of the P.G. hated 
tsarist autocracy and serfdom in 
Russia, advocated revolutionary meth- 
ods of struggle against tsarism. P.G. 
studied socialist literature; they high- 
ly valued the works of Belinsky, Her- 
zen, Feuerbach, and Fourier. Their 
library contained the works of 
Rousseau, Proudhon, Michelet, Leroux, 
Saint-Just, L. Blanc, and others, and 
also Marx’s The Poverty of Philosophy 
and Engels’ The Position of the Work- 
ing Class in England. The philosophi- 
cal and sociological ideas of P.G. were 
fully o in Petrashevsky’s Kar- 
manny Slovar Inostrannykh Slov (Pock- 
et Dictionary of Foreign Words), 1846, 
in Speshnev’s Letters to K. Khayetsky, 
in the Speeches of Khanykov, Kash- 
kin, Aksharumov and Tol, in Filip- 
pov’s Ten Commandments, in Grigo- 
tyev’s Soldier’s Talk, etc. Adhering 
to the materialist positions, Petrashev- 
sky, Speshnev, and some others criticised 
the idealism of Kant, Hegel, Fichte, 
and Schelling. They recognised na- 
ture and its laws to be objective reality, 
undergoing continuous change and de- 
velopment. They declared nature to 
be the prime source of life and human 
knowledge. P.G. maintained that “there 
is nothing in the world except 
matter”, there is nothing that is su- 
pernatural, nothing that could not 
be included in the natural world and 
not developed from it. While highly 
assessing Feuerbach’s philosophy, P.G., 
however, criticised his propagation of 
love as a new form of religion which 
“draws all men to God” (Speshnev). 


— 338 — 


Phenomenology 


Petrashevsky, Speshnev, Kashkin, and 
others were atheists. They critically 
assimilated Fourier’s theory, reject- 
ing religious elements in his teaching. 
The utopian socialist ideas of the Left 
wing of P.G. were close to the ideas 
of the revolutionary democrats. 

Phenomenalism, a theory of knowl- 
edge based on the postulate that only 
sensations are the immediate object of 
knowledge. Extreme P. leads to sub- 
jective idealism: the world is a “sum 
total of ideas”, “of complexes of sen- 
sations” (Berkeley, q.v. Empirio-Cri- 
ticism, q.v.) or agnosticism (q.v.): we 
are unable to know what is concealed 
behind the sensations (Hume, q.v.). 
Moderate P., recognising the existence 
of objects manifested in sensations, 
leads either to inconsistent material- 
ism which considers objects as material 
things (see Locke) or to Kantian ag- 
nosticism, if objects are regarded as 
unknowable “things-in-themselves” (see 
Kant, J. St. Mill, Spencer). In con- 
temporary positivism (q.v.) P. assumes 
the linguistic form, inasmuch as 
its main thesis is reduced to the possi- 
bility of expressing experience in an 
“object” or “phenomenalistic” lan- 
guage. Acknowledging initially the 
complete possibility of reducing state- 
ments about things to statements about 
the content of consciousness, some neo- 
positivists are lately realising the fu- 
tility of these attempts. From the 
viewpoint of dialectical materialism, 
the initial thesis of P. is insolvent be- 
cause it divorces knowledge from 
reality. 

Phenomenology, a subjective ideal- 
ist trend founded by Husserl (q.v.) 
which exerted a great influence on 
many trends in contemporary bour- 
geois philosophy. The central concept 
of P. is the “intentionality” (intentio- 
nalitat) of consciousness (its being 
directed on the object), which is de- 
signed to assert the subjective idealist 
principle: “There is no object without 
a subject.” The main requirements of 
the phenomenological method are: (1) 
phenomenological reduction, i.e., ab- 
stention from any judgements pertaining 
to objective reality and going beyond 
the bounds of “pure”, i.e., subjective 








Phenomenon 


experience; (2) transcendental re- 
duction, i.e., consideration of the sub- 
ject of knowledge itself not as a real, 
empirical, social, and psycho-physio- 
logical being, but as “pure” trans- 
cendental consciousness. The ideas of 
P. became the philosophical basis of 
existentionalism, q.v. (M. Scheler, 
Heidegger, q.v.). Some bourgeois phi- 
losophers (Sartre, Merlo Ponti, qq.v.) 
counterpose P. to dialectical material- 
ism. Catholic philosophers (Edith Stein, 
Van Breda) synthesise P., with Neo- 
Thomism (q.v.). The openly idealist 
and irrationalist conclusions from P. 
have aroused opposition within the 
phenomenological school itself; its Left 
wing is trying to protect P. from exis- 
tentionalism, preserving only its sup- 
posed “rational kernel” (Farber and 
partly Ingarden). The theoretical cen- 
tre of the phenomenological trend is 
the Husserl archives of the Louvain 
Catholic University in Belgium. 
Phenomenon, or appearance (Gk. 
phainomenon—to appear), an ob- 
ject of experience perceived by means 
of the senses. In Kant’s philosophy, P. 
differs in principle from noumenon 
(q.v.) which remains beyond the 
bounds of experience and is inaccessible 
to human contemplation. Kant tried, 
by means of the concept of P., to dis- 
criminate between essence and appear- 
ance regarding the first as unknowable 
(see Agnosticism). From the viewpoint 
of dialectical materialism there is no 
sharp boundary between appearance 
and essence; the essence (q.v.) is per- 
ceived through the phenomenon (see 
Phenomenalism, Phenomenology). 
Philogenesis and Ontogenesis, terms 
introduced by Haeckel (1866) for desig- 
nating the historical, generic (P.) and 
individual (O.) development of organ- 
isms. In organic nature P. & O. are 
inextricably connected and recipro- 
cally conditioned (see Biogenetic Law). 
O. is the result of historical develop- 
ment, i.e., the result of P. On the other 
hand, P. is based on individual changes, 
i.e., on O. This interaction reflects 
the unity of the part (individual) and 
the whole (genus), the particular and 
universal, the dialectics of the spiral- 
like process of development, at each 


22° 


— 339 — 


“Philosophical Notebooks’’ 


stage of which the qualitative leaps 
made at previous stages are reproduced. 
The idea of the unity of P. & O. was 
put forward by Darwin (q.v.) and elab- 
orated by Haeckel, Michurin (q.v.), 
and others. 

Philosopher’s Stone (stone of wis- 
dom, elixir, tincture), according to 
ideas prevailing in the Middle Ages, a 
substance supposedly capable of con- 
verting base metals into gold and sil- 
ver, of curing all diseases, and reju- 
venating people. Practical observa- 
tions of diferent transmutations of some 
substances into others and also natural 
philosophic surmises about the unity 
of matter were the basis of these ideas. 
In the Middle Ages they acquired a 
distinctly religious mystic tinge. The 
development of scientific chemistry ex- 
ploded the idea of P.S. At present the 
possibility of transmutation (q.v.) of 
chemical elements has been scientifi- 
caliy proved. 

Philosophical Communism, a term 
used by Engels to designate a trend of 
utopian communism among the revo- 
lutionary bourgeois intelligentsia of 
Germany in 1842-43. P.C. wanted 
to connect the theoretical views of 
the Young Hegelians (q.v.), particu- 
larly of Feuerbach (q.v.), with ele- 
ments of the teachings of utopian so- 
cialists and also with tasks of a social 
nature, chiefly anti-feudal changes. 
P.C. completely ignored the role of 
the proletariat and did not understand 
the class nature of communism. This, 
together with the inadequate level of 
concrete historical and especially eco- 
nomic studies, explains the speculative 
nature of P.C. Its rational element 
consisted in stressing the ties of com- 
munism with classical German philos- 
ophy. Herwegh, Hess, Lining, Ber- 
nays, and Grün belonged to this vague 
and confused trend. Subsequently, P.C. 
degenerated into true socialism (q-v.). 

“Philosophical Notebooks”, Lenin's 
notes on philosophy, which were pub- 
lished for the first time in 1933. P.N. 
are extensive excerpts copied by Lenin 
(mainly between 1914 and 1916) from 
various philosophical works. Besides 
summaries of their content Lenin made 
important critical. remarks, conclusions 





“Philosophical Notebooks” 


and generalisations. P.N. contain 
summaries of the following books by 
Marx and Engels, The Holy Family; 
Ludwig Feuerbach, Lectures on the Es- 
sence of Religion; Hegel, The Science of 
Logic, Lectures on the Philosophy of 
History, and Lectures on the History of 
Philosophy; Lassalle, The Philosophy 
of Heraclitus the Obscure of Ephesus; 
and Aristotle, Metaphysics. Of great 
interest is the fragment “On the Ques- 
tion of Dialectics” in which Lenin 
gives in a concise form a profound 
exposition of the essence of material- 
ist dialectics. P.N. also deal with books 
on natural science and contain many 
valuable ideas and statements on di- 
verse problems of philosophy. The 
central subject of P.N. is dialectics. 
Lenin gave a definition of dialectics 
which reveals all aspects of its essence 
and elements; he formulated the basic 
principles of the Marxist understanding 
of logic and its categories, characterised 
the dialectical process of knowledge 
(q.v.), and the doctrine of opposites as 
the core of dialectics. Lenin’s propo- 
sition on the unity of dialectics, logic, 
and the theory of knowledge and also 
his statements concerning the elabor- 
ation of dialectical logic (q.v.) are 
of great importance for the develop- 
ment of philosophy. Of particular sig- 
nificance in this respect are Lenin’s 
ideas that the history of thought and 
the laws of thinking coincide in logic 
and that to elaborate a correct theory 
of knowledge it is necessary philosoph- 
ically to sum up the history of tech- 
nology, natural science, the mental 
development of children, animals, etc. 
As regards the history of philosophy, 
Lenin showed that it is a history of 
the struggle between materialism and 
idealism; he pointed to the importance 
of studying the history of dialectics; 
examined a number of methodological 
questions in the history of philosophy 
and assessed the views of many philos- 
ophers, paying special attention to 
Hegel. In his notes on books dealing 
with the natural sciences Lenin stressed 
the importance of dialectical ma- 
terialism as the only scientific metho- 
dology. P.N. are a model of creative 
development of materialist dialectics 


— 340 — 


Philosophy 


and offer a programme for further 
work in Marxist philosophy. At the 
same time one should bear in mind 
in reading P.N. that these are notes 
Lenin made for himself and which he 
did not prepare for publication. 
Philosophy, science of the general 
laws of being (i.e., nature and society), 
human thinking, and the process of 
knowledge. P. is one of the forms of 
social consciousness (q.v.). It is ul- 
timately determined by society's eco- 
nomic relations. The fundamental ques- 
tion of P. as a special science is the 
relation of thinking to being, con- 
sciousness to matter. Every philosoph- 
ical system gives a concretely elaborat- 
ed solution of this problem even if 
the “fundamental question” is .not 
directly formulated in it. Pythagoras 
was the first to use the term “P.”; 
it was singled out as a special science 
by Plato. P. arose in slave society as 
a science embracing the sum total 
of man’s knowledge of the objective 
world and himself, which was natural, 
eonsidering the low level of knowledge 
at that early stage in human history. 
As social production developed and 
scientific knowledge accumulated, in- 
dividual sciences branched out from 
P., the latter being singled out as 
an independent science. P. as a science 
arose out of the necessity to elaborate 
a general view of the world, to study 
its general elements and laws, out of 
the need for a rational method of think- 
ing, for logic. This need put the re- 
lationship of thinking to being in the 
foreground in P., because its solution 
underlies all philosophy and is the basis 
of the method and logic of knowledge. 
This also resulted in the polarisation of 
P. into twa diametrically opposed 
trends, materialism and idealism, dual- 
ism holding an intermediate position 
between them. The struggle of material- 
ism and idealism lays its imprint on 
the entire history of P. and is one of its 
main driving forces. This struggle is 
closely associated with the development 
of society, the economic, political, and 
ideological interests of the classes. 
Elaboration of the specific problems 
of P. led to the singling out of various 
aspects as more or less independent 











Philosophy 


and at times sharply delineated divi- 
sions. These are ontology, epistemolo- 
gy, logic, ethics, aesthetics, psychol- 
ogy, sociology, and history of P. At 
the same time P., in view of the inad- 
equacy of concrete knowledge, tried 
to replace the missing links and laws 
of the world by invented ones, thereby 
becoming a special “science of the 
sciences”, standing above all other sci- 
ences. In relation to nature it was 
natural philosophy (q.v.) and in rela- 
tion to history, the philosophy of 
history (q.v.). The last system of 
this kind was Hegel’s P. But as know- 
ledge was accumulated and differen- 
tiated, all grounds for the existence 
of P. as a “science of the sciences” 
disappeared. Marxism-Leninism for the 
first time clearly understood the social 
requirements, giving rise to P. as 
a special science, and its place and role 
in spiritual culture, and consequently 
also the range of its problems, its sub- 
ject-matter (see Materialism, Dialec- 
tical; Materialism, Historical). Theo- 
retical knowledge of phenomena of the 
surrounding world is impossible with- 
out logically developed thinking. But 
it was P. that elaborated logical cat- 
egories and laws because of the his- 
torically shaped division of labour be- 
tween the sciences. Marxist-Leninist P. 


developed and consistently applied 
the materialist principle in under- 
standing the objective world and 


thought, fructifying it by its dialectical 
outlook and constructing dialectical 
logic as the “science not of external 
forms of thought, but of the laws of 
development ‘of all material, natural, 
and spiritual things’, in other words, 
of the development of the entire con- 
crete content of the world and of its 
cognition, i.e., the sum total, the con- 
clusion of the history of knowledge of 
the world”. (Vol. 38, pp. 92-93.) Marx- 
ist P. considers logical forms and laws 
as forms and laws of development of 
natural and socio-historical processes 
cognised and tested by entire human 
experience. It abolishes the distinction 
between ontology, logic, and the theory 
of knowledge. This is a fundamental 
principle of the P. of dialectical mate- 
rialism. The philosophical theory of 


— 341 — 


Philosophy, Analytical 


Marxism thus represents a dialectical 
materialist solution of the fundamental 
question of P., a solution concretely 
expounded and elaborated in all de- 
tails. Logical forms and laws appear 
here as universal forms and laws gov- 
erning every natural and socio-histor- 
ical process reflected in man’s mind, 
as stages in the theoretical reproduc- 
tion of objects in conformity with 
their real development. P. based on 
such an understanding of its role, 
subject-matter, and tasks in the de- 
velopment of human culture is a pow- 
erful instrument of man’s knowl- 
edge and activity, an active factor in 
further developing knowledge and prac- 
tice. With such an understanding of 
P. its parts, psychology and sociology, 
ethics and aesthetics increasingly 
turn into independent sciences which 
are only traditionally regarded as phil- 
osophical. True, this tradition has 
its grounds, for these sciences are main- 
ly connected with specific problems 
of P., especially the relationship of 
the subject and the object. Anti-phil- 
osophical tendencies are inherent in 
some contemporary theories. They are 
especially characteristic of neo-posi- 
tivism, which declares the problems 
of P. to be pseudo-problems and tries 
to replace philosophical analysis of 
development of contemporary ‘knowl- 
edge and practice by analysis of 
the “language of science”, i.e., a lin- 
guistic semantic analysis, of the “ex- 
ternal forms of thoughw°—language, 
sign systems for expressing thoughts, 
etc. Thereby they hold that philosophy 
as a science is actually abolished. 
This tendency is opposed by dialectical 
materialism, which continues the finest 
traditions of world P. It develops P. 
as a special science which promotes 
man’s self-awareness, his understand- 
ing of the place and role of scientific 
discoveries in the general develop- 
ment of human culture and thereby 
provides a criterion for assessing them 
and connecting separate links of knowl- 
edge in a single world outlook (q.v.). 

Philosophy, Analytical, a wide- 
spread and somewhat varied trend in 
present-day philosophy which unites 
different groups, tendencies, and in- 








Philosophy, Fundamental Question — 342 — Philosophy, Fundamental Question 


dividual philosophers who consider it 
the business of philosophy to analyse 
language. A.P. is today most wide- 
spread in the USA and Britain, with 
individual philosophers and groups in 
the Scandinavian countries, Finland, 
Australia, etc. A.P. is championed 
by supporters of logical emptricism 
(q.v.) and neo-pragmatism—W. Quine, 
N. Goodman, and Morton White. 
A number of American analytical 
philosophers do not belong to any 
school (Wilfrid Sellars and others). In 
Britain the dominant form is linguistic 
philosophy (q.v.). A. J. Ayer and 
Karl Popper occupy a special position, 
close to logical empiricism. All these 
groups of A.P. are varieties of neo- 
positivism (q.v.). At the same time 
it is typical of most of them that the 
centre of gravity is shifted from general 
epistemological questions to concrete 
forms and means of analysing language. 
Two basic approaches may be dis- 
cerned: (1) the construction of arti- 
ficial “model” languages with a pre- 
cisely fixed logical structure (logical 
empiricists, the neo-pragmatists, and 
a number of “independent” analysts). 
These investigations are based on logic 
and logical semantics; (2) the historical 
study of existing natural languages 
(linguistic philosophy).To a greatextent 
the writings of modern analytical philos- 
ophers are not really philosophical 
or epistemological studies in the real 
meaning of the word, but the studies 
in concrete logic, specific methods 
or concrete linguistics which have an 
undoubted scientific content. As far 
as general philosophical problems are 
concerned, A.P. either avoids them or 
provides an incorrect, idealist solu- 
tion to them. 

Philosophy, Fundamental Question 
of, the question of the relationship 
of consciousness to being, of thinking 
to matter and nature, examined from 
two aspects, first, what is primary— 
spirit or nature, matter or consciousness 
—and second, how is knowledge of the 
world related to the world itself or, 
to put it differently, does consciousness 
correspond to being, is it capable of 
truthfully reflecting the world? A 
consistent solution of the F.Q.P. is 


possible only if both sides are consi- 
dered. The philosophers who formed the 
camp of materialism regarded matter, 
being, as primary, and consciousness 
as secondary, and held that conscious- 
ness is the result of tnfluence exerted 
upon it by the objectively existing 
external world. The philosophers in 
the camp of idealism accepted the idea 
of consciousness as primary and re- 
garded them as the solely true reality. 
From their viewpoint cognition is not 
a reflection of material being but mere- 
ly cognition of consciousness itself 
in the form of self-cognition, an analysis 
of sensations and concepts, cogni- 
tion of the absolute idea, universal 
will, etc. Dualism and agnosticism 
(qq.v.) hold an intermediary, incon- 
sistent position in solving the F.Q.P. 
A metaphysical approach to solving 
this question was inherent in pre- 
Marxian philosophy; it consisted either 
in underestimating the activity of con- 
sciousness or in reducing knowledge to 
passive contemplation (metaphysical 
materialism) and the identification of 
consciousness and matter (see Material- 
ism, Vulgar), in exaggerating the activ- 
ity of thought, elevating it into an abso- 
lute and divorcing it from matter (ideal- 
ism), or in asserting their incompatibi- 
lity in principle (dualism, agnosticism). 
Only Marxist philosophy has given an 
all-round, dialectically materialist, sci- 
entifically-based solution of the F.Q.P. 
It sees the primacy of matter in that: 
(1) matter is the source of conscious- 
ness, while consciousness is a reflection 
of matter; (2) consciousness is a result 
of a long process of development of 
the material world; (3) consciousness 
is a property and function of highly 
organised matter—the brain; (4) the 
existence and development of the hu- 
man mind and thinking is impossible 
without the linguistic material shell, 
without speech; (5) consciousness arose 
as a result of man’s material labour 
activity; (6) consciousness is social 
and is determined by social being. 
Noting the absolute antithesis of mat- 
ter and consciousness only within the 
bounds of the F.Q.P., Marxism-Leninism 
simultaneously points to their inter- 
connection and interaction. A derivat- 





Philosophy, History of 


— 343 — 


Philosophy, History of 


ive of material being, consciousness 
possesses relative independence and 
in its development also exerts retro- 
active influence on the material world, 
facilitating its practical mastery and 
transformation. The human mind, re- 
lying on practical experience, is ca- 
pable of truthfully knowing the world. 
The relationship of matter and con- 
sciousness is the fundamental question 
of philosophy because, by virtue of 
its universality, it encompasses all 
philosophical questions, determines the 
solution not only of particular prob- 
lems, but also the nature of the world 
outlook as a whole and provides a re- 
liable criterion for differentiating the 
basic trends in philosophy. That is 
why a scientific formulation of the 
F.Q.P. makes it possible consistently 
to apply the principle of partisanship 
in philosophy, strictly to delimit and 
counterpose materialism and idealism 
and resolutely to uphold the scientific 
world outlook of dialectical material- 
ism. 

Philosophy, History of (as a science), 
studies the origin and development of 
philosophy, the laws and phases of 
this development, and the struggle 
of philosophical schools and trends. 
Even in antiquity, philosophers (e.g., 
Aristotle, q.v.) turned to the views 
of their predecessors with the object 
of criticising or utilising them in their 
own concepts. Diogenes Laertius, Sex- 
tus Empiricus (qq.v.) and others con- 
tributed compendiums of the opinions 
and biographies of philosophers. A 
more or less arbitrary list of “opinions” 
of philosophers is contained in the 
main works of the H.P. up to the 18th 
century. Empiricism dominated in stu- 
dies of H.P., and they were primarily 
of an educative nature. Gradually, 
with the development of philosophy, 
elements of a scientific approach to 
its history appeared: H.P. was re- 
leased from the grip of theology and 
attempts were made to apply the 
principle of historicity, to establish 
the connection between the develop- 
ment of philosophy and the general 
development of history and scientific 
knowledge. Materialist philosophers 
(see Francis Bacon, Spinoza) and also 


thinkers who drew close to the idea of 
historical laws (see Vico, Herder, and 
others) made an important contribu- 
tion to H.P. Hegel’s (q.v.) concept 
of H.P. is especially interesting. His 
main principle was that the succes- 
sion of philosophical ideas in point 
of time reproduces the sequence of 
logical categories in a developed phi- 
losophical system, namely, in the He- 
gelian system. According to Hegel, 
H.P. is the process of development 
of thought and apprehension of truth 
(see Absolute Idea); truth can be un- 
covered only in the entire history of 
human thought. Each separate defini- 
tion of truth, expressed in a special 
world outlook or system, is histori- 
cally limited, incomplete, and one- 
sided. The birth of a new philosophical 
system elevates thought to the stage 
of a higher, more concrete and devel- 
oped logical category. Hegel’s concept 
contained valuable surmises: the idea 
of the necessary and natural develop- 
ment of philosophy, its dependence on 
the history of society and knowledge, 
etc. On the whole, however, this con- 
cept is inacceptable because of its 
idealistic nature: Hegel conceives H.P. 
as the self-development of the absolute 
spirit, which leads to many mistakes 
and to a distortion of real history. Rus- 
sian 19th century thinkers, especially 
Herzen (q.v.), contributed valuable 
ideas towards the elaboration of a 
scientific H.P. Nevertheless, pre-Marx- 
ists could not, any more than contem- 
porary idealist philosophers, trans- 
form H.P. into a science. A scientific 
approach is provided only by dialec- 
tical and historical materialism. Marx- 
ist philosophy, first, establishes the 
objective laws governing the devel- 
opment of all forms of social conscious- 
ness and, second, brings out the struc- 
ture and characteristics of scientific 
knowledge, which alone makes it pos- 
sible to study its history scientifi- 
cally. The central place in a scienti- 
fic H.P. is held by a study of the 
history of formation and struggle 
of materialism and idealism, dialec- 
tics and metaphysics. In the process 
of the development of philosophy, 
scientific materialist views, based on 





ee e E, 





Philosophy, History of 


the progress of knowledge and the 
practical activity of people, oust un- 
scientific idealist views. A Marxist 
analysis of H.P. includes partisanship 
as an important element in the as- 
sessment of the various schools and 
trends (see Partisanship in Philosophy). 
Such an approach does not, of course, 
mean discarding the positive elements 
achieved within the framework of 
idealist philosophy. A scientific analy- 
sis of H.P. proceeds from the neces- 
sity to examine the development of 
philosophy as a process determined by 
the socio-economic and political ad- 
vance of society, to evaluate philosoph- 
ical ideas and systems (ultimately) 
as an expression of the interests and 
ideology of this or that class or social 
group, as a reflection of the require- 
ments of production and the develop- 
ment of scientific knowledge. But it is 
not enough to find a “social equiva- 
lent” to some theoretical construction; 
it is necessary first of all to determine 
why the given social system and the 
sum total of historical conditions have 
produced this philosophical system 
and not another. Otherwise it is im- 
possible to avoid simplification and 
a vulgar materialistic identification 
of economics and philosophy. The dia- 
lectical materialist approach makes it 
possible to present H.P. as a single 
process, to disclose the necessary con- 
nections between the different schools 
and trends, the progress in the solu- 
tion of philosophical problems, the 
connection between H.P. and the his- 
tory of knowledge in general. Then 
the recurring attempts to solve some 
problems (methodology of scientific 
cognition, relationship of rationalism 
and empiricism, the universal and the 
particular, the concrete and the ab- 
Stract, the nature of human activity, 
etc.) are no longer regarded as develop- 
ment determined by an aim immanent 
in philosophy, but appear as specific 
landmarks in the history of society 
and knowledge. Since H.P. is the 
process of development of philosophi- 
cal cognition of the world, it must es- 
tablish the direct connections between 
the historical development of human 
knowledge and its internal structure 


— 344 — 


Philosophy, Linguistic 


and logic. Here we see clearly the dia- 
lectical principle of the unity of the 
logical and the historical: the history 
of an object (philosophy) is insepar- 
ably connected with its developed 
logical structure, the emergence of 
science is inseparable from its devel- 
oped state and only from the stand- 
point of the latter can it be properly 
understood. It is this that opens the 
way to comprehending the laws by 
which philosophy develops and helps 
to understand the real place and sig- 
nificance of concepts and ideas that 
arise in the course of history. At the 
same time, H.P. must not be separat- 
ed from the history of the natural 
sciences and the historical experience 
of society. Philosophy must dialectic- 
ally analyse and summarise the his- 
tory of thought, science, and technology. 
Study of H.P. is of great importance 
for the development of contemporary 
philosophy. Marxist philosophy has 
assimilated everything positive creat- 
ed by human thought. Study of H.P. 
is necessary for developing and im- 
proving the modern methods of sci- 
entific research and practical trans- 
formation of the world, for raising the 
level of philosophical thought. As En- 
gels put it, “Theoretical thinking is an 
innate quality only as regards natural 
capacity. This natural capacity must 
be developed, improved, and for its 
improvement there is as yet no other 
means than the study of previous phi- 
losophy.” (Dialectics of Nature, p. 58.) 

Philosophy, Linguistic (also known 
as “logical analysis”, “linguistic anal- 
ysis”, and the “philosophy of everyday 
language”), a trend in analytical phi- 
losophy (q.v.) widespread in Britain 
(G. Ryle, A.J. Wisdom, J. Austin, 
and others). In the US, similar views 
are held by Max Black, N. P. Mal- 
colm, andfothers. The trend,stems from 
the “philosophy of common sense” 
of George Edward Moore (q.v.) and the 
views of the later Wittgenstein (q.v.). 
Like other schools of neo-positivism 
(q.v.), L.P. denies that philosophy 
is a world outlook, and regards the 
traditional philosophical problems as 
pseudo-problems arising out of a failure 
to comprehend the . real nature of 





Philosophy, Linguistic 


language owing to the confusing influ- 
ence of language on thought. On the con- 
trary, it is maintained, philosophy 
should elucidate the difficulties that 
arise through the wrong use of words. 
According to the representatives of the 
Cambridge school of L.P., philosophy 
should perform a “therapeutic” func- 
tion by curing the disabilities of our 
language. In their efforts to “get rid 
of metaphysics”, linguistic philoso- 
phers not only reject the “ontological 
metaphysics” of traditional philos- 
ophy. Denying the possibility of ar- 
riving at any comprehensive philo- 
sophical conception, they also reject the 
“metaphysics” of logical positivism 
(q.v.) with its principle of “verifica- 
tion” (q.v.). But it is the denial that 
philosophy is a world outlook that dis- 
tinguishes L.P. as an extreme and most 
reactionary form of positivism. With 
the analysis of language as the sole 
aim of philosophical investigation the 
advocates of L.P., particularly the 
representatives of the Oxford group, 
unlike the logical positivists, concen- 
trate their attention not on artificial 
model languages but on the language 
of common speech. Here they proceed 
from the true assumption that the rich 
resources of the natural spoken lan- 
guage cannot be fully expressed within 
the framework of any “ideal language”. 
In renouncing analysis of the problems 
of epistemology (the relation of lan- 
guage to thought, the connection be- 
tween language and the cognitive proc- 
esses involved in forming mental 
images, the genesis of linguistic forms, 
etc.), which are the sole context in 
which the phenomena of language 
can be successfully studied, L.P. con- 
fines research to a superficial descrip- 
tion of various types of usage and 
closes the path to a true explanation 
of the essence of language, arriving 
ultimately at a merely conventional 
interpretation. For L.P. language is 
a means of construction, not a reflec- 
tion of the world; it becomes something 
mystical, a self-sufficing force. The 
justifiable criticism of attempts to 
make an all-embracing reconstruction 
of the language within the framework 
of an “ideal language” goes hand in 


— 345 — 


Philosophy of Antiquity 


hand with a refusal to investigate 
language in general on the basis of 
any all-round theoretical platform. 
Thus the refusal to tackle the basic 
problems of philosophy leads to the 
collapse of L.P. even in the field to 
which it confines philosophical inves- 
tigation. 

Philosophy of Antiquity, the total- 
ity of philosophical theories devel- 
oped in the Greek slave-owning society 
from the end of the 7th century B.C. 
and in the Roman slave-owning society 
from the 2nd century B.C. up to the 
beginning of the 6th century A.D. 
The P.A. is an original, but not iso- 
lated, phenomenon in the development 
of man’s philosophical cognition. It 
took shape on the basis of the rudi- 
ments of astronomical, mathematical, 
hysical, and other knowledge 
heught into the Greek cities from the 
East as a result of interpretation of 
ancient mythology in art and poetry 
and attempts to remove from philo- 
sophical thought the mythological con- 
ceptions of the world and of man that 
had held them captive. By the 5th 
century B.C., philosophical and cos- 
mological systems had been developed 
in which myths were a means of figur- 
atively expressing ideas rather than 
the basis of an outlook. In the 6th 
and even in the 5th centuries B.C., 
philosophy and the knowledge of na- 
ture had not been separated. The 
number of hypotheses that occurred 
owing to the absence of experimental 
verification was enormous. As far as 
philosophy was concerned, this mul- 
tiplicity of hypotheses meant a mul- 
tiplicity of types of philosophical ex- 
planations of the world. This multi- 
plicity and the level of elaboration 
made P.A. a school of philosophical 
thinking for later times. “...The mani- 
fold forms of Greek philosophy,” wrote 
Engels, “contain in embryo, in the 
nascent state, almost all the later 
modes of outlook on the world.” 
(Dialectics of Nature, p. 44.) The 
starting point for the development of 
the P.A. was philosophical material- 
ism. Thales, Anaximander, Anaxime- 
nes, Heraclitus (qq.v-), despite the many 
differences between them, all assumed 








Philosophy of Antiquity 


that things originated from some single 
material source. Among those who 
held these naive materialist views, cer- 
tain ideas arose which later led to 
the development of idealism. The germs 
of the schism into materialist and ideal- 
ist trends can be discerned among the 
earliest Greek thinkers. In the second 
half of the 5th and early 4th centuries 
B.C. these trends developed into the 
opposites of materialism and idealism. 
Equally clear in the P.A. is the anti- 
thesis of the dialectical and metaphys- 
ical methods of thinking. Many of the 
early Greek philosophers were actually 
dialecticians, who studied nature as 
a single whole and, consequently, in the 
interaction and connection of its phe- 
nomena. In the more than a thousand 
years of the development of the P.A., 
the materialism and idealism, dialec- 
tics and aes which took shape 
in early Greek philosophy underwent 
an intricate evolution, reflecting, in 
the final analysis, the dialectics of 
the development of the society of an- 
tiquity. The materialism of the P.A. 
was developed by Empedocles, Anax- 
agoras, Leucippus, and Democritus 
(qq.v.). In the teachings of Socrates 
(q.v.) and, particularly, Plato (q.v.) 
philosophical idealism took shape, 
counterposing itself, first and foremost, 
to the materialism of the atomists. 
From this time onwards there was a 
clearly marked struggle between the 
two main lines of development, mate- 
rialism and idealism (or, as Lenin said, 
“the line of Democritus and the line 
of Plato”). Aristotle (q.v.), who wav- 
ered between materialism and idealism, 
also expressed his ideas in polemics 
with theories preceding and contem- 
porary to him. Aristotle’s criticism 
of the theory of the “idea”, the central 
theory in Plato’s idealism, was partic- 
ularly energetic and witty. In the 
Hellenic period, the beginning of the 
crisis of the slave-owning system, the 
struggle between the different schools 
in the P.A. became more acute. Es- 
pecially sharp was the struggle be- 
tween the Epicurean school of material- 
ism and the stoics into whose funda- 
mentally materialist doctrine elements 
of idealism had made extensive in- 


Philosophy of History 


roads. Questions of ethics came to be 
placed first among philosophical prob- 
lems, but these ethics had their basis 
in the theory of nature and the theory 
of knowledge and thought. Philosophi- 
cal schools were shut off from the world, 
they became coteries of people united 
in their indifference to external events 
and their excessive interest in questions 
of ethics and education. At the same 
time there were changes in the rela- 
tions of philosophy to the specialised 
sciences, and a new type of scientist 
and a new type of scientific literature 
made their appearance; this was spe- 
cial literature comprehensible only to 
those with special training. In the epoch 
of the Roman Empire the crisis of 
the slave-owning community became 
more acute and the urge for religious 
self-oblivion and solace became strong- 
er. A wave of religious cults, doctrines, 
and mysteries spread from the East 
to the West. Philosophy itself became 
religious, even mystical in some doc- 
trines. Examples of this were Neo-Pla- 
tonism (q.v.) and Neo-Pythagoreanism, 
the first of which exerted consi- 
derable influence on the develop- 
ment of Christian philosophy. In 529 
the Emperor Justinian issued a decree 
closing down the philosophical schools 
in Athens. But before this decree and 
quite independently of it, the basic 
ideas of the P.A. had completed their 
course of development. 

Philosophy of History, the name 
given to a sphere of knowledge which 
studies the meaning of history, its 
laws, and the main trends of man’s 
development. Historically, P.H. dates 
back to antiquity. It was elaborated 
by the 18th century Enlighteners 
(Voltaire, Herder, Condorcet, Montes- 
quieu, qq.v.). To combat the influence 
of theology on history, dating back to 
St. Augustine (q.v.), the Enlighteners 
introduced into P.H. the idea of caus- 
ality, elaborated the. theory of pro- 
gress, voiced the idea of the unity of 
the historical process, and emphasised 
the influence of the geographical and 
social environment on man. Hegel 
(q.v.) regarded history as a single, 
law-governed intrinsic process of self- 
development of the spirit, the idea. 








Philosophy of Identity 


The limitations of P.H., expressed 
in its speculative, a priori, and ideal- 
istic nature, were overcome by Marx 
and Engels. The discovery of historical 
materialism provided the basis for 
creating a scientific history. In con- 
temporary P.H., the concepts of Toyn- 
bee (q.v.) and Spengler (q.v.) enjoy 
the greatest influence. The objective 
laws of history are feared by the bour- 
geoisie, and this makes most bourgeois 
sociologists and historians renounce 
philosophical generalisations of history. 
They regard it as a chaotic succession 
of accidents and reject the concepts 
of causality, law, and progress. 
Philosophy of Identity, a philo- 
sophical concept aimed at solving the 
question of the relationship of thinking 
and being, spirit and nature by ac- 
knowledging their absolute identity. 
The. basic principle of P.I. is diametri- 
cally opposed to the principle of dual- 
istic systems (see Dualism). P.I. as 
a definite philosophical concept is 
historically associated with the name 
of Schelling (q.v.), who tried to over- 
come the dualism of Kant’s and Fich- 
te’s systems by advancing a new ini- 
tial principle of monistic philosophy, 
the absolute identity ofthe subjective 
and the objective, the ideal and the 
real. The principle of the identity of 
thinking and being also underlies the 
Hegelian system. But this principle 
is realised by Hegel (q.v.) differently, 
because Hegel understood identity 
dialectically, mot as an immobile 
absolute, an indefinite unity, and one 
indifferently opposed to multifarious 
being, but as a self-developing logical 
idea, whose definiteness and diversity 
are contained within itself as its im- 
manent infinite form. What sets P.I. 
apart from other objectively idealist 
conceptions is not recognition of the 
identity of thinking and being, but 
the metaphysical understanding of this 
identity. P.I. attempts to solve the 
fundamental problem of philosophy 
by dissolving the difference between 
spirit and nature, thinking and being, 
in immobile and absolute substance. 
Ideas close to Schelling’s P.I. were 
expounded by Parmenides (q.v.) and 
Spinoza (q.v.). At present the ideas 


— 347 — 


Philosophy, Practical 


of the metaphysical identity of think- 
ing and being are advocated by certain 
schools of Neo-Thomism (q.v.). In con- 
trast to P.I., Marxist philosophy bases 
its monism (q.v.) on the ideas of the 
material tunity and development of 
the world. 

Philosophy of Life (Ger. Lebens- 
philosophie), a subjective-idealist trend 
of philosophy which arouse in Germany 
and France at the turn of the century. 
Schopenhauer (q.v.) was its main 
ideological predecessor. The origins of 
this philosophy are associated with the 
rapid development of biology, psychol- 
ogy, and other sciences which revealed 
the insolvency of the mechanistic pic- 
ture of the world. P.L. tried to over- 
come the limitations of mechanistic 
materialism from idealist positions. 
Its appearance signified a crisis of 
bourgeois philosophy, its renunciation 
of science and transition to irrational- 
ism and nihilism. As regards its ob- 
jective content P.L. is a distorted, 
idealist interpretation of the socio- 
historical process. The pivot of this 
philosophy is the concept of life as the 
absolute, infinite principle of the world 
which, in contrast to matter and con- 
sciousness, is active, multiform, and 
in eternal motion. Life cannot be cog- 
nised with the help of the senses or 
logical thinking, it is perceived in- 
tuitively and is accessible to emotion 
(chiefly religious). Two main groups 
can be singled out in P.L.: one (Berg- 
son, q.v.) understood life in the bio- 
logical sense and extended biological 
properties to all reality; the other 
(Nietzsche, Dilthey, qq.v., and Sim- 
mel) conceived life as the will, internal 
emotion, irrational play of spiritual 
forces. The central ideas of P.L. were 
the ideological source of existentional- 


ism (q.v.). 
Philosophy, Practical Ie The 
ethical branch of classical philo- 


sophical systems, the teaching on the 
principles and laws of action (for exam- 
ple, the Ethics of Spinoza, q.v., the 
Critique of Practical Reason of Kant, 
q.v., etc.). 2. A widespread trend in 
modern philosophy, directed against 
materialism and science. In P.P. one 
can include Nietzscheism, pragmatism 








Physical Picture of the World 


(q.v.), the philosophy of life, q.v. 
(Bergson, q.v.), existentialism (q.v.), 
and other schools related to them, 
which consider cognition as an “in- 
strument” of achieving practical re- 
sults. Denial of theoretical thought 
and objective truth and the cult of the 
subconscious in P.P. are due to the 
dissolution of thought in the biological 
function of adaptation: the truth of 
an idea is determined not by its re- 
flection of objective reality but by 
its practical validity, utility: all ideas 
(including religious ones) are “true” 
if they lead to success. Thus, the rel- 
ativism and agnosticism of P.P. are 
disguised by reference to practice, in- 
terpreted in an extremely subjectiv- 
ist spirit. 

Physical Picture of the World, a 
term which has become widespread 
chiefly in recent years and which de- 
notes a conception of nature (at times, 
in a narrower sense, the inorganic 
world) proceeding from certain gener- 
al principles of physics. In this sense, 
ancient atomism (q.v.), the physics 
of Descartes (q.v.), and the system 
of Newton {(q.v.) were a P.P.W. A 
feature of all attempts to construct 
a P.P.W. in the 17th and 18th centu- 
ries was the idea that complex natural 
phenomena are reducible to simple 
mechanical motion of discrete particles 
of matter. The idea of specific laws 
irreducible to the more simple forms 
of motion became established in 19th 
century natural science. This concep- 
tion was voiced in the most profound 
and generalised manner in Engels’ 
Dialectics of Nature. The 19th century 
P.P.W. was based on a hierarchy of 
the forms of motion and their reciprocal 
transitions, and in this sense the law 
of conservation of motion was its most 
general principle. In the 20th century, 
the laws of Newtonian mechanics could 
no longer play the part of the most 
general laws. The laws of electromag- 
netic phenomena laid claim to this 
role, but the electromagnetic picture 
of the world could not embrace all 
physical phenomena. On the other 
hand, electromagnetic fields did not 
fit into the general theory of relativity 
which describes gravitational fields. 


— 348 — 


Physics 


Attempts by Einstein and other physi- 
cists to construct a single theory of the 
field did not lead to the creation of 
a new and harmonious P.P.W. A single 
theory of elementary particles and 
their transmutations, the rough out- 
lines of which are now emerging in 
physics, can be the basis of such a 
picture. Thus the development of 
science confirms the ideas of dialec- 
tical materialism, which, as Lenin put 
it, by no means “professed a ‘mechan- 
ical’ and not an electromagnetic, or 
some other, immeasurably more com- 
plex, picture of the world of moving 
matter”. (Vol. 14, p. 280.) 

Physicalism, a conception in logical 
positivism (q.v.), elaborated by 
Carnap, Neurath (qq.v.), and others, 
that every descriptive term in science 
can be translated into the language 
of physics. Propositions which cannot 
be translated are regarded as devoid 
of scientific meaning. The problem 
of the unity of all scientific knowledge 
and of its objective truth is thus re- 
placed by the search of a common, 
or, to be more exact, a single language 
of science. Instead of analysing the 
objective connection of different sciences 
and their unity, physicalists seek to 
translate specific kinds of existing 
knowledge into the language of physics 
and, on this basis, achieve their unifica- 
tion. This is a kind of revival by neo- 
positivism (q.v.) of the mechanistic 
principle of reducibility. But in this 
the logical positivists failed and subse- 
quently many of them broke with 
“orthodox” P. 

Physics, a science of the changes 
and movements of elementary particles, 
structure of atoms, gravitational, elec- 
tric, magnetic, and other fields, and 
molecular processes. In antiquity, the 
word “physics” designated the sum 
total of knowledge about nature. Sub- 
sequently physics was understood as 
the study of the laws governing the 
motion of bodies (mechanics) and the 
causes of sound (acoustics), of thermal, 
electric, magnetic, and optical phenom- 
ena. Classical physics sought to as- 
cribe the causes of these phenomena to 
Newton’s (q.v.) laws of mechanics. 
In the 19th century, it was established 








Physics 


that physics deals with specific laws. 
Thermodynamics studies the behav- 
iour of large sets of molecules a dis- 
tinctive feature of which is irreversible 
transition from less probable to more 
probable states, while mechanical proc- 
esses as such do not possess such 
irreversibility. On the other hand, 
in classical electrodynamics, the view 
arose that the laws of the origin and 
spread of an electromagnetic field 
cannot be reduced to the laws of me- 
chanics. Physics was thus emancipated 
from mechanics in the 19th century. 
At the same time, the mechanical heat 
theory demonstrated the reversible 
transition of mechanical processes into 
thermal, and the study of electricity 
established that mechanical processes 
pass into electrical and vice versa. 
It was established in the 19th century 
that mechanical, thermal, and elec- 
tromagnetic processes are connected 
by reversible transitions, the quanti- 
tative measure of all these forms of 
motion, energy, remaining constant. 
The principle of the conservation of 
energy (see Conservation of Energy, 
Law of) became the basic principle 
of P. At the turn of the century, many 
new, hitherto unknown physical phe- 
nomena were discovered—the origina- 
tion and propagation of radio signals, 
X-rays, and radioactivity. At the same 
time the periodicity of the chemical 
properties of elements discovered by 
Mendeleyev held the focus of theoreti- 
cal physics. Exploring the causes of 
these phenomena, P. branched out 
into atomic and nuclear physics and 
then the physics of elementary parti- 
cles. In the first half of the 20th cen- 
tury, theoretical physics passed from 
the basic classical concepts to ideas 
associated with the theory of relativ- 
ity and quantum mechanics. Experi- 
mental physics, which has registered 
striking successes, is exerting an un- 
paralleled impact on technology and 
people’s living conditions. Throughout 
its development P. has been closely 
connected with philosophy. In an- 
tiquity, physical knowledge and hy- 
potheses were a component of material- 
ist philosophical systems. Generalisa- 
tion of physical knowledge accumulat- 


— 349 — 


Pisacane 


ed through the development of clas- 
sical mechanics, formed the basis for 
the materialist ideas of modern times. 
Their analysis and summary of 19th 
century discoveries in physics provided 
Marx and Engels with a basis on which 
the teaching of dialectical material- 
ism was founded. In the 20th century, 
as in earlier periods, idealist trends 
have been seeking to make use of the 
changes in the conception of physics 
in favour of idealist, positivist con- 
clusions (see Idealism, Physical). The 
analysis of the real meaning of new 
concepts, made by Lenin in his Mate- 
rialism and Empirio-Criticism, and 
subsequent. development of science 
show that P. provides irrefutable ar- 
guments in support of dialectical 
materialism and that the application 
of the philosophical ideas of Marxism 
in physical research gives fresh stimuli 
to the study of nature. 

Piaget Jean (1896-), Swiss psychol- 
ogist, philosopher, and logician, pro- 
fessor at Geneva University. P. made ~ 
a valuable contribution to many of 
the branches of psychology. Using 
vast experimental data, P. created in 
the 30s and 40s the theory of the in- 
tellect formation, which regards the 
intellect as a system of operations, i.e., 
the inner actions of the subject, de- 
rivative from the external object ac- 
tions, and forming a certain structural 
unity. P.’s psychological and logical 
ideas were synthesised in his “genetical 
epistemology”, a theoretico-cognitive 
conception based upon a genetical and 
historico-critical approach to the analy- 
sis of knowledge. According to P., 
the development of a subject’s knowl- 
edge of an object makes it more and 
more invariant, more and more stable 
in the changing conditions of experi- 
ence, this invariance (q.v.) of knowl- 
edge being considered as a reflection 
of the object itself and its properties. 

Pisacane, Carlo (1818-57), Italian 
revolutionary democrat and utopian 
socialist. Active fighter for the liber- 
ation of Italy from foreign yoke, P. 
linked up the unification of his coun- 
try with the establishment of a so- 
cialist system. Seeing in private prop- 
erty the main and eternal cause of 








IRTP Ty eT en ee 
` x i 4 


Pisarev 


the split of society into antagonistic 
classes, P. called for its abolition, for 
the introduction of public property 
and the organisation of a collective 
economy. This was, according to him, 
the only means of eliminating social 
inequality and exploitation. P. called 
for an expropriation of the bourgeoi- 
sie and big landowners through a 
popular peasant revolution. In_ his 
works P. acts as a confirmed material- 
ist and enemy of religion. 

Pisarev, Dmitry Ivanovich (1840- 
68), Russian materialist thinker, critic, 
revolutionary journalist. He was born 
in a landlord’s family. His literary 
activity began in 1859. In 1861, he 
graduated from St. Petersburg Uni- 
versity. He was a staff member and 
actual editor of the journal Russkoye 
Slovo (The Russian Word) from 1861. 
For defending Herzen he was imprisoned 
in the Peter and Paul Fortress from 
1862 to 1867. In the years 1867-68 
he was on the staff of the magazines 
Dyelo (Cause) and Otechestvenniye Za- 
piski (Notes of the Fatherland). P.’s 
revolutionary and socialist views, 
which took shape towards the end of 
1861 (“Scholastics of the 19th century”, 
1861; a leaflet against Shedo-Ferroti, 
1862), changed significantly. The rapid 
decline of the wave of revolutionary 
emancipation movement which arose 
in 1859-61 convinced P. of the lack 
in Russia of the conditions necessary 
for a revolution, of the peasantry’s 
inability to emancipate themselves 
and to build a new society. P. saw the 
main purpose of his activity in the 
solution of “the problem of the starv- 
ing and destitute people”, he advoc- 
ated the socialist ideals (it is true 
that P. was not satisfied with any of 
the existing socialist doctrines). Not 
giving up the use of revolutionary 
violence against the exploiters (The 
Historical Ideas of O. Comte, 1865; 
The Thinking Proletariat, 1865; The 
Propagators of Negative Doctrines, 
1866; Heinrich Heine, 1867, and oth- 
ers), P. put forward the idea of a 
“chemical” path of revolution—gradu- 
al social changes, leading to public 
education, to the growth (due to the 
dissemination of knowledge) of the 


= *350i— 





Planck 


productivity of labour and to the 
improvement of the living conditions 
of the masses as the main prerequisites 
of a radical “reconstruction of social 
institutions”. He sought to entrust 
the progressive intelligentsia, “the 
thinking realists”, with the task of 
public education. His works written 
during the last years of his life (e.g., 
The French Peasant in 1789) testify 
to the growth of the radical tendencies 
in P.’s world outlook. His socio-polit- 
ical conception made a considerable 
stress on the social functions of science. 
He regarded the progress of scientific 
knowledge as the basis of historical 
development. This fact determined 
P.’s incessant struggle against religion 
and the various manifestations of 
“narrow-minded mysticism” in sci- 
ence, drawing mankind away from the 
path of reasonable progress and com- 
pletely ignoring “the most elementary 
testimonies of experience” (Plato's 
Idealism, 1861, and others) and con- 
ditioned P.’s negative attitude to- 
wards Hegel’s “speculative philosophy”. 
P. saw a counter-balance to idealism 
in the theories of the “vulgar material- 
ists” T. Moleschott and Vogt, whom 
he assessed positively (The Physiolog- 
ical Studies of Moleschott, 1861; The 
Process of Life, 1861; Physiological 
Pictures, 1862). P. was one of the first 
in Russia actively to propagate Dar- 
winism (Progress in the Animal and 
Plant World). Inclining towards sen- 
sualism in epistemological problems, 
P. was, however, opposed to empiri- 
cism (The Blunders of Immature 
Thought, 1864) and pointed to the con- 
structive role of creative vision. Lenin 
highly appraised P.’s appeal to crea- 
tive vision. A confirmed adherent of 
tealism, P. engaged in sharp polemics 
with the supporters of “pure art”, 
sometimes going so far as to proclaim 
the “strictest utilitarianism” of art 
and consicering it as one of the obsta- 
cles to scientific progress (The Destruc- 
tion of Aesthetics, 1865; Pushkin and 
Belinsky, 1865). 

Planck, Max (1858-1947), German 
physicist and theoretician, member 
of the Berlin Academy of Sciences 
from 1894. In December 1900, while 





EE —x« <<< =s-- “7 


Plato — 351 — 


Plekhanov 





elaborating the thermodynamic theory 
of thermal radiation, P. arrived at 
the necessity of introducing a new 
universal constant—quantum of action 
(q.v.). Thus P. became the founder 
of the quantum theory, which estab- 
lished the fact of discontinuity in the 
energetic processes and extended the 
notion of atomism to all phenomena 
of nature. Many works of P. are de- 
voted to the philosophical problems 
of natural science, including the phil- 
osophical significance of the law of the 
conservation of energy, the unity of 
the natural-scientific picture of the 
world, the methodology of physical 
investigation, the principle of cau- 
sality, the interrelation of natural 
science with philosophy and religion. 
P. sharply criticised positivism (q.v.), 
particularly the philosophy of Mach 


(q.v.). 

Plato (428/427-347 B.C.), Greek 
idealist philosopher, disciple of Socra- 
tes (q.v.), founder of objective ideal- 
ism, author of more than 30 philo- 
sophical dialogues (Sophistes, Parmeni- 
des, Theatietus, Republic, and others). 
In defending the idealist world out- 
look, P. actively fought against the 
materialist teaching of that time. He 
widely employed the teachings of Soc- 
rates, the Pythagoreans, Parmenides, 
and Heraclitus (qq.v.). To explain 
being, he developed the theory of the 
existence of immaterial forms of ob- 
jects, which he called “Forms” or 
“Ideas” and identified with being. 
To these “Ideas” P. counterposed non- 
being, identified with matter and 
space. According to P., the sensible 
world, which is the product of “Ideas” 
and “Matter”, occupies an intermediate 
position. “Ideas” are eternal, “trans- 
celestial”; they neither arise nor perish, 
they are irrelative and do not depend 
upon time and space. Sensible objects 
are transient, relative, and they de- 
pend upon time and space. The centre 
of P.’s cosmology is the teaching of 
the “world soul”, while the centre 
of his psychology is the teaching of 
the reincarnation of the soul, which 
lives in our body. P. distinguished the 
types of knowledge depending upon 
various cognisable objects. Authentic 


knowledge is possible only of truly 
existent “forms”. The source of such 
knowledge is the immortal human 
soul’s reminiscence of the world of 
ideas, contemplated before its incar- 
nation in the mortal body. We cannot 
have knowledge of sensual objects and 
phenomena, but only a probable “opin- 
ion”. Between “Ideas” and sensible 
objects P. placed the mathematical 
objects, accessible to rational knowl- 
edge. The method of cognition is 
“dialectics”, which P. understood as 
a two-way process: ascending by de- 
grees of generalising concepts up to 
the highest kind and descending again 
from the most genera! concepts to those 
of lesser and lesser generalisation. In 
this process the descent involves only 
“forms” (“Ideas”), and not the sen- 
sible individual things. P. was a rep- 
resentative of the Athenian aristoc- 
racy. His teaching on society portrayed 
an ideal aristocratic state, the basis 
of which is slave labour (Laws); the 
state is governed by “philosopher- 
rulers”; it is watched over by soldiers, 
or “guardians”; below these free citi- 
zens are the “handicraftsmen”. In the 
words of Marx, P.’s utopia was the 
Athenian idealisation of Egypt’s caste 
system. Marx remarked that P. fully 
understood the role of the division 
of labour in the formation of the Greek 
“polis” (“city-state”). P.’s teaching 
played a prominent role in the further 
evolution of idealist philosophy. 
Plekhanov, Georgi Valentinovich 
(1856-1918), Russian revolutionary and 
thinker, founder of the Social-Demo- 
cratic movement in Russia, an eminent 
Marxist theoretician and publicist. P.’s 
world outlook and political activity 
underwent a complicated evolution. 
Initially P. was the leader of the Na- 
rodnik organisation “Land and Free- 
dom” (later, “Black Redistribution”); 
later (in 1880), having emigrated from 
Russia, he studied the works of Marx 
and Engels and established connections 
with the Social-Democratic move- 
ment in Western Europe. As a result 
of this he “deserted Narodism (q.v.) 
and became a convinced adherent of 
Marxism, an active propagandist of 
its ideas in Russia; the “Emancipa- 








Plekhanov 


tion of Labour” group which he founded 
in Switzerland (1883) played a 
great role in the dissemination and 
victory of Marxism in the Russian 
emancipation movement. P. himself 
greatly contributed to the development 
of the Marxist theory, refuting the 
ideology of Narodism, “legal Marx- 
ism” (q.v.), revisionism, and bour- 
geois philosophy. After 1903, Plekha- 
nov could not understand the peculia- 
rities of the new epoch. He departed 
from revolutionary Marxism and 
took a compromising position in 
relation to the opportunists, and then 
became a Menshevik. During the First 
World War P. sided with the so- 
cial-chauvinists. He did not accept 
the October Revolution of 1917. Al- 
though he took part in the factional 
struggle against the Bolsheviks, to 
the end of his life P. remained loyal 
to Marxism, to the cause of the work- 
ing class. That is why Lenin, while 
calling the Menshevik tactics “the 
height of banality and meanness”, 
at the same time stressed that “in 
philosophy Plekhanov upheld the right- 
eous cause”. P.’s works The Develop- 
ment of the Monist View of History, 
1895 (q.v.); Essays on the History of 
Materialism, 1896; The Role of 
the Individual in History, 1898, and 
many others brilliantly expound the 
Marxist theory. P. assessed Marxism 
as a new stage in philosophy, showed 
its qualitative distinctions from all 
previous philosophical and sociolog- 
ical doctrines. P. developed the ma- 
terialist understanding of history, show- 
ing what intricate relations exist be- 
tween social being and social conscious- 
ness; he emphasised ýthe role of social 
psychology in the struggle of ideas, 
which is the expression of the struggle 
between the antagonistic classes in a 
given society; P. was one of the found- 
ers of Marxist aesthetics and art crit- 
icism; he developed the Marxist teach- 
ing on the origin of art, of art as a 
special form of reflection of social life, 
of realism as the essence of art. P. laid 
the foundation of the Marxist history 
of Russian social thought, notwith- 
standing certain unacceptable princi- 
ples in his assessment of Russian phi- 


— 352 — 


Pluralism 


losophy. He disclosed the historic role 
of the Russian revolutionary demo- 
crats as the forerunners of Marxism 
in Russia. P. drew many valuable 
conclusions on the origin and develop- 
ment of religion, on the role of religion 
in social life, on its place among the 
other forms of social consciousness, 
on the attitude of the Marxist Party 
towards religion. In philosophical pro- - 
blems P. committed a number of er- 
rors: he underestimated the role of 
subjective factors in historical devel- 
opment, made concessions to the hier- 
oglyph theory, gave inexact formu- 
lations in which he leaned towards 
“geographical materialism”, and “re- 
duced Marxism to Spinozism”, etc. 
But these individual errors seem ex- 
traneous against the background of 
P.’s system of philosophical views as a 
whole and his lifelong defence of dia- 
lectical and historical materialism. P.’s 
philosophical works are rich and con- 
vincing, and the popularity and the 
captivating interest of his exposals 
make them even today valuable man- 
uals for the study of Marxist phi- 
losophy. 

Plotinus (205-270), Greek idealist 
philosopher, born in Egypt and lived 
in Rome. P. was the founder of Neo- 
Platonism, which intensified the mys- 
ticism of Plato's teaching. According 
to P., the world process begins with 
the incomprehensible and inexpres- 
sible divine. One, which is the eternal 
source of all being and emerges first 
as universal reason, then as the world- 
soul, and later as individual souls, 
as individual bodies including matter, 
which P. considers as non-being. For 
P., the object of human life is to as- 
cend to the One. This can be achieved 
by restraining the bodily attractions 
as well as by developing spiritual 
forces, including those of cognition. At 
its supreme ecstatic stage of ascent 
the soul achieves the communion with 
God. P.’s teaching develops mystical 
dialectics (q.v.): the principle of op- 
posites and their unity, determines 
harmony and beauty, evil and ugliness 
in the world. 

Pluralism, the conception opposed 
to monism (q.v.), which holds that 








Poincaré 


— 353 — 


Politics 





all that exists consists of a multiplic- 
ity of equivalent isolated substances, 
irreducible to a single principle. P.’s 
views were the basis of Leibniz’s 
(q.v.) monadology (see Monad). Mod- 
ern idealists (pragmatists, neo-positiv- 
ists, existentialists, and others) gravi- 
tate towards P. in their attempt to 
be above materialist and idealist 
monism. In the last analysis, 
however, P. in its objective content is 
opposed only to dialectical materialist 
monism. In sociology, P. serves as 
the basis for denying the existence 
of a single determining principle of 
society, for understanding history as 
a current of accidental events, and, 
consequently, for refusing to analyse 
the objective laws of social develop- 
ment, 

Poincaré, Jules Henri (1854-1912), 
French mathematician, professor at 
the Paris University, member of the 
French Academy. His main works 
are devoted to mathematical physics, 
differential equations, combinatorial 
topology, etc. In 1905, simuitaneously 
with Einstein (q.v.), P. arrived at 
some understanding of the special theo- 
ry of relativity (q.v.). He devoted 
much study to general methodological 
problems of science; he maintained 
that the laws of science do not relate 
to the real world, but that they repre- 
sent arbitrary conventions destined to 
promote a more convenient and use- 
ful (according to the “principle of 
the economy of thought” of Mach, 
q.v.) description of the corresponding 
phenomena. In Lenin’s words, “the 
essence of Poincaré’s ‘original’ theory 
amounts to a denial ... of objective 
reality and of objective law in nature”. 
(Vol. 14, p. 165.) The conventionalism 
(q.v.) of P. represents one of the va- 
tieties of physical idealism (q.v.). P. 
was one of the forerunners of the in- 
tuitional (constructive) trend in math- 
ematics. 

Polarity, a conception, characteris- 
ing the forms of contradiction (q.v.), 
i.e., antithesis (q.v.), the correlation 
of the extremes of any unity. P.’s 
sides stand in opposition to each other 
but at the same time are in need of 
each other. Thus, capital and wage 


23-1682 


labour form the polar opposites of 
capitalist society. 

Politics, participation in the affairs 
of the state (q.v.), its guidance, deter- 
mination of the forms, aims, and the 
content of the activity of the state (see 
Lenin, Miscellany, Book XXI, p. 14). 
P. include problems of the state struc- 
ture, the management of the country, 
leadership of classes (q.v.), problems 
of party struggle, etc. The fundamental 
interests of classes, the relations be- 
tween the classes are reflected in P. 
P. also express the relations between 
nations (q.v.) and states (foreign po- 
litics), The relations between classes, 
and hence between their politics, arise 
from their economic position. Political 
ideas and the institutions correspond- 
ing to them are the superstructure of 
the economic basis (see Basis and 
Superstructure). This does not mean, 
however, that P. are the passive re- 
sult of economics (see Economics and 
Politics). For P. to be a great trans- 
forming .force they must correctly 
reflect the needs of the development 
of material life of society. The politics 
of the reactionary segment of the bour- 
geoisie hinder the progressive develop- 
ment of society, because they run 
counter to its objective needs. The 
strength of the Communist Party’s 
policies lies in the fact that it takes 
into account these needs. The scien- 
tifically grounded P. are based on the 
laws of social development and direct- 
ed to suit the interests of society. The 
P. of the Communist Party answer the 
essential needs of the people, find 
permanent support among the masses. 
Successful guidance of the building 
of communism is secured due to the 
integration of the correct P. with the 
corresponding organisational work. This 
fact is a guarantee of the reality of the 
P. itself. That is why the Communist 
Party attaches great significance to 
the political education of the masses, 
to the training of Party cadres. The 
Communist Party guides the devel- 
opment of culture and all the spheres 
of ideology: science, art, morality, etc. 
It condemns every manifestation of 
apolitical attitude and ideological un- 
principledness in the cultural 











Polysyllogism 


development, demands a systematic 
struggle against reactionary ideology. 
The internal policy of the Communist 
Party, directed towards the building of 
communism, is linked up with its foreign 
policy, whose object is to ensure peace- 
ful conditions for building commu- 
nism in the USSR and save mankind 
from world war. 

Polysyllogism, the complex syllo- 
gism, which is a sequence, chain of 
syllogisms, in which the conclusions 
of preceding syllogisms (called pro- 
syllogisms) are included in the prem- 
isses of consequent ones (called epi- 
syllogisms). A P. in which each epi- 
syllogism is preceded by only one pro- 
syllogism, is called linear. We distin- 
guish the progressive and regressive 
relation of syllogisms in Pp. according 
to whether the conclusion of the pro- 
syllogism becomes the major or the 
minor premiss of the episyllogism. A 
P. in which each episyllogism is pre- 
ceded by two prosyllogisms is called 
a cascade P. Formal logic lays down 
certain general conditions for the 
correctness of various kinds of P. 

Polytheism and Monotheism, the 
worship of many gods or of one god. 
P. arose from totemism (q.v.), fetish- 
ism (q.v.), animism (q.v.) in the 
period of the decay of primitive-com- 
munal society. Belief in the plurality 
of equal fetishes and spirits was replaced 
by belief in gods who assumed con- 
crete appearance, name, and cult. 
Social division of labour, earthly re- 
lations of supremacy and submission 
were reflected in the hierarchy of gods. 
The consolidation of the slave-owning 
system, the creation of monarchies, 
led initially to the worship of one God, 
with recognition of the existence of 
others. Then from the Pantheon of 
gods one Almighty God was singled out 
—a copy of the earthly king; M. was 
thus established. Pure M., however, 
did not exist. Signs of P. are discernible 
even in such monotheistic religions 
as Islam (q.v.) and Judaism (q.v.), 
to say nothing of Christianity (q.v.), 
with its Trinity, the Virgin, and a 
great number of saints. 

Pomponazzi, Pietro (1462-1524), Ita- 
lian philosopher of the Renaissance. 


= 354 — 


rer mm we 


Population 





He developed Aristotle’s (q.v.) teach- 
ings in a materialist and anti-scholas- 
tic spirit. In his main work De /mmor- 
talitate Animi (1516) P. stressed the 
elements of sensualism (q.v.) in Ari- 
stotle’s philosophy, and claimed that 
the soul, constituting the form of the 
body, was, nevertheless, mortal. This 
gave rise to indignation on the part of 
the clergy, and P.’s book was burned. 
Rejecting one of the main dogmas of 
religion, the immortality of the human 
soul, this theoretician of humanism 
(q.v.) stressed the fact that only refus- 
al to believe this dogma corresponds 
to the real nature of man, because the 
object of his activity is found not in a 
life beyond, but here, in this earthly 
world. Adhering similarly to the con- 
ception of twofold truth (q.v.), P. 
aspired for the complete separation of 
philosophy and politics from religion. 
Popovsky, Nikolai Nikitich (1730-60), 
Russian enlightener, philosopher, and 
poet, disciple of Lomonosov. He was 
professor of elocution and philosophy 
at the Moscow University (since 1755). 
Of the works of P. the following have 
been preserved: “Speech, delivered at 
the secondary school of Moscow Univer- 
sity, on the beginning of lectures on 
philosophy” (1755), “Letter on how 
science benefits society and the educa- 
tion of youth” (1756), and others. 
In philosophy P. took the standpoint 
of deism (q.v.), although his views 
could be assessed generally as material- 
istic. He translated into Russian John 
Locke’s Some Thoughts Concerning Edu- 
cation, Alexander Pope’s Essay on 
Man, and a number of works of Quin- 
tus Horace, Titus Livy, and others. 
He was the first to lecture on philos- 
ophy in Russian at the University, 
proving that philosophy “is the mother 
of all sciences and arts”, that it 
must be independent of theology and is 
destined to satisfy the inquisitiveness 
of the human mind concerning the na- 
ture and structure of the worlds in 
the Universe. P. advocated enlighten- 
ment and the development of the sci- 
ences, reasonable legislation and good 
government, and wider civil rights. 
Population, all the people living in 
a given territory. Growth of P. is one 














Poretsky 


of the requisites for society’s material 
life. P. is a unity of two aspects; so- 
cio-economic (P. as the aggregate of 
members of society who are in definite 
social relations among themselves) and 
biological (P. as the aggregate of bio- 
logical individuals). The natural and 
social aspects of P. are closely connect- 
ed, being sides of a single whole. P. 
as a socio-economic category includes 
the producers of material wealth and 
children and the aged who do not take 
part in social production, and also (in 
antagonistic class formations) the ex- 
ploiting classes. As socio-economic con- 
ditions change the biological character- 
istics of P. are essentially altered 
(health, birth rate, reproduction, etc.). 
Each socio-economic formation has its 
own historically transient law of P. 
(capitalism, for example, is marked by 
relative surplus population). Unscien- 
tific theories (see Malthusianism) pro- 
ceed from the false idea of eternal and 
immutable laws of P., justifying capi- 
talist exploitation, oppression of the 
peoples in the colonies, and poverty 
and shortage of food by the high birth 
rate and other similar causes. In reality 
the growth of P. depends on diverse 
factors: the level of the productive 
forces, relations of production, the state 
and law, morality, religion, political 
and other ideas, and, lastly, on the geo- 
graphical environment. However intri- 
cate the relationships between these 
factors, the main role in the growth of 
P. is played by the relations of produc- 
tion (q.v.), the socio-economic system 
which determines the position of the 
working people, the overwhelming ma- 
jority of the population. Although other 
factors, operating in the opposite direc- 
tion, may temporarily outweigh the 
influence of production relations, ulti- 
mately it is always decisive. This is the 
initial proposition for a Marxist analy- 
sis of P. problems. 

Poretsky, Platon Sergeyevich (1846- 
1907), Russian logician. Between 1887- 
88, at the Kazan University, he was 
the first in Russia to lecture on mathe- 
matical logic. P. contributed to the 
elaboration of the algebra of logic (q.v.). 
For this theory he found original and 
simple methods of solving the problem 


23° 


— 355 — 


Positivism 


of finding a set of consequences follow- 
ing from a given system of premisses 
and a set of ha s, irom which 
these consequences are deducible (O 
sposobakh resheniya logicheskikh ra- 
venstv i ob obratnom sposobe matemati- 
cheskoi logiki [On the Methods of Solv- 
ing Logical Equations and the In- 
verse Method in Mathematical Logic], 
1884). P.’s philosophical views can be 
described as natural-scientific mate- 
rialism. 

Port Royal, the celebrated Cister- 
cian Abbey near Paris, which in the 
17th century was the most active centre 
of Jansenism (a socio-religious move- 
ment based on the teaching of the Dutch 
theologian Cornelis Jansen). P.R. was 
a major centre of enlightenment in 
France in the 17th century. It was here 
that Pascal (q.v.) lived and worked. 
Various textbooks were written for use 
in this school, one of which was the 
well-known manual of logic (by Antoine 
Arnauld and Pierre Nicole). It was writ- 
ten in the tradition of Cartesian ration- 
alism (q.v.), and contained, among 
other things, a detailed classification 
of propositions and an investigation 
of the distinction between synthetic 
and analytic (q.v.) methods. In 1712, 
Louis XIV, who took the side of the 
Jesuits in their struggle against the 
Jansenists, ordered the complete de- 
struction of the Abbey. 

Positivism, a widely spread subjec- 
tive-idealist trend in philosophy of the 
middle 19th-20th centuries. lt denies 
that philosophy is a world outlook, 
rejects the traditional problems of 
philosophy (the relation of conscious- 
ness to being, etc.) as “metaphysical” 
and unverifiable by experience. P. at- 
tempts to create a methodology or a 
“logic of science” which would stand 
above the antithesis between material- 
ism and idealism. One of the main 
principles of the positivist methodology 
of science is extreme phenomenalism 
(q.v.), according to which the task of 
science is declared to be a pure descrip- 
tion of facts and not their explanation. 
The positivist claim to “neutralism, 
non-partisanship” in philosophy has 
its profound social roots. The most im- 
portant of them derives from the con- 








Positivism 








tradictory attitude of the bourgeoisie 
to the specialised sciences: on the one 
hand, it is interested in the develop- 
ment of the natural sciences, without 
which the development of production 
is impossible; on the other hand, it 
rejects philosophical conclusions which 
go beyond the limits of natural-scienti- 
fic theories and undermine the idea of 
the eternity of bourgeois society. P. 
was founded by Comte (q.v.), who in- 
troduced the term P. Historically, 
there are three stages in the develop- 
ment of P. The exponents of the “first” 
P. were Comte, E. Littré, and P.Laffitte 
(France), John Stuart Mill (q.v.) and 
Spencer, q.v. (England). Alongside the 
problems of the theory of knowledge 
(the problem of the general historical 
laws of its development—Comte) and 
logic (Mill), solved in a spirit of ex- 
treme empiricism and phenomenalism, 
the main place in the “first” P. was 
assigned to sociology (see Organic Theo- 
ry of Society by Spencer), the object of 
which was to prove the natural and 
eternal nature of capitalism. The rise of 
the “second” P.—empirio-criticism 
(q.v.)—dates back to the 70s-90s of the 
19th century and is associated with the 
names of Mach and Avenarius (qq.v.), 
who renounced even formal recognition 
of the objectively-real objects, which 
was a feature of the “first” P. In Mach- 
ism the problems of cognition are 
interpreted from the viewpoint of ex- 
treme psychologism (q.v.), merging 
with subjectivism. The rise and forma- 
tion of the “third” P. is linked up with 
the activity of the Vienna circle, q.v. 
(O. Neurath, R. Carnap, M. Schlick, 
P. Frank, qq.v., and others) and of the 
Berlin Society for Scientific Philosophy 
(H. Reichenbach, q.v., F. Kraus, 
and others), which combined a number 
of trends: logical atomism (q.v.), log- 
ical positivism (q.v.), general seman- 
tics, q.v. (close to these trends are oper- 
ationism and pragmatism, qq.v.). 
The main place in the “third” P. is tak- 
en by the philosophical problems of 
language, symbolic logic, the structure 
of scientific investigations, and others. 
Having renounced psychologism, the 
exponents of the “third” P. took the 
course of reconciling the “logic of 


— 356 — 


Possibility and Reality 


science” with mathematics, the course 
of extreme formalisation of epistemo- 
logical problems. 

Possibility and Reality, categories 
reflecting the dialectical development of 
the objective world, the various stages 
and periods in the emergence and 
development of objects. P. expresses 
the objective tendency of development 
inherent in existing phenomena, the 
presence of conditions requisite to the 
appearance of the objective thing (ob- 
ject, phenomenon) or at least the ab- 
sence of conditions that would exclude 
its coming into being. R. is the name 
for anything objective (object, condi- 
tion, situation) which actually exists 
as the result of the realisation of a P. 
The mutual connection and conversion 
of P. and R. are closely linked with 
the law-governed, necessary develop- 
ment of the objective world, with re- 
cognition of the principle of determin- 
ism (q.v.). A distinction is made be- 
tween real and abstract P. Abstract 
(or formal) P. expresses the absence in 
reality of any conditions that might ex- 
clude any given phenomenon, but does 
not assume the presence of any condi- 
tions making its appearance inevita- 
ble. It may also express a tendency 
which has not as yet developed and may 
be connected with lack of knowledge 
of the circumstances requiring analysis. 
In the latter case it may involve im- 
possibility. Real P. denotes the pres- 
ence of all the necessary conditions 
under which a P. will inevitably be 
realised. In certain circumstances, 
however, abstract P. may become real 
P., and vice versa. The quantitative 
relation between abstract and real 
P. may be expressed in probability 
(see Probability, Theory of). P. of any 
one phenomenon does not jin itself 
exclude the P. of the opposite. phenome- 
non, or the P. of its not occurring. 
Allowance for real possibilities, the 
steps taken to turn some of them into 
R., and removal of the danger of un- 
desirable Pp. constitute an important 
part of human activity. Such activity 
is presupposed by the theoretical analy- 
sis of P., particularly the consider- 
ation of its relations to necessity and 
chance (q.v.). P. becomes R. only when 








Postulate 


— 357 — 


Pragmatism 





the full set of-conditions for the existence 
of a certain phenomenon either 
arises spontaneously or is consciously 
prepared. The more there are of such 
conditions and the more essential these 
conditions are, the more likely a P. 
becomes. Thus, the P. of an economic 
crisis under commodity production is 
already implicit in the act of selling 
commodities. But the conversion of 
this P. into R. requires a whole set of 
conditions and relations that does not 
exist within the framework of simple 
commodity production. These arise 
only in capitalist society, where crises 
become inevitable. By combining cer- 
tain materials and forces of nature, 
man is able to bring into being such 
phenomena as he desires (creating the 
full set of conditions required for such a 
phenomenon) and to prevent such phe- 
nomena as he does not desire (temov- 
ing their cause), Such activity is not, of 
course, unconditional. It is limited by 
the objective laws of the world and 
develops in accordance with these laws. 
In social life, P. becomes R. through 
man’s practical activity. For example, 
the building of communist society is 
impossible unless people work conscious- 
ly for it under the leadership of a 
Communist Party, but this activity 
must be in accordance with the objec- 
tive laws of social development. In the 
history of philosophy up to the time 
of Marx and Engels, the most profound 
analysis of P. and R. was given by 
Aristotle and Hegel (qq.v.). 

Postulate, a principle or proposition 
in a scientific theory, which is taken 
as the initial proposition, incapable 
of proof within the framework of that 
theory. In modern logic and scientific 
methodology the concepts “P.” and 
“axiom” (q.v.) are, as a rule, equiva- 
lent. Sometimes the difference in the 
meanings of these concepts derived 
from ancient philosophy is preserved: 
axioms signify the initial logical prin- 
ciples, and P. initial propositions in a 
special scientific theory. 

“The Poverty of Philosophy”, one 
of Marx’s early works, which outlined 
the basic principles of scientific so- 
cialism. It was written in French in 
1847 and was directed against the views 


of the French petty-bourgeois philoso- 
pher and economist, the anarchist Prou- 
dhon (q.v.). Marx came out against 
the “dialectical” phraseology of Prou- 
dhon, demonstrating that the latter did 
not rise above the bourgeois outlook. 
Marx devoted much attention to criti- 
cism of Hegelian dialectics and the 
elaboration of materialist dialectics. 
A scientific analysis of the capitalist 
mode of production is given in P.P. and 
the foundations of Marxist political 
economy are laid. Marx deeply studied 
the economic situation, the historical 
tole of the proletariat in the class 
struggle. “The condition for the eman- 
cipation of the working class,” Marx 
wrote, “is the abolition of every class.... 
Meanwhile the antagonism between the 
proletariat and the bourgeoisie is a, 
struggle of class against class, a struggle 
which carried to its highest expression 
is a total revolution.... It is only in an 
order of things in which there are no 
more classes and class antagonisms 
that social evolutions will cease to be 
political revolutions. Till then, on the 
eve of every reshuffling of society, the 
last word of social science will always 
be [here Marx quotes the following 
words of George Sand in her Jan 
Ziska}: ‘Combat or death: bloody strug- 
gle or extinction. It is thus that the 
question is inexorably put.’” (Marx, 
The Poverty of Philosophy, p. 197.) 
Practice, see Theory and Practice. 
Pragmatics, a branch of semiotic 
(q.v.). ; 
Pragmatism (Gk. pragma, things 
done), a widespread subjective ideal- 
istic trend in modern philosophy. The 
so-called “principle of pragmatism” is 
the core of pragmatic philosophy and 
determines the value of truth by its 
practical utility (see Peirce). In James 
(q.v.) works P. is formulated both as a 
method of solving philosophical dis- 
putes by means of comparing “practi- 
cal consequences”, following from a 
theory, and as a theory of truth: truth 
is that “what works best in the way of 
leading us, what fits every part of life 
best and combines with the collectivity 
of experience’s demands”. A subjective 
understanding of “practice” and truth 
leads P. to define a concept (idea) as an 











Praxiology 


— 358 — 


Predicate 








“instrument” of action (Dewey, q.v.), 
and cognition as the sum total of subjec- 
tive “truths” (“humanism” of F.C.S. 
Schiller, q.v.). By practical utility, 
however, P. understands not confirma- 
tion of objective truth by the criterionof 
practice, but what meets the subjective 
interests of the individual. In explain- 
ing reality P. adopts the standpoint 
of veadiedtentpiriciem”, which is close- 
ly related to empirio-criticism (q.v.). 
Oea e reality is identified in P. 
with “experience”, and the division of 
cognition into a subject and object is 
made only within experience. Proceed- 
ing from “radical empiricism” and the 
comprehension of truth as practical 
utility, P. “... deduces from all this 
alGod for practical purposes, and only 
for practical purposes...”. (Lenin, Vol. 
14, p. 342.) In logic P. comes to irration- 
alism, in open form in James’ works, 
and in disguised form by appeals for 
the creation of a “logic of scientific 
investigation” in Dewey’s. P. regards 
the laws and forms of logic as useful 
fictions. P. subscribes to meliorism in 
ethics, while in sociology it varies from 
the cult of “outstanding individuals” 
(James) and apology for bourgeois de- 
mocracy (Dewey) to an outright defence 
of racism and fascism (F.C.S. Schil- 
ler). At the present time P. appears in 
the form of “experimental naturalism”, 
combining subjective idealism with 
anti-Marxism and  anti-communism 
(Sidney Hook), or ih the form of neo- 
pragmatism, combining P. with neo- 
positivism (q.v.), and semantic ideal- 
ism (“semiotic” of C. W. Morris, oper- 
ationism, q.v., of P.W. Bridgman, 
q.v., pragmatist interpretation of for- 
mal logic of C. I. Lewis, R. Carnap, 
q.v., and W. Quine). For a long time 
P. dominated the spiritual life of the 
USA, only recently has it given way 
to neo-positivism and religious philo- 
sophical conceptions. 

Praxiology, a teaching within the 
framework of practical sociology; it is 
a method of considering various ac- 
tions or aggregates of actions from the 


‘point of view of their effectiveness. 


Founded by the President of the Polish 
Academy of Sciences Tadeusz Kotarbin- 
ski, it is one of the methods of modern 


sociological investigation. The essence 
of this method consists in practical 
(and historical) investigation and de- 
scription of the various habits and meth- 
ods of work, revealing their integral 
elements and hence arriving at various 
practical recommendations. P. studies 
the history of these categories, and un- 
dertakes concrete investigations of the 
work of collective bodies, analyses 
forms of labour organisation, its spe- 
cialisation, the subjective (less fre- 
quently objective) factors in the change 
of organisation and the degree of effica- 
cy of labour. P. studies the interaction 
between individuals, and between the 
individual and the collective, in the 
process of production. It is spread to 
some extent in Poland. 

Predestination, Theory of, the teach- 
ing according to which everything 
in the world, including the phenomena 
of the human psyche, is predetermined 
by the sheer will of God (Augustin, 
Luther, Calvin, qq.v., pre-established 
harmony, q.v.), or by strict mechanical 
necessity. Consistent advocacy of the 
T.P. leads to denial of development and 
recognition of the fact that any activi- 
ty is senseless. Modern science rejects 
the T.P. and corroborates the teaching 
of dialectical materialism on the self- 
motion (q.v.) of matter. 

Predicables, types of predicates in 
Aristotle’s logic. In Topics Aristotle 
counts four P.: genus, species, property, 
and accident. Porphyry, Aristotle’s 
commentator, adds differentia specifica 
to this list. P. are opposed to individual 
names, because the latter, as distin- 
guished from P., cannot be used as predi- 
cates. Aristotle’s teaching on P. is 
linked with the teaching on the kinds of 
proposition—categories (praedicamenta). 

Predicate (in traditional logic), an 
element of any proposition, which is ei- 
ther affirmed or denied in respect of 
the subject of the proposition. As a 
rule, the concept P. expresses the con- 
cept of properties. Aristotle himself 
was at variance with traditional logic 
in that he defined P. somewhat different- 
ly (and from the functional point of 
view more precisely), by uniting the 
predicate and the copula. Contemporary 
formal logic proceeds from a more 





TE ee RE, La TRE Lo a NED TS 


ey 


my 


Pre-established Harmony 


general conception of P., understand- 
ing it as a logical function which is 
specified for an object-field and as- 
sumes this or that truth-value. Unlike 
the traditional conception of P. as a 
one-term function, this function may 
be of two, three, etc., variables, i.e., 
it may express multi-term relations. 
Thus, “x is a river” is a one-term P., 
“x<y” is a two-term P. and “x lies 
between y and z” is a three-term P. 
The substitution for variables of the 
names of individual objects belonging 
to those object-fields, for which the P. 
has sense, gives true or false statements. 

Pre-established Harmony, recogni- 
tion of divinely ordained harmonic 
changes of soul and body, denying 
cause-effect connection between the soul 
and the body and holding that every 
desire of the soul and the corresponding 
motion of the body are pre-established, 
preordained parallel to, and independ- 
ently of, each other. The teaching of 
P.H. represents an attempt to over- 
come the dualism of spiritual and ma- 
terial substances. Hints of P.H. are to 
be found in Descartes’ (q.v.) teaching, 
but it is explicit in the works of the 
occasionalists (q.v.), viz., Arnold Geu- 
lincx, Nicolas Malebranche (q.v.). The 
concept P.H. was somewhat revised 
by Leibniz (q.v.), who professed P.H. of 
all monads in the Universe. According 
to Leibniz, the world and each one 
of the creatures inhabiting it develops 
by its own abilities, but these abil- 
ities are created and chosen by God in 
such a way as to predetermine the best 
possible order in the world. 

Preformationism, an anti-dialectical 
conception of development which dom- 
inated biology in the 18th century. 
According to P., the properties and signs 
of the mature organism are laid 
in a ready form in the embryo. The 
influence of P. was undermined by 
Darwin’s (q.v.) theory of evolution, 
according to which the development 
of the embryo is accomplished by means 
of successive transformations condi- 
tioned by heredity (q.v.) and appear- 
ing only in definite conditions of the 
external medium. 

Premisses (in logic), propositions 
from which a new proposition, or in- 


— 359 — 


Priestley 


ference (q.v.) is drawn. According to 
the kind of inference, the P. may be a 
great variety of propositions or their 
combinations. For the conclusion to be 
true the P. must be true and correctly 
(according to the laws of logic) com- 
bined in reasoning. 

Pre-Socratics, name for the earliest 
Greek philosophers (7th to beginning of 
4th century B.C.). The term is conven- 
tional because many of the most no- 
table P. made their contribution to 
philosophy after Socrates (q.v.). It is 
not conventional in the sense that the 
P. did not pose the problem of the pur- 
pose and destiny of the individual, of 
the relation of thought to being, of the 
immanent dialectics of thought, and 
confined themselves to the study of 
nature, the Universe, and objective real- 
ity as it was apparent to the senses. 
These problems were all treated from 
the standpoint of a sensual Universe 
consisting of a perpetual cycle of Herac- 
litus (q.v.), Diogenes of Apollonia 
(5th to 4th centuries B.C.), Xenopha- 
nes, Pythagoras, Parmenides (qq.v.) 
and his Eleatic pupils, Empedocles, 
Anaxagoras, Leucippus, and Democrites 
(qq.v.). The main object of study of 
pre-Socratic philosophy—the Universe 
—was believed to consist of the usual 
sensual elements—earth, water, fire, 
and ether, which constantly inter- 
change by means of densification and 
rarefaction. The dialectics of the ele- 
ments is a characteristic feature of the 
natural philosophy of the P., particu- 
larly Democritus and Heraclitus. These 
elements are sensual and imbued with 
an organising but purely material prin- 
ciple (logos in Heraclitus, love and 
enmity in Empedocles, the eternally 
moving atoms in the atomists, etc.). 
The founders of Marxism-Leninism gave 
a high appraisal of the spontaneous 
materialism of the P., which emerged 
from the attempt to refute mythology 
and uphold scientific philosophy. 

Priestley, Joseph (1733-1804), Eng- 
lish scientist and materialist philoso- 
pher. He discovered oxygen and worked 
on the problems of optics and elec- 
tricity. He was an advocate of the 
principles of the French Revolution. As 
a result of persecution P. emigrated 








Primary and Secondary Qualities 


to the USA (1794). He continued the 
traditions of F. Bacon and Hobbes 
(qq.v.). In P.’s opinion, all matter pos- 
sesses the properties of extent, density 
and impenetrability, its characteristics 
being determined by the presence of 
the forces of attraction and repulsion. 
Man’s thought and sensations are the 
product of other organisation of the 
very same matter. P. rejected Locke’s 
dualism (q.v.) from the mechanistic 
position: for example, he tried to ex- 
plain association of ideas by vibration. 
He demanded the combining of experi- 
ments and theory. He paid great atten- 
tion to the problems of hypothesis, 
analogy (qq.v.), etc. In sociology P. 
advocated the principle of determinism 
(q.v.), but opposed fatalism (q.v.). 
P. was an adherent of the ethics of 
eudemonism (q.v.). In his opinion, 
the greatest individual happiness is 
compatible with the happiness of 
other men. 

Primary and Secondary Qualities, 
the terms used to distinguish the quali- 
ties (properties) of things according to 
their objectivity. The terms were intro- 
duced by Locke (q.v.), although this 
distinction was made earlier by De- 
mocritus, Galileo, Descartes, Hobbes 
(qq.v.). By primary, or objective, pro- 
perties Locke meant motion, impenetra- 
bility, solidity, cohesion of particles, 
shape, volume, etc. Secondary, or sub- 
jective, qualities (colour, smell, taste, 
sound), according to Locke, “are nothing 
in the objects themselves” and they de- 
pend upon the primary properties. 
This point of view is explained by the 
mechanistic nature of Locke’s material- 
ism. Thus, all properties that could 
not be explained by means of mechan- 
ics were declared by him to be second- 
ary, definable only by the subject’s 
organisation and state. The singling out 
of subjective properties was based on 
confusion of the objective existence of 
the properties with their degree of ade- 
quacy and the form of their reflection 
in consciousness, and resulted from the 
misunderstanding of the special role 
played by thought in reflecting the 
properties of objects. Turning to ac- 
count the inconsistencies of metaphys- 
ical materialism, the subjective ideal- 


— 360 — 


Primitive-Communal System 


ists, D. Berkeley, D. Hume, and 
others, classed primary properties as 
subjective. Dialectical materialism de- 
nies the division of the properties of 


things into objective and  subjec- 
tive. 
Primitive-Communal System, the 


first socio-economic formation (q.v.), 
which existed many thousands of years 
ago and was common to all peoples in 
the early stage of their development. 
The production relations of this system 
were the product of a low level of devel- 
opment of the productive forces, of 
the primitive state of the tools of 
labour, of the natural division of labour 
by sex and age. The basis of the produc- 
tion relations was common ownership 
of the means of production (tools of 
labour, land, dwellings, agricultural 
implements, etc.). Within the frame- 
work of common ownership there was 
also private ownership of weapons, 
clothes, household utensils, etc. In the 
P.C.S. production was carried out 
collectively, by the clans. The produce 
was divided into equal parts and con- 
sumed collectively. Only by working 
together could the primitive people 
secure their means of subsistence and 
protect themselves against the attacks 
of wild animals and neighbouring com- 
munes. On the basis of the first major 
division of labour (q.v.)—the separation 
of animal husbandry from cultiva- 
tion—the productive forces of the P.C.S. 
began developing with considerably 
greater speed. With their development 
there arose and developed exchange, 
private property, and economic ine- 
quality of individual members of the 
commune. Slave labour led to further 
economic inequality and was respon- 
sible for the disintegration of the primi- 
tive commune. Collective production 
and equal distribution of the product 
began to fetter the productive forces. 
At the higher stage of development of 
the P.C.S. the second major division of 
labour took place: the separation of 
the handicrafts from agriculture. This 
facilitated the further break-up of the 
P.C.S. The result was the emergence 
of the poor and the rich, exploitation, 
classes (q.v.) and the state (q.v.). The 
P.C.S. was replaced by class societies, 





Primitivism 


— 361 — 


Probability Logic 





e.g., the slave-owning system (q.v.) 
and feudalism (q.v.). 

Primitivism, a formalistic trend in 
modern art which arose at the beginning 
of the 20th century. Its typical repre- 
sentative was the French self-educated 
artist Henri Rousseau (1844-1910). 
Inherent in P. is the emphatic rejec- 
tion of the historically evolved artis- 
tic rules and technical achievements, 
which are deliberately replaced by imi- 
tation of the art patterns of primitive 
society, and admiration of the naive 
and simplified forms of children’s 
creation. P. prefers pseudo-popular 
and pseudo-juvenile stylisation, exag- 
geration, and inflation of individual 
details to the reproduction of reality 
in development. 

Principal Co-ordination, a subjective 
idealist theory developed by R. Avena- 
rius (q.v.) and his disciples (R. Willy, 
I, Petzoldt, and others), According to 
this theory, between our “ego” (sys- 
tem C, or the central term) and the 
environment (system R, or the coun- 
ter-term) there is P.C. (inseparable 
link). The objective world cannot exist 
without a certain “ego” which per- 
ceives it. People in their “experience” 
deal only with the values in a given 
expression (E—values)—sensations of 
green, cold, etc. (“elements”)—and 
affectional relations of the pleasant, 
the true, the known, etc. (“charac- 
ters”). This theory is incompatible 
with science, which considers man as 
the product of a long evolution of mat- 
ter, and nature as existing before man 
and independently of him. Echoing 
Berkeley (q.v.) and Fichte (q.v.), the 
theory of P.C. leads to solipsism (q.v.). 
The criticism of P.C. is given in Lenin’s 
Materialism and  Empirio-Criticism 
(q.v.). 

Principle, the leading idea, the basic 
rule of behaviour. In early ancient 
philosophy water, air, fire, the earth, 
etc., were taken as the prime elements. 
The P. was considered as the expression 
of necessity or the law of phenomena. 
Logically, the P. is the central con- 
cept, the basis of a system, and the 
generalisation and extension of some 
proposition to all the phenomena of 
the field from which the P. is abstract- 





ed. The P. of activity, for example, 
means the ethical standard character- 
ising the relations between people in 
society. 

Probability Logic, logic in which 
propositions (q.v.) signify not only 
truth or untruth but may have the 
intermediate significance of probabi- 
lity of truth (p), of likelihood. The logi- 
cal framework built on this basis is 
used to arrive at an approximate judge- 
ment of hypotheses not by compar- 
ing them with reality but through other 
propositions expressing knowledge al- 
ready available to us. Thus, the degree 
of probability contained in the prop- 
osition “it will rain tomorrow” may 
be estimated by reference to the me- 
teorological data available. Conse- 
quently, the p of a hypothesis is a 
function of two arguments: the hypo- 
thesis itself (A) and the available in- 
formation (k). If A follows logically 
from k, p is true to the extent that & is 
true; if A contradicts k, p is false; in 
all other cases p has an intermediate 
significance. The problem of the pre- 
cise numerical value of the p of certain 
propositions in relation to others is” 
open to discussion and has been treat- 
ed in various ways by representatives 
of various trends in P.L. The p of 
complex hypotheses, when the p of all 
the propositions comprising them is 
known, is calculated according to 
the rules of mathematical calculation 
of probability (see Probability, Theory 
of), P.L. being one of the interpreta- 
tions of this calculation. It would 
seem that the most fruitful applica- 
tion of P.L. is in inductive logic (q.v.). 
Reference to P.L. was made by Aristot- 
le and the sceptics of ancient times, 
but Leibniz was the first philosopher 
to have serious ideas on the subject. 
The theory of probability which arose 
at the end of the 17th century could 
more properly be described as P.L. or 
as an undivided science of probability. 
The separation of P.L. from the theo- 
ry of probability began in the middle 
of the 19th century, when the atten- 
tion of the latter became concentrated 
on mass chance events. Even today, 
many attempts have been made to 
regard the study of probabilities as an 


] 
pi 
$ 





Probability, Theory of 


integral science with two branches, 
the theory of probability and P.L. 
Probability, Theory of, the study of 
mass-scale random events, i.e., of 
events that occur repeatedly under 
certain circumstances. When, for in- 
stance, several times a coin is tossed 
in the air, the result of each throw being 
an individual elementary random 
event, there can be only two alterna- 
tives: the coin must land heads or tails. 
In many instances of the operation of 
chance the most important factor is, 
of course, what will happen in each 
individual case. With this the T.P. is 
not concerned. But mass random events 
cover an extremely wide field (e.g., the 
sex of an infant, frequency of defects 
in mass production, etc.). They occur 
also in physical, chemical, biological, 
and social phenomena. Hence the ex- 
tremely wide application of the T.P. 
in technology and the natural and so- 
cial sciences. One of the basic properties 
of mass-scale random events on which 
the theory is based is the stability of 
their relative frequencies (see 
Great Numbers, Law of), i.e., of the 
ratio of the number of experiments 
(or observations), in which the mass- 
scale random event occurs to the total 
number of experiments (or observa- 
tions). This quantity is stable, particu- 
larly over a large number of experi- 
ments, and it is called the probability 
of the given mass-scale random event. 
The probability of any given event is 
calculated experimentally, but once it 
is given a mathematical expression, 
we can judge by the probability of 
certain initial events the probability 
of other events connected with them. 
The concepts of chance and probability 
are not part of pure mathematics. 
Neither can the T.P. be considered part 
of pure mathematics, although it can 
be made part of it by use of axiomatis- 
ing (see Axiomatic Method). In spite 
of the value of such mathematical treat- 
ment, the T.P. remains a science in 
its own right, with its own specific 
subject-matter, its function being to 
reveal the objective regularity in chance 
phenomena. These regularities, how- 
ever, are statistical in character (see 
Laws, Statistical and Dynamic). The 


— 362 — 


Proclus 


investigation of probability, therefore, 
gives a fuller insight into law and also 
into the problem of the relation between 
chance and necessity. Moreover, it 
should be stressed that the probability 
of events is one of their objective 
properties and not the result of our ob- 
servations of them, as is held by the 
advocates of the subjective-idealist ap- 
proach to the T.P. (e.g., the German 
mathematician Richard von Mises). 
The history of the T.P. is usually divid- 
ed into four periods: the first em- 
braces the formation of its elementary 
concepts and theorems (Pascal, Fermat, 
Bernoulli) when no concrete scientific 
material was available for its appli- 
cation. In the second period, covering 
the 18th century and the beginning of 
the 19th, the need for calculations of 
probability arises in various spheres: 
the theory of errors (Gauss), the theory 
of accuracy in shooting (Poisson and 
Laplace), but so far the claim of the 
T.P. to the function of generalised logic 
still holds. The third period, covering 
the second half of the 19th century, 
saw the development of statistics on 
the basis of obsolete theoretical ma- 
terial, and the beginnings of the break- 
away of the T.P. from probability log- 
ic. A revolution in method was brought 
about by Chebyshev, who placed a new 
emphasis on strictness of proofs and 
evaluations. In the fourth period, in 
the 20th century, there was a sudden 
widening of the application of the 
T.P. in various fields of technology and 
the natural and social sciences and it 
was recognised as a science. In this pe- 
riod an extremely important role in 
the development of the T.P. is played 
by the Soviet mathematicians 
S. M. Bernstein, A. N. Kolmogorov, 
A. Y. Khinchin, and others. 

Process, a regular, successive chang- 
ing of a phenomenon, its transition 
into another phenomenon (see Develop- 
ment). 

Proclus (410-85), founder of the 
school of Neo-Platonism (q.v.), born in 
Constantinople and died in Athens. P. 
was the initiator of the dialectical no- 
tion of triadicism (see Triad and also 
Hegel). Because of his effort to fit the 
contents of ancient mythology in a 








Production 


— 363 — 


Productive Forces 





single philosophical system, P. is 
characterised in historico-philosophi- 
cal literature as a systematiser of hea- 
thenism, a scholastic of Hellenism. 
Proceeding from the idea of Plato (q.v.) 
that the singular is revealed in plural- 
ity, and that the latter strives to secure 
unity, P. recognised three stages of 
the development of all that exists: 
sojourn, aspiration forward, the reverse 
aspiration. According to P., devel- 
opment proceeds not by division or 
transformation, but as a result of full- 
ness of strength, in consequence of 
which one creates the other, itself not 
undergoing change. Main works: The 
Elements of Theology, Platonic Theolo- 


y. 

Production, the process of consuming 
labour power and creating the means 
of production and articles of personal 
use necessary for the existence and de- 
velopment of society. The process of 
P. as the purposeful activity of people 
by which they act upon external nature 
and transform it to make it conform to 
their needs and at the same time change 
their own nature, is a perpetual and 
natural condition of human life. The 
basic elements of every process of P. 
are: purposeful activity of people, 
their labour (q.v.), the object of la- 
bour and the means of labour. In the 
process of P. men also influence one 
another, uniting in a definite way for 
joint activities. Therefore, P. always 
bears a social character. Consequently, 
there are two sides to P: the productive 
forces (q.v.) and the relations of produc- 
tion (q.v.). P. is inseparably linked 
with distribution, exchange, and con- 
sumption, the three of which forming an 
integral whole. P. is the starting point 
and the determining factor with re- 
spect to consumption. P. is connected 
with consumption through distribution 
which, conditioned by the mode of 
production (q.v.), by the form of own- 
ership, establishes the share of individ- 
ual members in the social product. 
P. always exists in a definite, histori- 
cally established social form. It may 
be the primitive, the slave-owning, the 
feudal, the small-scale commodity, 
the capitalist, the socialist, or the com- 
munist social form. The general fea- 


tures of P. (the unity of its main ele- 
ments, its relation to distribution, 
exchange, and consumption) assume a 
different nature depending upon its 
historical type, i.e., the mode of produc- 
tion, upon the nature of the relations of 
production (see Capitalism, Socialism). 

Productive Forces, the means of pro- 
duction and people equipped with pro- 
duction experience and habits of work. 
The P.F. express the attitude of men 
to the objects and forces of nature used 
for the production of material wealth. 
The main productive force of society 
are the producers, the workers who con- 
stantly improve the instruments of 
labour, use more widely the wealth 
of nature, enrich their production ex- 
perience, raise the productivity of la- 
bour. The condition of the P.F. are an 
index to the degree of human society’s 
power over nature. The P.F. undergo 
constant development: first of all the 
instruments of labour are perfected, 
and this determines the necessity for 
the development of the relations of 
production (q.v.) and the mode of pro- 
duction (q.v.). The history of human 
society shows that in the formations 
with antagonistic classes, at a certain 
stage of the development of material 
production, there arises a contradic- 
tion, a conflict between the P.F. and 
the relations of production. The rela- 
tions of production begin to lag behind 
the level of development of the P.F., 
they become outmoded, outlive them- 
selves, and turn from a form of develop- 
ment of the P.F. into an obstacle and 
hindrance to them. The delay in the 
development of the P.F. of contempo- 
rary capitalism, where the relations 
of production have long ago become 
obsolete, corroborates this proposition. 
Under the socialist mode of production, 
when the relations of production are 
constantly and in a planned way brought 
in accord with the growing P.F., 
there is powerful and accelerated de- 
velopment of the latter. The creation 
of the material and technical basis, 
i.e. the P.F., of communism is a 
decisive link in the chain of the 
economic, social, and cultural problems 
involved in building communist 
society. 











Progress and Retrogression 





Progress and Retrogression in Social 
Development, opposite forms of social 
development as a whole or individual 
aspects of it, signifying respectively 
either the progressive development of 
society on an ascending line, its rise, 
or the reversion to the old, outlived 
forms, stagnation, and decay. The crite- 
rion of social P. is the degree of develop- 
ment of the productive forces, of the 
economic system, and the institutions 
of its superstructure determined by 
it, together with the development and 
dissemination of science and culture, 
the development of the individual, 
the degree of extension of social free- 
dom. The development of the mode of 
production is basic and decisive here. 
In individual historical periods, in 
individual countries an essential, if not 
decisive significance for the descrip- 
tion of social development from the 
point of view of P. or R. may, on the 
strength of their relative independence, 
attach to such social phenomena as 
political life, culture, education, etc., 
although they are secondary, deriva- 
tive and determined by the economic 
system. The history of the countries 
where a fascist dictatorial regime was 
established, or is established (see 
Fascism) may serve as example of 
social R. determined by political fac- 
tors. The development of antagonistic 
socio-economic formations is extremely 
contradictory. Although in certain pe- 
tiods of history these formations serve 
as stages of P., in the period of decline 
and decay, the features of R. become 
the dominant ones. However, in this 
period R. cannot be universal, inas- 
much as the basic tendency in the de- 
velopment of mankind as a whole is 
not R. but P., which in the case in 
point is expressed in the emergence 
of the elements and prerequisites of a 
new society and in the development of 
certain aspects of social life. Thus, for 
example, the R. observed in the devel- 
opment of bourgeois society in the 
imperialist era is accompanied by P. 
in many branches of science and technol- 
ogy, as well as in a number of other 
social phenomena. However, to assess 
the vitality of a given society, its abil- 
ity to show P. or R., it is more im- 


— 364 — 


Proletarian Internationalism 


portant to determine the general ten- 
dency of its development, which aids 
classes and social groups interested 
in social P. to cognise more deeply and 
apply the laws of social development. 
The concepts “P.” and “R.” are inter- 
preted differently in philosophy and 
sociology. The scientists in the period 
of the progressive development of cap- 
italism (Vico, Herder, Hegel, qq.v., 
and others) recognised P. and tried to 
find its rational foundation. Scientists 
in the period of the decline of capital- 
ism either reduce the concept “P.” 
to the spheres of individual cultures 
and civilisations (Spengler, Toynbee, 
qq.v.) or do not admit the possibility 
of studying P. in history. They try to 
explain R. by the action of purely sub- 
jective factors, the R. of nazi Germany, 
for example, by the features of Hitler’s 
personality and by the activities of 
the National-Socialist Party. Marxism- 
Leninism gives a scientific explanation 
of P. & R. P. as a progressive develop- 
ment without relapses into R. is possi- 
ble only in a non-antagonistic, commu- 
nist society. 

Prolegomena, a short introduction 
to some science, the object of which is 
a preliminary acquaintance with its 
contents, problems, and the method 
of investigation. Prolegomena zu einer 
jeden künftigen Metaphysik, die als 
Wissenschaft wird auftreten können, 
by Kant serves as introduction to the 
Critique of Pure Reason (in fact a short 
summary of this work). 

Proletarian Internationalism, the ide- 
ology of the international solidarity 
of the proletarians and labouring peo- 
ple of all countries, one of the basic ideo- 
logical principles by which the work- 
ing class and its party are guided. The 
idea of P.I. was first enunciated by 
Marx and Engels in the Manifesto of 
the Communist Party (q.v.), which 
proved the community of interests 
of the workers of all countries in the 
struggle for liberation from capitalism. 
The essence of P.I. is expressed in the 
slogan “Working men of all countries, 
unite!” The working class of every 
nation cannot regard its struggle dis- 
associated from the struggle of the 
proletariat of other nations, for its 





Proletarian Internationalism 





enemy is not only the bourgeoisie of 
its own country but the bourgeoisie of 
other countries. Hence the common 
fundamental interests of the world 
proletariat as a whole. In P.I. the love 
of the proletariat for its country, the 
desire to see it free from class and other 
kinds of oppression, is integrally bound 
up with the support of the struggle of 
the working people of other countries 
for peace, democracy, and socialism. 
A scornful attitude to other nations, 
even small ones, is alien to P.I., for 
every nation makes its own contribu- 
tion to world culture. The Great Octo- 
ber Socialist Revolution and the victory 
of socialism in the USSR weakened 
the world system of imperialism, under- 
mined its foundations, and rendered 
great support to the international pro- 
letariat in its just struggle; at the same 
time P.I. was shown by the support 
which the international working class 
rendered to the Soviet Republic. The 
ideas of P.I. are embodied in the solu- 
tion of the question of nationalities 
in the USSR and other socialist coun- 
tries and in the creation of a new type 
of the multinational state founded on 
friendship between nationalities. With 
the formation of the world socialist 
system many more aspects of the con- 
tent of P.I. have become manifest. 
One of the manifestations of P.I. in 
contemporary conditions is the friend- 
ship and mutual help of the countries 
forming the world socialist system. 
The safeguarding of the security of 
the socialist community, the struggle 
for peace and against war, aid to the 
peoples of backward countries in de- 
veloping their national economy and 
culture are among the most important 
requirements of P.I. P. I. is inseparably 
linked with socialist patriotism, with 
devotion to socialism, to the world so- 
cialist system. The building of commu- 
nism inthe USSR is a great internation- 
alist task of the Soviet people, an- 
swering the interests of the world so- 
cialist system as a whole, the interests 
of the international proletariat, the 
whole of mankind. In our times the 
principles of P.I. demand an uncompro- 
mising struggle against all varieties 
of national seclusion, against the ideol- 


3 


Proof 





ogy of cosmopolitanism, and the resolute 
defence of the unity of the Workers’ 
and Communist Parties. All striving 
to divide peoples on a nationalist or 
even racial basis, all Great-Power atti- 
tudes to other peoples are incompati- 
ble with the ideology of P.I. These are 
manifestations of petty-bourgeois ideol- 
ogy, which replaces the class approach 
by a geographical or racial approach 
and condemns the peoples to isolation 
and national parochialism, diverts 
them from the international revolution- 
ary movement, and leads to the weaken- 
ing of the anti-imperialist struggle. 
Proof, process of reasoning designed 
to establish the truth (or falsity) of an 
idea. The idea to be proved is called 
the thesis. The inferences on which the 
proof is built, and from which the the- 
sis logically follows, are called argu- 
ments (q.v.). Arguments are assumed 
to be true and must not involve prem- 
isses which assume the thesis to be 
proved, otherwise the result is the error 
known as circular evidence (q.v.). A 
P, which establishes the truth of 
the thesis is called simply P.; one which 
establishes the-falsity of the thesis is 
called a refutation. P. may be direct, 
i.e., it may consist of a series of deduc- 
tions whose premisses are arguments or 
propositions inferred from arguments, 
or it may be arrived at by means of 
additional assumptions. The latter type 
of P. is built up in the following 
manner. Certain propositions are proved 
with the help of assumptions, after 
which the P. of these propositions is 
converted in accordance with certain 
special rules into a P. of the origi- 
nal thesis (without assumptions). Pp. 
arrived at with the help of assump- 
tions include: (1) those whose assump- 
tions are eliminated by means of the 
deduction theorem (q.v.); (2) P. by 
cases, in the following form: if we know 
of the existence of cases Ai, or Ag a 
or Ax, we first prove thesis B, assum- 
ing Ai, then A,, and so on, up to Ak. 
Thesis B is thus proved without assump- 
tions; (3) apogogic P. (q.v.). Pp. are 
subject to various errors due to ignora- 
tio elenchi, acceptance of unfounded or 
erroneous arguments, or due to the 
employment of incorrect methods. A. P. 








Proof of the Existence of God 


containing an error is invalid. But the 
detection of error in a P. does not con- 
stitute P. of the falsity of the thesis. It 
is possible to have Pp. that establish 
the truth of a thesis not as a certainty 
but as a probability (see Probability 
Logic). 

Proof of the Existence of God, ar- 
guments seeking to prove the main 
dogma of religion—the existence of 
God—put forward by various idealist 
philosophers. The three basic arguments 
are as follows. The cosmological argu- 
ment (found already in Plato and Aris- 
totle, qq.v., and maintained by Leib- 
niz and Wolff) states that God exists 
as the prime cause of all things and 
all phenomena. This argument is 
based on the unscientific assumption 
that the world must be finite in time, 
and that its prime cause is non-mate- 
rial. The teleological argument (proposed 
by Socrates and Plato, qq.v., 
subsequently developed by the stoics, 
q.v.) states that everything in nature 
has a purpose that can be explained 
only by assuming the existence of a 
supernatural rational being, which 
arranges all phenomena harmoniously. 
This argument was disproved by Dar- 
win’s (q.v.) theory of evolution, which 
proved the natural causes of purpose- 
fulness. The ontological argument was 
advanced by St. Augustine, who assert- 
ed that all men conceive of God as 
the perfect being. This conception, he 
argued, could not arise unless a perfect 
being existed in reality. Therefore God 
exists. In the Middle Ages this argu- 
ment was taken up and defended by 
Anselm of Canterbury (q.v.). Its weak- 
ness in assuming, that what is thought 
must be real was so obvious that it was 
criticised not only by the materialist 
philosophers but by many theologians, 
e.g., Thomas Aquinas (q.v.). Other 
arguments for the existence of God, 
epistemological, psychological, and 
moral, are advanced by various idealist 
philosophers. Arguments for the exist- 
ence of God were disproved within 
the framework of idealism by Kant 
(q.v.), who asserted that God is a 
being above experience (transcenden- 
tal) and known only by reason, and 
therefore the existence of God cannot 


— 366 — 


Propositional Calculus 


be proved. Analysis of the arguments for 
the existence of God reveals that they 
all contain a logical mistake (see Cir- 
cular Evidence) and rest ultimately 
on blind faith. 

Propaedeutics, preliminary exercise, 
preparatory, introductory course in 
some science, expounded in a systema- 
tised and concise form. P. precedes a 
more detailed study of the correspond- 
ing branch of knowledge. A school 
course of philosophy is sometimes 
called philosophical P. 

Property, a side of an object which 
determines its difference from, or sim- 
ilarity to, other objects and is mani- 
fested in the interaction with them. 
(For example, extension, elasticity, 
colour, electric conductivity, etc.) Ev- 
ery P. is relative. In relation to wood, 
iron is hard, in relation to diamond it is 
soft. Each individual thing possesses 
a countless number of Pp., the unity of 
which expresses its quality (see Quali- 
ty and Quantity). Pp. inherent in 
all objects or connected with the very 
nature of matter are called universal 
(see Attributes). There are specific and 
general Pp., basic and non-basic, nec- 
essary and accidental, essential and 
non-essential, external and internal, 
compatible and incompatible, separa- 
ble and inseparable, natural and artifi- 
cial, etc. Dialectical materialism as- 
serts that all Pp. of things are inherent 
in the things themselves, i. e., are objec- 
tive. Pp. do not exist independently 
and they can be separated from a thing 
only abstractly. A study of separate 
Pp. of objects is a stage in cognising 
their qualities. 

Propositional Calculus, the logical 
system (see Calculus) which formalises 
reasoning based on true relations be- 
tween propositions which are regarded 
in abstraction from their internal sub- 
ject-predicate structure. Various for- 
mulations of P.C. are possible. There is, 
for example, the inductive definition 
of a formula: (1) propositional varia- 
bles p, q, T, ... are formulas; (2) if Aisa 
formula then (A) is a formula; (3) if A 
and B are formulas, then (A)>(B), 
(A) V (B), (A) -(B) are formulas; (4) 
nothing else is a formula. An axiom is 
a formula of the following types: 1) 





Propositional Function 


A->(B->A); 2) (A-B)+A; 3) (A+B)> 
((A (B+C)>(A>C)); 4) (A.B)>B; 
5) A>+(B-(A.B)); 6) A>(AVB); 7) B> 
—(AVB);8) (A>C)>((B>C)>((AVB) > 
+C)); 9) (A+B)>((A>B)+A); 10) 
A-+A where the line over the symbols 
is a sign of negation (q.v.);. a sign of 
conjunction (q.v.);a sign of implica- 
tion (q.v.) and V a sign of disjunction 
(q.v.). The following rule of inference 
is assumed: from A and AB B is di- 
rectly inferred. This is the basis for a 
definition of the formula, inference and 
proof deduced from P.C. P.C. is non- 
contradictory (see Non-Contradiction) 
and complete (see Axiomatic Theory, 
Completeness of). The decision prob- 
lem (q.v.) is decidable. For non-classi- 
cal P.C. see Constructive Logic and 
Many-Valued Logic. 

Propositional Function, one of the 
main concepts of contemporary formal 
logic (q.v.). P.F. is characterised by 
the fact that it relates one of the values 
of truth (truth, falsehood) to the objects 
of a given object-field. For example, 
the concept “horse” (i.e., the concept 
of the property of “being a horse”) 
from this point of view fulfils the role 
of a function, ascribing to the objects of 
a given object-field (e.g., the field of 
material bodies) the value “truth”, if 
the object is a horse and the value 
“falsehood”, if the object is not a 
horse. The introduction of the P.F. 
and quantifiers (q.v.), performed within 
the limits of a functional calculus 
(q.v.) makes it possible to express the 
structure of judgements more profound- 
ly and completely than within the 
limits of a propositional calculus (q.v.), 
to reflect a wider range of conclusions 
and proofs, used in reasoning. 

Prosyllogism, see Polysyllogism. 

Protagoras (481-411 B.C.), Greek 
philosopher, a leading Sophist (q.v.), 
lived in Abdera; he was expelled from 
Athens for his atheism, and his book 
On the Gods was burnt. Bourgeois re- 
searchers interpreted P. as an absolute 
sceptic, translating extant fragments 
of his work as follows: “Man is the 
measure of all things: of those which 
are, that they are; of those which are 
not, that they are not.” But the Greek 
word corresponding to “that” may be 


— 367 — 


Protestantism 


translated differently: “existing, so 
long as they exist”, etc. With this 
interpretation P. is not a subjectivist 
and sceptic; his thesis contains an 
element of a materialistic shade of 
anthropologism; this agrees with the 
assessment of Sextus Empiricus which 
amounts to the fact that for P. “matter 
is unstable” and “the main causes 
(logoses) of all things are in matter”. 

Protestantism, the third kind of 
Christianity (q.v.), after Orthodoxy 
(q. v.) and Catholicism (a.v.), originating 
in the period of the Reformation (q.v.). 
P. is the name of a number of various 
independent religions or churches dif- 
fering in dogmatic and canonical prin- 
ciples. The Protestant religion has its 
own specific features. Protestants do 
not recognise the Catholic purgatory, 
reject Orthodox and Catholic saints, 
angels, the Virgin, worshipping only 
the divine Trinity. The main distinc- 
tion between P., on the one hand, 
and Catholicism and Orthodoxy, on the 
other, is that P. professes an imme- 
diate link between God and man. In 
the Protestant view, grace is commu- 
nicated to man by God, without the 
intermediary of the church and “sal- 
vation” is achieved only by man’s own 
faith and God's will. This doctrine 
undermined the primacy of spiritual 
power over secular power, making the 
Catholic Church and the Pope of Rome 
redundant, liberating man from feudal 
chains and arousing in his soul the 
feeling of personal responsibility, open- 
ing the way for the bourgeois-demo- 
cratic liberties and bourgeois indivi- 
dualism. As a result of the different rela- 
tions between God and man in P., not 
only the clergy and the church but also 
the religious cult are assigned a secon- 
dary place. There is no worship of icons 
or relics, the number of sacraments is 
reduced to two (Baptism and the Euch- 
arist), divine service consists, as a rule, 
of sermons, congregational prayer, the 
singing of psalms. Formally, P. is 
based exclusively on the Bible, but in 
practice every Protestant religion has 
its own symbol of faith, authorities, 
“sacred” books, etc., its own kind of 
“sacred tradition”. Contemporary P. 
is spread mainly in the Scandinavian 











Proudhon 


countries, Germany, Switzerland, 
Britain, and the USA. In the 20th 
century the oecumenic movement has 
gained considerably in P., resulting 
in the creation of the World Council 


of Churches. 

Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph (1809-65), 
French political figure, philosopher, 
sociologist, and economist, one of the 
founders of anarchism (q.v.). P.’s 
works are: Qu'est-ce que la propriété? 
(1840), La Philosophie de la misère 
(1846), and others. In philosophy P. 
was an idealist, eclectic; he vulgarised 
Hegelian dialectics, transforming it 
into a rough scheme, into a teaching 
of the mechanical combination of “good” 
and “bad” aspects in every phenome- 
non. P. considered the history of so- 
ciety as the struggle of ideas. While 
declaring big capitalist property as 
“stolen”, he was perpetuating small 
property. He defended the utopian 
idea of organisation under capitalism 
of a “just exchange” between indivi- 
dual commodity producers. The foun- 
ders of Marxism criticised the teachings 
of P. and his adherents. 

Psyche, the product of interaction 
specific to a subject between that 
subject and the object. To simple 
speculation P. takes the form of pheno- 
mena of man’s so-called subjective 
world accessible to self-observation: 
sensations, perceptions, ideas, thoughts, 
feelings, etc. Speaking about the 
essence of P., it is necessary to distin- 
guish it as a philosophical concept and 
as a concrete scientific concept. The 
philosophical concept of P. has a 
direct bearing on the fundamental pro- 
blem of philosophy (q.v.). In this res- 
pect the concept “P.” is identified 
with the concepts “consciousness”, 
“thought”, “cognition”, “mind”, 
“idea”, “spirit”, etc., and is regarded 
by dialectical materialism as a special 
property of a highly organised matter, 
which is the reflection of the objective 
reality in the form of ideal images 
(q.v.). Matter and P. are in opposi- 
tion, but only within the limits of 
the fundamental problem of philosop- 
hy, i.e., the problem of the relation 
of thinking to being, for P. cannot 
exist outside and independent of mat- 


— 368 — 


Psyche 


ter. Lenin wrote: “To operate beyond 
these limits with the antithesis of 
matter and mind, physical and mental, 
as though they were absolute opposites, 
would be a great mistake.” (Vol. 14, 
p. 246.) As a concrete scientific concept, 
P. is simultaneously the product and 
condition, specific to the subject, of 
the interaction with the object. In the 
process of such interaction, systems 
of nervous links are formed in the 
human brain; ensuring the reflection 
of reality, these systems are at the 
same time the regulators of the process 
of the interaction of the subject and 
the object, allowing man to orientate 
himself in the surrounding world. P. 
as a material structure, with its 
own reflecting function, is not reduc- 
ible to a nervous phenomenon: every 
individual element of this structure 
is built according to the laws of physiol- 
ogy as a result of the interaction of 
the organs and tissues of the organism; 
but P. itself is formed in the process 
of the interaction of the subject with 
the object and in this sense it is formed 
according to other, psychological, laws. 
The appearance of P. is connected with 
the development of life, with the proc- 
ess of complication of the forms of 
interaction between living beings and 
their surroundings, with the appearance 
of the signal connections of the organ- 
ism and the surroundings. In the proc- 
ess of animal evolution the special 
organ of P. is formed, first the nervous 
system and, later, its highest section, 
the brain. With higher animals and 
man such an organ is the cortex of 
the big cerebral hemispheres. The P. of 
man developed in the process of labour 
inseparably linked with the develop- 
ment of speech. It differs qualitatively 
from the P. of animals, which is the 
result of biological development. The 
specific feature of human P. is con- 
sciousness of reality, which ensures 
prevision of events and planning of 
actions. The transition to the higher 
form of the development of the P. was 
the result of the reconstruction of the- 

organ of the P. — the brain: in the ` 
human phase, the mechanisms of the 
nervous activity of animals were com- 
plemented with the mechanisms of the 








Psycho-Analysis 


second signal system, i.e., the signali- 
sation of reality by means of words 
(see I. Pavlov). From its very origin 
human P. has been a socio-historical 
product. In individual development 
the P. of contemporary man is 


formed in the process of his mas- 
tering the forms of activity de- 
veloped in the course of history 


(see Psychology and Higher Nervous 
Activity). 

Psycho-Analysis, the general theory 
and method of treating nervous and 
psychical diseases proposed by S. Freud, 
and a theoretical tenet of Freudism 
(q.v.). The main propositions of P. are 
the following: the subconscious (q.v.) 
which dominates the psyche is inhibit- 
ed in the depths of the psyche by 
“censorship”, a psychic instance formed 
under the influence of the system 
of social interdictions. In special “con- 
flicting” cases the unconscious incli- 
nations evade “censorship” and appear 
before the consciousness as dreams, 
slips of the tongue or of the pen, neu- 
rotic symptoms (the appearance of 
diseases), etc. Since the psychic is 
primary with respect to the somatic 
(corporeal) it is necessary to investi- 
gate the psyche by subjective methods. 
One such method introduced by P. is 
the so-called “method of free associa- 
tions”, a method of interpreting dreams, 
slips of the pen, etc. These methods 
are called upon to divine the “truth”, 
i.e., the sexual condition which the 
apparent sense (or visible nonsense) 
of the manifestations of the uncon- 
scious conceal. P. is a glaring example 
of a “vicious circle”: the supposed 
supremacy of the unconscious, which 
it is required to prove, “is proved” 
in every concrete case of P. by means 
of arbitrary interpretations, based on 
this supposition itself. In the latter 
period of his activities Freud, and 
later his disciples and contemporary 
investigators, transplanted the subjec- 
tive methods of P. into social history, 
all the events of which they arbitra- 
rily interpret as manifestations of the 
unconscious inclinations of the indi- 
vidual and the people as. a whole. 
P. is the theoretical and methodolog- 
ical basis of a number of trends of 


24-1682 


— 369 — 


Psycho-Physical Problem 


the modern psychological school (q.v.) 
in sociology. 

Psycho-Physical Parallelism, one of 
the trends in psychology, dualistically 
(see Dualism) offering a solution of the 
problem of the relation between the 
psychical as the ideal (q.v.) and the 
physiological, or physical, as the mate- 
rial. The adherents of P.P. (W. Wundt, 
T. Lipps, H. Ebbinghaus, E. B. Titche- 
ner, T. Ribot, and others) regard the 
psychical and the physiological as mu- 
tually independent, parallel, cause- 
effect lines. But as corporeal injury, for 
instance, affects the psychical condition, 
and the sense-content of the psychical 
processes changes the course of physiolog- 
ical processes, P.P., as a rule, is 
supplemented by the theory of psycho- 
physical interaction (L. Busse, C. 
Stumpf, O. Külpe, and others), according 
to which the psychical and the physio- 
logical have constant influence one 
upon the other. Here, as in the vulgar 
materialist conception, the very prin- 
ciple of the correlation of the ideal 
content of the psyche and physiology 
is erroneous. In reality the content 
of the psychical processes is determined 
causatively by the objective world 
and man's practical and theoretical 
mastery of it. The physiological proc- 
esses constitute the necessary mate- 
rial mechanism, ensuring the vital 
activity and all the social functions 
of man, including the process of cog- 
nition, reflection. But physiology by 
itself does not determine the content 
of the psychical processes. That is 
why epistemologically the psyche must 
be contrasted not to the physiologi- 
cal mechanism of reflection but to 
what is reflected. In the last analysis, 
P.P. necessarily leads to idealistic 
conclusions in the spirit of psycho-so- 
matics (q.v.). 

Psycho-Physical Problem, the prob- 
lem of the relation between the psychical 
and the physical. The P.P. became 
particularly acute in the 17th century, 
when Descartes affirmed the existence 
of two substances (matter—the sub- 
stance which has extent but does not 
think, and the soul—the substance 
that thinks but has no extent) and 
counterpoised the soul and the body. 














Psychological School! in Sociology 


In contemporary psychology there have 
always been tendencies towards a 
false solution of the P.P., e.g., the 
theory of psycho-physical parallelism 
(q.v.) and its varieties. According to 
this theory, psychical and physical 
phenomena seem to represent two par- 
allels, sets of phenomena independent 
of each other, the links of which cor- 
respond to each other. The dialectical 
materialist approach to the P.P. is 
based on the proposition that the unity 
of the world implies its materiality. 
The psychical is not a special principle 
(substance), but a product of the develop- 
ment of matter. 

Psychological School in Sociology, 
a subjective idealist conception of so- 
ciety which spread at the end of the 
19th and the beginning of the 20th 
century. The representatives of the P.S. 
sought the key to the understanding 
of the social phenomena in the psyche 
of individuals or in the collective 
psyche (psychical interaction of indi- 
viduals). The founder of the P.S. was 
the American sociologist Lester Ward. 
Ward saw the qualitative peculiarity 
of society in the psychological char- 
acter of social phenomena. Another 
prominent exponent of the P.S. was 
the French sociologist Gabriel Tarde, 
who considered men's imitating one 
another (vogue, tradition) to be the 
main law of sociology. The German 
sociologist Georg Simmel was also close 
to the P.S. The beginning of the 20th 
century saw the decay of the P.S., 
the rejection of frank, straightforward 
psychologism. The psychological the- 
ories of society merge with so-called 
“cultural sociology” (A. Weber and 
others). Contemporary psychologism 
does not constitute a special school, 
but is a peculiar methodological prin- 
ciple. The Ta ion of psychologism 
to social phenomena is practised to 
a greater extent in American social 
psychology (E. Bogardus, L. Bernard, 
and others). Freudism (q.v.) is also 
widespread. Psychologism may be con- 
sidered as a kind of social reformism, 
since it is based on the aspiration to 
reform society by means of psychology. 
Psychologism in sociology also serves 
as a means of influencing the people. 


— 370 — 


Psychology 


Psychology, a science, dealing with 
one of the aspects of the interaction 
of the subject and the object. The ob- 
ject of P. is psychic activity (q.v.), 
the psychic qualities and conditions 
of the subject. The border-lines, distin- 
guishing P. from other related sci- 
ences (theory of knowledge, logic, eth- 
ics, aesthetics, and others), have never 
been clearly defined. P. dates back to 
antiquity and it developed for long 
within the sphere of philosophy. The 
history of P. has been the arena of 
a fierce struggle between materialism 
and idealism. The fundamental prob- 
lem whose solution determines the ma- 
terialist or the idealist positions in 
psychology is the problem of the na- 
ture of psyche: whether it is the prod- 
uct of the development of matter or 
is a substance independent of matter. 
In the middle of the 19th century, 
with the introduction of the experi- 
mental method in P., it became an 
independent field of knowledge. How- 
ever, the false subjectivist methodo- 
logical positions of many representa- 
tives of P. at that time plunged P. 
into a crisis. In the 20th century, it 
split into a number of idealist and 
mechanistic trends—behaviourism, 
Gestalt psychology, Freudism (qq.v.), 
and others. P. as a science founded on 
dialectical materialism was created 
in the USSR. Scientific P. proceeds 
from the Marxist-Leninist theory of 
knowledge and its natural scientific 
basis is the theory of reflexes in the 
psyche, propounded by Sechenov (q.v.) 
and developed by I. Pavlov (q.v.). 
Contemporary P. is very much differ- 
entiated and besides general P., which 
investigates the nature of psychic ac- 
tivity and its laws, it includes child 
P., pedagogical P., labour P., art P., 
and others. One of the basic problems 
of P. is the investigation of human 
labour, especially in connection with 
man’s modern technological control. 
Under socialism P. investigates the 
formation’ of the moral make-up of 
the new people, especially of the young 
generation, seeks new means and meth- 
ods to assist an all-round develop- 
ment of the individual, his physical 
and mental capabilities. By disclosing 


See. Ft. 2 TAFT 





Psychology of Creative Work 


the laws of psychical activity, its 
appearance and development, P. pro- 
vides valuable data for the construction 
of a dialectical-materialist theory of 
knowledge and logic (see Psyche, 
Higher Nervous Activity). 

Psychology of Creative Work, the 
field of psychology which investigates 
the laws of man’s activity in creating 
what is new and original in science, 
technology, art, and other forms of la- 
bour activity. The object of the P.C.W. 
includes also the creative elements 
in learning and recreation. Despite 
the wealth of descriptions of the cre- 
ative process, the P.C.W. has been 
but slightly worked out. Attempts to 
disclose the P.C.W. by the theories 
of “intuition”, “unconscious work”, 
and others are not of scientific interest, 
inasmuch as their authors erroneously 
consider creative work as an unexplained 
phenomenon, accessible only to the 
elect. Often enough the role of any 
labour or any activity (q.v.) whatsoever, 
including thinking, has been denied in 
the act of creation; it was considered 
that the discovery of the new comes 
about by itself or as a result of uncon- 
scious work. Materialist psychology 
proceeds from the fact that creative 
work, in its developed forms, is a 
result of labour. The motives and aims 
of creative activity arise from the 
requirements of society, and the possi- 
bility of solving a given creative prob- 
lem appears when the conditions neces- 
sary for it are provided in the course 
of social development. Scientists, in- 
ventors, artists make use of the knowl- 
edge and the means which have been 
worked out and stored in the devel- 
opment of science, technology, and 
the arts. However, the creative ele- 
ment proper often presupposes the 
discovery of a new mode, means or 
method of action, reflecting the prop- 
erties and relations of objects and 
phenomena hitherto unknown. Concen- 
trating all his attention on a task, 
man usually cannot observe himself, 
and that is why often enough the 
finding of the solution is experienced 
by him as something sudden, although 
in reality it is the result of an inten- 
sive and persisting work. Creative ac- 


24° 


— 371 — 


Psycho-Somatics 


tivity demands the maximum appli- 
cation of the initiative, knowledge, 
and abilities of man. Such application 
is reflected in the will and the partic- 
ular emotional conditions depicted 
in detail in many works of literature. 
Psychology of Religion, a trend in 
psychology which investigates emo- 
tional experiences over the belief in 
the supernatural, the emotions, feel- 
ings, called forth by religious preaching 
and staging, the means of religious 
suggestion and autosuggestion, the cul- 
tivation of religious fear, the feeling 
of sinfulness leading to the appearance 
of a religious faith, religious ecstasy, 
and also the psychic factors promoting 
the conservation of religious faith, etc. 
Contemporary theologians pay great 
attention to the psychological aspect 
of religion, attempting to turn religion 
into an eternal factor of inner life, 
into a psychic factor. The representa- 
tives of the empirical P.R. come out 
under the banner of positivism, the 
“objective” study of religion (James, 
Starbuck, Flournay, Ribot, Godin, and 
others). This school studies the reli- 
gious feelings of separate individuals, 
reducing religion to a subjective psy- 
chic condition. It completely ignores 
the social causes which distort people’s 
psyche as well as their world outlook 
along religious lines. Adherents of the 
empirical P.R. make wide use of differ- 
ent questionnaires, methods of obser- 
vation and experiment. The psycholo- 
gy of religion openly attempts to 
prove the existence of God. A number 
of its works are carried out with the 
purely practical purpose of working 
out methods of religious influence upon 
the human psyche. Perverted emotions, 
broken will, morbid manifestations 
of the human psyche—neurosis, hyste- 
ria, ecstasy, etc., are used to strengthen 
religion, enhance the church's author- 
ity. The perversion of the human 
psyche by religion and the use of it 
for religious purposes is particularly 
fanatical in religious sects in which 
“direct” intercourse of believers with 
God is staged. : 
Psycho-Somatics, a subjective ideal- 
ist theory, which regards man as the 
integral unity of soul and body, but 








Public Authority 


with the psyche transformed into some- 
thing isolated from social historical 
practice and into the primary princi- 
ple and basis of all processes in the 
human organism. In the spirit of 
Freudism P. elevates into absolute 
the role of psychical reactions in hu- 
man behaviour, in the inception of 
diseases, and in maintenance of health. 
P. appeared in the thirties of the 20th 
century (Alexander and Dunbar). 

Public Authority, one of the main 
attributes of the state (q.v.) as distinct 
from pre-class tribal organisation. Its 
significance was for the first time dis- 
closed by Engels (The Origin of the Fam- 
ily, Private Property and the State, 
q.v.). P.A. is isolated from the people, 
defends the interests of the exploiters, 
the minority of society. It is exercised 
by men for whom government becomes 
a profession (officialdom, army, police, 
etc.). Important adjuncts of P.A. are 
the courts, prisons, and other penal 
institutions. 

Public Opinion, a certain aggregate 
of ideas and concepts which express 
the attitude of one or several social 
groups to events and phenomena of 
social life, to the activity of classes 
and individuals. P.O. is manifested in 
the approval or condemnation of a 
man’s actions by the people around 
him. It is formed purposefully by class 
organisations and institutions and also 
spontaneously when people are guided 
solely by practical experience and tra- 
dition. That is why P.O. reveals not 
only a difference of interests, but also 
an unequal degree of social awareness. 
In an antagonistic society two mu- 
tually exclusive P.O. always exist as a 
reflection of the interests of the exploit- 
ers and the exploited. In socialist 
society P.O. differs radically in both 
its nature and its features. Here the 
struggle of opinions is not antagonistic 
and the differences are resolved through 
the growth of the communist conscious- 
ness of society’s members, stimu- 
lated by criticism and self-criticism 
(q.v.) and ever growing consideration 
for the interests of the people. This 
is promoted by the activities of the 
Communist Party armed with the knowl- 
edge of the laws of social development. 


— 372 — 


Purpose 


The conversion of socialist statehood 
into communist public self-adminis- 
tration (q.v.) determines the growing 
role of P.O. as a means of communist 
education and a peculiar regulator 
of people’s behaviour. 

Purism, a trend in modern art; 
appeared in the twenties of the 20th 
century in France and detached it- 
self from cubism (q.v.). Its founders 
(A. Ozenfant, b. 1886, and Le Corbusier, 
pseudonym of Charles-Edouard Jean- 
neret-Gris, 1887-1965) proclaimed the 
main task of art to be the “purification” 
of reality from what seems to be alien 
to it, namely the “ideological complex- 
ity”, by reducing the vital phenomena 
and events to their elementary, sim- 
plest forms. Inasmuch as “man is a geo- 
metrical creature”, art must also be 
permeated with geometry, and “a pic- 
ture can be constructed in the same way 
as a machine”. P. makes a fetish of the 
machine, transforming man into its 
appendage and adjunct. In a number 
of works of Fernand Léger (1881-1955), 
W. Baumeister (1889-1955), and others, 
the image of man is reduced to a mech- 
anism, to a peculiar aggregate of 
pistons, gears, and cylinders. Still life 
has become the favourite genre of P. 

Purpose, a result anticipated in the 
mind and on the achievement of which 
human action is concentrated. P. is a 
regular feature of man’s cognitive activ- 
ity; it expresses his dependence on the 
surrounding world and on objective 
laws with which the purposeful activ- 
ity of people must be co-ordinated. 
P. which runs counter to these laws is 
unrealisable. The dialectical interac- 
tion between necessity and freedom is 
expressed in purposeful activity of 
people. P. is also a conscious motive 
which guides and regulates action. It 
pervades practice as an intrinsic law 
of actions, which determines their mode 
and nature and to which man subordi- 
nates his will. P. may be distant, im- 
mediate, direct, general or specific, 
intermediate or final. The supreme ul- 
timate P. of the Soviet people, com- 
munism, has now become a direct P. 
In science (biology, sociology, cyber- 
netics) P. also designates a stable 
condition of a system to be achieved 








Purposefulness 


through feedback, q.v. (see Purposeful- 
ness). 

Purposefulness, an aspect and mani- 
festation of the intricate causal con- 
nection and law-governed develop- 
ment of the organic world, of social 
systems, man’s actions, and so on. P. 
is expressed in various ways in differ- 
ent spheres: in the organic world, 
in the adaptation of organisms to the 
environment; in social life, in the with- 
ering away of obsolete social orders 
and the rise of new ones capable of 
promoting the progress of society, in 
the activity of people aimed at achiev- 
ing definite aims, etc. Facts of organic 
P., utilised by teleology (q.v.) for 
proving God’s existence, received scien- 
tific explanation in Darwin’s (q.v.) 
theory of natural selection. The P. of 
the forms of social life is scientifically 
demonstrated in Marxist economic the- 
ory and historical materialism. Cyber- 
netics (q.v.) in its general form means 
the adverse action of feedback (q.v.), 
in which the information about the 
discrepancy between the required and 
actual state turns into a cause for the 
ever greater approximation of the sys- 
tem to the required state. The highest 
form of P. is that of human activity in 
which (and only in which) a purposeful 
aim is included in the cause-and- 
effect chain as its most important link. 
All actions of men corresponding to 
some purpose are purposeful in the 
broad sense. In a more profound sense, 
only that activity is purposeful which 
conforms not only to the given condi- 
tions, but also to the general trend 
of development and is based on knowl- 
edge of the objective laws and require- 
ments of development. 

Pyrrho of Elis (c. 365-275 B.C.), 
Greek philosopher, founder of antique 
scepticism (q.v.). His teaching is clear- 
ly expounded in the works of his dis- 
ciple Timon. P. concerned himself 
chiefly with ethics, the problems of 


— 373 — 


Pythagoreans 


happiness and its achievement. He 
sought to attain imperturbable happi- 
ness (see Ataraxia) by abstaining from 
sufferings (see Apathia), scepticism 
being the means of achieving this. 
According to P., we cannot know any- 
thing about the things, and, therefore, 
it is best to refrain from judging them, 
the moral value of this action lying 
in the achievement of a peace of mind. 
P.’s teaching influenced the New Acad- 
emy (see Academy of Plato) and Ro- 
man scepticism. 

Pythagoreans, followers of the Greek 
philosopher Pythagoras of Samos 
(c. 580-500 B.C.). The Pythagorean 
school flourished until the end of the 4th 
century B.C., making a valuable con- 
tribution to the development of math- 
ematics and astronomy. However, 
by absolutising abstract quantity and 
divorcing it from material objects, 
the P. arrived at an idealist philosophy, 
according to which quantitative rela- 
tions constitute the essence of objects. 
Thus, having discovered that a certain 
quantitative interval is the basis of 
musical tones and harmony, the P. 
absolutised this discovery in their 
teaching on the cosmic “harmony of 
the spheres”. This teaching gave rise 
to Pythagorean mathematical symbol- 
ism and mysticism of numbers which 
was full of superstitions and combined 
with P.’s faith in the transmigration 
of the soul. As the school developed, 
its idealistic and mystical tendency 
grew. Pythagoreanism was not only a 
philosophical and mathematical school; 
it was also a religious brotherhood 
and political organisation of the slave- 
owning aristocracy. Pythagoras found- 
ed a reactionary Pythagorean Union 
in Croto (South Italy). Five hundred 
years later, in the epoch of the decline 
of the antique slave-owning system, 
the Pythagorean mysticism of num- 
bers was adopted and revived in Neo- 
Platonism (q.v.). 








Quality and Quantity, philosophical 
categories reflecting important sides 
of objective reality. The world con- 
sists not of ready, finished things, but 
represents a sum total of processes in 
which things are constantly changing, 


coming into being, and undergoing 
destruction. But from this it does not 
follow that they do not have a definite 
form of existence, are absolutely un- 
stable, and are indistinguishable among 
themselves (see Relativism). However 
much an object changes, for a time 
it remains a given qualitatively defi- 
nite object, and not another. The 
qualitative definiteness of objects and 
phenomena is what makes them stable, 
what differentiates them, and makes 
the world boundlessly diverse. Quality 
is the essential definiteness of an 
object by virtue of which it is the given 
object and not another, and differs 
from other objects. The quality of an 
object is not reduced to its separate 
properties. It is bound up with the 
object as a whole, embraces it com- 
pletely, and is inseparable from it. 
That is why the concept of quality 
is associated with the being of an 
object. While remaining itself, an 
object cannot lose its quality. But 
each object is bound by thousands 
of threads with other objects, is in 
diverse relations with them, and rep- 
resents the unity of the singular, the 
particular, and the universal (qq.v.). 
Besides qualitative definiteness, all 
objects also possess quantitative defi- 
niteness: a definite magnitude, number, 
volume, speed of its processes, degree 
of development of properties, etc. 


Quantity is that definiteness of a thing, 


owing to which it can be (really or 
mentally) divided into homogeneous 
parts or assembled from these parts. 
Homogeneity (similarity, identity) of 
parts or objects is a distinctive feature 
of quantity. The differences between 
dissimilar objects are qualitative, the 
differences between similar objects are 
quantitative. In contrast to quality, 
quantity is not associated so closely 
with the being of an object; quantita- 
tive changes do not at once lead to the 
destruction or essential change of an 
object. Only after reaching a definite 
limit for each object do quantitative 
changes cause qualitative changes. In 
this sense quantitative relations differ 
from qualitative relations by an out- 
ward relation to the nature of the 
objects. That is why in the process 
of knowledge (for example, in math- 
ematics) they can be separated from 
their content as something indiffer- 
ent. The exceptionally wide applica- 
bility of mathematical theories to 
spheres of natural science and technology 
differing in their concrete content is 
explained by the fact that mathematics 
studies quantitative relations. Quality 
cannot be reduced to quantity, as 
metaphysicians try to do. No object 
possesses only. qualitative or only 
quantitative properties. Each object 
represents the unity of a definite quality 
and quantity (see Measure). Disturb- 
ance of the measure leads to a change 
of the given object or phenomenon, 
to its conversion into another object 
or phenomenon (see Transition from 
Quantity to Quality). 

Quantification of the Predicate, 
establishment of the volume of the 








Quantifiers 


predicate (q.v.) of a proposition. In 
traditional formal logic, judgements 
are divided according to the volume 
of the subject (q.v.); two kinds of 
judgements are distinguished: univer- 
sal (for example, “all squares are rec- 
tangles”) and particular (for example, 
“some students are sportsmen”). 
W. Hamilton(q.v.) proposed also to take 
into account the volume of the predic- 
ate, for example, besides two kinds 
of affirmative judgements in which 
the predicate is taken not in its full 
volume and which Hamilton calls 
universal-particular and particular-par- 
ticular, two more kinds are singled 
out: universal-universal (for example, 
“all equilateral triangles are equian- 
gular triangles”) and _particular-uni- 
versal ¥(for example, “some trees are 
oaks”) in which the predicate is taken 
in its full volume. Such Q.P. makes 
it possible to consider the judgement 
as an equation. In mathematical 
logic, Q.P. is understood to mean the 
linking of variable predicates by quan- 
tifiers (q.v.) and the transition from 
functional calculus of the first order to 
functional calculus of the second order. 
Quantifiers, operations in mathe- 
matical logic which link subject varia- 
bles, variable propositions or variable 
predicates of various logical functions, 
thus forming expressions which are 
completely and definitely characterised 
by their truth-value or falsehood. 
There are universal Q. (symbol y) and 
existential Q. (symbol q). For exam- 
ple, given the propositional function 
(q. v.) “X possesses the property of N”, 
then a universal quantifier yx con- 
structs the proposition “every X pos- 
sesses the property of N”, while the 
existential quantifier qx constructs 
the proposition “there exists X pos- 
sessing the property of N”. 
Quantity, see Quality and Quantity. 
Quantum Mechanics (quantum the- 
ory), the department of physics that 
studies the motions of small-scale 
particles. The foundations of Q.M. 
were laid in 1924 by Louis de Broglie 
(q.v.), who discovered the wave-cor- 
puscular nature of physical quantities. 
As a consistent system Q.M. was 
developed by Schrédinger, Heisenberg 


— 375 — 


Quantum Mechanics 


(qq.v.), and others in 1925-27. The 
basic features of Q.M. as a physical 
theory (wave-corpuscular dualism, 
q.v., the uncertainty principle, q.v., 
etc.) derive from the existence of the 
quantum of action (q.v.). In conditions 
when the quantum of action can be 
neglected, Q.M. turns into classical 
mechanics (see Correspondence Princi- 
pe Unlike classical mechanics, the be- 
aviour of an individual particle in Q.M. 
is governed by probability, statistical 
laws. Consequently, in Q.M. theconcept 
of trajectory of motion and the classical 
motions of causality are meaningless. 
The unusual properties of small-scale 
particles are reflected in the so-called 
wave function, which provides a quan- 
tum-mechanical characteristic of a 
article's state. This function is derived 
rom the quantum-mechanical “wave 
equation”, which is the fundamental 
law of motion of elementary particles. 
For small velocities this is Schrdéd- 
inger’s equation. For high velocities 
the law of motion of very small parti- 
cles is expressed by Dirac’s equation, 
which takes into account the require- 
ments of relativity theory (q.v.). Q.M. 
has contributed to the understanding 
of an extremely broad range of phe- 
nomena in physics, chemistry, and 
even biology: atomic structure, ra- 
dioactivity (q.v.), the periodic system 
of elements, etc. Insofar as Q.M. deals 
with matter at a deeper level than 
classical physics, it has posed such 
philosophical problems as the relation- 
ship between subject and object, knowl- 
edge and physical reality, chance and 
necessity, determinism and indeter- 
minism, physical “observability” and 
mathematical formalism, etc. Differ- 
ent philosophical approaches to these 
problems are directly manifested in 
the different interpretations of the 
basic features of Q.M., the wave func- 
tion in the first place. The essence 
of the wave function cannot in prin- 
ciple be expressed in the language of 
classical physics, insofar as it ascribes 
to particles simultaneously wave and 


corpuscular properties, which are 
mutually exclusive in the classical 
sense. In treating of microcosmic 


particles one must approach them 








Quantum Mechanics 


from the point of view of materialist 
dialectics, which provides a key to 
the understanding of dialectical con- 
tradiction and dialectical synthesis, 
and especially one must expand our 
notions of space and time, thereby 
going beyond the confines of Q.M. 
In a period when physics was unable 
to do this, the Copenhagen school of 
Q.M. gained prominence, declaring 
the wave function to be merely 
“a record of our knowledge concerning 
the state of microcosmic particles” (see 
Bohr, Copenhagen School, Comple- 
mentarity Principle). Some idealistical- 
ly reasoning scientists went so far as to 
reject the objective nature of the mi- 
crocosm and causality in it, tending 
to overemphasise the role of the ob- 
server and the instrument. Actually, 
though, the wave function is a reflection 
of the objective properties of micro- 
cosmic particles and it is entirely 
wrong to draw subjectivist conclusions 
from the unconventional nature of 
these properties. It is hardly accidental 
that with the development of modern 
physics, with its discovery of the 
reciprocal interchangeability of ele- 
mentary particles, their structure and 
their, inseparable connection with va- 
cuum, which thereby confirmed the 
objective nature of the “paradoxes” 
sf Q.M., many outstanding scientists, 
such as Heisenberg and Bohr, gradually 
moved away from positivist methods. 


— 376 — 


Quietism 


Quantum of Action, A, a universal 
constant equal to 6.55 10-27 erg/sec. 
A fundamental quantity in quantum 
mechanics (q.v.), it was discovered 
by Planck (q.v.) in 1900. Q.A. can be 
regarded as the boundary between 
small-scale and large-scale phenomena. 
The domain in which it can be neglected 
and assumed to be zero is the macro- 
scopic domain. As contrasted, in the 
domain of microscopic events the Q.A. 
cannot, as a matter of principle, be 
assumed to tend to zero. The basic 
importance of the Q.A. is that it es- 
tablishes the connection between dia- 
lectically contradictory and mutually 
exclusive properties of microscopic 
particles. This connection is expressed 
in equations of Louis de Broglie, q.v. 
(see also Wave-Corpuscular Dualism, 
the Uncertainty Principle). 

Quietism, a passive contemplative 
attitude to life, renunciation of vig- 
orous activity, the name of a trend 
in Catholicism (q.v.) which arose in 
the 17th century. Q. is a consequence 
of fatalism (q.v.) and it is inherent 
to a certain extent in all religions. 
Marxist ethics, rejecting fatalism, holds 
that although man depends on cir- 
cumstances, circumstances also depend 
on him. condemns indifference, 
lack of initiative, and non-resistance 
to evil and urges man to work actively 
to realise the lofty ideals of commu- 
nism. 





Racialism, a reactionary theory, 
justifying social inequality, exploita- 
tion, and wars by the fact that people 
belong to different races. The insolv- 
ency of R. lies in that it reduces human 
social natures to their biological, 
racial features and arbitrarily divides 
races into the “higher” and “lower” 
ones. In nazi Germany R. was the 
official theory which served to justify 
aggressive wars and mass annihilation. 
The rapid development of formerly 
backward peoples, particularly in the 
socialist countries, and the absence 
of racial antagonism among them have 
convincingly refuted R. 

Radioactivity, spontaneous disin- 
tegration of atomic nuclei due to irra- 
diation of various kinds. We distin- 
guish natural and artificial R. (creation 
of radioactive isotopes). Today R. is 
widely used in science (to define the 
age of minerals, etc.), in technology 
(atomic tracers), in armaments (atomic 
bombs), etc. The discovery of R. 
(A.H. Becquerel, 1896) destroyed the 
belief in the indestructibility of the 
atom. A scientific, dialectical-material- 
ist explanation of the discovery of 
R. was given by Lenin in his Material- 
ism and Empirio-Criticism; he asserted 
that matter is inexhaustible and all 
bounds in the cognition of matter 
are relative. 

Radishchev, Alexander Nikolayevich 
(1749-1802), Russian writer and ma- 
terialist, father of revolutionary thought 
in Russia; was born in St. Peters- 
burg and studied at Leipzig Univer- 
sity (1766-71). In the notes to his trans- 
lation of Mably’s Thoughts on Greek 
History (1773), he condemned autoc- 
racy as “the condition most alien to 
human nature”. In “A Letter to a 


Friend Living in Tobolsk” (1782) R. 
affirmed that the kings never waived 
their power for the sake of the “liberty” 
of the people. The ode of R. Liberty 
(1783) glorified the “great example” 
of the English and American revolu- 
tions—the execution of the king by 
Oliver Cromwell and the armed strug- 
gle of the American colonies for in- 
dependence. In his work Zhitiye F.V. 
Ushakova (The Life of F.V. Ushakov), 
1789, R. declared that an uprising of 
the people driven to “extremity” was 
the earnest of liberation of “suffering 
society” and he cursed those who 
believed that an appeal to the monarchs 
would alleviate the lot of the people. 
The conception elaborated by R. in 
these works, which gave further devel- 
opment to the idea of Enlightenment 
of the 18th century (first of all of Histo- 
ire philosophique du commerce des Deux- 
Indes of Raynal, and Diderot, q.v.), was 
thoroughly substantiated by the data on 
Russian life, cited in R.’s main work — 
Puteshestviye iz Peterburga v Moskvu 
(The Journey from St. Petersburg to Mos- 
cow), 1790. This work shows the futility 
of attempts to help the people by means 
of liberal reformism and sets the task 
of instilling revolutionary ideas in the 
people as a condition for the imminent 
popular revolution. R.’s political ideas 
were based on a generalisation of the 
most important events of the 17th- 
18th centuries: the victorious bour- 
geois revolutions in the West and the 
fiasco of Catherine II’s policies of 
“enlightened absolutism”, which showed 
(with particular evidence after the 
peasant war of 1773-75) the futility 
of the peasants’ hopes in those “at the 
top”. For the publication of The Jour- 
ney R. was condemned to death, the 








Ramakrishna 


sentence being commuted to exile to 
Siberia (up to 1797). In exile R. wrote 
the philosophical treatise O cheloveke, 
yego smertnosti i bessmertii (On Man, 
His Mortality and Immortality), 1792, 
in which, examining the problem of 
the supposed immortality of the soul, 
he contrasted two diametrically oppo- 
site systems of views: those of the French 
and English materialists of the 18th 
century (Holbach, Helvétius, Joseph 
Priestley) and the German idealists 
of the 17th-18th centuries (Leibniz, 
Herder, Mendelssohn). Describing the 
arguments of the former as founded 
upon experience and proof, and con- 
sidering the affirmation of the latter 
to be speculative, close to “imagina- 
tion”, R. at the same time tried to 
apply dialectical ideas in the material- 
ist system of proofs of the mortality 
of the soul, particularly Leibniz’s idea 
that the “present is pregnant with 
the future”. He adduced proof that 
nothing in man’s life on earth indicates 
the possibility of the existence of the 
soul after his death. However from the 
position of limited metaphysical mate- 
rialism R. could not reinterpret the 
activity of human cognition, on which 
the representatives of German idealism 
speculated. Disappointed to a certain 
extent in the outcome of the French 
Revolution and: witnessing the rep- 
etition of Catherine II’s ostentatious 
liberalism in the administration of 
Alexander I, R. committed suicide. 
Ramakrishna (real name Gadadhar 
Chatterji) (1834-86), public figure in 
India in the middle of the 19th cen- 
tury, reformer of Hinduism (q.v.). R. 
advocated a single religion true for 
all mankind, the philosophical pre- 
requisites of which were taken from the 
Vedanta (q.v.) and shakti-tantra. He 
tried to reconcile the different schools 
of Vedanta, representing them as 
different stages of the spiritual experi- 
ence of yoga. Acknowledging as the 
supreme principle of being the abso- 
lute Shankara (nirguna brahman) free 
from any internal distinction, he at 
the same time rejected the concept 
that the world is illusory and defended 
the importance of public activities. 
He understood the latter in a very 


— 378 — 


ee 


Rationalism 


narrow sense and reduced them essen- 
tially to philanthropy and concern 
for universal “spiritual perfection”, 
in which he saw the key for overcoming 
the disasters of the iron age (kali-yuga), 
the features of which were the omnipo- 
tence of money, the dominance of foreign 
invaders, etc. In his pronouncements 
on kali-yuga he exposed the evil con- 
sequences of the British colonial ad- 
ministration and maintained a naive 
belief in the revival of science by 
means of faith. R.’s preaching did not 
go beyond a passive protest against 
colonial rule. Yet his preaching of 
a single religion in the India of 
those days with her numerous re- 
ligious sects and doctrines—all of them 
survivals of feudal ideology—was a 
sort of appeal for national unity. 
Rationalism 1. A teaching in the 
theory of knowledge, according to 
which universality and necessity—the 
logica! attributes of true knowledge— 
cannot be deduced from experience and 
its generalisation; they may be deduced 
only from the mind itself: either from 
concepts innate in the mind (theory 
of innate ideas, q.v., of Descartes, 
q.v.), or from concepts existing only 
in the form of the predispositions 
of the mind. Experience exerts 
a certain stimulating influence upon 
their appearance, but the character 
of absolute universality and absolute 
necessity is given to them by preceding 
experience and the judgements of the 
mind or a priori forms absolutely in- 
dependent of experience. In this sense 
R. is in opposition to empiricism (q.v.). 
R. came into being as an attempt to 
account for the logical peculiarities 
of mathematical truths and mathemat- 
ical natural science. Its representatives 
in the 17th century were Descartes, 
Spinoza, Leibniz; in the 18th century, 
Kant, Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. 
The limitation of R. lies in its denial 
of the thesis that universality and 
necessity came into being through 
experience. R. absolutises the indispu- 
table nature of these logical attributes, 
does not recognise the dialectics of 
transition of knowledge from the lesser 
universality and necessity to the great- 
er and absolute ones. This limitation 








Reactology 


of R. was overcome by Marxism, which 
examines knowledge in its unity with 
practice (see Cognition; Theory and 
Practice). 2. Rational character of 
thought and world outlook. It tells 
not only on the theory of knowledge, 
but also on psychology, ethics, and 
aesthetics. In psychology, R. places 
in the forefront the intellectual psy- 
chical functions, reducing, for example, 
will to reason (Spinoza); in ethics, 
the first place is given to the rational 
motives and principles of moral ac- 
tivities, and in aesthetics, to the ra- 
tional (intellectual) character of crea- 
tive work. In all these cases R. means 
belief in reason, in the reality of ra- 
tional judgement, in the force of ar- 
gument. In this sense R. is opposed 
to irrationalism (q.v.). 3. In theology, 
R. is a trend, according to which only 
those dogmas of faith are acceptable 
which the mind considers to be in 
conformity with logic and the “natural 
light” of the intellect. 

Reactology, a mechanistic Sipe ty 
tion, regarding the psyche of highly 
developed animals and man as an 
arithmetical sum of reactions on ex- 
ternal influences. It was current in So- 
viet physiology and psychology of the 
1920s-30s. The term “R”. was introduced 
by K.N. Kornilov, Ucheniye o 
reaktsiyakh cheloveka s psikhologiches- 
koi tochki zreniya (Teaching on the 
Reactions of Man from the Psycholog- 
ical Point of View), 1922. Like be- 
haviourism (q.v.), R. left out of ac- 
count the dependence of the external 
influences upon the internal situation, 
upon the whole system of the organ- 
ism’s higher nervous relations. R. 
played a certain positive part in the 
struggle against idealist psychology and 
physiology. The mechanistic tendencies 
of R., however, often grew into ideal- 
ism. 

Realism, Medieval, a trend in me- 
dieval scholasticism, maintaining that 
universal concepts (see Universals) 
possess real existence and precede the 
existence of singular objects. M.R. 
continued Plato’s line in the solution 
of the problem of the relation between 
the concept and the objective world, 
between the universal and the singular. 


— 379 — 


‘ 


Realism, Socialist 


M.R. served as the philosophical basis 
of Catholicism. Its prominent expon- 
ents were Anselm of Canterbury (q.v.) 
and Wilhelm of Shampo. Thomas Aqui- 
nas (q.v.) was close to this trend as 
well. The representatives of nominal- 
ism (q.v.) fought against realism. This 
struggle was a reflection of the two 
trends in philosophy—materialist 
(nominalism) and idealist (realism). 

Realism, Naive, a spontaneous ma- 
terialist understanding of the world 
inherent in every person, the convic- 
tion that all objects exist independ- 
ently of human consciousness. But 
N.R. is not a consistent, theoretically 
conceived scientific world outlook. A 
false interpretation of N.R. is given 
by subjective idealism (see Berkeley, 
Mach, and others). The Machists, for 
example, claim that N.R. is a world 
outlook according to which man deals 
only with his sensations and the exist- 
ence of a material world is of no im- 
portance to him. 

Realism, Socialist, an artistic meth- 
od presupposing a truthful, historically 
concrete reflection of reality taken in 
its revolutionary development. It orig- 
inated at the beginning of the 20th 
century, in the conditions of the crisis 
of capitalism, the upsurge of the prole- 
tarian struggle and the preparation 
for the socialist revolution in Russia 
(Gorky’s novel Mother and his plays, 
poems by Demyan Bedny and other 
proletarian poets). For the first time 
in world art, workers became the 
heroes of artistic works. Being a logical 
continuation and development of the 
best realist traditions of past art, 
S.R. is a new stage in man’s artistic 
progress. Its essence is fidelity to the 
truth of life, no matter how stern 
it may be, this being expressed in 
artistic images from the communist 
angle. The chief ideological and aes- 
thetic principles of S.R. are as follows: 
devotion to communist ideology, serv- 
ice to the people and partisanship, 
close bonds with the working people’s 
struggle, socialist humanism and in- 
ternationalism, historical optimism, 
rejection of formalism and subjectiv- 
ism, and of naturalist primitiveness. 
To be equal to the tasks of S.R. means 





Reality 


to have a thorough knowledge of human 
life, thoughts and sentiments, to be 
fully responsive to human experiences 
and to be able to portray them in 
good artistic form. This is why S.R. 
is a powerful instrument for educating 
people in a communist spirit. Based on 
the Marxist-Leninist world outlook, 
S. R. promotes the artists’ endeavours 
and helps them choose various forms 
and styles consistent with their indi- 
vidual inclinations. 

Reality, the being of things as op- 
posed to non-being, and also to other 
possible forms of being. In the history 
of philosophy R. was clearly distin- 
guished from actuality in the other 
sense; R. was more often treated as 
the being of something essential in a 
given thing, as the being of itself, 
while actuality was understood as the 
presence of all the essential and the 
inessential in a given thing. Usually 
R. was considered the being of some- 
thing to the exclusion of all the contin- 
gent in it, i.e., that which is not by 
necessity connected with the given 
being (see Matter, Essence, Existence). 

Reason and Intellect, the stages or 
the modes of thinking, propounded in 
some systems of pre-Marxian philoso- 
phy. By R. is usually meant the fac- 
ulty to reason correctly, to make con- 
clusions, to expound one’s thoughts 
logically. By intellect is meant the 
capacity to find the causes and es- 
sences of phenomena, to investigate 
them comprehensively, to disclose the 
unity of opposites. The beginnings of 
this division are to be found in the 
teachings of Plato, Aristotle, Nicholas 
of Cusa (qq.v.). They occupy a special 
place in Kant’s and Hegel’s (qq.v.) 
philosophy. In Kant’s opinion, sen- 
sations stem from the action of an un- 
knowable “thing-in-itself” on the sense- 
organs, are ordered by means of a 
priori forms of sensibility (space and 
time) and the reason (categories of 
unity, plurality, causality, possibility, 
necessity, and others). Reason imparts 
a form to sensuous contents and, there- 
fore, cognises things not as they are, 
but as they appear. Further motion 
of cognition is possible with the help 
of the intellect, whose forms of syn- 


— 380 — 


Reasonable Egoism, Theory of 


thesis are the ideas of the soul, the 
world, and God. In an attempt to cog- 
nise the objects of these ideas the hu- 
man mind arrives at insoluble contra- 
dictions (antinomies). The way to the 
world of “things-in-themselves” is shut 
out also for the theoretical reason. 
There remains recourse to the “practical 
reason” and to broadening the world 
outlook at the expense of faith. In 
Hegel’s opinion, reason does not go 
beyond static definiteness, abstract 
identity, abstract universality, fixed 
opposites separated from one another 
(essence and appearance, necessity and 
chance, life and death, etc.). Discur- 
sive thought, however, is not enough, 
it is merely the necessary stage which 
allows one to rise higher, towards the 
intelligible forms of cognition. The 
dialectical negative-intelligble aspect 
of thought is the resolution by one- 
sided and limited definitions of them- 
selves and their transition into their 
opposites. The speculative positive- 
intelligible aspect of thought contains 
in itself those resolved opposites 
beyond which discursive reason can- 
not go, and precisely in this it reveals 
itself as concrete and integral. Al- 
though rejecting Hegel’s idealism, Marx- 
ism highly assesses the critique of 
metaphysics and dialectics, contained 
in his teachings on R. & I. 
Reasonable Egoism, Theory of, a 
theory in ethics advanced by the 
Enlighteners of the 17th-18th centuries, 
based on the following principle: cor- 
rectly understood private interest 
should coincide with social interest. In 
the ethics of Helvétius, Holbach, Dide- 
rot, Feuerbach the T.R.E. expressed 
the interests of the rising bourgeoisie 
in its struggle with ascetic religious 
morality and served as the ideological 
Preparation for bourgeois revolutions. 
he Enlighteners proceeded from the 
possibility of a harmonious combina- 
tion of private and social interests 
while preserving private property. In 
their view, the T.R.E. reflected the 
practice of the revolutionary bourgeoi- 
sie, free enterprise, private initiative, 
and their “social interest” was in fact 
the class interest of the bourgeois. 
Chernyshevsky, Dobrolyubov, and 








Red Shift 


other Russian revolutionary democrats 
used the T.R.E. to justify the struggle 
of the toiling masses. In their ethics 
private interest as the motive of human 
behaviour was filled up with social 
content. They saw the significance of 
life and the criterion of man’s action 
in unselfish service of the people, 
in their emancipation from the chains 
of serfdom, in the revolutionary trans- 
formation of reality in the name of 
the “popular good”. Although the 
T.R.E. played a historically progres- 
sive role, it was metaphysical, for it 
appealed to man in general, to his 
abstract “eternal” nature. 

Red Shift (metagalactic), recession 
of frequencies of electromagnetic radia- 
tion (of light or radio waves) emitted 
by galaxies (q.v.). Specifically, the 
lines of the visible part of the spectrum 
are shifted to its red extremity, whence 
the name. Its most natural explana- 
tion is by reference to the Doppler 
effect, i.e., the result of galaxies moving 
away from each other. The R.S. thus 
constitutes evidence that the Meta- 
galaxy (q.v.), or at least the observ- 
able part thereof, has been expanding 
over a period of milliards of light- 
years. This does not warrant the as- 
sumption of an “expanding” Universe, 
since the Metagalaxy, vast as it is, 
is but a small part of the Universe. 

Reducibility, a form of expressing 
the necessary connection between ele- 
ments of a logical or scientific theory 
in general. The moods of the figures 
of a syllogism were reduced to moods 
of the first figure by Aristotelian syl- 
logistic. In mathematical logic, ex- 
pressed in the form of a deductive the- 
ory, R. is an operation for obtaining 
axioms from the respective proposi- 
tions of a theory. R. establishes the ra- 
tional ties between the propositions 
of a theory which have a different 
degree of community. Therefore it 
acts as a necessary moment in the 
development of a theory itself. But 
attempts to reduce theories, differing 
in their concrete nature, to one another 
are always doomed to failure. For 
example, attempts to reduce the laws 
of higher forms of motion to lower, 
of complex to simple, have proved 


— 381 — 


Reflection 





untenable, although each higher form 
of movement contains the lower as a 
subordinate element. The desire to 
explain the properties and laws of 
more complex systems by the laws 
of simpler systems is a characteristic 
feature of the metaphysical method 
of thinking. This naturally does not 
imply denial of the relative role played 
by the lower forms of motion in 
studying the higher forms. 

Reflection 1. A basic concept 
of materialist epistemology. Dialectic- 
al materialism differentiates psychic 
R. as a property of highly organised 
matter from the general property of 
R. inherent in all matter. Psychic R. 
arises as a result of the action of objects 
on the reflectory apparatus of animals 
and man, the analytically synthetic 
processing of the traces of that action 
and the application of the products 
of processing as substitutes, represen- 
tatives, or models of objects. With 
the help of models of things and their 
properties a subject orients itself in 
the environment. Psychic R. has two 
sides: (1) content of R. or the image, 
and (2) the mode of its material exist- 
ence, i.e., the ways the influences 
of objects are processed in the reflectory 
apparatus. The content of psychic R. 
is characterised by two main features: 
(1) the relation of isomorphism (q.v.) 
existing between the imprint in the 
reflectory apparatus and a definite 
aspect of the object exerting the in- 
fluence; in specific cases isomorphism 
appears in different kinds and levels 
of similarity; (2) the property of ob- 
jectivity. The latter signifies that in 
the content of R. the subject receives 
not the condition of his receptors, 
nerves and brain, as physiological 
idealists (q.v.) claim, but the content 
of the objects of the external world. 
The objective content is directly viewed 
by the subject in the ideal form of R. 
(see the Ideal), i.e., in the form of 
an image of the object. Human knowl- 
edge qualitatively differs from the 
psychic R. of animals by its social 
nature manifested in the existence 
of consciousness (q.v.) associated with 
language, and in active transformation 
of the external world. The general 





Reflection, Theory of 


property of R. inherent in all matter 
is akin to sensation because there is 
some isomorphism; but it is not iden- 
tical with sensation because there is 
no objectivity: isomorphic imprints 
in inorganic nature are inert, i.e., they 
are not utilised as models, as instru- 
ments of orientation. Owing to isomor- 
phism between the influences and im- 
prints in inorganic nature the general 
property of R. is the genetic founda- 
tion, the prerequisite, for the appear- 
ance of psychic R. It is also the natural 
(physical) foundation of the process 
of man’s knowledge of reality around 
him, since man in his cognitive activ- 
ity, in discovering essential properties 
and relations of things, utilises, and 
relies on, the direct results of the in- 
teraction of things and mediated re- 
sults. 2. A term widely used in 
pre-Marxist philosophy and denoting 
the reflection and investigation of the 
cognitive act. It holds different con- 
tents for different systems. Locke (q.v.) 
considered R. as the source of special 
knowledge, when observation is direct- 
ed towards the internal activity of 
consciousness, whereas sensation has 
external things as its object. For 
Leibniz (q.v.), R. is nothing more 
than attention to what happens in 
man himself. For Hume (q.v.), ideas 
are R. of impressions we receive from 
outside. For Hegel (q.v.), R. is a mu- 
tual reflection of one in another, 
e.g., in the essence of a phenomenon. 
3. To reflect means to apply conscious- 
ness to one’s self, to ponder upon 
one’s own psychical state. 

Reflection, Theory of, the material- 
ist teaching on man’s cognition of 
reality, the processes of reflection (q.v.) 
in living nature, technology and on 
the prerequisites of this reflection in 
inanimate nature. Apart from the prob- 
lems of the theory of knowledge 
(q.v.), which studies the ways and 
means of man’s acquiring true knowl- 
edge, the universal logical forms 
(categories) and laws of cognition, the 
Marxist T.R. covers the problems 
concerning the natural scientific basis 
of man’s cognitive activity, the origin 
and essence of his consciousness and 
also the property of reflection in 


— 382 — 


Reflexes 





inanimate nature. With the appea- 
rance of cybernetics (q.v.) great 
importance attaches to the problem 
of applying this property in com- 
munications, automation, and tele- 
mechanics. Consistent application of 
materialism to the solution of complex 
problems of cognition became possible 
thanks to the spread of materialist 
dialectics to the sphere of cognitive 
activity. In Marxist philosophy ma- 
terialist dialectics is at the same time 
the theory of knowledge and dialectical 
logic. The terms T.R. and theory of 
knowledge are synonymous in Marxist 
philosophical literature when reference 
is made to their essence or to the range 
of problems relating to the specifics 
of human knowledge. 

Reflexes, Conditioned and Uncondi- 
tioned, adaptive reactions of man and 
animals determined by the stimulation 
of receptors and the activity of the 
central nervous system at different 
levels. U.R. are inborn responsive 
reactions of the organism, and are the 
same among al! individuals of the 
given species. They are characterised 
by a constant connection between the 
action on a receptor and a definite 
responsive reaction, ensuring the adap- 
tation of the organism to relatively 
stable conditions of life. U.R. are 
effected as a rule by means of the spinal 
cord and the lower parts of the brain. 
Intricate complexes and chains of 
U.R. are called instincts (q.v.). C.R. 
are reactions in response to the stimu- 
lation of receptors acquired in the 
course of the organism’s life; in higher 
animals and man C.R. are developed 
by the formation of temporary con- 
nections in the cerebral cortex and they 
serve as a mechanism of adaptation 
to the intricate changing conditions of 
the environment. According to mod- 
ern ideas, the C.R. end not in action 
but in perceiving and assessing their 
results (see Feedback). Sechenov (q.v.) 
was the first to point to the reflectory 
nature of the psyche. The objective 
method of C.R. evolved by I. Pavlov 
(q.v.) underlies the doctrine of higher 
nervous activity (q.v.), in particular 
the doctrine of the two signal systems 
(q.v.). This doctrine is one of the 


Reformation 


scientific foundations of materialist 
psychology and the dialectical material- 
ist theory of reflection (q.v.). 

Reformation, a widespread anti- 
feudal and anti-Catholic movement 
in Europe in the first half of the 16th 
century, ushering in the beginning 
of Protestantism (q.v.). The R. was 
the first immature bourgeois revolu- 
tion in human history; the bourgeoisie 
in alliance with part of the noblemen 
came out against the ruling church. 
Starting in Germany, the R. engulfed 
a number of European countries and 
brought about the defection from the 
Catholic system of England, Scotland, 
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Holland, 
Finland, Switzerland, partially Ger- 
many, Bohemia, and Hungary. The 
R. cheapened and simplified the church, 
raised interior personal faith above 
the external manifestations of religion, 
imparted divine sanction to the stand- 
ards of bourgeois morality. In the 
countries where the R. triumphed, the 
church on becoming dependent upon 
the state, enjoyed less power than in 
Catholic countries, and this facilitated 
the development of science and secular 
culture as a whole. The national char- 
acter ofthe new religion was in keep- 
ing with the process of formation of 
bourgeois nations. In the R. the Chris- 
tian-plebeian camp existed alongside 
with the noblemen’s and burghers’ 
camps. Its representatives came out 
not only against the clergy but also 
against the nobility; not only against 
feudal inequality, but also against 
inequality in property status. In this 
they based themselves on certain 
evangelical principles dating back to 
early Christianity (see Miinzer). The 
Catholics’ answer to the R. was 
counter-Reformation, which managed to 
prevent the further spread of Protes- 
tantism in Europe and to eradicate it 
in Poland and France. 

Reformism, a political trend inside 
the workers’ movement, which denies 
the necessity of class struggle, the so- 
cialist revolution, and the dictator- 
ship of the proletariat, professes class 
collaboration and hopes by mere re- 
forms to transform capitalism into a 
“welfare society”. R. appeared in the 


— 383 — 


Reformism 


last quarter of the 19th century. Its 
social basis is the bribed upper stratum 
of the working class, the so-called 
labour aristocracy. R. is closely con- 
nected with revisionism (q.v.). Con- 
temporary R. is represented by the 
Socialist International, an internation- 
al union of reformists; it was established 
in 1951. By 1962, it united 40 par- 
ties numbering more than ten-and-a- 
half million members. The root-evil 
of all social-reformist theories con- 
sists in that they try to combine what 
is incompatible: private ownership 
and social justice, social inequality 
and general prosperity. Contemporary 
R. has no single integral world out- 
look. The theorists of R. (A. Philip, 
V. Eichler, P. Bonnel, I. Strachey 
and others) eclectically combine the 
ideas of neo-Kantianism, positivism, 
abstract anthropologism, and Christian- 
ity. R. maintains that dialectics is 
obsolete, advocates smooth evolution- 
ism; it rejects materialism and declares 
the natural-historical and economic 
inevitability of socialism a myth: 
socialism is “deduced” from the sphere 
of the spirit, from the ethical ideas of 
the individual, which are beyond time 
and beyond classes. The aesthetic 
traditions of socialism are betrayed; 
alliance with clericalism (q.v.), the 
conciliation of science with religion 
have become the policy of Right So- 
cial-Democracy. A characteristic fea- 
ture of the leaders of contemporary R. 
(Spaak, Brandt, and others) is outspok- 
en anti-communism (q.v.). “Anti- 
communism has brought social reform- 
ism to an ideological and political 
impasse. This is one of the main reasons 
for the crisis of Social-Democracy.” 
(Programme of the CPSU.) The crisis 
of Social-Democracy constitutes the 
natural consequence of the general 
crisis of capitalism (q.v.), the result of 
the whole history of R. The adoption 
of new programmes (1958-61) marked 
the end of the postwar evolution of R., 
its growth into the system of capital- 
ist relations. The exponents of Right 
socialism defend state-monopoly capi- 
talism, support the aggressive ventures 
of imperialist reaction. Only the art 
of political pharisaism cultivated 





Fearn ee er as oe 


Reichenbach 


during decades, the relatively low level 
of class self-consciousness of the pro- 
letariat and the postwar economic 
“boom” keep them on the surface of po- 
litical life at present. The last decade 
was marked by a real decline in the 
role and influence of R. The process 
of liberation of the working class 
from the influence of R. is going on 
uninterruptedly. The struggle with R., 
the overcoming of the split in the work- 
ing class is one of the urgent tasks 
of the communist movement. Exposing 
the treacherous role of the Right lead- 
ers of Social-Democracy, criticising 
the Right opportunist practice and 
the ideology of R., the Communist 
Parties actively advocate co-operation 
with the Social-Democratic masses in 
the struggle for peace, democracy, and 
socialism. 

Reichenbach, Hans (1891-1953), phi- 
losopher and logician, professor of 
physics at Berlin University. In his 
early works he analysed the episte- 
mological nature of geometry and 
the logical structure of relativistic 
physics. In the twenties of this cen- 
tury R. was one of the organisers of the 
Society of Scientific Philosophy in 
Berlin, which, with the Vienna circle 
(q.v.) formed the basis for the move- 
ment of logica! positivism (q.v.). After 
the nazis came to power in Germany 
R. emigrated to the USA. He engaged 
in the analysis of causality, regularity, 
the relations of causality and probabil- 
ity, the working of statistical and dy- 
namic laws, etc. Although R. went 
over to logical positivism, nevertheless 
in some of his works (for example, 
Experience and Prediction, 1938) he 
was very close to materialism. As a 
logician R. was well-known mainly 
for his contribution to probability logic 
(The Theory of Probability, 1935) and 
for his investigations of the logical 
analysis of propositions expressing 
scientific laws (the so-called theory 
of nomological propositions). 

Relation, a necessary moment in the 
interconnection of all phenomena de- 
termined by the material unity of the 
world. The R. of things is as objective 
as the things themselves. Things do 
not exist outside R. and the latter is 


— 384 — 


Relation 


always the R. of things. The existence 
of each thing, its specific features and 
properties, and its development depend 
on the sum total of its Rr. to other 
things of the objective world. The 
properties themselves, necessarily in- 
herent in one process or another or 
in a thing, are manifested only in 
their Rr. to other things and processes. 
Development of a phenomenon leads 
to a change in its Rr. with other phe- 
nomena, the disappearance of some Rr. 
and the appearance of other Rr. On 
the other hand, changes in the sum 
total of Rr. in which the given object 
exists may lead to a change in the 
object itself. Rr. are as diverse as 
things and their properties. It is neces- 
sary to differentiate internal Rr. of 
different, particularly opposite sides 
of an object and its external Rr. with 
other objects. Account should be taken, 
first, of the relative nature of differ- 
ences in internal and external Rr., 
second, the passage of one into anoth- 
er, and, third, the fact that external 
Rr. depend on internal Rr., manifest 
and reveal them. Social Rr. are of a 
special nature. Man enters into Rr. 
with the things he creates, the objective 
world, and other people. As a result, 
in the world he is mastering he con- 
templates himself and begins to treat 
himself as a man (gains self-conscious- 
ness) only by treating another man 
as his own likeness. This is what ex- 
plains, on the one hand, the social 
nature of human consciousness, and, 
on the other, the necessity of studying 
social Rr. in order to know history. 
In dialectical logic, “the relations 
(= transitions = contradictions) of 
notions = the main content of logic, 
by which these concepts (and their 
relations, transitions, contradictions) 
are shown as reflections of the objective 
world”. (Lenin, Vol. 38, p. 196.) In 
mathematical logic, Rr. are opposed 
to properties like multiple predicates 
to a singular predicate (see Predicate). 
“More”, “equal”, “cause” are the 
examples of dyadic Rr. “Among” and 
others are triadic Rr. In formal logic, 
the theory of Rr. was developed by 
De Morgan (q.v.), C. Peirce, and E. 
Schröder: The logical theory of Rr. 








Relations of Production 


— 385 — 


Relativism 





studies the general properties of Rr. 
and the laws governing them. A cal- 
culus of Rr. related to a calculus of 
classes forms an essential section of 
the theory of Rr. This studies the con- 
nections between Rr. and operations 
with them and establishes the laws 
by which some Rr. can be deduced 
from others. 

Relations of Production, one of the 
most important concepts of Marxist- 
Leninist social science, reflecting the 
objective material relations, existing 
in any society independently of human 
consciousness. They are formed be- 
tween people in the process of social 
production, exchange, and distribu- 
tion of material wealth. The R.P. are 
an indispensable aspect of any mode 
of production (q.v.), for men cannot 
produce without uniting somehow for 
joint activities and mutual exchange 
of their activities. The basis of the 
R.P. is the relation of the ownership 
(q.v.) of the means of production. 
With social, collective ownership the 
members of society are equal as regards 
the means of production, and in the 
process of production relations of 
collaboration and mutual help are 
formed’ between them. If ownership 
is private, relations of domination 
and subjection are inevitably estab- 
lished between men. Those who possess 
many implements and means of pro- 
duction may economically subordinate 
to themselves those who have few or 
no means of production. Thus, on the 
basis of social and private ownership 
there emerged the two possible main 
forms of relations of production found 
in history: collaboration and mutual 
help or domination and subjection. 
Social ownership appeared in history 
in the form of the property of the clan, 
the tribe, the commune, public or state 
property, co-operative and collective- 
farm property, etc.; private owner- 
ship appeared in history in three basic 
forms: slave ownership, feudal owner- 
ship, and capitalist ownership, to 
which correspond the three main types 
of exploitation of man by man. Private 
ownership of producers, based on per- 
sonal labour has existed and still 
exists today, but this form is always 


25-1682 


subordinated to the R.P. dominating 
in the society in question and gradually 
decays under their determining in- 
fluence. Besides the two main forms 
of R.P., in periods of the fall of one 
and the rise of another socio-economic 
formation (q.v.) there emerged tran- 
sitional relations of production. The 
peculiarity of these relations is that 
they combine in one economic structure 
economic relations of different types 
and even of different natures. For 
example, in the period of the decay 
of the primitive-communal system 
(q.v.) the remnants of tribal relations 
were combined in the patriarchal family 
with the rudiments of slave-owning 
relations. In the period of the decay 
of the slave-owning relations there 
arose in a number of countries the col- 
onate, combining in itself the elements 
of slave-owning and feudal relations; 
in the period of the transition from 
capitalism to socialism some economic 
forms combine in themselves relations 
based on collective and private owner- 
ship (state capitalism, joint state-pri- 
vate enterprises, semi-socialist forms 
of the co-operatives in the village, 
etc.). 

Relativism, an idealist theory of 
relativity, conventionalism, and sub- 
jectivity of human cognition. Asserting 
the relativity of knowledge, R. denies 
objective cognition, maintaining that 
our knowledge does not reflect the ob- 
jective world. Such a point of view 
was already clearly expressed in Gor- 
gias’ (q.v.) philosophy, although with 
him R. had a positive significance for 
the development of dialectics. As a 
whole R. is common to the agnostic 
and subjective-idealist systems. It was, 
for example, one of the epistemological 
principles of “physical” idealism (q.v.). 
Dialectical materialism recognises the 
relativity of cognition only in the 
sense that its every historical stage 
is limited by a given level of develop- 
ment of the productive forces and of 
science, and not in the sense of negating 
objective truth. Some trends of con- 
temporary philosophy use R. as a 
means of struggle against materialist 
philosophy (see Truth, Absolute and 
Relative). 











Relativity, Theory of 


Relativity, Theory of, a physical 
theory, according to which physical 
processes occur in a uniform way in 
all systems moving rectilinearly and 
uniformly relatively to one another 
(the special T.R.) and also with acce- 
leration (the general T.R.). It follows 
from this that one can only judge of the 
movement of a system by the changes 
in the distances between the bodies 
forming this system and other bodies 
(“bodies of calculation”), whose pres- 
ence alone imparts sense to the con- 
cept of movement. Einstein (q.v.) for- 
mulated the special T.R. in 1905 
and the general T.R. in 1916. T.R. 
proceeds from the so-called classical 
principle of relativity advanced by 
Galileo and Newton, according to which 
mechanical processes occur uniformly in 
the systems moving rectilinearly and 
uniformly relative to one another. The 
development of optics and electrodyna- 
mics led to the conclusion that this prin- 
ciple is applicable to the transmission 
of light, i.e., of electromagnetic waves 
(the velocity of light is independent of 
the movement of a system). This con- 
clusion was explained by the special 
T.R., which renounced the concept of 
absolute time, absolute simultaneity 
and absolute space. Einstein postu- 
lated that time depends on the move- 
ment of a system and the intervals 
of time change in such a way that the 
velocity of light in the given system 
does not alter according to the move- 
ment. Spatial scales are also subject 
to change. A large number of physical 
conclusions were drawn from these prem- 
ises. Usually they bear the name 
of “relativist”, e.g., based on T.R. 
They should not be confused with phi- 
losophical relativism (q.v.), which de- 
nies the objective nature of scientific 
knowledge. Of great importance is Ein- 
stein’s conclusion that mass of a body 
is proportional to its energy. This cor- 
relation is widely applied in practice. 
In 1907-08, the conclusion was drawn 
from the T.R. that four-dimensional 
geometry should be used for a descrip- 
tion of physical processes (see Multi- 
Dimensional Space, Minkowski). By de- 
veloping and generalising the T.R. Ein- 
stein arrived at the general T.R. In 


— 386 — 


Relativity, Theory of 


classical mechanics acceleration has 
an absolute meaning, since it is accom- 
panied by inertia which is absent in 
systems undergoing no acceleration. 
The force of inertia makes it possible 
to consider acceleration without any 
reference to a system of calculation 
relatively to which the acceleration 
takes place. Einstein held that inertia, 
being dependent on acceleration, is 
equivalent to the forces of gravity 
which cause similar acceleration of 
bodies in immobile systems or in sys- 
tems moving without acceleration. 
Hence, even accelerated movement is 
not absolute: the movement of a system 
accelerated in the absence of the field 
of gravitation cannot be distinguished 
in terms of inner effects from the rest 
of the system or its uniform and recti- 
linear movement in the field of gravita- 
tion. Essentially, the general T.R. is 
a new theory of gravitation. It is based 
on the assumption that four-dimen- 
sional space-time continuum in which 
the forces of gravity operate is subject 
to the correlations of non-Euclidean 
geometry. The correlations of non- 
Euclidean geometry on a surface can 
be graphically presented as common 
Euclidean correlations on curved sur- 
faces. By analogy, Einstein regarded 
the deviation of geometrical correlations 
in four-dimensional space-time from 
Euclidean correlations as a curvature 
of space-time. He identified such a 
curvature with the action of the forces 
of gravity and the fields of gravitation. 
Gravitation is the curvature of space- 
time. This assumption was borne out 
in 1919 by astronomical observations, 
which showed that the ray of a star, 
the prototype of a straight line, is 
curved in the vicinity of the Sun under 
the influence of gravitation. Unlike 
the special theory, the general T.R. 
has not so far acquired the nature of 
a complete and indubitable physical 
conception. The philosophical conclu- 
sions of T.R. fully confirm the correct- 
ness of the ideas of dialectical mate- 
rialism and of the assessments of the 
development of contemporary physics 
which were given by Lenin in his 
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism. The 
idealist and positivist trends in phi- 








Religion 


— 387 — 


Renaissance 





losophy have tried to use the T.R. to 
substantiate their claim that science 
is subjective and that physical proc- 
esses depend on observation. The 
actual meaning of T.R. is that physical 
processes are independent of the choice 
of the systems of calculation. In all 
systems these processes proceed uni- 
formly. T.R. provides a picture of 
objective processes and is a more exact 


reflection of reality than classical 
mechanics. 
Religion, a fantastic reflection in 


people’s minds of external forces domi- 
nating over them in everyday life, a 
reflection in which earthly forces as- 
sume non-earthly forms. From the the- 
ological point of view (which philosoph- 
ical idealism attempts to justify) R. 
is linked with the eternal inner feeling 
of man, expressing his connection with 
some spiritual principle. R. is a specif- 
ic form of social consciousness, charac- 
terised by a unity of world outlook, 
feelings, and cult (ritual-magic cere- 
monies). The basic and decisive feature 
of R. is belief in the supernatural. 
Marxism considers R. as a socially 
conditioned and hence historically 
transient phenomenon. In the course 
of a long historical period people 
did not know of any R. It came into 
being at a definite stage in the develop- 
ment of the primitive-communal sys- 
tem (q.v.) as the reflection of human 
importance before the awesome and 
incomprehensible natural forces. In 
a class society R. is rooted for the most 
part in the helplessness of men in the 
face of elements in social development, 
in the exploitation and want of the 
masses. In the words of Lenin, R. here 
is “one of the forms of spiritual oppres- 
sion which everywhere weighs down 
heavily upon the masses of the people, 
overburdened by their perpetual work 
for others, by want and isolation.” 
(Vol. 10, p. 83.) With the victory of 
the socialist revolution R. gradually 
loses its influence on social conscious- 
ness. Dissemination of the scientific 
communist world outlook among the 
people is gradually reducing R. to 
naught. The final end of R. and its 
elimination from human life is only 
possible in a developed communist so- 


25° 


ciety. However, the disappearance of 
R. is not an automatic process; it 
presupposes persistent work of educat- 
ing the masses in the spirit of atheism, 
extensive propaganda of natural-scien- 
tific knowledge and the Marxist world 
outlook. A comprehensive treatment 
of the essence of R., and the attitude 
of the Communist Party towards R. 
is given in Lenin’s articles “Socialism 
and Religion”, “The Attitude of’ the 
Workers’ Party to Religion”, and 
others. 

Renaissance (philosophical), a term 
used in the history of philosophy to 
denote the general sociological and 
philosophical doctrines that developed 
in Europe (primarily in Italy) during 
the period of feudal decline and the 
establishment of early bourgeois so- 
ciety (15th to early 17th centuries). 
While scholasticism (q.v.) remained 
the official philosophy in this period, 
the rise of humanist culture (see Hu- 
manism), the revival of the philosophi- 
cal legacy of antiquity, and a series of 
important scientific discoveries ena- 
bled the progressive philosophy of the 
R. to break free of theology and de- 
velop anti-scholastic trends. These first 
showed themselves in ethics, bringing 
about a revival of the ethical doc- 
trines of stoicism (Petrarch) and epicure- 
anism (Laurentius Valla), which struck 
at the prevailing Christian morality 
of the time.. The major role in the phi- 
losophy of the new age was played by 
natura] philosophical conceptions (Ni- 
cholas of Cusa, q.v., Cardano, Telésio, 
q.v., Paracelsus, Bruno, q.v., Campa- 
nella, q.v., etc.), which testified to 
the collapse of the scholastics’ picture 
of the world and their methods of ex- 
plaining nature. Although the transi- 
tional character of the R. was evident 
in some of these conceptions (preoccu- 
pation with astrology, magic, alche- 
my, and other unscientific interpreta- 
tions of the world), the general line 
of development of natural philosophy 
came to mean the increasing supremacy 
of the materialist understanding of 
the world, most typically expressed 
in the philosophical views held by 
Bruno. The anti-scholastic direction 
of the philosophy of the R. was even 








Revelation 


— 388 — 


Revisionism 








more apparent in the philosophical 
doctrines that grew up directly from 
the new natural science (particularly 
the heliocentric system of Copernicus, 
q.v.,)» and depended less than natural 
philosophy on the philosophical sys- 
tems of antiquity. The most important 
results of the scientific trends in the 
R. were the methods of experimental 
mathematical investigation of nature, 
phildsophically generalised in the works 
of Leonardo da Vinci and particularly 
Galileo (q.v.), the determinist inter- 
pretation of reality, as opposed to its 
teleological interpretation by the scho- 
lastics, and the formulation (by Kepler 
in astronomy and Galileo, in mechanics) 
of genuinely scientific laws of nature 
free of elements of anthropomorphism 
(q.v.). The determining features of R. 
philosophy were: metaphysical under- 
standing of the ultimate elements of 
nature as absolutely unqualitative and 
inanimate in spite of the views of 
some natura! philosophers; absence of 
a historical view of nature and, conse- 
quently, a deistic inconsistency which 
set a place apart for God in an infinite 
world (Galileo and, to a certain ex- 
tent, Francis Bacon, q.v.). The vast 
socio-economic changes that took place 
in the new age were also reflected in 
much of the sociological thought of 
the time, particularly the characteristic 
view of society as a conglomeration of 
isolated individuals, which expressed 
the growing individualism of the bour- 
geoisie (see Machiavelli). The emer- 
gence and consolidation of national 
states were reflected in the new concep- 
tions of state power as something com- 
pletely independent of religious sanc- 
tion and the authority of the church 
(Machiavelli, Bodin, and Modrzewski). 
The R. saw the appearance of utopian 
philosophers such as Miinzer (q.v.), 
who demanded the socialisation of prop- 
erty on the basis of the “holy scrip- 
tures”, and the first attempts were 
made to outline a communist social 
system, which at that time could not 
but be utopian (see More and Campa- 
nella). 

Revelation, a concept of religious ide- 
alist philosophy signifying supersensu- 
ous direct perception of truth acces- 


sible only to the chosen at a moment of 
mystic enlightenment. Idealist philos- 
ophers connected with R. are striving for 
truth and good. For those to whom R. 
is not accessible truth becomes an object 
of faith. Science rejects such an ex- 
planation, because it associates R. 
with blind faith in the supernatural. R. 
should be distinguished from intuition 
(q.v.). 

Revisionism, an opportunist trend, 
hostile to Marxism, but acting on be- 
half of it in the workers’ revolutionary 
movement. It got its name from the 
fact that it reconsiders, revises the 
Marxist doctrine, its revolutionary 
programme, strategy and tactics. R. 
appeared at the end of the 19th centu- 
ry, at a time when Marxism was victori- 
ous over all kinds of non-proletarian 
socialism and was spreading widely 
among the working masses. The main 
representatives of the old R. (end of 
the 19th-beginning of the 20th cen- 
tury) were Bernstein and Kautsky 
(qq.v.) in Germany, F. Adler and 
O. Bauer in Austria, the Right-wing 
Socialists in France, and others. In 
Russia the “economists”, Mensheviks, 
and, later, after the October Revolu- 
tion, the Trotskyites, the Bukhari- 
nites, sought to revise Marxism. R. 
attempts to implant bourgeois ideol- 
ogy in the working-class movement, to 
accommodate Marxism to bourgeois 
interests, robbing it of its revolu- 
tionary spirit. The revisionists engage in 
the “bourgeois emasculation” (Lenin) 
of Marxism in all its component parts— 
philosophy, political economy, scientif- 
ic communism. The replenishment of 
the working class by the petty bour- 
geoisie and the bribing of the higher 
strata of the proletariat—the so-called 
labour aristocracy—by imperialism, 
serves as the social basis of R. The suc- 
cessors of the old R.—the contempo- 
rary leaders of the Right-wing Social- 
ist parties—have finally deserted Marx- 
ism and gone over to the bourgeoisie. 
In the strict sense of the word, con- 
temporary Right-wing socialism can 
no longer be called R. and in Marxist 
literature it is designated as reformism 
(q.v.). By contemporary R. is meant 
the Right-opportunist trend, which 








Revisionism 


— 389 — 


Revolution, Bourgeois 





appeared in later years (particularly 
in 1956-58) in some of the Communist 
parties of capitalist countries (Gates, 
Bittelman in the USA; A. Giolitti in 
Italy; Lefebvre in France, etc.) and 
in the Communist parties of some so- 
cialist countries (Yugoslavia, Hunga- 
ry, Poland, GDR). A clearcut characte- 
ristic of the main features of contempo- 
rary R. is given in the Programme of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union. “Right opportunism, which is 
a reflection of bourgeois influence, is 
the chief danger within the Communist 
movement today. The revisionists, who 
mask their renunciation of Marxism 
with talk about the necessity of taking 
into account the latest developments in 
society and the class struggle, in effect 
play the role of pedlars of bourgeois- 
reformist ideology within the Com- 
munist movement. They seek to rob 
Marxism-Leninism of its revolutionary 
spirit, to undermine the faith which 
the working class and all working 
people have in socialism, to disarm 
and disorganise them in their struggle 
against imperialism. The revisionists 
deny the historical necessity of the 
socialist revolution and the dictator- 
ship of the proletariat. They deny the 
leading role of the Marxist-Leninist 
party, undermine the foundations of 
proletarian internationalism, and drift 
to nationalism.” In philosophy the 
revisionists distort the main principles 
of dialectical and historical material- 
ism, substituting for them a set of ideas 
taken from contemporary bourgeois 
philosophy and sociology. They re- 
place materialist dialectics by sophistry 
and eclecticism and propagate subjecti- 
vism. At the same time the revisio- 
nists belittle the significance of the 
conscious activities of the masses, the 
role of the subjective factor in history. 
They adopt the position of vulgar 
materialism, counting on the spon- 
taneous “transformation of capitalism 
into socialism”. Characteristic features 
of R. are distortion of the fundamental 
problem of philosophy, denial of the 
division of the philosophical trends 
into two camps—miaterialism and ideal- 
ism, renunciation of the principle of 
partisanship in ideology, the divorce 


of theory from practice. Contemporary 
R. does great harm to the Communist 
and working-class movement, seeks to 
sow disorder among the Marxist-Leninist 
parties, to disrupt the socialist camp, 
to lure the working class away from 
the revolutionary struggle against im- 
perialism. R. has suffered a decisive 
rebuff and has been ideologically de- 
feated. However, at the present time 
the struggle against it, like the struggle 
against dogmatism (q.v.), constitutes 
one of the most important tasks of the 
Communist parties. 

Revolution, Bourgeois, a type of 
social revolution concerned mainly with 
resolving the contradictions between 
the productive forces and the feud- 
al or semi-feudal economic and polit- 
ical system. The category includes 
revolutions in the colonies and de- 
pendent countries against imperialism 
and feudal survivals. The historical 
function of B.R. is to get rid of the 
obstacles to capitalist development. 
The fact that some revolutions of this 
type may carry out certain anti-capi- 
talist measures does not alter their 
general character, since they leave in- 
tact the foundation of bourgeois so- 
ciety, namely, private ownership of 
the means of production. History has 
recorded many bourgeois revolutions 
in various countries at various times. 
The process of liquidating feudalism, 
which began in the 16th century (the 
Great Peasant War in Germany, the 
Revolution of the Netherlands), has 
not yet reached completion (e.g., the 
numerous bourgeois revolutions in the 
colonies and dependent countries of 
Africa, Asia, and Latin America). 
There is bound to be, therefore, a great 
variety of specific forms of B.R. and 
of the forces that motivate it. Whereas 
in the period that preceded the rise of 
monopoly capitalism the leading role 
in B.R. belonged entirely to the bour- 
geoisie, in the period of imperialism 
the influence of the proletariat on the 
course and results of B.R. has sharply 
increased; in a number of cases the lead- 
ership passes to the proletariat (Rus- 
sian revolution of 1905, the new de- 
mocratic revolution in China). The 
most general way of classifying B.Rr. 











Revolution, Social 


is to divide them into upper-crust 
bourgeois and bourgeois-democratic re- 
volutions. The upper-crust B.R. is 
carried out under the leadership of 
the bourgeoisie without any wide par- 
ticipation by the people and does not 
lead to deep-going social changes, 
for example, the 1867-68 revolution in 
Japan, the Young Turk Revolution 
and various contemporary revolutions 
in Asian and African countries, which 
have proceeded no further than the 
winning of national sovereignty. A 
special form of B.R. is found in the 
bourgeois-democratic revolution. Its 
features are active participation of the 
proletariat and the peasantry, a link- 
up with the agrarian revolution and 
the peasant movement for fundamental 
reform of land relations, and action 
by the masses with demands differing 
from those of the bourgeoisie. There are 
several types of bourgeois-democratic 
revolutions, each with its distinctive 
historical role and motive forces: (1) 
the bourgeois-democratic revolutions of 
the period of struggle against feudalism 
which took place under the leadership 
of the bourgeoisie and ensured its eco- 
nomic and political domination, e.g., 
the French Revolution of 1789-94; 
(2) the bourgeois-democratic revolu- 
tions of the early period of imperialism 
and the first stage of the general crisis 
of capitalism. The proletariat acting 
in alliance with the peasantry becomes 
the leader of this type of B.R., which 
clears the ground for the accelerated 
development of capitalism and creates 
the conditions for the development of 
the bourgeois-democratic revolution in- 
to a socialist revolution, e.g., the Feb- 
ruary 1917 revolution in Russia; (3) 
the bourgeois-democratic revolutions 
of the second stage of the general cri- 
sis of capitalism (the revolutions in 
the People’s Democracies, q.v.); (4) the 
bourgeois-democratic revolutions in the 
colonies and dependent countries dur- 
ing the third stage of the general crisis 
of capitalism, known as the national- 
democratic revolutions. Successful revo- 
lutions of this type lead to the setting 
up of independent National Democ- 
Tacies (q.v.). 


Revolution, Social, a turning point 


— 390 — 


Revolution, Social 


in social life, signifying the overthrow 
of the obsolete and the establishment 
of a new progressive social system. 
In contrast to the theorists of the liber- 
al bourgeoisie and opportunism, who 
regard social revolution as fortuitous, 
Marxism-Leninism teaches that revo- 
lutions are the necessary, natural re- 
sult of the development of class so- 
ciety. The epoch of social revolutions 
completes the process of evolution, the 
gradual ripening in the womb of the 
old society of the elements or pre- 
requisites of a new social system. S.R. 
resolves the contradiction between the 
new productive forces and the old 
relations of production, destroys the 
obsolete relations of production and 
makes way for the further develop- 
ment of the productive forces. It is as 
a result of revolutions that the require- 
ments of the law that the relations of 
production conform to the character 
of the productive forces (see Corres- 
pondence of Production Relations, etc.) 
are fulfilled. The old production rela- 
tions are strengthened by their bearers— 
the ruling classes, who safeguard the 
existing order by means of state author- 
ity. Hence, in order to clear the way 
for social development, the progressive 
classes must overthrow the existing 
state system. The basic problem of 
every revolution is the problem of 
political power. The transfer of power 
from the hands of the ruling reac- 
tionary class into those of the revolu- 
tionary class is accomplished through 
a sharp class struggle. Revolution is 
the highest form of the class struggle. 
During revolutionary epochs the broad 
masses of the people, who formerly 
stood aloof from political life, rise to 
a conscious struggle. That is why rev- 
olutionary epochs always signify great 
acceleration of social development. 
Revolutions must not be confused with 
so-called palace coups, putsches, etc. 
The latter forcibly change the top gov- 
erning section, replace individual per- 
sons or groups within the same class 
in power. The character of revolutions 
is determined by the social tasks they 
accomplish and by the social forces 
that participate in them. In this respect 
the socialist revolution differs radic- 





l 


ain d — — 


Revolution, Socialist 


ally from all previous revolutions (see 
Revolution, Bourgeois), for it produces 
more profound changes in the life of 
the people: abolishes the exploiting 
classes and eradicates all forms of 
exploitation of man by man. An exam- 
ple of such a revolution is the Great 
October Socialist Revolution. The un- 
even economic and political develop- 
ment of the capitalist countries in the 
period of imperialism leads to revolu- 
tions breaking out at different times in 
different countries. From this it fol- 
lows that the transition from capitalism 
to socialism on a world scale is bound 
to constitute a whole historical epoch. 
During this period one country after 
another falls away from the capitalist 
system, further deepening the crisis 
of that system. Besides socialist rev- 
olutions the national liberation rev- 
olutions and various kinds of demo- 
cratic liberation movements are of great 
significance during this epoch. These 
revolutions destroy the crumbling co- 
lonial system of imperialism, and deal 
further blows at its rears. “Socialist 
revolutions, anti-imperialist national 
liberation revolutions, people’s de- 
mocratic revolutions, broad peasant 
movements, popular struggles to over- 
throw fascist and other despotic re- 
gimes, and general democratic move- 
ments against national oppression—all 
these merge in a single world-wide 
revolutionary process undermining and 
destroying capitalism.” (Programme of 
the C.P.S.U.) In the present-day epoch 
the world capitalist system as a whole 
has already ripened for the social revo- 
lution of the proletariat. However, in 
each individual country the possibilities 
of development of the revolution depend 
upon a number of conditions (see Rev- 
olutionary Situation). Depending upon 
concrete historical conditions, and first 
of all upon the strength of the working 
class and its allies on the one hand, 
and upon the degree of resistance of the 
reactionary classes, on the other, the 
revolution may be realised by peaceful 
or by armed means. 

Revolution, Socialist, a radical trans- 
formation of society, marking the tran- 
sition from capitalism to socialism. 
S.R. replaces the production relations 


— 391 — 


Revolution, Socialist 


of domination and subjugation based 
on private ownership by relations of 
co-operation and mutual assistance, and 
thereby abolishes all exploitation of 
man by man. The fundamental princi- 
ples of the S.R. were elaborated by Marx 
and Engels, who discovered the laws 
of social development. They proved 
that S.R. was a natural result of so- 
ciety’s development and described it as 
the historic mission of the proletariat. 
They inferred the necessity of destroy- 
ing the bourgeois state machinery and 
establishing the dictatorship of the 
proletariat (q.v.) to build socialism. 
S.R. begins in the absence of any ready 
forms of the new mode of produc- 
tion and is, therefore, creative in na- 
ture. The construction of a new society 
takes a definite length of time, which 
Marx defined as a special period of 
transition from socialism to communism 
(its first phase). The dictatorship of 
the proletariat serves as the instru- 
ment for building the new society. The 
conclusion on proletarian dictatorship 
is the chief element of Marx’s revolu- 
tionary theory. By analysing the im- 
perialist stage of capitalism, Lenin 
carried Marxism forward and enriched 
it with some vastly important, funda- 
mentally new propositions: the pos- 
sibility and necessity of the proletariat 
gaining victory first in one or several 
countries, which necessitates the co- 
existance of countries with different so- 
cio-economic and political systems; 
the revolution first breaking the weak- 
est links in the chain of the world 
capitalist economy; the hegemony of 
the proletariat and the growth of na- 
tional bourgeois-democratic revolutions 
into socialist revolutions; the link 
between the struggle of the workers 
in the advanced capitalist countries and 
the national liberation movement of 
the peoples in colonies; the revolu- 
tionary situation (q.v.);skilful combina- 
tion of objective and subjective fac- 
tors; the multiformity of the S.R., and 
a number of other propositions. Social- 
ist construction in the U.S.S.R. and 
other countries has shown that the 
leadership of the revolution by the 
working class and the establishment of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat, the 








Revolutionary Situation 


alliance of the working class and the 
peasantry, the abolition of capitalist 
property, the socialist transformation of 
agriculture, planned economic develop- 
ment, cultural revolution, abolition 
of national oppression, defence of so- 
cialist gains, and proletarian inter- 
nationalism constitute the main regu- 
larities of S.R. Depending on the level 
of the development of the productive 
forces, the combination of national 
peculiarities, the general cultural level 
of the people, their historical tradi- 
tions, the alignment of class forces in the 
country and in the world, these regu- 
larities determine the specific features 
of the transition from capitalism to 
socialism in the country concerned. 
Thus, depending on these conditions, 
the revolution may be peaceful or 
armed.Marxism-Leninism holds that the 
sharpness and intensity of the class 
struggle depend on the strength of 
resistance by the reactionary bourgeoi- 
sie to the majority of the people, on 
the use of force by this bourgeoisie. In 
our time the theory of S.R. has been 
developed further, yielding a number 
of new conclusions: on the need for 
favourable conditions to accomplish 
a revolution by peaceful means; on the 
possibility of non-capitalist develop- 
ment in backward countries and the 
establishment of national democracy 
(q.v.); on the possibility of transi- 
tional stages in the struggle for 
proletarian dictatorship; on the 
union of all democratic movements 
opposing the tyranny of the financial 
oligarchy in one mighty anti-imperialist 
torrent. 

Revolutionary Situation, the sum 
total of the objective conditions, ex- 
pressing the economic and political 
crisis of a given social system and de- 
termining the possibilities of a social 
revolution. As pointed out by Lenin, 
the R.S. is characterised by the fol- 
lowing principal symptoms: impossi- 
bility for the ruling classes to main- 
tain their supremacy in an immutable 
form. For a revolution to break out 
it is usually not enough that the “low- 
er strata do not want” to live in the 
old way; another condition is that 
“the upper strata cannot” live so. 


— 392 — Rickert 


The want and misery of the oppressed 
classes must be unusually pressing. 
There must be a considerable rise in 
the activity of the masses, who allow 
themselves to be robbed quietly in a 
“peaceful” period, but in stormy times 
are driven to independent historical 
action both by all the circumstances 
of the crisis and the “upper strata” 
themselves (see Lenin, Vol. 21, p. 214). 
The mere presence of a R.S. is not 
enough for the victory of the socialist 
revolution. Besides the objective con- 
ditions there must also be subjective 
conditions, i.e., ability of the revolu- 
tionary masses to fight bravely and 
selflessly, the presence of an experien- 
ced revolutionary party, carrying out 
a correct strategical and tactical gui- 
dance. The Marxist theory of the R.S. 
rejects petty-bourgeois adventurism 
and putschism in approaching the pro- 
blem of revolution. It opposes revolu- 
tions being “pushed on” artificially, 
particularly with the aid of wars. 
Rickert, Heinrich (1863-1936), Ger- 
man idealist philosopher, who, toge- 
ther with Windelband (q.v.), was the 
leader of the Freiburg school of neo- 
Kantianism (q.v.). He considered the 
object of investigation to be the study 
of the possibilities and methods of 
cognition in various fields. He devoted 
special attention to the methodology 
of the historical sciences and philo- 
sophical investigations. R. maintained 
that there are two methods in sci- 
ence: generalised abstraction in the 
natural sciences, and individualised 
abstraction in the historical sciences. 
The first method, involving an infinite 
variety of objects, allows the formu- 
lation of a system of universal concepts 
and laws; the second permits the 
establishment of relations between 
certain events and phenomena and 
moral “values”, the ideal essences 
of the Platonian type, freely chosen 
by man. The ethical views of R. ex- 
erted considerable influence upon con- 
temporary sociology. R.’s main works 
are: Der Gegenstand der Erkenntnis 
(1892), Die Grenzen der naturwissenschaf- 
tlichen Begriff sbildung (1896), and Main 
Problems of Philosophical Methodol- 
ogy, Ontology, and Anthropology (1934). 





Robinet 


— 393 — 


eS a ee 


Romanticism 





Robinet, Jean-Baptiste (1735-1820), 
French materialist philosopher. The 
main sources of his views were the 
teachings of Locke (q.v.) and Condillac 
(q.v.), but he was also influenced by 
Leibniz’s (q.v.) ideas. R. recognised 
material substance which is infinite 
in space and time. The diversity of 
` nature is ruled by the principle of 
universal unity and harmony deter- 
mined by the causal relation of things. 
In the understanding of causality R. 
made concessions to Hume’s (q.v.) con- 
ception. R. was an adherent of hylozo- 
ism (q.v.); he considered the animal- 
cules, the tiniest living creatures, as 
the elementary bricks of the Universe. 
The inconsistency of R.’s materialism 
is expressed in his recognition of a 
god who created the world from ma- 
terial substance. According to his the- 
ory of knowledge, sensations are the 
source of knowledge, including theo- 
retical thought. He distinguished three 
kinds of cognition: sensation, dis- 
course, and intuition, and three corre- 
sponding types of truth: sensory, de- 
monstrative, and intuitive. He consid- 
ered ideas as the copies of objects, 
and criticised Plato’s (q.v.) idealism, 
limiting sensory cognition to external 
phenomena, but his conviction of the 
unlimitedness of human cognition dis- 
tinguished his views from the theories 
of agnosticism (q.v.). His main work: 
De la nature (1761-66). 

Romance, a specific socio-psycholog- 
ical and aesthetic striving and mood, 
penetrating both human activity and 
the creative art of some artists. Maxim 
Gorky derived the necessity-for the or- 
ganic inclusion of revolutionary R. in 
the artistic method of socialist realism 
from the fact that the source of R. is 
in the reality reflected by art, in the 
heroic life of the proletariat and of the 
brave fighters for freedom and happi- 
ness, in the creative labour of the build- 
ers of a classless society. Our reality 
is heroic and hence romantic. Revolu- 
tionary R. is a particular aesthetic 
form for bringing out the struggle be- 
tween the new and the old in social de- 
velopment, by employing a feeling 
for the new and by clearly realising 
the prospects and aims of social devel- 


opment. Revolutionary R. is an artist- 
ic form of historical prevision, the 
embodiment of the artist’s vision 
born by life itself and directed towards 
its transformation. 

Romantic School, the first mature 
expression of romanticism. It existed 
in Germany at the end of the 18th 
century and the beginning of the 19th 
century. Its efflorescence was in the 
years 1798-1800 when a close colla- 
boration was established in Jena be- 
tween the literary critics Friedrich and 
August Schlegel, Karoline Schlegel, the 
poets Tieck and Novalis, the philos- 
ophers Schelling (q.v.) and Friedrich 
Schleiermacher (q.v.). The journal A the- 
naeum was published during this pe- 
riod (1798). The R.S. came out against 
the rationalism of the Englightenment, 
opposing to its “soulless rationality” 
the cult of feeling and creative ecstasy, 
which, they maintained, reveals the 
mysteries of nature more profoundly 
than the tedious work of the scientist. 
The romanticists saw as the motive 
force of cognition the experience of 
the contradiction between the finite 
and the infinite, the aspiration for the 
infinite, the frustration born of the 
unattainability of the infinite, an iron- 
ical attitude towards oneself and 
one’s creation. The exponents of the 
R.S. maintained love, a mystical cult 
of nature, artistic creative work, relig- 
ious experience, to be the means 
of possible access to the infinite. They 
idealised the feudal-Catholic past, 
some of them went over to Catholicism 
and became ideologists of the Resto- 
ration. The R.S. later appeared in 
France, Poland, Italy, Spain, Den- 
mark, and the USA. 

Romanticism, an artistic method in 
European art which replaced classic- 
ism in the 20s-30s of the 19th century. 
It arose from two different sources: 
a) the liberation movement of the peo- 
ple, awakened by the French revolu- 
tion of 1789, the struggle of the people 
against feudalism and national oppres- 
sion; b) the frustration of broad social 
circles with the results of the revolution 
of the 18th century. This determined 
the formation of two trends in artistic 
R. One of them was the reaction to the 








Roscelin 


victory of the bourgeois system, ex- 
pressing at the same time fear of rev- 
olutionary and popular movements. 
As a rule, criticism of capitalism was 
here one-sided and reactionary, seeing 
only its dark sides and not seeing the 
progressive element which was brought 
about by the victory of the new system. 
This trend found a way out of the so- 
cio-historical contradictions in the cre- 
ation of illusory ideals which were 
an apology for the medieval past. Hence 
the attachment of the romanticists 
(Tieck, Schlege!, Novalis, Zhukovsky, 
Kaulbach, and others) to unusual sit- 
uations and fantastic images. The 
other basic trend of R. had a progres- 
sive revolutionary direction, express- 
ing the protest of the wide social cir- 
cles against the bourgeois, as well as 
against the feudal system, against re- 
actionary politics. Although the aes- 
thetic ideals of this trend of R. were 
also occasionally utopian, while its 
images were often distinguished by 
their duality and inherent tragical- 
ness, they nevertheless expressed a 
certain understanding of the contra- 
dictions of bourgeois society and in- 
terest in the life of the broad masses 
of people, and were directed towards 
the future. Among the artists of pro- 
gressive R. were Byron and Shelley, 
Hugo and Sand, Mickiewicz and Petöfi, 
Ryleyev and Kiichelbecker, Géricault 
and Delacroix, Bryullov and Rude, 
Schubert, Chopin, Schuman, Berlioz 
and Liszt. 

Roscelin, Joane (c. 1050-c.1112), 
scholastic from Compiègne (France). 
He is known for his polemics with 
Anselm of Canterbury and Abélard 
(qq.v.) and for his heretical inter- 
pretation of the Trinity as a complex 
of three separate gods. This tritheist 
teaching was condemned by the church 
and R. was compelled to renounce it at 
a council in Soissons (1092). He was 
one of the founders of the nominalist 
tradition in medieval philosophy (see 
Nominalism). As testified by Anselm, 
R. affirmed that general conceptions 
are only names, titles, merely “vi- 
brations of the air”? (flatus vocis). In 
reality, according to R., there exist 
only single sensorily perceptible things. 


— 394 — 


Rural Commune 


Among his works only a letter to Abé- 
lard has been preserved. 

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1712-78), rep- 
resentative of the Left wing of the 
French Enlighteners (see Enlighten- 
ment). R. became famous as a philos- 
opher, sociologist, and aesthetician, 
author of artistic works of world value, 
and one of the theoreticians of peda- 
gogy. Main philosophical and socio- 
logical works of R.: Discours sur lori- 
gine et les fondements de l'inégalite 
parmi les hommes (1755) and Le contrat 
social (1762). He advocated deism 
(q.v.). Alongside with the existence of 
God R. also recognised the immortal 
soul. He taught that matter and spirit 
are two eternally existing principles (see 
Dualism). In the theory of knowledge 
he adhered to sensationalism (q.v.), 
although he also maintained that moral 
ideas are innate. As a sociologist R. 
took a radical position. He severely 
criticised feudal class relations and the 
despotic regime, and supported bour- 
geois democracy and civil liberties, the 
equality of people irrespective of their 
birth. R. saw the causes of inequality 
in the establishment of private proper- 
ty. At the same time he stood for the 
perpetuation of small property. Being 
an exponent of the theory of social 
contract (q.v.), R. held, in opposition 
to Hobbes (q.v.) that in the “natural 
state” there was not only no war of 
everybody against everybody, but that 
friendship and harmony reigned among 
people. In his work Emile ou De l'édu- 
cation (1762) R. severely criticised the 
oid feudal class system of education 
and demanded that education should 
aim at the training of active citizens, 
who respected labour. R.’s pedagogical 
views were petty-bourgeois; his ideal 
was the honest handicraftsman. The 
founders of Marxism-Leninism highly 
appraised the historical role of R., 
noting at the same time his idealism 
and bourgeois limitation. 

Rural Commune, a form of economic 
association which arose at the last 
stage of the primitive-communal sys- 
tem. As distinct from the earlier prim- 
itive communes (See Patriarchy, 
Clan), the R.C. rests not on a consan- 
guine basis. Marx pointed out that the 





Ruskin 





by 


rural commune’ is becoming the 
first social group of free people not 
connected by sanguine ties”. (Archives 
of Marx and Engels, Book I, Russ. 
ed., p. 284.) By its nature R.C. is dual. 
It combines two elements: (1) private 
ownership of all the means of produc- 
tion(except the land)and individual pro- 
duction and individual appropriation, 
and (2) collective ownership of the 
ploughland (regularly divided for in- 
dividual, private use), meadows, for- 
ests, and pastures. Ali peoples had 
the R.C. As a survival of the old soc- 
ial relations it continued to exist in 
the slave, feudal, and even capitalist 
societies. 

Ruskin, John (1819-1900), English 
aesthetician and critic. Studied, and 
then taught at Oxford University (1869- 
84). His idealist outlook was greatly 
influenced by Carlyle (q.v.). From the 
position of conservative romanticism 
R. criticised bourgeois society, its 
parasitism and depraved morals; he 
saw “the main root” of unjust wars in 
the “will of the capitalists”. R.'s 
ideal was patriarchal-handicraft pro- 
duction, which he sought to revive. R. 
considered the education: and moral 
upbringing of people as a means of 
deliverance from social disasters, as- 
signing a great role to art in this cause. 
The aesthetic feeling is innate in man. 
Art originates from the “imitative in- 
stinct” and the instinctive desire is 
to embody or describe something; but 
the objective basis is the divine beauty 
of nature, untouched by man. Perfect 
art reproduces the beauty of reality 
and through it man is morally uplifted. 
R. exerted great influence on the cul- 
tural life of England. His main works: 
Modern Painters (1843-60, in five 
volumes), The Stones of Venice (1851- 
53, in three volumes), Lectures of 


Art (1870), The Art of England 
(1883). 
Russell, Bertrand (1872-), English 


philosopher, logician, public figure. R. 
contributed considerably to the devel- 
opment of modern mathematical 
logic. He developed the logic of rela- 
tions, perfected the language of logical 


— 395 — 


Ryle 





symbols. At the beginning of the 20th 
century, R., together with Whitehead 
(q.v.), following Frege (q.v.), made 
attempts to elaborate the logical basis 
of mathematics (see Logicism). He 
wrote a large number of philosophical 
works on natural science problems. 
R. maintains that philosophy draws its 
problems from natural science, and 
that its task is the analysis and ex- 
planation of the principles and concepts 
of natural science, that the essence of 
philosophy is logic, the logical analysis 
of language. R. is justly regarded as 
the most prominent representative of 
modern neo-positivism (q.v.). In the 
solution of the fundamental problem 
of philosophy R.’s outlook underwent 
evolution from objective to subjective 
idealism. Man, according to R., has to 
do with sense data. What man perceives 
is a “fact” or a complex of “facts”. 
Facts cannot be considered as physical 
or psychical; they are neutral. Accord- 
ing to R., what is empirically corro- 
borated should be ascribed not to the 
sphere of pure physics, but to physics 
plus the corresponding section of psy- 
chology. Psychology is an essential 
component of every empirical science. 
In the theory of knowledge R. is: an 
agnostic: denying the materialist the- 
ory of knowledge, he suggests the phi- 
losophy of scepticism in its place. At 
the present time R. is an active parti- 
cipant in the movement for general 
disarmament, his articles and speeches 
against war and for peace serve the 
cause of human progress. j 

Ryle, Gilbert (1900- ), English phi- 
losopher, one of the leaders of the so- 
called linguistic philosophy (q.v.), pro- 
fessor of philosophy at Oxford. For R. 
the task of philosophy is merely to 
solve problems arising from the im- 
perfect understanding of our means of 
knowledge. He maintained that in a 
number of cases the grammatical form 
of expression of thoughts is bound to 
confuse us and leads to what are called 
errors of category. In his main work 
The Concept of Mind (1949) R. advances 
a conception very close to behaviour- 
ism (q.v.). 





S 


Saint-Simon, Claude-Henri de Rou- 
vroy (1760-1825), French utopian so- 
cialist. The son of a count, he was 
brought up by Jean d’Alembert; dur- 
ing the French Revolution was close 
to the Jacobins; took part in the War 
of Independence of the United States. 
S.S. subscribed to the views of the 
French materialists, opposed deism and 
idealism, particularly German idealism, 
and put up against them “physicism”, 
i.e., a study of nature. He resolutely 
upheld determinism, extending it to 
the development of human society, 
and paid special attention to substan- 
tiating the idea that history is governed 
by laws. S.S. held that Kory must 
contribute to human progress as much 
as the natural sciences. Each social 
system is a step forward in history, 
but the driving forces of social develop- 
ment are progress of scientific knowl- 
edge, morality, and religion. Corres- 
pondingly, history passes through three 
phases: theological (the period of the 
domination of religion, which covers the 
slave and feudal societies}, metaphy- 
sical (the period of the fall of the feud- 
al and theological systems), and posi- 
tive (the future social system based on 
science). His idealist approach to his- 
tory did not prevent S.S. from expound- 
ing the idea that social progress is an 
objective process and advancing sur- 
mises on the role of property and class- 
es in the development of society. More- 
over, his sociological concept helped 
to show that every new social system 
springs naturally from preceding his- 
torical development. According to S.S., 
the society of the future will be based 
on scientifically organised and planned 
large-scale industry, but with the pre- 
servation of private property and class- 
es. The dominating role in it will be 


played by science and industry, by 
scientists and industrialists. Among 
the latter S.S. put also the workers, 
merchants, and bankers. Planning of 
industry will be done in the interests 
of the majority of society’s members, 
especially the poor and the lowly. 
All must be given the right to work; 
each man works according to his abil- 
ity. Particularly important is the sur- 
mise that the future society instead of 
ruling over people will administer 
things and manage production. The 
utopian nature of the views of S.S. 
stands out in his failure to understand 
the historic role of the proletariat as 
the builder of the new society and of the 
revolution, as the means of transform- 
ing the old society, and in the naive 
hope that by propaganda of a “posi- 
tive” philosophy it will be possible to 
achieve rational organisation of the 
people’s life. After his death, his 
doctrine was advocated by B.P. En- 
fantin (1796-1864) and A. Bazard (1791- 
1832). Before long, however, the school 
of Saint-Simonists degenerated into a 
religious sect, which accentuated the 
weak sides of the doctrine. Main works: 
Lettres d'un habitant de Genève a 
ses contemporaines (1803), Mémoire sur 
la science de l'homme (1813-16), Travail 
sur la gravitation universelle (1821-22), 
Du système industriel (1821), Catéchis- 
me des industriels (1823-24), and Nou- 
veau christianisme (1825). 

Saankhya, one of the major ortho- 
dox systems of ancient Indian philos- 
ophy. Being a dualist doctrine, S. 
recognises the existence of two prime 
elements in the Universe: material, 
prakrti (matter, nature) and spiritu- 
al, purusa (consciousness). Purusa is 
neither the supreme God, the creator, 
nor the universal spirit. It is the eter- 





Santayana 


nal, unchanging individual conscious- 
ness which contemplates both the course 
of life of a living being in which it 
finds abode and the process of evoluti- 
on of the Universe taken as a whole. 
Prakrti is in constant change and de- 
velopment and is subject to the law 
of cause-effect connection. All changes 
of prakrti depend on the correlation in 
which the three gunas are represented 
in it, the main material properties of 
the gunas being sattva (clarity, purity), 
tamas (inertia) and rajas (activity). 
A combination of these gunas produces 
the entire diversity of nature. Con- 
tact of prakrti with the purusa deter- 
mines the beginning of the evolution 
of the individual and the Universe. 
Each living being consists of three 
parts: purusa, the subtle body, and the 
gross material body. The subtle body 
comprises the intellect, sense-organs, 
and the relevent elements and emo- 
tions of the Ego. The subtle body is the 
concentration of karma (see Hinduism) 
and follows the purusa until the latter 
achieves complete liberation from be- 
ing incarnated in any substance. The 
gross material body consists of material 
elements and perishes with the death 
of a being. The foundation of the S. 
system is ascribed to the legendary 
wise man Kapila, but the first syste- 
matic exposition of S., Sankhya-karika, 
was given by Isvara-Krishna in the 
middle of the Ist millennium of our 
era. 

Santayana, George (1863-1952), an 
American philosopher and writer, pro- 
ponent of critical realism (q.v.). Ad- 
mitting the objective existence of the 
material world, S. held that only “es- 
sences” could be cognised, i.e., real or 
possible qualities of things which ap- 
pear in cognition as signs of objects. In 
his understanding of the “essences” 
S. was close to Plato (q.v.) and Husserl 
(q.v.). S. regarded consciousness as an 
epiphenomenon: consciousness is not 
a reflection of reality but more or less 
significant poetry. In aesthetics he 
defined the beautiful as “objectifica- 
tion of pleasure”. In ethics supported 
escapism: happiness should be sought 
in liberating the spirit from the flesh, 
from the world and knowledge. In 


— 397 — 


Sartre 


sociology (Dominations and Powers, 
1951), S. put forward a theory which 
explains the development of society 
by the instinct of self-preservation and 
the striving for material benefits, etc. 
In political science S. was an anti- 
democrat who favoured the power of 
the elite. Rejecting theological dog- 
mas, S. recognised religion as the poet- 
ry of social behaviour. Main work: 
Life of Reason (5 vols., 1905-12). 

Sarasvati, pseudonym Dayananda 
Mulshankar (1824-83), Indian idealist 
philosopher and religious reformer, 
founder of Arya Samaj (Bombay, 1875), 
a reformist Hindu society, preaching 
“return to the Vedas” and revival of 
the ancient religion of the Aryans. 
He attacked idolatry, polytheism, domi- 
nation of the priests, superstition, 
retrograde customs, etc., and strove 
to “cleanse” Hinduism from medieval 
superimpositions. Religious reformism 
combined quaintly in S. with his ideas 
of enlightenment. While advocating 
universal scientific education, he at 
once sought to present science as a 
projection of the Vedas (q.v.). In phi- 
losophy, S. was a follower of Mádhva’s 
dvaita Vedanta, on the basis of which 
he sought to conciliate all the six main 
philosophical systems of antiquity. 
He attempted to oppose the ancient 
Indian idealised varna system to the 
medieval feudal and caste system and 
contemporary Western bourgeois civ- 
ilisation. Contsitutional monarchy was 
his political ideal. S. advocated inde- 
pendent national development for In- 
dia and was a spokesman of the Indian 
bourgeoisie, then in the process of 
formation, to whose interests he adapt- 
ed the ancient philosophical and politi- 
cal ideas. 

Sartre, Jean-Paul (1905-), French 
philosopher and writer. S. is an ex- 
ponent of so-called “atheistic existenti- 
alism”. His main works: L’Etre et le 
Néant (1943), L’Existentialisme est 
un Ahumanisme (1947), Critique de 
la raison dialectique (1960). His views 
were shaped under the influence of 
Husserl and Heidegger (qq.v.). There 
is also a definite connection between 
his’ philosophy and the doctrine of 
Kierkegaard (q.v.); Freud’s method 








Scepticism 


of psychoanalysis also exerted a certain 
influence on S. Anthropocentrism and 
subjectivism are characteristic of his 
philosophy. He conceives man as 
“being for himself” from which there 
are such derivative forms as “being 
in itself” (i.e., the objective world), 
space and time, quantity and quality, 
etc. Thus, the objective world, being 
irrational and determinated, is the 
opposite of human activity, which is 
free and does not depend on objective 
laws. Such an idealist concept of free- 
dom (its essence is expressed in the 
principle: “Man is what he makes 
himself”) underlies Sartrian ethics. 
In a number of his works S. makes the 
futile attempt to prove existentialism 
with the help of Marxist philosophy. 
S. was in the ranks of the French Re- 
sistance during the 2nd World War; 
he is waging an active struggle against 
the revival of fascism and for peace; 
S. is a member of the World Peace 
Council. 

Scepticism, a philosophical concep- 
tion questioning the possibility of ob- 
jective knowledge of reality. Con- 
sistent S. is close to agnosticism (q.v.). 
S. is most widespread in periods of 
social development when the old so- 
cial ideals are already tottering, but 
the new ones have not yet asserted 
themselves. As a philosophical doctrine, 
S. emerged during the crisis of antique 
society (4th century B.C.) as a reaction 
to the preceding philosophical systems 
which had tried to explain the sensual 
world by means of contemplative ar- 
guments and in so doing had often 
contradicted one another. S. reached 
its peak in the teachings of Pyrrho, 
Arcesilaus, Carneades, Aenesidemus, 
Sextus Empiricus (qq.v.), and others. 
Following the traditions of the 
sophists (q.v.), the first sceptics drew 
attention to the relativity of human 
knowledge, the impossibility of prov- 
ing it formally and its dependence on 
various circumstances (living condi- 
tions, the state of the sense-organs, the 
influence of traditions and habits, 
etc.). Doubt as to the possibility of 
any generally recognised and demon- 
strable knowledge underlay the moral 
conception of antique S. The sceptics 


— 398 — 


Schelling 


of old preached abstention from judge- 
ments for the sake of achieving com- 
plete peace of mind (ataraxia) and 
thereby happiness, the objective of 
philosophy. But the sceptics them- 
selves by no means refrained from 
judgements. They wrote works criticising 
the contemplative philosophical dog- 
mas and putting forward their tropes 
(q.v.), or arguments, in support of S. 
There were various sceptic tendencies 
in the philosophy of the 17th and 
18th centuries. bn the whole, S. played 
an important role in refuting the dog- 
mas of medieval ideology. The works 
of Montaigne, Charron, Bayle (qq.v.), 
and others questioned the arguments 
of the theologians, thus preparing 
the ground for the adoption of material- 
ism. On the other hand, the S. of Pas- 
cal, Hume, Kant (qq.v.), and others 
restricted the possibilities of reason in 
general and cleared the way for religious 
faith. In modern philosophy, the tra- 
ditional arguments of S. have been 
adopted for its own aims by positiv- 
ism (q.v.), which considers all judge- 
ments, generalisations, and hypotheses 
as useless if they cannot be tested by 
experience. 

Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph 
von (1775-1854), German philosopher, 
third (in point of time) of the famous 
German classical idealists. Professor 
in Jena, Erlangen, and Berlin; member 
of the Munich Academy of Sciences. 
In the nineties he published a series 
of works on problems of the philosophy 
of nature. Using Kant’s (q.v.) views 
and Leibniz’s (q.v.) doctrine of living 
monads and the purpose in nature, S. 
introduced the idea of development 
into the understanding of nature. In 
his System des transzendentalen Ideal- 
ismus (1800) S. tried to combine Fich- 
te’s (q.v.) subjective idealism with the 
objective idealism of his own system. 
According to S., philosophy must 
supply the answer to two questions: 
how does the development of uncon- 
scious-spiritual nature lead to the 
birth of consciousness? And, on the 
contrary, how does consciousness, which 
in itself is only a subject, become an 
object? The first question is answered 
by the “philosophy of nature”, and the 





Schelling 


second by the doctrine of “transcen- 
dental idealism”. S. believed that his 
system differed from Fichte’s subjective 
idealism, since to Fichte’s tenet that 
the subjective is primary he opposed 
—in the philosophy of nature—investi- 
gation in which the objective is pri- 
mary. By the subjective S. understood 
not the consciousness of the individual 
but the mind’s direct contemplation 
of the object itself, or “intellectual 
intuition”. Unlike Fichte, S. extended 
“intellectual intuition” to all levels 
of thinking (“reflection”) of conscious- 
ness about its own activity. In devel- 
oping this doctrine, S. joined the re- 
actionary wing of the Romantic school 
(q.v.), according to which intuition 
is the lot of only a few of the elect. 
As consciousness attains comprehen- 
sion of its own spontaneity it under- 
stands itself to be both free and sub- 
ject to necessity. The regular process 
in which spirit and nature, subject 
and object, freedom and necessity, 
are combined is manifested and oper- 
ates necessarily through the free action 
of individuals. However, to S., this 
process is not open to knowledge, but 
only to faith, and the guarantee of 
historical and moral progress lies only 
in God. S.’s doctrine, conceived as 
dialectics of necessity and freedom in 
history but developed on the basis 
of idealism and mysticism, turned out 
in reality to be fatalism (q.v.) and 
complete denial of historical prevision. 
From the “philosophy of nature” and 
the system of “transcendental idealism” 
S. went over to the “philosophy of 
identity” (q.v.), a new form of objec- 
tive idealism. The main problem in 
S.’s doctrine becomes the idea of the 
identity of object and subject, the 
supreme law is declared to be the law 
of the identity of indivisible reason 
with itself. The process of compre- 
hending identity, the transition from 
the indivisible to the multiple takes 
place in the absolute. S.’s doctrine 
of freedom was further developed in 
Philosophische Untersuchungen über das 
Wesen der menschlichen Freiheit (1809). 
Together with Fichte, S. understood 
freedom as recognised necessity; he 
saw in freedom not the heroic deed of 


— 399 — 


Schiller 


an individual but the achievement 
of society. However, in contradistin- 
ction to this view, S. mystifies the 
problem of freedom, connecting it 
with the problem of evil in the world; 
he proclaims purely individual prin- 
ciple which has its originin the trans- 
cendental world “comprehensible by 
reason” to be the ultimate root of free- 
dom. From about 1815, S. passed over 
to a new and final phase in his devel- 
opment: to the mystical “philosophy 
of mythology and revelation”. His 
teaching in this period is distinguished 
by extreme intensification of mystical 
elements. He brands all philosophies 
based upon reason; to them he coun- 
terpoises the “philosophy of revela- 
tion”, which seeks truth beyond the 
limits of reason—in “religious experi- 
ence”. The public propaganda of the 
“philosophy of revelation?” as devel- 
oped by S. failed. The young Engels, 
in brilliant pamphlets, explained to 
his contemporaries the reactionary con- 
tents of S.’s “philosophy of mythology 
and revelation”. 

Schiller, Ferdinand Canning Scott 
(1864-1937), English pragmatist, pro- 
fessor at Oxford and Los Angeles. S. 
called his variety of pragmatism (q.v.) 
“humanism”. He regarded truth as 
man’s creation, and declared all human 
knowledge to be subjective. Following 
James’ (q.v.) understanding of truth, 
S. nevertheless believed that only 
good results can be the criterion of 
truth. He understood “reality” as 
“experience”, as a plastic shapeless 
mass, subject to the influence of man’s 
will: “the world is what we make it”. 
Thus S. arrives at solipsism (q.v.), 
declaring it to be theoretically pos- 
sible, although inconvenient in every- 
day life. In his “metaphysics” he com- 
bined subjective idealism with evo- 
lution theory, which he regarded as 
a purposeful process directed by divine 
power. S. pragmatically interpreted 
formal logic, replacing it by the “logic 
of application”. He took the laws and 
forms of logic to be postulates and con- 
venient fictions. From the position akin 
to that of Nietzsche’s he acclaimed fas- 
cism as a means of creating the “su- 
perman”. Main work: Humanism (1903). 











Schiller — 400 — Scholasticism 
Schiller, Johann Friedrich (1759- School). He deduced religion and 
1805), German poet and aesthete. morality from the inner disposition 


His views were formed under the in- 
fluence of Rousseau’s and Lessing’s 
(qq.v.) ideas, the movement of Sturm 
und Drang. In 1871, S. published 
the drama Die Räuber, full of protest 
against despotism and social injustice, 
and then the Kabale und Liebe, which, 
in Engels’ words, was “the first Ger- 
man politically tendentious drama”. 
S. acclaimed the French Revolution, 
but later he was disappointed in it. 
His drama and philosophical lyrics 
are penetrated with humanism and 
hate for tyranny; they evince great 
profundity in portraying feelings and 
characters. But in his search for an 
abstract aesthetic ideal, the poet de- 
parted from reality in some of his 
works. In the nineties, S. became a 
follower of Kant’s philosophy and 
aesthetics, but he did not follow him 
in everything (for instance, he criti- 
cised the formalism of Kant’s categor- 
ical imperative, q.v.). He regarded 
art as a means of moulding the full 
man, freely creating good, and con- 
sidered that only art helps man to 
achieve real freedom. Although his 
demands for freedom were purely 
spiritual, they constituted a protest 
against the feudal regime. S.’s main 
philosophical works are: Philosophische 
Briefe (1786), Uber Anmut und Würde 
(1793), Briefe über die ästhetische 
Erziehung des Menschen (1795). 
Schleiden, Matthias Jakob (1804-81), 
German biologist, professor at the 
University of Jena. He was one of 
the authors of the cell theory (see Cell); 
investigated the structural unity and 
development of organisms. S.’s phi- 
losophical views were close to those 
of Kant (q.v.). Main work: Beiträge 
zur Phytogenesis (1838). 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Ernst Da- 
niel (1768-1834), German Protestant 
theologian and philosopher. He was 
for many years a preacher, a professor 
at the University of Berlin. S.’s views 
are a combination of the ideas of Spi- 
noza, Kant, Fichte, Schelling, Jacobi 
(qq.v.), and others. His philosophy 
was dominated by Romantic, anti- 
Enlightenment trends (see Romantic 


of the subject. According to S., the 
basis of infinite being is the unity of 
the world, or God, in whom all con- 
tradictions are reconciled. In con- 
trast to Hegel, S. said the laws of dia- 
lectics were not universal. For him, 
dialectics expressed only the move- 
ment of knowledge. He further devel- 
oped the criticism of the Old Testa- 
ment as begun by Spinoza, extending 
it to the New Testament. His ideas 
stimulated further criticism of all 
the sources of Christianity (see Young 
Hegelians). None of these criticisms, 
however, went beyond the framework 
of the religious world outlook. His 
philosophico-religious views greatly in- 
fluenced the ideology of Protestantism. 
Main works: Reden über die Religion 
(1799), Monologen (1810). 

Schlick, Moritz (1882-1936), Austrian 
philosopher and physicist, one of the 
leaders of logical positivism (q.v.) 
and founder of the Vienna Circle (q.v.). 
As a physicist he studied the problems 
of theoretical optics, was one of the 
first interpreters of the theory of rela- 
tivity (q.v.), 1917. In his book, All- 
gemeine Erkenntnislehre (1918), he for- 
mulated ideas which were later adopt- 
ed by logical positivists, particularly 
the teaching on the analytic a priori 
nature of logic and mathematics and 
the principle of verification (q.v.). 
Besides defending the general concep- 
tion of logical positivism (Positivismus 
und Realismus, 1932), he tried, from 
the idealist position, to analyse spe- 
cial philosophical problems (space and 
time, causality and probability) and 
ethics (significance of value judgements, 
free will). He put forward a non-scien- 
tific theory on the “inexpressibility 
of the content”, according to which 
“immediate experience”, the content 
of our knowledge, cannot be trans- 
mitted to another. For him, only 
“structural retations of experience” 
can be expressed in words and trans- 
mitted. He criticised Carnap’s and 
Neurath’s (qq.v.) conventionalism 
q.v.). 

Scholasticism, the name given to 
medieval “school philosophy” whose 


E 


Schopenhauer 


followers—the scholastics—tried to give 
a theoretical substantiation to the 
religious world outlook. S. rested on 
the ideas of ancient philosophy (Plato, 
q.v., and especially, Aristotle, q.v., 
whose views S. adapted to its own 
purposes). The dispute over univer- 
sals (q.v.) was prominent in medieval 
S. Historically, S. is divided into 
several periods: early S. (9th-13th cen- 
turies) was under the influence of 
Neo-Platonism, q.v. (Erigena, Anselm 
of Canterbury, Avicenna, Averroés, 
Maimonides, qq.v.). “Classical” S. 
(14th-15th centuries) was dominated 
by “Christian Aristotelianism” (Al- 
bert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, qq.v.). 
The disputes between the Catholic 
(Suarez, Cajetan) and Protestant (Me- 
lanchthon) theologians, which took 
place in late S. (15th-16th centuries) 
were ultimately a reflection of the 
struggle waged by the Catholic Church 
against the Reformation (q.v.). The 
19th century saw the period of neo- 
scholasticism, which unites various 
schools of Catholic philosophy (Thom- 
ism, the Platonic-Augustinian school, 
the Franciscan school, etc.). 
Schopenhauer, Arthur (1788-1860), 
German idealist philosopher; taught in 
Berlin and Frankfort on the Main (from 
1832). Main work: Die Welt als Wille 
und Vorstellung (1819).S.became famous 
only after the revolution of 1848, when 
the bourgeoisie, frightened by the rev- 
olutionary people, turned to reaction. 
The influence of S.’s ideas increased 
particularly in the epoch of imperial- 
ism (q.v.). He was an enemy of mate- 
rialism and dialectics;counterpoised me- 
taphysical idealism to the scientific 
understanding of the world. Having 
accepted Kant’s views of the appear- 
ance (q.v.) as notions conditioned by 
consciousness, he rejected the “thing- 
in-itself” and maintained that blind 
and irrational will is the essence (q.v.) 
of the world. His voluntaristic ideal- 
ism is a form of irrationalism. The will 
which rules the world excludes any 
laws of nature or society and hence 
the possibility of scientific cognition. 
Denial of historical progress is another 
peculiarity of S.’s voluntarism. His 
world outlook, permeated as it was 


26-1682 


— 401 — 


Schwann 


by hate of revolution and the people, 
is utterly pessimistic. His aesthetic 
views had great influence; he fought 
progressive, realistic art and preached 
aesthetism which scorns reality and 
is alien to the vital interests of the 
people. He set off desirelessness and 
passive contemplation of artistic in- 
tuition against the meaningful creative 
art. The summit of S.’s_ philosophy 
was the mystic ideal of nirvana— 
absolute serenity, killing the “will 
to live”, which he borrowed from Bud- 
dhism (q.v.). His views constituted 
the ideological basis of Nietzsche’s 
(q.v.) philosophy. 

Schrédinger, Erwin (1887-1961), Aus- 
trian physicist, professor at Dublin 
University (from 1940), foreign member 
of the Academy of Sciences of the 
USSR (from 1934). Developing the 
teaching of de Broglie (q.v.), he found- 
ed wave, or quantum, mechanics (q.v.). 
In 1926, he discovered the basic (the 
so-called wave) equation of quantum 
mechanics. His outstanding physical 
idea was the wave theory of matter. 
In the unified field theory and the 
generalised theory of gravity, he tried 
to show that the corpuscular struc- 
ture of matter, its discontinuity, are 
the result of its wave structure, of 
continuity. S. was also interested in 
statistical physics (q.v.), biophysics, 
the history of science, and philosophy. 
His main philosophical idea was the 
conviction that subject and object 
are indivisible, that there is a mistaken 
notion of their division and that the 
outside world is “objectivised” by 
modern philosophy and science. For 
this reason S. turned to ancient phi- 
losophy, in which, according to him, 
there was no such conflict, beginning 
with the hylozoism (q.v.) of Ionic 
natural philosophy and ending with 
the doctrine of the Vedas (q.v.). From 
this position S. interpreted the re- 
sults of modern science, especially the 
quantum theory. 

Schwann, Theodor (1810-82), German 
biologist,- professor at the Louvain 
and Liége universities (Belgium). One 
of the founders of the cell theory (see 
Cell). Main work: Mikroskopische Un- 
tersuchungen über die Ubereinstimmung 








| 
) 
| 





Science 


in der Struktur und dem Wachstum 
der Tiere und Pflanzen (1839). Elements 
of deism (q.v.) and teleology (q.v.) 
are inherent in his philosophical views. 

Science, a form of social consciousn- 
ess which represents a historically de- 
veloped system of knowledge whose 
truth is verified and constantly made 
more precise in the course of society’s 
practical experience. The power of 
scientific knowledge lies in its general 
character, universality, necessity, and 
objective truth. In contrast to art, 
which reflects the world in artistic 
images, S. cognises it in concepts by 
means of logical thinking. In direct 
opposition to religion, which gives 
a distorted, fantastic picture of real- 
ity, S. bases its conclusions on facts. 
The strength of S. lies in its generali- 
sations; behind the accidental and 
chaotic it finds and studies objective 
laws, without the knowledge of which 
conscious and purposive practical ac- 
tivity is impossible. The needs of mate- 
rial production, the requirements of 
society's development are the driving 
force of S. The progress of S. consists 
in its passing on from the disclosure 
of relatively simple causal-consequen- 
tial relations and essential connections 
to the formulation of more profound 
and fundamental laws of being and 
thinking. The dialectics of scientific 
cognition, new discoveries and theo- 
ries do not cancel out former results 
and do not negate their objective truth; 
they only specify the bounds of their 
application and determine their place 
in the general system of scientific 
knowledge. S. is closely connected with 
the philosophical world outlook, which 
arms it with the knowledge of the most 
general laws governing the develop- 
ment of the objective world, the theory 
of knowledge, and a method of inves- 
tigation. Idealism leads S. into the 
blind alley of agnosticism and subor- 
dinates it to religion. In present-day 
conditions only the philosophy of 
dialectical materialism is capable of 
ensuring the correct approach to reality 
and opening the way to broad and 
fruitful generalisations. Arising out 
of the requirements of society’s pro- 
ductive activity and subject to the 


— 402 — 


Scientific Prevision 


constant stimulating influence of the 
latter, S. in its turn greatly affects 
the course of society’s development. 
Present-day production is inconceiv- 
able without S., whose role is con- 
stantly growing. Being brought closer 
to production in the process of build- 
ing the material and technical basis 
of communism, S. is becoming a direct 
productive force of society. 

Scientific Prevision, prediction of 
natural and social phenomena, not yet 
observed or not yet established by 
experiment, based on a generalisation 
of theoretical and experimental data 
and consideration of the objective laws 
governing development. S.P. can be 
of two kinds: (1) it may concern exist- 
ing phenomena which are unknown 
or have not yet been observed experi- 
mentally (for example, prediction of 
anti-particles, new chemical elements, 
deposits of minerals, etc.); (2) it may 
bear on phenomena which must arise 
only in the future given definite con- 
ditions (for example, the prediction 
by Marx and Engels of the inevitable 
downfall of capitalism and the vic- 
tory of the communist formation, 
Lenin’s conclusion concerning the pos- 
sibility of building socialism in one 
single country, the propositions of the 
Programme of the CPSU about the main 
features of future communist society 
and the ways of building it). S.P. is 
always based on the extension of cog- 
nised laws of nature and society to 
a sphere of phenomena which are un- 
known or have not yet arisen, a sphere 
in which these laws should preserve 
their force. S.P. inevitably also con- 
tains elements of supposition, especially 
as regards concrete future events and 
their dates. This is determined by the 
emergence, in the course of develop- 
ment, of qualitatively mew causal 
connections and possibilities which 
did not exist previously and, insofar 
as society is concerned, by the especial 
complexity of its development because 
in society the agents are people endowed 
with a mind, individual characters, 
etc., as a result of which unexpected 
situations may arise. Practice is always 
the final criterion of the correctness 
of S.P. Denial of the objective laws 





Sechenov 


of reality (agnosticism, scepticism), 
also leads to denial of S.P., as the 
unavoidable outcome of the idealist 
theories of social development. On the 
other hand, recognition of S.P. is based 
on a materialist understanding of 
history. 

Sechenov, Ivan Mikhailovich (1829- 
1905), father of Russian physiology 
and founder of materialist psychology 
in Russia. He was professor of the 
Medico-Surgical Academy (1860-70) and 
Moscow University (1891-1901), Honor- 
ary Member of the Academy of Scien- 
ces since 1904. S. was an irreconci- 
lable fighter against idealismin physiol- 
ogy and psychology. His philosophical 
and socio-political views were greatly 
influenced by the Russian revolution- 
ary democrats, particularly Cherny- 
shevsky. In his scientific activity S. 
was guided by three main methodolog- 
ical principles—the proposition on the 
material unity of the world, the prin- 
ciple of determinism and the genetic 
approach to the object studied, par- 
ticularly to psyche (q.v.). S. initiated 
experimental physiological investiga- 
tions of the central nervous system, 
in particular the brain. His major 
discoveries were made in the physiol- 
ogy of the nervous system, i.e., re- 
search into central inhibition and the 
properties of “inertness” of the nerve 
tissue. The extension of the reflectory 
principle to the activity of the brain 
(“Reflexes of the Brain” and “Who 
and How Should Elaborate Psychol- 
ogy”) marked the beginning of the 
reflectory theory of the mental activ- 
ity of animals and man. He introduced 
new concepts (the “sensory instru- 
ment”, or analyser, acquired reflexes, 
etc.) which served as points of depar- 
ture for Pavlov (q.v.) in creating the 
doctrine of higher nervous activity. 
S. made an important contribution 
to the natural scientific treatment of 
such problems of materialist epistemol- 
ogy as the nature of the sensory re- 
flection and its cognitive function 
(“First Lecture at Moscow University”, 
“Impressions and Reality”, “Object, 
Thought and Reality”), as the connec- 
tion and transition from sensory reflec- 
tion to thinking and the nature of 


26° 


— 403 — 


Self-Consciousness 


thought processes (“Elements of 
Thinking”), the role of objective, 
practical activity in shaping images 
and mental abilities, and a number 
of other problems. 

Secondary Qualities, see Primary and 
Secondary Qualities. 

Sectus Empiricus (c. 200-250), Greek 
philosopher and physician, follower of 
Aenesidemus (q.v.). The extant works 
of S.E. Hypotyposes pyrrhoniennes, 
Adversus mathematicos sum up the 
arguments used by ancient sceptics 
(see Scepticism) to refute the idea 
of “dogmatic” philosophy about the 
possibility of proving indisputable 
knowledge. Demonstrating the impos- 
sibility of any universal obligatory 
scientific, theological, ethical, and 
other truths, S.E. advised philosophers 
to refrain from any solutions and 
knowledge in order to achieve com- 
plete peace of the mind and bliss, the 
realisation of which is the aim of phi- 
losophy. S.E. proposed that man be 
guided in life by natural requirements, 
inclinations, habits, laws, traditions, 
and above all by common sense. 

Self-Consciousness, the process of 
man singling himself out from the 
objective world, awareness of his rela- 
tion to the world, awareness of himself 
as a personality, his behaviour, actions, 
thoughts, sentiments, desires, and inter- 
ests. An animal is identical with its 
activity, it changes nature only by 
virtue of its presence, i.e., is related 
to it directly. Man, however, mediates 
his relation to nature by his social 
practical activity and above all by 
the use of tools. Thanks to labour he 
is singled out from the natural con- 
nections: in the process of labour he 
correlates his aims and tasks with 
the natural material and takes into 
account his own possibilities. By chang- 
ing nature, he changes himself. By 
creating products in the process of 
labour, man, as it were, doubles him- 
self, and in the object of his activity 
contemplates his handiwork. He dif- 
ferentiates himself as producer from 
the objects of his activity. But since 
labour is always of a social character, 
man begins to be aware of himself 
as a particle, a cell of the given 








Self-Motion 


— 404 — 


Self-Realisation, Theory of 





historical system, regarding another 
man as similar to himself and seeing 
in him a man. Language plays an impor- 
tant part in the shaping of S.C. because 
language is the direct reality of 
thought and discharges its function for 
man only because it exists for others. 
S.C. (as an earnest, as an inclination) 
arises simultaneously with conscious- 
ness as a derivative from it, but is dis- 
played at a considerably higher stage 
in the development of mankind. At 
first man differentiates himself from 
the object, becomes aware of the object 
of his activity and of himself as a 
subject only in the process of acting 
on things. Then S.C. is manifested as 
a generic, collective element: man is 
still fully absorbed by the genus which 
carries human essence. As the gentile 
system declines, civilisation appears 
and the individual emerges, the S.C. 
of the personality as such arises. In 
the history of philosophy, S.C. was an 
active principle and it frequently 
exhausted the understanding of the 
practical activity of man (see Fichte, 
Hegel, Young Hegelians). Moreover, 
S.C. was frequently regarded as a 
creative element in relation to the 
objective world. In reality S.C., being 
an active principle, can be understood 
only as a result of man’s productive 
activity in society and as its aspect; 
it depends on the reflection of the 
objective world and is determined 
by it. 

Self-Motion, movement which has 
åts source and cause in the moving 
thing itself. From the very beginning 
the conception of S.M. was the opposite 
‘of “external impulse” as the sole 
cause of changes in nature. In the his- 
‘tory of philosophy the origin and de- 
‘velopment of the category of S.M. was 
.agsociated, first, with the question 
of the “beginning” of the world, the 
prime cause of world processes and, 
second, with difficulties in explaining 
the actual processes of development. 
Materialists tried to explain movement 
by forces and properties inherent in 
nature itself: combination and divi- 
‘sion of the primary elements (Ionian 
philosophy), “love” and “hate” (Em- 
pedocles), atoms and void (Leucippus 


and Democritus). Deduction of change 
from an ideal transcendental element 
was characteristic of idealist systems 
(Plato). The problem of understanding 
the cause of movement became es- 
pecially acute with the appearance of 
the Christian dogma of the creation 
of the world. To prove the S. M. of 
the world it was necessary to reveal 
the source and mechanism of its move- 
ment within itself, but theology 
placed this source outside of it (activ- 
ity of God). The mechanistic concept 
of causality (and change) is theoreti- 
cally (methodologically) untenable be- 
cause it cannot withstand the idea of 
the “prime impulse” (Newtonian me- 
chanics) and is incapable of explaining 
real processes of development. A radical 
transformation of the method of think- 
ing was required for a scientific ex- 
planation of S.M.: dialectics had to 
come to the aid of materialism. The 
Spinozian idea of causa sui (cause of 
itself), the Leibniz principle of the 
monad as the self-moving and self- 
determining substance, the Kantian 
ideas of the development of the heav- 
ens, earth, and man, the evolution 
idea in Schelling’s philosophy and, 
lastly, Hegel’s idealist dialectics—all 
were the landmarks in developing 
the S.M. conception which consists 
of nothing else but “an exhibition 
of contradiction” (Hegel). Marxist phi- 
losophy, upholding the materialist ap- 
proach to S.M., emphasises that this 
category has a dialectical content, is 
incompatible with a mechanistic un- 
derstanding of development (simple 
decrease, increase, repetition) and is 
inseparably connected with the dia- 
lectical conception of development as 
the unity of opposites. 
Self-Realisation, Theory of, an ob- 
jective idealist ethical theory of the 
19th-20th centuries, according to which 
the moral demand made on man is 
that he “realise” in his actions his 
inner, strictly individual Ego; this 
Ego at the same time is in harmony 
with the absolute Ego, or the universal 
spirit, i.e., in essence with God. Thus, 
this theory actually avoids the prob- 
lems of human development. In differ- 
ent variants this theory was expounded 








Semantic Philosophy — 405 — 


by the British objective idealists (Fran- 
cis Bradley, Bernard Bosanquet, John 
Muirhead), the American personalists 
(Mary Calkins, Josiah Royce, William 
Hocking, Borden Bowne), and others. 

Semantic Philosophy, see General 
Semantics. 

Semantics, see Semiotic. 

Semblance, the outward manifesta- 
tion of the essence or, to be more 
exact, certain aspects of the essence of 
things as immediately perceived by the 
senses. The subjective factor in S. 
lies in the fact that S. gives only an 
inadequate, distorted expression of the 
essence of things (refraction observed 
when an object is immersed in water, 
apparent movement of the Sun round 
the Earth, etc.). It is incorrect, how- 
ever, to treat S. as purely subjective, 
for it is always in some way connected 
with objective reality, of which it is 
a manifestation. Even the subjective 
factor which distorts reality is often 
determined by objective factors. The 
task of cognition is to reduce S. to 
reality and explain how the latter is 
manifested in S. (see Essence and 
Appearance). 

Semiotic, a science which engages 
in the comparative study of sign sys- 
tems (see Sign), from the simplest sig- 
nalisation systems to natural languages 
and formalised languages (q.v.) of sci- 
ence. The main functions of a sign 
system are: (1) the function of trans- 
mitting a communication or express- 
ing sense (see Denotation and Sense); 
(2) the function of communication, 
i.e., ensuring understanding by the 
listeners (readers) of the transmitted 
communication, and also a motive 
to action, an emotional influence, etc. 
The exercise of any of these functions 
presupposes a definite internal organi- 
sation of a sign system, i.e., the pres- 
ence of different signs and laws of their 
combination. In conformity with this, 
three main divisions are singled out: 
(1) syntactics, or the study of the in- 
ternal structure of the sign systems 
regardless of the functions they per- 
form; (2) semantics which studies the 
sign systems as a means of expressing 
sense; (3) pragmatics which studies 
the relation of the sign systems to those 


Sensation 


who use them. The biggest role in the 
development of S. methods is played 
by a study of systems possessing, on 
the one hand, sufficiently rich media 
for expressing sense, and on the other, 
a sufficiently clearly defined structure. 
Up to now such systems have been 
above all formalised languages of mathe- 
matics and particularly of mathemati- 
cal logic. Metalogic (q.v.) is the most 
developed S. subject. S. studies pro- 
mote the formalisation of new spheres. 
of science (cf. the recently developing 
calculi in mathematical linguistics, 
experiments in formalising certain. 
concepts of pragmatics, the concepts 
of “verse metre”, etc.). The concepts. 
and methods of S. acquire great im- 
portance in view of the development 
of the theory and practice of the ration- 
al storaging and automatic processing 
of information; in this sphere S. comes 
in close contact with cybernetics. The 
main principles of S. were first for- 
mulated by the American logician and 
mathematician Charles S. Peirce; sub- 
sequently they were expounded and 
systematised by the philosopher Charles 
Morris (Foundations of the Theory 
of Signs, 1938). Questions of S. were 
in fact considered as early as the 1920s: 
by Polish logicians of the Lvov- Warsaw 
school (q.v.). 

Seneca, Lucius Annaeus (4 B.C.-65 
A.D.), prominent exponent of Roman 
stoicism, the tutor of Nero who subse- 
quently sentenced him to death. His 
numerous works and the biggest of 
them, Epistolae morales ad Lucilium, 
have been preserved in the original. 
S. adhered to the pantheism (q.v.) 
of the Greek stoics, i.e., regarded the 
world as a single material and rational 
whole and elaborated chiefly moral 
problems which, when properly solved, 
enable man to attain calm and un- 
disturbed spirit (see Ataraxia). He 
sought to link his ethics, individualist 
in the main, with the tasks of society 
and the state. The ethics of S. exerted 
a great influence on the Christian ideol- 
ogy. Engels called S. the uncle of 
Christianity. 

Sensation, the elementary result of 
the action of the objective world on 
man’s sense-organs (analysers). Diverse 





Sensationalism 


— 406 — 


Set Theory 





factors of the environment (electro- 
magnetic oscillations, molecules of 
chemical substances, etc.) stimulate 
the peripheral part of an analyser, 
the receptor; the stimulus in the form 
of discrete impulses is transmitted along 
the nerve canals to the central part of 
the analyser, the cerebral cortex, where 
S. arises. Thus, S. is secondary in 
relation to material reality. According 
to the specific character of the external 
stimuli, Ss. are divided into separate 
groups: visual, tactile, auditory, gus- 
tatory, olfactory, etc. Each group of 
Ss. possesses specific modality—a sum 
total of qualities incomparable with 
the qualities of Ss. of other groups. 
Thus, colours do not resemble sounds, 
taste or smells. The most developed 
Ss. are visual; next come tactile, audito- 
ry, gustatory, and olfactory. A feature 
of the relation existing between the 
Ss. and the properties of the objects 
of the material world causing them 
is that different properties of external 
objects may correspond to one and 
the same quality of S. The process 
of getting to know the objective world 
begins with S. In this process they 
perform two functions, first, separate 
Ss. act as a signal; for example, colour 
signals the temperature of heated metal. 
The source of our knowledge of the 
temperature of a given body is not 
the colour itself but a correlation 
between calour and temperature known 
in advance. The second and most im- 
portant function of S. is that as part 
of the image given in perception (q.v.) 
it conveys connections and relations 
inherent in the objective world. S., 
like other forms of sensory contem- 
plation, is the channel through which 
man is directly connected with the 
objective world. In his Materialism 
and Empirio-Criticism Lenin criticised 
the idealist interpretation of S. 
Sensationalism, a doctrine in episte- 
mology (q.v.) which considers sensa- 
tions the sole source of knowledge. 
If sensations are regarded as a reflection 
of objective reality, consistent S. 
under certain conditions leads to ma- 
terialism (Holbach, Helvétius, Feuer- 
bach). But if sensations are regarded 
only as subjective, behind which noth- 


ing exists or the unknowable thing-in- 
itself is posited, S. leads to subjective 
idealism (Berkeley, Hume, Kant, 
Mach, Avenarius, Bogdanov). There- 
fore S. by itself is not yet a materialist 
line in philosophy. Although it played 
a big part in the development of ma- 
terialist philosophy, its limitations 
made it often powerless in struggle 
against idealism. Sensation can become 
a necessary side of cognition only given 
its organic unity with other sides of 
the cognitive process: practice and 
abstract thinking (see Knowledge; 
Theory and Practice; Contemplation; 
Empiricism; Rationalism). 

Separation of Powers, the teaching of 
the division of powers into legislative, 
executive, and judicial. Locke(q.v.) was 
the first to suggest the idea of the S.P.; 
later it was developed by Montesquieu 
(q.v.). The teaching of the S.P. served 
as the ideological foundation of the 
alliance of the bourgeoisie and the 
aristocracy and of the limitation of 
absolutism by concentrating legislative 
power in the hands of bourgeois repre- 
sentative institutions. In the bourgeois 
state the S.P. is purely formal; in a 
number of cases it is used to justify 
the “strong” presidential, executive 
power. 

Set Theory, a branch of mathematics 
dealing with one of the main categories 
of philosophy, logic, and mathematics 
—the category of the infinite—by 
exact methods. It was founded by 
Georg Cantor. The subjects of S.T. 
are the properties of sets (sum totals, 
classes, ensembles) which are for the 
most part infinite. The fundamental 
principle of the S.T. is the establish- 
ment of different “orders” of infinity. 
The classical S.T. proceeds from the 
recognition of the applicability of the 
principles of logic, unquestionable in 
the sphere of the finite, to the infinite 
sets. However, as early as the end of 
the 19th century the development 
of the S.T. brought to light difficulties, 
such as paradoxes (q.v.), connected 
with the application of the laws of 
formal logic, particularly the law of 
the excluded middle (q.v.) to the in- 
finite sets. In the polemics that started 
in connection with this, some impor- 


Shelgunov 


tant epistemological problems of math- 
ematical cognition were formulated: 
the nature of mathematical concepts, 
their relation to the real world, the 
concrete content of the concept of exist- 
ence in mathematics, etc. In the course 
of these polemics there arose such 
trends in philosophy and mathematics 
as formalism (q.v.), intuitionism (q.v.), 
logicism (q.v.). Special attention is 
deserved by the constructive trend in 
Soviet mathematics. The methods of 
the S.T. are largely employed in all 
fields of modern mathematics. They 
have significance as a matter of prin- 
ciple in the problems of the substantia- 
tion of mathematics, particularly for 
the modern form of the axiomatic 
method (see Axiom). All the problems 
of substantiating mathematics by logi- 
cal means are nothing but problems 
of substantiation of the S.T. However, 
efforts to substantiate the S.T. itself 
encounter difficulties which have not 
been overcome up to now. 

Shelgunov, Nikolai Vasilyevich 
(1824-91), Russian revolutionary dem- 
ocrat and public figure, follower 
of Herzen, Belinsky, and Chernyshev- 
sky (qq.v.). As a journalist he wrote 
on problems of history, politics, and 
economics; he was also an art critic 
and populariser of natural scientific 
knowledge. In his leaflets “To the 
Young Generation” and “To the Sol- 
diers” (1861), he severely criticised 
the peasant reform and called for a 
peasant revolution. He assisted in 
introducing Marxism into Russia. In 
his article “The Urban Proletariat in 
England and France” (1861) he enun- 
ciated the fundamental ideas of En- 
gels’ book The Condition of the Work- 
ing Class in England, recalling its 
author as “one of the best and noblest 
of Germans”, to whom “European 
economic literature owes its best work 
on the economic life of the English 
worker”. In his social views S. did not 
reach up to materialism, although 
he spoke of the role of the masses in 
history and of the significance of the 
development of production for social 
progress. He believed that Russia 
could pass over to socialism through 
the peasant commune. He criticised 


— 407 — 


Shevchenko 


the doctrine of innate ideas from po- 
sitions of materialist sensationalism. As 
an adherent of Chernyshevsky’s aesthet- 
ic views, S. fought the “art for art’s 
sake” theory. S.’s works—Usloviya 
progressa (The Conditions of Progress), 
1863, Zemlya i organicheskaya zhizn 
(The Earth and Organic Life), 1863, 
Ubytochnost neznaniya (The Disad- 
vantage of Ignorance), 1864, Pisma o 
vospitanii (Letters on Education), 1873- 
74, and others—are devoted to phil- 
osophical problems. S. was arrested 
several times for his attacks against 
serfdom and its survivals. 

Shevchenko, Taras Grigoryevich 
(1814-61), Ukrainian poet, artist, think- 
er, fighter against tsarism and serfdom, 
founder of the revolutionary democratic 
trend in the Ukrainian history of so- 
cial thought. Born in a family of serfs, 
he was ransomed in 1838. Graduating 
from the Academy of Arts in 1845, 
he joined the following year a secret 
political organisation in Kiev. He was 
connected with the Petrashevsky (q.v.) 
group. In 1847, he was arrested, forced 
to serve in the eet and exiled. At 
the end of his exile (1857) he was 
drawn close to Chernyshevsky, Dobro- 
lyubov (qq.v.) and other staff members 
of the journal Sovremennik, who exerted 
a good influence upon him. His poeti- 
cal works The Dream, Caucasus, The 
Last Will, etc., and his activities were 
directed against the “gang of self- 
seeking landowners”, and the “crowned 
hangman”, meaning the tsar, and 
against the apologists for serfdom. 
Exposing the oppression of Russian 
tandowners and the tsar, S. came out 
against the Ukrainian bourgeois na- 
tionalists, stood for the friendship of 
the Russian and Ukrainian peoples 
and fought for the development of 
the Ukrainian culture and language. 
S.’s world outlook was materialistic, 
since he held that spiritual power was 
unthinkable without matter; but mis- 
takenly identifying materialism with 
its vulgar form, he did not call him- 
self a materialist. Stressing the inev- 
itability of the downfall of serfdom, 
S. considered the masses to be the de- 
cisive force in social development. 
He severely criticised both religion 








Shintoism 


and the church. In aesthetics he stood 
on the side of realism, holding nature 
to be the source of the beautiful. He 
held that art must be true to life, in 
close contact with the people, and be 
a vehicle of progressive ideas. S.’s 
Dnevnik (Diary) vividly reflects these 
views. He greatly influenced the devel- 
opment of the Ukrainian revolutionary 
social thought and culture (I. Franko, 
M. eee Lesya Ukrainka, 
etc.). 

Shintoism (Jap. the way of the 
gods), a religion which emerged in 
Japan under the primitive-communal 
system and underwent considerable 
changes in the course of its develop- 
ment. The term Shinto first came into 
use in the 18th century to distinguish 
S. from Buddhism, from which many 
of its rites and conceptions were bor- 
rowed. In 1868, S. was proclaimed the 
state religion, which it remained for- 
mally until 1946; actually it began to 
lose its significance at the end of the 
19th century. The chief element in 
S. is worship of numerous kami (spirits), 
which were originally personified by 
animals, plants, things, natural phe- 
nomena, and the souls of the ancestors. 
According to S., contact between the 
gods and people is effected through 
the emperor (Mikado), the descendant 
of Amaterasu, the Sun goddess, and 
her representative on earth. The Mikado 
is considered to be the forefather of 
all the Japanese and is honoured as a 
god. Following Japan’s defeat in the 
2nd World War the divine origin 
of the Mikado began to be denied. 

Shulyatikovism, synonym for crude 
simplification and vulgarisation of 
Marxism, which reduces the compli- 
cated process of the development of 
philosophy, art, literature, natural 
science in a class society to the simple 
expression of the “class interest”. 
As a means of criticism of vulgar 
sociologists (Fritsche, Pereverzev, and 
others) the term “Shulyatikovism” 
appeared in the Soviet literature of the 
20s and 30s. The term is derived from 
the name of V. Shulyatikov (1872- 
1912), a Russian Social-Democrat, 
literary critic, whose book, Opravda- 
niye kapitalisma v zapadnoevropeiskoi 


— 408 — 


Sign 


filosofii (The Justification of Capital- 
ism in West European Philosophy), 
1908, is an example of such vulgarisa- 
tion. Proceeding from the philosophy 
of Bogdanov (q.v.), S. tries to show 
that all philosophical systems are but 
the theoretical justification of bour- 
geois interest, and, for this reason, are 
alien to the proletariat, and that 
Marxism is in no way connected with 
them. S. denied the existence of any 
element of objective truth in the 
philosophical views of Descartes, Spi- 
noza, the French materialists, Hegel, 
and other pre-Marxian philosophers, 
since they give a “picture of the class 
structure of society”. Characteristic 
of S. are direct deduction of ideological 
phenomena from the forms of the or- 
ganisation of production, denial of the 
relative independence of science, liter- 
ature, and philosophy, the desire 
to find a vulgarly understood “class 
equivalent” for every philosophical 
category or artistic image. 

Sign, a concept of philosophy, logic, 
linguistics, psychology and other sci- 
ences dealing with an analysis of 
human activity. Most often S. is un- 
derstood as a sensorily perceptible 
object, action or event which indicates, 
denotes or represents another object, 
event, action, subjective formation, 
etc. This description covers an es- 
sential feature of S., but cannot serve 
as its definition, because it considers 
only one of the relations or connections 
(namely, the relation of designation), 
which, taken all together, constitute 
a S. Attempts to define the concept 
S. encounter considerable difficulties, 
because S. is a complicated structural 
formation, the methods for the study 
of which have not yet been sufficiently 
elaborated. A feature in the history 
of the analysis of S. is a desire to solve 
the problem by studying its separate 
parts. Attention has been concentrated 
on examination of the relation of 
designation (in logic, and in the 19th- 
20th centuries in logical semantics); 
the analysis of the relationships within 
S. systems considered independently 
of the content they express (in logical 
syntax); the description of relation- 
ships and historical changes in the 








Signal Systems 


meanings of S. and S. systems within 
the framework of man’s practical work 
and psychical activity (in epistemolog- 
ical concepts and psychology and, 
lately, in pragmatics as part of semiot- 
ic, q.v.). Awareness of the limitations 
of such approaches to the analysis 
of S. made feel the need for its synthet- 
ic description (for example, within the 
bounds of semiotic). But the methods 
of synthesis in the conceptions put 
forward by C.S. Peirce, q.v., K. Bith- 
ler, C. Morris, q.v., were still undevel- 
oped, chiefly because human activity 
was limited to individual activity, 
disregarding social productive activ- 
ity. Dialectical materialism has fur- 
nished the methodological principles 
for the study of S. and S. systems and 
provided a scientific understanding 
of the structure and functions of socio- 
productive activity. Language (q.v.) 
holds a special place among the S 
systems. 

Signal Systems, the conditioned- 
reflex mechanism for reflecting reality. 
The main postulates of the doctrine 
of S.S. (formulated by the Russian 
physiologist Ivan Pavlov) are as fol- 
lows. In the higher animals, including 
man, the subcortex is the first region 
of intricate relationships of the organ- 
ism and the environment. The sub- 
cortex closest to the cerebral hemis- 
pheres has its intricate unconditioned 
reflexes caused by a few unconditioned, 
i.e., inborn external agents. Hence, 
limited orientation in the environ- 
ment. The second region is the cerebral 
hemispheres, without the frontal lobes. 
Here a new principle of activity orig- 
inates by means of conditioned connec- 
tion: signalling of the few unconditio- 
ned agents by the innumerable mass of 
other agents which are analysed and syn- 
thesised and make possible greater ori- 
entation in the same environment. This 
is the only signal system in the animal 
organism and the first signal system in 
man. He has another (second) signal 
system located in the frontal lobes of 
the brain, signalling by word, by 
speech. This introduces a new principle 
of nervous activity—abstraction and 
generalisation of countless signals of 
the first system, followed by an analysis 


— 409 — 


Skovoroda 


and synthesis of the generalised 
signals, a principle which makes for 
unlimited orientation in the external 
world. 

Sigwart, Christoph (1830-1904), Ger- 
man logician, professor of philosophy 
at Tübingen University (1865-1903), 
subjective idealist, Neo- Kantian. 
Known for his Logic (1873-78). Accord- 
ing to S., logic is based on psychology 
and is the science of correct thinking. 
The criterion of truth, in his opinion, 
is necessity and universal significance, 
for which there is no basis whatso- 
ever in the objective world. Evidence, 
simply postulated with a reference to 
faith, is considered by S. to be the 
basis of necessary thinking. He elabor- 
ated in detail the theory of inference. 

Simultaneity, coincidence in time 
of events separated in space. The 
classical picture of the world contained 
the concept of absolute time, single 
flow of time proceeding uniformly 
everywhere and consisting of instants, 
each of which ensues throughout space. 
The theory of relativity (q.v.) dislodged 
from the scientific picture of the 
world the absolute motion ascribed 
to ether and rejected the concept of 
absolute S. Identification of the mo- 
ments of time of two events has mean- 
ing when we examine events within 
the bounds of a definite frame of refer- 


ence. Events simultaneous in one 
frame of reference will be non-simul- 
taneous in others. 


Single Individual (Ger. der Einzelne), 
one of the central categories in the 
ethics of existentialism (q.v.). This 
concept expresses a distorted idea of 
man considered outside social relations. 
Existentialists regard “singleness” and 
“inimitability” as the main features 
of man. The peculiarity or “individual- 
ity” of the S.I. is a source of morality 
and the criterion of ethical evaluation. 
Existentialists utilise the category of 
S.I. to justify individualism (q.v.) 
and egoism (q.v.). 

Skovoroda, Grigory Savvich (1722- 
94), a Ukrainian enlightener, democrat, 
philosopher and poet. He was educated 
at the Kiev-Mogilyansky clerical acad- 
emy. Renouncing a clerical career, 
he chose the life of a wandering 





Skovoroda 


preacher and philosopher. His outlook 
was influenced by the works of Feofan 
Prokopovich and Lomonosov (q.v.), 
his theological education having im- 
parted to his views a contradictory 
character. In solving the fundamental 
question of philosophy, he evinced 
vacillation between materialism and 
idealism, but his standpoint on many 
questions was materialistic. Following 
Lomonosov, he came to the conclusion 
that matter is eternal and infinite, 
that nature is ruled by law-governed 
connections and is its own cause (Dru- 
zhesky razgovor o dushevnom mire 
[Friendly Conversation on the Spiritu- 
al World}, 1775). Dualistic vacilla- 
tions led S. to create the theory of 
“three worlds” embracing all that 
exists: the “macrocosm”, or nature, 
the “microcosm”, or man, and the 
“world of symbols”, the Bible. Each 
of these he considered as comprising 
two natures, the outward, or material, 
and the inner, or spiritual. In an at- 
tempt to overcome the dualism (q.v.) 
of his teaching, S. tried to eliminate 
the contradiction between the material 
and spiritual principles by combining 
the concepts “God” and “nature”, 
considering them as identical, as is 
typical of pantheism (q.v.). He ac- 
knowledged the boundlessness of human 
knowledge, but associated the stud 
of nature with the necessity for self- 
analysis and recognition of the “world 
of symbols”. S. sharply criticised the 
official religion for its dogmatism and 
scholasticism and propagated the helio- 
centric teaching of Copernicus which 
was inimical to the church (Potop 
Zmiin [The Deluge of Snakes], 1791, 
and other works). He ridiculed the 
vices and parasitism of the clergy. 
His moral preachings were couched 
in a religious form and were associated 
with the search for a “religion of love 
and virtue”. He defended the interests 
of the people, called for an end to 
lawlessness and to ignorance among 
the working people, but his solution 
of social problems was utopian, inas- 
much as he considered the moral prin- 
ciple to be the main factor in setting 
up a new society. His sociological 
views reflected the weakness and li- 


— 410 — 





Slave-Owning System 


mitations of the then peasant anti- 
feudal movement. S.’s works were not 
published during his life, but were 
widely circulated in manuscript 
copies. 

Slave-Owning System, the first an- 
tagonistic class society, arising on the 
ruins of the primitive-communal sys- 
tem (q.v.). Slavery existed in some 
degree and in one form or another in 
all countries. It reached its highest 
form of development in ancient Greece 
and ancient Rome, where slaves be- 
came the chief productive force of 
society. Under the S.S. the slave-own- 
ers made up the ruling class. It fell into 
different social groups: the big land- 
owners, the owners of big workshops, 
the merchants, the money-lenders. 
The second main class was composed 
of the numerous exploited slaves. 
Besides these two main classes in the 
S.S. there were the intermediate strata 
of the population: small proprietors, 
who lived by their own labour (the 
handicraftsmen and peasants), and the 
lumpen-proletariat, composed of ruined 
handicraftsmen and peasants. Pri- 
vate ownership of the means of pro- 
duction and of the slaves by the slave- 
owners constituted the basis of the 
dominant production relations of the 
S.S. Exploitation of the slaves, based 
upon extra-economic compulsion, as- 
sumed monstrous proportions. To 
counter such exploitation and oppression 
the slaves showed a low productivity 
of labour and destroyed instruments 
of production. The surplus product 
created by every slave was insignifi- 
cant. But the whole mass of surplus 
product, owing to the large number 
of slaves exploited and the extreme 
cheapness of their labour, was relative- 
ly great. On this basis some social 
and technical progress, development of 
science, art, and philosophy became 
possible. The state emerged and de- 
veloped with the rise of the S.S. The 
whole history of slavery is the history 
of class struggle. The class struggle 
reaches its highest point with the decay 
of the S. S. Slave uprisings are inter- 
woven with the struggle of the ruined 
small! peasants against the big landown- 
ers. In Rome the collapse of the S.S. 


Slavophites 





was precipitated by invasion. The 
Slave-owning form of exploitation 
was replaced by feudal exploitation. 
The slave-owning mode of production 
did not completely disappear with the 
collapse of the S.S. It continued to 
exist in one degree or another in the 
period of feudalism (q.v.) and capital- 
ism ( .v.). 

Slavophiles, representatives of a con- 
setvative political and idealist trend 
in Russian social thought which strived 
to justify Russia’s need for a special 
path of development as compared with 
that of Western Europe. In its objective 
purport it was a reactionary utopian 
programme for the transition of the 
Russian nobility to the bourgeois path 
of development with maximum pre- 
servation of their privileges. This pro- 
gramme was evolved at a time when 
the necessity for a departure from the 
old forms of exploitation and an adap- 
tation of the ruling class to the new 
historic conditions had become obvious 
even to the most reactionary figures, 
including the Tsar, Alexander II. The 
founders of Slavophilism were I. Ki- 
reyevsky, and A. Khomyakov; its mem- 
bers included K. and I. Aksakov, Y. Sa- 
marin and P. Kireyevsky. The move- 
ment got its first literary expression 
in 1839, its ideas were developed in 
the forties and fifties and were subse- 
quently adopted by the pan-Slavists 
and the Russian intellectuals who emi- 
grated from Russia after the October 
Revolution. Defending their main idea, 
the S. regarded orthodoxy, community 
life, which they idealised, the “sub- 
mission” of the Russian people and 
the “absence” in its history of any class 
divisions as “peculiarities?” of Russian 
history. The S. justified this conception 
sociologically, claiming that the relig- 
ion of a people determines the charac- 
ter of its thinking and is, therefore, 
the foundation of its social life. Since 
the S. considered orthodoxy the true 
religion, they held that only those 
peoples who professed it, first and fore- 
most the Russians, could have any 
claim to progress, while other peoples 
could do so only to the extent to which 
they accepted orthodox civilisation. 
The S. sought a philosophical justifica- 


__— All — Social Being and Social Consciousness 


tion of their teachings in a religious 
and mystic system, in the voluntaristic 
ontology of Khomyakov and the in- 
tuitionist epistemology of Kireyevsky. 

Social Being and Social Conscious- 
ness, two interconnected and interact- 
ing aspects, material and spiritual, of 
society’s life. Marxism understands 
S.B. as the material life of society, the 
production of material wealth and the 
relations (in class society, class rela- 
tions) people enter in the process of pro- 
duction. S.C. is the views, concepts, 
ideas, the political, legal, aesthetic, 
ethical, and other theories, philosophy, 
morality, religion, and other forms of 
consciousness. The relationship of S.B. 
and S.C. is part of the fundamental 
question of philosophy (q.v.) as ap- 
plied to society. Prior to Marxism the 
view prevailed in philosophy that con- 
sciousness plays a determining role in 
the life of society. Actually, however, 
consciousness is a reflection of the peo- 
ple’s S.B. in their spiritual life. The 
first formulation of this proposition, 
which lays a solid scientific foundation 
under social science, was given by Marx 
and Engels. In The German Ideology 
they said: “Men, developing their 
material production and their material 
intercourse fi.e., relations of produc- 
tion.—Ed.], alter, along with this, 
their real existence, their thinking and 
the products of their thinking. Life is 
not determined by consciousness, but 
consciousness by life”. (The German 
Ideology, p. 38.) Marxism explained 
this fact of decisive impor- 
tance for understanding the life of 
people and also demonstrated that the 
relationship of S.B. and S.C. is not 
simple but complex and fluid and that 
it grows more complex simultaneously 
with social life. At the initial stages 
of history, S.C. was formed as a direct 
product of the material relations of 
people; subsequently, with the division 
of society into classes and the appearance 
of politics, law, and political strug- 
gle, S.B. acted in a determining way 
on the minds of people through a mass 
of intermediate links like the state 
and state system, legal and political 
relations, etc., which also exerted 
a great influence on S.C. In these 





Social Consciousness, Forms of 


conditions the direct deduction of S.C. 
from material relations leads to vulgar- 
isation and simplification. At the same 
time Marxism demands understanding 
of, and consideration for, the great 
role of S.C. and its influence on the de- 
velopment of S.B. itself. The absolute 
counterposing of these two sides of 
the people’s life holds true only within 
the framework of the fundamental 
question of what is primary and what 
is secondary. Outside of it, such ab- 
solute contrasting is meaningless. In 
certain periods the role of S.C. can and 
does become decisive, although ulti- 
mately it is determined and condi- 
tioned by S.B. The diverse forms of S.C., 
for all their dependence on S.B., pos- 
sess relative independence. The latter 
is expressed in the fact that changes 
in the material life of society never 
create new products of S.C., becaus espi- 
ritual concepts—scientific, philosophi- 
cal, artistic, and other ideas—depend 
on the data accumulated earlier and 
are also subject to a definite intrinsic 
logic of development. Moreover, changes 
in material relations cannot cause 
instantaneous automatic changes of the 
S.C. because people’s spiritual concepts 
possess a considerable power of inertia, 
and only struggle between new and old 
concepts leads to the victory of those 
which are called into being by the 
main requirements of changed material 
lNe, by new being. The Marxist doctrine 
of S.B. and S.C. is of great metho- 
dological importance; it helps to for- 
mulate problems of social life scientif- 
ically and to solve them in the course 
of practical activity. 

Social Consciousness, Forms of, dif- 
ferent forms of reflection in the minds 
of people of the objective world and 
social being in the course of their prac- 
tical activity.Social consciousness exists 
and is displayed in the forms of politi- 
cal ideology, legal conceptions, moral- 
ity, religion, science, art, and philos- 
ophy. The diversity of F.S.C. is de- 
termined by the wealth and diversity 
of the objective world itseli—of nature 
and society. Different forms of con- 
sciousness reflect diverse spheres and as- 
pects of reality (for example, political 
ideas reflect relations between classes, 


— 412 — 





Social Consciousness, Forms of 


nations, and states and serve as a basis 
for political programmes realised in the 
action of classes and social groups; 
the sciences study the concrete laws of 
nature and society, etc.). Each form 
of consciousness has its own object of 
reflection and is also marked by a 
specific form of reflection (for example, 
scientific concepts, moral rules, artis- 
tic images, religious dogmas). The 
wealth and complexity of the objective 
world merely creates the possibility 
for the various F.S.C. to appear. This 
possibility is realised on the basis of a 
definite social requirement. Science 
arises only when the simple accumula- 
tion of experience and empirical knowl- 
edge becomes insufficient for the de- 
velopment of social production; polit- 
ical and legal views and ideas arise 
with the appearance of classes and the 
state to justify and consolidate the 
relations of domination and subordi- 
nation, etc. In each socio-economic 
formation (q.v.) all forms of conscious- 
ness are interconnected and in their 
entirety constitute the spiritual life 
of the given society. The specific nature 
of a social requiremept giving rise to 
one F.S.C. or another also determines 
the historically concrete role which they 
play in the life and development of 
society. The communist formation, for 
example, comes into being and develops 
on the basis of the knowledge and pur- 
poseful application of objective laws. 
That is why under socialism, the lower 
phase of communism, religion begins 
to wither away; at the higher phase 
religious survivals will be fully elimi- 
nated. At the same time essential 
changes will occur in the spiritual 
life of society as a whole. With the 
victory of communism the need for 
political and legal ideology will disap- 
pear and they will wither away. On 
the other hand, such F.S.C. as morality, 
science, art and philosophy will flour- 
ish. They will not only serve various 
social needs, but will also mould the 
spiritual countenance of each indi- 
vidual, become a requisite for his all- 
round development, for active creative 
endeavour, the display of the entire 
wealth of individual capabilities, in- 
clinations and habits, for the full- 











Social Contract, Theory of 





blooded life of each man (see Social 
Being and Social Consciousness). 
Social Contract, Theory of, an ideal- 
ist doctrine of the origin of the state 
and law as a result of a contract con- 
sciously concluded between people. 
From the viewpoint of this theory, 
complete anarchy and “war of all against 
all” or, according to some views, 
idyllic freedom, precedes society and 
the state. The general feature of the 
“natural state” is unrestricted person- 
al freedom which people consciously 
forgo in favour of the state to ensure 
their safety, private property, and 
other personal rights. The first concepts 
of the origin of state by contract arose 
in antiquity. (Chinese philosopher of 
the 5th century B.C. Mo Tz, sophists, 
q.v., Socrates, q.v., Epicurus, q.v.) 
The T.S.C. was most developed in the 
17th-18th centuries (see Hobbes, Gas- 
sendi, Spinoza, Locke, Rousseau) in 
view of the struggle of the bourgeoisie 
against feudalism and the absolute 
monarchy. It was the ideological justi- 
fication of the bourgeoisie’s claim to 
political power. The bourgeois limi- 
tations of this theory were expressed 
chiefly in proclaiming the eternity of 
the “natural? law of private property 
and justifying the economic inequality 
of people. This theory was also shared 
by the enlighteners in Russia (see Ra- 
dishchev), the United States (Thomas 
Jefferson), and other countries. 
Social-Darwinism, a doctrine which 
regards struggle for existence and nat- 
ural selection as the prime mover of 
social progress. It originated from the 
application of Darwin’s (q.v.) biolo- 
gical theory to sociology by Friedrich 
Lange, Otto Ammon and Benjamin 
Kidd. It was current in sociology in 
the late 19th century. Certain Social- 
Darwinists (Elmer Pendell, Francis 
Montagu) claim that natural selection 
and struggle for existence continue to 
operate in human society to this day. 
Others hold that natural selection oper- 
ated in society in its pure form a 
mere 100 years ago, but that under the 
impact of progress in science and tech- 
nology the struggle for existence sub- 
sided and a situation emerged in which 
not only the fittest could survive but 


EEA NR 


— 413 — 


Social Psychology 


also those who in earlier conditions 
were doomed to extinction. The expo- 
nents of such theories saw the root 
of all social evil in the intensified pro- 
pagation of such inferior people. S.D. 
is used extensively te justify the alleg- 
edly “eternal” and “inviolable” nature 
of the capitalist system and attacks 
on the working people’s democratic 
rights, to extol the jungle law reigning 
in capitalist society, to depict mil- 
lionaires as heroes and supermen, and 
to classify workers and working peo- 
ple in general as “second-rate” people. 

Social Estates, a form of class divi- 
sion typical of the slave and feudal 
societies. S.E. were social groups dis- 
tinguished by their status in society 
and the legal place they held in the 
state machinery. Affiliation to S.E. 
was hereditary. In feudal Russia, only 
the nobles and gentry belonged to 
the nobility. They were freed from du- 
ties, not subject to corporal punish- 
ment, and could be tried by their own 
court of law, the court of the landed 
nobility. They alone possessed the 
right to own manors and serfs. The 
clergy were also a privileged estate. 
The townsmen (chiefly petty artisans 
and tradesmen) and peasants made up 
the lower S.E., subject to duties. The 
remnants of the division of society into 
estates survive even now in many of 
the capitalist countries, particularly 
where the outdated feudal relations 
have not been entirely eliminated. To 
retain its class domination, the con- 
temporary bourgeoisie is prepared to 
sustain estate prejudices (typical in 
this respect are the nazi theories of 
the corporative state, suggesting the 
restoration of social estates, and also the 
reactionary “elite” theories recommend- 
ing the transfer of power to-the select 
top of society). In Russia, estate divi- 
sions were abolished in 1917. 

Social Psychology, the totality of 
feelings, emotions, habits, ideas, illu- 
sions, volitional trends and other char- 
acteristics common to people because 
of the common socio-economic condi- 
tions in which they live. The histori- 
cally developed forms of S.P. include 
S.P. of classes, nations, social or pro- 
fessional groups, etc. Typical of the 











Social Psychology 


psychology of the working class, for 
example, is its sense of collectivism and 
class solidarity, whereas the psychol- 
ogy of the bourgeoisie is characterised 
by individualism and money-making. 
Under socialism the psychology of peo- 
ple is typified by a sense of collectivism, 
public duty, a creative attitude to 
labour, internationalism, a keen sense 
of dignity and confidence in the future. 
Although the building of socialism in 
the U.S.S.R. has brought about the 
moral, political and ideological unity 
of society, there are still in social pro- 
duction and private life survivals of 
the bourgeois psychology of individual- 
ism, such as greed, parasitism, religi- 
ous superstition, etc. One of the 
reasons responsible for these survivals 
is that changes in human sentiments 
and habits take place more slowly than 
in ideology. Along with the material 
conditions of social life, the latter is 
an important factor determining the 
trend of development of S.P. The con- 
struction of communism, obliteration 
of the distinctions between town and 
country and between mental and phys- 
ical labour, will result in the formation 
of a basically common S.P. of the mem- 
bers of communist society. The term 
S.P. also applies to that department of 
science which deals with social psycho- 
logy. The main task assigned by Marx- 
ism-Leninism to S.P. is to analyse the 
socio-economic nature of the objective 
factors, the laws governing the for- 
mation of social sentiments, moods and 
incentives of activity, and other mental 
processes. The mentality of Soviet peo- 
ple was analysed in the past (e.g., by 
A.S. Makarenko) and is being analysed 
today in studies of their social behavi- 
our. These studies serve the communist 
education (q.v.) of working people. 
S.P. became a special branch of soci- 
ology in the late 1890s (Gabriel Tarde, 
Gustave Le Bon, William McDougall, 
Edward Ross). Among the capitalist 
countries, the USA is the one where 
S.P. is making especially rapid prog- 
ress, Its main trends are behaviour- 
ism (Emery S. Bogardus and S. Strans- 
feld, the adherents of E.L. Thorndike, 
John B. Watson and George H. Mead) 
and psychoanalysis (E. Jones and B. 


— 414 — 


Socialism 


Trotter, the adherents of Sigmund 
Freud and Alfred Adler). Despite the 
differences in views held by the expo- 
nents of these schools, they have in 
common general defects of idealism 
and metaphysics; they ignore the de- 
terminative role of production rela- 
tions in society and recognise the psy- 
chic factors as primary in social devel- 
opment; they identify S.P. with so- 
ciology and use unscientific methods 
of selecting and processing the collect- 
ed information. 

Social Relations, relations between 
people established in the course of 
their joint practical and spiritual ac- 
tivity; these are divided inte material 
and ideological. The production of 
material wealth forms the basis for the 
existence and development of human 
society. That is why the relations of 
production, economic relations, are the 
most important of all the S.R. The re- 
lations of production (q.v.) determine 
the nature of all the other S.R.—polit- 
ical, legal, etc. Understanding of the 
dependence of all S.R. on the relations 
of production made it possible for the 
first time to explain the course of hu- 
man history. 

Socialism, a social system based on 
public ownership of the means of pro- 
duction; comes into being as a result 
of the abolition of the capitalist mode 
of production and the establishment of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat (q.v.). 
S. builds on two forms of ownership: 
state (public) ownership and co-opera- 
tive and collective ownership. Public 
ownership presupposes absence of ex- 
ploiter classes and of exploitation of 
man by man, and existence of relations 
of comradely co-operation and mutual 
aid among workers engaged in produc- 
tion. Under S. there is no social op- 
pression and inequality of nationali- 
ties, and no antithesis between town 
and country, between mental and phys- 
ical labour, although the essential 
distinctions between town and country, 
and between mental and physical la- 
bour, continue to exist. Socialist so- 
ciety consists of two friendly classes— 
the working class and the collective- 
farm peasantry—and a social stratum, 
the intelligentsia (q.v.). The distinc- 











FY Y 


Socialism and Communism 


tions between the two classes and also 
between them and the intelligentsia 
are being gradually obliterated. A prom- 
inent feature of the relations between 
all these social groups is their socio- 
political and ideological unity, while 
the relations between socialist nations 
are marked by friendship, co-operation 
and fraternal mutual assistance. By 
virtue of public ownership, S. develops 
its entire economy on a planned, pro- 
portionate basis, a practice that is 
impossible under capitalism. The de- 
velopment and improvement of social 
production is aimed at satisfying the 
people’s material and cultural require- 
ments to an ever fuller degree. Life 
in a socialist society is grounded on 
broad democracy, implying the draw- 
ing of all working people into active 
administration of the state. Socialist 
democracy ensures social rights—the 
rights to labour, rest and leisure, free 
education and medical services, to se- 
curity in old age, equal rights for men 
and women, and citizens of all races 
and nationalities—and political lib- 
erties—freedom of speech, freedom 
of the press, freedom of assembly, and 
the right to elect and be elected. S. 
differs from the higher phase of com- 
munism by the lesser degree of maturity 
of all the aspects of social life. Under 
S. the productive forces are not yet 
developed enough to secure an abun- 
dance of products and labour is not yet 
a prime vital necessity for all members 
of society. For this reason, material 
wealth is distributed according to the 
principle, “From each according to 
his ability, to each according to his 
work”. The natural outcome of the 
development of S. is communism. In 
the Soviet Union, S. has triumphed 
fully and for all time, and the country 
has embarked on the full-scale build- 
ing of communism. At present, S. is 
being built in a number of countries 
in Europe, Asia and America. The 
world socialist system embraces over 
one-third of the world’s population. 

Socialism and Communism, the two 
phases of the communist socio-econom- 
ic formation, socialism (q.v.) being 
its first, or lower, phase, and commu- 
nism its higher phase. They differ in 


— 415 — 


Socialism and Communism 


degree of economic maturity. Already 
under socialism there is no private 
ownership of the means of production, 
and its production relations are based 
not on domination and subjugation, 
but on comradely co-operation and 
mutual assistance of people free from 
exploitation. In this respect there is 
no difference between socialism and 
communism. Under socialism, public 
ownership of the means of production 
exists in two forms: as state (public) 
property and as collective-farm and 
co-operative property (q.v.). Under 
communism, however, there will be 
one property of the whole people. 
Under socialism there are still distinc- 
tions between the working class and 
the collective-farm peasantry. Once the 
building of communism is completed, 
these distinctions will disappear. The 
same will be true of the distinctions 
between the working class and the peas- 
ants, on the one hand, and the intelli- 
gentsia, on the other. All these distinc- 
tions are conditioned in the final count 
by the level of development of the pro- 
ductive forces. It is this factor that de- 
termines the differences in the forms 
of distribution, which under socialism 
are governed by the principle: “To 
each according to the quantity and 
quality of labour done”, and which 
under communism are governed by the 
principle: “To each according to his 
needs”. Under communism, due to 
the growth of the productive forces, 
direct distribution of wealth will take 
the place of commodity and money 
relations still existing under socialism. 
Changes in the economy are accompa- 
nied by changes in the superstructure 
(see Basis and Superstructure). Polit- 
ical and legal institutions and politic- 
al and legal ideology will wither away 
at a particular stage of communist 
development. All people will observe 
single, generally recognised rules of 
communist living, for these will meet 
their inner requirements and customs. 
The state will wither away, and the 
Party as well will have fulfilled its 
historical role. Communism will see 
an ever growing rapprochement between 
nations in all respects up to the point 
of the complete disappearance of any 








Socialism and Communism 


distinctions between them. Communism 
will be a higher form of social organi- 
sation, which will function on the 
basis of greatly developed productive 
forces, science, technology, culture 
and communist public self-administra- 
tion. The Programme of the CPSU 
says: “Communism is a classless social 
system with one form of public owner- 
ship of the means of production and 
full social equality of all members of 
society; under it, the all-round develop- 
ment of people will be accompanied 
by the growth of the productive forces 
through continuous progress in science 
and technology; all the springs of 
co-operative wealth will flow more 
abundantly, and the great principle, 
‘From each according to his ability, 
to each according to his needs’, will 
be implemented. Communism is a high- 
ly organised society of free, socially 
conscious working people, in which 
public self-administration will be estab- 
lished, a society in which labour for 
the good of society will become the 
prime vital requirement of everyone, 
a necessity recognised by one and all, 
and the ability of each person will be 
employed to the greatest benefit of the 
people.” (The Road to Communism, 
p. 509.) The gradual development of 
socialism into communism involves a 
series of profound qualitative changes 
centering on three main problems: 
the creation of the material and tech- 
nical basis of communism (the decisive 
link in the chain of all social-economic 
tasks), the promotion of communist 
social relations and the moulding of 
the new man. The Programme of the 
CPSU scientifically outlines the 
period during which a communist so- 
ciety will in the main be built in the 
Soviet Union. The creation of the ma- 
terial and technical basis of communism 
by 1980 will ensure an abundance of 
material and cultural values for the 
whole population, and Soviet society 
will draw closer to the point of intro- 
ducing the principle of distribution ac- 
cording to the needs of its members. 
Social relations will develop systemat- 
ically: class distinction will be the 
first to vanish, followed after 1980 by 
the distinctions between mental and 


— 416 — 


Socialism of the Chair 


physical labour and subsequently by 
national distinctions, including łan- 
guage distinctions. Another specific 
feature of communist construction will 
be the moulding of the new man, an 
individual developed comprehensively 
and harmoniously, combining spiritual 
wealth, moral purity and perfect phy- 
sique. Communism implies harmonious 
relations between the individual and 
society. 

Socialism, Christian, a doctrine which 
seeks to impart a socialist tinge to the 
Christian religion, to picture Christi- 
anity (q.v.) as the champion of the work- 
ing people’s interests and a means of 
deliverance from all social evils. C.S. 
originated in the 1830s and 1840s as a 
variety of feudal socialism, reflecting 
the hostile attitude of the outgoing 
feudal classes to capitalism. The aim 
of C.S. was to fight against the revo- 
lutionary movement and reconcile the 
antagonistic classes. In our days C.S. 
looks for a “third line” differing from 
both capitalism and communism, actu- 
ally, its ideal “Christian democracy” 
does not go beyond the bounds of bour- 
geois social relations. C.S. is closely 
connected with reformism (q.v.), and 
it seeks to split the ranks of the work- 
ing class. 

Socialism, Fabian, a reformist trend 
in Britain which arose as an antipode 
to scientific socialism. Its name is 
an allusion to the Roman army leader 
Fabius Cunctator (Procrastinator). The 
Fabian Society was organised in Brit- 
ain in 1884, and in 1900 it entered the 
Labour Party as a literary-publicist 
group. F.S. was represented by Beat- 
rice and Sidney Webbs, Morgan Phi- 
lipps, Clement Attlee, Herbert Morri- 
son, and others. Officially, F.S. denies 
any connection with philosophy, but 
many of its proponents support relig- 
ion, adhere in their views of history 
to the doctrine of the decisive role of 
ideas in society, and deny the class 
struggle. F.S., according to Lenin’s 
definition, “is the most consummate 
expression of opportunism and of 
Liberal-labour policy”. (Vol. 21,p. 260.) 

Socialism of the Chair, an ironical 
name given to a group of German 
liberal professors and politicians, mem- 





Socialism, Scientific 


bers of the socio-ethical school which in 
the second half of the 19th century was 
the first to “prove” theoretically that 
capitalism would peacefully develop 
into socialism. Following the teaching 
of the historical school in political 
economy, the Socialists of the Chair 
held that political economy must go 
beyond the bounds of studying econom- 
ic phenomena in the narrow sense 
and merge with the other social sci- 
ences. They held that the state could 
regulate economic relations. S.C. was 
a peculiar reaction to the spread of the 
working-class movement and it ex- 
pressed the desire of the bourgeoisie to 
retard the growth of the proletariat’s 
class consciousness. In 1872, soon after 
the suppression of the Paris Commune, 
the Socialists of the Chair organised a 
Socio-Political Union{which advocated 
the need for social reforms and state 
intervention in economic relations. 
Lorenz Stein, Adolf Wagner, Gustav 
Schmoller, Lujo Brentano, and Werner 
Sombart (q.v.) were among the propo- 
nents of S.C. 
Socialism, Scientific, 
nism, Scientific. 
Socialism, Utopian, a teaching on 
society based on common property, 
obligatory labour of all members, and 
equal distribution ‘of products. The 
term “utopia” (from Gk., literally a 
non-existent place) as a designation of 
an ideal society was first used by 
Thomas More and was the name he 
gave to an imaginary island on which 
an ideal society was set up. Subsequent- 
ly, this term was applied in describing 
imaginary and mainly impracticable 
social systems. The utopian socialists, 
who criticised the existing system based 
on private property, painted pictures of 
the ideal future society and set out to 
prove theoretically the need for pub- 
lic ownership, voiced a number of bril- 
liant ideas and conjectures. That is 
why U.S. (together with English po- 
litical economy and German classical 
philosophy) is one of the ideological 
sources of scientific socialism. Condem- 
nation of private property and praise 
of common ownership can be found 
in the works of some of ancient Greeks 
and Romans, the medieval “heretics”, 


see Commu- 


27-1682 


— 417 — 


Socialism, Utopian 


in the programmes of some peasant 
uprisings in the epoch of feudalism, and 
in the views of peasant ideologists. That 
was a natural reaction to the inequali- 
ty and exploitation in antagonistic 
societies. As capitalism developed, U.S. 
became more complex as a theory and 
branched out, forming various schools 
and trends. The systematic develop- 
ment of U.S. began in the period of 
capitalism’s birth, the Renaissance and 
Reformation—Houska in Bohemia, 
Miinzer (q.v.) in Germany, More (q.v.) 
in England, Campanella (q.v.) in Ita- 
ly, and others. It was further developed 
in the period of bourgeois revolutions 
in Europe, being at that time the ideol- 
ogy of the proletariat’s predecessors 
(see Melier, Mabley, Morelly, and Ba- 
bouvism in France, Lilleburn and Win- 
stanley in England). U.S. reached its 
apex during the rapid development 
of capitalism, when the illusions of 
the ideologists of bourgeois revolutions 
vanished and the contradictions of 
capitalist society became increasingly 
apparent (St. Simon and Fourier, qq.v., 
in France and Owen, q.v., in England). 
No utopian socialist, however, suc- 
ceeded in attaining a materialist un- 
derstanding of history or discovering 
the real driving forces of society and 
its future, socialist transformation. 
Even St. Simon, who came closest of 
all to the correct understanding of the 
role of property and classes in the pro- 
gressive development of history, main- 
tained that the progress of scientific 
knowledge, morality, and religion was 
the basis of social development. Be- 
sides this, there was a lack of under- 
standing of the real ways for transform- 
ing the existing social relations, renun- 
ciation of revolution and naive faith 
that the existing order could be changed 
by spreading socialist ideas. Accord- 
ing to Marx, only the development of 
the productive forces, which make a 
revolution in the mode of production 
inevitable, and the emergence of an 
industrial proletariat, sufficiently 
schooled and organised by the develop- 
ment of capitalist society itself, create 
the historical possibility of converting 
socialism from an utopia to science. 
Marx and Engels translated this possibi- 

















Socialist Emulation 


lity into reality by scientifically proving 
the inevitability of the transition to 
communism and discovering the force 
capable of effecting this transition, the 
proletariat, and by creating the doc- 
trine of socialist revolution (q.v.) and 
the dictatorship of the proletariat (q.v.) 
as the instrument for applying the so- 
cialist ideals in life. Marxism criti- 
cally re-fashioned and assimilated every- 
thing valuable in U.S. With the rise 
of Marxism U.S. increasingly became 
a factor impeding the working-class and 
socialist movement. In individual coun- 
tries, U.S., merging with the revo- 
lutionary democratic ideology, played 
a progressive part (Russian revolu- 
tionary democrats, Narodniks in the 
1870s, and others) even after the de- 
velopment of Marxism. 

Socialist Emulation, a social phe- 
nomenon expressing the creative ini- 
tiative of the working people aimed 
at furthering socialist production in 
every way possible. S.E. is based on 
socialist relations of production. Being 
entirely different from capitalist com- 
petition, which is a means of exploit- 
ing the working people, S.E. is a form 
of conscious and free creativity on the 
part of the people and an expression 
of their talents and abilities. Socialism, 
which abolishes exploitation and trans- 
fers political power to the working 
class, provides great opportunities for 
large-scale emulation for the first time 
in history. S.E. has its source in the 
radical change in the attitude to la- 
bour, which occurs for the first time 
in the history of society after labour 
is freed and becomes labour for oneself, 
for society. Lenin wrote that commu- 
nism begins where ordinary workers 
display concern for the welfare of the 
whole of society. As a form of socialist 
organisation of labour, S.E. is based 
on friendship, mutual assistance and 
collectivism. The characteristic fea- 
tures and indispensable conditions of 
S.E. are as follows: publicity 
of achievements in production scored 
by individual enterprises and workers, 
mutual assistance among the workers, 
the advancement of those who are 
lagging behind to the level of the fore- 
most, broad popularisation of advanced 


— 418 — 


Socialist State 


experience, etc. S.E. plays an enormous 
role in increasing labour productivity, 
improving the workers’ skill and de- 
veloping new technology. The socialist 
principle of remuneration for labour 
done serves to combine public and per- 
sonal interests in S.E. S.E. stimulates 
criticism and self-criticism (q.v.), helps 
improve the organisation of production, 
dissemination of experience and enlist- 
ment of working people in management 
of production. It aims at inculcating 
in people the communist attitude to 
labour. By improving the economic 
relations of socialism and developing 
socialist democracy, S.E. promotes the 
formation of communist social rela- 
tions. Lenin emphasised the organisa- 
tion of emulation as an important task of 
the state in his works: How To Organise 
Emulation?, The Immediate Tasks of 
the Soviet Government, and A Great 
Beginning. S.E. has assumed a variety 
of forms, including communist subbot- 
niks and the Stakhanov movement. 
Today, the main form of S.E. is the 
movement for communist labour under 
the slogan: “Learn to live and work 
in a communist way.” 

Socialist State, the state formed by 
socialist society, the political part of 
the superstructure that develops on 
economic basis of socialism. The S.S. 
is a new type of state succeeding the 
bourgeois state as a result of socialist 
revolution (q.v.). Creation of the so- 
cialist superstructure embraces the pe- 
riod of transition from capitalism to 
socialism. In this period, the state 
takes the form of the dictatorship of 
the proletariat (q.v.). It is socialist 
in its aims and tasks, because it serves 
as a means of building socialism. As 
socialist society progresses, the func- 
tions of the S.S. change accordingly. 
With the abolition of the exploiting 
classes, the function of suppressing 
their resistance disappears, while the 
main functions of the S$.S.—economic 
organisation, education and cultural 
development—are exercised to a greater 
extent. After the world socialist sys- 
tem (q.v.) was formed, the S.S. ac- 
quired a new external function, that of 
promoting fraternal co-operation with 
other socialist countries, in addition 





=. 


Society, Organic Theory of 


to the old functions of fighting for 
world peace and defending the social- 
ist country. With the complete and 
final victory of socialism and the entry 
of Soviet society into the period of 
full-scale communist construction, the 
state of proletarian dictatorship turns 
into a state of the whole people (q.v.), 
an organ expressing the will of the 
entire people. The S.S. is an instru- 
ment for strengthening socialism and 
gradually developing socialist society 
into communist society. The withering 
away of the state implies the gradual 
development of the socialist state and 
the entire political organisation of so- 
cialist society into communist public 
self-administration (q.v.). The construc- 
tion of a developed communist society 
and the victory and consolidation of 
socialism on a world scale are indis- 
pensable for the complete withering 
away of the state. 

Society, Organic Theory of, an un- 
scientific theory which likens human 
society to a biological organism and, 
on this basis, considers the capitalist 
system “natural” and immutable. Spen- 
cer was the father of this theory. After 
him this theory was expounded by the 
German sociologist Schäf fle; who com- 
pared various social groups in a class 
society to organs of the human body. 
This theory is supported by contem- 
porary American sociologists Bogardus 
and Parsons. 

Socio-Economic Formation, a histo- 
rical type of society based on a defi- 
nite mode of production (q.v.), and 
appearing as a stage in the progressive 
development of mankind from the prim- 
itive-communal system (q.v.) through 
the slave-owning system (q.v.), feu- 
dalism (q.v.), and capitalism (q.v.) to 
the communist formation (see Social- 
ism and Communism). The concept of 
S.E.F. was first elaborated by Marxism 
and is the cornerstone of the material- 
ist understanding of history. It makes 
it possible, first, to differentiate one 
period of history from another and, 
instead of arguments about “society 
in general”, to study historical events 
within the bounds of definite forma- 
tions; second, to group the systems in 
different countries on the same level 


27° 


— 419 — 


Sociology 


of production (e.g., in capitalist Brit- 
ain, France, West Germany, and the 
United States) and to reveal the fea- 
tures common to these countries and, 
hence, to utilise in studies the general 
scientific criterion of repetition, whose 
application to social science the subje- 
ctivists deny; third, in contrast to eclec- 
tic theories which regard society as a 
mechanical totality of social phenome- 
na (the family, the state, the church, 
etc.) and the historical process result- 
ing from the influence of diverse fact- 
ors (natural conditions and education, 
development of trade and birth of a 
genius, etc.), the concept of S.E.F. 
makes it possible to examine human 
society in each period of its develop- 
ment as a single “social organism” 
incorporating all social phenomena in 
their organic unity and interaction on 
the basis of the mode of production. 
The productive forces (q.v.) make up 
the material and technical basis of so- 
ciety; the relations of production (q.v.), 
its economic structure or basis. The 
ideas which arise on this basis, the 
ideological relations and various or- 
ganisations and institutions form the 
superstructure of society (see Basis and 
Superstructure); lastly, the language, 
the family, and the historical commu- 
nities of people (see Tribe, Nationali- 
ty, Nation), etc., form specific social 
phenomena which are related neither 
to the basis nor to the superstructure 
but are essentially important for un- 
derstanding the development of a 
S.E.F. Each formation has its partic- 
ular laws of emergence and develop- 
ment. At the same time, general laws 
operating in all formations bind them 
into a single process of world history. 
Capitalist society is the last formation 
based on the antagonism between class- 
es. It completes the pre-history of 
mankind. The communist formation 
which brings peace, labour, freedom, 
equality, and happiness for all people 
on earth, for the first time in history 
provides conditions for the boundless 
development of mankind based on 
the accelerated growth of the produ- 
ctive forces. The communist formation 
begins the true history of mankind. 

Sociology, the science of society and 








A el ala kil Ue! A ™ R re = 
. PA 
Sociology — 420 — Sociology 


the laws governing its development. 
The inception of sociological doctrines 
goes back to remote antiquity. Mo- 
Tz, Democritus, Plato, Aristotle, Epi- 
curus, and Lucretius (qq.v.) attempted 
to apprehend the causes of social 
changes, the motive forces in the life of 
people, the reasons for social upheavals, 
the origin of the state and law, the 
forms of an ideal social and political 
system, etc. In feudal times, religious 
sociological doctrines appeared, based 
on dogmas of the church and represent- 
ing its interests., The chief exponents 
of S. at that time were St. Augustine 
and Thomas Aquinas (qq.v.). At the 
time of the decay of feudal society and 
the emergence of capitalism, sociologi- 
cal teachings appeared that were aimed 
against the theological view on history 
and society, as represented by ibn- 
Khaldun and Machiavelli (q.v.). The 
earliest attempts to treat history as a 
law-governed process go back to Vico, 
Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau, and 
Herder (qq.v.) in the 17th and 18th 
centuries; their sociological theories are 
put forward in the form of a philosophy 
of history (q.v.). At the time of the 
ascendant development of capitalism 
a number of bourgeois historians (Au- 
gustin Thierry, Frangois Guizot, Fran- 
çois Mignet) advanced some profound 
ideas about social laws and the struggle 
of classes. The dialectical conception 
of Hegel (q.v.), which described his- 
tory as a law-governed and necessary 
process, was the summit of sociological 
thought in the pre-Marxian epoch. 
Subsequently, Comte (q.v.), who coined 
the term “sociology”, endeavoured to 
build on an idealistic foundation a 
“scientific sociology” that would re- 
veal the eternal and immutable laws 
of human society, similar to the laws 
of natural science. Prior to the emerg- 
ence of Marxism, S. was, on the whole, 
typified, by an idealistic and meta- 
physical approach to the elucidation of 
social phenomena. Pre-Marxian theories 
maintained that man’s historical activ- 
ity was impelled by ideal motives and 
overlooked the material basis of society. 
For this reason, they were unable to 
apprehend its laws, and moreover, took 
no account of the activity of the 


masses. The role of the masses and — 
their struggle against the relations 
of exploitation were stressed by such 
revolutionary democrats as Herzen, 
Chernyshevsky (qq.v.), etc. Marx and 
Engels were the founders of material- 
ist S., creating the theory of historical 
materialism (q.v.). They pinpointed 
the true determinative material basis 
of society, the relations of production 
Se iscovered the objective laws 
of history and society, proved that the 
development of society is a natural 
historical process in which socio-econom- 
ic formations (q.v.) succeed each 
other, and predicted the inevitable 
replacement of capitalism by commu- 
nism. Contesting the truth of historical 
materialism, bourgeois S. of the late 
19th century and early 20th century 
opposed to it a variety of unscientific 
sociological schools (psychological, or- 
ganic, geographical, biological, rac- 
ist, etc.). These argued the eternity of 
capitalism and colonialism and pro- 
pagated racial inequality. Most of the 
sociological trends inthe capitalist coun- 
tries are idealistic and metaphysical. 
As a rule, they repudiate objective 
social laws, historical progress, the 
very concept of social evolution and 
the progressive ideas of the past, and 
champion the outdated capitalist sys- 
tem against the ideas of socialism and 
communism. They are largely irra- 
tional and agnostic, for they maintain 
that it is impossible to create a general 
sociological theory, reject scientific 
prevision and the possibility of planned 
guidance of society, and cultivate em- 
piricism. Modern S. in the capitalist 
countries has broken up into a number 
of specialised Ss. (industrial S., rural 
S., S. of the family, mental diseases, 
microsociology, q.v., and the like). 
As regards methodology, modern bour- 
geois S. is, as a rule, typified by eclec- 
tical pluralism (q.v.), which rejects the 
unity of society as the determinant of 
its basis, and upholds the chaotic in- 
teraction of numerous factors. The 
task of Marxist S. today is to follow 
the method of historical materialism 
to produce concrete scientific investi- 
gations of the pressing problems of 
the contemporary historical epoch: the 





Sociology, Empirical 


building of communist society, the 
moulding of new relations between 
ae a new way of life, new morality, 
etc. 

Sociology, Empirical, one of the 
trends in modern sociology dealing 
with the description of particular as- 
pects of social life. It was widely dis- 
seminated after the Second World 
War, especially in the USA (Lundberg, 
Dodd, Mayo, etc.). The study of indi- 
vidual social phenomena by means of 
concrete sociological investigations 
(q.v.) can play a positive role only if 
it is based on a scientific theory, exam- 
ining society as a unity developing 
according to law. The exponents of 
E.S., however, reject the unity and 
integrity of society and the objective 
laws of its development. They refuse 
to penetrate into the essence of social 
phenomena and consider society as a 
mechanical aggregate of separate so- 
cial phenomena, which they merely 
describe and list, investigating only 
the relationships between different 
factors. Empirical sociology’s meth- 
od is limited to questionnaires, in- 
terviews, and statistical material. They 
maintain that this purely quantitative 
method of investigation is the only 
scientific method. The main features 
of E.S. are lack of a general philosophi- 
cal basis and a profound differentiation 
between social studies, which results 
in the creation of different sociologies 
independent of each other (urban so- 
ciology, rural sociology, family sociol- 
ogy, industrial sociology, sociology of 
alcoholism, sociology of advertisement, 
sociology of mass media, etc.). 

Sociology, Naturalist, a trend in con- 
temporary bourgeois sociology, whose pro- 
ponents elevate into an absolute traits of 
man as a biological being and assert that 
the development of mankind is deter- 
mined by the laws of biology. Among 
the naturalist trends are Social-Dar- 
winism (q.v.), Malthusianism (q.v.), 
and other unscientific theories of pop- 
ulation which ascribe to it the deci- 
sive part in the development of society, 
and also a biological variety of racial- 
ism (q.v.), as distinct from psycho- 
racialism, which treats racial features 
as an absolute and regards the struggle 


— 421 — Socio-Political and Ideological Unity 


of races as the main factor of social 
development. 

Sociology, Romantic, a sociological 
trend which took shape in the middle of 
the 19th century in England and Germa- 
ny. In the beginning R.S. was interwoven 
with feudal socialism (Carlyle, q.v.), 
in the contemporary period it merged 
with fascism (Heidegger, q.v.). The 
basic idea of R.S. is the cult of the 
heroic past of the Aryan tribes, an ap- 
peal to return to the eternal and im- 
perishable “law of the jungle”, to 
return to the formation of armed bands. 
R.S. renounces bourgeois democracy. 
Starting with Gobineau, the exponents 
of R.S. fight for the dominance of the 
“superior Aryan race” over all peo- 
ples. This idea led eventually to the 
nazi (Giinther, Krieck, Rosenberg) cult 
of the leader, the hero,the superior race. 
This formed the ideological basis of 
Hitler’s Reich. 

Sociometry, experimental and ap- 
plied microsociology (q.v.). Applying 
the usual methods of empirical sociol- 
ogy (questionnaires, interviews, etc.), 
S. probes the psychological relation- 
ships among men in some specific place 
(factory, office, school, home, and the 
like). 

Socio-Political and Ideological Unity 
of a Nation, the community of econom- 
ic, political, ideological and moral 
interests and principles that emerges 
as a result of the construction of so- 
cialism. Economically, the socio-polit- 
ical and ideological unity of a nation 
is based on socialist ownership of the 
means and instruments of production 
and on socialist relations of produc- 
tion. Politically, it is based on the s0- 
cialist state, the system of socialist 
democracy. The settlement of the nati- 
onal question is a necessary requisite 
and integral part of the nation’s socio- 
political and ideological unity (see 
Friendship of Peoples). Ideologically, 
this unity is based on Marxism-Lenin- 
ism, the ideology of the working class, 
which becomes the ideology of the whole 
people. The socio-political and ideo- 
logical unity of the Soviet people is 
most vividly displayed in the fact that 
the state which came into existence as 
a dictatorship of the proletariat (q.v.) 








Socrates 


has now become a state of the whole 
people (q.v.), while the Communist 
Party, once the party of the working 
class, has become the vanguard of the 
whole people. 

Socrates (469-399 B.C.), Greek phi- 
losopher, whose doctrine initiated the 
turn from materialist naturalism to 
idealism. He lived and taught in Ath- 
ens and his many pupils included Pla- 
to, Antisthenes, Aristippus (qq.v.) and 
Euclid of Megara. S. wrote nothing 
and his doctrine is known through the 
writings of Plato and Aristotle (q.v.). 
The structure of the world and the 
physical nature of things are un- 
knowable; we can know only ourselves. 
This understanding of the object of 
knowledge was expressed by S. in 
the formula: “know thyself”. The 
supreme purpose of knowledge is 
not theoretical but practical—the art 
of living. Knowledge, according to S., 
is the thought, the idea of the univer- 
sal. Ideas are revealed through defini- 
tions and are summed up through in- 
duction. S. himself provided exam- 
ples of definitions and generalisations 
of ethical concepts (for example, val- 
our, justice). Definition of a concept 
is preceded by a conversation, in the 
course of which questions bring out 
contradictions between the interloc- 
utors. Disclosure of contradictions 
leads to the elimination of sham knowl- 
edge, while the state of unrest prompts 
the mind to search for real truth. S. 
compared his methods of study with 
the “art of the midwife”; his method 
of questioning presupposed a critical 
attitude to dogmatic assertions and 
came to be known as Socratic “irony”. 
The ethics of S. is rationalistic: evil 
actions are only produced by ignorance 
and no one is ever bad of his own 
free will. 

Solipsism (Lat. solus, alone; ipse, 
self), a subjective idealist theory, ac- 
cording to which only man and his 
consciousness exist, while the objective 
world, including people, exist only 
in the mind of the individual. In 
principle, every subjective idealist phi- 
losophy inevitably arrives at S. Ber- 
keley and Fichte (qq.v.) and support- 
ers of the immanence school (q.v.) 


— 422 — 


er F ; 


Solovyov 


drew closest to this outlook. The view- 
point of S. deprives human activity 
and science of all sense. For this reason 
subjective idealist philosophers are 
trying to avoid extreme S. for which 
purpose they posit the existence of a 
generic, super-individual, divine con- 
sciousness. Epistemologically, S. re- 
gards sensation (q.v.) as the absolute 
source of knowledge. Lenin gave a 
criticism of S. in his Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism. 

Solovyov, Vladimir Sergeyevich 
(1853-1900), Russian idealist philoso- 
pher, theologian, and poet. Graduated 
from Moscow University (1873). His 
views were greatly influenced by Chris- 
tian literature and also the ideas of 
Buddhism, Neo-Platonism (qq.v.) and 
other philosophico-religious systems. 
S. was especially close to the Slavo- 
philes (q.v.). The idea of the “oneness 
of being” which by its nature is un- 
conditional and absolute is central in 
his doctrine. Ultimately, the “oneness 
of being” is defined by S. as the sphere 
of the divine, while the real world, as 
its embodiment. Truth (“oneness of 
being”) can be cognised neither ration- 
ally nor empirically; it is conceived 
only by “integral” knowledge based 
on mystical knowledge: faith in the 
unconditional existence of the object; 
mental contemplation (or imagination) 
which gives a true idea of the object: 
creation (or realisation of this idea in 
experiment). As for “integral” knowl- 
edge, it is a synthesis of the mystical, 
rational (philosophical) and empirical 
(scientific) knowledge. From this S. 
deduced the unity of theology, philos- 
ophy and science and called it the 
“free theosophy”. In society the idea 
of “oneness of being” reveals itself 
as the voluntary spiritual union of 
people (“free theocracy”), oras the church 
which determines the absolute aims 
of society—the establishment of a 
“kingdom of God” on earth where all 
social contradictions will be resolved. 
A “free theocracy” can result from a 
merger of the Western (Catholic) and 
Eastern (Orthodox) Christian churches 
within the framework of a monarchy; 
in this respect a “special role” belongs 
to the Russian people. According to 





Sombart 


S., the main purpose of philosophy is 
to justify the socio-religious ideal and, 
therefore, it must serve theology. S. 
also based ethics on religion. The poet- 
ry and aesthetics of S. became one of 
the ideological well-springs of Russian 
symbolism (q.v.). The unscientific the- 
ory of S. which reflected the interests 
of the reactionary circles of the bour- 
geoisie and the nobility exerted a 
great influence on Russian idealist- 
religious philosophy at the turn of the 
century (See Berdyayev, Trubetskoi, 
and others). Main works: Kritika Otule- 
chonnykh Nachal (Critique of Abstract 
Principles), 1880 Chteniya O Bogoche- 
lovechestve (Lectures of Man-God), 1877- 
81; /storiya i Budushchnost Teokratii 
(History and Future of Theocracy), 
1885-87; Rossiya i Vselenskaya Tserkov 
(Russia and the Oecumenical Church), 
1889; Opravdaniye Dobra (Justifica- 
tion of Good), 1897-99. 

Sombart, Werner (1863-1941), Ger- 
man sociologist and economist, pro- 
fessor of Berlin University. Studied 
capitalism as a social phenomenon and 
also problems of social mobility and 
social stratification. At first S. consid- 
ered himself a Socialist and Marxist, 
but later turned anti-Marxist. His 
central idea is the peaceful evolution 
of capitalism into a society of “social 
pluralism’ where capitalism and so- 
cialism will remain together for a 
long time. The main content of S.’s 
doctrine is the perpetuation of capital- 
ism, denial of its general crisis and 
of the historical inevitability of its 
replacement by socialism. Neo-Kanti- 
anism of the Baden school (q.v.) fur- 
nished the philosophical basis of his 
sociological views. Main works: So- 
zialismus und Soziale Bewegung im 19 
Jahrhundert, 1896; Der moderne Kapi- 
talismus, three volumes, 1902, 1928, 
and Die Zukunft des Kapitalismus, 1932. 

Sophistry, a deliberate application, in 
disputes or in proof, of specious ar- 
guments embodying a subtle fallacy. 
While distinguishing S. from dialectics, 
Lenin wrote that flexibility of concepts 
applied subjectively is identical to 
sophistry. (Vol. 38, p. 110.) The most 
typical cases of S. are the following: 
consideration of events out of context, 


— 423 — 


Soul 


application of laws peculiar to one set 
of phenomena to another set, and of 
one historical period to the events 
of another period. 

Sophists, wandering teachers of rhe- 
toric and philosophy in ancient Greece, 
who became prominent in the 5th cen- 
tury B.C. They did not form a school, 
but shared some common views; they 
rejected religion, gave a rationalist 
explanation to natural phenomena, and 
upheld ethical and social relativism. 
The main group of S. (“older” S.) 
championed slave-owning democracy. 
Generally speaking, they had a materi- 
alist understanding of nature. The 
proponents of this group—Protagoras 
(q.v.), Hippias, Prodicus, Antiphon— 
were the first encyclopaedists, embody- 
ing the enlightened thought of the peri- 
od. Their attention was focussed on 
problems of cognition. Some S. arrived 
at sceptical conclusions regarding be- 
ing and the knowledge of it (e.g., 
Gorgias). S. belonging to the aristo- 
cratic camp—Critias, Hippodamus— 
gravitated towards philosophical idea- 
lism. In disputes S. resorted to methods 
which later became known as sophi- 
stry (q.v.). This trend was particularly 
strong among the late S. (4th century 
B.C.), who, to use Aristotle’s words, 
turned into teachers of “imaginary 
wisdom”. 

Sorites, a chain of (categorical) syl- 
logisms, the conclusion of each form- 
ing a premiss of the next, one of the 
premisses being mutely implied. S. 
may be exemplified as follows: 

2 is an even number. 

All even numbers are natural num- 
bers. 

All natural numbers are rational 
numbers. 

Hence, 2 is a rational number. 

From the first two premisses we can 
obtain the following conclusion: 2 is 
a natural number. This conclusion plays 
the part of a minor premiss of the next 
syllogism (all natural numbers are 
rational numbers and 2 is a natural 
number). However, the premiss “2 is 
a natural number” is mutely implied. 
S. is often used in a proof for the pur- 
pose of brevity. 

Soul, a term used sometimes as a 











reSS——-- <= -— > 


Soviet Marxist Philosophy 


synonym for the psyche (q.v.). Prim- 
itive peoples regarded the S. as some- 
thing material (shadow, blood, breath, 
etc.). In religion, the S. is viewed 
as an incorporeal and immortal imma- 
terial force, capable of existing sepa- 
rately and independently of the body 
in another world. In idealist philosophy, 
the S. is identified with various ele- 
ments of consciousness. Plato (q.v.) 
calls it the eternal idea, Hegel (q.v.) 
regards it as the lowest, sensual mani- 
festation of the spirit in its connection 
with matter (sentient and active). 
In dualistic doctrines the S. is looked 
upon as something that has an inde- 
pendent existence, that exists along- 
side the body (Descartes, Spencer, 
Wundt, and James, qq.v.). Pre-Marxi- 
an materialism (Democritus, q.v., me- 
taphysical materialism) regarded the 
S. as something secondary to, and de- 
pendent on, the body, while reducing 
its activity to elementary mechanical 
or physico-chemical processes. Mate- 
trialist philosophers were often pre- 
pared to recognise a universal soul (see 
Hylozoism). A genuinely scientific ex- 
planation of the human psyche was pro- 
vided b dialectical materialism, 
unscientific notions of the S. being re- 
futed only when mental phenomena came 
to be studied experimentally and ob- 
jective methods of investigating them 
HEN discovered (see Sechenov and Pav- 
ov). 

Soviet Marxist Philosophy, appeared 
after the October Socialist Revolution 
in Russia. In its first years, it developed 
in struggle against the remnants of 
the old, bourgeois philosophy and the 
philosophical theories of Menshevism, 
Russian Machism (Bogdanov, q.v., 
and others). In 1922, the first Marxist 
philosophical journal Pod znamenem 
marxisma (Under the Banner of Marx- 
ism) was founded. Its third issue car- 
tied Lenin’s article “On the Signifi- 
cance of Militant Materialism”, devoted 
to the tasks of the journal and the de- 
velopment of S.M.P. This article, as 
well as Lenin’s other creative works, 
has had a decisive influence on all 
the subsequent work of Soviet philos- 
ophers. In the initial years, the basic 
task was to form a new body of philos- 


— 424 — 


Soviet Marxist Philosophy 


ophers closely associated with the 
Communist Party and its entire strug- 
gle for the country’s socialist recon- 
struction. The class struggle in the 
first period of the Soviet state's exist- 
ence was reflected in all fields of ideol- 
ogy, including philosophy. In the late 
twenties and early thirties, there de- 
veloped a criticism of relapses into 
mechanistic materialism (N. I. Bukha- 
rin, A. I. Varyash, V. N. Sarabyanov, 
and others) and of manifestations of 
Menshevistic idealism (A. M. Debo- 
tin’s group), which tried to identify 
Marxist dialectics with Hegel's, di- 
vorced theory from practice, and un- 
derestimated the Leninist stage in 
the development of philosophy. The 
first Soviet manuals appeared, explain- 
ing the essence of dialectical and 
historical materialism. The journal 
Under the Banner of Marxism, which 
ceased publication in 1944, and other 
periodicals were bent on elaborating 
philosophical problems of building 
socialism and cultural revolution, re- 
viewing the past history of philosophy 
in the light of Marxist philosophy, 
working for an alliance with the na- 
turalists and for their transition to 
the positions of dialectical materialism. 
The first publications of Dialectics 
of Nature by Engels (1925) and Lenin’s 
Philosophical Notebooks (1929) gave 
an impulse to research into new ques- 
tions. But the development of Soviet 
philosophy, as of other social sciences, 
was seriously retarded in the period 
of the cult of Stalin’s personality. His 
work On Dialectical and Historical 
Materialism was unwarrantedly de- 
clared the peak of Marxist philosophy. 
The Party’s criticism of the personal- 
ity cult and the decisions of the 20th 
Congress of the CPSU laid the founda- 
tion for a new stage in the development 
of Soviet philosophy. A feature of this 
stage is a considerably wider range 
of subjects for philosophical research 
and a deeper approach to urgent ques- 
tions in modern philosophical science. 
A large place has been given to the 
study of Lenin’s philosophical legacy. 
New textbooks and manuals have been 
written, in which the dogmatic features 
associated with the cult of Stalin have 


re 


Soviet Marxist Philosophy 


been overcome. The chief trend in the 
development of contemporary Soviet 
philosophy is determined by the tasks 
of communist construction outlined 
in the decisions of the 20th, 22nd and 
23rd Congresses of the CPSU and its 
new Programme. The Party decisions 
summing up the experience of com- 
munist construction in the USSR and 
the entire world development have a 
profound philosophical content and 
reveal the laws governing social de- 
velopment in contemporary condi- 
tions. A number of Soviet philosophers, 
mainly sociologists, are working on 
questions concerning the laws of com- 
munist construction, the dialectics of 
the transition from socialism to com- 
munism, the development of the So- 
viet state, the merger of the two forms 
of socialist ownership into communist 
ownership, the elimination of the es- 
sential distinctions between town and 
country, between physical and mental 
labour, the development of socialist 
culture, and others (G.M. Gak, G.I. 
Gleserman, F.V. Konstantinov, T.A. 
Stepanyan, V. P. Tugarinov, P. N. 
Fedoseyev, V. A. Fomina, G. P. Frant- 
sev, D. I. Chesnokov, and others). 
Although concrete social problems are 
still not sufficiently studied in phil- 
osophical literature, many sociological 
works have been published in recent 
years. Some of them are devoted to 
the raising of the cultura! and technical 
level of the working class, the obliter- 
ation of the distinctions between 
town and country, the elimination 
of religious survivals, etc. A large 
place in the studies of Soviet philos- 
ophers is taken up by problems of dialec- 
tical materialism. Moreover, they 
generalise the achievements of con- 
temporary natural science, further elab- 
orate materialist dialectics, study 
the new forms in which its laws are 
manifested under socialism, questions 
of dialectical logic and the theory 
of knowledge, the categories of dia- 
lectical materialism, the problem of 
xa materialist system of categories and 
philosophical questions of the natural 
sciences (E. V. Ilyenkov, B. M. Kedrov, 
P. V. Kopnin, I. V. Kuznetsov, M. E. 
Omelyanovsky, M. N. Rutkevich, V. I. 


— 425 — 


Soviet Marxist Philosophy 


Svidersky, Y. P. Sitkovsky, A. G. 
Spirkin, B. S. Ukraintsev, V. P. Chert- 
kov, and others). Soviet philosophers 
are working extensively in the field 
of Marxist studies of the world history 
of philosophy; in recent years much 
has been achieved in the study of 
Russian materialist philosophy; a group 
of philosophers are sted contem- 
porary philosophy in the capitalist 
countries, critically analysing idealistic 
philosophical conceptions (V. F. As- 
mus, M. P. Baskin, B. E. Bykhovsky, 
A. M. Deborin, M. A. Dynnik, M. T. 
Iovchuk, I. S. Kon, G. A. Kursanov, 
A. O. Makovelsky, Y. K. Melvil, 
M. B. Mitin, K. N. Momjyan, I. S. 
Narsky, T. I. Oiserman, O. V. Trakh- 
tenberg, B. A. Chagin, I. Y. Shchipa- 
nov, and others). Communist con- 
struction has posed as one of the most 
important tasks in the field of philos- 
ophy the elaboration of problems in 
communist morality, Marxist ethics, 
the struggle against the survivals 
of capitalism in people’s consciousness 
and behaviour, against the influence 
of religious views, and so on. A num- 
ber of philosophers: Y. A. Levada, 
A. F. Shishkin, and others, devoted 
their works to these problems. In the 
last few years Soviet philosophers have 
been devoting their investigations to 
problems of aesthetics: the history of 
aesthetics, the aesthetic categories, 
the theory of socialist realism, criticism 
of bourgeois aesthetic theories, and 
so on (Y. B. Borev, A. G. Yegorov, 
M. A. Lifshitz, M. F. Ovsyannikov, 
Z. V. Smirnova, G. M. Fridlender, 
and others). Whereas formerly phi- 
losophers specialising in the field of 
formal logic devoted their efforts main- 
ly to the study of traditional logic, 
in recent times they have begun to 
concern themselves with urgent prob- 
lems of logic which require dialectical- 
materialistic generalisation of the 
achievements in mathematical logic, 
semantics, and so on (K. S. Bakradze, 
Y. K.  Voishvillo, D. P. Gorsky, 
A.A. Zinoviev, P. S. Popov, P. V. Ta- 
vanets, S. A. Yanovskaya, and others). 
Works have been published dealing 
with the philosophical analysis of 
cybernetics, its essence and connections 





oo E 


aN 


NS a a Ea 





Space 


with other sciences, questions of 
psychology in general and social psy- 
chology in particular (B. G. Ananyev, 
A. N. Leontyev, S. L. Rubinstein, 
B. M. Teplov, and others). Soviet 
philosophers are faced with great tasks, 
the principal of which are: a more 
profound generalisation of the real 
processes of communist construction, 
development of the new culture, the 
formation of the man of communist 
society, elaboration of the human 
morality of communism. 

Space, see Time and Space. 

Space, Multi-Dimensionał, an ab- 
straction of space having more than 
three dimensions, as distinguished from 
the usual space (as studied in element- 
ary geometry), through every point 
of which only three straight lines per- 
pendicular to one another can be drawn 
and, therefore, the position of each 
of the points can be determined by 
three numbers. In M.D.S. with 
n-dimensions, the position of a point 
in space is defined by n-numbers 
(while space can have a finite or an 
infinite number of dimensions). The 
concept of M.D.S. appeared in mathe- 
matics as a result of the development 
and the consequent generalisation of 
the concept of space. It is the outcome 
of a complicated process of abstraction 
and idealisation and serves as a pow- 
erful means of studying reality. In 
physics, for instance, the abstraction 
of n-dimensional space found an im- 
portant application. The three numb- 
ers defining the position of a point 
in space, and the number defining 
its position in time are considered 
together, and this gives the four- 
dimensional space (four-dimensional 
space-time continuum) of the theory 
of relativity (q.v.). Infinite dimensional 
functional spaces are applied in quan- 
tum mechanics. However, it should 
not be deduced from the fact that the 
concept of M.D.S. is effective in science 
that the multi-dimensional space is 
a form of the existence of matter; 
the latter is three-dimensional and its 
properties are disclosed in the various 
systems of geometry. 

Species and Genus (in logic), catego- 
ries expressing the range of concepts 





— 426 — 


Speech 


in relation to one another. If the range 
of concept A constitutes a part of con- 
cept B, A is a species of B, and B is the 
genus of A (similarly, A is spoken of 
as a special concept in relation to B, 
and B as a generic concept in relation 
to A). For example, animals are a 
species of organisms; organisms are 
the genus that includes animals. The 
relation of G. to S. is that of the gen- 
eral to the particular. 

Speculative Philosophy 1. A sys- 
tem of philosophical propositions in- 
ferred without reference to experience. 
Relying on the “sheer power of intel- 
lect”, the speculative philosopher cre- 
ates this or that set of speculative prin- 
ciples, with which he seeks to embrace 
all objective reality. However, no spec- 
ulative system has yet stood the test 
of time, for in the final analysis reality 
is incalculably richer than any va- 
riety of S.P., which may, indeed, con- 
tain some correct inferences, but sole- 
ly because it passes off properties of 
reality for its own speculative defini- 
tions. Descartes (q.v.) was the first 
consistently speculative philosopher. 
The speculative method is extensively 
employed by the modern scholastics 
(see Neo-Thomism). 2. The philo- 
sophical systems of Fichte, Schelling 
and, particularly, Hegel, inferred from 
one principle by means of the dialecti- 
cal deductive method. According to 
Hegel, speculative examination is a 
synonym of dialectical analysis. The 
achievements of this trend of S.P. 
stem from the fact that examination 
of the dialectics of ideas enabled the 
philosophers to guess some aspects of 
reality. However, the striving at all 
costs to explain all aspects of reality 
by means of speculation made the ex- 
ponents of S.P. slavishly subordinate 
to the object, whose fortuitous and 
individual definitions they were com- 
pelled to construct as absolutely neces- 
sary and universal. 3. In the broad 
sense of the word, speculative thinking 
connotes theoretical thinking. 

Speech, man’s activity by which he 
communicates with his fellow men, 
expressing and conveying his thoughts 
by means of a language (q.v.). S. is 
the process of using language. Thanks 


a 





Spencer 


to S. the consciousness of the individ- 
ual constantly reflects the world, 
being enriched by what is reflected in 
social consciousness and associated 
with the achievements of the social 
productive practice of mankind. In 
this intercourse, constant exchange 
of thoughts takes place: on the one 
hand, the comprehension of another’s 
thoughts and their mastery, and on 
the other, the formulation and ut- 
terance of one’s own thoughts. In this 
connection S. is divided into passive 
(sensory) speech as perception and 
comprehension of the S. of others, 
and active (motor) speech as the ut- 
terance of one’s own thoughts, feelings, 
and desires. What is divided between 
the speaker and the listener is united 
psychologically by the internal struc- 
ture of S. into an integral whole: speak- 
ing, man hears and comprehends; 
hearing and understanding, he speaks. 
Physiologically, this is explained by 
the unified work of the linguamotor 
and auditory analysers, by the links 
between them (see Signal Systems). 
The main kinds of speech are oral, 
i.e., spoken and heard, .and written. 
The latter appeared in human history 
much later than the oral and developed 
through a number of stages from pictog- 
raphy (the transmission of thought 
by conventional schematic pictures) 
to contemporary phonetic writing. A 
special kind of speech is internal S., 
the particular feature of which is 
inaudible articulation of sounds. S. 
is the object of psychological investi- 
gation, which studies the process of 
mastering language, the formation of 
S. in the process of man's individual 
development, the conditions of the 
influence of S., of its perception, com- 
prehension and pronunciation, etc. 
Spencer, Herbert (1820-1903), Eng- 
lish sociologist and psychologist, one 
of the founders of positivism (q.v.). 
His philosophical views were strongly 
influenced by Hume, Kant, and Mill 
(qq.v.). The notion of the “unknow- 
able” was highly prominent in his 
system. A scientific concept, S. held, 
was conflicting and, therefore, incom- 
prehensible. The contention that sci- 
ence is based on the limited experience 


— 427 — 


Spengler 


of the individual, that is, on a false 
foundation, was another proof S. ad- 
vanced for his notion that science is 
unable to penetrate to the essence of 
things. Recognition of the “unknow- 
able” is one of the corner-stones of 
religion, which gave S. cause to main- 
tain that science and religion were 
contiguous. Subjective idealism and 
agnosticism (q.v.) combined in the 
teaching of S. with elements of objec- 
tive idealism (recognition of “absolute 
reality” as a source of human sensations 
and impressions) and a spontaneously 
materialist interpretation of the prob- 
lems of specialised sciences. The 
spontaneously materialist approach was 
prominent in S.’s teaching on evolu- 
tion. S. spread the idea of evolution 
from living beings to all things and 
phenomena. However, he conceived 
evolution in a mechanistic way, as 
redistribution in the world of matter 
and motion, and thereby blotted out the 
distinctions between different spheres 
of the material world. S.’s_ concep- 
tion of evolution lay at the root of 
his sociological views, of the so-called 
organic theory of society (q.v.), which 
attempted, quite unscientifically, to 
analyse social life in biological terms. 
S. was strongly opposed to socialism. 
His most notable work is System of 
Synthetic Philosophy (1862-96). 
Spengler, Oswald (1880-1936), Ger- 
man idealist philosopher, ideologist 
of the Prussian junkers, one of the 
theoretical forerunners of German fas- 
cism. His main work, Der Untergang 
des Abendlandes (Eng. trans. Decline 
of the West), 1918-22, in 2 vols., em- 
bodying his philosophy of history, 
was published soon after the defeat 
of Germany in the Ist World War, 
and was a success with the ideologists 
of imperialism. S. extols the “old 
Prussian spirit”, the monarchy, the 
gentry, and militarism. For him war 
is “the eternal form of the highest 
human existence”. Denying the no- 
tion of historical progress, S. opposes 
fatalism (q.v.) to the materialistic 
understanding of history. He is a fol- 
lower of historical relativism, accord- 
ing to which history falls into a number 
of independent, unique “cultures”, 








Spinoza 


peculiar superorganisms possessing in- 
dividual fate and going through the 
periods of origin, efflorescence, and 
death. According to S., the task of 
“the philosophy of history” is to un- 
derstand the “morphological structure” 
of each “culture”, at the basis of which 
lies the “soul of culture”. To him, 
Western culture beginning from the 
19th century, i.e., the establishment 
of capitalism, has entered the period 
of decline. Its efflorescence was the 
epoch.of feudalism. In our time the 
British historian Toynbee (q.v.) is 
propagating a “philosophy of history” 
close to that of S. 

Spinoza, Baruch or Benedict (1632- 
77), Dutch materialist philosopher; 
excommunucated for his free-thinking 
by the Jewish community of Amster- 
dam. His main works are Tractatus 
theologico-politicus and Ethica. S. was 
the founder of the geometric method 
(q.v.) in philosophy. S.’s doctrine orig- 
inated in a historical environment 
which made the Netherlands a foremost 
capitalist country after its liberation 
from the yoke of the Spanish feudal 
monarchy. Like the leading thinkers 
of his age, Francis Bacon and Descartes 
(qq.v.), S. considered mastery over 
nature and the improvement of man 
to be the main purpose of knowledge. 
S. supplemented the doctrines of his 
forerunners with a teaching on freedom: 
he showed how human freedom was 
possible within the bounds of neces- 
sity. In solving this problem, S. built 
on his teaching on nature. In defiance 
of the dualism of Descartes, S. main- 
tained that only nature existed, being 
the cause of itself and needing nothing 
else for its being. As “creative nature”, 
it was divine substance. S. differen- 
tiated between substance, or uncon- 
ditioned being, and the world of indi- 
vidual ultimate things, or modes, 
both corporeal and thinking. The sub- 
stance was one, while the modes were 
infinitely many. The infinite intellect 
could apprehend infinite substance in 
all its forms or aspects. But finite 
human reason apprehended the essence 
of substance as infinite in but two as- 
pects: as “extension” and as “thought”. 
These were attributes of sub- 


— 428 — 


Spinoza 


stance. S.’s teaching on the attributes 
of substance is, on the whole, material- 
istic, but metaphysical, because he 
does not consider motion an attribute 
of substance. These are the proposi- 
tions S. drew upon in creating his teach- 
ing on man. According to S., man is a 
creature in whom the mode of exten- 
sion, the body, is coupled with the 
mode of thought, the soul. By token 
of either, man is part of nature. In 
his teaching about the soul mode, 
S. reduced the complexities of psychic 
life to intellect and emotion—joy, 
grief, and desire. He identified will 
with intellect. Man’s behaviour, S. 
maintained, was motivated by his 
inclination for self-preservation and 
personal advantage. S. repudiated the 
idealistic notion of freedom of the will 
and defined will as always dependent 
on motives. At the same time, he be- 
lieved freedom possible as a behaviour 
based on knowledge of necessity. How- 
ever, according to S., only a sage, and 
not the mass of people, can be free. 
This interpretation of freedom is ab- 
stract and unhistorical. In his theory 
of knowledge S. continued his rational- 
ism (q.v.). He elevated intellectual 
knowledge based on reason above the 
lower order of knowledge derived from 
the senses, and belittled the role of 
experience. S. described direct appre- 
hension of the truth, or the intuition 
of the mind, as the highest type of 
intellectual knowledge. In so doing, 
he followed Descartes in declaring 
clarity and intelligibility the criteria 
of truth. S. did a lot to promote the 
development of atheism (q.v.) and 
free-thinking, both scientific and re- 
ligious. The purpose of religion, he 
held, was not the comprehension of 
the nature of things, but merely in- 
culcation of high moral principles. 
This is why neither religion nor the 
state should encroach on freedom of 
thought. S.’s teaching on society makes 
him a successor to Hobbes. Unlike 
the latter, S. considered not monarchy, 
but democratic government as the 
highest form of power and restricted the 
omnipotence of the state by freedom. 
S. exercised a strong influence on 17th- 
and 18th century metaphysical material- 





— 429 — 


Spiral in Development 


ism, and his religious free-thinking 
affected the development of atheism. 
Engels held S’s philosophical views 
in high esteem. “It is to the highest 
credit of the philosophy of the time”, 
he wrote, “that from Spinoza down 
to the great French miaterialists—it 
insisted on explaining the world from 
the world itself and left the justification 
in detail to the natural science of the 
Eee (Dialectics of Nature, pp. 25- 
26.) 

Spiral in Development, a figurative 
description of the outcome of devel- 
opment employed by Engels and Lenin 
in elucidating the law of the negation 
of the negation (q.v.). The process of 
development produces in phenomena 
an “apparent return to the old” (Lenin) 
in the course of change; this implies 
the repetition at a higher level of some 
features of a lower level. This may be 
depicted graphically as a S. in which 
each new turn repeats the preceding 
one, but at a higher level. The general 
impression of ascendant and progres- 
sive development is thus created. 
Development in a spiral form is at 
once opposed to the typically meta- 
physical idea of development as being 
motion along a closed circle without 
any new elements. 

Spirit (Lat. spiritus—breath), a con- 
cept broadly associated with concepts 
of the ideal, and of consciousness as the 
highest form of mental activity; in 
the more restricted sense, synonymous 
with the concept of thought. In the 
history of philosophy, a distinction is 
made between the subjective S. (the 
subject, individual), the absolutisation 
of which leads to subjective idealism 
(q.v.), and the objective S. (social 
consciousness, objectivisation of human 
capabilities), admission of the pri- 
macy of which leads to objective ideal- 
ism (q.v.). The ancient - philosophers 
regarded S. as the activity of abstract 
thought (e.g., for Aristotle, q.v., the 
highest activity of S. is the percep- 
tion of perception, delight in theory). 
It is also regarded, however, as su- 
per-rational principle, apprehended 
directly, intuitively (Plotinus, q.v.). 
This point of view is associated with 
religion, according to which S. is God, 


Spontaneity 


a supernatural being, which can be 
known only through faith. German 
classical philosophy stressed the active 
quality of the S., regarding it as the 
activity of self-consciousness (q.v.). 
Hegel conceived of S. as the unity 
of self-consciousness and conscious- 
ness achieved in reason, and as the unity 
of practical and theoretical activity of 
the S. on the basis of practica! activ- 
ity: S. exists insofar as it is active, 
although its only activity is cognition. 
According to Hegel, S. overcomes the 
natural and achieves selfhood in the 
process of self-consciousness. Material- 
ist philosophy regards S. as secondary 
in relation to nature. For the ancient 
materialists S. was the most reason- 
able part of the soul, and it pervaded 
the whole body. The materialists 
of the 17th and 18th centuries (Hobbes, 
Locke, La Mettrie, qq.v.) regarded S. 
merely as a form of sensual knowledge. 
Dialectical materialism does not re- 
duce the spiritual to the simple sum 
of sensations and rejects the concep- 
tion that it is something existing in- 
dependently of matter. The spiritual 
is the function of highly organised 
matter, the result of the material socio- 
historical practical activity of human 
beings. The spiritual life of society— 
social consciousness—is the reflection 
of social being. At the same time it 
actively influences social being and 
the practical activity of mankind. The 
concept of S. is also used in the meta- 
phorical sense as a synonym of essence, 
e.g., S. of the age, S. of the times 
(cf. Soul, Thought, Consciousness, 
Psyche). 
Spiritualism 1. An idealist teach- 
ing about the spiritual origin of the 
world. For some spiritualists the ma- 
terial world is a medium for the mani- 
festation of God and his abilities, while 
for others it is an illusion of human 
consciousness. Exponents of S. main- 
tain that the soul exists independent 
of the body. Consistent spiritualists, 
who falsify modern knowledge, sug- 
gest replacing science by blind faith 
in spirits and divine providence. 2. 
Term used by some modern philoso- 
phers to denote idealism. 
Spontaneity, action without deliber- 








Spontaneity and Consciousness 


ation, used. in reference to processes 
impelled not by outside influences, 
but intrinsic causes; also, ability to 
act on intrinsic motives. The philo- 
sophical conception of S. was first 
treated by the antique atomists in 
telation to the problems of necessity 
and chance, possibility, reality and 
probability, and freedom of the will. 
Epicurus, for example, associated the 
spontaneous deviation of the atom 
from a straight line in falling with 
chance and freedom of the will, and 
rejected mechanical determinism. Dia- 
lectical materialism defines S. as a 
specific property of matter, a token 
of its self-movement. From the stand- 
point of materialistic dialectics, wrote 
Lenin, “the condition for the knowl- 
edge of all processes of the world in 
their ‘self-movement’ (q.v.), in their 
spontaneous development, in their real 
life, is the knowledge of them as a unity 
of opposites” (vol. 38, p. 360). Recog- 
nition of spontaneous motion and de- 
velopment does not rule out the need 
for considering external influences on 
the developing object, and its interre- 
lation with the objective world as a 
whole. The idealistic conception of 
S. as independent of the objective 
world and of the non-determinative 
“freedom of man’s will” is groundless 
and conflicts with the facts of science 
(see Will). 

Spontaneity and Consciousness, the 
categories of historical materialism 
defining the relation between an ob- 
jective historical regularity and the 
purposeful activity of men. By spon- 
taneity is meant a process of social 
development whose objective laws are 
not cognised by men and are, there- 
fore, beyond their control, operating 
often with the devastating force of 
a natural calamity, while the con- 
scious efforts of men do not lead to 
the materialisation of set goals and 
even bring about results entirely unex- 
pected by them. Historical activity 
is said to be conscious when people 
pursue it in accordance with cognised 
objective laws of social development 
and direct it purposefully towards the 
materialisation of set goals. All pre- 
socialist socio-economic formations de- 


— 430 — 





Square of Opposition 


veloped as a rule spontaneously. Trans- 
fer of power to the working class headed 
by the Communist Party and the sub- 
stitution of public ownership of the 
means of production for private 
ownership ushered in a new period in 
history, a period of conscious historical 
pursuit. But the difference between 
the historical activity of men under 
socialism and in the previous forma- 
tions is not absolute. Previously, too, 
men based themselves to some extent 
in their activity on the objective laws 
of history and gradually cognised in- 
dividual manifestations of historical 
necessity. On the other hand, elements 
of spontaneity still survive under so- 
cialism, because various problems of 
social science have not yet been ex- 
haustively elaborated or because of 
a lack of skill in utilising objective 
laws to the full, or again because 
of the certain lag of social conscious- 
ness behind social being. In the con- 
text of historical materialism, the ques- 
tion of S. & C. is treated in close as- 
sociation with the tactics of the com- 
munist and working-class movement. 
It is politically important, because 
it concerns the Party’s leadership of 
the people and is an object of acute 
struggle against reformism and revi- 
sionism. 

Square of Opposition, the term pro- 
posed in the 16th century by Julius 
Pacius, translator and commentator 
of Aristotle (q.v.). It served for a long 
time as a mnemonic device for memor- 
ising the relations between the four 
main types of premisses (q.v.) of Aris- 
totelian logic. S. O. is given in the 
form of a diagram in which these rela- 
tions are graphically shown. The let- 
ters A, E, I, O respectively symbolise 
universal affirmative, universal nega- 
tive, particular affirmative and partic- 
ular negative premisses. 


A Contrary E 
i 

$ Š 
% 3 
a a 
I 0 





Subcontrary 








Stages, Theory of 


SApS 


Stankevich 





Stages, Theory of, the conception of 
US sociologist Walt Rostow set out 
in his book, The Stages of Economic 
Growth. A Non-Communist Manifesto 
(1960). According to this conception 
history is divided into five stages: (1) 
“traditional society”, which includes 
all societies not short of the capitalist; 
it is marked by a low productivity 
of labour and the predominance of 
agriculture; (2) “transitional society”, 
which coincides with the transition 
to pre-monopoly capitalism; (3) “stage 
of take-off”, marked by industrial 
revolutions and the beginning of in- 
dustrialisation; (4) “stage of maturity” 
(completion of industrialisation and 
emergence of industrially developed 
countries); (5) “stage of high mass 
consumption”, claimed to be attained 
as yet only in the United States. For 
relations of production, the real basis 
of historical development, T.S. sub- 
stitutes an eclectical interaction of a 
variety of factors—technical, economic, 
psychological, political, cultural, his- 
torical, and the like. Taking the share 
of capital in the national income as 
the basis for dividing society into 
stages, Rostow arbitrarily classifies 
different socio-economic formations 
(q.v.) under the head of “traditional 
society” and thereby ignores the quali- 
tative differences between them. T.S. 
endeavours to identify phenomena 
which are qualitatively different in 
social substance by placing them under 
the common head of “industrial so- 
ciety” (e.g., the attempts to identify 
socialist and capitalist industrialisa- 
tion). Eager to vindicate colonialism 
and US capitalism, T.S. repudiates 
the need for socialist revolutions and 
maintains that the whole world is 
moving towards an “integrated in- 
dustrial society” as exemplified by the 
United States, and thereby attempts 
to goad the peoples recently liberated 
from the colonial yoke on to the capi- 
talist path of development. Rostow’s 
conception claims to be a materialist 
interpretation of society and endeav- 
ours to capitalise on its outward 
resemblance to Marxism (acknowledge- 
ment of technical and economic fact- 
ors, and the like). T.S. is aimed against 





the Marxist teaching of socio-economic 
formations and has been elevated to 
the rank of an official political doctrine 
in some capitalist countries. Philo- 
sophically, it is based on subjective 
idealism and voluntarism (q.v.). While 
eclectically recognising the interaction 
of a variety af factors, it ultimately 
accentuates the subjective ones, such 
as “free choice” of historical path, 
“free solution”, and the like. 
Stankevich, Nikolai Vladimirovich 
(1813-40), Russian idealist thinker; 
graduated from the linguistic depart- 
ment of Moscow University (1834); 
founder and leader of a circle frequent- 
ed by Belinsky from 1833 to 1837 
and, at different times, by Bakunin 
(q.v.), K. S. Aksakov, and others. S. 
centred his attention on questions of 
ethics as the key to various social 
problems. He was opposed to serfdom 
and attacked the corruption and ego- 
ism of the Russian gentry. He appealed 
for moral improvement and enlighten- 
ment, and for the unity of men on the' 
basis of “the principle of love” which 
he cloaked in a religious garb. Despite 
the utopian nature of his conception 
of social progress, his propaganda 
had a beneficial effect, because it 
criticised the Russia of his day and 
called for civic dedication. The phil- 
osophical views of S. (judging by his 
correspondence and his writings, col- 
lected in the book Verse. Tragedy. 
Prose, 1890) were originally borrowed 
from his Russian teachers, M. G. Pav- 
lov, N. I. Nadezhdin, I. I. Davydov, 
M. P. Pogodin, etc., and the school 
of Lyubomudry (Lovers of Wisdom). 
Later (1834), he studied the works of 
Schelling, Kant, and Hegel, in which 
he sought answers to questions that 
troubled him. His views were coloured 
strongly by idealist dialectics. In the 
last years of his life, S. arrived at 
the conclusion that philosophy had 
to be brought closer to reality, approved 
of the ideas of the Young Hegelian 
Cheshkovsky and of Feuerbach (q.v.), 
who had begun to criticise Hegelian 
philosophy. The work and personality 
of S. were highly commended by Be- 
linsky, Herzen, and Dobrolyubov 


(qq.v.). 








Stasov 


Stasov, Vladimir Vasilyevich (1824- 
1906), Russian art theorist, music 
and art critic. His outlook was affected 
by Diderot, Lessing, Chernyshevsky, 
Belinsky, and Dobrolyubov (qq.v.). 
S. was an exponent of the materialist 
aesthetics of the Russian revolutionary 
democrats. The chief demands S. made 
on the arts were: realism, service to 
the people, ideological orientation. 
None but the art that meets all these 
demands, he maintained, can perform 
its basic purpose—to promote the dem- 
ocratic reconstruction of society. S. 
opposed the proponents of “art for 
art’s sake”, idealist aesthetics, for- 
malists, decadents, and the like. He 
had avery strong influence on the dem- 
ocratic trend in Russian music and 
painting (the “Big Five” and the “Wan- 
derers”), on the development of Rus- 
sian art in general. His works include 
Dvadtsat pyat let russkogo iskusstva 
(Twenty-Five Years of Russian Art), 
1882-83, /skusstvo v 19 vyeke (Art in 
the 19th Century), 1901, etc. 

State, the political organisation of 
the class dominant in ecnomy; its pur- 
pose is to safeguard the existing order 
and to suppress the resistance of other 
classes. It appeared when society broke 
up into classes as a tool of the exploit- 
ing class for the suppression of the 
exploited population. The emergence 
of S. consisted in the formation of 
a special public authority (q.v.) with 
an army and police, with prisons and 
various institutions of coercion. In 
a society based on the private owner- 
ship of the means of production, S. 
is always a tool of the dominant ex- 
ploiting class, a dictatorship, a special 
force for the oppression of the exploit- 
ed masses regardless of the specific 
form of government. The socialist S. 
is different in principle. It is also a 
tool of class dictatorship, viz., dictator- 
ship of the proletariat (q.v.), but it 
operates in the interests of all working 
people, that is, in the interests of the 
vast majority of the people, by sup- 
pressing the exploiters. The socialist S. 
may be of different forms, but its sub- 
stance is always the same—dictator- 
ship of the proletariat. After the Second 
World War, Ss. of people’s democracy 


— 432 — 


State & Co-operative Property 


sprang up in a number of European 
and Asian countries. They, too, like 
the Soviets in the USSR, are a specific 
form of socialist S. Engels wrote that 
the proletarian S. is not S. in the full 
sense of the word. S. in the full sense 
of the word is a force that alienates 
itself more and more from the people, 
opposes the people and is intended to 
keep the people under the domination 
of the exploiting class. The proletarian 
S., on the other hand, essentially ex- 
presses the interests of the people. 
Hence its other distinctive feature, 
which Lenin described as “withering”. 
State will not exist externally. In the 
future it will give place to commu- 
nist public self-administration (q.v.). 
The state of the whole people (q.v.) 
is a phase which brings us nearer 
to stateless society. State of the 
whole people develops from state of 
the working-class dictatorship at a 
certain stage in the building of com- 
munist society. 

State and Collective-Farm and Co- 
operative Forms of Property, two forms 
of socialist ownership (q.v.). Both 
forms are based on collective owner- 
ship of the means of production. State 
property is the property of the whole 
people, while co-operative property 
is the property of individual collective 
farms and co-operatives. Land is placed 
at the disposal of collective farms in 
perpetuity, and they use it as they see 
fit. The results of labour and all mov- 
able and immovable property belong 
to the collective farm. Besides com- 
monly-owned property, members oi 
collective farms have at their disposal 
personal plots of land, domestic ani- 
mals, etc. At a definite stage, when the 
collective farms are able to satisfy 
the requirements of their members 
out of the common result of their la- 
bour, these personal plots will gradu- 
ally become redundant. The state form 
of property, or national property, is 
the leading form, and the co-operative 
form is secondary. Merging of the two 
forms proceeds gradually in the stage 
of full-scale communist construction. 
The Programme of the CPSU defines 
the means by which they will merge 
into a single form of communist prop- 














“The State and Revolution” 


erty. State property is perfected by 
concentration and centralisation of 
production, progressive co-operation 
and specialisation. Co-operative prop- 
erty is raised to the level of national 
property by the further economic de- 
velopment of the collective farms, 
growth of their fixed assets, co-opera- 
tion of collectively-owned property 
with state property, and the develop- 
ment of production links between col- 
lective farms through the building 
of joint collective-farm power stations, 
factories processing farm products, etc. 

“The State and Revolution” The 
Marxist theory of the state and 
the tasks of the proletariat in the revo- 
lution, a book by Lenin written in 
August-September 1917 and published 
in May 1918. When the socialist revo- 
lution was being prepared in Russia 
questions concerning the attitude of 
the proletariat to the state were of 
keen theoretical and practical political 
significance. In his book, Lenin dealt 
with the main aspects of the Marxist 
theory of the state (q.v.), with its 
development by Marx and Engels on 
the basis of the experience of the 1848- 
51 revolution and, particularly, of the 
Paris Commune of 1871. Lenin sub- 
stantiated the Marxist conclusion that 
the main task of the working class in 
revolution with regard to the state is 
to break down the bourgeois state ma- 
chine and to establish dictatorship of 
the proletariat (q.v.). In describing 
the two phases of communist society, 
Lenin analysed the economic reasons 
for the withering away of the proletar- 
ian state and outlined the chief ways 
of developing socialist statehood: ex- 
tending democracy, giving the masses 
a growing share in state administra- 
tion, etc. Lenin’s book contains dev- 
astating criticism of anarchism and 
opportunism, the trends which dis- 
torted the Marxist teaching on the 
state and emasculated its revolution- 
ary content (chiefly by rejecting dic- 
tatorship of the proletariat). The book 
is unfinished. Lenin left unwritten a 
chapter that was to sum up the experi- 
ence of the 1905 and 1917 revolutions. 
Lenin’s main ideas on the socialist 
state (q.v.) were developed further in 


28-1682 


— 433 — 


State & State-Monopoly Capitalism 


the Programme of the CPSU adopted 
by the 22nd Party Congress. 

State and State-Monopoly Capital- 
ism, forms of capitalist economy in 
which private capitalist enterprises are 
transformed into state enterprises and 
economic matters are controlled by 
the state. In the pre-monopoly stage, 
state capitalism served to accelerate 
capitalist reproduction. In the im- 
perialist epoch, it is succeeded by 
state-monopoly capitalism, in which 
large monopolies merge with the bour- 
geois machinery of state, subordinating 
the latter to the monopolies with the 
object of extracting the highest pos- 
sible capitalist profits. State-monopoly 
capitalism represents the highest degree 
of socialisation of production under 
capitalism, for which reason Lenin 
described it as a “complete material 
preparation for socialism”. However, 
state-monopoly capitalism is not dis- 
tinct from imperialism and does not 
imply peaceful growth of capitalism 
into socialism. It does not alter the 
nature of capitalism and does not elim- 
inate the contradictions between 
labour and capital, or anarchy of 
production and economic crises. In- 
stead of strengthening the capitalist 
system, state-monopoly capitalism deep- 
ens its main contradictions. State- 
monopoly capitalism which intensifies 
exploitation of working people and 
suppresses the labour and national 
movements, should not be confused 
with state capitalism obtaining in the 
developing countries, such as India, 
Indonesia, etc., which is progressive 
and promotes economic progress and 
national independence. Appraisal of 
state capitalism must take into con- 
sideration whose interests it promotes, 
those of the monopolies or of the people. 
In a proletarian dictatorship, state 
capitalism is not the dominant econom- 
ic form and is fundamentally different 
in nature, because it is controlled by 
the working class and is utilised to 
develop large-scale production. “The 
transition to communism,” Lenin said, 
“is also possible through state capital- 
ism, provided state power is controlled 
by the working class.” (Vol. 33, pp. 403- 
04.) 














j 
l 
f 
f 
| 


TE ME a a VF: va teaches Oe ets ake A aaa A 
Bien TEN ney op et ea dah TA KE ere? $ 
SAT t > í Ri ‘ > 


State of the Whole People 


State of the Whole People, a state 
expressing the interests and will of all 
the people, an instrument for building 
communism. It arose as a result of the 
complete and final victory of socialism 
in the USSR and it is the successor 
to the state of the dictatorship of the 
proletariat (q.v.), after the latter had 
fully discharged its historical tasks 
and society had entered the period of 
full-scale building of communism. The 
main features of the S.W.P. are that 
it is not an instrument for the suppres- 
sion of some class, it rests on a single 
social foundation and is a landmark 
in the transition to communist public 
self-administration (q.v.). It remains 
in being until the complete victory 
of communism. “Expressing the will 
of the people, it must organise the 
building up of the material and tech- 
nical basis of communism, and the 
transformation of socialist relations 
into communist relations, must exer- 
cise control over the measure of work 
and the measure of consumption, pro- 
mote the people’s welfare, protect the 
tights and freedoms of Soviet citizens, 
socialist law and order, and socialist 
property, instil in the people conscious 
discipline and a communist attitude 
to labour, guarantee the defence and 
security of the country, promote frater- 
nal co-operation with the socialist 
countries, uphold world peace, and 
maintain normal relations with all 
countries.” (Programme of the CPSU.) 

Statement, in modern formal logic, 
a sentence in a particular language 
(q.v.) considered in relation to the 
appraisals of its truth (true, false) or 
modality (probable, possible, impos- 
sible, necessary, etc.). S. which covers 
other Ss. is said to be compound. Oth- 
erwise, it is said to be simple. Every 
S. expresses an idea. This idea con- 
stitutes its content and is said to be 
the meaning of S. The appraisal of the 
truth of S. is said to be its truth-value. 
The material term to which S. refers 
is said to be its subject. Sometimes S. 
is referred to as “proposition” or 
“judgement”. 

Statistical Physics, a department of 
physics dealing with the properties 
of groups of particles (from elementary 


qi 


— 434 — Stoics 


particles to galaxies). Even in classical 
S.P., which deals with particles gov- 
erned by the laws of classical mechan- 
ics, we observe irreducibility of the 
properties of the whole (a group of 
particles) to the properties of its parts 
(see Part and Whole). The conclusions 
of S.P. revealed the limitations of the 
metaphysical conception of causality, 
the so-called Laplacian determinism 
(see Determinism and Indeterminism). 
Modern S.P. is associated with the 
quantum theory and deals with parti- 
cles governed by quantum laws. How- 
ever, in certain circumstances modern 
S.P. slides back to classical S.P. (see 
Correspondence Principle). 

Stirner, Max (pseudonym of Johann 
Caspar Schmidt, 1806-56), German ide- 
alist philosopher, founder of anarchistic 
individualism; he was close to the 
Young Hegelians (q.v.). In 1844, he 
published a book, Der Einzige und sein 
Eigentum, where he developed the 
system of anarchism. The sole reality, 
according to him, is “I”, the egoist, 
and the whole world is his possession. 
The notions of morals, justice, law, 
society, etc., are thrown overboard 
and declared to be “illusions”, “con- 
straining husk”. Each individual is 
himself the source of morals and jus- 
tice. According to S., private property 
must be preserved, as the self-hood of 
the “ego” is expressed in it. The so- 
cial ideal of S. is the “union of egoists”, 
wherein everyone sees in the other 
nothing but the means of achieving 
his own ends. Regarding history as the 
product of ideas, S. believed that by 
overcoming the dominant concepts we 
can change social relations. He openly 
opposed communism and the revolu- 
tionary struggle of the proletariat. 
His outwardly “rebellious” slogans are 
merely the cover for the interests of 
the petty bourgeois who tries to pre- 
serve his economy from bankruptcy. 
In The German Ideology Marx and 
Engels criticised all aspects of his 
speculative idealism and showed his 
loss of touch with the real social rela- 
tions in Germany in the mid-19th 
century. 

Stoics, exponents of a philosophical 
school that appeared within the frame- 








Stoics 


work of Hellinistic culture in the 
4th century B.C. under the impact 
of cosmopolitan and individualistic 
ideas and technical developments im- 
pelled by the expansion of mathemat- 
ical knowledge. Zeno and Chrysippus 
(qq.v.) were the most prominent ex- 
ponents of the school in the 4th and 
3rd centuries B.C. The role of the 
sciences treated by the S. was defined 
by them as follows: logic is the fence, 
physics the fertile soil, and ethics its 
fruit. The chief task of philosophy 
concerned ethics; knowledge was no 
more than a means of acquiring wisdom 
and skill of living. Life, the S. held, 
had to be lived according to nature. 
This was the ideal of every wise man. 
Happiness lay in apathia (q.v.), or 
freedom from emotion, in peace of 
mind, in imperturbability. Fate pre- 
ordained everything in life. He who 
consented was led on by fate; he who 
resisted was dragged along. The S. 
were materialists in their conception 
of nature. All there is in the world, 
they said, are bodies of varying den- 
sity. The true has to be distinguished 
from the truth. Nothing but bodies 
really exist. The true, on the other 
hand, is incorporeal and does not exist. 
The true is no more than a statement. 
With the S., materialism combined 
with nominalism (q.v.). The senses 
apprehend reality as individual things. 
Science strives to apprehend the gener- 
al, but this general, as such, does not 
exist in the world. The S. acknowledged 
four categories: (1) the substratum 
(the existing); (2) quality; (3) state 
(e.g., “to be”); (4) relative state (“to 
be to the right of something”). In 
contrast to logic of predicates (see 
Aristotle), S. created a logic of propo- 
sitions (q.v.), based not on categorical 
judgements, but on relative ones. The 
S. established the varieties of the 
connection of judgements which mod- 
ern logic designates as material im- 
plication (q.v.). The most prominent 
S. of the subsequent epochs were the 
disciples of Chrysippus: Zeno of Tarsus 
and Diogenes of Seleucia; Boethus of 
Sidon (d. 119) and Panaetius of Rhodes 
(2nd century B.C.). S. appeared on 
Roman soil in the first centuries A.D.; 


28° 


— 435 — 


Stratification, Social 


they applied themselves to the moral 
and religious ideas of the stoic schoo'; 
chief among them were Lucius Annaeus 
Seneca (q.v.), Musonius Rufus, Epic- 
tetus (q.v.) and Emperor Marcus Aure- 
lius (q.v.). 

Stoletov, Alexander Grigoryevich 
(1839-96), Russian physicist, one of 
the founders of Russian physics and 
modern electrical engineering. S. took 
a materialist view of natural phenom- 
ena. He was the first Russian physi- 
cist to come out against the philosophy 
of Machism (in his article, “Helmholtz 
and Modern Physics”, 1894), which 
he qualified as decadent. In his early 
period he tried to reduce all physical 
phenomena to the basic principles of 
mechanics, but under the influence 
of the new discoveries in the natural 
sciences he gradually transcended the 
limitations of a mechanistic materia!- 
ism. He frequently used the term “me- 
chanical” to denote “materialist” and 
“scientific”, and for him “mechanism” 
was virtually a banner under which 
he campaigned for materialism in 
natural science. His world outlook was 
shaped under the impact of forward- 
looking Russian materialists. For his 
ideas, he was harassed by the tsarist 
government, which debarred him from 
being elected to the Academy of Sciences. 

Stratification, Social, a sociological 
doctrine on society’s structure, which 
holds that society is stratified into so- 
cial layers; these are identified on 
the strength of a wide range of crite- 
ria, including economic, political, bio- 
logical, racial, religious, etc., there 
being no agreement among its expo- 
nents as to which of these is decisive. 
S.S. also includes the division of so- 
ciety into classes but this is based on 
arbitrary and inessential criteria (e.g., 
occupation, housing, residential area, 
size of income, etc.). According to 
modern sociologists, S.S. is in a state 
of flux, for it depends on social mobil- 
ity (q.v.), that is, the movement of 
men between various strata and classes. 
This doctrine is- unscientific and 
false, for it gives a distorted picture 
of the class structure of modern bour- 
geois society and ignores the real cri- 
terion of class divisions, namely, 





Stress Conception 


the relation of men to means of produc- 
tion. 

Stress Conception, a doctrine devel- 
oped by Canadian physician Hans 
Selye (b. 1907). Stress is that state of 
the organism which responds with 
adaptive reactions to the effect of 
strong irritants. In philosophical terms, 
this doctrine has much in common 
with J. Miiller’s physiological ideal- 
ism, for both overrate the role of the 
organism's internal state in its interac- 
tion with environment. Selye virtually 
reduces the role of environment to 
that of a “trigger mechanism”, which 
activates the “eternal” adaptive mech- 
anisms. He holds that the great 
qualitative diversity of external in- 
fluences tend to produce a standardised 
reaction. Objectively, the S.C. is aimed 
against the theory that the central 
nervous system has the leading part 
to play in the organism’s vital activ- 
ity (see I. Pavlov). Selye succumbs 
to autogenesis (q.v.) and the teleolog- 
ical idea in biology. Some modern 
sociologists (Jasmin, R. Francis, K. 
Meninger, and others) mechanically 
apply the S.C. to men and society. 
Man is defined as a teleological centre 
and human aims as the drive to attain 
“egoistic” biological requirements. The 
origins of egoism and altruism, revenge 
and gratitude, etc., are viewed in a 
strictly biological light. Selye’s fol- 
lowers have been trying to formulate 
concepts of social, commercial, ethical, 
aesthetic, and psychological stress. 
This tends to build up the concept 
of a “social Selyeism”. The doctrine is 
unsound because it is based on a one- 
sided transposition of biological con- 
cepts to society. 

Structure, the law-governed and 
stable connection and interrelation of 
parts and elements of a system or a 
whole. A precise definition of S. in 
mathematics and mathematical logic 
is based on the concept of isomorphism 
(q.v.). The category of S. is closely 
bound up with the categories of law, 
form, necessity, etc. It remains immu- 
table despite the continued alteration 
of its parts and the whole itself, and 
changes only when the whole under- 
goes a qualitative leap. On the other 


— 436 — 


Struggle for Existence 


hand, all the elements of the whole 
are essentially dependent on its S., 
and have a qualitatively distinct role 
to play depending on the mode and 
system of their concatenation and or- 
ganisation. Thus, graphite and dia- 
mond differ from each other in the differ- 
ent arrangement of their atoms of car- 
bon. Much more importance is now 
attached to the concept of S. in sci- 
ence, as mathematics, physics, and 
biology have come up against the fact 
that their objects of study are integral. 
In particular, there is a method of 
studying the structure of an object 
before the study of its elements and 
parts. It has transpired that three 
dialectically connected and dialecti- 
cally cognisable types of structure can 
be brought out in any organic whole. 
The first step in cognition is to deter- 
mine the mechanical S. of the whole, 
which shows how it is divided into 
parts. The discovery of the fact that 
the “part is equal to the whole” (Hegel) 
and is the source of the whole points 
to the very fact of organic integrity. 
The complete cognition of the whole 
means a cognition of its organic S. 
as the realisation of the whole com- 
plexity of relationships between the 
parts of the whole. In this connection, 
there has been a sharp rise in the im- 
portance of studying the epistemological 
aspects of the S. concept. S. has a 
specific place in linguistics (the so- 
called structuralism—the study of lan- 
guage as a system of signs) and in 
psychology (the concept of the integ- 
rity or structural nature of the psyche, 
which is especially characteristic of . 
Gestalt psychology, q.v.). 

Struggle for Existence, resistance of 
organisms to the factors of animate 
and inanimate nature unfavourable to 
their life and propagation. As a result 
of this struggle the species best adapted 
to their environmental conditions sur- 
vive and produce the most abundant 
and viable progeny. The struggle for 
existence is one of the forms of relation- 
ship between organisms within one 
species and between representatives 
of different species and is a factor in the 
evolution of plants and animals. Ap- 
plication of the idea of the struggle 





Struve 


for existence to human society has given 
rise to the reactionary theory of Social- 
Darwinism (q.v.). 

Struve, Pyotr Berngardovich (1870- 
1944), Russian bourgeois economist 
and philosopher, and leader of “legal 
Marxism” (q.v.). S. criticised Narod- 
ism, advocated the development of 
capitalism in Russia and propounded 
bourgeois objectivism; he declared his 
“adherence” to Marxism but revised 
its basic propositions; he ascribed to 
Marx an “economic materialism”; he 
criticised the labour theory of value 
from the standpoint of vulgar political 
economy, and propounded Malthusian- 
ism (q.v.). From 1905 leader of the 
Right-wing Cadets. In philosophy 
(Diverse Topics, 1902, Patriotica, 1911, 
et al.) he was a follower of Kant and 
subsequently a proponent of mystical 
idealism. From 1917 a whiteguard 
émigré, an enemy of the Soviet power. 
His ideas were exploded by Lenin in 
The Economic Content of Narodism and 
the Criticism of It in Mr. Struve’s 
Book and other works. 

Style in art, a historically derived 
and stable integrity of an imaginative 
system, the means and methods of 
artistic expression predicated by the 
sameness of the aesthetic and social 
content. This sameness is achieved on 
the strength of a definite creative meth- 
od. S. reflects the socio-economic con- 
ditions of a society, as well as the pe- 
culiarities and traditions of the nation 
concerned. Take archaic, Hellenistic, 
Roman, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, 
Rococo, Empire, modern and other 
Ss. Each S. gains its fullest expression 
in some definite types of art. A new 
S. appears in order to express deep- 
going social changes whenever a fun- 
damentally new correlation emerges 
between the artistic form and the ide- 
ological content. Formalistic aesthetics 
produces either an exaggeratedly broad 
conception of S., identifying it with 
the artistic method (which reduces, 
say, realism to one of the Ss.), or an 
exaggeratedly narrow conception, iden- 
tifying it with the artistic mannerisms 
of this or that artist. The concept of 
“S. of the epoch” is also wrong, for it 
divorces S. from the world outlook and 


— 437 — 


Subject and Object 


from the artistic method. There is 
always a variety of artistic methods in 
every epoch, and it is within the frame- 
work of these methods that various 
Ss. develop, which, in turn, embrace 
artists of different artistic mannerisms 
and approaches. Multiplicity of Ss. 
and mannerisms is a typical feature of 
socialist realism. 

Subconscious, a characteristic of the 
active mental processes which, not 
being at the time the centre of con- 
scious activity, influence the course 
of conscious processes. Thus, that which 
man does not directly think about 
at a given moment, but which he knows 
in principle and which is associated 
with the object of his thoughts, may 
influence the train of thought that 
accompanies it in the context of its 
meaning. In exactly the same way 
the perceptible (although direct and 
unconscious) influence of the condition, 
situation, automatic actions (motions) 
are present as the subconscious percep- 
tion in all conscious actions. A defi- 
nite conscious role is played by the 
context of language, an idea unexpressed 
but implied by the very structure 
of the sentence. There is nothing mysti- 
cal or unknowable in the S. These phe- 
nomena are the by-product of conscious 
activity, and they include the mental 
processes which have no direct part in 
the comprehension of the objects on 
which man’s attention is concentrated 
at the given moment. For the idealist 


distortions of the understanding 
of the S. see Unconscious, Freu- 
dism. 

Subject and Object, philosophical 


categories. S. was initially (e.g., Aris- 
totle, q.v.) taken to be the repository 
of certain properties, states and ac- 
tions, and in that context was identified 
with the concept of substance (q.v.). 
This meaning of the term S. is still 
current. But beginning from the 17th 
century, S., like its correlative, O., 
were used chiefly in the epistemologi- 
cal sense. Today, S. is taken to be an 
active and cognisant man, endowed 
with consciousness and will; O., as 
that which is given in cognition, or 
that towards which S.’s cognitive or 
other activity is directed. The S. & O. 











Subject and Object 


— 438 — 


Subjective Method in Sociology 





relationship is a problem that is con- 
nected with the fundamental question 
of philosophy, and has, accordingly, 
been given a different interpretation 
by materialists and idealists. Material- 
ists regard O. as existing independent- 
ly of S. and take it to be the objective 
world, and in a narrow sense, the object 
of cognition. But mechanistic and me- 
taphysical miaterialists were unable 
to. produce a scientific answer to the 
problem of the O. & S. relationship, 
because they held this to be based only 
on the action of O. on S., with S. be- 
ing regarded as something passive and 
receptive of external influences. S. was 
understood to be an individual, whose 
substance was seen only in his natural 
origin. S. remained passive not only 
in the sphere of cognition but also in 
practical activity, for the old materi- 
alists were incapable of understanding 
the objective law-governed nature of 
human activity towards the attain- 
ment of subjective aims. The idealists 
take the opposite view of this. They 
deduce the relationship between S. 
and O. and the very existence of O. 
only from the activity of S., trying to 
explain the S.’s active role in cognition 
on that basis. Subjective idealists take 
the view that S. is the unity of the 
individual's psychic activity; this vir- 
tually eliminates O., for it is held to 
be nothing but the aggregate of the 
states of S. The objective idealists, 
notably Hegel, have made some valu- 
able suggestions on the role of practice 
in the S. & O. relationship, the depend- 
ence of this relationship on history 
and the social nature of S. But because 
the idealists tended to absolutise the 
epistemological activity of S. they 
drew the conclusion that O. was the 
result and product of the activity of 
S., who was regarded besides as a purely 
ideal being or substance. Dialectical 
materialism holds that O. exists in- 
dependently of S., but the two are re- 
garded as a unity. S. himself becomes 
an O. in another aspect and is, there- 
fore, subject to objective regularities. 
There is, accordingly, no gulf between S. 
& O. in principle. Their interaction is 
based on man’s socio-historical practice, 
which alone gives a clue to S.’s epis- 


temological activity. This means that 
man becomes S. only in history and in 
society, and is for that reason not an 
abstract individual, but a social being 
all of whose capacities and potential- 
ities have been shaped by practice. 
Man, being the active force in the in- 
teraction between S. & O., nevertheless 
depends on O. in his activity, for the 
latter sets definite limits to the S.’s free- 
dom of action. This produces the need 
for cognition of the laws governing 
O. for the purpose of adapting one’s 
activity to them. The S.’s activity is 
also objectively conditioned by his 
requirements and the level of produc- 
tion. Depending on this and also on the 
level of cognition of the objective 
laws, man sets himself conscious 
goals, in the attainment of which both 
O. & S. undergo change. As society de- 
velops, subjective factors play a pro- 
gressively greater part, especially un- 
der socialism, where social develop- 
ment is controlled by men, which does 
not, of course, signify any change in 
the principles behind the S. & O. re- 
lationship. 

Subject-Matter 
Philosophy. 

Subjective Method in Sociology, an 
idealist method which demands that 
society be viewed only as the product 
of the activity of outstanding individ- 
uals. It ignores the objective laws 
of social development, denies the deci- 
sive role of the masses in history and 
is equivalent to voluntarism (q.v.). 
Active proponents of it in Russia were 
the Narodniks (Lavrov, Mikhailovsky 
qq.v., et al.) who declared that histo- 
ry is made by the “critical thinker”, 
Hence, the negative attitude to the 
revolutionary initiative of the masses, 
and the tactics of individual terror 
against tsarist statesmen. Lenin gave 
a profound critique of the method in his 
What the “Friends of the People” Are 
and How They Fight the Social-Demo- 
crats. Modern sociologists who accept 
the method most frequently subscribe 
to the elite theory, which says that 
history is directed by the will of a 
small group of the “elect”, chiefly bu- 
sinessmen (H. Magid, J. Schumpeter, 
et al). 


of Philosophy, see 





he a MA th evi MaA 


Sublime — 439 — Successive Continuity 


Sublime, a category expressing the 
aesthetic meaning and significance of 
heroic deeds and great events and their 
reproduction in art. Events and phenom- 
ena regarded as sublime are aesthet- 
ically perceived by man as the oppo- 
site of everything base and common 
place. The S. evokes feelings that lift 
a man above the trivial and mediocre 
and spur him on to fight for lofty ideas. 
The S. is closely connected with the 
beautiful, for, like the beautiful, it is 
the embodiment of the progressive aes- 
thetic ideal (q.v.). In contrast to the 
S., everything base and trivial is al- 
ways ugly, though it may sometimes 
be beautifully adorned. Whereas ideal- 
ist theories attribute the S. to the sub- 
ject or to ideas of divine infinity and 
eternity, Marxist aesthetics attributes 
it to objective reality, at the same 
time attaching great importance to 
the conscious cultivation of lofty aes- 
thetic feelings and ideas. 

Substance, in pre-Marxist philoso- 
phy, the immutable primary principle 
underlying all existing things, and re- 
maining intact in all transformations, 
as distinct from the concrete mutable 
objects and phenomena; that most 
general and deep-going essence, whose 
cause and foundation consist in noth- 
ing else but in itself. Idealism takes 
S. to be God, universal reason, idea, 
etc.; pantheism (Nicholas of Cusa, 
Bruno, qq.v.), God who is identified 
with nature and matter. Materialists 
take S. to be something material. Dual- 
istic theories (see Descartes) accept 
a dual S.: a material and an ideal one, 
both being absolutely equivalent, which 
clashes with the very idea of S. Dialec- 
tical materialism rejects the idea of 
any immutable, uniform, homogene- 
ous S. and holds that matter (q.v.), 
which is in constant motion and 
development, is the S., foundation 
of the world. This concept is more pre- 
cise and clear (see Unity and Diversity 
of the World). 

Substance and Field, fundamental 
concepts of physics, denoting the two 
basic forms of matter at macroscopic 
level, S. being the aggregate of discrete 
formations possessing rest mass (atoms, 
molecules and their combinations), 


while F. is a form of matter character- 
ised by continuity and having zero rest 
mass (electromagnetic field and gravi- 
tational field). The discovery of the 
field as a form of matter was of enor- 
mous philosophical importance because 
it showed the fallacy of the metaphys- 
ical identification of matter with S. 
Lenin’s formulation of the dialectical- 
materialist definition of matter (q.v.) 
was in many respects based on the phil- 
osophical generalisation of the doctrine 
of the F. At the subatomic level (i.e., 
the level of elementary particles) the 
distinction between S. and F. becomes 
relative. The fields (electromagnetic 
and gravitational) .lose their purely 
continuous character; they are necessar- 
ily compared with discrete formations, 
the quantums (photons and gravitons), 
and the elementary particles of which 
S. is composed (protons, neutrons, 
electrons, mesons, etc.) emerge as quan- 
tums of the nucleon, meson, etc., 
fields and lose their purely discrete 
character. It is wrong at the subatomic 
level to make a distinction between 
S. and F. even on account of their pos- 
sessing or not possessing rest mass, 
since the nucleon, meson, etc., fields 
do possess rest mass. In modern phys- 
ics, fields are contrasted to and com- 
pared with particles, forming two 
inseparably connected aspects of the 
microcosm and expressing the unity of 
the corpuscular (discrete) and wave 
(continual) properties of microobjects. 
Concepts of F. also form the basis for 
the explanation of the processes of in- 
teraction embodied in the principle 
of immediate action (see Immediate 
Action and Action at a Distance). 
Substratum, the material foundation 
for the unity of the diverse properties 
of an individual object or thing; the 
material foundation of the unity and 
uniformity of various objects. S. is 
usually viewed as the foundation of the 
particular or the individual. 
Successive Continuity, the objective 
and necessary connection between the 
old and the new in the process of de- 
velopment, one of the main features 
of the law of the negation of the ne- 
gation (q.v.). As opposed to metaphys- 
ics, which absolutises the simple rep- 








Sufficient Reason, Principle of 


roduction of objects, materialist dia- 
lectics turns to the investigation of the 
processes of progressive development 
in nature, society, and thought. The 
very genesis of the forms of the motion 
of matter shows that every higher 
form of motion, succeeding lower 
ones, does not annul them but in- 
cludes them in and subordinates them 
to itself. A dialectical understanding 
of negation presupposes not only the 
liquidation of the old but also the 
conservation and further development 
of the progressive and rational in 
what was achieved in previous stages, 
without which the movement forward, 
whether in being or in cognition, would 
be impossible. A correct understand- 
ing of the processes of S.C. is of partic- 
ular significance in analysing the laws 
of development of science and art, and 
in fighting both the uncritical attitude 
to the achievements of the past and 
the nihilist negation of cultural herit- 
age. 

Sufficient Reason,. Principle of, a 
general principle of logic, according 
to which a proposition is considered 
true only if sufficient reason for it 
can be formulated. S.R. is a proposi- 
tion (or set of propositions) which is 
known to be true, and from which the 
conclusion may be logically derived. 
The truth of the reason may be demon- 
strated by experiment, or derived 
from the truth of other propositions. 
The principle characterises one of the 
essential features of logically correct 
thinking—proof. The principle was 
first formulated by Leibniz (q.v.), 
though it was implied in many earlier 
systems of logic (e.g., in Leucippus and 
Aristotle, qq.v.). It was the subject of 
Schopenhauer’s (q.v.) doctor’s thesis 
(Ober die vierfache Wurzel), 1813. In 
character it is an extremely general 
principle with a wide field of applica- 
tion. 

Sutism, a mystical religious teach- 
ing in Islam (q.v.) which arose in the 
8th century and spread in the countries 
of the Arab khalifate. Early S. is char- 
acterised by pantheism (q.v.) with 
some materialist elements. Subse- 
quently, under the influence of Neo-Pla- 
tonism (q.v.), Indian philosophy, and 


— 440 — 





Sun Yat-sen 


Christian ideas, asceticism and extreme 
mysticism dominated S. S. accepted 
the existence of God as the only reality, 
with all things and phenomena being 
his emanation. Accordingly, the su- 
preme goal of life was communion with 
the deity through contemplation and 
ecstasy. Among the prominent expo- 
nents of S. were the Persian philoso- 
pher al-Suhrawardi (12th century), the 
Arab thinker al-Ghazzuli (1059-1111), 
the Central Asian philosopher Sufi 
Alayar (d. 1720), and others. 

Sun Yat-sen (1866-1925), Chinese 
revolutionary democrat. Received med- 
ical education at Hongkong. In 1894 
set up China's first revolutionary organ- 
isation “Alliance for the Renascence 
of China”. Under the influence of the 
Russian Revolution of 1905-07 Dr. Sun 
Yat-sen rallied the revolutionary forces 
for the overthrow of the ruling dynasty, 
with a programme based on three po- 
litical principles: nationalism (China’s 
national independence), democracy (es- 
tablishment of a republic), and people’s 
welfare (elimination of social inequal- 
ity). S.’s revolutionary-democratic pro- 
gramme was given a high evaluation 
by Lenin, who criticised, however, S.’s 
utopian idea that capitalism in China 
could be “averted”. The victory of the 
Great October Socialist Revolution 
had a great impact on S. He drew close 
to the Communist Party of China, 
reorganised the Kuomintang and sup- 
ported demands for a new democratic 
revolution. In the new conditions, he 
restated his programme of the three 
People’s Principles and adopted the 
threefold policy of alliance with the 
USSR, alliance with the Communist 
Party of China, and support for the 
peasants and workers. His economic 
programme included the demand to 
‘restrict capital”, i.e., nationalise big 
foreign and local capital. S.’s philo- 
sophical views were the theoretical basis 
of his revolutionary democracy. He 
took a materialist view of the relation- 
ship of mind and matter. He regarded 
the process of cognition in connection 
with man’s practical activity, and 
held that the results of cognition, ideas 
and principles were an active force 
helping to remodel the world. In the 





Superstition 


interpretation of social phenomena he 
remained, on the whole, an idealist. 
His main philosophical work: The 
Doctrine of Sun Wen. 

Superstition, a term denoting false 
faith (q.v.). In theological and bour- 
geois writings, S. is usually contrasted 
with true faith in general and is asso- 
ciated with primitive magic (q.v.). The 
adherent of any religion tends to re- 
gard the dogmas and rituals of all other 
religions as S. Marxist atheism denies 
that there is any difference in principle 
between religious faith and religious S. 

Surrealism, a trend in modern art 
which originated in France in the early 
1920s. It is a characteristic expres- 
sion of the crisis of capitalist society, 
and its philosophical roots lie in the 
subjective idealist theories of Freud, 
which regard art as nothing but the 
product and function of erotism. Ac- 
cording to S., the content of art boils 
down to “sexual impulses”, the in- 
stincts of the fear of death and also 
of life. The contradictions which are 
tearing capitalist society asunder, the 
feelings of horror and impotence in 
face of the real world produced by these 
contradictions have impelled some sur- 
realist artists to embody them in im- 
ages which tend to breed disgust to- 
wards reality and life itself. Hence, the 
stress of surrealist art on depicting 
nightmares, hallucinations, patholog- 
ical states, hopeless pessimism, etc., 
as exemplified in the works of such 
writers as T. S. Eliot, L. Céline, James 
Joyce, Franz Kafka, Ezra Pound, and 
the sculptor Henry Moore, and the 
painters Salvador Dali, A. Kubin, etc. 

Survivals of Capitalism (in people’s 
consciousness), remnants of bourgeois 
ideology and psychology, of the mor- 
ality of private ownership, manifested 
in opinions, habits, traditions after 
the victory of the socialist revolution 
(q.v.). Parasitism, alcoholism, hooli- 
ganism, roguery and cupidity, red 
tape and religious prejudices are harm- 
ful to socialist society. The tenacity of 
the old prejudices in the consciousness 
of a certain section of Soviet people is 
accounted for by human consciousness 
lagging behind social being and by 
the ideological influence of the capi- 


— 441 — 


Syllogism, Figures & Moods of 


talist world. The existence of the sur- 
vivals may be affected by certain eco- 
nomic difficulties, and other factors 
(e.g., difficulties resulting from the 
war). The old in men’s consciousness 
manifests itself with particular fre- 
quency where educational work is neg- 
lected, or where distortions of the so- 
cialist principles of community life 
are tolerated, where there is a breach 
of socialist democracy and revolu- 
tionary law. Communist education of 
working people, above all labour edu- 
cation, is the basic means of overcom- 
ing survivals in man. In the struggle 
against the S.C. a great role falls to 
society, to criticism and self-criticism, 
popularisation of Marxism-Leninism 
and atheism and also to literature and 
the arts, which stigmatise the S.C. and 
create positive characters. 
Swedenborg, Emanuel (1688-1772), 
Swedish natural scientist who subse- 
quently became a mystic and theosophi- 
an. S. is known for his works in mathe- 
matics, mechanics, astronomy, and 
mining, was an honorary member of the 
St. Petersburg Academy of Sciences. 
His philosophical works are permeated 
with the spirit of rationalism (q.v.) of 
Leibniz and Wolff. As a result of nerv- 
ous shock and hallucinations S. lapsed 
into mysticism and proclaimed him- 
self a “ghost-seer”. S. undertook to 
interpret the Bible allegorically “on 
a mission of Christ himself”. The theo- 
sophian doctrine of S. was influenced 
by a number of systems of gnosticism 
(q.v.) and the Jewish cabbala. The 
mystic doctrine of S. was criticised by 
Kant in his Träume eines Geistersehers. S. 
had followers in Germany, France, and 
Russia. Main works: Arcana Coelestica 
(1749-56) and Heaven and Hell (1758). 
Syllogism, see Syllogistic. 
Syllogism, Figures and Moods of, 
varieties of a syllogism (see Syllogistic) 
which depend on the position of the 
middle term in the premisses and their 
number and type (general assertions, 
particular assertions, general nega- 
tions, particular negations; see Judge- 
ment). In the first figure the middle 
term is the subject in the major premiss 
and the predicate in the minor; in the 
second figure it is the predicate in 








Syllogistic — 442 — Synthetic and Analytic 


both premisses; in the third it is the 
subject in both premisses. These figures 
were introduced by Aristotle. The 
fourth figure, in which the middle term 
is the predicate in the major premiss 
and the subject in the minor, was add- 
ed by Aristotle’s followers. Classical 
logic has 19 moods; contemporary 
logic excludes, as not applicable in 
all cases, four moods which lose their 
general significance when they deal 
with empty sets (for example, “all 
golden mountains are golden”; “all 
golden mountains are mountains”, but 
from this it does not follow that some 
mountains are golden—example given 
by Russell). 

Syllogistic, a doctrine of inference 
(q.v.), historically the first logical 
system of deduction (q.v.) formulated 
by Aristotle (q.v.). The main purpose 
of S. is to ascertain the general condi- 
tions in which a definite conclusion fol- 
lows or does not follow from propositions 
containing the assertion that the pred- 
icate involves or does not involve the 
subject and serving as premisses of the 
conclusion. Every syllogism consists 
of a triad of propositions: two premisses 
and a conclusion. Propositions which 
contain a term that does not enter in the 
conclusion (it is called the middle 
term) are the premisses (q.v.) of a 
a syllogism. Depending on the position 
of the middle term in the premisses, 
all syllogisms are divided into four 
figures in which, depending on the 
type of logical constants binding the 
terms (proper to all, proper to none, 
proper to some, not proper to some), 
moods are singled out (see Syllogism, 
Figures and Moods of). Alongside the 
assertoric S., the foundations for the 
modal S. (see Modality) were laid by 
Aristotle. From the viewpoint of mod- 
ern formal logic, the assertoric S. 
is a relatively narrow theory of deduc- 
tion. The use of means and methods of 
mathematical logic makes it possible 
systematically to construct S. as a 
formal logical system: it is strictly 
axiomatised and its non-contradiction, 
completeness and decidability are 
demonstrated. 

Symbolism, a trend in literature, and 
the arts. It originated in French litera- 


ture in the 1880s (P. Verlaine, A. Rim- 
baud, S. Mallarmé, J. Moréas), Sub- 
sequently, the influence of S. extended 
to G. Rodenbach, M. Maeterlinck, 
S. George, H. Hofmannstahl, R. Rilke, 
S. Przybyszewski, and others. In Rus- 
sia, S. started in the 1890s (N. Minsky, 
D. Merezhkovsky, K. Balmont and 
V. Bryusov). Early in the 20th centu- 
ty, A. Blok, A. Bely, Vyacheslav Iva- 
nov, J. Baltrušaitis, and others joined 
the symbolists. The ideological aesthe- 
tic gas ee of S. isextremely eclect- 
ic. It is based on Platonism, on Kant’s 
doctrine of the phenomenon and nou- 
menon, the voluntarist philosophy of 
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche (qq.v.) 
and the mysticism of Solovyov (q.v.). 
The symbolists preached mystic ideal- 
ism and the anarcho-individualist 
“freedom” of the artist and the idea 
of the self-value of art and denied the 
social mission of art. The real world 
is a reflection of the ideal, “transcen- 
dental” world, about which only the 
mystic intuition of the poet can bring 
us something by conveying this “some- 
thing” in an artistic symbol (in this 
symbolists see the mission of art). 
But the symbol, too, is indefinite be- 
cause it portrays something indefinite. 
The idea of reproducing nuances of 
the soul (connected with the “eter- 
nal”), everything unstable and unclear, 
brings S. close to impressionism (q.v.) 
in literature. Although some symbol- 
ists speak of the kinship of art with the 
people, S. is a decadent trend. 
Syntactics, a branch of semiotic 


ave). 

Synthetic and Analytic, concepts 
in logical semantics (q.v.). All proposi- 
tions in a system fall into two types: 
those whose truth can be established 
only on the basis of the rules govern- 
ing the given system without recourse 
to facts, and those whose truth or fals- 
ity cannot be ascertained by the rules 
alone but requires recourse to facts. 
The former are analytic, the fatter 
synthetic. A strict distinction between 
S. & A. has a meaning only for a given 
formalised language (q.v.). In the his- 
tory of philosophy, the problem of 
the S. & A. is closely associated with 
the distinction between empirical (fac- 








System 


tual) knowledge and theoretical knowl- 
edge (of laws). Leibniz expressed this 
distinction by the division of all truths 
into necessary truths (theoretical knowl- 
edge) and accidental truths (factual 
knowledge). Kant defined as analytic, 
in opposition to synthetic, those judge- 
ments whose predicate is contained 
in, and identical with, the subject. 
They are independent of experience. 
Continuing this tradition, modern for- 
mal logicians distinguish between log- 
ical truth (analytic statements) and 
factual truth (synthetic statements). 
Analytic statements do not communi- 
cate any information about reality 
(they are tautological); they constitute 
the content of the formal sciences 
(mathematics and logic); synthetic 
statements are based on experience and 
constitute the content of the empirical 
sciences. The former are a priori state- 
ments, the latter a posteriori. From 
the standpoint of dialectical material- 
ism, all statements of any science 
are based in the last resort on expe- 
rience. The division of statements into 
A. and S. is conditioned by their 
place in a definite logical system 
of knowledge. 

System, a set of interconnected ele- 
ments constituting a unified whole. 
Analysis of a S., of system-objects, is 
one of the characteristic features of 
modern sciences. A system-object can- 
not be divided into individual elements 
and the relations between them; it 
cannot be studied merely by revealing 
some relation or other which is present 
in it; the specific feature of such an 
object is the presence of interdepend- 
ent connections, and the study of 
their interdependence is an important 
task both of specially scientific analy- 
sis and of theoretical-cognitive (logico- 
methodological) analysis. Relatively 
long ago D ae i realised the ne- 
cessity of analysing system-objects. 
Efforts have been made ever since an- 
tiquity to establish the laws for con- 
structing a system of knowledge; 
in some branches of science, for in- 
stance, in mechanics in the 17th-18th 


— 443 — 





Systems, General Theory of 


centuries, a number of concrete system- 
objects were studied. But the character- 
istic tendency up to the middle of the 
19th century was still to try and divide 
the object studied into its compo- 
nents, with the result that the specific 
features of the system were lost sight 
of. The development of scientific knowl- 
edge revealed the inadequacy of such 
a method of study and the necessity 
for finding an adequate method for 
studying system-objects. A strict for- 
mulation of the task of studying sys- 
tem-objects was given by dialectical 
materialism. Marx and Lenin analysed 
an extremely complex developing ob- 
ject, the S. of economic relations in 
capitalist society, and expounded the 
basic methodological principles for 
such studies. Further elaboration of 
these principles is one of the chief 
tasks for the methodological study of 
S., and its successful accomplishment 
will be of inestimable assistance to 
many modern sciences dealing with 
the analysis of S. (physics, chemistry, 


biology, linguistics, psychology, so- 
ciology, and others). 
Systems, General Theory of, a con- 


cept of the study of objects which rep- 
resent a system (q.v.), put forward 
a by L. Bertalanffy, an Austrian biolog- 
ist now working in Canada. The main 
idea of this theory is recognition of 
the isomorphism (q.v.) of the laws 
governing the functioning of objects 
of different types representing a system. 
It attempts to construct a mathe- 
matical apparatus describing these 
laws. Bertalanffy has rendered an im- 
portant service by studying the dis- 
covered systems which conten ex- 
change substance and energy with the 
environment. As a branch of natural 
science, G.T.S. is of definite impor- 
tance for the development of science. 
But Bertalanffy clearly exaggerates its 
methodological content. This theory is 
above all descriptive and completely 
abstracts itself from an analysis of the 
structure of knowledge capable of re- 
flecting objects in a system. 








Tachism, a trend in art which origi- 
nated in France following the 2nd 
World War. One of the latest variants 
of abstract art (q.v.), T. is based on 
the principles of subjectivist and ideal- 
ist aesthetics. It separates the artist’s 
creativity from reality, from the peo- 
ple’s vital interests and spiritual re- 
quirements, and makes art a means 
of expressing all sorts of subjectivist 
conceptions. Hence, the striving of 
T. to dehumanise the content of artis- 
tic works. One of the founders of this 
trend, Jean Dubuffet (b. 1901), claimed 
that “the colour of dirt is no less beau- 
tiful than the colour of the sky”. And 
in actual fact tachists try to express 
their inner self by reproducing on can- 
vas chaotic conglomerations of shape- 


less, motley stains. To this end they ® 


employ such “highly expressive” 
means as tar, coal, sand, broken glass, 
etc. All this shows that T. has nothing 
in common with real art. 

Tai Chen, or Tai Tung-yuan (1723- 
77), Chinese materialist philosopher, 
studied natural sciences, particularly 
mathematics and astronomy. Accord- 
ing to T.C., nature is eternal and exists 
independently of human consciousness. 

f the interconnection between the 
ideal Wf (q.v.) and the material ch'i 
(q.v.), the two fundamental concepts 
of the Neo-Confucian philosophy of 
nature, T.C. said that ch'i was primary 
and li secondary. The world, he said, 
is in a state of continuous inception 
and development. He described mo- 
tion as the interaction of opposite 
forces—the positive yang and the nega- 
tive yin (q.v.). The action of these forces 
is eternal, indestructible and indivisi- 
ble from nature. All phenomena and 
things are subject to natural necessity. 


T.C. believed sensations to be the basis 
of cognition, denied the existence of 
“innate knowledge” and advocated ex- 
perimental verification of general con- 
clusions. He maintained that the libe- 
ration of the people depended on the 
development of education and the mor- 
al self-improvement of the individual. 

T’ai Shih, or “The Great Ultimate”, 
one of the basic concepts of the onto- 
logical and natural philosophical sys- 
tems in the history of Chinese philos- 
ophy. It is first mentioned in the 
Book of Changes, where this concept 
denotes the initial stage, the prime 
cause of origin and development of 
all phenomena and things. The term T. 
is of primary importance in Neo-Con- 
fucianist philosophy. For instance, in 
his work Explanation of the Diagram 
of the Great Ultimate, Chou Tun-i 
(1017-73) proves the process of world 
development. Initially, nature was in 
the state of chaos, or the “unlimited 
Great Ultimate”. The self-motion of 
the Great Ultimate gives rise, through 
the connecting links yin and yang (q.v.) 
and the five agents, or “elements” of Wa- 
ter, Fire, Wood, Metal and Earth, to the 
multiformity of reality and its develop- 
ment. The greatest of the Neo-Con- 
fucians, Chu Hsi (1130-1200) gave an 
idealistic interpretation of T’ai Shih 
and identified it with Ji, the absolute 
aw. 

Tan Ssti-tung (1865-98), Chinese phi- 
losopher, ideologist of the bourgeois 
refoimation movement towards the 
end of the 19th century. He expounded 
his philosophical views in his book 
Jén-hsiieh (A Study of Benevolence), 
which played a big role in develop- 
ing the bourgeois-revolutionary move- 
ment in China. T. sought to justify 





Tantrism 


the demands of the reformers’ move- 
ment theoretically. His teaching was 
but a combination of the ideas of Chi- 
nese traditional philosophy with cer- 
tain natural scientific conceptions held 
in Western Europe. The main concept 
of his teaching—Jen—means both an 
ethical standard and a metaphysical 
principle. Jen is the unifying factor in 
the interaction of all phenomena and 
things in the “ether”. T.S. professed the 
dependence of ethics and morality on 
social regulations. Philosophically, he 
was not consistent, his scientific 
conceptions being interwoven with re- 
ligion, materialism with idealism, and 
dialectics with metaphysics. 

Tantrism, a _ philosophico-religious 
teaching in ancient India, initially 
associated with the cult of female 
deities and magic rites performed to 
obtain greater fertility of the land. 
Historically, T. changed its form sev- 
eral times under the impact of the 
religions which later developed; it was 
Buddhist, Shivaist, Shaktist and Vish- 
nuist. In the Middle Ages, T. opposed 
the teaching of Vedanta (q.v.) on the 
maya advaita and admitted the reality 
of the world and its evolution out 
of the spiritual primary principle. 
Tantrists held that the structures of 
the microcosm and the macrocosm were 
identical and tried to find a key to 
the knowledge of nature in man’s 
knowledge. Their teaching on the hu- 
man body (deha vada) contains much 
information that enables us to judge 
of the development of chemistry and 
medicine in ancient and medieval In- 
dia. It is indicative that the tantrists’ 
psycho-physical exercises (sadhana) 
have no connection with ascetic renun- 
ciation of the world. Moreover, the 
traditional religious aim, mukti (Skr. 
spiritual liberation), is combined with 
bhakti (enjoyment). An important fea- 
ture of T. is its appeal to all Indians, 
irrespective of their caste, sex and 
age. This is due to the fact that T. 
maintains a number of essential features 
of primitive-communal ideology. T. 
greatly influenced Indian philosophy, 
in pace the ideas of the early 
Sankhya (q.v.). Among those influenced 
by T. in recent times were Rama- 


— 445 — 


Taoism 


krishna, Vivekananda, Tagore, and Au- 
robindo Ghose (qq.v.) 

Tao, one of the key categories in 
Chinese classical philosophy. Origi- 
nally, T. denoted “the way”, and was 
later used in philosophy to denote the 
“path” of nature, the laws governing 
nature. T. also connoted the purpose 
of life and the “ethical standard” (tao 
té). T. also means logic, reason and 
argument (tao li). The concept changed 
in step with the development of Chi- 
nese philosophy. Such materialist phi- 
losophers as Lao Tzù, Hsiin Tzů, Wang 
Chung (qq.v.), etc., interpret T. as the 
natural way of things and the law that 
governs things. The idealists interpret 
it as the “ideal principle”, the “true 
non-being” (Wang Pi, etc.), the “di- 
vine way” (Tung Chung-shu and others). 
T. is thus one of the basic questions over 
which materialists and idealists part 
ways. 

Taoism, the doctrine of tao or “the 
way” (of things), originated in China 
in the 6th or 5th century B.C. Lao 
Tzit (q.v.), who is considered its found- 
er, set out its basic ideas in a book 
Tao Té Ching (The Canon of Reason 
and Virtue). It maintains that all 
things originate and change due to 
their own “way”, or fao. All things 
are mutable and turn into their oppo- 
site in the process of mutation. Man 
should adhere to the naturalness of 
things, without striving or crying. T. 
opposed domination and oppression, 
and urged a return to the primitive com- 
munity of the ancients. Yang Chu (q.v.), 
Hsiin Tsiang, Yin Wen and Chuang 
Tzu, were prominent exponents of T. 
in the 4th and 3rd centuries B.C. Yang 
Chu contended that by observing the 
natural laws of life (tao) man would 
“preserve his nature intact”, while 
Hsiin Tsiang and Yin Wen believed 
that adherence to tao would yield ev- 
ery man wisdom and knowledge of the 
truth. They averred that man’s soul 
consists of delicate material particles, 
“ching chi”, which come and go de- 
pending on the “purity” or “pollution” 
of our “thought organ” (Asin). Chuang 
Tzů blended his somewhat puerile 
materialistic world outlook with such 
idealistic propositions as non-existence 











Tarski 


of objective truth, life being an illu- 
sion, and true being springing from the 
eternal and independently existing tao. 
Chuang Tzti’s views were the ideologi- 
cal embryo of T. as a religion, which 
originated at the dawn of the new era 
(T.as a philosophy is to be distinguished 
from T. as a religion). Subsequent- 
ly. the rational philosophical ideas of 

. were advanced in the works of Chi- 
nese materialists, such as Wang Chung 
(q.v.), and others. 

Tarski, Alfred (1902- ), logician 
and mathematician, an eminent rep- 
oe of the Lvov-Warsaw school 
q.V.). 

Taste, Aesthetic, man’s ability ac- 
quired through sharing in the life of 
society to understand and appreciate 
the beautiful (q.v.) and the ugly (q.v.). 
Good aesthetic taste implies the abili- 
ty to enjoy something truly beautiful, 
and also a sense of the necessity to 
create the beautiful in one’s work, 
everyday life, behaviour, and art. 

Tautology 1. In traditional logic, the 
most glaring logical mistake commit- 
ted in defining a concept. In this mean- 
ing T. is a logically untenable defni- 
tion in which the definitive is a mere 
repetition in other words of what is 
contained in the part to be defined. 2. 
In mathematical logic, the same thing 
z - identically true statements 
q.v.). 

Technocracy, a modern sociological 
trend which came into being in the 
USA on the strength of the ideas of 
the economist Thorstein Veblen. It 
gained popularity in the thirties 
(H. Scott, G. Loeb, and others). Tech- 
nocratic societies have sprung up in 
the USA and some European countries. 
Adherents of T. claim that anarchy and 
instability of contemporary capitalism 
are the result of the administration of 
state affairs by politicians. They hold 
that capitalism may be cured provided 
that economic life and state adminis- 
tration are taken over by technicians 
and businessmen. Their demagogic crit- 
icism of capitalist economy and po- 
litics camouflages their striving to 
justify the direct subordination of 
the state machinery to industrial mo- 
nopolies. Closely associated with T. 


— 446 — 


Teleology 


is managerism, which is now wide- 
spread in the USA. 

Technology, the totality of machines, 
mechanisms, systems and means 
of control, collection, storaging, pro- 
cessing and transmitting energy and 
information, created for the purposes 
of production, research, war, etc. The 
requirements of T. underlie the develop- 
ment of natural science. As Engels said, 
once society develops a technological 
requirement, it advances science more 
vigorously and quickly than a dozen 
universities. Practical results of science 
find their expression in T. On the 
other hand, T. supplies science with 
experimental equipment. The develop- 
ment of T., of the productive forces 
in general, determines the socio-eco- 
nomic structure of society. Labour is 
organised and distributed according 
to what instruments society possesses. 
The progress of mechanical T. gave 
birth to the working class, paved the 
way for its organisation and the build- 
ing of a socialist mode of production. 
In its turn, social structure greatly 
influences the rate and nature of the 
development of T. Thus, the develop- 
ment of T. under capitalism engenders 
chronic unemployment, crises of over- 
production and converts the worker 
into an appendage: of the machine; in 
capitalist society the progress of mod- 
ern automatic T. leads to a lowering 
of the standard of the worker’s educa- 
tion, to his intellectual degeneration. 
The decay of imperialism is reflected 
in the accelerated development of those 
industries which bring in greater 
profit, even if the results of this growth 
are prejudicial to man (military T.). 
Only socialism provides unlimited pos- 
sibilities for developing T., since its 
sole purpose is to ensure man’s domi- 
nation over nature. Under socialism, 
T., based on automation, electronic 
computers and new technological proc- 
esses, transforms science into a direct 
productive force and facilitates the 
conversion of labour into a play of 
man’s physical and spiritual powers. 

Teleology, the theory of the purpose- 
fulness (q.v.) of all natural pheno- 
mena. According to T., not only man 
but also all natural phenomena are 








Telésio 


guided by final purposes and have 
souls of a special kind. While man 
sets himself a task in a conscious 
manner, a purpose in nature is imple- 
mented unconsciously. T. is indissolu- 
bly connected with hylozoism, pan- 
psychism, pantheism (qq.v.), etc. T. 
holds that the principle of life and 
thought is rooted in the very basis of 
matter, which consists not of dead 
atoms, but of live monads (q.v.), 
possessing a vague capacity of imagi- 
nation. T. tries to explain the univer- 
sal interconnection of all natural phe- 
nomena and their law-governed char- 
acter. The first consistent system of 
T. was elaborated by Aristotle (q.v.). 
To him, every thing has its own pre- 
destination, bears in itself an active 
purposeful principle, soul, entelechy 
(q.v.), and all purposes in nature are 
subordinate to one supreme goal. The 
main idea of Aristotle’s T. was pre- 
served in the teachings of Thomas Aqui- 
nas, Leibniz, Hegel, Heidegger (qq.v.), 
and others. The concept that the pur- 
pose of nature lies beyond the world 
and represents the supreme basis and 
ultimate goal of the world process served 
as a physico-teleological proof of the 
existence of God. Kant (q.v.) proved 
the logical insolvency of this con- 
cept, which was carried to the extreme 
in the theory of pre-established harm- 
ony (q.v.). The teleological view of 
living nature was widespread in the 
biological theories of the 17th-19th 
centuries. Darwin's theory of evolution 
(q.v.) gave a rational interpretation of 
the relative purpose of living creatures 
and thereby undermined the domina- 
tion of T. in biology. After Darwin, 
teleological conceptions in biology 
were preached by neo-vitalism, Neo-La- 
marckism, etc. Contemporary cyber- 
netics shows that purposefulness is the 
process of optimum adaptation of ob- 
jects to the surroundings. While reject- 
ing idealistic teleological speculations, 
dialectical materialism provides the 
basis for a rational explanation of 
purposefulnes in living nature. 
Telésio, Bernardino (1508-88), Ital- 
ian natural philosopher of the Renais- 
sance, materialist. He wrote De Natura 
rerum juxta propria Principia (1565). 


— 447 — 


Temperament 


He urged philosophers to study nature 
by means of experiments and empha- 
sised the importance of the sense-organs, 
which he held to be the main source 
of human knowledge. He opposed the 
speculative syllogistic method spe- 
cific to scholasticism. T. was a pred- 
ecessor of Francis Bacon (q.v.). In 
his interpretation of nature T. proceed- 
ed from the fact that matter, filling 
up all the space (thus excluding void), 
is as eternal as God. Like all other 
natural philosophers of his time, T. 
adhered to hylozoistic ideas (see Hylo- 
zoism). T.’s system of cosmological 
conceptions implies that heat and cold 
as the antithetical and animated ele- 
ments aspiring to self-conservation are 
in combat for matter, heat being con- 
centrated on the Sun and cold on the 
Earth. 

Temperament, the sum total of the 
individual qualities of a person char- 
acterising the dynamics of his or her 
psychic activity. T. is manifested in 
the strength of man’s feelings, their 
depth or superficiality, the speed with 
which they are displayed, their sta- 
bility or variability. T. is similarly 
manifested in the peculiarities of the 
individual’s movements. The basis 
of T. is man’s higher nervous activity. 
A strong, balanced and mobile type 
corresponds to the sanguine T., dis- 
tinctive features of which are quickly 
arising but easily changeable emo- 
tions, and vivacious movements. 
strong, balanced, but immobile type 
corresponds to the phlegmatic T., 
which is characterised by the stability 
of feelings, by calm movements. A 
strong, unbalanced type corresponds 
to the choleric T., whose distinctive 
features are suddenly changing emo- 
tions, emotional excitability, impet- 
uous movements. A weak type cor- 
responds to the melancholic T. with 
deep and lasting feelings, to which 
little outward expression is given. It 
should be noted that T. depends not 
only on the inborn qualities of the 
nervous system, but also on the con- 
ditions of man’s life and work. T. is 
not invariable throughout an individ- 
ual’s life. No type of T. is necessarily 
a hindrance to the development of all 











Term — 448 — 


the socially essential qualities of the 
person. However, every T. requires 
special ways and means of forming 
these qualities. T. is one of the pre- 
requisites of originality of character 
in man. 

Term 1. A word having only 
one meaning, fixing a definite concept 
of science, technology, the arts, etc. 
T. is an element of the scientific lan- 
guage whose introduction was deter- 
mined by the necessity for exact and 
unambiguous designation of the data 
of science, especially those data which 
have no corresponding names in the 
everyday language. As distinct from 
words used in everyday language 
T. is devoid of emotional connota- 
tion. 2. In logic, T. is an essential ele- 
ment of a proposition (subject or pred- 
icate) or a syllogism (the predicate 
of a conclusion is called the major 
term, the subject of the conclusion is 
the minor term, and the concept con- 
tained in the premisses of a syllogism 
but not in its conclusion is called the 
middle term). 

Thales of Miletus (c. 624-547 B.C), 
the first historically known ancient 
Greek philosopher. In ancient tradi- 
tion he was considered one of the “sev- 
en wise men”. According to legend, 
T.M. mastered the mathematical and 
astronomical knowledge of Egypt and 
Babylon. He is credited with predict- 
ing the solar eclipse in 585-584 B.C. 
T.M. was the founder of the sponta- 
neous-materialistic Miletian school. He 
sought a single first principle in the 
diversity of things (element, q.v.) and 
considered it as a corporeal substance 
perceptible by the senses. He held 
water to be the primary element of 
all that exists. 

Theism, a religious philosophy which 
acknowledges the existence of a per- 
sonal God as a supernatural being 
endowed with reason and will and 
mysteriously influencing all the ma- 
terial and spiritual processes, includ- 
ing the lives of people. According to 
T., all that occurs in the world is the 
implementation of divine providence, 
on which, it holds, the laws of nature 
depend. T. is the ideological basis 
of clericalism, theology, and fideism 


Theology 


(qq.v.). T. is essentially hostile to 
science and the scientific world out- 
look (see Atheism). 

Theodicy (Gk. theos—God; dike— 
justice), a term used to designate phil- 
osophico-religious treatises which strive 
to justify the glaring and irreconcil- 
able contradiction between belief in 
an almighty, good, creative God and 
the existence of evil and injustice in 
the world. In the 17th and 18th cen- 
turies T. became an independent branch 
of philosophical literature. Leibniz’s 
essay on evil, Théodicée (1710), which 
was widely famous at the time, was 
subjected to scathing criticism by 
Voltaire in his satirical philosophical 
novel Candide (1759). By its social 
content T. is an attempt at philosophi- 
co-religious justification of the evil 
and injustice reigning in a society 
based on antagonistic classes and ex- 
ploitation. This is the main topic of 
many theological works, including Cath- 
olic ones, which sophistically treat 
evil not as a reality but as a privation 
(“privatio”), a lack of something. 

Theogony 1. A system of reli- 
gious myths concerning the origin of 
the gods, the genealogy of the gods. 
The first known poetical collection of 
ancient Greek myths in European lit- 
erature was Theogony by Hesiod (8th 
century B.C.). 2. Theogonie is the title 
of a work published by Feuerbach in 
1857. It critically views the evolution 
in the conceptions of God in antique, 
Judaic and Christian mythology and in 
theology. 

Theology, or the science of God, the 
system of dogmas in a given religion. 
Christian T. is based on the Bible, 
the decrees of the first oecumenical 
councils and the “Holy Fathers”, the 
Holy Scriptures and the sacred tradi- 
tions, and is divided into basic theol- 
ogy (fundamentalism and apologetics, 
q.v.), dogma, morals, and worship, etc. 
The prominent features of T. are ex- 
treme dogmatism, authoritarianism, 
and scholasticism. Closely related 
to T. is religious philosophy, which 
tries to prove that T. is compatible 
with science. T. has been severely 
criticised. by progressive thinkers of all 
times. 








Theorem 


Theorem, in modern formal logic 
and mathematics, any proposition in 
a Strictly built (e.g., axiomatically) the- 
ory, which is proved (or deduced) by 
applying the permissible rules of de- 
duction. The concepts “axiom” (q.v.) 
and “T.” are relative: the same prop- 
ositions of a given theory may be 
regarded in some cases as axioms, and 
proved in others as Tt. Absolute divi- 
sion of the propositions of a theory 
into axioms and Tt. is only possible 
within the framework of a concrete 
system. 

Theory, a system of generalised 
knowledge and explanation of differ- 
ent aspects of reality. The term T. 
has different connotations: as opposed 
to practice or a hypothesis (unverified, 
suppositional knowledge) T. differs from 
practice, since it spiritually or men- 
tally reflects and reproduces reality. 
At the same time it is inseparably 
linked with practice, which places 
pressing problems before knowledge and 
requires it to solve them. For this 
reason practice is part and parcel of 
every T. Each T. is complex in struc- 
ture. For example, two parts may be 
distinguished in physical theories: for; 
mal calculations (mathematical equa- 
tions, logical symbols, rules, etc.) and 
a “substantive” interpretation (cate- 
gories, laws, principles). The structure 
and treatment of this “substantive” 
part of T. are connected with the scien- 
tist’s philosophy and with definite 
methodological principles of approach 
to reality. Both natural-scientific and 
social Tt. are determined by the his- 
torical conditions in which they orig- 
inate, by the historically given level 
of production, technology and exper- 
iment. and the dominant social order, 
which may favour or, contrariwise, 
hamper the creation of scientific Tt. 
Tt. may and actually do play a big 
role in transforming society by revo- 
lutionary means. Thus, while appear- 
ing as a generalisation of the cognitive 
activity and results of practice, T. is con- 
ducive to transforming nature and social 
life. The criterion of the truth value 
of T. is practice (see Criterion of Truth). 

Theory and Practice, philosophical 
categories denoting the spiritual and 


29-1682 


— 449 — 


Theory and Practice 


materialist aspects of the single socio- 
historical process of cognition and 
transformation of nature and society. 
T. is the people's experience general- 
ised in their consciousness, the sum 
total of their knowledge of the objective 
world; a relatively independent system 
of knowledge interrelated by the in- 
herent logic of concepts reproducing 
the objective logic of things. As dis- 
tinct from empiricism and positivism 
(pragmatism, in particular), Marxist 
philosophy regards P. not as the sen- 
suous subjective experience of the 
individual and not as an action per- 
formed by subjective motives alone, 
but as the activity of people to 
sustain the existence and development 
of society, as the objective process 
of material production, which consti- 
tutes the basis of people’s lives, and 
also as the revolutionary and trans- 
forming activity of classes and all the 
other forms of social activity which 
bring about changes in the world. 
Scientific experiment is also a form 
of practice. T. & P. form one indissol- 
uble unity; they do not exist without 
each other and constantly influence 
each other. P. is the basis of this in- 
teraction. It is practical socio-produc- 
tive activity that generates and deter- 
mines at each stage both consciousness 
and the theoretical assimilation of real- 
ity. People act in a conscious way, 
trying to find the purport of reality. 
This does not mean that they are guid- 
ed in their actions by a strictly con- 
sistent scientific T. But their activity 
is always directed by a definite total- 
ity of knowledge. At the dawn of 
human history one undivided “ev- 
eryday consciousness” was the only 
form of existence of such knowledge. 
Understanding of the purport of the 
habits of work, empirical generalisation 
of the results of actions and observa- 
tions, tradition and belief, the true or 
fantastical reflection of social being— 
this T. was not a logical and harmoni- 
ous system of concepts, nor a scientific 
reproduction of the objective laws of 
reality. The relation of T. to P., how- 
ever, was so complete that this T. 
was directly “woven” into the “lan- 
guage of real life”, into the practical 








Theory and Practice 


activity of people. With the division 
of labour into mental and physical, 
T. & P. separate and are ascribed to 
different social spheres. Although they 
continued to be dependent on each 
other and to interact upon each other, 
they turn into relatively independent 
forms of social activity. As Marx and 
Engels put it, “from this moment con- 
sciousness is able to emancipate itself 
from the world and begin the building 
of ‘pure’ theory, theology, philosophy, 
morality, etc.”. (Marx, Engels, Werke, 
Bd. 3, S. 31.) The appearance of “pure” 
T. meant a great revolutionary leap 
in the history of mankind. The develop- 
ment of theoretical investigations, the 
abstract logical form of “pure” T. 
enabled people to penetrate deeply 
into the essence of natural phenomena 
and to create a constantly changing 
scientific picture of the world. On 
the other hand, scholars themselves 
failed to see in full the obvious connec- 
tion between T. and P. In conjunction 
with the individualistic world outlook 
inherent in societies where private 
ownership dominated, there arose vari- 
ous illusions; beginning with the view 
of cognition as an act of individual 
passive contemplation of the surround- 
ings by a “theorist” and ending with 
the idealistic systems which regard 
theoretical consciousness (ideas) as the 
creator of reality. “From this moment 
consciousness is actually able to imag- 
ine that it is something different from 
the recognition of the existing prac- 
tice.” (Ibid.) The capitalist mode of 
production, which socialises labour, 
develops productive forces on an un- 
precedented scale, creates objective 
prerequisites for bridging the gap be- 
tween T. and P. T. acquires an immeas- 
urably greater role in the process of 
production. The practical movement 
of the masses aimed at abolishing pri- 
vate ownership unites with the ad- 
vanced, Marxist theory, which discloses 
society’s objective laws and directs 
the entire activity of the working-class 
party towards the achievement of 
communism, a scientifically realised 
goal. With the emancipation of labour, 
the abolition of class antagonisms, 
and the obliteration of distinctions be- 


— 450 — “Thermal Death” of the Universe 


tween mental and physical labour, the 
gap and the antithesis between T. 
and P. is eliminated. After the victory 
of socialism, and particularly in the 
period of full-scale construction of 
communism, Marxist-Leninist T. and 
science in general come into closer 
contacts with P. The powerful produc- 
tive forces brought to life by free labour 
to benefit the whole of society require 
direct participation of T. in produc- 
tion. Moreover, science, as the highest 
form of theoretical activity and an 
essential aspect of the habits of mecha- 
nised and automated work, becomes 
itself a productive force. Only the 
emergence of mankind’s true history 
visibly discloses the essence of the 
single socio-historical and practico- 
theoretical process of cognition 
and transformation of nature and 
society. 

Theory of Knowledge, see Episte- 
mology, Cognition, and Reflection, 
Theory of. 

Theosophy, a mystic teaching acknowl- 
edging that God may be known 
by a direct link with the other world. 
Relying on Buddhism (q.v.), Brah- 
manism and other oriental philoso- 
phies, T. claims that the human soul 
alternates its presence and absence on 
earth several times until it finally 
expiates sin and merges with God. 
Theosophic societies have arisen in 
the USA, Britain and other capital- 
ist countries since the end of the 19th 
century. 

“Thermal Death” of the Universe, 
the ultimate condition of the world 
which is alleged to emerge as a result 
of the irreversible conversion of all 
forms of movement into its heat form, 
of the diffusion of heat in space and 
the transition of the world into the 
state of balance with a maximum 
value of entropy (q.v.). This conclusion 
is drawn on the basis of making an 
absolute of the second law of thermo- 
dynamics and extending its applica- 
tion to the entire Universe. The idea 
of T.D. holds no water, since (1) the 
Universe is infinite in space and rep- 
resents an unbounded totality of an 
endless number of qualitatively difier- 
ent systems; (2) the number of pos- 





p 


Thermodynamics 


sible conditions of matter in the Uni- 
verse is infinite and cannot be reached 
over any lapse of time; the concept 
of the most probable condition identi- 
fied with the maximum value of en- 
tropy is inapplicable to the world as 
a whole; (3) the second law of thermo- 
dynamics does not determine the 
trends of all possible changes in mat- 
ter; there are other laws in the world 
which condition the concentration of 
diffused matter and energy and their 
inclusion in new cycles of development. 
The formation of stars and galaxies 
is but one of the manifestations of this 
process. The irreversible changing of 
matter in the Universe does not imply 
that the world is hurtling to an ulti- 
mate condition, but means an endless 
emergence of qualitatively new condi- 
tions, possibilities, and trends of de- 
velopment. 

Thermodynamics, the branch of the- 
oretical physics studying the laws of 
heat motion, the conversion of heat 
into other types of energy. As distinct 
from statistical physics (q.v.) T. is 
a classical example of a descriptive 
theory of physical phenomena, which 
involves no suppositions concerning 
the structure of matter. For the most 
part T. is based on two principles that 
originated experimentally and play 
the role of axioms in the deductive 
system. The first principle is the ap- 
plication of the law of the conserva- 
tion of energy to the phenomena which 
have bearing on the changes of inner 
energy. It assumes the form of the law 
of the equivalence of heat and work. 
Sometimes the first principle is for- 
mulated in terms of the impossibility 
of effecting a perpetual motion of the 
first kind. Under the second principle of 
T. heat cannot of itself pass from a cool- 
er body to a hotter body without changes 
in any other bodies. The second prin- 
ciple of T. is a limited law, which has 
no bearing on systems consisting of 
a small number of particles. Attempts 
to extend its application beyond its 
sphere, particularly to the world as 
a whole, lead to the emergence of con- 
tradictions and to false philosophical 
conclusions (see “Therma! Death” of 
the Universe). 


29° 


— 451 — “Thing-in-Itself” and Phenomenon 


“Theses on Feuerbach”, eleven the- 
ses found in Marx’s notebook, written 
in the spring of 1845. After more pre- 
cise formulation they were first pub- 
lished by Engels in 1888 as an appen- 
dix to Marx’s work Ludwig Feuerbach 
and the End of German Classical Phi- 
losophy. As Engels put it, Theses on 
Feuerbach are “invaluable as the first 
document in which is deposited the 
brilliant germ of the new world out- 
look”. (Marx, Engels, Selected Works, 
Vol. II, p. 359.) According to their 
content, Theses are close to The Ger- 
man Ideology. In his Theses Marx 
concisely formulates the cardinal prin- 
ciples of a new philosophy. Their cen- 
tral idea is the analysis and elaboration 
of a scientific understanding of practice. 
This task required a materialistic un- 
derstanding of history, the basic prop- 
ositions of which Marx expounds. 
These are: that social life is mainly 
practical, that man is the product of 
his own labour, that he is essentially 
social by nature, that ideological phe- 
nomena (for instance, religion) depend 
on the conditions of society’s existence 
and development. From this viewpoint 
Marx criticised the historical idealism 
of Feuerbach and the utopian socialists. 
Proceeding from the unity of theory 
and practice, Marx raised the problems 
of epistemology in a new light, criti- 
cised the entire “preceding” material- 
ism, noting that its main shortcoming 
was its contemplative approach. He also 
criticised idealism for its distortion 
of the “active aspects”, i.e., the activ- 
ity of the subject in the process of 
its interaction with the object (see 
Subject and Object), Marx’s theses 
substantiated the essence, tasks and 
role of the philosophy of dialectical 
materialism in the practical transfor- 
mation of society. 

Thing, any part of the material world 
possessing relatively independent and 
stable existence. Its characteristic fea- 
ture is the integral unity of the proper- 
ties by means of which it is connected 
and interacts with other things. 

“Thing-in-Itself” and Phenomenon 
(Thing-for-Us), philosophical terms, 
the former meaning things as they 
exist by themselves, independently of us 











Thomism 


and our knowledge, the latter denoting 
things as they reveal themselves 
to man in the process of cognition. 
These terms acquired particular sig- 
nificance in the 18th century, when it 
was stated that it was impossible to 
know “things-in-themselves”. First stat- 
ed by Locke (q.v.), this proposition 
was developed in detail by Kant (q.v.), 
who claimed that we are concerned only 
with the phenomenon, which is com- 
pletely removed from the “thing-in- 
itself”. For Kant, the “thing-in-itself” 
also means essences which are super- 
natural, unknowable, inaccessible to 
experience: God, freedom, etc. Dialec- 
tical materialism, which proceeds from 
the premise that it is possible to acquire 
exhaustive knowledge of things, regards 
cognition as the process of turning the 
“thing-in-itself” into the phenomenon on 
the basis of practical experience (see 
Cognition, Theory and Practice). 

Thomism, the leading trend in Cath- 
olic philosophy started by Thomas 
Aquinas (q.v.). T. was most widely 
accepted in the various schools of the 
Dominican Order. In the Middle Ages 
T. was opposed by the adherents of 
Duns Scotus (q.v.) who grouped around 
the Franciscan Order. The most 
prominent continuator of T. in the 
epoch of the Renaissance (q.v.) was 
the Italian Dominican Thomas del 
Vio (Cajetan of Tiene). The earlier 
bourgeois revolutions, the Reforma- 
tion, and the resultant loss by the Cath- 
olic Church of its former supremacy 
were responsible for a certain renova- 
tion of T., by the Spanish Jesuit Fran- 
cisco Suarez. The mid-19th century 
saw the last revival of T. (see Neo- 
Thomism), the prominent representa- 
tives of this trend being Stöckl, Baeum- 
ker (Germany), de Wulf, Mercier 
(France), Newman (Britain), Liberatore 
(Italy), and others. The main tendency 
of contemporary T. is to falsify modern 
natural science theoretically and to 
adapt Thomas Aquinas’ system to 
the philosophies of Kant and Hegel 
(qq. v.) and to modern idealistic the- 
ories (see Husserl, Heidegger, Nikolai 
Hartmann, and others). 

Thoreau, Henry David (1817-62), 
American idealist philosopher and writ- 


— 452 — 


Thought 


er, graduated from Harvard Universi- 
ty in 1837. He was a member of the 
circle of transcendentalists (q.v.), head- 
ed by Emerson (q.v.). T.’s views took 
shape under the influence of European 
romantics, especially Carlyle and Rous- 
seau (qq.v.). He criticised capitalism 
and its culture from petty-bourgeois 
positions. “The luxury of one class is 
counterbalanced by the indigence of 
another. On the one side is the palace, 
on the other are the almshouse and 
‘silent poor’,” wrote T. in his main 
work Walden or Life in the Woods 
(1854). T.’s pantheistic world outlook 
has a flavour of mysticism: the laws of 
nature coincide with universal reason 
(including the moral order). The pur- 
pose of knowledge is truth, which peo- 
ple reach through understanding the 
divine reality that surrounds them, 
i.e., nature. He actively opposed slav- 
ery in the USA. 

Thought 1. The highest product 
of the brain as specially organised mat- 
ter; the active process through which 
the objective universe is reflected in 
concepts, judgements, theories, etc. T. 
arises in the process of the social and 
productive activities of men, ensures 
a mediate reflection of reality and 
reveals the natural connections within 
it. The material physiological mecha- 
nisms of T. were investigated by I. Pav- 
lov (q.v.) and resulted in his theory of 
the second signalling system (q.v.). 
Nevertheless T., being inseparably linked 
with the brain, cannot be fully ex- 
plained by the activity of the physiolog- 
ical system. The inception of T. is 
associated primarily with social de- 
velopment, rather than biological evo- 
lution. From the standpoint of its 
mode of inception, its method of func- 
tioning, and its results T. is a social 
product. The explanation of this is 
found in the fact that T. is inseparably 
linked only with such activities as 
labour and speech, which are peculiar 
only to human society. Hence, 
man’s T. occurs in closest association 
with speech and its results are ex- 
pressed in language (q.v.). T. comprises 
such processes as abstraction, analy- 
sis, and synthesis (qq.v.), the formu- 
lation of definite tasks and the discov- 





op ie 





Thought 


ery of their solutions, the advancement 
of hypotheses (q.v.), concepts, 
etc. The process of T. invariably pro- 
duces some idea. The fact that T. is 
capable of generalised reflection of 
reality finds expression in man’s abil- 
ity to form general concepts (q.v.). 
The formation of scientific concepts is 
frequently associated with the for- 
mulation of corresponding laws (q.v.). 
The fact that T. is capable of mediate 
reflection of reality finds expression in 
man’s ability to arrive at logical con- 
clusions and proof (q.v.). This ability 
greatly increases the range of cogni- 
tion. It enables man to proceed from an 
analysis of facts which may be precy 
perceived to cognition of that whic 

cannot be perceived through the sense- 
organs. Concepts and systems of con- 
cepts (scientific theories) record (gen- 
eralise) the experience of mankind, 
represent the sum total of man’s knowl- 
edge, and serve as a point of depar- 
ture for further cognition of reality. T. 
is the object of study of various dis- 
ciplines (physiology of higher nerv- 
ous activity, logic, cybernetics, psy- 
chology, epistemology, etc.) by vari- 
ous methods. Prominent among exper- 
imental studies in the field of T. has 
lately been modelling (q.v.) in the 
shape of various cybernetic devices. 
T. does not exist in the life of each in- 
dividual as a purely intellectual proc- 
ess, but is inseparably ‘linked with 
other psychological processes, i.e., it 
has no existence isolated from man’s 
consciousness (q.v.) as a whole. Ideal- 
ism has always striven to dissociate 
T. from matter (the human brain, lan- 
guage, society’s practical activities), 
and when it did recognise such an asso- 
ciation, it strove to present the T. of 
single individuals as something de- 
tived from certain spiritual principles 
superior to matter and the conscious- 
ness of individuals (e.g., Hegel, q.v.). 
Denial of T. as something really exist- 
ing is taught by neo-positivism (q.v.). 
Reducing mankind’s entire range of 
experience to facts directly observed, 
as does behaviourism (q.v.), neo-posi- 
tivism declares T. to be a fiction, just 
like matter (unlike language, which is 
invariably regarded as a fact perceived 


— 453 — 


Thought 


through the sense-organs). Neo- 
positivism ignores the fact that lan- 
guage is a means of expression, a form 
of the existence of thought. Language 
analysis is used in the study of those 
properties of the brain known as thought 
2. In psychology, T. is the proc- 
ess of interaction of the cognising in- 
dividual with the object of cognition, 
the pre-eminent mode of the individ- 
ual’s orientation in reality. T. as 
such is always creative; it arises in 
situations where the solution of prob- 
lems requires the acquisition of new 
knowledge and methods of altering 
the environment to meet the needs. 
The products of T. are psychological 
models (psychics, q.v.) of reality seen 
epistemologically as the images of 
objects. T. is the essential prerequisite 
of any other activity, inasmuch as the 
latter is its summarised and digested 
result. T. undergoes a complex evo- 
lution, producing derived forms of 
intellectual activity, such as the proc- 
esses of perception, imagination, ac- 
quiring various habits, etc. As these 
latter gain in strength, T. utilises 
them in solving new and more compli- 
cated problems. In an elementary 
form T. is characteristic of animals as 
well. At the stage of man the appear- 
ance of labour led to the shaping of 
the speech form of T. characteristic 
of the human being and representing 
a theoretical form of activity as singled 
out of practice. As a result of the de- 
velopment of the second signal system 
T. in its highest form is transferred 
to the inner plane of activity. Psy- 
chic models rather than real things 
may be its objects. Models of reality 
constructed with the aid of speech may 
be the subjective results of such T. 
These model not only the relationships 
between subject and object but also 
the relationships among various ob- 
jects. From an epistemological stand- 
point these models constitute concepts, 
judgements, conclusions reflecting the 
laws governing the movement of ob- 
jects, their specific aspects and proper- 
ties, which are frequently outside the 
range of direct perception, basic as- 
sociations and interrelationships. The 
objective products of the speech form 





Time and Space 


of T. participate in practical activity 
and are fixed in the corresponding 
transformations of real things. They 
constitute socio-historical experience, 
which is acquired by the younger gen- 
eration through the process of learn- 
ing. T. may be productive, creative 
(psychology of creative activity, q.v.) 
or reproductive (memory, habit, qq.v.). 
Both these forms of T. are closely in- 
terrelated: productive T. may be 
transformed into reproductive, and 
reproductive T. may become one of 
the prerequisites of creative T. 

Time and Space, basic forms of exist- 
ence of matter. Philosophers are main- 
ly concerned with whether T. &. S. 
are real or simply pure abstractions 
which exist only in men’s conscious- 
ness. The idealist philosophers deny 
the objectivity of T. & S. and make 
them dependent on the individual 
consciousness (Berkeley, Hume, Mach, 
qq.v.). They regard them as a priori 
forms of sensory contemplation (Kant, 
q.v.) or as categories of the absolute 
spirit (Hegel, q.v.). Materialism recog- 
nises the objectivity of T. & S. and 
denies the existence of any reality 
outside them. T. &. S. are inseparable 
from matter, this being a manifesta- 
tion of their universality. S. is three- 
dimensional and T. has only one di- 
mension; S. expresses the distribution 
of simultaneously existing objects, 
while T. expresses the sequenice of exist- 
ence of phenomena as they replace one 
another. T. is irreversible, i.e., every 
material process develops only in one 
direction—from the past to the future. 
The development of science has explod- 
ed the metaphysical idea that T. & S. 
exist independently of material proc- 
esses and separately from each other. 
Dialectical materialism proceeds not 
from the simple connection of T. & S. 
with matter in motion, but from the 
fact that motion is the essence of T. 
& S., and that, consequently, matter, 
motion, time, and space are insepa- 
rable. This idea has been confirmed in 
modern physics. The natural science 
of the 18th and 19th centuries, while 
recognising the objective nature of 
T. & S., followed Newton (q.v.) in 
regarding them as divorced from each 


— 454 — 





Timiryazev 


other, as something self-dependent, 
existing completely independently of 
matter and motion. Following the 
atomistic views of the ancient natural 
philosophers (see Democritus and Epi- 
curus), natural scientists right up to 
the 20th century identified space with 
a vacuum, which they considered ab- 
solute, always and everywhere the same 
and motionless, with T. flowing on 
always at the same pace. Modern 
physics has discarded the old concep- 
tions of T. & S. as empty receptacles 
and proved their profound relation 
with matter in motion. The main con- 
clusion in Einstein’s theory of relativ- 
ity (q.v.) is precisely the establish- 
ment of the fact that T. & S. do not 
exist by themselves, in isolation from 
matter, but are part of a universal in- 
terrelation in which they lose their 
independence and emerge as relative 
aspects of the integral and indivisible 
space-time. Science has proved that 
the flow of time and the extent of bod- 
ies depend on the speed at which 
these bodies move, and that the struc- 
ture or geometrical properties of the 
four-dimensional continuum (space- 
time) change according to the accumula- 
tion of masses of substance and the 
field of gravitation caused by them. 
The ideas of Lobachevsky (q.v.), Rie- 
mann, Gauss, and Bolyai contributed 
much to the. present-day theory of 
T. & S. The discovery of non-Euclid- 
ean geometry refuted Kant’s teach- 
ing on T. & S. as forms of sensory 
perception outside the range of expe- 
rience. The researches of Butlerov 
(q.v.), Fyodorov, and their followers 
revealed the dependence of spatial 
properties on the physical nature of 
material bodies, and the dependence of 
the physico-chemical properties of mat- 
ter on the spatial distribution of atoms. 
The fluctuations in people’s views -on 
T. & S. are used by the philosophical 
and physical idealists (q.v.) as an ex- 
cuse for denying their objective reality. 
According to dialectical materialism, 
human cognition is producing a more 
profound and correct conception of 
the objectively real T. & S. 
Timiryazev, Kliment Arkadyevich 
(1843-1920), Russian scientist, follower 


Toland 


— 455 — 


Tolstoi 





of Darwin (q.v.), founder of plant 
physiology in Russia. T.’s world out- 
look was shaped under the impact of 
the ideas of the Russian revolutionary 
democrats. At an early stage he real- 
ised that further progress of biology 
would depend on success in the cog- 
nition of the deep-going processes of 
vital activity in the organisms (physi- 
ology, biochemistry and biophysics). 
His experimental work in plant photo- 
synthesis played a considerable role 
in substantiating the unity of living 
and inanimate matter. T. did not 
confine his research within the narrow 
framework of experimental methods; 
he made broad philosophical generali- 
sations and fruitfully applied the his- 
toric method, which in many respects 
coincides with the dialectical materi- 
alist method .T. strove to place biol- 
ogy at the service of the people. He 
associated his research with the practice 
of land cultivation, popularised the 
achievements of biology. Of great im- 
portance was the struggle T. waged 
against the idealistic theories in biolo- 
gy (see Vitalism). He was the first 
among the prominent Russian natural 
scientists to accept the Great October 
Socialist Revolution. The collection of 
his articles published in 1920 under 
the title Nauka i demokratiya (Science 
and Democracy) was highly appraised 
by Lenin. 

Toland, John (1670-1722), English 
materialist philosopher, advocate of 
free-thinking. He greatly influenced 
Voltaire, Diderot, Holbach, Helvétius, 
and others. Having begun with deistic 
criticism of religion, T. adopted athe- 
ism: he denied the immortality of the 
soul, retribution in another life, the 
creation of the world and miracles, 
and tried to prove the secular origin 
of the “sacred” books and to explain 
that religion originated from condi- 
tions on earth. His book Christianity 
not Mysterious (1696) infuriated the 
clergy and was burnt; T., however, 
managed to escape. His great merit 
was his theory of the unity of matter 
and motion. Motion, he held, is an 
essential and indispensable property 
of matter. He criticised Spinoza (q.v.), 
who did not regard motion as the basic 


property of matter, and also Newton 
and Descartes (qq.v.), who believed 
that God is the source of motion. Ac- 
cording to T., matter is eternal and 
indestructible, and the Universe is 
infinite. However, he adhered to mech- 
anistic materialism, denied contin- 
gency, regarded thought as a purely 
physiological movement of the cere- 
brum, and held that the movement of 
matter does not undergo qualitative 
changes. 

Tolstoi, Levy Nikolayevich (1828- 
1910), great Russian writer and think- 
er. His works of art and his teaching 
reflected for the most part the epoch 
between 1861 and 1904, thatis, the 
epoch of the accelerated growth of 
capitalism and the ruin of the patriar- 
chal peasantry. As Lenin said, T. em- 
bodied in his works in amazingly bold 
relief “the specific historical features 
of the entire first Russian revolution, 
its strength and its weakness”, one of 
its principal distinguishing features 
being “a peasant bourgeois revolu- 
tion”. (Vol. 16, p. 324.) T. gave an ap- 
praisal of the reality in his day from 
the standpoint of the Russian peasant- 
ry. Hence the “crying” contradictions 
in his viewpoints: on the one hand, 
we see ruthless criticism of capitalism 
and the official church, and exposure 
of the anti-popular essence of the ex- 
ploiting state and, on the other hand, 
the preaching of submissiveness, the 
doctrine of non-resistance to evil, a 
refined form of religion. T.’s philosoph- 
ico-religious views were influenced 
by Christianity, Confucianism (q.v.), 
and Buddhism (q.v.), and also Rous- 
seau and Schopenhauer (qq.v.). The 
basic concept of T.’s teaching is the 
concept of faith (q.v.), which he under- 
stood mainly rationalistically: faith 
is the knowledge of what man is and 
the meaning of his life. The meaning 
and the value of human life consist in 
uniting people on the basis of love and 
in uniting them with God on the basis 
of realising their divinity. In this the 
great thinker saw the ideal of a “true” 
Christian religion. According to T., 
the state, church, and civilisation as 
a whole prevent the implementation 
of this ideal. He exposed the vices 











Totemism 


of bourgeois civilisation, denied its 
culture in general, and called upon 
people to take to plain living, to under- 
take a simple, peasant work. Man is 
only free when he serves God (the good, 
or unconditional, “universal and invis- 
ible principle”). In other spheres he 
is not free; the historical process is 
guided by God and is influenced by 
the activity of the masses, the individ- 
ual having no importance in actual 
fact. Thus T. came to fatalism (q.v.). 
In his works on aesthetics (for instance, 
“What Is Art?”, written in 1897-98), 
T. strongly opposed decadence and the 
official art of the gentry. In defining 
art as human activity by means of 
which people convey to one another 
their feelings, T. regards it as an essen- 
tial condition of human life. It must 
unite people, help them realise their 
ideals; it must be also understandable 
by them. However, T. saw the supreme 
goal of mankind in the establishment 
of “God’s kingdom on earth” and for 
this reason came to the unscientific 
conclusion that a religious idea must 
be the guiding idea in the arts. T. en- 
joyed great authority not as a preacher 
of reactionary and utopian ideals, but 
as a brilliant realistic writer, as the 
author of War and Peace, Anna Kare- 
nina, Resurrection, and other highly 
remarkable works, as a humanist who 
upheld the protest of the masses 
against social inequality and oppression. 
His main philosophico-religious works 
are: /ssledovaniye dogmaticheskogo bo- 
gosloviya (Investigation of Dogmatic 
Theology), 1880; Ispoved (Confession), 
1880-82; V chom moya vera? (What Dol 
Believe In?), 1883; Tsarstvo bozhiye 
unutri nas (God’s Kingdom Inside Us), 
eink and Put zhizni (Path of Life), 
1910. 

Totemism, one of the early forms of 
religion in primitive-communal so- 
ciety. As a term it was used for the 
first time by John Long at the end of 
the 18th century. The main feature of 
T. is belief in the common origin, blood 
relationship and association of a group 
of people with a definite kind of ani- 
mal, plant, object or phenomena. The 
emergence of T. was conditioned by the 
primitive economy (hunting, fruit- 


— 456 — 


Tragic, The 


gathering, etc.) and the lack of knowl- 
edge of the other ties in society be- 
sides consanguinity. The primitive con- 
ception of the totem is the animal- 
ancestor, its portrayal or symbol, and 
also a group of people. The totem, 
the powerful protector of people, sup- 
plies them with food. T. is widespread 
among the aboriginal tribes of Austra- 
lia, North and South America, Mela- 
nesia, Polynesia, and Africa. The sur- 
vivals of T. are preserved in developed 
religions (God is the father of believers; 
pure and impure animals; the eucharist 
means the partaking of God’s body), 
and in folklore (tales of marital and 
blood relationships between people and 
animals). 

Toynbee, Arnold Joseph (1889- ), 
English historian and sociologist. His 
philosophy of history replaces the 
concept of social progress by the “the- 
ory of cycles”. He holds that world 
history proceeds in great cycles of 
ups and downs and is a sum total of 
various “civilisations”, which pass 
through the same phases: birth, growth, 
downfall, disintegration, and destruc- 
tion. In treating the problem of the 
motivating forces of history, T. com- 
bines belief in “divine revelation” as 
the meaning of history, and “a hope 
of communion with Him” with the 
cult of individuals, “creative individ- 
uals” or “creative minorities”. T. 
differs from Spengler (q.v.) in trying 
to prove that it is possible to save 
“Western civilisation” by means of 
clericalism (q.v.). 

Traduction, a sort of indirect in- 
ference in which the premisses and con- 
clusions are propositions of equal de- 
gree of generality. The analogy (q.v.) 
and also the conclusions drawn in ana- 
logue simulation (q.v.) are examples 
of traductive inference. Depending on 
the nature of the premisses and the 
conclusion T. may be one of three 
types: (1) inference from the singular 
to the singular; (2) inference from the 
particular to the particular; (3) infer- 
ence from the general to the general. 

Tragic, The, a category of aesthetics 
expressing the contradictions of social 
development, the individual and so- 
ciety, the struggle between the beautiful 








Transcendent 


and the ugly. The T. reflects the 
contradictions which are unresolvable 
at a given time, the contradictions 
between historically necessary require- 
ments and the practical impossibility 
of implementing them. Tragic con- 
tradictions lead to painful emotions, 
sufferings, and even to the death of 
the hero. Marxist aesthetics sees the 
main cause of tragic developments in 
the collision of social forces resulting 
from the laws of social development. 
Marx and Engels made a distinction 
between the tragic nature of the pro- 
gressive forces, opposing the obsole- 
scent order and unable to triumph in 
the given conditions, and the tragic 
nature of the historically obsolete 
class, which nevertheless has not yet 
exhausted its potentialities. A tragic 
situation sets in also when certain rep- 
resentatives of the old social order 
realise the doom of their class, but 
cannot sever their ties with it and 
adopt the positions of a new class which 
has the future on its side. In life and 
art, the T. evokes in people’s hearts 
both grief and an aesthetic delight (see 
Catharsis), since the T. purifies man’s 
feelings and consciousness, ` fosters in 
him hatred for vile motives and steels 
his will and courage. The era of the 
socialist revolution and the building 
of a new society has given rise to new 
types of tragic contradiction and con- 
flict, whose heroes display revolu- 
tionary optimism and purposefulness, 
understand that communist society is 
inevitable, believe in the forces of 
the people and are ready to face the 
most difficult trials and even death for 
the triumph of communism. The trag- 
edy is a specific form of expression 
in art (for instance, Hamlet by Shake- 
speare, Boris Godunov by Pushkin, 
and the Optimistic Tragedy by Vsevo- 
lod Vishnevsky). 

Transcendent, a term denoting that 
which is beyond consciousness and cog- 
nition as opposed to the immanent 
(q.v.). This term is of vast importance 
in the philosophy of Kant (q.v.), who 
held that man’s knowledge is unable 
to penetrate into the T. world, the 
world of the “things-in-themselves” 
(q.v.). On the other hand, man’s behav- 


— 457 — 


Transcendental 


iour is dictated by the T. standards 
(free will, immortal soul, God). 
Transcendental, in scholasticism 
(q.v.), the transcendentalia are notions 
which apply to any being and mean the 
supercategorial. The T. definitions of 
being are broader in scope than the 
traditional categories of scholastic phi- 
losophy: form and matter, act and 
potentiality, etc.; they express the 
universal, supersensuous properties of 
being which are cognised through in- 
tuition, before any experience. Accord- 
ing to scholasticism, the three princi- 
pal transcendentals (there are six of 
them in all) denote: unity, the relation 
of being to itself, or the identity of 
being; truth, the comparison of being 
with the infinite spirit, or the appre- 
hension of being in divine reason; 
blessing, the comparison of being with 
the infinite will, or purposefulness of 
being determined by the divine will. 
Transcendentals were mentioned for 
the first time by Alexander of Hales 
(a 12th-13th century Franciscan scholas- 
tic and realist), Albert the Great (q.v.) 
and Thomas Aquinas (q.v.). The term 
T. was introduced later, in the 16th 
century. The development and recog- 
nition of the theory of transcendentals 
as the nucleus of scholastic metaphys- 
ics date back to a later period (16th-17th 
centuries). In recent times the theory 
has been criticised from the standpoint 
of nominalism (q.v.). Spinoza and 
Hobbes (qq.v.) called it “naive” and 
“senseless”, and Kant (q.v.) “sterile” 
and “tautological”. According to Kant, 
the only transcendental is knowledge 
which deals both with objects and 
the method of their a priori cognition. 
The knowable being, or the transcen- 
dent (q.v.) world of “things-in-them- 
selves”, as Kant postulated, lies be- 
yond the limits of experimental knowl - 
edge and for this reason is not reflected 
in the transcendental (logical) defini- 
tions. The modern scholastics hold 
that the theory of T. is independent 
of experience and the concrete sciences, 
and seek to prove the “eternal value” 
of metaphysics and the philosophical 
justification of the theological truths. 
By its objective content the theory 
of the transcendental definitions is but 


Transcendental Apperception 


an attempt to create a purely contem- 
plative, complete theory of being. 
Marxist philosophy does not use the 
term T. 

Transcendental Apperception, a term 
introduced by Kant, denoting a priori 
(q.v.), that is non-empirical, initial, 
pure, and invariable consciousness, 
which, he claimed, determines the 
unity of the world of phenomena, from 
which it receives its forms and laws. 
According to Kant, the unity of T.A. 
is the condition for the interrelation 
of human conceptions, their preserva- 
tion and reproduction; the identity 
“ego”, i.e., the fact that the thesis 
“I think” is included in any concep- 
tion, forms the basis of this unity. 
Basing himself on this idealistic pos- 
tulate of Kantianism, Fichte (q.v.) 
created his own system of subjective 
idealism. 

Transcendental Idealism, a term de- 
noting a special kind of philosophical 
idealism whose representatives were 
Kant (q.v.) and his followers. In scho- 
lastic philosophy it was used to desig- 
nate concepts which rise above all the 
thinkable categories (see Transcenden- 
tal). According to Kant, all idealism 
that preceded him developed the theory 
of being in a “dogmatic” way, that is, 
failed to investigate beforehand the 
conditions and the very possibility of 
unconditionally universal and uncon- 
ditionally necessary truths. Kant held 
that theoretical philosophy (“metaphys- 
ics”) should explain how these truths 
are possible in science and whether 
they are possible in philosophy. In his 
opinion, explanations of this kind are 
supplied by transcendental idealism 
(also known as “critical”), which tries 
to prove that the a priori forms of con- 
sciousness are the condition for such 
truths and studies the possibility of 
applying these forms both within the 
framework of experience and beyond it. 
In accordance with this approach, a 
number of theories enunciated in Kant’s 
Critique of Pure Reason has been called 
transcendental (e.g., transcendental aes- 
thetics, transcendental logic). 

Transcendentalists, a group of the 
US idealist philosophers and writers 
who set up the so-called Transcendental 


— 458 — 


Transition to Quality 





Club in Boston in 1836. In 1840-44, T. 
published their official organ The Dial. 
This group included Emerson (q.v.), 
George Ripley (1802-80), Margaret Ful- 
ler (1810-50), Thoreau (q.v.), and oth- 
ers. Although the members of this 
group called themselves T. (thus re- 
vealing their connection with the phi- 
losophy of Kant, q.v., and Schelling, 
q.v.), their world outlook was in- 
fluenced mainly by the ideas of Plato 
(q.v.), the Lake poets in England (Sam- 
uel Coleridge and William Words- 
worth), and also of Carlyle (q.v.) and 
Rousseau (q.v.). The club members 
were chiefly petty-bourgeois intellec- 
tuals. They criticised capitalism from 
the standpoint of romanticism and a 
petty-bourgeois ideology for its bru- 
tality and called upon people to per- 
fect themselves morally and draw near- 
er to nature. Many of the T. opposed 
slavery in the USA. In 1841, George 
Ripley set up a colony based on the 
teaching of Fourier (q.v.), known as 
Brook Farm; it existed till 1847. 
Transcensus, the passage from the 
subjective to the objective, from the 
sphere of consciousness to the sphere 
of the objective world effected in the 
course of human practice, but prohi- 
bited or restricted by the subjective 
idealists and agnostics. According to 
Kant, T. can be achieved only by faith, 
and not by knowledge. Hume denied 
T. in general. As Lenin noted, the very 
idea of T. taken to mean that there 
is a boundary in principle between the 
appearance and the “thing-in-itself”, 
is a nonsensical idea of the agnostics. 
Transformism, a conception of 
changes occurring in plant and animal 
organisms. T., however, does not recog- 
nise continuity and progressive develop- 
ment in the organic world. The term T. 
is sometimes used as a synonym to 
the theory of evolution (q.v.). 
Transition from Quantity to Quali- 
ty, one of the basic laws of dialectics, 
explaining how and in what condition 
motion and development take place. 
This universal objective law of develop- 
ment states that the accumulation of 
imperceptible, gradual quantitative 
changes leads of necessity at a definite 
moment for each process to radical 


Transition to Quality 


changes of quality, to a leap-like transi- 
tion from the old to a new quality (see 
Quality and Quantity, Measure, Leap). 
This law holds true in all processes of 
development in nature, society, and 
thought. Quantitative and qualitative 
changes are interconnected and inter- 
dependent: there is not only transition 
from quantity to quality, but also an 
opposite process—change of quantitative 
indications as a result of a change in 
the quality of objects and phenomena. 
Thus, the transition from capitalism to 
socialism involved a considerable change 
in quantitative indications: acceler- 
ation of economic and cultural develop- 
ment, growth of national income and 
workers’ wages, etc. Quantitative and 
qualitative changes are relative. A 
change may be qualitative in respect 
to some (less general) properties, and 
only quantitative in respect to other 
(more general) properties. Thus, the 
transition from the pre-monopolistic 
to the monopolistic stage of capitalism 
is not an absolute change of quality: 
the quality of capitalism changed only 
in the sense that certain new essential 
features and properties have appeared, 
but its essence remains unchanged. Any 
process of development is at the same 
time both continuous and discontin- 
uous. Discontinuity appears in the 
form of a qualitative leap, and contin- 
uity in the form of a quantitative 
change (see Evolution and Revolu- 
tion). Such a conception of development 
is diametrically opposed to the meta- 
physical view, which one-sidedly sets 
off evolution against leaps originating 
from no one knows where. Marxism 
has proved the unscientific character 
of the views of the revisionists and 
those sociologists who reduce the de- 
velopment of society to slow evolution 
and minor reforms, deny leaps and 
revolutions, and of the anarchists and 
Left-wing adventurists who disregard 
the long and painstaking work of ac- 
cumulating strength and preparing the 
masses for decisive revolutionary ac- 
tions. The dialectical materialist un- 
derstanding of the law of transition 
from quantity to quality is in direct 
opposition to that of idealism. Hegel, 
who was the first to formulate this law, 


SS ae 


— 459 —Transmutation of Chemical Elements 


mystified it like other laws of dialec- 
tics. In his teaching the categories of 
quantity and quality and their mutual 
passages initially appeared in an ab- 
stract form—in the absolute idea—and 
only later in nature. Marxist philosophy 
considers this law not as a prerequisite 
for constructing the world, but as a 
result of the study of nature, as the 
reflection of what happens in reality. 
Being a most important law of the 
objective world, it is also a vastly im- 
portant principle for knowing the 
world and consciously transforming it 
in practice. In changed conditions 
of social development the laws of dia- 
lectics are revealed in a specific form. 
Thus, under socialism the passage 
from quantity to quality (leaps) does 
not take the form of political revolu- 
tions; social changes here take place 
gradually through the dying away of 
the old and the emergence of elements 
of the new. This is the basic law of 
the growth of socialism into commu- 
nism. 

Transmutation of Chemical Elements, 
the transformation of one kind of atoms 
into another (for example, uranium 
atoms into lead atoms, etc.). The idea 
of the possibility of the mutual trans- 
mutations of elements was expressed 
by ancient Chinese and Indian philos- 
ophers, by Plato, Aristotle (qq.v.), 
and others. Such ideas were, in essence, 
the outcome of conjectures concerning 
the profound internal unity of matter, 
its variability, although often cloaked 
in an idealistic form. The belief in 
the philosopher’s stone (q.v.) was based 
on these ideas. When the chemical 
elements came to be connected with 
certain kinds of atoms (Dalton, q.v.), 
which were considered to be indivisible 
and immutable, independent of one 
another, the idea of the transformation 
of elements was put aside for a long 
time. Metaphysical views of the eter- 
nal, immutable, and simplest ele- 
ments of matter—“the bricks of the 
Universe”—came to predominate. Men- 
deleyev's periodical system of elements 
played an important role in paving the 
way for the idea of the T.C.E. How- 
ever, this idea received a firm scientific 
foundation and practical application 











Trendelenburg 


only with the discovery of radio- 
activity, the complex structure of 
the atom (q.v.) and the atomic 
nucleus (q.v.), and nuclear reactions. 
T.C.E. confirms the tenet of dialecti- 
cal materialism on the development of 
matter, the unity and mutability of 
its various forms, and shows the in- 
solvency of the metaphysical views 
on the existence of eternal and immu- 
table primary elements in nature. 

Trendelenburg, Friedrich Adolf 
(1802-72), German metaphysician, pro- 
fessor of Berlin University, opponent 
of Hegel. The rational kernel of his 
criticism of Hegel (q.v.) was his striv- 
ing to show that Hegel tacitly used the 
concept of the external world in deduc- 
ing his categories, and only because of 
this can these categories be considered 
as having imaginary independence, 
insofar as they are isolated from the 
material world. But having revealed 
the illusiveness of the dialectical transi- 
tions in a purely idealistic understand- 
ing, T. proved to be anti-dialectic in 
principle. In actual fact he was an eclec- 
tic, an adherent of teleology (q.v.). T. 
was a prominent connoisseur of Aristotle 
and translator of his works. His 
main work: Logische Untersuchungen 
(1840). 

Triad, trinity, three-phase develop- 
ment. The concept T. was introduced by 
the Neo-Platonists (q.v.), in particu- 
lar Proclus (q.v.). It was widely used 
by German classical philosophers, in- 
cluding Hegel (q.v.). According to 
Hegel, every process of development 
passes through three phases: thesis, 
antithesis, and synthesis. Every next 
phase denies the previous one, turning 
into its opposite, while synthesis not 
only denies antithesis but also com- 
bines in a new way certain features of 
both previous phases of development. 
In its turn synthesis begins a new T., 
and so on. T. reflects one of the pe- 
culiarities of development, in which 
the original starting point is reached 
again, but on a higher plane owing 
to the experience accumulated. Hegel 
made an absolute of T. and, contrary 
to his own statements, transformed it 
into an artificial scheme imposed on 
reality, a formal method of building a 


— 460 — 


Tropes 


philosophical system, a scheme of 
the three-phased development of the 
concept. Marxist philosophy applies 
the rational content of T. to character- 
ise the process of development (see 
Negation of the Negation, Law of). 
Tribe, a form of human community 
peculiar to the primitive-communal 
system. The foundation of T. is formed 
by the gentile relations, resulting in the 
tribes’ territorial, linguistic, and cul- 
tural disunity. Only the individual’s 
attachment to a T. made him co-owner 
of the common property, gave him a 
definite share of the produce, and the 
right to participate in social life. The 
replacement of gentile relations by 
commodity-exchange relations led to 
the disintegration of the tribes and 
united them in nationalities. 
Tropes, principles with the aid of 
which the ancient sceptics (see Scep- 
ticism) formulated the impossibility of 
attaining objective knowledge of what 
exists. It was Aenisidemus (q.v.) who 
gave the greatest number of T. in the 
most consistent form. The first four 
T. deny the possibility of attaining 
knowledge of things on the strength 
of the fluidity, indefiniteness, and 
contradictoriness of man’s sensuous 
perception. Four other T. proceed from 
the state of the object. The ninth T. 
generalises all the other eight T., since 
it deals with the relativity of perception 
in connection with the infinite variety 
of relations between the perceiver 
and the perceived. The tenth T., un- 
connected with the previous nine T., 
deals with the impossibility of acquir- 
ing objective knowledge owing to the 
variety of people’s opinions, moods, 
actions, intentions, etc. (for instance, 
some people have their own laws, other 
people have different laws; some peo- 
ple hold that the soul is immortal, 
others that it is mortal). The falseness 
of all T. is seen from the following: 
in order to affirm the relativity of 
cognition of objects, one must have 
an idea of the autonomous and inde- 
pendent existence of those objects; 
that is, if a sceptic does not know what 
is the independent object, he can neither 
prove the relativity of cognition of 
them nor even know of their existence. 


Trubetskoi 


Trubetskoi, Sergei Nikolayevich 
(1862-1905), Russian idealist philoso- 
pher, graduate of Moscow University, 
professor of that university. In 1900-05 
was editor of the journal Problemy 
Filosofii i Psikhologii. In 1905, he was 
elected Rector of Moscow University. 
T.’s world outlook was formed under 
the influence of German classical phi- 
losophy and the views of Vladimir 
Solovyov (q.v.). According to T., a 
true world outlook can be built only 
on the basis of the absolute, which is 
to be understood as “a universally 
united concrete being”. This ideal 
being reveals itself both as an auto- 
nomous existing entity and as “voli- 
tive” subject, engendering all the mul- 
tiplicity of empirical things. Space, 
time, necessity are other forms of the 
other being of this absolute. T. called 
his views “concrete idealism”. Cognition 
of being proceeds in empirical (scienti- 
fic) and speculative philosophical forms. 
Faith is also a source of knowledge. 
T.’s “concrete idealism” is closely 
telated with the recognition of God as 
“infinite love” and the idea of unifica- 
tion of people in the fold of the church, 
A member of the Zemstvo liberal move- 
ment of Russia, T. advocated the 
system of representative organs of 
power, the autonomy of universities. 
At the same time he was a staunch 
supporter of monarchy, an opponent 
of socialism and revolutionary methods 
of struggle. His main works are: O 
prirode chelovecheskogo soznaniya (The 
Nature of Human Consciousness), 1890; 
Osnovaniya idealizma (Principles of 
{dealism), 1896; Ucheniye o logose v ego 
istorii (The Theory of Logos and Its 
History), 1900. He was also the author 
of a number of works on the history 
of ancient philosophy. 

“True Socialism”, a variety of petty- 
bourgeois socialism which arose in 
Germany in the mid-1840s (K. Griin, 
M. Hess, H. Kriege, O. Liining, and 
H. Püttmann). The philosophical views 
of the “true Socialists?” were an eclec- 
tic combination of the ideas of French 
and English utopian socialists and 
Young Hegelians with Feuerbach’s eth- 
ics. “True Socialists” considered so- 
cialism as à supra-class theory, declar- 


— 461 — 


Fey Sey TEE 


Truth, Absolute and Relative 


ing it to be the realisation of some kind 
of general human essence. They denied 
the class struggle, preached reconcilia- 
tion of social contradictions, non-partic- 
ipation in politics and in the struggle 
for bourgeois democratic freedoms, and 
urged the proletariat not to take part 
in political revolutions. Marx and 
Engels resolutely fought against the 
ideology of “T.S.” and its influence on 
the working-class movement. In their 
works The German Ideology, A Circular 
Against Kriege, German Socialism in 
Poetry and Prose and Manifesto of the 
Communist Party they criticised “T.S.", 
demonstrating the reactionary role it 
played during the period when the 
revolution was maturing in Germany. 
Under the influence of Marx and Engels 
a number of “true Socialists” (Weyde- 
meyer, Dronke, and others) broke with 
their old views. During the 1848 revo- 
lution many “true Socialists” discarded 
their pseudo-socialist phraseology and 
joined the ranks of petty-bourgeois dem- 
ocrats. Some ideas of “T.S.” are now 
utilised to falsify Marxism in a spirit 
of idealist ethics. 

Truth, the true, correct reflection of 
reality in thought, which is ultimately 
verified by the criterion of practice. 
The characteristic of truth is applied 
to thoughts and not to things them- 
selves or the means of their linguistic 
expression. Marxism was the first to 
provide a materialist basis for the un- 
derstanding of T. and to indicate new 
dialectical aspects of its study (see 
Truth, Objective; Truth, Absolute and 
Relative; Truth, Concrete; Criterion 
of Truth). 

Truth, Absolute and Relative, cat- 
egories of dialectical materialism that 
define the development of knowledge 
and the relation that is revealed between 
(1) that which is known and that 
which will become known as science, 
develops; (2) that part of our knowledge 
which may be changed, made more 
precise or refuted as science develops, 
and that which is irrefutable. The 
theory of A. & R.T. provides the an- 
swer to the question “Can human ideas 
which give expression to objective 
truth, express it all at one time, as a 
whole, unconditionally, absolutely, or 











Truth, Absolute and Relative 


only approximately, relatively?” 
(Lenin, Vol. 14, pp. 122-23). A.T. is 
understood (t) as complete, exhaustive 
knowledge of reality and (2) as knowl- 
edge which will not be refuted in the 
future. At every stage of development 
our knowledge is conditioned by the 
level achieved in science, technology 
and production. As knowledge and 
practice (experience) develop, man’s 
conception of nature is deepened, per- 
fected and made more exact. Scien- 
tific truths, therefore, are relative in the 
sense that they do not give complete, 
exhaustive knowledge of the subjects 
being studied and contain elements that 
will be changed and made more exact 
and profound as knowledge develops or 
will be replaced by others. At the same 
time every R.T. is a step forward in 
the cognition of A.T. and will contain, 
if it is truly scientific, elements or 
grains of A.T. There is no impassable 
barrier between A.T. and R.T. A.T. 
is composed of the totality of R.Tt. 
The history of science and social ex- 
perience confirm that knowledge de- 
velops in this dialectic way. As scien- 
tific knowledge develops the properties 
of objects and relations between them 
become known more fully and pro- 
foundly and we draw nearer to A.T., 
which is confirmed by the application 
of theory in practice. On the other 
hand, theories that have been elaborat- 
ed are constantly being developed 
and made more exact; some hypothe- 
ses are refuted (e.g., the hypothesis of 
the existence of the ether), others are 
confirmed and become proved truths 
(e.g., the hypothesis of the existence 
of the atom); some conceptions are 
excluded from science (e.g., thermo- 
gen and phlogiston), others are made 
more exact and summarised (cf. the 
concepts of simultaneity, q.v., and 
inertia in classical mechanics and in 
the theory of relativity), etc. The the- 
ory of A. & R.T. is given concrete form 
in science in the principle of corre- 
spondence (q.v.). This principle is op- 
posed to metaphysics, which declares 
every truth to be eternal and immuta- 
ble (“absolute”), and to the various 
idealist conceptions of relativism which 
maintain that all truth is only relative 


— 462 — 


Truth in Formalised Languages 


and that the development of science is 
only evidence of a series of errors that 
replace each other in sequence so that 
there cannot be any objective truth. 
Actually, to use Lenin’s words, “Every 
ideology is historically conditional, 
but it is unconditionally true that to 
every scientific ideology (as distinct, for 
instance, from religious ideology) there 
corresponds an objective truth, abso- 
lute nature”. (Vol. 14, p. 136.) 
Truth in Formalised Languages, a 
basic concept of logical semantics which 
specifies the Aristotelian concept of 
truth as applied to propositions in 
formalised languages (q.v.). Attempts 
to define the concepts of a “true prop- 
osition” in a spoken language inevi- 
tably leads to antinomies of the type 
of “liar” (see Antinomies, Semantic). 
The first strict and non-contradictory 
definition of the concept “true propo- 
sition” was obtained by Tarski in 
1931 for a language of calculus classes 
with the help of the concept of decida- 
bility in a specially constructed me- 
talanguage in the following form: state- 
ment X is true if and only if it is 
decidable by all subjects (by all classes 
in a language of calculus classes) and 
is false if there are no objects which 
decide it. Tarski showed that a for- 
mally exact definition of the concept 
of a true proposition in a particular 
language L can be given only in some 
metalanguage ML; ML must be logi- 
cally richer than L, that is, it must 
contain language L as a part of itself 
and, moreover, ML must have expres- 
sions of higher logical types (see Types, 
Theory of) than language L. This con- 
dition is definitely not decided if L 
is a natural language without any 
restrictions. A substantial result of 
these studies was the establishment 
of the non-coincidence of classes of 
true and demonstrable propositions of 
a language of calculus classes (and 
other logically richer classes): every 
demonstrable proposition is true, but 
not every true proposition is demon- 
strable. The existence of true non- 
demonstrable propositions in a for- 
malised language is proof of its incom- 
pleteness and non-contradiction (see 
Logical Synthax; Axiomatic Theory, 





Truth, Objective — 463 — Types 


Completeness and Non-Contradiction 
of). There are also other methods of 
defining the concept of truth in for- 
malised languages (McKinsey, Carnap, 
Martin). 

Truth, Objective, content of human 
knowledge which does not depend on 
the will and desire of the subject. 
Truth is not constructed by the will 
or desire of people, but is determined 
by the content of the object reflected 
and this is what determines its objectiv- 
ity. The doctrine of O. T. is directed 
against all possible subjective idealist 
conceptions of truth, according to which 
truth is constructed by man and is a 
result of conventions between people. 
Such understanding of truth is un- 
scientific and reactionary, inasmuch as 
it allows all kinds of superstitions, 
religious beliefs, etc., to be regarded as 
truth because they are shared by most 
people. Contemporary idealist philos- 
ophy opposes the objectivity of truth. 
This leads to a subjective approach 
to scientific knowledge, thereby un- 
dermining and discrediting science. 
Pragmatism (q.v.), for example, holds 
that a proposition is true if its accept- 
ance ensures success in life; neo-posi- 
tivism declares mathematical and logi- 
cal truths to be conventions (see Con- 
ventionalism). 

Truth, Relative, see Truth, Absolute 
and Relative. 

Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques (1727- 
81), French economist, sociologist, 
statesman. He shared the materialist 
views of Holbach, Diderot and Hel- 
vétius (qq.v.). In his philosophico- 
historical studies he advocated the 
idea that society’s progress is closely 
related with the development of the 
forms of economic life. He recognised 
the importance of economic growth, 
the progress of science and technology 
in the interests of social development. 
He joined the economic school of the 
physiocrats, who in contrast to mer- 
cantilists held that the “produit net”, 
i.e., surplus value, is created in the 
sphere of production, not in the sphere 
of circulation. T. advanced some ideas 
about the class division of society 
and the essence of wages. He ap- 
proached the scientific definition of the 


class. His main work was Réflexions 
sur la formation et la distribution des 
richesses (1776). 

_ Turing, Alan (1912-54), English log- 
ician and mathematician. In 1937, he 
suggested a definition of an abstract 
computer (“the Turing Machine”), 
with the aid of which it would be possi- 
ble in principle to perform any calcu- 
lation or logical process according to 
an exactly formulated instruction. “The 
Turing Machine” was one of the first 
exact conceptions of the algorithm 
(q.v.), anticipating a number of fea- 
tures common to the universal numerical 
computers that came into existence lat- 
er. T. was the first to emphasise the 
importance of creating teaching ma- 
chines, i.e., machines which could 
accumulate the necessary experience 
and improve their behaviour in the 
process of interaction with the environ- 
ment. 

Twofold Truth, the term denoting 
the mutual independence of the truths 
of philosophy and theology. The theory 
appeared in the Middle Ages, when 
science strove to shake off the trammels 
of religion. The notion of T.T. was set 
out most clearly in Arab philosophy. 
Ibn-Roshd (q.v.) believed that philos- 
ophy contained truths unacceptable 
to theology, and vice versa. The idea 
of T.T. was propounded by exponents 
of Averroism (q.v.) and nominalism 
(q.v.), such as Duns Scotus, William 
of Occam (qq.v.), and by Pietro Pom- 
ponazzi (q.v.) at the time of the Renais- 
sance, etc. At present the T.T. doc- 
trine is employed by theologians and 
reactionary philosophers to defend reli- 
gion and to combat the scientifi¢ mate- 
rialist world outlook. 

Types, Theory of (the Hierarchy of 
Types), a method of building forma} 
(mathematical) logic, by which a 
distinction is made between objects of 
various levels (types); it aims at exclud- 
ing paradoxes (q.v.) or antinomies 
(q.v.) from logic and the theory of num- 
bers. Ernst Schröder was the first to 
develop T.T. and to apply it to the 
logic of classes (1890). In 1908-10, 
B. Russell built a detailed system of T.T. 
and applied it to the calculus of predi- 
cates. It is based on distinction ac- 

















Typification in the Arts — 464 — Typification in the Arts 


cording to types between: individuals 
(type 1), properties (type 2), the prop- 
erties of properties (type 3), etc. 
He also introduced the division of types 
into orders. T.T. is but one of the meth- 
ods of removing antinomies from con- 
structions in the theory of plurality 
and formal logic. 

Typification in the Arts, an artistic 
method of penetrating into the essence 
of things and phenomena; a method 
of reproducing human life, thoughts 
and feelings in the form of vivid artis- 
tic images. T. is a complex process 
which represents the mutually penetrat- 
ing unity of two antithetical aspects of 
creative work: artistic generalisation 
and individualisation (q.v.) of objec- 
tive content. In conformity with his 
ideological design and the peculiari- 


ties of his poetical nature the artist 
processes this content, imparts to it 
a lively and original emotional form 
which gives man high aesthetical enjoy- 
ment. In order to create a typical image, 
the artist must truthfully portray the 
typical phenomena of life and reveal 
the essence of processes and contradic- 
tions underlying social development. 
To this end he studies life, selects and 
picks out the most characteristic fea- 
tures—the conduct, habits, tastes, out- 
ward features which are common to 
a certain group of people. With the 
aid of creative imagination he 
embodies his generalisations in original 
characters acting in peculiar circum- 
stances. Artistic types are capable of 
great ideological and emotional 
influence. 





Ugly, The, an aesthetic category 
denoting phenomena inimical to the 
beautiful (q.v.), and man’s negative 
attitude to these phenomena. In so- 
ciety ugliness, as opposed to beauty, 
is the result of social conditions that 
are inimical to the free manifestation 
and flowering of man’s vital energy, 
its restricted and grotesquely one- 
sided development and the consequent 
collapse of the aesthetic ideal. In true 
art the portrayal of what is aestheti- 
cally ugly is one way of asserting the 
ideal of beauty. 

Umov, Nikolai Alexeyevich (1846- 
1915), Russian physicist, professor of 
Moscow University; in 1911, resigned 
from the university with other pro- 
gressive scientists in protest against 
the actions of the tsarist government. 
U. studied problems of theoretical 
and experimental physics, first in- 
troduced the concept of the energy 
flow (the Umov-Pointing Vector). He 
was a mechanistic materialist, and 
Descartes (q.v.) was his ideal in phi- 
losophy. Although the break-up of the 
concepts of classical physics struck 
a strong blow at a number of Cartesian 
principles, U. remained loyal to ma- 
terialism and opposed relativism (q.v.) 
and physical idealism (q.v.). A splen- 
did organiser, populariser of science, 
and teacher, U. played a big part in 
founding the Russian materialist school 
of physicists. 

The Uncertainty Principle, a prop- 
osition of quantum mechanics for- 
mulated by W. Heisenberg (q.v.) in 
1927, according to which it is impos- 
sible to specify or determine simul- 
taneously both the position and ve- 
locity of a particle as accurately as is 
wished. The U.P. is expressed in terms 


30-1682 


ue we, Ah he eo 
à (3 F, 


of the quantitative correlations be- 
tween the so-called uncertainties of 
conjugate variables: position and mo- 
mentum, and also time and energy. 
The less uncertain a particle’s position 
is, the more uncertain is its momentum, 
and vice versa. A similar correlation 
obtains between the measurement of 
the momentum of time and that of a 
particle’s energy. The U.P. is an ob- 
jective characteristic of the phenomena 
of the microcosm associated with their 
wave-corpuscular nature; uncertain- 
ties are inherent in the real state of 
the microobject and do not limit 
cognition. Heisenberg and Bohr (qq.v.) 
deduced the U.P. from the action of 
the instrument determining a particle’s 
position upon its momentum (e.g., 
the action of an aperture in the dia- 
phragm, through which an electron 
asses, on the electron’s momentum) and 
rom the action of the instrument 
determining the particle’s momentum 
on its position in space. This is also 
true of the action of time-measuring 
instruments on the energy of a particle 
and of energy-measuring instruments 
on the possibility of an accurate de- 
termination of time. The U.P. prompt- 
ed certain philosophers to draw posi- 
tivist conclusions up to the point of 
negating the causality of states of an 
elementary particle and the objectiv- 
ity of the microcosm, its independ- 
ence of cognition (so-called instrument- 
al idealism; see Instrument). Material- 
ist criticism of such idealistic distor- 
tions of quantum mechanics was in- 
strumental in ascertaining its actual 
meaning. 

Unconscious 1. Qualifying an ac- 
tion, unconscious means performed 
automatically, by reflex, before the 

















Unity and Conflict 


reason for it has reached the conscious- 
ness, e.g., defensive reaction, etc., or 
when consciousness is naturally or 
artificially switched off (sleep, hyp- 
nosis, intoxication, sleep-walking, etc.). 
2. In idealist theories, a term for a 
special region of psychic activity in 
which are concentrated eternal and 
immutable desires, motives and as- 
pirations determined by the instincts 
and incomprehensible to consciousn- 
ess. The idealist doctrine of the U. 
was most fully developed in Freudism 
(q.v.), which divided the psyche into 
three layers—the unconscious, the sub- 
conscious, and the conscious. The U. 
is the deep foundation of the psyche 
and determines the whole conscious 
life of the individual and even of whole 
nations. Unconscious desires for pleas- 
ure and death (instinct of aggression) 
form the core of all emotions and 
emotional experiences. The subconscious 
is a special frontier zone between the con- 
scious and the unconscious. This zone 
is invaded by unconscious desires and 
here they are strictly censored by con- 
sciousness. Consciousness is a super- 
ficial manifestation of the psyche at 
the point of contact with the real 
world and it is largely dependent on mys- 
tical, unconscious forces. The U. figures 
in the theories of Herbart, Schopen- 
hauer (qq.v.), and other idealists as 
the mystical, unknowable basis of 
conscious action. 

Unity and Conflict of Opposites, 
Law of, a universal law of reality and 
its understanding by the human in- 
tellect, expressing the essence, the 
“core” of materialist dialectics. Every 
object contains opposites. By opposites 
dialectical materialism means ele- 
ments, “aspects”, etc., that (1) are in 
indissoluble unity, (2) are mutually 
exclusive, not only in different re- 
spects, but in one and the same re- 
spect, i.e., (3) interpenetrate each other. 
Their unity is relative, their conflict 
is absolute. The conflict of opposites 
means that the contradiction within 
the essence of an object is being per- 
petually resolved and just as perpet- 
ually reproduced, thus bringing about 
the transformation of the old into the 
new. The law of the U. and C. of O. 


— 466 — 


Unity and Conflict 


thus explains the objective inner “ori- 
gin” of all motion without calling in 
any external forces and allows us to 
understand motion as self-motion. It 
reveals the true, concrete unity of 
diversity as a concrete and not dead 
identity and enables us to conceive 
the concrete wholeness and develop- 
ment of an object “in the logic of con- 
cepts”. That is why this law forms 
the “core” of dialectics. It pinpoints 
the antithesis between dialectical and 
metaphysical thinking, which inter- 
prets the “origin” of motion merely 
as something different from, and ex- 
ternal to, motion itself, and unity 
as “alien” to diversity. Metaphysics 
leads one to substitute for motion 
and the concrete unity of diversity 
a mere description of the external 
results of motion and the aspects of 
an object compared purely externally. 
The history of dialectics is the history 
of the controversy surrounding these 
problems and the attempts to resolve 
them. The founder of the dialectics 
of contradictions was Heraclitus (q.v.). 
The Eleatics (Zeno, q.v.) converted 
contradiction into something purely 
subjective and reduced it to a means 
of denying motion and diversity 
(“negative dialectics”, aporia, q.v.). 
Plato (q.v.) attempted to achieve a 
synthesis. In the Renaissance the idea 
of the “coincidence of contraries” was 
developed by Nicholas of Cusa (q.v.) 
and Bruno (q.v.). Kant (q.v.) “elim- 
inated” antinomies only by separat- 
ing the subject from the object. At- 
tempts to overcome this split led to 
the idea of dialectical contradiction 
(see Fichte, Schelling and Hegel). 
Hegel did all that was possible towards 
solving the problem of contradiction 
within the framework of idealism. In 
modern idealist philosophy the char- 
acteristic tendencies are, on the one 
hand, to irrationalise contradiction 
as something insoluble, and, on the 
other hand, to attempt to dismiss 
this category altogether and replace 
it by terminological distinctions (var- 
ious positivist conceptions). Marxism 
has interpreted and defined the law 
of the U. and C. of O. “as a law of 
cognition (and a law of the objective 





4 
| 
t 
4 
jj 


Unity and Conflict — 467 — Unity and Diversity of the World 


world)” (Lenin). Materialist inter- 
pretation, based on the principle that 
dialectics, logic, and the theory of 
knowledge coincide, prevents the law 
being reduced to a “sum of exam- 
ples”. The objective universality of 
the law forms the foundation of its 
methodologicat functions in the proc- 
ess of cognition. This law also deter- 
mines the structure of scientific theory 
inasmuch as it reveals the dialectical 
division of unity. A classical example 
of this structure is found in Marx’s 
Capital, in which the solution of con- 
tradictions carries the investigation 
forward in accordance with the logic 
of the subject itself and provides a 
rational means of evolving new con- 
cepts. Dialectical contradiction in the 
process of cognition is not merely a 
matter of setting thesis and antithesis 
against each other; its purpose is to 
arrive at their solution. To understand 
dialectical contradiction means to un- 
derstand how it is resolved and the 
solution has nothing in common with 
removing formal logic’s confused con- 
tradictions in reasoning. The dialec- 
tical contradiction within a theory 
can be adequately formulated only in 
the process of ascending from the ab- 
stract to the concrete (see The Ab- 
stract and the Concrete). The full ex- 
position of a theory cannot, therefore, 
be confined within the framework 
of a single “system devoid of contra- 
dictions”. The process of development 
proceeds through the clash of external, 
relatively independent opposites. Dia- 
lectics regards external opposites not 
as primordially distinct essences but 
as the result of the division of unity, 
and ultimately as derivatives of in- 
ternal opposites. The Marxist doctrine 
of social development rests on the ap- 
plication of this law, on investigation 
of the contradictions in society; it 
forms the basis of the thesis of the 
class struggle as the motive force in 
the development of class society and 
draws upon this thesis for all its rev- 
olutionary conclusions. Socialism is 
the natural result of the development 
and solution by means of social revo- 
lution of the contradictions of capital- 
ism. There are various kinds of con- 


30° 


tradictions and various ways of re- 
solving them. Socialism also develops 
by means of contradictions, but these 
contradictions are of a specific nature: 
(see Antagonistic and Non-Antagonis- 
tic Contradictions). The category of 
dialectical contradiction is important 
from the point of view of method 
in modern natural science, which 
is more and more often confronted 
with the contradictory nature of 
objects. 

Unity and Diversity of the World 
The unity of the world lies in its 
materiality, in the fact that all things 
and all phenomena are various forms 
or attributes of matter in motion. 
There is nothing in the whole world 
that is not a concrete form of matter, 
or the manifestation of its qualities 
and interrelations. The unity of the 
world is expressed in the universal 
connection of phenomena (q.v.) and 
objects, in the fact that all forms of 
matter possess such universal attributes 
as motion, space, time, the ability 
to develop, etc., in the existence of 
universal dialectical laws of being, 
operating at all levels in the structural 
organisation of matter. But the unity 
of the world should not be understood 
as uniformity of structure, as the sim- 
ple endless repetition of what already 
exists and the subordination of every- 
thing to identical specific laws. In 
nature there is an infinite number 
of qualitatively different levels in the 
structural organisation of matter, at 
each of which matter possesses different 
properties and structure and is subject 
to different specific laws of motion. 
We now know several of these levels, 
which correspond to different scales: 
atomic nuclei and elementary particles, 
atoms and molecules, macroscopic bod- 
ies, cosmic systems of various orders. 
The quantitative and qualitative di- 
versity of natural phenomena presents 
no insuperable barrier to acquiring 
authentic knowledge of them. Proceed- 
ing from the unity of natural phenom- 
ena and the universal qualities and 
laws of material motion, the human 
mind discovers in every finite phenom- 
enon elements of the infinite, and in 
the transient, aspects of the eternal. 








Universal 


— 468 — 


Universal Significance 





Universal, see Individual, Particu- 
lar, Universal. 

Universal Connection of Phenomena, 
the most general law governing the 
existence of the world; the result of 
the universal interaction (q.v.) of all 
things and phenomena. It expresses 
the inherent underlying structural iden- 
tity of all elements and properties in 
every integral system and the infinite 
multiformity of connections and rela- 
tions between all systems or phenome- 
na. The universal interaction of bodies 
determines the existence of specific 
material objects and all their specific 
properties and features. U.C.P. is 
infinite in its manifestations. It in- 
cludes all the relations existing be- 
tween particular properties of bodies 
and between particular natural phe- 
nomena expressed in specific laws and 
also the relations between the univer- 
sal properties of matter and the trends 
of development governed by the uni- 
versal dialectical laws of being. Every 
law (q.v.) is, therefore, a specific ex- 
pression of the U.C.P. Without U.C.P. 
the world would be a chaotic agglom- 
eration of phenomena rather than 
the integral, law-governed process of 
motion that it is. The connections 
between objects and phenomena may 
be mediate or immediate, permanent 
or temporary, essential or unessential, 
mecessary or accidental, functional or 
non-functional (see Functional Depend- 
ence), etc. U.C.P. is closely related 
to causality (q.v.). However, cause 
and effect as such are conceivable 
solely in isolation from the universal 
connection between the one or more 
phenomena concerned and other phe- 
nomena. If considered in their con- 
nection with the whole, cause and 
effect pass one into the other and be- 
come universal connection and inter- 
action, Reverse connection (q.v.) is a 
particular case of interaction in all 
self-regulating systems. Connections 
between phenomena are not to be 
reduced to the merely physical inter- 
action of bodies. There also exist in- 
calculably more complex biological and 
social relations, governed by their 
own specific laws. The development 
of matter and the conversion to more 


highly organised forms produces more 
complex types of interaction between 
bodies, creating qualitatively new mo- 
tion. This also applies to the develop- 
ment of human society, where progress 
in the mode of production and the de- 
velopment of civilisation result in 
more complex relations between in- 
dividuals and between states, produc- 
ing a growing multiformity of politi- 
cal, economic, ideological and other 
relations. The concept of U.C.P. has 
great cognitive significance. Cognition 
of the objective world is possible 
only through the investigation of the 
causa] and other connections between 
phenomena, and through the identi- 
fication of the more essential connec- 
tions, relations, etc. Cognition proceeds 
through motion of thought from re- 
flection of the less profound and less 
general connections to the determina- 
tion of more profound and more gen- 
eral connections and relations be- 
tween phenomena and processes. The 
structure and classification of the sci- 
ences is a reflection of U.C.P. This 
explains why the connections and re- 
lations between sciences become con- 
tinuously closer, keeping pace with 
the progress of scientific cognition. 
“Marginal” sciences appear, which 
connect formerly remote fields of knowl- 
edge (e.g., biochemistry, astrophys- 
ics, etc.). 


Universal Significance, a determinant 
of the truth-value of human know- 
ledge in subjective idealist philosophy. 
The propositions concerning U.S., “so- 
cially organised experience” merely 
disguise the conclusion of solipsism 
(q.v.) which follows from the subjec- 
tive idealist premises. The proposi- 
tions concerning U.S. as the criterion 
of truth are insolvent. (Lenin, Vol. 
14, pp. 122-26.) Not everything of 
universal significance is true. For 
example, notwithstanding the recog- 
nition of religious dogmas by believ- 
ers they are false. On the other hand, 
everything true sooner or later be- 
comes universally significant. U.S. 
is merely one of the consequences of 
the truth of knowledge and not a cri- 
terion of truth. 





Universals 


Universals, the name given to general 
ideas in medieval philosophy. The 
dispute about U. centred on whether 
they are objective, real or merely 
names of things; whether, on the one 
hand, they exist “before things”, ide- 
ally, as held by extreme realism (q.v.) 
and Erigena (q.v.) or “in things” as 
held by moderate realism and Thomas 
Aquinas (q.v.); or, on the other hand, 
whether they exist only in the mind 
“after things”, in the form of mental 
constructions, as professed by concep- 
tualism (q.v.) or are even mere words 
as held by extreme nominalism (q.v.), 
Roscellin (q.v.), and William of Oc- 
cam (q.v.). 

Universe, all surrounding nature, 
infinite in time and space, embracing 
the endless multiplicity of qualita- 
tively different forms of matter. Modern 
means of investigation (with a range 
of up to 3,000 million light years) 
show that matter is irregularly dis- 
tributed in the U. They disclose the 
existence of different integral systems 
—planets, stars, galaxies (q.v.) and 
clusters of galaxies. No specific law 
governing the existence er structural 
organisation of matter is applicable 
to the whole U. because matter is qual- 
itatively infinite and its laws are 
heterogeneous in respect of space- 
time relations (see Astronomy; Cos- 
mology). 

Upanishads, ancient Indian reli- 
gious and philosophical commentaries 
on the Vedas (q.v.), compiled over 
many centuries. The oldest U. date 
back to the 10th-6th centuries B.C. 
The U. invest the vedic gods and rites 
with new philosophical content. They 
are interpreted as the allegorical por- 
trayal of man and the Universe. Belief 
in the reincarnation of the soul receives 
a moral foundation. U. raises the ques- 
tion of what is supreme reality, the 


— 469 — 


Utilitarianism 


knowledge of which gives knowledge 
of everything. The answer is idealistic: 
that from which everything existing 
is born, in which it lives after birth, 
and to which it returns after death is 
brahma, the creative principle of the 
Universe; brahma is identical with 
the spiritual essence of man, atman. 
To rid himself of the cycle of new 
births on earth, man, according to 
the U., must dedicate himself to con- 
templation of the unity of his souk 
with brahma. The U. also provide 
an idea of the materialist doctrines 
they opposed. Those doctrines held 
that one of the material elements— 
water, fire, air, light, space or time— 
was the primary foundation of the 
world and denied the existence of the 
soul after man’s death. Commentaries. 
on the U. written by Badarayana and 
later Samkara (8th century) became 
the foundation of the Vedanta (q.v.). 

Utilitarianism, a bourgeois ethical 
theory which considers the useful- 
ness of an action as the criterion of its 
morality. It was founded by Bentham 
(q.v.), who formulated its basic prin- 
ciple as the “greatest happiness of 
the greatest number” by satisfaction 
of their individual interests. The mor- 
ality of an action can be mathematic- 
ally calculated as the balance of the 
pleasure and suffering resulting from 
it. John Stuart Mill (q.v.) introduced 
into U. the principle of qualitative 
assessment of pleasures and the de- 
mand that mental pleasures be pre- 
ferred to physical ones. U. also un- 
derlies the understanding of the func- 
tions of state and law. The applica- 
tion of the principle of utility to the 
theory of knowledge gave rise to prag- 
matism (q.v.). In contemporary bour- 
geois ethics, U. is replaced by an “analy- 
sis of ethical statements”. (See Emo- 
tivism; Logical Positivism in Ethics). 








V 


Vairasse, Denis, author of the novel 
Histoire des sevarambes (1677-79), the 
first work in French literature propa- 
gating the ideas of utopian socialism 
(q.v.). The main character in the novel 
is Sevrais, legislator of the Sevaram- 
bes, who considers that pride, greed, 
and sloth are the cause of social evils 
and abolishes all privileges of birth. 
He also abolishes private property 
and decrees that the land and all its 
riches belong to the people, labour 
being compulsory for all except the 
old and the sick. The description of 
society before Sevrais’ reforms makes 
V. a forerunner of the theorists of 
natural law and the utopian socialists 
of the 18th century. The reformed 
land of Sevarambie is divided on the 
production principle into urban and 
rural osmasies, in which children are 
given an education combining general 
and vocational subjects. The Sevar- 
ambes elect their monarch, whose 
power is restricted by elected bodies, 
and the Sun is worshipped as the su- 
preme ruler and divinity. The novel 
became widely known and gave rise 
to many imitations. 

Vaiseshika (Skr.—viSesa, particu- 
larity), a system of ancient Indian phi- 
losophy, first expounded by Kanāda 
{Vaiseshika-Sitra, 3rd century B.C.). 
Considerably developed in the work 
of Pragastapada (4th century A.D.) 
known as the Paddrtha-Dharma-San- 
graha. V. displays strong materialist 
tendencies. Everything that exists is 
divided into seven categories: substance, 
quality, action, universality, par- 
ticularity, inherence, and non-existence. 
The first three exist in reality. The next 
three are logical categories, products of 
mental activity, an important role 


in cognition being played by the cat- 
egory of “particularity”, which ex- 
presses the real variety of substances. 
The world consists of substances pos- 
sessing quality and action. Of these 
there are nine: earth, water, light, 
air, ether, time, space, soul, and mind. 
All material objects are formed of 
atoms of the first four substances. 
Atoms are eternal, indivisible, and 
invisible. They have no extent, but 
in combination with other atoms they 
make up all bodies that are extensive. 
The combination of atoms is guided 
by the world soul. Owing to the per- 
petual motion of the atoms the world, 
which exists in time, space, and ether, 
is periodically created and destroyed. 
Atoms may be divided according to 
quality into four types, depending on 
their origin, and may give rise to four 
types of sensation: touch, taste, sight, 
and smell. The epistemology of V. is 
similar to that of Nyaya (q.v.) and 
distinguishes four types of true and 
four types of false knowledge. The 
truth is arrived at through perception, 
deduction, memory, and intuition. 
Value, Singular, a strictly definite, 
single meaning which ensures accu- 
racy of a conclusion or prediction. The 
concept of S.V. is widely applied in 
different spheres of contemporary sci- 
entific knowledge. In mathematics, 
for example, it characterises a function 
which accepts only one meaning for 
each meaning of an argument; it ex- 
presses a condition of definiteness 
and consistency of a conclusion in 
formal logic; in physics, one of the 
types of connection between cause 
and consequence (so-called Laplacian 
determinism). S.V. is achieved by 
introducing a number of additional 





iad 


Values == 471 


conditions which preclude other pos- 
sible meanings (plural values). To un- 
derstand S.V. and plural values one 
must study them in connection with 
such categories of materialist dialec- 
tics as necessity and chance (q.v.), 
possibility and reality (q.v.), and 
others. 

Values, properties of material ob- 
jects and phenomena of social con- 
sciousness which characterise their im- 
portance to society, to a class, and 
man. Material things represent differ- 
ent kinds of V. because they are the 
objects of different human interests 
(material, economic, spiritual). For 
example, a glass, being a drinking 
vessel, represents a material V., i.e., 
a use-value or good (q.v.). A product 
of human labour, the glass as a com- 
modity possesses economic value. If 
a glass is an object of art it also has 
aesthetic V., beauty. But in all these 
relations the glass appears not merely 
as a material object but also as a so- 
cial phenomenon—an object of use, 
a commodity, a work of art—and is 
an object of human interest. Similarly, 
phenomena of social consciousness, 
ideas are V. In them people express 
their interest in an ideological form. 
For example, the idea of communism 
embodies the interests, aspirations and 
desires of the masses, the will of the 
working people, and the practical aim 
of the Communist Parties. As the aim 
and object of aspirations, as a dream 
guiding the actions of the people, 
the idea of communism is a social 
ideal, or spiritual V. In addition to 
material, economic and aesthetic V., 
there are also moral, legal, political, 
cultural, and historical V. Actions of 
people and social phenomena may 
represent moral good or evil (ethical 
V.) and be an object of approval or 
condemnation. To direct and regulate 
the behaviour of people, society creates 
a system of moral concepts—ideals, 
principles, and assessments. These are 
also moral V. Valuable ideas reflect 
some reality, are knowledge of some 
things, and, moreover, direct the ac- 
tivity of people, i.e., are of a practical 
nature. That is why in class society 
they bear a clear-cut class character. 


Vedanta 


The struggle of the communist and 
the bourgeois ideologies is at the same 
time a_ struggle of opposite systems 
of V. The nature of V. is studied by 
axiology (q.v.). 

Variable and Constant, terms used 
in mathematics and logic. In mathe- 
matics, a V. is a quantity which may 
have different values and aC. is a quan- 
tity which maintains the same val- 
ue. Descartes was the first to use these 
terms systematically. In mathematical 
logic Vv. are used in formulating the 
laws of logic, axioms, and rules of 
inference of logical calculi, thus stress- 
ing their general nature. Vv. in logic 
denote in this case arbitrary constant 
objects (statements, objects, predi- 
cates); such Vv. are called substantive. 
In logical calculi, Vv. may be regard- 
ed as objects defined in a special way; 
such Vv. are called formal. Symbols 
of logical operations, quantifiers (q.v.), 
and others are logical Cc. 

Vavilov, Sergei Ivanovich (1891- 
1951), physicist, President of the Acad- 
emy of Sciences of the USSR (1945- 
51). His main works were devoted 
to physical optics, particularly the 
investigation of the nature of photo- 
luminescence. He attached great im- 
portance to the philosophy and history 
of science and gave a dialectical-ma- 
terialist interpretation of a number 
of revolutionary discoveries in mod- 
ern physics, such as the corpuscular- 
wave dualism (q.v.). He also introduced 
the idea of a field as a particular form 
of matter, and named mathematical 
hypothesis (q.v.) as the principal re- 
search method in modern physics. He 
wrote interesting and profound studies 
of Lucretius, Galileo, Newton, Lomo- 
nosov, Faraday, Lebedev (qq.v.), and 
others. 

Vedanta (Skr. the end of the Veda, 
q.v., or Uttara-Mimamsa; Skr. recent 
research), one of the orthodox systems 
of Indian philosophy, an objective- 
idealist philosophico-religious doctrine 
based on the teaching of the Upani- 
shads (q.v.). To this day V. holds an 
important place in the philosophy of 
Hinduism (q.v.). Its first basic prop- 
ositions were expounded by Bada- 
rayana in the Vedanta Snttras (3rd 








Vedas — 472 — Vekhism 
and 4th centuries A.D.). Further given to discussion of God, man, 
development took the form of commen- and nature. The term “V.” is also 


taries on this work and on the Upani- 
shads. There are two trends in the V. 
One is the advaita (absolute non- 
duality), founded by Samkara in the 
8th century. According to this trend, 
the world contains no other reality 
except God, which is indefinable, 
has neither condition nor quality. The 
conception that the Universe contains 
a variety of objects and phenomena 
results from lack of knowledge (avidya); 
in fact, everything except God is a 
pure illusion (maya). In Gdvaita the 
path to knowledge is through intui- 
tion and revelation, whereas deduc- 
tion and sensation play only a sec- 
ondary role. The aim of individual 
effort is to comprehend the divine 
unity underlying the apparent diver- 
sity of things. The second trend in the 
V. is the ViSisf{advaita (differential 
non-duality), founded by Ramanuja 
(llith to 12th centuries). According 
to Raménuja’s teaching, there are 
three realities: matter, soul, and God. 
They are mutually dependent on one 
another: the individual soul rules the 
material body and God rules them 
both. Without God, soul and matter 
can exist only as abstract concepts. 
The aim of individual effort is to liber- 
ate oneself from material existence 
and this is achieved through spiritual 
activity, knowledge, and love of God, 
the latter being of particular import- 
ance. Advaita was closely connected 
with the worship of the God Shiva, 
and ViSistddvaita with the God 
Vishnu. 

Vedas (Skr. knowledge), the four 
principal sacred books of ancient In- 
dia; the Rg Veda, Atharva Veda, Sama 
Veda, and Yajur Veda, produced be- 
tween the 10th and 5th centuries B.C. 
The term “Veda” includes also the 
Brahmanas (books expounding and 
interpreting the ritual of the Vedas), 
the Aranyakas (the “forest treatises”), 
explaining the mystical meaning of 
the vedic ritual and symbolism, and 
the Upanishads (q.v.), treatises in 
which the worship and mythology of 
the V. are provided with a philosophi- 
cal argument and where first place is 


used in the sense of “sacred book” 


or “supreme wisdom”. Besides 
ancient religious concepts, the V. 
contain purely speculative sections 


dealing with the causes and aims of 
existence of the world and human 
behaviour. 

Vekhism, an ideology of the Russian 
bourgeoisie. As the democratic and 
proletarian movement developed in 
Russia, the Russian bourgeoisie evolved 
as a political force, quickly man- 
ifesting what Lenin called its “con- 
genital counter-revolutionism”. (Vol. 
15, p. 27.) In 1902, the former “legal 
Marxists” (see “Legal Marxism”), Stru- 
ve, Berdyayev, and Bulgakov (qq.v.) 
collaborated with avowed mystics in 
producing the Problemy idealizma 
(Problems of Idealism), a collection 
of articles aimed against materialism. 
Subsequent collections and the setting 
up of philosophico-religious societies 
culminated in the publication of the 
programmatic collection Vekhi (Land- 
marks) in 1909. This “encyclopaedia 
of liberal apostasy”, as Lenin called 
it, covered three subjects: (1) the strug- 
gle against the ideological principles 
of the whole world outlook of Russian 
and international democracy; (2) re- 
pudiation of the liberation movement; 
(3) an open proclamation of “flunkey 
sentiments” and a correspondingly 
“flunkey” policy in relation to tsar- 
ism. (See Vol. 16, p. 124.) Vekhi 
attempted to set off the Russian phil- 
osophico-religious tradition represent- 
ed by Yurkevich, Solovyov, and Dos- 
toyevsky (qq.v.) against materialism 
and atheism. Their alternative to the 
class struggle was defence of the per- 
sonality in its search for “inward”, 
“spiritual” liberation. On the outbreak 
of the Ist World War the supporters 
of V. became the most rabid of chauv- 
inists, and the October Revolution 
found them in the camp of the monarch- 
ist counter-revolution. As émigrés, the 
former Vekhi supporters opposed the 
tendency among certain émigré intel- 
lectuals (“smenovekhovtsy”) to aban- 
don the counter-revolution. Character- 
istic features of V. were the use of 


Vellansky 


subtle forms of religion in the struggle 
against Marxism, the defence of ex- 
treme individualism in ethics, anti- 
intellectualism and subjectivism in 
philosophy, and its reactionary polit- 
ical connections. 

Vellansky (Kavunnik), Danilo 
Mikhailovich (1774-1847), Russian doc- 
tor and idealist philosopher, follower 
of Schelling (q.v.). In his Prolyuziya 
k meditsine (Prolusion to Medicine), 
1805, Biologicheskoye issledovaniye 
prirody (The Biological Investigation 
of Nature), 1812, Opytnaya  nablyu- 
datelnaya i umozritelnaya fizika (Ex- 
perimental, Observed, and Speculative 
Physics), 1831, Osnovnoye nacherta- 
niye obshchei i chastnoi fiziologii (The 
Fundamental Outlines of General and 
Particular Physiology), 1836, and other 
works, V. evolved an idealist natural 
philosophy, thus pioneering in Russia 
the concepts of idealist dialectics (uni- 
versal connection between phenomena, 
development in the form of the triad, 
conflict between polarities as the 
source of development, etc.). 

Verification, Principle of, the basic 
principle held by logical positivists, 
according to which the truth of every 
statement about the world must ul- 
timately be ascertained by compar- 
ing it with the evidence of the senses. 
The principle, as formulated in the 
Vienna Circle (q.v.), is based on the 
thesis that knowledge cannot in the 
final analysis extend beyond the limits 
of sensory experience, a distinction 
being made between the direct veri- 
fication of assertions specifically de- 
scribing the data of experience, and in- 
direct verification, by logical reduc- 
tion of a proposition to directly 
verifiable statements. The obvious phil- 
osophical weakness of the principle, 
which leads to solipsism and deprives 
of cognitive significance all scientific 
statements not tested by “direct ex- 
perience”, compelled the logical pos- 
itivists to accept a watered-down ver- 
sion of this principle that demanded 
partial and indirect experimental ver- 
ification of scientific statements; in 
this form it merely expresses somewhat 
inadequately the usual methodological 
requirement of science that theoretical 


— 473 — 


Vico 


propositions should correspond to the 
empirical facts. 

Vernadsky, Vladimir Ivanovich 
(1863-1945), Soviet scientist whose 
field of research took in geology, biol- 
ogy, and the study of the atom. Mem- 
ber of the USSR Academy of Sciences. 
A professor at Moscow University 
1898-1911, he was among the 124 
professors and teachers of the univer- 
sity who resigned in protest against 
repressive measures taken by the tsar- 
ist authorities. After this he continued 
his work in the Academy of Sciences, 
where he contributed to the emergence 
of geochemistry as a science and 
founded the new branch known as bio- 
geochemistry. He developed the theory 
of the noosphere (q.v.) and was one 
of the founders of genetic mineralogy 
and radiogeology; he also worked 
in the field of crystallography, soil 
science, meteorite study, and the his- 
tory and methodology of natural sci- 
ence. His standpoint was materialist 
and he was spontaneously guided by 
some of the ideas of dialectics. He em- 
phasised the importance of philosophy 
in scientific research and stressed the 
need for systematic elaboration of the 
logic and methodology of natural 
science. He wrote a number of sub- 
stantial works on the history and 
theory of science, e.g., O nauchnom 
mirovozzrenii (On the Scientific World 
Outlook), 1902-03. 

Vico, Giovanni Battista (1668-1744), 
Italian philosopher and sociologist, 
professor at the University of Naples. 
He advanced the theory of the histor- 
ical cycle (q.v.). Though he recognised 
the existence of a divine principle 
from which the laws of history origin- 
ated, V. nevertheless pointed out that 
society must develop according to 
certain inner laws. According to V.’s 
theory, every nation passes through 
three stages in its development, the 
divine, the heroic, and the human, 
which are analogous to the periods 
in the life of man—childhood, youth, 
and maturity. The state, which arises 
only in the heroic period, represents 
the domination of the aristocracy. 
This is replaced in the human period 
by a democratic society, in which 





Vienna Circle 





freedom and “natural justice” are 
triumphant. This, the peak of human 
development, is followed by decline. 
Society returns to its primary state, 
then upward movement is resumed 
and a new cycle begins. V. extended 
his principles of historical develop- 
ment to language, law, and art. His 
main work was Principii d’una scienza 
nuova (1725). 

Vienna Circle, a group forming the 
ideological and organisational centre 
of logical positivism (q.v.). Developed 
from a study group organised in 1922 
by Schlick (q.v.) at the department 
of the philosophy of inductive sciences, 
Vienna University. Its members 
included Carnap (q.v.), from 1926, 
F. Waismann, H. Feigl, O. Neurath, 
H. Hahn, V. Kraft, F. Kaufmann, 
and K. Gödel. Associated with the 
group were P. Frank (Czechoslovakia), 
q.v., E. Kaila (Finland), A. Blum- 
berg (US), J. Jörgensen (Denmark), 
A. Ayer (Britain), q.v., and others. 
The V.C. inherited the ideas of Machism 
(q.v.). It also accepted many of the 
ideas of Wittgenstein (q.v.), particu- 
larly the concept of logical analysis of 
knowledge, the doctrine of the analyti- 
cal character of logic and mathematics, 
and the criticism of traditional phi- 
losophy as meaningless. Having 
achieved something in the nature of a 
synthesis between a Machist type of 
positivism and the concepts of logical 
analysis: of knowledge, the V.C. for- 
mulated the basic propositions of log- 
ical positivism in its fullest and 
clearest form. In 1929, Carnap, Neu- 
rath, and Hahn published a manifesto 
entitled Wissenschaftliche Weltaffas- 
sung: Der Wiener Kreis. The V.C. 
thus acquired a definite organised 
form and established international ties 
with other neo-positivist groups (it 
already had ties with the Reichen- 
bach-Dubislav group in Berlin (see 
Neo-Positivism). In 1930, the V.C. 
in collaboration with Reichenbach 
(q.v.) began publishing the magazine 
Erkenntnis, and in the thirties its 
members worked energetically on the 
ideas of logical positivism. Towards 
the end of the thirties, owing to the 
departure from Vienna of a number 


— 474 — 


Vivekananda 


of its members, the tragic death of 
Schlick and Hitler’s invasion of Aus- 
tria, the V.C. ceased to exist. It has 
been succeeded by the logical empiri- 
cism (q.v.) of Carnap, Feigl, and others. 

Vitalism, an idealist trend in biol- 
ogy, which attributes all the process- 
es of life activity to the special im- 
material factors said to be present in 
living organisms (entelechy, q.v.; élan 
vital, vital force, etc.). The roots of 
V. go back to the teaching of Plato 
(q.v.) on the soul, which is supposed 
to spiritualise the animal and vege- 
table worlds, and to the teaching of 
Aristotle (q.v.) on entelechy. As a 
conception V. took shape in the 17th 
and 18th centuries. It was advocated 
by G. Stahl, J. J. Uexkull, and H. 
Driesch (q.v.), and is at present rep- 
resented by L. Bertalanffy, A. Wenzl, 
and others. Citing the qualitative 
individuality of animate nature, V. 
separates the processes of life from 
material physico-chemical and bio- 
chemical laws. Exaggerated stress on 
the antithesis between animate and 
inanimate nature leads V. to deny 
the possibility of the emergence of the 
animate from the inanimate. When 
the problem is posed in this way there 
is nothing for it but to ascribe the ori- 
gin of life to divine causes or to assume 
its existence as eternal. V. makes ca- 
pital out of the as yet little investi- 
gated problems of biology, the chief 
objects of its attention being the 
problems of the essence of life, the 
wholeness and purpose of structure and 
function, embryogenesis, regene- 
ration, etc. For example, the process 
of the embryonic development is re- 
garded by V. as the urge of the embryo 
to realise a predetermined aim. The 
history of the development of science 
is the history of the refutation of V., 
a profound criticism of which is to be 
found in the works of Engels, Lenin, 
Haeckel, Timiryazev, Mechnikov, Pav- 
lov, and others. 

Vivekananda (real name—Narendra 
Nath Dutta, 1863-1902), Indian ideal- 
ist philosopher, pupil of Ramakrishna 
(q.v.). Studied philosophy at Calcutta 
University (1880-84). In 1893, toured 
the USA, Britain and Japan 


EEO 


Voltaire 


preaching the ideas of Vedanta (q.v.). 
Founded the Ramakrishna Mission 
in 1897. V. attempted to bring the ideas 
of the Advaita Vedanta closer to the 
scientific principles of his day. Like 
Ramakrishna, he advocated a “sin- 
gle religion” based on the Vedanta. 
His public activities, however, went 
beyond the narrow limits of religious 
reform. He became a prominent figure 
in socio-political life, advocated strug- 
gle for national independence and 
condemned the Indian liberals’ policy 
of appealing to the British authorities. 
He was thus the direct predecessor 
of the ideological leaders of the Indian 
national liberation movement in the 
early years of this century. He defined 
four stages of social progress accord- 
ing to which varna (caste)—the Brah- 
mins, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya or the 
Sudra—was in power. He described 
the bourgeois society of his day as 
the “kingdom of the Vaisyas”, and^ 
the socialist society of the future as the 
“kingdom of the Sudras”. Though 
he condemned imperialist oppression, 
racialism, and mititarism, his sociai- 
ism was utopian and petty bourgeois. 

Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de 
(1694-1778), French writer, philos- 
opher, and historian, one of the lead- 
ers of the French Enlightenment. The 
son of a notary, V. was educated in a 
Jesuit college. He was twice arrested 
(1717 and 1725) for his anti-feudal 
satires. Most of his life was spent 
outside France. V. co-operated with 
Diderot in the compilation of the En- 
cyclopaedia. He was a deist (see De- 
ism), and his view of the world was 
contradictory. Though a supporter of 
Newtonian mechanics and physics, 
he recognised the existence of God 
as the prime mover. The motion of 
nature proceeds according to eternal 
laws, but God is inseparable from 
nature; God is not a special substance 
but rather the principle of action in- 
herent in nature itself. V. was actually 
inclined to identify God (the “éternel 
géométre”) with nature. He criticised 
dualism (q.v.) and rejected the idea 
of the soul as a special kind of sub- 
stance. Consciousness, according to V., 
is a property of matter inherent only 


— 475 — 


p 


Voltaire 


in living bodies, although to prove 
this correct proposition he produced 
the theological argument that God 
endowed matter with the ability to 
think. In contrast to the theological 
metaphysics of the 17th century, V. 
insisted on scientific investigation of 
nature. Rejecting the Cartesian teach- 
ing on the soul and innate ideas, V. 
regarded observation and experience 
as the source of knowledge and preached 
the materialism of Locke. The 
task of learning was to study objective 
causality. At the same time V. re- 
cognised the existence of “ultimate 
causes” and maintained that experi- 
ence pointed to the probable existence 
of a “supreme reason” and “architect” 
of the Universe. His socio-political 
views were distinctly anti-feudal. V. 
fought against feudalism, advocated 
equality before the law, and demanded 
property taxation, freedom of speech, 
etc. But he rejected criticism of pri- 
vate ownership on the grounds that 
society must inevitably be divided 
into rich and poor. The most reasonable 
form of state, according to V., was a 
constitutional monarchy ruled by an 
enlightened monarch. Towards the end 
of his life he tended to the view that 
the best form of state was a republic. 
In his historical works he criticised 
the biblical and Christian view of the 
development of society and drew in 
broad outline a picture of the history 
of mankind. The “philosophy of his- 
tory” (the term was his invention), 
is based on the idea of the progressive 
development of society independent 
of the will of God. But he interpreted 
historical change idealistically, as due 
to changes in ideas. His struggle 
against clericalism and religious fanatic- 
ism was of great significance in his 
work, the chief target of his satire 
being Christianity and the Catholic 
Church, which he regarded as the 
arch enemy of progress. Nevertheless V. 
did not accept atheism, and though 
he denied the possibility of any incar- 
nation of God (Christ, Mahommed, 
Buddha, etc.), he considered that the 
idea of a vengeful god should be main- 
tained among the people. This was one 
of the class limitations of his outlook. 








Voluntarism 


Main works: Lettres philosophiques 
(1733), Traité de Métaphysique (1734), 
Eléments de la philosophie de Newton 
(1738), Histoire Universelle (1769), 
etc. 

Voluntarism, an idealist (mainly 
subjective-idealist) trend in philosophy 
and psychology which regards will! as 
the initial basis of the Universe, 
counterposes it to the objective laws of 
nature and society, and denies the 
dependence of the human will on the 
environment. The term was introduced 
by the German sociologist Tönnies 
and the German philosopher Paulsen. 
It took shape as a philosophical theory 
in the 19th century in the works of 
Schopenhauer (q.v.), although ele- 
ments of it are to be found in Kant 
and Fichte (qq.v.). E. Hartmann and 
Nietzsche (qq.v.) were greatly influ- 
enced by the doctrine, which is one 
of the sources and a characteristic 
feature of the ideology of fascism. In 
Russia voluntarism was typical of the 
Narodniks (see Lavrov, Mikhailov- 
sky, etc.), who counterposed the ac- 
tions of “lone heroes” to the objective 
laws of history. Between the 19th 
and 20th centuries V. gained a foot- 
hold in psychology (see Wundt). Marx- 
ism-Leninism rejects V. and points 
out the relative nature of free will, 
regarding human will as derived from 
the objective laws of the development 
of nature and society (see Objective 
and Subjective Factors in History). 

Vorovsky, Vatslav Vatslavovich 
(1871-1923), Marxist publicist, revo- 
lutionary, and Soviet diplomat. Joined 
the Bolsheviks in 1903. Much of his 
work was devoted to spreading and 
popularising Marxist ideas among the 
workers and to fighting against their 
distortion and vulgarisation. His bio- 
graphical works on Marx, Pismo iz 
Berlina (Letter from Berlin), 1908; 
Karl Marx, 1917, etc., expound the 
philosophical, economic and political 
views of the founders of Marxism. In 
“Kommunistichesky Manifest” i yego 
sudba v Rossii (The “Communist Ma- 
nifesto” and Its Fate in Russia), 1907, 
and K istorii marxisma v Rossii (On 
the History of Marxism in Russia), 
1908, he describes the spread of Marx- 


— 476 — 


Vulgar Sociologism 


ist teaching in Russia and examines 
in detail the trans!ations of the Mani- 
festo into Russian; he himself translat- 
ed the Communist Manifesto, Marx’s 
speech in court on February 7, 1849, 
and his Critique of the Hegelian Phi- 
losophy of Right. A number of his 
articles deal with the problem of spon- 
taneity and consciousness in the work- 
ing-class movement, the attitude of 
the Party to the trade unions, the ag- 
rarian problem and the history of the 
revolutionary movement in Russia, 
and the critical analysis of neo-Kan- 
tian, Machist, and religious mystical 
ideology (“Letter to the Editors of 
Zhizn”, 1901; “The Rebels and the 
Reckless”, 1906; “Was Herzen a So- 
cialist?”, 1920, etc.). V. was one 
of the first Marxist literary critics. 
He stressed the social meaning of 
works of art, the organising role of 
revolutionary ideals in art, and the 
class origin of social pessimism and 
decadence (O burzhuaznosti modernis- 
tov [On the Bourgeois Nature of the 
Modernists}, 1908; Bazarov and Sanin, 


1909; Maxim Gorky, 1910; Leonid 
Andreyev, 1910, etc.) 

Vulgar Evolutionism, a theory in- 
ferring that development is simply 


an increase or decrease of the original 
properties of a phenomenon; denies 
leap-like development and conversion 
of quantitative into qualitative changes, 
transformation of one quality into 
another; it is the antipode of dialec- 
tics. V.E. is the philosophical founda- 
tion of reformism and opportunism, 
and is today the methodological basis 
for the bourgeois theories of the “trans- 
formation” of capitalism into social- 
ism. In biology, V.E. is represented 
by the so-called theory of preforma- 
tionism (q.v.). 

Vulgar Sociologism, an  oversim- 
plified interpretation of social pheno- 
mena; distorts historical materialism 
by exaggerating such factors of social 
development as machines, forms of 
production management, economics, 
politics, ideology. In a narrow sense 
it is an oversimplified conception of the 
class purport of ideology. In philos- 
ophy, as represented by Bogdanov 
(q.v.) and V. Shulyatikov, and in 








Vvedensky 


— 477 — — 


Vvedensky 





aesthetics and literary criticism, as 
represented by V. Shulyatikov, V. Pe- 
reverzev and W. Fritzsche, V.S. denied 
the relative independence of ideology 
and inferred all ideological forms 
directly from the mode of production. 
It produced a crude interpretation of 
the connection between the creative 
work of writers and the classes, the 
class struggle. The contention that 
language was a class and superstructur- 
al phenomenon (by N. Marr and his 
followers) was a variety of V.S. in 
linguistics. Lenin described V.S. as 
an example of extreme vulgarisation, 
a caricature of materialism in history. 

Vvedensky, Alexander Ivanovich 
(1856-1925), Russian philosopher and 
psychologist, Neo-Kantian. Professor 
at St. Petersburg University (1888), 
President of the St. Petersburg Phil- 
osophical Society (1899). Carrying 


Kant’s ideas a stage further, he deep- 
ened the dualism of faith and knowl- 
edge, soul and body, etc. In his work 
O predelakh i priznakakh odushevleniya 
(On the Limits and Characters of Ani- 
mation), 1892, he asserted that the 
spiritual life of others has no objective 
distinguishing characters and cannot, 
therefore, be known (“V.’s_ psycho- 
physical law”). In Psikhologiya bez 
usyakoi metafiziki (Psychology Without 
Metaphysics), 1914, he attempted to 
justify a psychology that confined 
itself merely to describing mental 
phenomena. His logic is consistently 
idealist (Logika kak chast teorii pozna- 
niya [Logic as Part of the Theory of 
Knowledge], 1909). He was an oppo- 
nent of atheism (Sudba very v boga v 
borbe s ateizmom [The Fate of Faith 
in God and the Struggle Against Athe- 
ism], 1922). 








W 


Wang Chung (27-104), Chinese ma- 
terialist philosopher. In his main work 
Animadversions (Lun Héng) he reso- 
lutely opposed mysticism and idealism 
and the doctrine of “heaven” as the 
supreme guiding force that controls 
the origin and development of things 
and phenomena. According to Wang’s 
teaching, everything in the world 
has its source in the basic material 
elements, the ch’i (q.v.). Man is part 
of nature and comes into being as 
a result of the concentration of the 
ch'i. Dispersal of the ch'i leads to 
death and destruction. Wang declared 
that the process of cognition began 
with man’s sensory perception, and 
rejected the idea of “innate” knowl- 
edge. He opposed the theory that the 
life of society depends on spontaneous 
natural phenomena. History, he said, 
develops in cycles; periods of great- 
ness are followed by decline, and then 
the process repeats itself. 

War, armed struggle as a means of 
effecting the policy of a class. The 
scientific explanation of W. was pro- 
vided by Marxism. Marx and Engels 
disproved the theory that W. is eternal 
and inevitable and showed that wars 
come about because of the domination 
of private ownership and the policy 
of the exploiting classes. In Marxism- 
Leninism a distinction is made between 
two kinds of Ww.: unjust and just. 
Ww. that continue the policy of the 
exploiting classes, consolidate their 
rule, and add to their wealth are unjust. 
Ww. that have the aim of liberating 
the people from class and national 
oppression are just. In the age of im- 
perialism, world Ww. occurred owing 
to the formation of a world capital- 
ist system of economy and the urge 


felt by the bourgeoisie to seize markets 
and colonies. W. has always been hated 
by the mass of the people, but it is 
only since the setting up of the world’s 
first socialist country that the forces 
of W. have been opposed by an or- 
ganised force of peace. As the sole 
reasonable alternative to W. Lenin 
evolved the principle of peaceful co- 
existence (q.v.). Although after the 
Great October Socialist Revolution 
imperialism ceased to be a social sys- 
tem exercising undivided control over 
the destinies of the world, world W. 
remained inevitable because imperial- 
ism was economically and militarily 
stronger than the USSR. But when 
socialism became a world system, W. 
ceased to be inevitable. The problem 
of W. and peace is the fundamental 
issue of modern times; in the age of 
missiles and thermonuclear weapons 
it is a question of life or death for mil- 
lions of people. The proletariat, and 
indeed all progressive mankind, con- 
demn W. in general, making excep- 
tion only for just Ww. of liberation 
and defence, which nations that be- 
come the victims of aggression are 
compelled to wage. Marxists disagree 
with the position of those who wish, or 
justify the wish, to resolve all contra- 
dictions between socialism and capi- 
talism, all conflicts arising between 
nations by means of W. The growing 
superiority of the forces of socialism 
over the forces of imperialism, of the 
forces of peace over the forces of W., 
provides a guarantee that W. will 
disappear from the life of society with 
the result that all controversial issues 
will be settled peacefully. The historic 
mission of communism is to abolish W. 
and bring about eternal peace on Earth. 


Wave-Corpuscular Dualism 


Wave-Corpuscular Dualism, a spe- 
cific property of microscopic objects, 
treated in quantum mechanics (q.v.) 
and implying the possession by these 
objects of properties belonging to 
both particles and waves. An exact 
physical formula of W.C.D. is con- 
tained in the equations of de Broglie 
(q.v.). W.C.D. symbolises the close 
inner relationship between the mac- 
rocosm and the microcosm (qq.v.) and 
the peculiarities of their unity. The 
positivist interpretation of W.C.D. 
denies any inner unity of the wave 
and particle properties of microscopic 
objects and declares them to be mu- 
tually exclusive and merely mutually 
complementary (see Complementarity 
Principle). A consistently materialistic 
interpretation of W.C.D., as devel- 
oped by Langevin and Vavilov (qq.v.) 
and other scientists, views the micro- 
particle as being neither corpuscle 
nor wave, but something else, their 
oes though tangible evidence 
of this has been so far lacking. Such 
evidence is beginning to be furnished 
by the new theories of elementary 
particles. 

Weber, Max (1864-1920), German 
sociologist. Associated with Neo-Kan- 
tianism and positivism (qq.v.). Ac- 
cording to W., the essence of any so- 
cio-economic phenomenon is deter- 
mined not so much by its objective 
aspects as by the viewpoint of the in- 
vestigator, the cultural significance 
attached to any given process. Proceed- 
ing from the assumption that the social 
sciences study only individual aspects 
of various phenomena, W. tried to 
substitute for scientific abstraction the 
arbitrary notion of an “ideal type”. 
This “ideal type”, he claimed, had no 
basis inreality, but was merely a device 
for systematisipg and comprehending 
individual facts, a concept against 
which the investigator could meas- 
ure reality. The weight of W.’s ideas 
was directed against Marxist teaching 
on socio-economic formations. His the- 
ory of “ideal types” and also his 
conception of the “plurality” of his- 
torical factors had considerable in- 
fluence on contemporary bourgeois so- 
ciology. Works: Der Nationalstaat und 


— 479 — 


Welfare State 


die Volkswirtschaftspolitik (1895), Die 
protestantische Ethik und der Geist 
des Kapitalismus (1905), Wirtschaft 
und Gesellschaft (1921), etc. 

Weitling, Wilhelm (1808-71), first 
German utopian communist. A tailor 
by profession, he was active in organ- 
ising and spreading his ideas among 
the workers. He took part in the work 
of the secret Bund der Gerechten, 
for which in 1838 he wrote its mani- 
festo Die Menschheit wie sie ist und 
wie sein sollte. Having emigrated to 
the United States, he founded a com- 
mune there, which eventually col- 
lapsed. His main work was Garantien 
der Harmonie und Freiheit (1842), which 
Marx called the German workers’ 
unexampled and brilliant début in 
literature. W.’s aim was to organise 
a communist society, which would 
ensure harmony between the abilities 
and desires of every individual and 
society as a whole. He described in 
detail the structure of such a society, 
foreseeing the difficulties of the tran- 
sition period, for which he considered 
the best form of government would 
be dictatorship. The sciences would 
play a leading part in the future society 
and these would all be guided by phi- 
losophy. W. divided the sciences into 
three types: (1) philosophical medicine, 
embracing all manifestations of man’s 
physical and spiritual life; (2) philo- 
sophical physics; (3) philosophical me- 
chanics. W. made no secret of his 
dislike of abstract philosophy and 
particularly Hegel’s philosophy. He 
considered that communist society 
would be established throughrevolution 
and the formation of a revolutionary 
government. He also recognised the 
possibility of a peaceful transfer of 
power. While criticising religion, he 
used the Gospel to propagate the ideas 
of communism. He was imprisoned 
from 1843 to 1844 for writing and 
publishing his Das Evangelium des 
armen Sünders. 

Welfare State, a social myth wide- 
spread in modern capitalist society and 
intensively disseminated by the theo- 
reticians of reformism (q.v.). In sub- 
stance, it avers that having become 
“people’s capitalism”, the capitalism 


Westerners 


— 480 — 


Whitehead 





of the mid-20th century has created 
the W.S., a supra-class power capable 
of overcoming anarchy of production 
and economic crises, doing away with 
unemployment and ensuring the wel- 
fare of all working people. Ideologists 
and politicians of Social-Democracy 
point to the somewhat improved posi- 
tion of working people in the developed 
capitalist countries after the 2nd 
World War and to the social reforms 
enacted by bourgeois and reformist go- 
vernments under pressure from the inter- 
national working-class movement, and 
claim that the W.S. is socialism or, in 
any case, a “threshold to socialism”. The 
facts repudiate the W.S. myth. Unem- 
ployment and poverty hound hundreds 
of thousands and even millions of peo- 
ple in such highly developed countries 
as the United States. Social security 
measures are, as a rule, enacted there 
at the expense of the working people 
themselves. Democratic reforms are 
half-hearted and are often reduced 
to nought by the dominant political 
regime. In substance, the so-called 
W.S. is a system of state-monopoly 
measures designed to strengthen capi- 
talism and weaken the determination 
of the working class to work for social- 
ism. 

Westerners, proponents of a trend 
of Russian social thought in the 1840s. 
They called for the elimination of 
feudal backwardness and Russia’s de- 
velopment along the “Western”, i.e., 
bourgeois road. In the mid-1840s the 
Moscow group of W. included A. 
Herzen, T. Granovsky, N. Ogaryov 
(qq.v-), V. Botkin, K. Kavelin 
(q.v.), N. Ketcher, and Y. Korsh. 
V. Belinsky (q.v.), was closely asso- 
ciated with it. I. Turgenev, P. Annen- 
kov, and I. Panayev also subscribed to 
the views of the W. The W. condem- 
ned the autocratic feudal system, and 
advocated the Europeanisation of Rus- 
sia which had an objectively bourgeois 
content, but there were also differences 
among the W. At first the polemic (on 
aesthetical, philosophical and then so- 
cio-political questions) was over- 
shadowed by joint action: the disputes 
did not go beyond the groups of West- 
erners. But towards the end of the 


1840s two main trends crystallised: 
Belinsky, Herzen and Ogaryov came 
forward as materialists, revolutionary 
democrats and socialists; Kavelin, Bot- 
kin, Korsh, and others defended reli- 
gion and idealism and reflected the 
line of bourgeois-landowner liberalism 
in political questions. Some present- 
day falsifiers of the history of Russian 
social thought (H. Kohn, S. R. Tomp- 
kins, A. Schelting, and others), pur- 
posely distorting the content of the 
term W., use it to misrepresent the 
history of Russia. They claim that the 
Cadets (Constitutional-Democrats) 
and Mensheviks continued the tradi- 
tions of Belinsky and Herzen and call 
them W., while declaring the Bolshe- 
viks to be the ideological heirs of the 
Slavophiles (q.v.). 

Wetter, Gustav (1911- ) Austrian 
Catholic philosopher, Neo-Thomist, Je- 
suit, one-time professor at the Papal 
Oriental Institute in Rome. His works 
distort the history and theory of dia- 
lectical materialism and various con- 
temporary theories in the natural 
sciences. Arguing against the Marxist 
division of philosophy into material- 
ist and idealist, W. tries to maintain 
a “neutral” line which he calls “Neo- 
Thomist realism” (see Neo-Thomism), 
and which is in fact a theological form 
of objective idealism. 

Whitehead, Alfred North (1861-1947), 
logician, mathematician, and philos- 
opher, professor of London and Har- 
vard universities. Jointly with Bertrand 
Russell, W. wrote a fundamental book 
on mathematical logic (q.v.), Principia 
Mathematica, (3 vols., 1910-13). At- 
tempts to overcome the crisis in phys- 
ics by recognising the changeability 
of nature, led W. to understand nature 
as a “process”. Defining nature as 
“experience”, W. arrived at neo-real- 
ism (q.v.) which combines elements 
of materialism and idealism. Later 
or. W. went over to objective idealism 
(q.v.). According to W., the world 
process is the “experience of God” 
in which universals, passing from the 
ideal world (“primordial nature of 
God”) to the physical (“consequent 
nature of God”), qualitatively deter- 
mine “events”. In sociology, W. 


Wiener 


— 481 — 


Windelband 





combined recognition of ideas as the 
directing force of history with raising 
to an absolute the role of outstanding 
personalities (“men of science”) who 
ultimately govern the world. His main 
work Process and Reality (1929). 

Wiener, Norbert (1894-1964), Amer- 
ican mathematician, Doctor of Phi- 
losophy, founder of cybernetics (q.v.). 
His early works are mainly concerned 
with mathematics. He was also in- 
terested in theoretical physics and 
achieved important results in mathe- 
matical analysis and probability theo- 
ry. The study of the functioning of 
electronic control and computing 
machines and his research (in colla- 
boration with the Mexican physio- 
logist Dr. A. Rosenblueth) into 
the physiology of the nervous system 
led W. to formulate the ideas and prin- 
ciples of cybernetics (Cybernetics or 
Control and Communication in the 
Animal and the Machine, 1948). His 
general philosophical views are eclec- 
tic; he himself regards them as belong- 
ing to existentialism (q.v.). 

Will, a person’s conscious determi- 
nation to carry out a given action or 
actions. Idealism regards W. as a 
property independent of external in- 
fluences and circumstances and not 
connected with objective necessity, 
and men’s actions and behaviour as 
manifestations of the idealistically 
comprehended “free” will. In fact, it is 
the objective world that is the source 
of man’s purposive acts of will. 
Seen through the prism of the subject's 
internal conditions (needs, interests, 
desires, knowledge, etc.), the objective 
world enables him to set himself var- 
ious aims, take decisions and act in 
one manner or another. The W. that 
chooses merely on the basis of subjec- 
tive desires (see Voluntarism, Existen- 
tialism) is not free; that W. is free 
which chooses correctly, in accordance 
with objective necessity. As Engels 
put it, “Freedom of the will 
means nothing but the capacity to 
make decisions with knowledge of the 
subject.” (Anti-Dadhring, p. 158.) The 
volitional character of an action shows 
itself most clearly when a person has 
to overcome certain external or in- 


31-1682 


ternal obstacles to achieve his aim. 
The first stage of a volitional action 
lies in the posing and apprehension 
of the aim; this is followed by the 
decision to act and the choice of the 
most expedient means of acting. An 
action can be described as an act of 
will only if it is the execution of 
a decision. Will-power is not a gift 
of nature. Skill and ability in choosing 
an aim, taking correct decisions and 
carrying them out, completing what 
has been begun, are the fruit of knowl- 
edge, experience, education, and self- 
education. 

Winckelmann, Johann Joachim 
(1717-68), German advocate of en- 
lightenment, historian and theorist 
of art. His main work, Geschichte der 
Kunst des Altertums (1764), was the 
first attempt at scientific research 
into the history of art. The develop- 
ment of art, according to W., is deter- 
mined both by natural factors (climate) 
and by social factors (influence of the 
“state system and administration and 
the pattern of thought which they call 
into being”). The “noble simplicity 
and sublime majesty” of ancient Greek 
art, born of freedom, formed his aesthet- 
ic ideal, which he called upon others 
to follow. His aesthetic views had a 
great influence on the subsequent de- 
velopment of aesthetics and art. 

Windelband, Wilhelm (1848-1915), 
German idealist philosopher, founder 
of the so-called Baden school (q.v.), 
of Neo-Kantianism. Historian of phi- 
losophy, logic, ethics, and the theory 
of values. Treating the history of 
philosophy from the standpoint of 
Kantianism, he attempted to justify 
the difference of method between the 
natural and socio-historical sciences. 
According to W., the natural sciences 
are “nomothetic”, i.e., they seek to 
establish general laws, while the his- 
torical sciences are “ideographic”, i.e., 
deal with the particular, the individu- 
al. Based on a mistaken counterposi- 
tion of the general to the particular, 
this distinction was aimed against 
the Marxist teaching on the objective 
laws of historical development. Main 
works: Geschichte der alten Philosophie, 
(1888), Geschichte der neueren Philos- 











Winstanley 





— 482 — 


World Outlook 


ophie (two vols., 1878-80), Präludien 


(1884), and Geschichte und Naturwis- 
senschaft (1894). 
Winstanley, Gerrard  (b.1609-?), 


English 17th century utopian, ideolo- 
gist of the extreme Left trend in the 
English bourgeois revolution; one of 
the first to champion the interests of 
the expropriated masses; a ruined small 
tradesman and member of dissident 
sects. In 1648, W. adopted the posi- 
tions of rationalism. He held that the 
theory of natural law was a negation 
of private property and treated in a 
materialist way questions of ethics and 
morality. His main work, The Law of 
Freedom in a Platform, or True Magis- 
tracy Restored (1651) is permeated 
with the ideas of egalitarian commu- 
nism which W. wanted to be applied 
by peaceful means. He advocated the 
socialisation of land and all natural 
resources as the main foundation of 
collective property of the people. In 
his opinion, the ideal system should 
be based on the small peasant and 
artisan economy. The household is the 
main cell of society. The purpose of 
production is to ensure abundance of 
material wealth. W.’s ideal system 
combined features of the mode of pro- 
duction existing in England at that 
time with the communist principle of 
distribution through direct exchange 
of products. The political ideal was a 
consistently democratic republic. W.’s 
utopian ideas were intertwined with 
reflections of the class struggle of his 
time. 

Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1889-1951), 
Austrian philosopher and logician, one 
of the founders of analytical philosophy 
(q.v.). In his Tractatus logico-philoso- 
phicus (1921) he proposed the idea of 
a “logically perfect”, or “ideal”, lan- 
guage, the prototype of which he saw 
in the language of mathematical logic. 
This idea is an unjustified attempt 
to conceive all knowledge of the world 
as a sum of elementary assertions con- 
nected by the logical operations of 
conjunction and disjunction (qq.v.), 
etc. W. substantiates the logico-epis- 
temological conception ontologically, 
in the form of the doctrine of logical 
atomism (q.v.). Everything that does 


not come within the pattern of the 
“ideal” language—traditional philos- 
ophy, ethics, etc.—is declared void of 
scientific meaning; philosophy is con- 
sidered possible only as “criticism 
of language”. Refusing to accept the 
idea of an objective reality existing 
independently of “language”, of con- 
ciousness, W. arrives at solipsism 
(q.v.). The ideas of the Tractatus were 
taken up by logical positivism (q.v.). 
Some of W.’s ideas on logic (use of the 
tabular, or matrix, method of defining 
the meaning of truth, probability, etc.) 
influenced the development of modern 
logic. His views, as summed up in 
Philosophical Investigations (published 
posthumously in 1953) have in- 
fluenced linguistic philosophy (q.v.). 
Wolff, Christian von (1679-1754), 
German idealist philosopher, who sys- 
tematised and popularised the philos- 
ophy of Leibniz ee: Professor at 
the University Halle. Having 
stripped Leibniz's teaching of its di- 
alectics, W. developed a metaphysical 
teleology, according to which the gener- 
al connection and harmony of the Uni- 
verse are explained as being in ac- 
cordance with aims set by God. W. 
also systematised and revived scho- 
lasticism. He founded his system on 
the method of rationalist deduction, 
which reduced all the truths of phi- 
losophy to the laws of formal logic. 
His key to all philosophical problems 
was the law of contradiction. His work 
had an important effect in spreading 
knowledge of mathematics, physics, 
chemistry, botany, etc. Politically, 
he was on the side of enlightened ab- 
solutism. His main work was Verniinf- 
tige Gedanken von den Kräften des 
menschlichen Verstandes (1712). 
World Outlook, the system of views, 
concepts, and notions about the sur- 
rounding world. In the broad sense, 
W.O. comprises the sum total of all 
views of man on the surrounding world: 
philosophical, socio-political, ethical, 
aesthetical, scientific, etc. The core 
of every W.O. (in the narrower sense 
of the term) is made up of philosophical 
views. The pivotal problem of W.O. 
is the fundamental problem of philos- 
ophy (q.v.). Depending on its solution 


World Socialist System 


philosophy is divided into two main 
types of W.O.: materialist and ideal- 
ist. W.O. is the reflection of social 
being, and depends upon the level 
of human knowledge, acquired in 
a given historical period, and also 
upon the social system. In a class 
society, W.O. bears a class character, 
and the W.O. of the ruling class is 
dominant there. W.O. is of great 
practical importance, because it deter- 
mines human attitude toward the sur- 
rounding reality and serves as a guide 
to action. The scientific W.O. reveals 
the objective laws of nature and so- 
ciety and expresses the interests of the 
progressive forces; it also promotes 
general progress. The reactionary, un- 
scientific W.O. serves the decaying 
classes and arrests social development; 
it defends the interests of the exploit- 
ing classes and diverts the workers 
from the fight for their emancipation. 
A consistently scientific W.O. is the 
communist, Marxist-Leninist W.O., 
i.e., Marxism-Leninism (q.v.), of which 
dialectical and historical materialism 
(q.v.) is the basis and an integral part. 
It expresses the interests of the pro- 
letariat, of all labouring masses, which 
coincide with the objective laws of 
social development. Born as a W.O. 
of the working class, Marxism-Lenin- 
ism becomes the W.O. of the whole 
people. The scientific truth of the 
Marxist-Leninist W.O. is confirmed 
by the whole history of human prac- 
tice, the data of science and the vic- 
tories of the working people of the 
USSR and other countries which have 
accomplished socialist revolutions and 
are building socialism and communism. 
The liberation from bourgeois ideology 
and the assimilation of the communst, 
Marxist-Leninist W.O. promote higher 
consciousness and greater activity of 
the working class in the building of 
communist society, in the fight for 
peace and happiness for all mankind. 

World Socialist System, the social, 
economic, and political community 
of the free, sovereign nations advanc- 
ing along the paths of socialism (q.v.) 
and communism (q.v.). The socialist 
countries have the same type of eco- 
nomic foundation: social ownership of 


31° 


— 483 — 


World Socialist System 





the means of production and socialist 
production relations, identical political 
foundation, and a state system of the 
same type—the people’s power headed 
by the working class; Marxism-Lenin- 
ism is their single ideological basis. 
They have common interests in the 
defence of their revolutionary gains 
and national independence from the 
encroachments of the imperialist camp, 
and a single lofty aim—communism. 
On the strength of this, the W.S.S. ~ 
has established within its framework 
an essentially new type of international 
relations which has no precedent in 
history. The characteristic peculiari- 
ties of the relations among the peoples 
of the socialist countries are the fol- 
lowing: fraternal political, economic 
and cultural unity; genuine equality; 
absence of subjugation and exploita- 
tion of one country by another; mutual 
comradely support and reciprocal aid. 
The sum total of economic relations 
among the socialist countries forms 
the world system of socialist economy. 
Each socialist country plans and de- 
velops her own national economy. How- 
ever, the economic development of 
each of the states belonging to the 
world socialist system does not proceed 
in isolation. It goes hand-in-hand with 
the constantly growing exchange of 
activities between all socialist coun- 
tries, with comradely co-ordination 
of their economic plans. Each social- 
ist country strives not only for the 
development of her own economy but 
also for the economic advance of the 
whole W.S.S. In its turn, the might 
of the W.S.S. promotes the steady 
growth of each country’s economy, 
ensures the economic independence 
and sovereignty of each of the social- 
ist states. At present the W.S.S. has 
entered upon a new phase of its devel- 
opment. The USSR is building com- 
munist society in all spheres. Other 
socialist countries are successfully lay- 
ing the foundation of socialism, and 
some have already entered upon the 
period of building a developed social- 
ist society. At this stage the develop- 
ment of the W.S.S. is characterised 
by a deeper division of labour between 
various countries, closer co-operation, 











Wundt 


and greater economic mutual assist- 
ance. The W.S.S. exerts a tremendous 
revolutionary influence on the further 
growth of the national liberation move- 
ment, on the development of the class 
struggle in all the capitalist countries. 

Wundt, Wilhelm Max (1832-1920), 
German psychologist, physiologist and 
idealist philosopher; professor of phi- 
losophy at Leipzig University; founder 
of experimental psychology. W. based 
his psychological studies on the theory 
of psycho-physical parallelism (q.v.). 
W.’s philosophical conceptions are 
an eclectical combination of Spinoza, 
Leibniz, Kant, Hegel (qq.v.), 
and others. W. divided the process 


— 484 — 


Wundt 


of cognition into three stages: first, 
immediate perception; second, rational 
cognition of definite sciences represent- 
ing different points of view on the same 
object of investigation; third (cogni- 
tion by reason), philosophical synthes- 
is of knowledge, which is the subject 
of “metaphysics”. According to W., 
metaphysics transcended the dualism 
of natural science and psychology and 
achieved the fusion of materialism 
and idealism. W. defined being, the 
subject of metaphysics, as a volition- 
al system of spiritual values. Lenin 
advanced strong arguments against 
W. in his book, Materialism and 
Empirio-Criticism (q.v.). 





eR Le mdan eG EFS es 








— 


X 


Xenophanes of Colophon (c. 6-5 cent. 
B.C.), Greek philosopher, founder of 
the Eleatic school (see Eleatics), elegiac 
poet and satirist. He is known as one 
of the first critics of anthropomorph- 
ism and mythology (qq.v.). He assert- 
ed that people create gods only in 
their own image, and that any animal, 
if it believed in gods, would picture 
them as animals. Treating of the con- 
cept of being from a purely material- 
ist standpoint together with the pre- 
Socratics (q.v.), i.e., as earth and water, 
and as that which they engendered, 


X. arrived at a high level of abstrac- 
tion which made him regard being as 
always the same, identical with itself, 
uniform, and unchanging. Although X. 
himself did not approach the problems 
of the singular and multiple, the iden- 
tical and the changeable, his views 
facilitated the formulation of the prob- 
lem of dialectical relationship between 
these categories. In his theory of knowl- 
edge X. attempted to prove the in- 
sufficiency of sensory data or “im- 
pressions”. 





Y 


Yang Chu (c. 395-335 B.C.), Chinese 
philosopher who adopted positions 
of naive materialism and severely 
criticised religious views and the be- 
lief in immortality. According to him, 
all events and phenomena of nature 
and society are subject to the law of 
natural necessity, which he defined as 
fate. Hence, his views are not free from 
elements of fatalistic determinism. 
Y.C. asserted that everything has to 
die or to be destroyed. Life, of natural 
necessity, gives way to death, de- 
struction follows birth. In ethics he 
laid much stress upon the individual 
with his desire for maximum satis- 
faction of his feelings and wishes. 
However, the hedonism and eudae- 
monism of Y.C. were not carried to 
the extreme. He called on man to enjoy 
the present life and not to bother 
with the thought of what happens 
after death. His individualism was 
a reaction to the ethical and social 
ea of men in Confucianism 
q.v.). 

Yin and Yang, basic concepts of 
ancient Chinese philosophy. Origi- 
nally, they served to express lightness 
and darkness, hardness and softness 
the male and female principles in 
nature. As Chinese philosophy deve- 
loped Y. and Y. They increasingly sym- 
bolised the interaction of the extreme, 
diametrical opposites: light and dark- 
ness, day and night, sun and moon, 
heaven and earth, heat and cold, posi- 
tive and negative, etc. Yin-yang ac- 
quired exceptionally abstract meaning 
in the speculative schemes of Neo- 
Confucianism, especially in the 
doctrine of Ri (q.v.), the absolute law. 





The concept of interaction of polar 
forces, regarded as the axis of the 
cosmic forces of motion and the prime 
cause of constant change in nature, 
forms the main content of most of 
the dialectical systems of Chinese 
philosophers. The doctrine of dualism 
of the yin-yang forces is an indispen- 
sable element of the dialectical 
constructions of Chinese philosophy. 
The yin-yang concepts have also 
found diverse applications in 
elaborating the theoretical principles 
of Chinese medicine, chemistry, music, 
etc. 

Yoga, an orthodox idealist system 
of Indian philosophy. From the view- 
point of Y. the main purpose of all 
man’s actions must be complete release 
from material existence, death and 
birth. The two main conditions for 
this release are voiragya (fearlessness, 
aloofness) and yoga (contemplation). 
The first stems from conviction of 
the futility of mundane life, which 
is full of evil and suffering. The second 
arises out of conviction of the need 
for knowing the highest truth—God. 
In contrast to other systems of Indian 
philosophy, Y. attaches exceptional 
importance to the perfection of the 
body and the sense-organs. The main 
principles of Y. were formulated by 
Patanjali in the Yogasiitras (c. ist 
century B.C.). 

Young Hegelians (or Left Hegelians), 
ideologists of the German liberalism 
in the 1830s-1840s, representatives 
of the radical wing of Hegel’s (q.v.) 
philosophical school. In the conditions 
prevailing in Germany at that time 
their interpretation of Hegelian phi- 





Young Hegelians 


losophy and their criticism of Christian- 
ity were but a specific form of bourgeois- 
democratic thought and political 
interest in general. David F. Strauss’ 
book, Das Leben Jesu (1835), which 
critically analysed the Gospel dogmas, 
promoted the formation of the Hege- 
lian Left wing. Strauss considered 
Jesus as an ordinary historical person- 
ality, whose supernatural entity was 
due to a myth. The next step in the 
criticism of religion as a false form 
of consciousness was made by Bruno 
Bauer. He regarded the Gospel dogmas 
as deliberate inventions and the person 
of Jesus as fiction. The theories of 
the Y.H. were but the first attempt, 
modelled on religion, to analyse social 
consciousness as a social structure 
(ideology). Their attention was cen- 
tred on the question of how false con- 
cepts of society appear and acquire 
the force of compulsion. Strauss ex- 
plained this by the traditional per- 
sistency of mythological views. Bauer 
saw the source of this phenomenon in 
the “alienation” of the products of 
individual “self-consciousness”, in that 
the products of the human mind were 
considered as abstractions independent 
of it. The critical analysis of the ideal- 
ist doctrine of the Y.H. laid bare the 
limitedness of a purely immanent 
analysis of social consciousness and 
pointed to the necessity for investi- 
gating material social relations, for 
deducing from them the spiritual life 
of society. To a certain extent this 
necessity was grasped by Feuerbach 
(q.v.). The fask was fulfilled by Marx 
and Engels, who joined the Y.H. move- 
ment at the beginning of the 1840s. 
But they arrived at a radically new 
understanding of social development— 
the theory of historical materialism 
(q.v.). The bankruptcy of the Y.H. 
movement as bourgeois radicalism is 
seen most clearly in its underesti- 
mation of the role of the masses in 
history. This is clear from the works 
of Stirner (q.v.), one of the forerunners 
of anarchism (q.v.). The ideas of class 
struggle, of the objective laws of social 
development, and of the role of eco- 
nomic relations in the life of society 
were alien to the Y.H. Their character- 


— 487 — 


Yushkevich 
istic feature was revolutionary 
phraseology, containing only liberal 


threats to the ruling classes who were 
trying to arrest the bourgeois develop- 
ment of Germany. They regarded the 
masses as the “enemy of the spirit” 
and progress. According to them, the 
“critically thinking individual” was 
the motive force of history. Marx and 
Engels sharply criticised the ideas of 
the Y.H. in their works, The Holy 


Family and The German Ideology 
(qq.v-). 
Yurkevich, Pamfil Danilovich 


(1827-74), Russian idealist philosopher 
and theologian, professor at the Kiev 
Theological Academy (since 1851) and 
Moscow University (since 1861). He 
became famous after the publication 
of his article “On the Science of the 
Human Spirit” (1860), in which he 
tried to refute the works of Cherny- 
shevsky (q.v.) on the anthropological 
principle in philosophy and thus earned 
the praise and recognition of the re- 
actionaries who opposed the material- 
ism of the revolutionary democrats. 
Y. rejected the materialistic explana- 
tion of man’s psychical life, counter- 
posing to it the Christian notion of 
the unity of the body and the soul. 
Man, in his opinion, is cognised in two 
ways: the body is perceived by ex- 
ternal senses, while spiritual phenom- 
ena are perceived by inner senses, 
by faith. Science should not inter- 
fere in the explanation of the spiritual 
life because it does not possess the 
means necessary for such cognition. In 
his article, “Polemical Gems” (1861), 
Chernyshevsky showed that Y.’s re- 
ligious idealism was untenable. The 
works of Sechenov (q.v.), particularly 
his Refleksy golounogo mozga (Refiexes 
of the Cerebrum), 1863, laid the foun- 
dations for the scientific study of the 
psyche and refuted Y.’s religious views 
of the soul from the psychological 
point of view. 

Yushkevich, Pavel Solomonovich 
(1873-1945), Russian journalist, trans- 
lator of philosophical literature, So- 
cial-Democrat and Menshevik, who 
retired from political activity in the 
1920s. In the book Materialism i kri- 
tichesky realism (Materialism and Criti- 






o= 2 o o 





Yushkevich 


cal Realism), 1908, he criticised the 
philosophy of Marxism from the stand- 
point of Machism and subjective ideal- 
ism. He preached empirio-symbolism 
(q.v.). His work Mirovozzreniye i mi- 
rovozzreniya (World Outlook and World 
Outlooks), 1912, attempted to justify 
idealistic myths by employing the 
specific character of philosophical cre- 


— 488 — 


Yushkevich 


ativity. According to him, philosophy 
is not a science but a result of semi- 
artistic, intellectually emotional vi- 
sion, “a form of collective thought 
and sensation”. This brings him close 
to James, Dilthey, Nietzsche (qq.v.). 
Lenin criticised Y.’s views in his 
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism 


(q.v.). 








Z 


Zen Buddhism, a trend in Buddhism 


(q.v.); originated in China in the 
6th century; postui a single es- 
sence of Buddha and of all creatures, 
and the natural way, tao (q.v.), which 
supersedes all theoretical methods. 
Unlike other Buddhistic schools, Z.B. 
preaches “sudden awakening”, satori. 
The irrationalism and intuitionism 
of Z.B. has been rousing wide- 
spread interest among West Europe- 
an and American philosophers, espe- 
cially in recent years. 


Zeno of Citium (c. 336-c. 264 B.C.), 
founder of the stoic school (see Stoics). 
Born in Citium on Cyprus, son of a 
merchant; studied under Crates the 
Cynic, then under Stilpo and Diodorus 
of the Megarian school (q.v.) and later 
under Polemon the Platonian. In Ath- 
ens about 300 B.C. he founded his 
own school which was called stoic 
(from stoa potkile, portico decorated 
with frescoes). Only a few fragments 
of Z. writings are extant. He divided 
philosophy into three parts—logic, 
physics and ethics. He introduced the 
term “catalepsis” (concept). According 
to Z., the idea (fantasia) is the imprint 
(tuposis) of things in the mind. He 
regarded the “captivating image” as 
ihe criterion of truth, inasmuch as it 
ts associated with the apprehension 
of reality. 


Zeno of Elea (c. 490-c. 430 B.C.) 
of the Elea school (see Eleatics). Was 
the first to introduce the form of dia- 
Jogue; known for his logical paradoxes, 
which posed in negative form impor- 
tant questions of the dialectial nature 
of motion. Z. held that being is non- 
contradictory, therefore contradictory 
being is seeming being. His paradoxes 
amounted to proof that (1) it is logi- 
cally impossible to conceive the mul- 
tiplicity of things, (2) the assumption 
of motion leads to contradiction. His 


best known paradoxes against the 
possibility of motion are “Achilles 
and the Tortoise” and “the Flying 
Arrow” (see Aporia). Lenin, pondering 
over Z.’s arguments stressed that Hegel 
was right in raising objections to them: 
to move means to be in this place and 
at the same time not to be in it; it is 
the unity of the continuity and dis- 
continuity of space and time which 
makes motion possible. 

Zhegalkin, Ivan Ivanovich (1869- 
1947), logician and mathematician, 
professor at Moscow University; one 
of the founders of the Soviet school 
of mathematical logic (q.v.). In 1927- 
28, he devised a logic of propositions 
in the form of an arithmetic of two 
figures—nought (“even”) and one (“une- 
ven”), thus achieving great simplicity 
in the solution of logical problems. 
Unlike the usual logical constructions, 
his logic employs no conjunctions, 
only disjunctions (q.v.) being used 
in the same way as odd and even num- 
bers in arithmetic. 

Zoroastrianism, a dualistic ancient 
Iranian religion. Its creation is credit- 
ed to the mythical prophet Zarathush- 
tra (Zoroaster in Gk.). Z. had been 
fully shaped by the 7th century B.C. 
The main thing in Z. is the doctrine 
of the constant struggle in the world 
between two opposite elements: good, 
personified by the god of lightness 
Ahuro Mazd3o (Ormazd), and evil, 
personified by the god of darkness 
Angrö Mainyush (Ahriman). Its es- 
chatological ideas (see Eschatology) 
on the end of the world, retribution in 
another world, judgement, resurrec- 
tion of the dead and a future saviour 
born of a virgin exerted great influence 
on Judaism (q.v.) and Christianity 
(q.v.). Exists now in the form of Parsi- 
ism in India, which has preserved the 
old dualistic ideas but developed the 
concept of a single Almighty God. 











GLOSSARY OF FOREIGN WORDS AND PHRASES CURRENT 
IN PHILOSOPHICAL LITERATURE 


A, in logic, a universal affirmative 
proposition. Abbreviation for affirmo. 

Ad oculus (L.), to the eyes, visibly. 

A fortiori (L.), a phrase signifying 
all the more; applied to a proposition 
which is more admissible than the 
one previously conceded by an op- 
ponent. 

A posteriori (L.), after experience, 
as a result of experience. 

A priori (L.), prior to experience, 
independent of experience. 

Agens (L.), set in motion; a driving 
force, acting entity. 

Amicus Plato, sed magis amica est 
veritas (L.), Plato is dear to me, but 
truth is dearer still. A paraphrase 
ascribed to Aristotle (q.v.). 

Analogon rationis (L.), similar to 
reason. By this term Leibniz (q.v.) 
designated the lowest forms of con- 
sciousness inherent in animals. 

An sich (Ger.), translated from the 
Latin in se (in itself), introduced by 
Wolff (q.v.) to designate things, ob- 
jects as such, taken outside their 
relation to other things or phenomena. 
After Kant (q.v.) idealists used it to 
denote the inherently unknowable 
“thing-in-itself”. 

Antecedens—consequens (L.), 
cedent—consequent. 

Arbitrum liberum (L.), a free deci- 
sion, freedom of the will. 

Argumentum ad baculinum (L.), lit- 
erally: the argument of the stick; 
figuratively: most forcible of arguments. 

Argumentum ad hominem (L.), an 
irrelevant appeal to personal emotions, 
diverting an argument from sound 
facts and reasons to the personality 
of one’s opponent. 

Argumentum ad rem (L.), 
gument to the point. 


ante- 


an ar- 


Argumentum ad veritatem (L.), ob- 
jective proof. 

Argumentum e contrario (L.), the 
proof from the contrary. 

Argumentum e silentio (L.), a mis- 
leading argument used in reliance on 
keeping silent about something. 

Bellum omnium contra omnes (L.), war 
of all against all. According to Hobbes 
(q.v.), this is a natural condition of 
human society prior to the emergence 
of the state. Hobbes’ original expres- 
sion reads slightly differently: “Bel- 
lum omnium in omnes”. 

Bon sens (F.), common sense. 

Causa activa (L.), an acting cause. 


Causa corporalis (L.), a physical 
cause. 

Causa efficiens (L.), an efficient 
cause. 


Causa essendi (L.), cause of being, 
existence. 

Causa finalis (L.), a final cause. 

Causa formalis (L.), a formal cause, 
as the form according to which a 
statute is made. 


Causa materialis (L.), a cause acting 
in substance, matter; a substratum of 
action. 

Causa movens (motiva), L., a motive 
force, or cause. 

Causa occasionalis (L.), an accident- 
al cause. 

Causa sui (L.), cause of itself; this 
term was used by scholastics to signify 
causelessness (God is uncaused and 
necessary). F. Suarez, Descartes, Schel- 
ling and Hegel (q.v.) applied the term 
as well. Causa sui was the main prin- 
ciple of Spinozism. 

Characteristica universalis (L.), uni- 
versal language, a system of symbols 
projected by Leibniz (q.v.) who 





— 491 — 





believed in the possibility of translating 
philosophical concepts into a language 
of symbols. 

Circulus vitiosus (L.), also circulus 
in probando, a vicious circle, proof 
or evidence involving premisses which 
assume the conclusion which is to be 
established. 

Cogito, ergo sum (L.), I think, there- 
fore I am. Descartes’ fundamental ba- 
sis of philosophy. 

Coincidentia oppositorum (L.), coin- 
cidence of opposites. Nicholas of Cusa 
(q.v.) used this term to denote removal 
of contradictions in the infinite. 

Conditio sine qua non (L.), an indis- 
pensable condition. 

Consensus gentium (consensus om- 
nium), agreement of people; a crite- 
rion of truth: that which is universal 
among men carries the weight of truth. 
This argument was widely used by 
the stoics (q.v.), Cicero and the think- 
ers of the Scottish school. By means 
of this argument certain philosophers 
sought to prove the existence of God. 

Contradictio in adjecto (L.), contra- 
diction in a definition; a favourite 
example is the phrase “round square”. 

Contrat social (F.), social contract 
(see Social Contract, Theory of). 

Credo, quia absurdum est (L.), liter- 
ally: I believe it because it is absurd. 
This dictum is often attributed to 
Tertullian but not found in his works. 
Its meaning nevertheless conveys 
the thought of this Latin church father 
who maintained the rule of faith on 
the basis of one’s trust in the author- 
ity of Christ rather than upon the 
compulsion of reason. Cf. Sacrificium 
intellectus. Some philosophers hold 
that this expression appeared in the 
17th century. 

Credo, ut intelligam (L.), literally: 
I believe in order to understand. A 
principle held by Anselm of Canterbury 
(q.v.), who posited faith as the basis 
of knowledge. 

Cum principia negante non est dis- 
putandum (L.), logically, it is impos- 
sible to conduct a dispute unless there 
is a consensus regarding the basic 
premisses. 

De omnibus dubitandum (L.), doubt 
everything. A point of departure in 


Cartesian philosophy. Having opposed 
scholastic speculative philosophy and 
its admission of scientifically unde- 
monstrable truths, taken on trust, Des- 
cartes (q.v.) declared that doubt was 
the only right method of scientific 
cognition. 

Deus sive natura (L.), God, or na- 
ture, i.e., the identity of god and 
nature. A tenet of Spinozism. Feuer- 
bach (q.v.) criticised it from the ma- 
terialist position. 

Dictum de omni et nullo (L.), liter- 
ally, said of all and of none, the axiom 
of syllogism that whatever is affirmed 
(denied) of an entire class may be 
affirmed (denied) of any object in- 
cluded in this class. 

Differentia specifica (L.), a generic 
distinction. 

Docta ignorantia (L.), literally: 
learned ignorance, refers to men’s 
“understanding” of the immensity of 
the infinite and divine, and of the in- 
comprehensibility of God. 

E, in logic, a universal negative 
proposition; E is the first vowel in the 
Latin word nego. 

Elan vital (L.), literally: life force, 
vital impetus. This term was used 
by Bergson (q.v.) to denote the source 
of efficient causation. 

Ens (L.), being, existence in the 
most general sense of the term; essence, 
thing. 

Ens a se (L.), being as such, exist- 
ence thanks to itself, as distinct from ens 
ab alio, that which is dependent on 
something else, being conditioned and 
created by it. 

Ens entium (L.), the essence of es- 
sences. 

Ens rationis (L.), an entity of reason. 

Ens reale (L.), a real thing. 

Ens realissimum (L.), the most real 
entity, the inner content of all reality. 

Eppur si muove (It.), “It does move 
all the same!”; this is attributed to 
Galileo (q.v.) who said it before the 
Court of Inquisition after he was forced 
to renunciate the Copernican theory. 

Esse est percipi (L.), to exist means 
to be perceived, the main postulate 
of Berkeley’s (q.v.) philosophy: the 
existence of things consists in percept- 
ibility. 





Tau se heh aaa ae 


— 492 — 





Essentia (L.), essence, a basic con- 
cept of scholasticism; existentia—exist- 
ence—is an opposite concept. 

Exclusi tertii principium (L.), the law 
of excluded middle; one of the basic 
laws of logic: of the two mutually 
excluding statements one is bound 
to be true. A is B or A is not B, the 
third being excluded. 

Ex nihilo nihil fit (L.), out of noth- 
ing nothing is made (or comes), a prop- 
osition advanced by the Greek phi- 
losopher Melissus (5th century B.C.). 
Lucretius (q.v.) developed this idea 
in his poem De rerum natura. Sub- 
sequently, it was used by materialist 
philosophers in their attempt to prove 
that the world is eternal, contrary 
to the idealist teaching that God 
created the world. 

Experimentia est optima rerum 
magistra (L.), experience is the best 
teacher. 

Experimentum crucis (L.), the ex- 
periment of the finger-post, a crucial 
test which helps to ascertain which 
hypothesis is right and which is wrong. 
This expression belongs to Francis 
Bacon (q.v.)}. 

Genus proximum (L.), the nearest 
genus, i.e., a broader class of objects 
encompassing all the species under 
study. 

Homo homini lupus est (L.), man is 
a wolf to man. According to Hobbes 
(q.v.), this phrase expresses the gist 
of relations existing among people 
prior to the emergence of the state. 
The dictum belongs to Plautus, a 
Roman poet. 

Homo sapiens (L.), a human being; 
this concept was introduced by Lin- 
naeus (q.v.) to designate man as a 
biological species. 

I, a conventional sign in logic, 
designating a partial positive proposi- 
tion. / is the second vowel in the Latin 
word affirmo. 

Idem per idem (L.), the same 
through the same; definition through 
definable. 

Ignoramus et ignorabimus (L.), we 
are ignorant and shall remain ignorant. 
According to the German physiologist 
Du Bois-Reymond, who introduced 
this tenet, there is limit to human 


cognition, there are phenomena which 
we cannot know for the time being 
(Ignoramus) and shall not be able 
to know in the future (/gnorabimus). 
To uncognisable phenomena he re- 
ferred the essence of matter and power, 
the origin of motion. 

Tgnoratio elenchi (L.), ignoring the 
point in question, the fallacy of prov- 
ing a conclusion which is other than 
that required or which does not con- 
tradict the thesis which it was under- 
taken to refute. 

Im Werden (Ger.), in the process 
of becoming, appearance. 

In abstracto (L.), in the abstract, 
out of contract with reality. 

In concreto (L.), in reality, in actual 
fact, in a definite case, 

In statu nascendi (L.), in the state 
of conception, in the moment of crea- 
tion. 

Ipse dixit (L.), literally: he himself 
has said it. Reference to Pythagoras 
was regarded by his disciples as the 
most conclusive proof in a dispute. 
Subsequently, this phrase has been 
used to emphasise blind reverence 
for authority. 

Ipso facto (L.), by that very fact; 
thereby. 

M, a conventional sign in logic 
denoting the middle term of a syllog- 
ism. M is the first letter in the Latin 
word medius. 

Medicina mentis (L.), the medicine 
of the spirit; medieval philosophers 
gave this name to logic. 

Modus probandi (L.), a mode of 
proof. 

Mundus intelligibilis (L.), the world 
of intelligible realities. 

Mundus sensibilis (L.), the world 
of things perceived by the human 
senses. 

Natura naturans (L.), creative na- 
ture; natura naturata, created nature. 
These terms were introduced in a Latin 
translation of Averroés’ comments on 
Aristotle’s work De Caelo. Later they 
were used by Johannes Scotus Erigena 
(q.v.), who regarded God as natura 
naturans. Both terms are to be found 
in the works by Bruno, Spinoza, and 
Schelling (qq.v.). With Spinoza, natura 
naturans was a substance, while natura 





p 





— 493 — 





naturata was the world of individual 
things, modes. Schelling saw in na- 
tura naturans the nature as an active 
creating subject, an object of study by 
natural philosophy and not a lifeless 
object studied by natural science. 

Natura non facit saltus (L.), nature 
does not make leaps. This phrase was 
used for the first time in Linnaeus’ 
work Philosophia botanica. But the 
thesis on the gradual development of 
nature goes back to Aristotle. This idea 
is to be found in the works of Leibniz 
(q.v.) as well. 

Nervus probandi (L.), the nerve of 
proof, the most conclusive and deci- 
sive argument. 

Nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius 
fuerit in sensu (L.), literally: nothing 
is in the intellect which was not first 
in sense. The main thesis of sensation- 
alism (q.v.) formulated by Locke (q.v.). 
Leibniz (q.v.) qualified this proposi- 
tion by adding: nisi intellectus ipse, 
i.e., exceptifor what is already present 
as part of the innate nature of the in- 
tellect, thus indicating that reason 
possesses its own laws independent 
of senses. 

Nosce te ipsum (L.), know thyself. 
These words in Greek “Gndthi scauton” 
carved on the pediment of the temple 
of Apollo Delphinius, are ascribed to 
Thales (q.v.). 

Nota notae est nota rei ipsius (L.), 
literally: that which falls within the 
comprehension of a “note”, the axiom 
of syllogism that a known component 
of a thing also falls within the com- 
prehension of the thing. 

Notiones communes, or notitiae com- 
munes (L), common notions. The stoics 
regarded notions as common to all 
men and, therefore, innate to 
them. 

O, a conventional sign in logic de- 
signating a partial negative proposi- 
tion. O is the second vowel in the 
Latin word nego. 

Obscurum per obscurius (L.), explain- 
ing the obscure by means of the more 
obscure. 

Omnis determinatio est negatio (L.), 
se definition is negation” (Spinoza, 
q.v.). 

Omnis 


verum omni vero consonat 


(L.), all truths are mutually interde- 
pendent, a scholastic proposition. 

Ordo ordinans (L.), the organising 
principle, the organising world reason. 
By this term Fichte (q.v.) called God. 

P, a conventional sign in logic 
designating the predicate of a propo- 
sition. P, is the first letter in Latin 
word Praedicatum. 

Per se (L.), by himself; essentially; 
in itself. 

Petitio principii (L.), or begging 
the question; the illicit assumption 
in the premiss of that which is to be 
proved in the conclusion. 

Philosophia prima (L.), First Philos- 
ophy, the name given by Aristotle 
(q.v.) to metaphysics (q.v.) and by 
Wolf (q.v.) to ontology (q.v.). 

Post factum (L.), after the event. 

Post hoc, ergo propter hoc (L.), after 
this, therefore, because of this. A most 
current logical fallacy, in which it 
is argued that a consequent is caused 
by an antecedent simply because of 
the temporal relationship. This fal- 
lacy gives rise to many superstitions 
(belief in dreams, evil omen, etc.). 

Pro et contra (L.), to argue for and 
against. 

Profession de foi (F.), the profession 
of one’s faith, the declaration of one’s 
views and convictions. 

Quaternio terminorum (L.), violation 
of a rule in logic. It is most apt to arise 
through equivocation, an ambiguous 
word playing the role of the middle 
term with one meaning in the major 
premiss and another meaning in the 
minor premiss. 

Qui nimium probat, nihil probat (L.), 
he who proves too much proves noth- 
ing. 

Quod erat demonstrandum (L.), or 
Q.E.D., which was to be proved or 
demonstrated. 

Ratio (L.), reason, intellect, basis. 

Ratio agendi (L.), the basis of action. 

Ratio cognoscendi (L.), the basis of 
cognition. 

Ratio essendi (L.), the basis of being. 

Reductio ad absurdum (L.), reduction 
to absurdity; the proof of a proposi- 
tion by proving the falsity of its con- 
tradictory. 

Res cogitans (L.), thinking thing; 











— 494 — 


res extensa, extended thing. The terms 
introduced by Descartes to desig- 
nate spiritual and material sub- 
stances. 

Reservatio mentalis (L.), a mental 
reservation. A person, who makes a 
public statement containing some ob- 
ligation,» imparts a special meaning 
to his words, which releases him from 
this obligation. The method of mental 
reservations plays a special role in the 
Jesuitical casuistry. 

S, a conventional sign in logic denot- 
ing the subject of a proposition. S 
is the first letter in the Latin word 
subjectum. 

Sacrificium intellectus (L.), “Sacri- 
fice of reason”, rejection of one’s own 
thinking. After the Catholic Church 
adopted the dogma of the infallibility 
of the Pope this expression means sac- 
rifice of one’s convictions for the sake 
of the church authority. 

Salus populi suprema lex esto (L.), 
let the welfare of the people be the 
final law. This expression is ascribed 
to Cicero. 

Sic et non (L.), so and not so. The 
title of the work by Abélard (q.v.), 
who laid the foundations of the scho- 
lastic method based on the solution 
of problems through the conflict of 
diametrically opposite views, through 
the accounting of all arguments “for 
and against” (see Pro et contra). 

Species (L.), in philosophy, a mental 
image; in logic and biology, a concep- 
tion subordinate to a higher conception 
called a genus. 

Spiritus (L.), the spirit. 

Status nascendi (L.), the state of 
conception, origination. 


Sui generis (L.), of its own kind, 
the only one of its kind. 

Tabula rasa (L.), literally, a smoothed 
or blank tablet. The name given 
by the stoics and sensationalists to 
the soul at the birth of man. They 
held that experience lays its imprint 
on it only in the course of his develop- 
ment and fills it with ideas. The a 
priori juxtaposition of the soul with 
the blank tablet goes back to Plato, 
Aristotle (qq.v.), and other antique 
philosophers. The Greek equivalent 
belongs to Alexander of Aphrodisias and 
the Latin one, to Aegidius of Rome. 

Terminus (L.), the limit, frontier; 
the concept. 

Terminus a quo (L.), the limit from 
which; starting-point. 

Tertium comparationes (L.), a basis 
of comparison. 

Tertium non datur (L.), literally: 
the third is not given. See Excluded 
Middle, Law of. 

Tout est pour le mieux dans le meilleur 
des mondes possibiles (F.), literally: 
“All is for the best in the the best 
of possible worlds”, a maxim from Vol- 
taire’s Candide where he ridicules the 
theory of pre-established harmony 
(q.v.) advanced by Leibniz. 

Ultima ratio (L.), the last and deci- 
sive argument. 

Volonté generale (F.), literally: the 
general will. According to Rousseau 
(q.v.), people who live in a natural 
state conclude a social contract in or- 
der to place their personality and prop- 
erty within the purview of the gener- 
al will, which exercises supreme guid- 
ance in their interest. This will may 
be expressed by the people alone. 








REQUEST TO READERS 


Progress Publishers would be glad to have your opinion 
of this book, its translation and design, and any suggestions 
you may have for future publications. 

Please send your comments to 21, Zubousky Boulevard, 

Moscow, U.S.S.R. 


