Copemlois to 





/ill 



kansas city, missouri 



Books will be issued only 

on presentation of library card, 
lease report lost cards and 

change of residence promptly. 
Card holders are responsible for 

all books, records, films, pictures 
or other library materials 
checked out on their cards. 




D 0001 050SO 



JAN 05 



FROM COPERNICUS TO EINSTEIN 



From Coper KLICTULS 

* JL 



BY HANS REICHENBAGH 



Translated by Ralph B. Winn 




NEW YORK 
PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY, INC. 

M C M X L I I 



FROM COPERNICUS TO EINSTEIN 

COPYRIGHT MCMXLII BY 
PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY, INC. 
15 EAST 40TH STREET, NEW YORK 



Composed and Printed in the United States of America 
By Steingould Corp., New York 

TYPOGRAPHY BY SIDNEY SOLOMON 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER 

1. The Copernican View of the World 11 

2. Ether 29 

3. The Special Theory of Relativity 49 

4. The Relativity of Motion 73 

5. General Theory of Relativity 85 

6. Space and Time 107 



6201251 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

FIGURE 

1. A Tycho Brahe s Sextant 20 

2. Roemer s Observation of Jupiter s Moon 32 

3. The Phenomenon of Interference 38 

4. The Total Spectrum 46 

5. The Diagram of Michelson s Experiment 54 

6. A Diagram of the Measurement of the 

Speed of Light 59 

7. A Diagram of the Course of a Light-Signal 63 

8. Einstein s "Box Experiment" 86 

9. The Curvature of Light-Rays in Einstein s Box 95 

10. The Einstein Tower in Potsdam 100 

11. Major Segrave s 1,000 Horsepower Auto 

at Full Speed 1 10 



FROM COPERNICUS TO EINSTEIN 



Chapter 1 : THE COPERNICAN VIEW 
OF THE WORLD 



THIS little book purports to serve as an introduction to 
the great problems of space, time and motion. The in 
quiries it is concerned with are very old. Men have been 
forming ideas concerning space and time since times im 
memorial, and curiously enough, have been writing and 
fighting about these things with the greatest interest, even 
fanaticism. This has been a strange strife, indeed, having 
little to do with economic necessities ; it has always dealt 
with abstract things, far removed from our daily life and 
with no direct influence upon our daily activities. Why 
do we need to know whether the sun revolves around the 
earth or vice versa? What business of ours is it, anyway? 
Can this knowledge be of any use to us? 

No sooner have we uttered these questions than we 
become aware of their foolishness. It may not be of any 
use to us, but we want to know something about these 
problems. We do not want to go blindly through the 
world. We desire more than a mere existence. We need 
these cosmic perspectives in order to be able to experi 
ence a feeling for our place in the world. The ultimate 
questions as to the meaning of our actions and as to the 
meaning of life in general always tend to involve astro 
nomical problems. Here lies the mystery surrounding 

11 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



astronomy, here lies the wonder we experience at the 
sight of the starry sky, the wonder growing in proportion 
to our understanding of immense distances of space and 
of the stars inner nature. Here is the source of scientific 
as well as popular astronomy. 

These two branches have diverged in the course of 
their development. Astronomy, as a science, has come to 
forget its primitive wonder: instead, it approaches the 
realm of stars with sober research and calculation. This 
disenchantment with its subject-matter, which scientific 
study invariably entails, has permeated astronomy to a 
greater degree than the layman realizes. In observing the 
astronomers of today, how they measure, take notes, cal 
culate, how little attention fiiey pay to mysterious specu 
lations, one may be surprised to find the wonderful struc 
ture of learning so cut and dry at a close range. Yet 
nothing is more wrong and more objectionable than the 
feeling of a heartbreaking loss, with which some people 
regard the vanishing mysticism of the skies. Although 
science may have destroyed a few naive fantasies, what 
she has put in their place is so immensely greater that we 
can well bear the loss. 

It takes perseverance and energy, of course, to com 
prehend the discoveries of science; but whoever under 
takes the study is bound to learn many more surprising 
things from it than a naive study of nature can disclose. 
Scientific astronomy has always exercised, in fact, a great 
influence upon everyday thinking and upon the popular 
conception of the universe. If it is difficult today to pro- 

12 



The Copernican View of the World 



nounce the name of Copernicus without thinking of a 
turning point of history, it is not only because the name 
is connected with a profound transformation in the 
science, but also because all our knowledge and thinking 
have been deeply affected by his discovery. The statement 
that the earth does not occupy the center of the world 
means more than an astronomical fact; we interpret it as 
asserting that man is not the center of the world, that 
everything which appears large and mighty to us is in 
reality of the smallest significance, when measured by 
cosmic standards. The statement has been made possible 
as a result of scientific development in the course of 
thousands of years, yet it definitely contradicts our im 
mediate experience. It takes a great deal of training in 
thinking to believe in it at all Nowadays we are no 
longer conscious of these things, because we have been 
brought up since childhood in the Copernican view of 
the world. However, it cannot be denied that the view 
belies the testimony of our senses, that every immediate 
evidence shows the earth as standing still while the 
heavens are moving. And who among us can declare in 
all seriousness that he is able to imagine the tremendous 
size of the sun or to comprehend the cosmic distances 
defying all earthly ways of measurement? The signifi 
cance of Copernicus lies precisely in the fact that he 
broke with an old belief apparently supported by all 
immediate sensory experiences. He could do it only be 
cause he had at his disposal a considerable amount of 
accumulated scientific thought and scientific data, only 

13 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



because he himself had followed the road of disillusion 
ment in knowledge before he glimpsed new and broader 
perspectives. 

If we endeavor to trace, in the following pages, the 
development of the problems of space and time, begin 
ning with the discovery of Copernicus and closing with 
the still less accessible theory of the Copernicus of our 
day, we have no other alternative than to apply hard 
scientific thought to every step of the way. We must add 
that the discoveries of modern science have been made 
possible only by the abundance of new scientific materials. 
Einstein s doctrines are by no means an outgrowth of 
astronomical reflections alone; they are grounded in the 
facts of the theory of electricity and light as well. We are 
able to comprehend them only insofar as we get ac 
quainted with all of their sources. This derivation from 
several sources is characteristic of the theory of rela 
tivity. While the modern source gave rise to the special 
theory of relativity, the older sources provided the ma 
terial for the construction of the general theory of rela 
tivity, in which the old and new knowledge became 
blended in a magnificent unity. 

In this chapter we shall deal with old material ; in the 
next two chapters we shall present the special theory of 
relativity and its origin; and the last three chapters will 
be devoted to the blending of the material and, therefore, 
to the general theory of relativity. 

The world-picture found by Copernicus goes back to 
the ancient Greeks. It was systematized about 140 A.D. 

14 



The Copernican View of the World 



by Ptolemy Claudius of Alexandria and outlined in his 
famous work Almagest. The most important feature of 
the Ptolemaic scheme of the universe is the principle 
that the earth is the center of the world. The heavenly 
globe revolves around it; and Ptolemy knew full well 
that it has the same spherical shape below the horizon, 
which it assumes above the horizon. In fact, Ptolemy 
knew even that the earth is a sphere. His proofs to this 
effect reveal a great knowledge of astronomy. He shows, 
first of all, the existence of curvature from north to south. 
As the Polar Star stands higher in the north and lower 
in the south, the surface of the earth must be correspond 
ingly curved. The. proof of the existence of curvature 
from west to east reveals even better observation. When 
the clocks are set by the sun in two places located west 
and east, and when an eclipse of the moon is thus ob 
served, it will be seen at different times. However, the 
eclipse is a single objective event and should be seen 
everywhere at the same time. Hence we conclude * that 
the clocks at the two places are not in accord. This can 
be accounted for by the curvature of the earth in the 
west-east direction : the sun passes the line of the meridian 
at different moments in different places. 

In spite of the recognition of the spherical shape of 
the earth, Ptolemy was far from admitting its movement 
He contended, on the contrary, that it was impossible for 
the earth to be moving at all, either in a rotating or in a 
progressive manner. As far as the former is concerned, 
he admitted the possibility of such an opinion, as long 

15 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



as the movement of the stars was considered. However, 
when we take into consideration everything that happens 
around us and in the air, this view so he argues be 
comes obviously absurd. For the earth, during its rota 
tion, would have to leave the air behind. Objects in the 
atmosphere, such as flying birds, not being able to follow 
the rotation, would have to be also left behind. A pro 
gressive motion of the earth is equally impossible for, in 
that case, the earth would leave the center of the heavenly 
sphere, and we would see by night a smaller part of the 
sphere) and by day a larger one. 

One can see from these arguments that the great 
astronomer has devoted much serious thought to the 
problem. In the light of his rather limited knowledge of 
mechanics and of the heavenly spaces, his reasoning must 
have seemed quite conclusive. As far as his last objection 
was concerned, he could .not have suspected that the 
interstellar distances were so great as to make the lateral 
shift of the earth completely unnoticeable. 

The planets are characterized, according to Ptolemy, 
by common movements. Their path, as observed in the 
sky, is determined by superimposed circular orbits. As 
a result, there arise the so-called "epicycles." One must 
admit that Ptolemy has deeply understood the nature of 
planetary movements. When one gets acquainted with the 
Copernican conception, one discovers the facts revealed 
behind Ptolemy s epicycles: the loop of the planets 
course mirrors their double motion as regards the earth. 
In the first place, they move in a circle around the sun, 



16 



The Copernican View of the World 



and in the second place, this movement is observed from 
the earth which, in its turn, revolves around the sun. 

The Ptolemaic conception of the universe dominated 
the learned people s minds for more than one thousand 
years. The man who undermined this firm tradition 
Nicholas Copernicus required great independence of 
thought as well as great scientific knowledge, for only an 
insight into the ultimate relations of nature could give 
him the ability to discern new approaches to truth. 

The canon of Frauenburg was long known as a 
learned astronomer before his new ideas were presented; 
he had studied in Italy all branches of science, he had 
acted as doctor and church administrator in his home 
town, and his astronomic knowledge was so well recog 
nized that in 1514 he was asked by the Lateran Coun 
cil for his opinion on questions of calendar reform. His 
new ideas concerning the system of the universe were 
formed, in their essence, at the age of 33, However, he 
did not promulgate them at that time, but devoted the 
following years to a thorough elaboration and demon 
stration of his theories. Only excerpts of his doctrine 
were published during his lifetime. His main work en 
titled "Of the Rotation of Celestial Bodies" appeared 
only after his death in 1546. He read the proofs only on 
his death-bed and thus failed to notice that his friend 
Osiander supplied the work with a foreword which con 
tained a cautious compromise with the opinions of the 
Church. 

If we examine the proofs given by Copernicus of his 

17 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



new theory, we find them quite insufficient from the point 
of view of present-day knowledge. He was able, in fact, 
to cite as a distinct advantage only the greater simplicity 
of his system. He regards it as improbable that the stars 
move with great speed in their large orbits and finds it 
mo)re likely that the earth rotates on,&lt; its axis, so that the 
speed of motion in each particular point is considerably 
smaller. Against Ptolemy s objection to this he urges that 
Ptolemy considered the rotating movement of the earth 
as implying force, whereas it is simply natural ; its laws 
differ completely from those of a sudden jerky movement 
All of this is certainly inconclusive. We know today that 
Newton s theory contains the first real proof of the 
Copernican conception of the universe. But it seems that 
new ideas are able to gain foothold by the sheer power of 
their inherent truth long before their objective verifica 
tion has been obtained. 

On the other hand, it is very important to acknowl 
edge that the Copernican theory offers a very exact calcu 
lation of the apparent movements of the planets and that 
the tabulations (the so-called "Ephemerides") accomp 
anying it are far superior to the older ones. Here lies one 
of the reasons which led the scientists to accept the 
Coperpican system, even though it must be conceded that, 
from the modern standpoint, practically identical results 
could be obtained by me^jjsr of a somewhat revised Ptole 
maic system. Furthermore, Copernicus calculated quite 
accurately the radii of the planetary orbits (within less 
than \%). In fact, he knew already that the sun must be 

18 



The Copernican View of ike World 



slightly off the center of the solar system, for an assump 
tion to the contrary led to estimable discrepancies. 

Yet there was still a long way from this discovery to 
the recognition of the elliptic shape of the orbits; any 
conclusive evidence to this effect required above all 
better astronomic instruments. In this important connec 
tion, we must consider Tycho Brahe who is less promi 
nent as a theoretician than as a builder of outstanding 
instruments. Brahe was able to work for many decades 
under the protection of the Danish king. He built the 
castle Uranienburg on an island, to which was attached 
a large settlement where precise instruments were pre 
pared for him in special plants. It is amazing how the 
precision of instruments was increased in this manner. 
For instance, Copernicus had to be satisfied with meas 
urements within 10 of the arc. This corresponds approxi 
mately to an angle covered by a five-pence piece at a 
distance of six meters. Tycho increased the precision to 
within half a minute of the arc. This angle would be 
enclosed by the same coin at a distance of 120 meters. 
With the instruments of today, of course, angles can be 
measured within one hundredth of a second of the arc. 
The coin would have to be placed at a distance of 360 
kilometers to enclose such a small angle. 

This precision we owe mainly to the use of the tele 
scope. Tycho had to work without a telescope. One of his 
sextants with which he conducted his observations of 
Mars still stands in the Prague observatory, where Tycho, 

19 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



exiled from Denmark, spent the last years of his life 
(c. 1600). 

Figure 1 shows the picture of this historic instrument. 
The pointed leg is set in a stand. The whole instrument 
is movable at the hinge in the upper end of the leg. It 
measures IVfc meter at the shank. The shank may be 
turned and has a sight-hole at the bottom to the left, an 
ironplate with a slit, through which a sharp edge on the 




Figure I. A Tycko Brake s Sextant 

upper end of the shank (to the right) is adjusted. This 
endpiece slides along an angle-scale. The sight-plate it 
self measuring several centimeters is reproduced in an 
20 



The Copernican View of the World. 



enlarged form at the upper left corner. By means of such 
a crude-looking apparatus, Tycho found the data on 
which modern astronomy is historically resting. 

The man who continued Tycho Brahe s work was his 
assistant Johann Kepler whose name surpasses by far that 
of his master. Kepler carried on his observations with the 
sextants of Tycho. He determined the course of the mo 
tion of Mars by means of so many individual observa 
tions that he was able to pronounce it with certainty as 
elliptical in shape. He discovered through mere measure 
ment also other laws of planetary motion, called after 
him "the Kepler s laws." One must admire the strength 
of character of this man, which manifests itself in his 
zeal for factual accuracy. Kepler was at first a mystic 
and speculative dreamer, disinclined to sober observa 
tions. He concentrated in his early works on searching 
for strange mathematical harmonies of nature, and such 
a goal inclines one to distort facts rather than to establish 
them. It remains true, however, that Kepler has accom 
plished much more for his own aim by his zeal for factual 
accuracy than by his speculations. He himself expresses 
this thought In his work entitled "Harmony of the 
World," which appeared in 1619, he writes concerning 
the discovery of his laws: "At last I have found it, and 
my hopes and expectations are proven to be true that 
natural harmonies are present in the heavenly movements, 
both in their totality and in detail though not in a 
manner which I previously imagined, but in another, 
more perfect, manner. . . If you forgive me, I shall be 

21 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



glad ; if you are angry, I shall endure it. Here I cast my 
dice and write a book to be read by my contemporaries or 
by the future generations. It may wait long centuries for 
its readeif&lt; But even God himself had to wait for six 
thousand years for those who contemplate his work." 

We must not forget, however, that, though the astro 
nomic picture of the universe was considerably advanced, 
in regard to precision, by Kepler s discoveries, neverthe 
less, that world-view, though basically Copernican, diff 
ered very considerably from our Copernican idea of the 
world. Copernicus as well as Kepler was of the opinion 
that the solar system virtually exhausted the space of the 
universe. The stars, according to them, were tiny dots in 
the sphere of heavenly matter, which circumscribed the 
whole of space. When Giordano Bruno expressed his 
thoughts on the infinity of the firmament and maintained 
that fixed stars were independent solar systems, Kepler 
proceeded immediately to combat the idea. How difficult 
it must have been to climb the stairs leading to our 
present-day knowledge ! 

Astronomy made its decisive advance over Kepler s 
knowledge again through an improvement in ,the means 
of observation through the invention of the telescope. 
The great merit of having made the first serviceable 
telescope and of having used it for the observation of the 
sky belongs to Galileo ; though not the original inventor 
of the telescope, he constructed it after hearing of such 
instruments. He directed his telescope toward the moon 
and recognized the spots on the moon, on account of their 

22 



The Coperntcan View of the World 



jagged outline and shifting illumination, as tremendous 
mountains (1610). He pointed it towards Venus and saw 
its sickle-like shape, similar to that of the moon, which 
it periodically assumes as a result of receiving light from 
the sun. He directed the telescope towards Saturn and 
saw its triple figure the details of which he could not 
yet discern. He directed it towards Jupiter and saw its 
satellites (the four brighter ones) designated by him as 
"medizeic planets." 

All these facts, with their enlargement and enrich 
ment of the Copernican world, must have greatly aston 
ished his contemporaries. It also provoked, to be sure, 
the opposition of the old school of scientists who saw their 
tenets grounded in Aristotle seriously endangered. Gali 
leo s most precarious position can be best envisaged from 
a letter written by him to Kepler: "I am very grateful 
that you have taken interest in my investigations from the 
very first glance at them and thus have become the first 
and almost the only person who gives full credence to 
my contentions; nothing else could be really expected 
from a man with your keenness and frankness. But what 
will you say to the noted philosophers of our University 
who, despite repeated invitations, still refuse to take a 
look either at the moon or the telescope and so close 
their eyes to the light of truth? This type of people 
regard philosophy as a book like Aeneid or Odyssey and 
believe that truth will be discovered, as they themselves 
assert, through the comparison of texts rather than 
through the study of the world or nature. You would 

23 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



laugh if you could hear some of our most respectable 
university philosophers trying to argue the new planets 
out of existence by mere logical arguments as if these 
were magical charms." Galileo relates how another scien 
tist refused to take a look through the telescope "because 
it would only confuse him." The tragic fate of Galileo, 
caused by such antagonism, is well known. He had to pay 
with many years of incarceration and imprisonment for 
his sponsorship of the Copernican theory. 

Another achievement of Galileo had apparently no 
direct connection with astronomy; but this connection 
was discerned soon enough. Galileo was the first man to 
investigate the laws of falling bodies. He has thereby 
established the basic laws on which the science of mech 
anics was destined to grow. The apparatus he built was 
quite primitive. For instance, he had no watch in the 
modern sense of the word, but had to measure time by 
means of water running out of a vessel. In spite of every 
thing, he was able to determine the relationship between 
the distance and the time of the fall, and also the law 
of acceleration. He also discovered the fact a most sur 
prising fact for his day that all bodies fall equally 
fast Finally, he formulated the basic law of motion, 
named after him : that every body unaffected by external 
forces moves in a straight line at a uniform speed, and 
that this motion can never stop by itself. 

Although these laws seem to be merely bits of factual 
information, nevertheless they signify an extraordinary 
progress as compared to the preceding era. There was 

24 



The Copernican View of the World 



no inclination at that time to collect data. It was believed 
that all one wanted to learn could be disclosed by specu 
lative thinking. Galileo s great achievement was that he 
resorted to direct investigation of nature. Moreover, the 
facts he discovered were destined to attain a significance 
far beyond their own realm, namely, when Newton con 
structed the mechanics of heavens on them. 

Fate allotted to the English physicist Isaac Newton 
(1643-1727) an outstanding role in the history of the 
natural sciences of the described period. He was the great 
unifier who combined the individual discoveries of Co 
pernicus, Kepler and Galileo into one magnificent system. 
His intellectual achievement cannot be estimated too 
highly. With the vision of a genius he realized that the 
power of gravitation perceived by Galileo in his doctrines 
concerning falling bodies had a significance far tran 
scending the region of the earth, that this power of attrac 
tion constituted a property of all mass, and that it deter 
mined the planets behavior across cosmic distances. This 
far-reaching insight into the nature of things was accom 
panied by Newton s great caution in scientific investiga 
tion. He started with the correct premise that the power 
of attraction must diminish with distance. He then cal 
culated what the magnitude of this power, already esti 
mated by Galileo on the surface of the earth, could be 
at the distance of the moon. Next he computed the length 
of time required for the revolution of the moon around 
the earth, if this gravitational power was indeed respon 
sible for the motion of the moon. All this was a magnifi- 

25 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



cent elaboration of the original idea. Unfortunately, luck 
was against Newton, and his investigations resulted in 
anything but agreement with facts. Yet nothing shows 
better the greatness of the scholar s character than his 
conduct in the face of failure: he put his calculations 
away in a closet without publishing a single word con 
cerning his profound meditations (1666). Only twenty 
years later could the mistake be explained. The length 
of the earth s radius, taken by Newton as the basis of his 
calculations, had been inexact; new estimates on the astro 
nomers part gave a new measurement with which New 
ton s reflections about the moon proved to be in full 
accord. 

The mechanics of Newton has thus received confirma 
tion, and it must have seemed like a magic key to his 
contemporaries. His theory transformed the fundamental 
facts of the preceding centuries into a uniform system, 
including the Copernican theory of the heliocentric 
motion of the planets, Kepler s laws concerning their 
orbits, and Galileo s laws of falling bodies in a gravita 
tional field. Kepler did not live to greet this triumph of 
thought; no doubt, he would have rejoiced over this proof 
of the harmony of cosmic motions. 

The Copernican conception of the universe was at 
last scientifically established, insofar as the laws under 
lying it stood revealed. Up to that time the Copernican 
conception of the universe, as compared to the Ptolemaic 
conception, could justify itself only by its claim of re 
presenting the world-picture in simpler terms. But now, 

26 



The Copermcan View of the World 



with the addition of Newtonian mechanics, it became the 
only acceptable one. Its real merit was made explicit: the 
Copernican conception of the world provided an explana 
tion of natural phenomena, a cosmic order governed by 
laws. It was the destiny of the Western mind to absorb 
this worldview which so much corresponded to its innate 
tendencies of thought. 

Thus ends the first period of new physics; and with 
it has come a new method of inquiry to dominate the 
natural sciences ever since. The collection of facts is the 
starting point of investigation; but it does not mark its 
end. Only when an explanation comes like a bolt of light 
ning and melts separate ideas together in the fire of 
thoughtful synthesis, is that stage reached which we call 
understanding and which satisfies the seeking spirit. 

The following chapters will show how widely and 
how consciously new physics has carried through this 
method of inquiry. 



27 



Chapter 2 : ETHER 



WE HAVE already pointed out, in connection with the 
Copernican picture of the world, that the astronomic 
problems of motion and gravitation represent one of the 
sources from which the theory of relativity has sprung. 
Its other source lies in the theory of electricity and in 
that of light. We shall now concern ourselves with its 
development from this latter source ; and in so doing, we 
shall follow the trend of development characterizing the 
modern conception of the physical universe. The truth is 
that the science of physics was forced to go beyond the 
views of Copernicus, Galileo and Newton by questions 
arising in connection with electricity and optical phe 
nomena. These men, considered as innovators at their 
time, experienced all the inimical resistance of an out 
worn age still fighting for its existence, as we can judge 
from Galileo s tragic words quoted above. For the suc 
ceeding period the same men represent the classics, the 
great authorities who have dominated the thoughts of a 
whole era and whose work was carried on by generations 
of scholars; and the younger generation has to fight 
against them a battle similar to that which made those 
men famous. 

It seems that progress in the knowledge of nature can 
be made only through conflict between two successive 

29 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



generations. What is considered at one time as a revolu 
tion of all thinking, a tempest in the brain, is for the next 
age a matter of fact, a school knowledge acquired under 
the influence of one s environment and believed and pro 
claimed with the certainty of everyday experience. Thus, 
possible criticism to which even the greatest discoveries 
should be continuously submitted, is forgotten ; thus we 
lose sight of the limitations holding for the deepest in 
sights; and thus man forgets in his absorbing concern 
with the particulars to re-examine the foundations of the 
whole structure of knowledge. We shall always have to 
depend on men like Copernicus who question obvious 
matters and whose critical judgment penetrates deep 
into the foundations of truth. 

The history of the study of light illustrates this proc 
ess. For it represented a definite attempt to comprehend 
the phenomena of light on the basis of ideas aroused by 
new astronomy and mechanics; it was an attempt to make 
mechanics the last court of appeal, the ultimate founda 
tion of all knowledge. But this attempt failed. It turned 
out that the problem of light, too, can be solved only in 
a Copernican fashion, insofar as mechanics was. unable 
to explain electrical and optical phenomena, but, on 
the contrary, had to be explained by them. This was a 
tortuous road marked by continual frustrations. When 
ever new theories have been constructed, there appeared 
also new experiences accentuating the inadequacy of the 
solution that had been achieved. 

The first and most important step toward the under- 

30 



Ether 

standing of light was taken already at Newton s time by 
the Danish astronomer Olaf Roemer. It was a discovery 
of profound significance: in the year 1676 this astronomer 
determined the velocity of light and thus discovered, not 
only a new numerical result, but also a new physical con 
cept. Up to that time the idea that light required time 
to propagate did not occur at all to anybody. Among the 
scholars only a few outstanding minds had foreseen the 
possibility of such a fact. Nowadays, when the younger 
generation acquires this information on the school-bench, 
it is taken as a matter of fact; but one should understand 
to what extent it contradicts immediate experience. It 
seems natural to us to think that light fills the room the 
moment we switch on an electric lamp; actually this is 
not at all the case, for light spreads gradually from the 
electric bulb and its environment to the rest of the room. 
The word gradually is here used, of course, in a figura 
tive sense : the process of the propagation of light takes 
in this case less than one-millionth of a second. This im 
mense velocity of light was the main reason why the 
character of light as a spreading process could be recog 
nized only at a late period. Only exceedingly exact meas 
urements could determine the minute periods required 
for the propagation of beams of light 

This discovery remained therefore reserved for astro 
nomy, a science combining precision of measurement with 
the observation of tremendous distances; it offered suit 
able conditions for the determination of the velocity of 
light Olaf Roemer investigated the eclipses of Jupiter s 

31 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



satellites; he watched the disappearance and re-appear 
ance of these moons when, in their orbital motion, they 
passed V cone-shaped shadow of the planet. As a result, 
he found that the durations of such darkenings of the 
moon were not always precisely the same but varied by 
seconds, according to the time of the year. Such little 
deviations from exact figures led more than once, in the 
history of science, to deepest insights into the nature of 
the world. It is as if nature discloses its fundamental rela 
tionships in the minute errors of current theories. 





Pig. 2. Roemer s Observation of Jupiter s Moon 

In Roemer s case, the existence of a velocity of light 
was inferred from such deviations in observations, and 
even the numerical value of this velocity could be calcu 
lated rather exactly. The trend of his thovight can be 
understood, when Figure 2 is examined. 

32 



Ether 

The path of the earth is here portrayed as art ellipse 
with the sun (S) occupying one of its foci. Jupiter (J), 
with the orbit of one of its moons, is found to the right 
(It is understood that the limitations of the diagram 
make it impossible for us to give a true picture of dis 
tances and sizes) . When the moon enters the conical shad 
ow of Jupiter at point M, it sends the last beam of light, 
reaching the earth several minutes later at point E 1 . After 
a few days the moon emerges from the conical shadow, 
turns slowly around Jupiter and reaches once more point 
M (In reality, this is not the same point M, insofar as 
Jupiter with its moons will have moved forward; but 
this movement is very slow and can be disregarded in 
our explanation). At the moment of this second disap 
pearance, the moon sends again its last beam to the earth. 
The latter has moved in the meantime to E 2 , however, 
so that the beam has now a longer trip to make. Had the 
earth remained at E 1 , the astronomer would notice the 
disappearance of the moon at M every time after a de 
finite interval corresponding to the time required by the 
light to traverse the distance ME 1 . On both occasions the 
delay would be the same, and the duration of a complete 
orbital course of the moon would be found identically 
correct. But the earth has not remained standing still but 
has moved in the meantime to E 2 . Light has now a longer 
route ME 2 to traverse, and the excess of time required for 
it becomes responsible for a faulty prolongation of the 
orbital period. As the correct duration of each revolution 
of the moon is known from other sources (which cannot 

33 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



be here discussed), and as the distances ME 1 and ME* 
can also be estimated, the difference between the two in 
tervals of time required for the propagation of light can 
be readily calculated. The time required by light to tra 
verse a distinct distance becomes thus known, and the 
velocity of light can be immediately determined. 

Roemer s discovery was known to Newton, whom 
we meet here in an important role, not only in connection 
with mechanics but also in that with optics. Newton 
explained the propagation of light as the emission of tiny 
particles thrown into space and capable of passing 
through air and gases by virtue of their smallness. He was 
able to account for many optical phenomena by means 
of this theory of emission of light. His doctrine domi 
nated the physical interpretation of the world for one 
century, even though there was formed at that time the 
wave theory of light, which replaced Newton s concep 
tion at a later date. 

It was the mathematician Christian Huyghens who 
recognized, with remarkable keenness, the possibility of 
explaining all phenomena of light-transmission by means 
of wave-propagation. His theory found acceptance in the 
scientific circles with considerable difficulty mainly be 
cause he .put as it were the cart before the horse. It was 
eminently suited to explain quite simply the phenomena 
discerned in difficult optical experiments; but when it 
came to the most ordinary, easily observable facts of light- 
propagation, it had only extremely involved explanations 
to offer. Thus, it made the phenomena of the bending and 

34 



Ether 



interference of light easily understood; but the recti 
linear propagation of light, occurring in daily experience 
as one of its most conspicuous characteristics (e. g. in the 
formation of shadows) , could be conceived only as a very 
complicated process arising out of a peculiar superposi 
tion of light waves coming from various directions. That 
is why science had to cling to the emission- theory of light 
as long as there remained hope for Newton s theory to 
explain the phenomena found in experimentation, no 
matter in how intricate a manner. When finally, under 
the pressure of the results of additional experiments of 
great merit, the wave-theory won, it was shown that the 
principle, often regarded as self-evident, that natural* 
phenomena are basically simple , did not always hold 
true. Rather, it must be said today that, in general, the 
simplest relations in nature hardly ever appear "natur 
ally", but must be created in laboratory conditions by 
means of an artificial control of active factors. The sim 
plicity of natural processes, on the contrary, appears as 
an illusion due to the confluence of intricate factors. Who 
ever looks from a high mountain at the smooth surface 
of the sea, will not be inclined to think that, in reality, it 
has the character of a wave-like curved surface; rather, 
he will visualize it on a large scale and consider it as a 
plane. Similarly, when we face nature in everyday ex 
perience, we see it only in a broad outline. It takes the 
sharp eyes of science to notice behind it the intricate 
pattern of interconnected factors and to recognize-in them 
the true configurations of natural forces. 

35 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



The history of scientific optics is a continuous triumph 
of systematic methods over naive beliefs. It is easy to 
understand, therefore, that men outside the field of the 
natural sciences, whose outstanding achievements in other 
subjects were a result of straight-forward thinking and 
immediate relationship to nature, attacked again and 
again scientific optics for being essentially on the wrong 
path. Such individuals as Goethe and his various adher 
ents failed to see that the natural sciences of the modern 
era arrived at their complex doctrines through a search 
ing study of nature rather than through sheer speculation 
or abstraction from reality; that they can make inquiries 
into nature in a more exact way, because laboratory con 
ditions permit phenomena to occur under controls which 
do not exist in nature ; and finally, that a confident accept 
ance of the immediate evidence of the senses is nothing 
else than an uncritical overestimation of this somewhat 
crude set of organs, which can demonstrate its real vigor 
only in co-operation with keen and far-reaching powers 
of reason. One is tempted to remind the critic of the phys 
ical theory of colors of his own words "if you despise 
reason and science, man s loftiest power. n Let us leave 
alone, however, this quarrel over the theory of colors; it 
appears advisable to consider this quarrel from the stand 
point of psychology rather than from that of natural 
science. 

Facts gathered in connection with the phenomenon 
of interference helped a great deal to bring about the 
victory of the wave theory of light, absurd as it may seem 

36 



Ether 

to a mind guided solely by immediate experience. The 
substance of this theory can be described in this way: the 
addition of two brightnesses results in darkness, or, to use 
an equation: 

light + light = dark 

This phenomenon is not observed in daily life; it requires 
for adequate observation a special arrangement of light- 
rays. A theory considering light to be of material nature 
was unable to account for this equation, as a combination 
of two material particles can result only in more material, 
not less (Newton thought of explaining the phenomenon 
of interference by supposing that light-particles are 
equipped with special "fits"; but such an attempt at an 
explanation would presuppose essentially a compromise 
and must be rejected by a consistent wave-theory). 

On the other hand, for the wave-theory the phenom 
enon of interference is obvious. Imagine a wave produced 
by the swinging of a rope attached to a flag-pole; the 
arrival of a wave-crest at the top of the pole will result 
in a shaking of the pole, and a similar shaking in the 
opposite direction will be produced by the arrival of a 
wave-trough. If we produce two waves in the rope in such 
a way that the crest of one and the trough of the other 
reach the top of the pole simultaneously, then the crest 
and the trough will cancel each other, and no tremor of 
the pole will occur. This can serve as an illustration of 
our equation; it can be written in the following form: 
push 4- push = repose 

The above equation of light can now be well under- 

37 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



stood, if we regard brightness as a push of a light-wave 
which is characterized by a double direction. A schematic 
representation of the interference of such cross-waves is 
given in Fig. 3. 




Pig. 3. The Phenomenon of Interference 

The great merit of making the theory of light-waves 
plausible belongs to the French physicist Fresnel. He 
made a particular investigation of the problem of the 
exact nature of light-waves. There are longitudinal and 
transverse waves; to the latter class belong, for instance, 
water-waves, in which individual particles of water dance 
up and down and thus move transverse to the progressive 
direction of the wave. In longitudinal waves, on the other 
hand, individual particles dance back and forth in the 
direction of the propagation of the wave, so that a thick 
ening and a thinning takes place as a result, and spreads 
forward ; sound-waves exemplify this case. Fresnel was 
able to determine that light is connected with transverse 
waves, and his studies dealt primarily with the so-called 
polarization of light, a phenomenon characterized by the 
transverse quality of light. 

But if light has the nature of waves and is, consequent 
ly, not a substance, but a phenomenon of motion in a me 
dium what then is that medium itself? This is the fa- 

38 



Ether 

mous question concerning ether, to which now we must 
give some attention. The originators of the wave-theory 
believed as a matter of course that the propagation of 
light must be conceived as a wave in a medium; and they 
designated this imaginary medium ether, thus availing 
themselves of a very old notion in natural philosophy. 
As a matter of fact, in all other phenomena of waves such 
a medium is definitely known and the necessity for it 
seems to be apparent. The water-wave, for instance, can 
come into existence only because material water particles 
dance up and down, so that, while each adjacent particle 
executes the rhythm of the movement a little later, there 
arises a lateral movement of the wave ; this movement pre 
sents an immaterial phenomenon on a material back 
ground. Apart from such a background, wave movement 
appears to be unthinkable. It seems to be inseparable from 
the presence of matter and this assumption is the deep 
source of all attempts to discover the ether of light 

However, if there is a substantial medium, it must 
manifest itself in other ways than in the propagation of 
light. We do not have to infer the existence of water from 
the observation of waves. There are other direct activities 
demonstrating to us the existence of water, such as re- 
sistence to movement or the feeling of wetness, experi 
enced in contact with water. True enough, we should not 
expect such crude manifestations from ether, supposedly 
the finest substance permeating the pores of solid bodies. 
But there must be some effects demonstrating its exist* 
ence; it must be possible to prove its reality by means of 

39 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



the finest physical instruments. In fact, the history of 
physics is full of most ingenious attempts to demonstrate 
the existence of ether and to reveal its nature. But the 
results, we must concede, were completely negative. 

A detailed description of these experiments is out of 
place here, though one of them will be discussed in the 
next chapter. Suffice it to mention that the transverse 
character of the light waves brings troubles in its wake, 
insofar as only longitudinal waves should be expected in 
such a fine medium. Furthermore, there arises the ques 
tion of currents in ether. Similarly to water, there must 
arise in ether not only wave-motion but also current- 
motion resulting, in the vicinity of solid objects and 
celestial bodies, in whirlpools. The appearance of such 
currents should be discernible as disturbance in the prop 
agation of light. But nothing of the kind has ever been 
observed. The whole mastery of optical experimentation 
has been used in the pursuit of some proof of the existence 
of ether, but all in vain: the results obtained can be ac 
counted for only on the assumption that there is no ether. 

Thus natural science found itself in a most peculiar 
situation. Its experiments speak against the theory of 
ether. What then speaks in its favor? In the last analysis, 
only speculative considerations compel us to accept it. 
However, these considerations are of extraordinarily con 
vincing character. This is the compelling idea: if there 
are wave motions, there must be a medium. Thus reason 
is opposed to experience, and either one or the other must 
win in the end. 

40 



Ether 

In such a conflict it is proper to subject the idea to a 
critical revision. There have been many ideas claiming 
an absolute validity and supported by the persuasive 
power of logical conclusions ; yet they have been unable 
to withstand a deeper criticism. The concept of ether has 
not been formed on the basis of a logical conclusion, to 
be sure: it has an altogether different source. All com 
mon ideas comprising the knowledge of nature, such as 
substance, matter, wave, or motion, have not sprung out 
of pure speculation, but out of primary experiences of 
daily life. And nothing is more dangerous than to forget 
their origin and to ascribe to them a necessary and un 
conditional existence. Quite on the contrary, it is impor 
tant to comprehend that they have grown out of crude 
observations of nature, that they are hardly more than 
superficial generalizations concerning the world, and that 
it has never been demonstrated that these ideas are ap 
plicable to a finer understanding of nature. 

Material substance is definitely such an idea tending 
to endow something highly intricate with a logically 
simple form. What a complicated conglomeration of mat 
ter and forces is, for instance, the substance of water! One 
has to think only of the atomic theory portraying it as a 
turmoil of individual particles attracting each other or 
repelling each other, sometimes mutually dependent, 
sometimes completely independent. A more faithful pic 
ture of the substance of water resembles a shower of bul 
lets rather than a uniform substance. We may take it for 
granted that the concept of substance, characterizing this 



From Copernicus To Einsttin 



intricate picture, will do for all practical purposes. But 
will it do, when the explanation of the finest foundations 
of natural processes is at stake? 

This question has to be asked, thoughtfully, only once 
to plant a seed of doubt in our hearts with regard to a 
positive answer. We should assume, on the contrary, that 
the concept of material substance is hardly applicable 
to the propagation of light, occurring both in the inter 
spaces between the atoms and in the astronomical realm; 
it is a concept formed to fit the macroscopic relations. 
If this is the case, then the natural scientists will do wisely 
to worry as little as possible over ether and face the pos 
sibility that there is no ether at all. In other words, there 
may exist an oscillating process of propagation, which 
is not in any sense connected with a material medium. 
Why should we not form this new conception conforming 
so much better to the experience of optics? Must we trans 
fer, under all conditions, the macroscopic* ideas to mi 
croscopic* dimensions? May we not form, in view of 
highly complex and exact experiences of science, new 
fundamental principles doing justice to our new knowl 
edge? 

That scientific optics could and did take this path 
was a result of the progress made in the meantime by an 
other physical discipline, the theory of electricity. Here 
we became acquainted with forces of an entirely different 
kind than those of mechanics familiar since earlier days; 
the experimental investigations of Faraday, above all, 
showed that, not only the electrical current flowing in the 

42 



Ether 

wire, but also the electric and magnetic fields found in 
the air or empty space, contain in reality power and en 
ergy. One thinks of magnetic and electric lines of force 
in terms of iron filings, as a sort of proof; these lines mani 
fest, with a lawfulness of their own, the existence of elec 
tric and magnetic states permeating space and penetrating 
bodies. 

It is not necessary to regard these states as states of 
a special substance, like that of ether; if these fields are 
to be considered as substance, then it is a substance of an 
entirely different kind from that of material bodies, such 
as water and air. They lack, above all, a very important 
quality of matter, namely, that no two bodies can occupy 
one and the same space that is, impenetrability. On 
the other hand, two electrical fields can be superimposed 
without excluding each other, for the simple reason that 
they do not enclose any space whatsoever, It is incorrect 
to retort with the statement that a similar thing is ob 
served in the mixing of fluids or gases. As a matter of 
fact, such a mixing should not be understood as placing 
the molecules within each other 3 but rather as placing 
them Alongside each other , so that every one of them 
encloses space according to the principle of impenetra 
bility. Two electrical fields, however, are able to occupy 
one and the same space at the same time, not in the sense 
of mixture, but as being ^within each other , whole or 
part; they form together a new electrical field, in which 
either of the two fields can be demonstrated at any time. 
If the electrical fields are construed as substances, then 

43 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



the concept of substance unavoidably acquires an entirely 
new meaning; so that it is clearly advisable to retain the 
old idea of substance and to regard the concept of fields 
as its opposite. 

We may say, then, that the study of electricity has 
taught us to conceive materiality in a form different from 
substance, namely, in that of field. To this latter concept 
we owe the victory over the prospectless theory of mate 
rial ether. 

It was the Englishman James Maxwell who took the 
decisive step in reducing optics to phenomena of electric 
ity. Taking Faraday s experiments as the starting point, 
he sought a mathematical formulation of the fundamental 
principles of electricity and finally presented them in the 
form of the famous Maxwellian equations ; the result was 
a concatenation, i. e. a binding together, of electric and 
magnetic conditions as observed in the phenomena of in 
duction (consisting in the creatrdn of a magnetic field by 
means of an electrical current, or vice versa) . Maxwell 
noticed, however, that a mathematical development of 
his basic principles necessarily led to the conclusion that 
there must be electrical vibrations spreading through 
space. He immediately assumed that these vibrations must 
be identical with light and that light is, consequently, 
nothing other than an electrical phenomenon similar to 
the electric or magnetic fields arising in the vicinity of 
electrical currents; the former differs from the latter 
merely in the extraordinarily high rate of vibrations. He 
himself could give no experimental proof of this mathe- 

44 



Ether 

matical theory; the proof had to await the discovery of 
improved methods of observation. 

The confirmation of Maxwell s theory was reached 
along two lines. On the one hand, it became possible to 
show the effect of electric and magnetic fields on light- 
generating structures or radiant atoms (Stark s and Zee- 
mann s effect) and thus to prove that the emission of light 
is essentially an electrical phenomenon. On the other 
hand, long before these experiments took place, there 
came the great discovery of Heinrich Hertz: he succeed 
ed in producing, by means of an electrical apparatus, elec 
tric vibrations which, though of considerably lower fre 
quency of vibration than that of light, showed properties 
related to it and which could spread through space by 
themselves and independently of wires. These electrical 
vibrations produced by Heinrich Hertz in his laboratory 
were nothing other than wireless waves, known today as 
radio waves. Their widespread technical use in teleg 
raphy and radio constitutes a proof of how a discovery 
made purely for theoretical reasons, that is, in search of 
understanding natural phenomena, can yield unsuspected 
industrial benefit, never thought of even by the discoverer 
himself. 

Electrical waves are advancing fields which should 
not be regarded as bound to a material medium. They 
are waves in which electricity continually alternates be 
tween positive and negative. Yet they are not dependent 
on the ups and downs of small material particles, but 
move quite independently through space. They thus have 

45 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



qualities found by the science of optics in the slow course 
of experimentation with light. We are able to say today 
that light is simply a train of electrical waves of high 
frequency. 

The pursuit of this profound knowledge has yielded 
us an insight of unsuspected richness into a multitude of 
electrical waves. We have succeeded in producing elec 
trical waves the frequency of which is by far greater than 
that of light These waves of high penetrating capacity 
are the X-rays, discovered by Roentgen. The examination 
of radioactive substances has proved that they are send 
ing out even faster vibrating and more penetrating radia- 



s 



Eadio Infra- *&gt;Ultra- 
waTes red *4 violet 



03 



r^ 

2 



C-rays 



low-frequency 

wares 



fcighrfrequency 
waves 



fig. 4. The total Spectrum 

tion, namely, the gamma-rays related in many ways to the 
X-rays. Moreover, we have succeeded also in bridging 
the gap that previously existed between the light rays and 
the waves of the wireless, the progress having been made 
on both sides, On the one hand, the waves of the wireless 
telegraphy have been shortened (higher frequency means 
shorter waves) ; on the other hand, longer waves which 
no longer possess the property of being seen by the human 
46 



Ether 

eye, have been isolated among the light rays. The totality 
of these waves the so-called spectrum is represented 
in the order of their wave-lengths on Fig. 4. 

Thus we have come to regard light as a rather narrow 
section in the whole spectrum of electrical waves. There 
are electrical waves of every frequency, from to almost 
any magnitude. The highest known frequencies lie in the 
trillions (gamma-rays). But the human eye is sensitive 
only to a very small stretch of frequencies called light 
The eye does not respond to the waves of other frequen 
cies, and we need complicated apparatus to get acquainted 
with them. 

The limitation of the eye to a definite field of frequen 
cy has its source in the history of man s development The 
realm of electrical waves sent by the sun appeared to the 
eye as light; these rays are abundantly represented on 
the surface of the earth and permit an exchange of action 
between human beings and things, which we call seeing . 
It cannot be called impossible that our eyes may become 
adjusted to other waves, for instance, to those of the wire 
less telegraphy; but our biological organization prevents 
this, insofar as we cannot change our adaptation quickly 
in the manner of a receiving radio-set so as to adjust 
ourselves to other waves. Consequently, we avail ourselves 
of physical instruments, modify the action of waves with 
a frequency higher or lower than that of light, and finally 
bring about effects which our sense organs can register 
as visual or auditory phenomena. However, when we 
visualize the whole scope of electrical waves (as repre- 

47 



From Copernicus To Elnstdn 



seated in Fig. 4) and notice the little band of rays per 
ceptible as light, it appears to us as if the world were 
covered with a curtain with a small hole through which 
we are allowed to contemplate only a fringe of nature s 
immense riches. 

In conclusion, one may be desirous to raise the ques 
tion: But what about sound waves? The truth is that 
sound waves do not enter here into consideration at all. 
Though they are waves, they have no place in Fig. 4: for 
they are not electrical waves. Rather, they are elastic 
vibrations in a medium, with qualities similar to those 
formerly ascribed to light. Their ether is the air; they 
cannot be considered as fields. They are vibrations in a 
substance, not unlike the waves of water. Sounds are, 
therefore, inseparable from a medium. The sound of an 
electrical bell dies in a vacuum. In small inter-atomic 
regions there can be no sound, as the concept of substance, 
essentially macroscopic, has here no application. The 
sound waves, as completely macroscopic phenomena, offer 
us a picture of how light should not be conceived. For 
light, by virtue of its electrical character, stems from 
deeper foundations than the crude substance of the corpo 
real waves. 



48 



Chapter 3 : THE SPECIAL THEORY 
OF RELATIVITY 



THE facts and considerations given in the preceding 
chapter led us to the conclusion that light is an electrical 
process rather than a mechanical one. It is not related to 
either water waves or sound waves. It is more akin to 
radio waves emitted into space from aerials and consist 
ing in rapid changes of an electric and magnetic field. 
With such a statement, it is true, the problem of the ex 
istence of ether, assumed formerly, is not yet answered 
in the negative. All that is proved is that ether is not a 
substance, in the mechanical sense of the word, compar 
able to what we call matter. The question remains : Is it 
not possible that electrical prenomena may also be 
grounded in a substance? Can t there possibly exist a par 
ticularly fine substance underlying electrical fields and 
related to them as water is to water waves? Don t elec 
trical phenomena become intelligible only when an ether 
is assumed? 

The question of the existence of such an electrical 
ether cannot be dismissed without further ado. An ether 
may exist; yet it should be realized that the supposition 
has an exceedingly weak foundation. It rests on a belief 
which is unlikely ever to be verified, namely, on a be 
lief that the phenomena occurring within the fine pores 

49 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



of matter do not appreciably differ from those occurring 
in the cruder material structures accessible to our senses. 
This conjecture is not justified by anything we know; for 
indeed, the progress of natural science has shown in all 
of its fields that nature is different, in its inner organiza 
tion, from what it appears to our crude senses. Let us re 
call, for instance, the discoveries of biology, the science 
of living being, which inform us that all living organ 
isms consist of countless cells producing a unified living 
being only in collaboration. No one can say that this 
assumption is supported by the evidence of vision; yet it 
is true. And one should not be surprised that the science 
of physics, looking far deeper into the nature of things 
than biology, has come upon even greater discoveries. It 
seems that the vast changes in our ideas concerning the 
physical world are an outgrowth of the fact that the re 
quirements of scientific precision have grown quite sub 
stantially. As long as men are satisfied with the range of 
exactness given by sensory perception, they can put up 
with a rather simple explanation of nature. But as soon 
as the precise measurements made possible by the mod 
ern art of experimentation are introduced, inexactitudes 
and contradictions are found in current theories; as a re 
sult, involved theories have to be devised to make facts 
agree with interpretations. Thus, the tremendous devel 
opment in the field of theoretical physics during the last 
century was an effect of achievements of experimental 
physics. One should not forget that the physicists were 
not led to their bold assertions by mere ecstasy of specula- 
50 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



tion : they were guided by the urgent need to make the 
ories and facts agree and to explain the discoveries re 
vealed by improved physical instruments. 

In fact, Einstein s theory of relativity, the most mag 
nificent achievement of modern physics, was suggested by 
closest adherence to experimental facts; this is its 
strength. We may admire the grandeur of its structure of 
thought and the depth of its ideas; but this alone would 
never have secured for it that firm position in physics 
which it enjoys today. This position was secured because 
it is able to explain experimental facts, to foretell events; 
it was the later confirmation of these events which n^ade 
this theory great 

Einstein built his theory on an extraordinary confi 
dence in the exactitude of the art of experimentation. A 
number of physical experiments were under considera 
tion, at that time, which aimed to determine the state of 
motion of this hypothetical light-ether. To be more ex 
act: as ether was supposed to fill the whole of the world s 
space, the earth had to move through it The goal of these 
experiments was to measure the motion of the earth in 
regard to ether. The result of all these experiments was, 
however, negative. The existence of ether could not be 
determined. It was at this point that confidence in the re 
sults of experiments became significant: Einstein was 
certain that the experiments would have had a positive 
result did ether exist at all ; he concluded, therefore, that 
there is no such thing as ether. This conclusion as regards 
the non-existence of ether could be ventured only insofar 

51 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



as it presupposed the unconditional trustworthiness and 
exactness of experimental findings. 

We must here describe more accurately the trend of 
thought which led to the decisive examination of the ex 
istence of ether. If one maintains that there is no ether, 
one must comprehend that such a statement requires con 
ceptual clarification. It can mean only a definite asser 
tion concerning the properties of light; namely, that 
light has no properties of the kind characterizing 
"coarse" waves, exemplified by waves of water or air. 
Among the properties of substance, in the old sense of the 
word, we include impenetrability; and we have shown 
that this property does not apply to light as an electrical 
field. There is a second property of substance the de 
termination of a state of motion. We must now clarify 
this point 

When we observe a water wave, we necessarily ascribe 
to it a certain rate of velocity. The wave takes a period of 
time to travel from a ship to the shore. This velocity is de 
termined by the nature of water, by the speed with which 
each water particle carries along the next one, by the 
power of the inner cohesion of water. It is clear, more 
over, that the time required by the wave to traverse a 
certain distance depends on one more factor. Suppose it 
is low tide, and water recedes away from the land; then, 
obviously, the period of traveling will be lengthened, for 
the wave will be retarded. The velocity of the wave is 
normally considered with regard to the water s surface, 
If, however, this water surface is as a whole in motion, 
52 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



then this motion must be added to, or substracted from, 
the velocity of the wave, according to its direction. The 
speed required by the wave to reach the shore is com 
posed, therefore, of two velocities, that of the wave and 
that of the water surface. Consequently, the combined 
velocity will vary with the direction. In the case of a low 
tide, the velocity of the wave in the direction of the shore 
will be retarded, while the velocity of the wave moving 
from the ship to an island situated farther in the sea will 
be increased. Only with regard to the water surface is 
the speed of the wave equal in all directions. That is what 
is understood by the determination of a state of motion. 
If we apply measurements to water as our reference sys 
tem, then there prevails an equal velocity in all direc 
tions; and the state of motion of water is, consequently, 
the distinctive state of motion, in terms of which the cal 
culated velocity of the wave receives its natural value. 
Such reflections were entertained with regard to ether 
and in connection with astronomical relations. As light 
.traverses the world s space, ether must fill it like a great 
mass of water in which planets float like isles. Insofar as 
planets move around the sun, they must be characterized 
by a different state of motion from that of ether. Thus 
one comes to the assumption that the velocity of light, as 
measured on a planet like the earth, must vary with di 
rection, simply because ether is understood as a substra 
tum of light waves and only with regard to it can the 
velocity of light receive its natural value. In the eighties 
of the last century, an American physicist, Michelson, 

53 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



devised his famous experiment (since repeated many 
times) designed to test this line of reasoning. 

The arrangement of Michelson s experiment is graph 
ically presented in Fig. 5. The apparatus consisted of 
two horizontal metal bars AB and AC. In A there is a 



==36 



O~"~- III 
A 

Fig. 5, The diagram of Michelsorfs experiment. 

source of light from which rays are sent to B and C where 
they are reflected in a mirror and meet again at A. The 
dotted arrows of the figure are supposed to indicate this 
path; for a better view of the whole process they have 
been drawn partly below and partly above the bars, 
whereas the real path in both directions lay of course ex 
actly in the axis of the bar. The question is: if the rays 
leave A simultaneously, will they return to it also simul 
taneously? This would be the case were the apparatus 
and its metal bars to rest motionless in ether, for then the 
speed of light is equally great in both directions AB and 
54 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



AC. But the apparatus rests on the earth and hence par 
ticipates in the motion of the earth through ether. It fol 
lows that the velocity of light must be. different in the two 
directions. A simple calculation shows that, when the 
earth moves through ether in the direction AB, the ray 
A-B-A must return to the starting point a little later than 
the ray A-C-A. 

Michelson felt sure at the time that it was possible to 
prove the tardy return of that ray; after all, his methods 
were exact enough, and he used the finest optical instru 
ments. The belated arrival of the ray could be proved by 
means of interference, by the appearance of shadow- 
bands created by the coincidence of hills and dales of the 
two currents of waves (see Ch. 2) . Yet the surprising re 
sult was that no shadow-bands appeared at all : there was 
no retardation of the ray. 

This unexpected result kept the scientific world long 
in perplexity. The first man to attempt an explanation of 
the phenomenon was the Dutchman H. A. Lorentz. He 
assumed that the bar AB became shorter in consequence 
of its motion through ether; as a result the path A-B-A 
became shortened, and the ray came back just as quickly 
as the other ray. There is no objection to this explanation, 
except that it overlooks the fact that the problem of ether 
acquires a very peculiar turn. In brief, it signifies that 
ether exerts shortening forces upon the moving bodies in 
such a manner that the differences in the velocity of light 
connected with motion cannot be demonstrated. In other 
words, we are expected to believe in the existence of ether 

55 



From Copernicuf To Einstein 



and also to assume that the proof of the existence of ether 
is impossible. In view of such findings, it would seem to 
be more plausible to stop believing in ether: for what 
ever defies every attempt of proof has no existence for the 
physicist 

Einstein accepted the latter alternative, and the con 
vincing power of his 1 doctrine lies precisely in its openly 
logical deductions. We may now formulate his view, as 
following from the preceding. There is no ether, in the 
sense of a carrying medium of light; and there is no spe 
cial frame of reference in which the velocity of light is 
equally great in all directions. Rather, this is the case in 
every uniformly moving frame of reference. When meas 
ured on the moving planet of the earth, the velocity of 
light is identical in all directions; when measured on a 
differently moving planet or on a body "resting" in the 
solar system (such bodies, for all we know, do not exist) , 
the velocity of light is still the same in all directions. 

Einstein s doctrine signifies a definite turn in the his 
tory of the problem of ether and transforms hitherto neg 
ative findings into a positive principle. It cannot be said, 
to be sure, that it explains the negative findings; it pro 
ceeds the other way around and, assuming them as estab 
lished, asserts that no special explanation can be here ex 
pected at all. This procedure can be compared to that of 
introducing the principle of the conservation of energy. 
Insofar as the efforts of innumerable inventors to create 
a perpetuum mobile have proved fruitless, this principle 
of energy stands for a circumscription of the fact rather 

56 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



than for its explanation : the feat is impossible. 

Einstein s doctrine required, and was given by him, a 
considerable supplementation in connection with the the 
ory of knowledge. For the contention that for every uni 
formly moving frame of reference the velocity of light is 
equal in all directions takes us in one important respect 
beyond the experiment of Michelson. In that experiment 
the velocity of light was not measured in one single 
direction, but as the totality of time necessary for a light- 
beam to travel there and back. However, how do we 
know that the velocity is not greater or smaller in the di 
rection AB than it is in the direction BA, with the result 
that, in measuring the total time at A, the difference 
drops out? Is it not possible that Einstein s contention that 
the velocity of light is identical in both directions is a 
faulty hypothesis? 

The answer to these questions leads to the famous doc 
trine of the relativity of simultaneity. This most profound 
of Einstein s thoughts must here be explained in greater 
detail. 

Einstein distinguishes between simultaneity at the 
same spot and simultaneity of events separated by dis 
tance. This distinction becomes particularly clear when 
we take astronomic dimensions into consideration. An 
astronomical observer is attached to his spatial place; yet 
he receives messages or signals from distant points. He is 
able to record immediately only the simultaneity of their 
arrival to his place. Although this place is by no means a 
mathematical point, nevertheless it may be considered as 

57 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



virtually dimensionless as compared to distances trav 
ersed by light in a few seconds and referred to by the the 
ory of relativity. The arrival of a signal may be desig 
nated as a coincidence, as a "point-event" ; that is to say, 
as a phenomenon spatially and temporally dimensionless. 
Such a simultaneity at an identical point may be taken 
without change from the older physics. The logical prob 
lem arising beyond the realm of sensory perception is 
this : How does an observer arrive at the temporal order 
of events separated by space? 

"By means of physical measurements," is the first 
prompt answer. The observer measures the spatial dis 
tance and divides it by the speed of the signal ; thus he 
gets the time in which the distance was traversed. If a 
beam of light from Sirius reaches the earth simultaneous 
ly with a beam from the sun, then it is possible to estimate 
at what time each of the beams was emitted by taking 
into consideration the respective distances of the stars and 
the velocity of light 

That is, of course, correct. But first one must know the 
velocity of light How can it be measured? 

There is fundamentally but one method for the meas 
urement of a signal velocity, which we shall represent 
schematically in the following way. Let us imagine two 
clocks located at two different points (Fig. 6). A signal 
is given at the first point, say, at 12 o clock. It reaches the 
second point at 5 minutes after 12. Hence it took five min 
utes to cover the distance which we proceed to measure; 
when this is determined, the velocity in question is found 

58 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



by division. This is th only possible method of measuring 
the velocity. 

But is it true? Wasn t the velocity of light measured 
by Michelson in an entirely different manner? Michelson 
sent a beam of light to a distant point and arranged for its 
reflection and return. He had to measure only the time 
at the starting point without considering the moment at 
which the beam reaches the mirror. However, he thus 
found merely the sum-total of periods necessary to tra- 



12 

Ffg. 6. A Diagram of the Measurement of the Speed of Lfgbf. 

verse the path to and fro. He could not determine what 
interests us most, the velocity in a single direction. Our 
contention is therefore correct. 

We notice that our measurement of the velocity of 
light has resulted in a difficulty. In order to estimate that 
velocity we need two clocks at different points. In order 
to make the differences in time read from the clocks 
meaningful, the latter must be adjusted; that is to say, it 
is necessary to ascertain whether or not the clocks show 
the same figures at the same time. But we have arranged 
for the measurement of velocity solely for the purpose of 
finding a means of ascertaining the simultaneity at points 
located remotely from each other. We find ourselves in 
a vicious circle : in order to determine the simultaneity of 

59 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



distant events, we must know a velocity; and in order to 
measure the velocity, we must be capable of judging the 
simultaneity of events separated by distance. 

Einstein has shown a way out of this logical circle : the 
simultaneity of distant events cannot be verified, it can 
only be defined. It is arbitrary; we can determine it in 
any manner without committing a mistake. When accord 
ingly we make measurements, the results will contain the 
same simultaneity which has been introduced by defini 
tion ; this process can never lead to a contradiction. 

This is Einstein s famous theorem of the relativity of 
simultaneity. It requires a decisive change in our views, 
but it is unlikely that it will remain, for all times to come, 
as strange or bewildering as it appears to be at a first 
glance. As a matter of fact, anybody who grasps the idea 
completely will find it as intelligible and natural as the 
old idea of time; he will discover, moreover, that the new 
doctrine readily answers certain questions suppressed or 
neglected by the old theory. In the end he will find it diffi 
cult to think along the lines of the older view. The expe 
rience is similar to one frequently occurring when some 
body goes to another country: he finds at first that he is 
unable to g&lt;?t adjusted to the new language; then forgets 
about it, till one day, on returning to his native land, he 
discovers that the new language is really more familiar 
to him than his native tongue. 

The significance of this solution of the problem of sim 
ultaneity consists in that it makes intelligible Einstein s 
contention concerning the non-existence of any special 

60 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



frame of reference with regard to the propagation of 
light (and hence the non-existence of ether). Apart from 
this new thought, Einstein s principle would contain a 
logical contradiction. 

This principle must now be formulated in a more ex 
act manner. The velocity of light is identical in all direc 
tions in a uniformly moving frame of reference, provided 
simultaneity is correspondingly defined. This additional 
statement makes Einstein s contentions clear. We notice 
that the abandonment of the concept of macroscopic sub 
stance (together with that oi a special state of motion) is 
bound up with the relativity of simultaneity in a peculiar 
manner. The profound significance for physics of investi 
gations in the theory of knowledge thus becomes obvious. 

But Einstein s theory of simultaneity has a presupposi 
tion without which it could not be maintained : it is noth 
ing other than the assumption that no velocity greater 
than that of light can occur in nature. We must think it 
over very carefully why this assumption is so important. 

For this purpose we shall explain Einstein s theory in 
the following manner. A light signal is sent out from A 
at 12 o clock (fig, 7) ; it is then reflected and returns to A 
at 10 minutes after 12 o clock. At what time did it reach 
B? According to Einstein, this cannot be determined by 
experiments; we can only establish it by definition. We 
may, for instance, record it as having occurred at 12:05; 
but we can think of it also as occuring at 12:02 or 12:08. 
But we may not declare that the arrival at B takes place 
at 11 :59; for then the light would have arrived at B ear- 

61 



From Copernicus To Einstein. 



Her than it has started from A. We know that no physical 
occurrences can run backward as to time. This is the only 
limitation; any number within the stretch of time between 
12:00 and 12:10 can be chosen. 

Let us therefore set the time for the arrival of the 
lightbeam at 12:02. Can this lead to no contradiction? 
There would always be a possibility of contradiction were 
there signals faster than light in existence. Let us suppose 
that there is a signal requiring three minutes less than 
light to traverse the distance AB. Let this signal be sent 
from the point A simultaneously with the light-beam. As 
the light-beam arrives at B at 12:02, the other signal will 
arrive, according to our assumption, at 12:02 minus 3 
minutes, that is, at 1 1 :S9. Now, both signals were sent out 
from A at 12 o clock. It follows, absurdly enough, that 
the new signal arrives at B sooner than it starts from A, 
The determination of simultaneity has led us to a contra 
diction; but only because we have accepted the possibility 
of the existence of signals traveling faster than light 

A contradiction in Einstein s theory of simultaneity is 
impossible only if there are no signals traveling faster 
than light That is another contention of Einstein. In 
deed, it is the most important contention of his special 
theory of relativity. The statement must be made s*ill 
clearer, if we are to accept it fully. 

We must admit, of course, that no physicist has up to 
now found signals traveling faster than light; but are we 
certain that such signals do not exist? There are many 
things, no doubt, of which we have no knowledge today, 

62 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



but which we may come across perhaps tomorrow, Who 
would have thought ISO years ago that one could travel 
from New York to Boston in 5 hours, a distance requir 
ing at that time at least several days? Who would have 
believed then that it might become possible to converse 
orally across that distance, as it is now done every day 
over the telephone? May not similar surprises await us 
in the science of physics? May not some day a spreading 
process be discovered in comparison to which the velocity 
of light will appear like Stephenson s first train as com 
pared with a modern express train? 

A g?- ______________ ., 11206 

A - - . 




Fig. 7. A Diagram of the Course of a IJ&bt-Signal. 

Ready as the physicist may be to admit the possibility 
of any technical dream of the future, he cannot accept 
this dream. If a Utopian poet should portray the day 
when a regular traffic to Mars began or when the highly 
progressed humanity rescued the earth from the chains 
of the sun grown cold and steered the planet toward other 
stars, the physicist would have no objection, for physical 
reasons, to such conjectures. But to every fancy in which 
even the smallest action spreads quicker than light, in 
which waves of some kind "run ahead of light" as it were, 
he must respond with a blunt "impossible." Cautious as 
he may be in denying possibilities, he realizes that there 
are denials which must be uttered with assurance, unless 

63 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



his entire science is to lose its meaning. There are denials 
expressing a law of nature; and this is one of them. 

Such denials are, after all, common in physics. One 
can easily show that every law of nature carries within 
itself a statement of denial. The law of the conservation 
of energy, for instance, can be expressed in this form: 
there will never be found a process, even in one hundred 
thousand years, in which the amount of energy increases 
apart from an outside influence. Thus, the positive law 
of the conservation of energy contains within itself a neg 
ative consequence. And vice versa, the negative law of the 
limitation of the velocity of light can be formulated to 
show its positive kernel. We now want to bring out this 
kernel. 

In the first place, Einstein brings into the picture a 
peculiar contention concerning the energy of moving 
bodies. Every body in motion carries within itself an 
amount of energy which increases with the velocity of 
the body. This energy is required to start the motion; we 
recognize it, on the other hand, in the impact provided 
by a moving body to one standing still. According to Ein 
stein, the content of energy in a moving body grows with 
an increasing speed faster than assumed by the old theory. 
In order to bring a body up to the velocity of light, an 
infinite amount of energy would be required. It is there 
fore impossible for a body to move quicker than light; 
in fact, no material object can reach that velocity. 

In the second place, the law of the limitation of light- 
velocity rests upon the knowledge that light does not con- 

64 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



stitute a physical phenomenon of its own but rather rep 
resents a special case of the transfer of electrical activity 
in general. In the preceding chapter we had an oppor 
tunity to see that light is an electrical phenomenon and 
that light waves represent only a section of the great realm 
of electrical waves. What is maintained by Einstein with 
regard to light goes, therefore, for all electrical waves of 
which light is but a representative. But according to our 
knowledge of the internal structure of all substances, 
there are basically only two ways of transfering power 
from body to body: gravitation and the electrical wave. 
Every other manifestation of force is composed of them. 
If they both move with the velocity of light, as Einstein 
contends, then a slowing up may occur within the atoms 
of the body, when the power runs in a zig-zag course; 
but it can never be accelerated. Einstein s law of the limit 
character of the light-velocity means thus nothing other 
than a formulation of the fact that light represents one 
original form of the transfer of action, the other repre 
senting an equal speed limit. 

Only with the addition of this idea does Einstein s the 
ory of the relativity of simultaneity become intelligible. 
It even leads to a clarification of the concept of simul 
taneity itself. What do we mean when we speak of simul 
taneity? Let us take an example. Let us say that I wish to 
visit a friend of mine in Southampton. I depart in a 
steamer from New York at 12 o clock. Now it happens 
that my friend leaves Southampton for New York pre 
cisely at the same time. Neither of us knows about the 

65 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



other s departure. Only at the last moment do we send 
telegrams to each other. We shall now consider a small 
delay of the telegram due to its being written out and 
carried out, and we shall assume that the telegram ar 
rives within a few minutes. Such a telegram is then the 
quickest practical signal, although the delay makes it a 
little slower than the velocity of light. If both telegrams 
start out simultaneously, each will reach its destination 
slightly late, that is, after the ship s departure. Had my 
friend left but a few minutes later, my telegram would 
have reached him and kept him in Southampton. And 
vice versa, had I left a little later, I would have received 
the telegram and could have avoided a superfluous trip. 
The fact that we both left simultaneously simply means 
that it was impossible either for my telegram to reach 
him or for his telegram to reach me. We find that simul 
taneity means an exclusion of causal connection. When 
two events P and Q take place simultaneously, there is nd 
possible effect, of P on Q or of Q on P. 

If this is the definition of the concept of simultaneity, 
then the indeterminacy of simultaneity is at once appar 
ent As my telegram takes several minutes to reach South 
ampton, my friend could have left at 12:01 without re 
ceiving the telegram. On the basis of this "telegraphic" 
speed, the two events could have been called simultane 
ous. Now it is true that the velocity of light is consider 
ably greater; the light-signal or what is the same: the 
radio waves apart from the delay by writing and deliver 
ing the telegram require only a fraction of a second to 

66 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



traverse the distance over the ocean. But light does not 
travel infinitely fast. Because of the great velocity of light 
the interval of time within which simultaneity is arbi 
trary is short; but it is not a nought. We understand now 
how the relativity of simultaneity is connected with the 
limit character of the velocity of light: as there is a finite 
limit to all velocities transferring action, a possible causal 
connection of two distant events is necessarily excluded 
for a short duration; the arbitrariness of simultaneity lies 
precisely within this duration. 

The unique position which light occupies in the theo 
ry of relativity may be expressed also in a different man 
ner. Whereas in Einstein s original theory of relativity 
light served merely to determine simultaneity, it became 
clear in the later revision of the theory that light may be 
used for all measurements of time, for the designation of 
the measure of time, and even for the measurement of 
space. One may construct a geometry of light* in which 
light determines the comparison of spatial distances. Thus 
light comes to serve as the ordering net of physics, which 
gathers within the meshes of its rays all the events of the 
world and puts them in a numerical order. 

With this idea in mind, one may further represent the 
content of Einstein s theory of space-time in the follow 
ing way. Clocks and yardsticks, the material instruments 
for measuring space and time, have only a subordinate 
function. They adjust themselves to the geometry of light 
and obey all the laws which light furnishes for the com- 

*Sce H. Rekhenbach, Philosophic der Raum-Zeit-Lehre, Berlin, 1928. 

67 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



parison of magnitudes. One is reminded of a magnetic 
needle adjusting itself to the field of magnetic forces, but 
not choosing its direction independently. Clocks and 
yardsticks, too, have no independent magnitude; rather, 
they adjust themselves to the metric field of space, the 
structure of which manifests itself most clearly in the 
rays of light. 

In view of the preceding argument, this seems to be a 
fairly plausible statement; yet it leads to a noteworthy 
conclusion concerning the behavior of clocks. According 
to it, it is possible to show that moving clocks behave dif 
ferently from those in repose. Movement exerts a retard 
ing influence upon clocks. If a clock is moved from place 
to place and finally returned to its original place, it is 
slower than a clock which remained motionless at one 
and the same spot. The contention would be totally incon 
sequential, to be sure, were it applicable merely to clocks: 
the physicist then would calculate the influence of the 
motion and accordingly set the clock properly. But the 
theory of relativity maintains much more; it maintains, 
namely, that any running mechanism, regardless of kind, 
would manifest a similar retardation. Were an observer 
to make a journey with the clock and try to check the re 
tardation of the clock by means of measuring devices 
taken along, he would be unable to notice any difference, 
insofar as the clock would go without any change with re 
gard to his devices. Even if he investigates the processes 
of his own organism, estimates the period between two 
meals on the basis of hunger pangs, or measures the dura- 

68 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



tion of normal sleep by the clock brought along, he still 
would be unable to discern any difference from previous 
experiences. 

If this is to be fully understood, we must realize that 
all the processes of the human body are rooted in physico- 
chemical changes and ultimately rest on the motion of 
atoms and electrons. But the processes of these elemen 
tary particles will be slowed down in the same propor 
tion as the clock; man s feelings and perceptions will be, 
consequently, in complete accord with the clock. 

These reflections lead the theory of relativity to assert 
that nobody can be forced to acknowledge the retardation 
of a moving clock as long as it is compared with other 
objects participating in its motion. One may simply de 
clare that nothing has changed during the motion. Only 
regarding objects of another state of motion can we speak 
of a delay of our clock. 

In application to astronomical relations, that is, to 
great distances and great velocities, these considerations 
lead to remarkable conclusions. Let us suppose that the 
above mentioned ship of space to Mars has been actually 
invented and that one of twin brothers undertakes the long 
voyage while the other remains on the earth. Years pass, 
and the twin at home has grown old. Then one day the 
ship of space returns with his brother who looks only a 
few years older than on the day of his departure. The 
brother has not noticed during his trip, of course, the fact 
of his preserved youth, as all of his fellow-travelers have 
remained in the same age relationship as himself, and all 

69 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



the clocks on board have made as many double turns as 
there have been days of the travelers aging. Subjectively, 
the traveler lived but a few years, while the persons re 
maining on the earth lived through a great many years. 
If the traveler remains on the earth, the period of his 
whole life, from his own standpoint, will appear to him 
no longer than that of other people; but now he will be 
able to reach a much later age than his brother and his 
generation of men will ever be able to attain. 

This example has caused much surprise and even con 
troversy in the discussion of the theory of relativity; but 
it is impossible to deny that it follows necessarily from 
the theory of relativity and that all physical facts speak 
for the correctness of the contention. The theory of rela 
tivity will not declare, to be sure, anything concerning the 
possibility of ever traveling across the space of the uni 
verse, for the simple reason that prophesies with regard 
to technical progress are outside its domain. But it may 
assert that, if such a trip is ever undertaken, the travelers 
are bound to age slower, as explained in the above ex 
ample. The hypothetical form of the assertion is right, 
even compulsory, insofar as all available facts are in 
favor of the doctrine of relativity. We cannot accept the 
objection that the case is inconceivable. Quite the con 
trary, everything described in it is quite conceivable; and 
fiction has more than once resorted to such imagery, for 
instance, in the form of the monk of Heisterbach. The 
novelty of the case consists only in that it is now 
the imagery which represents the truth. 

70 



The Special Theory of Relativity 



Since we have undertaken to illustrate the contentions 
of the theory of relativity by cases of astronomical Uto 
pias, let us add one more remark concerning celestial 
telephoning. Our statement to the effect that no signal 
can travel faster than light leads to rather sad conclusions, 
in this connection. A beam of light requires about 8 min 
utes to cover the distance separating the earth from the 
sun, and 16 minutes to cover it both ways. The distance 
of Mars is sometimes greater, sometimes smaller than 
that of the sun, and therefore the corresponding figures 
will vary. Let us take an average position of Mars, the 
distance .of which corresponds approximately to that of 
the sun; in that case, the electrical waves conveying a 
telephone conversation will take 16 minutes for the round 
trip. This would mean that, in making a call to an inhabi 
tant of Mars, we must wait a quarter of an hour to get an 
answer to a question. Such slowness of communication 
would be quite unpleasant, and the cozy chats character 
istic of everyday telephone calls would hardly occur in 
communication with Mars. The situation is considerably 
worse with regard to fixed stars and their planets. In fact, 
the nearest fixed star is about 8 light years away from us. 
We would have to wait at the telephone receiver for six 
teen years to get an answer, not to mention the case of 
more distant stars an answer from which could be received 
only by our great-grand-children. 

The prospects for celestial intercourse compare un 
favorably to those of traveling. There is no limit to possi 
bilities of reaching remote planets. One might surmise 

71 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



that the traveling to a distant star would take so long that 
the traveler s span of life will not suffice to complete the 
journey. This argument, however, is inconclusive because 
of the fact that the speed of traveling holds back old age. 
The closer is the speed of traveling to that of light, the 
less would the traveler age and the slower would seem to 
him the flight of time. A trip over a distance of one hun 
dred light years might mean to him, subjectively, a two- 
year aging. 

These inferences from the theory of relativity are in 
deed quite fantastic. It is a strange matter of fact that the 
strictest scientific manner of thinking leads to ideas such 
as are found in the fairy tales of the Orient Truth seems 
to be richer in diversity even -than poets imagination. 
Attractive as the theory of relativity may appear to those 
who turn pages of natural science as if they were pages 
of a picture book, entrancing speculations were not re 
sponsible for the scientific acceptance and influence of 
the theory. Its success resides rather in the persuasive 
power of the soberest and sharpest thinking as well as in 
its overwhelming capacity of explaining experimental 
facts within the frame of one unified theory. In the fol 
lowing chapters we shall attempt to show the fruitf ulness 
of this method of thinking with regard to other funda 
mental problems. 



72 



Chapter 4 : THE RELATIVITY 
OF MOTION 



THE idea of the relativity of motion, which gave Ein 
stein s theory its name, leads us back to the older root of 
this theory, referred to in the first chapter. The Coperni- 
can view of the world and its consolidation through the 
mechanics of Newton have become the starting point of 
reflections which began to bear fruit only after Einstein 
combined them with his criticism of the problem of 
ether. To be able to understand this, we must examine 
somewhat closer the problem of the relativity of motion. 
The idea of the relativity of motion has a strangely 
compelling force, once it is well understood. Who is not 
familiar with the phenomenon commonly experienced 
in a railroad car: one s own train stands still, while a 
train on the next track starts moving but the impression 
is opposite, that one s own train has started. Only after a 
while does one notice the illusion. But a thought may oc 
cur in connection with this experience: what right have I 
to call what I distinctly saw an illusion. Was it an illu 
sion? Was it untrue? May I not contend with an equal 
right that the other train stood still while my train was 
moving? To be sure, I had not noticed at the time that 
the surroundings, e.g., the depot, remained standing still 
and that I, therefore, was motionless with regard to this 

73 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



environment But what of It if I include this environ 
ment into my conception? May I not then declare that 
the other train stood still and that my train together with 
the depot, even the whole earth, was moving past it? May 
I not declare this with an equal right? 

Once this idea is understood, it is impossible to get rid 
of it It is easy to see that the large size of the depot, as 
opposed to that of the moving train, cannot serve as a dis 
proof : the difference in size is quite irrelevant If two 
bodies located in empty space, a large one and a small 
one, were to move toward each other, should one say that 
the large body is standing still while the small one is 
moving? This would make no sense. That motion cannot 
depend on size is clear from a situation in which the bod 
ies are of equal size; here size certainly cannot determine 
which body is at rest 

The following consideration holds true. Suppose that 
body A is at rest and body B is moving toward it; the 
movement would be recognized by the diminution of the 
mutual distance. Let us then suppose that B is at rest 
while A is moving; again we notice only the diminution 
of the mutual distance. There is, therefore, no way of 
concluding from the observed phenomena as to which of 
the bodies is moving, insofar as the observed phenomena 
are the same in both instances. Hence it is nonsensical to 
speak of a "true" movement One can only say that the 
bodies move toward each other; their movement is rela 
tive. This is consequently the answer toward which such 
a process of reasoning leads : there is no true movement, 

74 



The Relativity of Motion 



no absolute movement, but only relative movement. 

This idea has been repeatedly uttered. And it is inter 
esting that it precipitated once before a quarrel over the 
relativity of movement, a quarrel which received then no 
less publicity than Einstein s theory in our days. It hap 
pened at the time of Newton and Leibniz; Newton s the 
ory of absolute motion was combatted by Leibniz. The 
famous correspondence, in which these questions are dis 
cussed, has been preserved since those days. Leibniz de 
fended in it the relativity of motion against the theolog 
ian Clarke, a friend of Newton, and offered for his views 
arguments which even today play a part in the discussion 
of relativity. He emphatically stated that all appearances 
are the same, regardless of whether one ascribes motion 
to one or the other of the two bodies. The problem, he 
added, is not different even in the case of one thousand 
bodies, and "the angels themselves" could not decide, on 
the basis of the observed phenomena, which body is real 
ly in motion. From Leibniz comes also the demonstration 
of the concept of relativity by means of the famous prin 
ciple of the identity of indiscernibles ; what is indiscern 
ible is not different, and it is therefore meaningless to talk 
of absolute motion. 

Nevertheless, the grounds cited by Newton in favor of 
absolute motion could not be weakened by Leibniz. New 
ton realized that all familiar proofs of the relativity of 
motion can be justified only kinematically, that is to say, 
insofar as motion is regarded as a change of place, as a 
visible phenomenon requiring no reasons. But the mo- 

75 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



ment one starts looking for the active forces of motion 
the picture changes completely; and therefore, points out 
Newton, the relativity of motion is untenable dynami 
cally, that is, from the standpoint of the theory of forces. 
To understand this we must give an outline of Newton s 
theory. 

First of -all, Newton differentiates between uniform 
and accelerated motion. A body left by itself in an empty 
space will not change its motion ; it will move at an even 
speed and in a straight path. To the law of inertia, al 
ready established by Galileo, Newton added this 
thought: there is a force responsible for every change of 
motion; and conversely, the presence of forces indicates 
that the body is not in a uniform, but an accelerated mo 
tion. 

The same reasoning applies, correspondingly, to a re 
tarded motion. It has become therefore customary in sci 
ence to regard the retarded motion as "negatively accel 
erated." This is merely a convenient method of expres 
sion, which no one need abhor. The circular or "rotary" 
motion is also considered as an accelerated motion; 
though its velocity may remain the same as to magnitude, 
it continuously changes its direction and consequently 
cannot be classified as a uniform motion. 

The rotary motion offers an excellent illustration of 
Newton s idea of the absolute motion. Let us take an ex 
ample. Imagine a merry-go-round surrounded by a 
round building similar to what we see at fairs. When we 
sit in it, we get fairly soon the impression that we stand 

76 



The Relativity of Motion 



still, together with the merry-go-round, while the build 
ing moves around us. If we forget for a moment what we 
saw before getting in, namely, that the building stands 
firmly on the ground and that the merry-go-round is 
equipped with wheels, have we any way of determining, 
while sitting in the merry-go-round, whether it is the 
building or the merry-go-round that moves? 

Indeed, we have. For we feel, while sitting in the 
merry-go-round, an outward pull caused by the so-called 
centrifugal power. This power forces us against the rail 
ing. Were the merry-go-round to stand still and the build 
ing to move, then the sight for the eyes would be the 
same, but the push toward the railing, the centrifugal 
power, would not be there. A true state of rest can be 
recognized by the absence of the centrifugal power. Its 
appearance or disappearance plays a decisive role in the 
question of absolute motion. 

This was Newton s idea explained by him in a similar 
example (that of a revolving pail). We can, he declared, 
determine even the direction of the rotation. Suppose 
there is another, smaller merry-go-round attached to the 
larger one approximately at its center, but revolving in 
the opposite direction. We climb now into the smaller 
merry-go-round and investigate: is the outward push 
(that is, the centrifugal power) stronger or weaker than 
in the larger one? If it is stronger, then the rotation of 
the smaller merry-go-round is faster than that of the lar 
ger one; and the direction of the rotation is the same. But 
if it is weaker, then the smaller merry-go-round rotates 

77 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



backward, in the opposite direction to that of the larger 
one. 

We must admire the logical accuracy with which the 
great physicist constructed his doctrine of the absolute 
motion and of the absolute space. In the following lines 
we cite from his principal work the passages recapitulat 
ing his theory. He writes in The Mathematical Prin 
ciples of Natural Philosophy : 

"II. Absolute space, in its own nature, without re 
gard to any thing external, remains always similar and 
immovable. 

"Relative space is a measure of this space or a certain 
movable part of it, which is defined by our senses by its 
position with regard to bodies, and is usually taken for 
motionless space 

"IV. Absolute motion is the translation of a body 
from one absolute place into another; and relative mo 
tion, the translation from one relative place into an 
other. . . . 

"And so, instead of absolute place and motion, we use 
relative ones ... in philosophical discussion, wp ought to 
abstract from our senses. . . For it may be that there is no 
body really at rest, to which the places and motions of 
others may be referred. . . . 

"The effects which distinguish absolute from relative 
motion purely relative, but in a true and absolute motion 
lar motions. For there are no such forces in a circular 
motion purely relative, but in a true anda bsolute motion 

78 



The Relativity of Motion 



they are greater or less according to the quantity of the 
motion." 

The words with which he closes the introduction to his 
main work show how sure Newton felt of his affirmation 
of absolute motion, namely: 

"How we are to obtain the true motions from their 
causes, effects, and apparent differences, and the con 
verse, namely, to derive the causes and effects from the 
true or apparent motions, shall be explained more at 
large in the following treatise. For to this end it was that 
I composed it." 

These words of Newton demonstrate sharply the con 
trast which may exist between the objective importance 
of a discovery and the subjective significance attributed 
to it by its author. Whereas the physical work of New 
tonian dynamics has become a firmly established part of 
science merely raised by its later development to a 
higher form of knowledge, but otherwise remaining, as 
an approximation, permanently valid Newton s phil 
osophical interpretation of his work has been of a re 
stricted duration. Nevertheless, a consistent development 
of the theory of absoluteness has contributed to the deep 
er insights of today; for only the compulsion to refute 
Newton s arguments could lead to the final clarification 
of the idea of general relativity, which was to be extend 
ed from relativistic kinematics to relativistic dynamics. 

Almost 200 years had to pass before a real refutation 
of Newton s thought was found. In the eighties of the 
last century, Ernst Mach, in criticizing Newton s work, 

79 



trom Copernicus To Einstein 



found the counter-argument. If we return to our example 
of a merry-go-round, this was Mach s idea : Newton has 
overlooked that the case of the merry-go-round at rest 
and of the building in rotation does not represent the op 
posite of the original case. He has forgotten to take into 
consideration the surroundings of the building, the earth, 
the whole universe. For, in revolving, the merry-go- 
round does not revolve with regard to the building alone 
but also with regard to the earth. In the contrary case we 
must let not only the building revolve round the resting 
merry-go-round, but also the earth and the universe 
only then shall we present an equivalent but reverse pic 
ture. 

But in that case, continued Mach, the centrifugal force 
will appear again in the merry-go-round, for this case is 
no other than the original one, though presenting a kine- 
matically different description. In this description, the 
centrifugal force should be understood as an effect of the 
revolving earth-mass or even of the star-mass. These mov 
ing masses produce a pulling field experienced by me 
within the merry-go-round. In a quite surprising way, 
the concept of force becomes thus involved in the re 
version leading to the two equivalent interpretations. The 
same observable effect, namely, the pressure against the 
railing, appears in one conception as a consequence of 
the merry-go-round s movement, in the other, as a conse 
quence of the rotation of the surrounding masses. That 
rotating masses should form such a field of radially diver 
gent forces, is for the science of physics a new but not an 



The Relativity of Motion 



unusual thought. According to this conception, the New 
tonian attraction of masses would be supplemented by 
the new forces arising out of rotary movement One could 
imagine (according to Mach) that the walls of the build 
ing are several miles thick; then, in rotating around the 
merry-go-round, the mass of the walls would produce in 
the middle of the merry-go-round a field of radially di 
vergent forces, corresponding to the centrifugal field. 
This field, of course, would be by far inferior in strength 
to that produced by the rotating universe. 

Could this be demonstrated experimentally? But, re 
marks Mach, the proof is already available. For we do 
observe the centrifugal force; if we interpret it as an ef 
fect of the revolving masses of stars, then this is all that 
can be asked for from observation. The new conception 
differs from the old one only in the interpretation, not in 
what can be observed by the senses. Nevertheless, it may 
be possible to devise experiments in which the idea of 
Mach would lead to new observations. Imagine a rota 
ting fly-wheel of a huge machine; it represents a rotating 
mass and should exercise in its interior a propelling ac 
tion creating near its axis an area of "centrifugal force." 
Mach did not, of course, mean here the action of the 
wheel s own centrifugal force, from whose explosive ef 
fect the wheel is protected only by its solidity; rather, he 
wanted to say that a small body at rest, if placed near the 
axis, would be subjected to a pull toward the edge of the 
wheel. This action is, to be sure, so minute that it cannot 
be demonstrated; the mass of the largest fly-wheel is, in- 

81 



Fr*m Copernicus To Einstein 



deed, exceedingly small in comparison to that of the uni 
verse or of the fixed stars the rotation of which produces 
the ordinary centrifugal force. 

But even more important than this physical conse 
quence is the relativization of the concept of force, as ex 
pressed by Mach. For, what Mach says is that in accord 
ance with varying descriptions of the state of motion, the 
field of forces, too, must be presented in a different fash 
ion. No sooner does the concept of force partake of rela 
tivity than the dynamic distinction of one state of motion 
disappears; and then there is no absolute motion in any 
sense. 

Here lies the weight of the argument. The^relativity 
of motion is tenable not only kinematicalry but also dy : 

/^DW*/* J ** "*"- "^7* 

namicalf%, if the relativization of the concept of force is 
introduced. Even forces are not absolute quantities; they 
depend upon the system of reference. When one passes to 
a differently moving system, the forces have to be meas 
ured differently. What appears as action of inertia when 
the merry-go-round is conceived as moving, appears as 
action of gravitation, when it is imagined as standing 
still and the earth as rotating. Even the Copernican 
world-view appears to be shaken by this consideration. It 
makes no sense, accordingly, to speak of a difference in 
truth between Copernicus and Ptolemy: both conceptions 
are equally permissible descriptions. What has been con 
sidered as the greatest discovery of occidental wisdom, 
as opposed to that of antiquity, is questioned as to its 
truth- value. Though this fact clearly warns us to be wary 
82 



The Relativity of Motion 



in the formulation and evaluation of scientific results, 
nevertheless it by no means signifies a step backward in 
the progress of history. The doctrine of relativity does 
not assert that Ptolemy s view is correct; it rather con-, 
tests the absolute meaning of either view. .This new in 
sight could be gained only because the historical devel 
opment went through both conceptions, because the re 
placement of the Ptolemaic world-view by the Coperni- 
can world-view established the new mechanics which 
finally provided the physicist with a means of recogniz 
ing the one-sidedness of the Copernican world- view it 
self. The road to truth followed here the three dialectical 
steps which Hegel regarded as necessary for all historical 
development, the steps leading from, a thesis over an ajati- 
thesisto a higher synthesis.^ 

It would be saying too much to regard the fulfillment 
of the third stage as given in Magh s idea. When Mach 
replied to Newton that the centrifugal force must be ac 
counted for in terms of the relative motion alone, he of 
fered merely a program, not a physical theory; in fact, 
it w^s merely a beginning of a program for the physical 
theory elaborating the idea. Indeed, not only the centrifu 
gal force but all mechanical phenomena must be account 
ed for in terms of the relative motion; the question is, 
above all, how to explain relativistically the phenomena 
of motion in the field of gravitation, i.e., the planets 
movements. 

It was the great achievement of Newtonian mechanics 
that it provided the Copernican world-view with ajiy- 

83 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



namic foundation. Whereas there existed no difference 
from the kinematic standpoint, between the Copernican 
and the Ptolemaic systems, Newton, taking the stand 
point of dynamics, decided in favor of Copernicus. For 
his theory of gravitational force offered to the latter view 
a mechanical explanation; whereas the complicated 
planetary orbits of Ptolemy did not fit into any explana 
tion. If the question is how to provide both conceptions 
of the universe with an equal justification in terms of dy 
namics, then a general theory of gravitation has to be 
found, which explains the Ptolemaic as well as the Co 
pernican planetary motion as a phenomenon of gravita 
tion. Here lies the great mathematico-physical achieve 
ment of Einstein, in comparison to which Mach s thought 
appears merely as a first suggestion. Einstein has indeed 
found a comprehensive theory of gravitation, and only 
because of this discovery, which places his name in the 
same category with Copernicus and Newton, can we say 
that the problem of the relativity of motion has been 
brought, physically, to its conclusion. 



84 



Chapter 5 : GENERAL THEORY 
OF RELATIVITY 

EVEN though the basic ideas leading to the general 
theory of relativity were clear to Einstein, the road to 
the complete theory was still long and laborious. Al 
ready in 1906, merely a year after the formulation of 
the special theory of relativity, Einstein had expressed 
the basic ideas of the new doctrine, going substantially 
beyond Mach. But the construction of the theory placed 
him before unsuspected mathematical difficulties. There 
was one period, in this path, when Einstein thought he 
had demonstrated the impossibility of a general theory 
of relativity. Only in 1915 did he succeed in completing 
the theory combining Mach s idea of the relativity of 
motion with the special theory of relativity into a com 
pletely new theory of gravitation, bringing thereby to 
a magnificent conclusion the era of classical physics. The 
news of Einstein s theory reached the public only in 1919, 
when an English expedition sent to observe an eclipse 
of the sun reported the first astronomical confirmation 
of his predictions. 

In attempting to present Einstein s theory of gravita 
tion, we must first get acquainted with the modification 
given by Einstein to Mach s idea. The idea of the relativ 
ity of force if stated in the form given by Mach, can be 

85 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



used only in connection with rotary motion. Einstein had 
to extend the idea in such a manner as to make it ap 
plicable to every motion. He achieved his aim through 
the so-called principle of equivalence. 

We can clarify this principle by means of the so-called 
"box experiment" invented by Einstein in order to illus 
trate his ideas. Let us imagine a closed box of the size 
of a room, in which a physicist finds himself (Fig. 8). 
There is a spiral spring hanging down from the ceiling, 
to which an iron weight m is attached. The physicist 




Pig. 8. Emstezrfs "Box Experiment 1 

has taken the measurement of the distance of the weight 
from the ceiling, i.e. of the distance to which the tension 
of the spring is adjusted. 

The box has no windows. Were the box set in motion 
from outside, would the physicist notice the fact? Suppose 
that the box is being pulled up by a rope, like an elevator, 
in the direction of arrow b. Would the physicist inside 
notice it? Indeed he would be able to notice the change 

86 



General Theory of Relativity 



in the interior of the box: the weight m would remain 
slightly behind the motion, on account of its inertia; the 
length of the spring would increase a little, accompanied 
by an increase in its tension. An accelerated or growing 
movement would thus result in a lengthening of the 
spring.* 

Now, says Einstein, let us assume the physicist is 
aware of the lengthening of the spring; this is all that he 
observes immediately. Must he infer a motion of the box? 
Certainly, he can make this inference, for the motion of 
the box would produce this effect; but can this effect 
arise in no other way? If such a second cause is possible 
there is no necessity to infer a motion of the box. 

Now, there exists indeed a second cause that could 
produce the same effect If we assume that a great planet 
ary mass is being gathered underneath the box, then it 
would produce a gravitational field. This field would 
act on the weight in the direction of the arrow g and 
pull it down. Again the physicist would observe an in 
crease in the tension of the spring as well as an increase 
of its length /. From the observed lengthening of the 
spring the physicist, therefore, could just as well infer 
a field of gravitation below the box, as a movement 
of the box upward. 

But is there no way of distinguishing between these 
two possibilities? Are there no other experiments enab 
ling us to differentiate between a gravitational field and 

*Were the motion uniform, that is, were the velocity of the box changeless, no 
expansion of the spring would take place. We must, therefore, keep steadily in 
mind, here and in the following, that the motion erf die box is accelerated. 

87 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



an accelerated motion? Certainly riot, as long as the phys 
icist performs his experiments within the box. But if he 
cuts a window into the box and observes the outer sur 
roundings, could he not then easily determine what is 
happening outside? 

He could easily observe with his own eyes, indeed, 
whether or not any planetary masses have gathered un 
derneath the box. We must remember here, however, that, 
according to the considerations given in the preceding, 
there are other possible gravitational fields than those 
produced by masses at rest; namely, the movement of 
masses, too, can produce a field of gravitation, called by 
us a dynamic field of gravitation. Let us assume that there 
are no masses gathered underneath the box, but that the 
physicist observes an accelerated motion of the box with 
regard to the surrounding world ; must he now say that 
the box is in motion and the world at rest? We have made 
it clear already that a mere observation with the naked 
eye cannot inform him of anything in this connection, be 
cause it informs him only of a change in relative distances. 
Now we find that mechanical experiments within the 
box are not decisive, if the physicist takes only dynamic 
fields of gravitation into consideration. The physicist 
could then account for the lengthening of the spring in 
two ways: 

L The box moves upward with acceleration, in the 
direction ; the weight m remains behind on account of 
inertia ; the spring becomes tense. 

2. The box stands still, but the surrounding masses 



General Theory of Relativity 



move downward with acceleration; they produce a dy 
namic gravitational field g ; the weight m is pulled down 
because of its heaviness; the spring becomes tense. 

Both explanations are justified; there is no objective 
discrimination between them. 

If we take a closer look at the two formulations, we 
notice that, whereas the last sentences sound alike, there 
is a peculiar difference in the sentences before the last. 
In the first formulation it is stated: "the weight m re 
mains behind on account of inertia"; in the second for 
mulation: "the weight m is pulled down because of its 
heaviness." Two entirely different properties of bodies, 
inertia and heaviness, are placed here parallel to each 
other. It is maintained that either of the properties leads 
to the same effect, namely, to the increased tension of the&lt; 
spring. What are the grounds therefor? 

In order to understand this, we must re-examine these 
properties in a greater detail. For the layman does not 
quite know what is to be understood by the concepts of 
inertia and heaviness. Hence let us start with a distinc 
tion that underlies them, namely, with the distinction be 
tween mass and weight 

If we put a block of iron on the hand, we feel a pres 
sure arising from its weight Two factors are involved 
in the weight of a body: first, the mass of the body itself, 
and second, the mass of the earth. This double effect of 
active factors can be made readily intelligible in the fol 
lowing manner. If we take a larger block of iron, we in 
crease the mass of the body, and thus the pressure on the 

89 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



hand grows. One cause of the pressure is therefore con 
tained in the bodily mass. We can increase the pressure 
also in a different way, without changing the body itself. 
If we visit one of those places of the earth, where the 
gravitation of the earth is stronger, then the body s attrac 
tion is magnified and its pressure on the hand is greater. 
In fact, there are such places. One could, for instance, 
descend into a deep mine pit; or one could go to the vicin 
ity of a pole of the earth, which lies closer to the center of 
the earth, on account of its flattened shape, than do the 
middle or tropical zones. The variations of gravitation 
are not, to be sure, very considerable: they cannot be felt 
by the hand; more sensitive scales would have to be used. 
The scales in question could not be of the balance type, 
for the weights placed in one side would increase in 
weight just as much as the block of iron, with the result 
that the scales would indicate the same weight as before. 
One would have to use a spring scale, similar to those 
used in households; then, in the places located closer to 
the center of the earth, the spring will be more com 
pressed. 

The weight of a body is, therefore, different from its 
mass; it is the effect of attraction of this mass by the 
earth. At a great distance from the earth and other heav 
enly bodies, the weight of a body would be nil, while its 
mass would remain unchanged. On a large planet, such 
as Jupiter, all bodies are considerably heavier than on 
the earth. Our muscular strength would not be sufficient 
there, for instance, to lift a child from the ground, while 

90 



General Theory of Relativity 



on a small heavenly body, such as the moon, we could 
pick up a grown-up person with great facility. We may 
define the mass, therefore, as that quality of a body, which 
determines its weight in a given gravitational field; the 
weight itself depends on that gravitational field. 

The mass, if understood in this way, characterizes the 
body only with reference to the gravitational field and, 
therefore, in a rather one-sided manner. We shall call 
it "the heavy mass 1 of the body. Besides, there exists an 
entirely different effect of the mass, which leads us to the 
concept of "the inert mass." 

Let us imagine a loaded railroad car. In order to set 
it in motion, a great force is required. This force is not 
directed, however, against gravitation, as the car rolls on 
horizontal tracks. It is the inertia of the load that opposes 
the motion. The applied force is, therefore, entirely in 
dependent of gravitation. In order to move the wagon on 
Jupiter, no more force would be required than on the 
earth, and vice versa; nor would this movement be easier 
on the moon. We designate as "the inert mass" that prop 
erty which is determined by the opposition to changes in 
motion. 

It is a fact of experience that the inert mass of a body 
equals its heavy mass. This is by no means a matter of 
course. This fact can be illustrated in the following 
manner. 

Suppose that a log of wood and a block of iron lie on 
the large scales, and the two are found to be of equal 
weight The log of wood is, of course, much larger. Now, 

91 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



both things are delivered, one after the other, to a rail 
road car; then we investigate whether it is equally diffi 
cult to set them in motion along the horizontal tracks. 
This is not a matter of course; one could surmise that the 
great wooden log would show more inertia-resistance 
than the small iron block, for their weight, or their pres 
sure on the understructure, does not enter here into con 
sideration. But experience instructs us that there is no 
difference at all. Bodies of equal weight have the same in 
ertia; the heavy mass equals the inert mass. 

This result also explains the fact that, with the elimin 
ation of air resistance in the vacuum, all bodies fall 
equally fast. The heavier body has a stronger downward 
pull, but at the same time it has to carry a greater inert 
mass; that is why it does not come down quicker. 

After these considerations, we may return to our start 
ing point, the physicist in the box, who is in possession of 
two equally justifiable explanations of the meaning of his 
findings. The connection of this Einsteinian consideration 
with Mach s criticism of the problem of rotation becomes 
now clear. Here, too, we find the duality of explanations : 
the observed effect of forces is either due to the resistance 
of inertia or to an overflow of a dynamic gravitational 
field. Whereas the observed effect was, in Mach s case, the 
centrifugal force and the pressure against the railing of 
the merry-go-round, in Einstein s case of the box experi 
ment it is the tension of the spring, and the lengthening of 
I. But now we recognize the advantage of Einstein s pre 
sentation: it allows us to discover the reason for the 

92 



General Theory of Relativity 



double explanation. In the two interpretations of the box 
experiment we referred once to the inertia of the weight 
m, the second time to its heaviness. That both concep 
tions lead to the same observable effect is a result of the 
fact that the inert mass and the heavy mass are equal. 

Although the equality of the inert mass and the heavy 
mass was long known, nevertheless Einstein was the first 
man to recognize the basic significance of this fact. He 
realized that here lies the reason why the distinction be 
tween accelerated motion and gravitation can not be made 
and why the physicist in the box can not, therefore, deter 
mine whether he is moving upward in an accelerated mo 
tion or a gravitational field interferes from below. Hence 
Einstein calls both conceptions equivalent, and maintains 
that it is meaningless to look for a truth-distinction be 
tween them. 

With this assertion the problem is given a truly Ein- 
steinian turn. For, when the equivalence is conceived as 
completely as it is done here by Einstein, the concept is 
found to be much richer in content than is offered by the 
experimental demonstration of the equality of inert and 
heavy mass. It represents a general assumption about all 
natural phenomena. This equivalence is supposed to hold 
not only for the mechanical, but also for the electrical, 
optical and other phenomena; in all these cases, no differ 
ence is supposed to result, whether one speaks of an ac 
celerated motion of the box or of a gravitational field. A 
far-reaching hypothesis is assumed with this: it intimates 
nothing less than that the electrical, optical and other 

93 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



phenomena are to be included under the general theory 
of gravitation, that gravitation plays the same role in the 
doctrine of electricity, of optics, etc., as in mechanics. 

I say that this is a truly Einsteinian turn. The physical 
depth of Einstein s ideas can be, indeed, comprehended 
only when one realizes how this method of reasoning is 
employed in his basic assumptions. This was the case in 
the special theory of relativity. It was known that several 
important attempts failed to confirm the existence of 
ether; Einstein concluded from this that, in general, no 
similar attempt can do better, no matter what means are 
used. The principle of equivalence reveals the same atti 
tude. It is known that mechanical phenomena manifest 
no distinction between accelerated motion and gravita 
tional field; Einstein concludes that this applies equally 
to all other phenomena. From the standpoint of logic, one 
cannot speak here of an inference, for this far-reaching 
assumption cannot be logically demonstrated by means 
of the scantily available facts. Rather, we have here a 
typical procedure in physics, that of the formation of a 
hypothesis; although a more extended assumption can 
not be logically justified, nevertheless it is made in the 
spirit of a conjecture. There seems to exist something 
like an instinct for the hidden intentions of nature; and 
whoever possesses this instinct, takes the spade to the 
right place where gold is hidden, and thus arrives at 
deep scientific insights. It must be said that Einstein pos 
sesses this instinct to the highest degree. His assumptions 
cannot be justified in a purely logical way; yet they intro- 

94 



General Theory of Relativity 



duce new ideas quite in the right place. That the place is 
right, can be readily recognized when gold lies in front 
of us. In physics, too, there is subsequent justification; ior 
it is possible to perform experiments which later verify 
the new hypotheses. Thus it is possible to perform ex 
periments testing Einstein s assumption that the electrical 
and optical phenomena are affected by gravitation. Such 
experiments have been made, and they have confirmed 
Einstein s hypothesis in a decisive way. 



^ 




Fig. 9- The Curvature of Light-Rays m Einste&s Box 

We shall elucidate this characteristic trend of thought 
by applying it to a certain example, namely, to the con 
nection of light and gravitation. For this purpose, we 
turn once more to the box in which the physicist performs 
his experiments without being able to distinguish between 
acceleration and gravity. 

Let us assume that the box is at rest (Fig- 9). In a 
side wall there is a small hole through which a ray of 

95 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



light shines in; it follows a straight, horizontal line in 
the dust of the air (represented by the dotted line of the 
figure) . If the box is now set in uniform motion, the line 
changes: whereas the light entering through the hole 
reached previously exactly the opposite point on the wall, 
now that the box moves up the point of illumination goes 
further down, away from the ceiling. The ray is seen now 
as a sloping line, though still running straight. Next, let 
us imagine that the box moves upward with acceleration. 
The farther down sinks the ray, the faster goes up the box, 
so that the ray takes the distorted form of a curved line 
(see the solid line) . In the dust of the air, it would be 
seen in the shape of a water jet spurting sidewise from 
the pipe and flowing down in an arc. This experiment 
cannot, of course, be actually performed, for the simple 
reason that light propagates so fast that, in contrast to it, 
the spatial displacement of the box in the same period 
of time amounts practically to nothing; no change in the 
ray could be actually observed. Our experiment is sup 
posed to be merely "mental", intended to clarify the prin 
ciple. 

Let us now turn to Einstein s principle of equivalence. 
Einstein maintains it is immaterial whether we consider 
an accelerated motion or a gravitational field. It follows : 
As the curvature of the light rays occurs in the case of 
accelerated motion, so it must occur also in a gravitational 
field. The surprising conclusion results immediately from 
the principle. 

We are facing here an entirely new consequence of 



General Theory of Relativity 



Einstein s theory of gravitation. The assertion is of a far- 
reaching significance. According to it, light does not pro 
pagate in open space in a straight line when it comes with 
in the sphere of the attraction of masses; on the contrary, 
it follows a curved path not unlike that of a flying missile. 
This contention could be examined astronomically in re 
peated observations since Einstein deduced it for the first 
time from his theoretical considerations; and it has been 
confirmed to its full extent Such observations not only 
require great precision but they can be made only during 
a total eclipse of the sun; elaborate preparations are there 
fore demanded of the astronomer who wishes to check 
Einstein s effect. 

Einstein has drawn still another conclusion from his 
principle of equivalence, which concerns the behavior 
of clocks within the field of gravitation. By calculating 
certain deviations of the clock for the accelerated motion 
of the above mentioned box and by transferring the re 
sults to gravitational fields, he concluded, on the basis of 
considerations similar to those just outlined, that a clock, 
subjected to the influence of a strong gravitational field, 
would become slow. This effect cannot be demonstrated, 
of course, on ordinary clocks, as all watches and even the 
finest chronometers are still too inexact to be used for 
measuring these small retardations. But the physicist 
knows another kind of watches the precision of which 
transcends by far anything of human making: they are 
the individual atoms of which all substance is construc 
ted. Let us describe briefly the plan for the demonstra- 

97 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



tion of Einstein s doctrine, based on this effect. 

Since the investigations of the last decades, it has be 
come known that the atom is not a uniform body, but 
consists of two distinct kinds of material, the positively 
charged nucleus and the negatively charged electrones; 
the heavy but very small nucleus stands in the middle, 
while electrons revolve round it in their elliptical course. 
On account of this circular movement of the electrons, 
the whole atom can be conceived as a clock, in which 
each revolution of an atom corresponds to one turn of the 
hand and constitutes a unit of clock-time. Now, the revo 
lution of electrons can be measured very exactly, insofar 
as it manifests itself in the number of vibrations of the 
light emitted by a circulating electron. Almost everybody 
has occasionally observed how a gas-flame becomes col 
ored once salt gets into it; ordinary cooking salt colors the 
flame yellow, because it contains sodium; potassium 
colors the flame violet, etc. This coloration is due to the 
fact that the atoms of basic elements are "stimulated" by 
the flame and emit light the vibrations of which depend 
on the number of electronic revolutions, manifesting 
themselves in the color of the light The exact estimation 
of the color is done by means of so-called spectral lines 
which are observed and photographed in an extremely 
delicate apparatus, the spectrometer. This apparatus 
splits every light into its component parts, so that white 
light is transformed by it into a "spectrum 3 * resembling 
the color sequence of the rainbow and extending from red 
to orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet The lights of 

98 



General Theory of Relativity 



the radiating atoms, on the contrary, are marked in fine 
but sharp transverse lines ? separated from each other, and 
each appearing in one definite color. 

Einstein maintains that such an atomic clock manifests 
retardation in a gravitational field. A very strong 
gravitational field, a much stronger one than anywhere 
on the earth, exists on the sun, for the mass of the sun 
is by far greater than that of the earth. The atmosphere 
of the sun consists of incandescent gases; as the con 
ditions prevailing there resemble those within the gaseous 
flame, atoms are aglow. In fact, with the help of a 
spectral apparatus, it is possible to recognize, as spectral 
lines, the colors emitted by individual elements of the 
sun and to measure the number of their vibrations. If 
the individual atoms are really somewhat retarded in 
their motion by the gravitational field of the sun, then 
the spectral lines arising in them must occupy a slightly 
different position in the spectrum than the lines arising 
in the earthly sources of light. They must shift in the 
direction of the lower number of vibrations, that is, 
toward the red end of the spectrum. One speaks, there 
fore, of the red shift of the spectral lines, observed in the 
sunlight. 

The experimental test has encountered great difficul 
ties at first, insofar as it deals with an extremely small 
deviation and the calculated effect lies just on the border 
line of the measurable. But recently, very precise 
measurements have satisfactorily confirmed Einstein s 
findings. The astronomer, E. Freundlich, in order to 

99 



From Copernicus To Einstein 




s J s 

JcS I 



a 



o 

,.a 



a 

g 

6 



d | 
^ "6 os 



100 



General Theory of Relativity 



reach a conclusive demonstration of this, has built in 
Potsdam the Einstein tower (shown in Fig. 10), a struc 
ture combining to perfection every astronomical and 
physical contrivance. The tower has a lens (5) in its 
cupola, into which the light of the sun is directed from 
a side (mirror system, 3, 4) , so that the tower as a whole 
forms a single large telescope. At the foot of the tower 
the light is caught (7) and directed toward a huge 
spectral apparatus. A space several meters long (8-10), 
which is completely shut off from the surrounding 
world, forms the interior of the apparatus. At 8 the 
light enters through a slot; and at 10 is found the most 
valuable instrument of the whole arrangement, the 
diffraction grating, consisting of a slightly curved metal 
lic mirror with innumerable and extraordinarily fine 
scratch-lines. It splits light into its constituent colors 
and reflects it back to 11, where it is reproduced on 
photographic plates. The final measurements of the red 
shift are supposed to begin soon.* 

Finally, we wish to mention, in this connection, the 
third astronomical test found by Einstein for his theory. 
With the mathematical elaboration of the theory, it 
became clear that the planetary movements followed a 
much more complex law than taught by Newton and 

* The experiments in the Einstein tower could not be continued since Professor 
Freundlich was forced to leave Germany when the Hitler government came into 
power. The Einstein tower was given a new name and is now used for purposes 
which the Nazi government deems less dangerous for the German race. Up to 
the present time a definitive clarification of the red shift of spectral lines in the 
sun has not heen given. (Trattslafo^s note.) 



101 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



believed since his days. Newton s doctrine, to the effect 
that the sun attracts the planets with a power decreasing 
in proportion to the square of the distance, was shown 
by Einstein to be only approximately correct It must 
be replaced, for more exact purposes, by a different law. 
Whereas every planet, according to Newton, describes 
an ellipse around the sun, it follows from Einstein s law 
that, though this ellipse is indeed described, nevertheless 
it is accompanied by another rotary movement: the 
ellipse, as a whole, revolves around the sun in the course 
of centuries. This rotary movement must be strongest 
for the planets in the neighborhood of the sun. The 
astronomers had noticed since the middle of the last 
century, that the planet Mercury shows certain deviations 
from its course: its ellipse actually executes a rotary 
movement of the kind. This was found in the lateral 
retrocession of one of the extreme orbital points, the 
perihelion. This so-called perihelion movement of 
Mercury amounts to only 43 seconds of the arc per 
century. Yet the astronomers were unable to find a 
satisfactory explanation of the fact. Einstein s law gave 
an explanation of this rotation of the ellipse. 

The coincidence of theory and observation has, in this 
case, remarkable force of persuasion. It would not be 
surprising, if a theory devised originally for the explana 
tion of the perihelion movement were to determine cor 
rectly the amount of this deviation. However, Einstein s 
theory has arisen from entirely different grounds. It is 
based on ideas concerning the relativity pf motion, the 

102 



General Theory of Relativity 



equivalence of gravity and acceleration; and all its con 
structions are made in the pursuit of this program. It 
was, therefore, highly surprising that Einstein, after 
being informed at a rather late stage of his ideas of the 
fact of the perihelion movement of Mercury, subjected 
his theory (rooted in entirely different sources) to the 
test of whether or not it will give an answer to this 
question. And when the long known amount of 43 
seconds of the arc was deduced from his theory, he had 
every right to regard this unexpected coincidence as an 
excellent confirmation of his assumptions. 

We have described in the preceding pages the astro 
nomical consequences of the theory of relativity in such 
detail, because we are interested in showing that facts of 
observation have been the ultimately deciding factors in 
the acceptance of Einstein s theory. This is its strength; 
for, in the last analysis, the final confirmation of physical 
ideas can be given only by nature itself. Were it merely 
the question of creating a picture of how to make intel 
ligible the inner workings of nature, physics would be a 
very simple science. Explanations are found altogether 
too easily, when imagination is given a little rein. But 
it is truly an art to find explanations from which new 
facts follow and which can be confirmed by experiments. 
This applies, above all, to the numerous inventors who 
still occupy themselves with the problem of ether and 
who still look around for ideas as to how to reconcile the 
contradictory properties of such ether. Such ideas can 
always be found; but they lack the force of conviction, 

103 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



because their avtho. . do not succeed in getting new ex 
perimental results from their theories. It is easy to devise 
a theory of ether, capable of accounting even for the 
curvature of light and the red shift; there is no trick to 
it after these effects have been discovered by Einstein. 
Whoever believes firmly in the existence of ether should 
take example from Einstein and predict effects capable 
of experimental proof. But as long as this does not occur 
and only the prenomena predicted by Einstein are ob 
served, so long shall we adhere to Einstein and to his 
theory of gravitation, which is also a theory of the rela 
tivity of motion. 

We do not wish to attempt presenting the mathemati 
cal structure of Einstein s theory. Nobody will doubt 
our words that, mathematically, it is an exceedingly in 
tricate matter. Einstein aimed to find a general concept 
of gravitation that would fit all the different descriptions 
which could be given for the state of gravitation. For 
this purpose, he had to introduce in physics a new math 
ematical method, the so-called tensor calculus. We are 
reminded here of Newton s case who, in a similar man 
ner, had to develop a new mathematical method, that of 
the differential calculus, on which to construct his theory 
of gravitation. However, whefeas Newton had to invent, 
at that time, the method of calculation himself, Einstein 
was fortunately able to utilize for this purpose the math 
ematicians works which were already available. The 
essence of the new method of calculation resides in two 
basic concepts, the invariant and the co-variant The field 

104 



General Theory of Relativity 



e 

of gravitation is a co-variable magnitude. If one passes 
from one frame of reference to another, this magnitude 
changes, varies with and this is the meaning of the 
word "co-variant . Nevertheless, one should not believe 
that the objective meaning of the knowledge of nature 
would be eliminated thereby; for all such descriptions 
given in terms of different frames of reference signify 
merely different ways of expression, enabling us to com 
prehend the true character of nature. It is something like 
the way in which one can express thought in German, 
English, French, etc. ; the language may be different, but 
the mental content is the same. Similarly, the presenta 
tion of the state of gravitation in the world can be made 
in different languages, depending on the chosen frame of 
reference. But all these descriptions refer to one and the 
same objective state. This state is the invariable, the un 
changeable. The peculiarity of the mathematics of rela 
tivity is perhaps best expressed in this pair of concepts, 
the invariant and the co-variant. The co-variant stands 
for the manner of description; the invariant, for the 
common state arrived at from all the various descrip 
tions. 

It is important to make this thought clear. It is occa 
sionally attempted to present Einstein s theory in the 
simple sentence that everything is relative. But Einstein 
has not made everything relative. Only some things have 
become relative, particularly things previously regarded 
as absolute verities. On the other hand, the theory has 
made only clearer the things which are true regardless 

105 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



of the arbitrariness of descriptions. By pointing out the 
arbitrary additions made by man in his description of 
nature for what they are, Einstein s theory has made ob 
jective truth stand out more visibly than ever. Thus, the 
theory of relativity represents the highest level on the 
road to an exact knowledge of nature, along which the 
natural sciences have proceeded for centuries with so 
much success. 



106 



Chapter 6 : SPACE AND TIME 



IN THE preceding chapters we have described the phys 
ical side of the discoveries connected with the theory of 
relativity. In doing so, we put a special emphasis on 
factual foundations, that is, on the data of observation 
and experimentation, which gave rise to the bold con 
clusions drawn by Einstein. In this last chapter, we intend 
to consider the other side of the problem, dealing not so 
much with physics as with another realm, that of philos 
ophy. Our theory will appear, in this light, no less im 
portant and significant. We encounter here the thoughts 
which made the theory of relativity famous in wide 
circles, which distinguish it from other physical theories 
and secure for it a prominent position within the modem 
philosophy of nature. It is the revolution of our ideas 
concerning space and time, to which we turn with this 
analysis. 

As far as time is concerned, a substantial part of the 
new ideas has already been presented in the chapter on 
the special theory of relativity. The foremost place is 
occupied here by the relativity of simultaneity; it main 
tains that the time-order of events separated by distance 
is arbitrary within certain limits. It must be stressed once 
more that the events in question must be widely separated 
in space. We have found that the time-order of such 

107 



Fro m Copernicus To Einstein 



events is not accessible to direct observation. As observers, 
we can be in the neighborhood only of one of the events; 
a signal must be sent from the other event, which thus 
notifies us of the event s existence. If we wish to be in 
formed as to the time at which it occurred, we must resort 
to calculation ; for that we must know the velocity of the 
signal. Yet we have found that it is impossible to measure 
the velocity, unless we have already established simul 
taneity; for such a measurement requires two clocks, cor 
rectly set and placed at different localities. The argument 
thus runs in a circle, one premise presupposing the other; 
and its solution consists in abandoning the objective mean 
ing of simultaneity. Simultaneity cannot be known, it 
must be defined, and this definition will be arbitrary to 
a certain extent. If cannons were fired on two distant 
mountains at the same time, I should hear the two reports 
simultaneously only if I were standing in the middle of 
the distance. I then could assert also that the two dis 
charges did not occur simultaneously but in succession; 
and that could be justified by ascribing to sound waves 
a greater speed in one direction than in the other. I could 
then consider, quite arbitrarily, one or the other dis 
charge as the earlier. Such an assertion would never 
involve me in contradiction; for I shall always be able 
to account for my observation: namely, that I hear the 
two reports simultaneously in the middle of the distance. 
Here lies one of the deepest thoughts of the theory of 
relativity. We shall regard as true whatever we observe 
immediately; no theory can put out of existence whatever 
108 



Space and Time 



our senses teach us. An unconditional respect for the evi 
dence of the senses, of experience, constitutes the basic 
principle of the theory of relativity. This is supple 
mented, however, by the clear realization that the power 
of human observation is limited. Only a small portion of 
the world-space can be mastered by the senses; whatever 
happens beyond it, must be deduced by reflection. This is 
where reasoning comes in; by its force our knowledge ex 
pands beyond the narrow horizon of vision and opens up 
before us the gates of distant worlds. When we declare 
that we see the stars, this is a very inexact way of expres 
sion; we see directly only the light penetrating our eye. If 
we proceed from the experience of brightness,, occurring 
here, to the statement that there are stars far away, we are 
compelled to draw an inference; and this inference can 
not be drawn without some arbitrariness. One part of this 
arbitrariness is represented by simultaneity. The way we 
define it can change our system of thought, but it cannot 
change the observed facts themselves ; that is why all these 
different descriptions are equally true and equally justi 
fied. 

The relativity of simultaneity has a peculiar conse 
quence, as far as the measurement of space is concerned. 
We shall make this clear by means of an Instructive 
example. For this purpose we consider an apparatus, 
well-known in photographic practice, the so-called focal- 
plane shutter. 

Most photographic cameras are equipped with a 
shutter mounted between the lenses; but all these shutters 

109 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



prove to be inadequate for the photography of fast mov 
ing objects, because their exposure time cannot be made 
short enough. A focal plane shutter is used, therefore, for 
very short exposures. In such a camera there runs vertic 
ally outward, close to the film, and therefore practically 
in the focal plane, a rolling curtain with a horizontal slit 
in it; the various parts of the film receive light only as 
long as the slit passes them. The time of exposure is, 
therefore, extremely short. But at the same time a pe 
culiar fault creeps in: the individual sections of the plate 
do not receive light all at the same time, but only one 
after another, and as the object moves while being photo 
graphed the individually illuminated sections do not 




Fig, 11. Major Segravefs 1,000 Horsepower Auto at Full Speed 

represent strictly simultaneous states of the object, but 
successive states. The object cannot change very much, 
however, in that brief period of time; nevertheless, a cer 
tain distortion of the picture does occur. This can be well 
observed on the wheels of a fast moving automobile, since 
they assume the shape of a somewhat crooked ellipse with 
a forward tilt (Fig. 11). 

A similar distortion occurs, according to Einstein, 
when one wants to determine the shape of moving bodies. 

110 



Space and Time 



The difficulties found here were not seen at all before 
Einstein. For if one observes a moving body from a frame 
of reference at rest, the moving object is "photographed", 
so to speak, from a position at rest; and then the image 
is examined. The moving body appears to an observer at 
rest as a sequence of such instantaneous snap-shots. At 
this point the relativity of simultaneity comes into con 
sideration; events which are conceived as simultaneous 
for one definition of simultaneity, represent a sequence 
of time for another. The significance of this, as far as pic 
tures of moving bodies are concerned, is as follows : what 
is instataneous photography for one temporal system, is 
a photography by focal plane shutter for another. The 
shape of moving bodies varies according to the definition 
of simultaneity. There are no true shapes of moving 
bodies; all shapes obtainable in this way are equally true. 
This is Einstein s theory of the change in the form 
of moving bodies. The comparison with a photography 
by focal plane shutter represents the nature of this theory 
extremely well. The only difference consists in that Ein 
stein s focal plane shutter would have to run f astefr than 
light. It therefore cannot be actualized by such an appa 
ratus as a photographic shutter. On the other hand, it 
follows from this fact that Einstein s "distorted snap- 
shots" are not "false" ; they can just as well be considered 
as strictly instantaneous snapshots. This result does not 
hold for ordinary photography by focal plane shutter; 
pictures so obtained must rightly be called distorted. 
Our reflection shows us that space-measurement de- 

111 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



pends on simultaneity. This idea can be expressed mathe 
matically by bringing together space and time into a 
four-dimensional structure, into a space- time manifold- 
ness. Strangely enough, this procedure which appears 
simple and harmless to the mathematician, has given 
cause for great surprise and for bewilderment to others. 
Many a reader of books on relativity thought that space 
was thereby transformed from a three-dimensional struc 
ture into a four-dimensional one; and he then attempted 
in vain to conceive the fourth dimension of space. He 
may have argued in this way: Imagine three sticks of 
wood meeting together at one point under right angles, 
like the length, width and height of a room. These are 
three dimensions of space; is there any room for the 
fourth one? How is it possible to pass the fourth stick 
through the point, so that it too would form right angles 
with the others? The author too cannot visualize how it 
would run; but the theory of relativity never asserted 
anything of the sort. It asserts merely that time should 
be added, as time, to space; and this is something entirely 
different. We may imagine it this way: Three numbers 
are needed to determine a point in space. Suppose a lamp 
hangs in the room. How can we determine its place? We 
measure its distance from the floor, from the back-wall 
and from the side-wall ; these three figures determine its 
position in space. The three numbers are called co-ordi 
nates. The room is three-dimensional, because three fig 
ures are needed for statements of the kind described. If 
we want to determine not a point in space but an event, 
112 



Space and Time 



we require another figure, namely, the statement of time. 
Suppose that we switch on the light for a second and 
produce a flash of light; this is an event It is completely 
determined if we know the three numbers defining the 
position of the lamp and, in addition, the fourth number 
defining the time of the light-flash. Insofar as there are 
four figures, space and time together are called a four- 
dimensional manifoldness. This is the whole secret. Un 
fortunately, this simple circumstance is often depicted 
in a most obscure language. 

Whatever new is asserted by the theory of relativity 
about the space-time manifoldness, is illustrated much 
more comprehensibly and clearly in our picture of the 
focal plane shutter. It shows that the measurement of 
space is dependent on the measurement of time. This is, 
of course, something very new and profound; but it 
does not deprive time of its specific temporal character. 
Rather, it must be said that only the theory of relativity 
has discovered and formulated the peculiar distinction 
of time and space. The philosophical investigation of the 
theory of relativity has shown that time is something 
even more profound than space, that it is connected with 
the deepest principle of all knowledge of nature, the law 
of cause and effect. 

If we now turn to the problem of space, we find here 
ideas going farther back than the relativistic doctrine of 
time. For what Einstein teaches about space and geom 
etry, has been prepared, on the mathematical side, one 
hundred years ago. These ideas are connected with the 

113 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



so-called non-Euclidian geometry. The geometry studied 
by us in school goes back to the Greek mathematician, 
Euclid ; it has been taught for two thousand years in the 
form originally given by him. Only within the last cen 
tury a new kind of geometry was discovered by several 
mathematicians, among whom Riemann is the most im 
portant This geometry appears at first glance totally 
unreasonable and nonsensical, insofar as it contains such 
sentences as that the three angles of a triangle are to 
gether more than 180, or that the circumference and 
diameter of a circle do not stand in the relationship 
TT = 3.14. A more exact examination, however, proves it 
to be a completely correct and permissible mathematical 
system, to which one has only to get used. 

The non-Euclidian geometry may be conceived simply 
as a play with concepts which, though logical in them 
selves, have no significance beyond that It seemed in 
fact that real space, the space of things and bodies of the 
universe, followed the laws of old Euclidian geometry. 
These laws were always taken as basic, whenever houses 
and streets were built, or areas measured for topographic 
maps, or cosmic distances calculated. But already the 
discoverers of non-Euclidian geometry asked themselves 
the question as to whether Euclid s laws are strictly true; 
possibly, they thought, more exact measurements may 
bring to light deviations corresponding to non-Euclidian 
geometry. They knew full well that such deviations can 
be expected only for very large dimensions. The great 
mathematician, Gauss, undertook therefore to measure 

114 



Space and Time 



a triangle of large size. The corner-points of his triangle 
were formed by three mountains: Brocken in Harz, 
Inselsberg in the Thueringian forest, and Hohenhagen 
near Goettingen. The summits of these mountains were 
almost at the limit of visibility from each other, if tele 
scopes were used. Gauss measured the three angles en 
closed by this triangle and inquired whether their sum 
differed from 180; however, there was no noticeable 
deviation. Nevertheless, some mathematicians and phy 
sicists believed ever since then that some day a deviation 
may be revealed in still larger triangles by means of more 
precise instruments. 

The relations governing space, in that case, can be 
elucidated if we take as our starting point the corre 
sponding relations in two-dimensional surfaces. It is 
found that the laws similar to those holding for non- 
Euclidian geometry of three-dimensional space actually 
apply to such two-dimensional structures as curved sur 
faces. At the same time, let us depict much greater devia 
tions than those assumed in Gauss s experiment; it then 
will be easier to visualize the relations to be considered. 

Let us imagine beings living on the surface of a 
globe, for whom nothing exists outside this globe-surface. 
In their world, there would not be any tunnel going 
through the globe; nor would it include things stretching 
away from the globe, such as trees or towers. Everything 
is flat for them, embedded completely in the surface of 
the sphere, including the beings tehemselves. Now the 

115 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



question arises: would these beings be capable of noticing 
that they live on a curved surface? 

The answer to this question is by no means self-evi 
dent. We notice the curvature of the surface of the earth 
mainly because we observe phenomena outside the two- 
dimensional surface. When we observe the curvature of 
a hollow in the ground we sight across it, i.e., we com 
pare its form with the course of light-rays; we see the 
curvature of the hollow merely because light is not con 
fined to the curved surface but freely permeates the 
three-dimensional space. But in the two-dimensional 
world as conjectured, light-rays would glide along the 
surface; therefore no curvature would be noticed by 
sighting. And yet there would be other ways to recognize 
the curvature. 

Suppose that those living beings undertake surveying; 
they draw figures in the sand and measure them with 
yardsticks. They draw a circle around the north pole of 
the globe, for instance, a circle corresponding to 89 of 
northern latitude. Then they measure the circumference 
of the circle, using the yardstick. Finally, they measure 
the diameter of the circle; but what will they measure 
as diameter? Certainly not the "true" diameter traversing 
the interior of the sphere, along the chord ; for they can 
not leave the surface of the globe, and there does not 
exist anything for them outside the surface. Consequently, 
they will take for diameter the curved line running from 
one point of the circle by the north pole to its opposite 
point. This line will appear straight to them, because, in 

116 



Space and Time 



following it with the eye, they see the opposite point, 
insofar as light moves along the contour of the globe. 
But, if they measure the length of this line by using the 
yardstick, and then divide the circumference of the circle 
by the figure obtained for the diameter, they will get a 
smaller number than TT = 3.14, as the measure of the 
diameter is too large. By the results of these measure 
ments they will know that they live on the surface of a 
globe. 

Now let us describe the corresponding situation for 
three dimensions. Suppose there is a large sphere of iron 
sheet, about the size of a house. There is an iron scaffold 
inside. A man climbs on it; he can climb also the outer 
surface, where there are handles and steps to cling to. He 
measures the circumference of the sphere with a yardstick 
and then the diameter in a similar way, climbing along 
one of the girders. Finally, he divides the figures and 
gets a smaller number than TT = 3.14. 

The result was easy to understand in the case of two 
dimensions. The surface was conceived as curved or bent 
in the third dimension, as a sphere s surface must be. But 
for the case of three dimensions, this answer is no longer 
possible. There is no room for curving the three-dimen 
sional space. How shall we then interpret the result? 
Nothing remains for us to do but to admit that we live 
in a non~ Euclidian space. Those experiences in measuring 
are what would be noticed in such a space as space-curva 
ture. Furthermore, we must keep in mind that the de 
scribed two-dimensional creatures would have no other 

117 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



way of visualizing the curvature of their two-dimensional 
space; they cannot speak of its bending in the third 
dimension. The deviation from normal measuring con 
ditions is just what one would experience inside a non- 
Euclidian space. 

We cannot go here any further into the problem of 
visualizing non-Euclidian space; for a more detailed 
treatment of these questions, we must refer the reader to 
the author s Philosophy of Space and Time* which in 
general must be consulted for a more extensive explana 
tion of the thoughts contained in this book. There we 
discuss, in particular, the question of the relativity of 
geometry; it appears, namely, that all geometrical meas 
urements imply an uncertainty similar to that of the rela 
tivity of motion, and that measurements of the objective 
geometry of space presuppose a special sort of definitions 
which we call coordinative definitions. This question is 
connected with the question of whether there exists a 
Euclidian interpretation of measurements as described. 
Here we must face the question as to how Einstein came 
to apply non-Euclidian geometry to his theory of gravi 
tation. 

We? have already pointed out in Chapter 3 that watches 
and yardsticks have no independent significance, accord 
ing to Einstein s conception, but change in a particular 
way and are adjusted to the geometry of light. But even 
light is not the final thing; for it, too, is subjected to the 
guiding power of gravitation. It may be well to remind 

*H. Reichenbach, Philosophic der Paum-Zeft-Lebrej Walter de Gruyter & Co., 
Berlin, 1928. cf. also the author s Atom and Cosmos, New York, MacMillan Co. 

118 



Space and Time 



here of the argument contained in Chapter 5, according 
to which light conforms to the gravitational field. Gravi 
tation is the primary effect of the masses filling space; 
it is the guiding power to which light, yardsticks and 
watches conform. The simple relations of spatial meas 
urement, as formulated in Euclidian geometry, are valid 
only in the absence of a gravitational field, that is, at 
great distances from the star masses. In the vicinity of 
such great masses, on the other hand, space is warped, 
so to speak; it assumes curved forms and follows strange 
laws, as given in non-Euclidian geometry. The deviation 
from Euclidian relations is always, to be sure, very small, 
so small, in fact, that it cannot be demonstrated by means 
of ordinary measuring devices. This is the reason why it 
passed so long unnoticed. Even such measurements as 
those of Gauss could lead to no success, because they in 
variably dealt with too small distances. The deviations 
manifest themselves only in cosmic distances; and it is 
the course of heavenly bodies and of light-rays between 
them that betrays the non-Euclidian nature of space. 
And there, in the wide stretches of the universe, we find, 
indeed, quite substantial changes of geometry. 

The most perplexing thing of it all is that the space 
of the universe must now be considered as finite. This 
does not mean that the masses of the stars alone are finite; 
it means that space itself is limited. We can visualize this 
in the following manner. If a ray of light is sent out in 
a straight line, it returns after a certain time from the 
opposite side, not unlike a ship sailing steadily west but 

119 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



returning to the port of departure from the other side. 
There is no unlimited extension in this space; all straight 
lines come finally to their source. Each star can be poten 
tially seen twice, therefore, once from the front and the 
second time from behind, when we look at it about the 
universe. Unfortunately, no proof of this theory of Ein 
stein can be given at the moment, for the road around 
the world is so long that the stars light grows too weak 
to be observed. But even if we could see the light, there 
would be no way of recognizing the particular star. In 
the countless thousands of years required by light to go 
around the world, the star would have wandered far away 
and would occupy an entirely different position from its 
counterpart; as a result, we should not be able to recog 
nize the two stars as identical. 

Einstein s conception of gravitation as a "metric 
power", as a force determining the relations of spatial 
measurement, leads therefore to a far-reaching revolu 
tion in our knowledge of space. Apart from the novelty 
of the theory of a limited heavenly space, which signifies 
a turning point similar to that of the doctrine of the 
spherical shape of the earth, at the time of its promulga 
tion, the method of dealing with the problem of space, 
applied in Einstein s theory, represents a new form of 
philosophical thinking. It follows the principle that state 
ments concerning space are not to be separated from 
statements concerning bodies in space, that a space has 
no absolute significance apart from things and the laws 
of their mutual relations, a principle recognized before 

120 



Space and Time 



Einstein only by Leibniz. This limitation of the concept 
of space to its bodily manifestations represents a key to 
the understanding of the meaning of geometry, a problem 
which, after the discovery of non-Euclidian geometry, 
could no longer be solved by Kant s doctrine of an apriori 
validity of Euclidian geometry. The apparent priority 
of the latter geometry, expressed in the fact that it con 
trols all our spatial imagery, can be understood if we 
realize that the space-perception we possess has arisen 
historically from contact with things following the laws 
of Euclidian space. The solid bodies and sticks we work 
with comply so closely with the rules of Euclidian geom 
etry that we do not notice any deviations from it; as a 
result, we have become so accustomed to the laws of 
Euclid that we regard them as absolutely necessary. The 
deviations pointed out by Einstein occur only in astro 
nomic dimensions. Were we to live, however, in a world 
where the laws just described should hold in the dimen 
sions of our daily environment where, for example, the 
measured relations between circumference and diameter 
would differ from 3.14 we should get accustomed also 
to these facts. We should find everything self-evident and 
natural. If a physicist came along and asserted the oppo 
site, namely, that Euclidian geometry must determine all 
our spatial imaginations, we should answer him that he 
asserts the impossible; and his loudest opponents would 
be the very persons who defend today the apriori char 
acter of Euclidian geometry. The great achievement of 
Einstein consists in that his thinking is free from conven- 

121 



From Copernicus To Einstein 



tional ideas, that he did not hesitate to disregard the 
oldest laws of natural science, the laws of geometry, and 
to set new ones in their place. Though these new geo 
metrical laws were recognized by other mathematicians 
before him, Einstein was the first one to take them down 
from the shelves of thought-possibilities and to apply 
them to physical science, to the description of nature. 
Such a scientific deed manifests boldness, reveals inde 
pendence of thought; and we should not be astonished 
that it was difficult for all of us, and will be so for every 
one who hears of these ideas for the first time, to under 
stand Einstein s theory. 

Once more a chapter of our presentation ends with 
a Copernican turn. The first such turn was given by the 
demonstration of the relativity of motion; with this prin 
ciple the step from the Ptolemaic world view to the 
Copernican one was repeated on a higher level, leading 
to a synthesis of both world views into one. In a similar 
way, the break with Euclidian geometry shakes the very 
foundations of our knowledge and signifies a transition 
to a knowledge of a higher kind, incomprehensible as this 
knowledge may appear at first view. But just as the Co 
pernican worldview became at last generally recognized 
and a common property of all educated people, so will 
it be with the theory of relativity. One hundred years 
from now, the doctrine will be accepted as self-evident; 
and it will be difficult to comprehend why it encountered 
at first so much opposition. In Schopenhauer s words, 
"Truth is allowed only a brief interval of victory between 

122 



Space and Time 



the two long periods when it is condemned as paradox 
or belittled as trivial." We who are permitted to see this 
period of victory with our own eyes may consider our 
selves fortunate to witness the Copernican discovery of 
our age. 



123 



106 198 



