m<OU 166308 >m 



OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

Call No. /#0 Af 9 i" ^ Accessio nlftS / 
Author ' 




Title 

This book should be rotoirned qn pr befoie the d^j:e last marked below- 



THE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS 
OF PHILOSOPHY 



by the same author 

The Morality of Punishment 

Idealism 
A Short Commentary on Kant's Critique 

of Pure Reason 
The Individual, the State and World 

Government 
The Definition of Good 



THE 

FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS 
OF PHILOSOPHY 



by 
A. C. EWING 

M.A., D. Phil. (Oxori) M.A., Lift. D. (Cantab) 
Fellow of the British Academy 

Lecturer in Moral Science 
in the University of Cambridge 




ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD 

Broadway House, 68-74 Carter Lane 

London 



First published in 1951 
by Rout ledge & Kegan Paul Limited 
Broadway House, 68-74 Carter Lane 

London E.C-4 

Printed in Great Britain 

by Lund Humphries, London and Bradford 

Second impression 1952 



I 



PREFACE 

* | ~J HERE are two classes of readers for whom this book is 
specially intended, first, university students who have 
just begun the study of philosophy, and, secondly, 
those who, without having had the advantage of being 
at a university, wish to acquire by private reading some idea of 
what philosophy is and of the great topics with which it deals. 
I have tried very hard to make the book clear for both these 
classes, but it is best to realize at the start that it is not possible 
for a man to enter on the study of philosophy without real hard 
mental work, however much is done to make his task easier. 
Many philosophers, whose ranks I hope I have not joined, have 
been and are very much to blame for making the subject unneces- 
sarily obscure by their manner of presentation, but the nature of 
the subject-matter is such as to forbid the sort of effortless under- 
standing we may have of a novel. 

Professor Dorothy Emmet and Mr. G. E. Hughes have kindly 
helped me by reading the last chapter and making valuable 
criticisms. My indirect debts to those whose books I have read 
on philosophy or who have had verbal discussions with me in the 
past are naturally in the case of a book of this kind too numerous 
to recount. 

A. c. EWING 
Trinity Hall 
Cambridge 



CONTENTS 

PREFACE P a g e 5 

I. WHAT PHILOSOPHY IS AND WHY IT IS WORTH 9 
STUDYING 

ii. THE "A PRIORI' AND THE EMPIRICAL 26 

in. TRUTH 53 

IV. MATTER 68 

V. MIND 99 

VI. THE RELATION OF MATTER AND MIND 123 

VII. SPACE AND TIME 143 

HI. CAUSE 159 

IX. FREEDOM 182 

X. MONISM V. PLURALISM UNIVERSALS 2o6 

XI. GOD 221 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 2 5 2 

INDEX 256 



Chapter One 



WHAT PHILOSOPHY IS 
AND WHY IT IS WORTH STUDYING 

INTRODUCTORY. ORIGIN OF THE TERM 
'PHILOSOPHY' 

A precise definition of the term 'philosophy' is not practic- 
/\ able and to attempt it, at least at the beginning, would be 
/ % misleading. A sarcastic person might define it as 'every- 
JL. jL. thing and /or nothing'. That is, it differs from the special 
sciences in that it attempts to give a picture of human thought as 
a whole, and even of Reality in so far as it is held that this can 
be done; but in practice the content of real information given by 
philosophy over and above the special sciences tends to evaporate 
till it seems to some that there is nothing left. This appearance is, 
I think, misleading; but it must be admitted that philosophy has 
so far failed to live up to its great claims and that it can produce 
no body of agreed knowledge comparable with that of the sciences. 
This is partly, though not wholly, because where agreed know- 
ledge is attained in answer to any question, the question is said to 
belong to science and not to philosophy. The term 'philosopher' 
originally meant 'lover of wisdom', and took its origin from a 
famous retort which Socrates made when he was called 'wise'. 
He said, that his wisdom only consisted in knowing that he was 
ignorant, and that he should therefore not be called 'wise', but 'a 
lover of wisdom'. 'Wisdom' here is not restricted to any particular 
part of thought, and 'philosophy' used to be understood as includ- 
ing what we now call the 'sciences'. This usage still survives in 
phrases like such phrases as 'Chair of Natural Philosophy'. As a 
great mass of specialized knowledge came to be acquired in a given 
field, the study of that field broke off from philosophy and came to be 



What Philosophy is 

an independent discipline. The last sciences to do that have been 
Psychology and Sociology. Thus there is a tendency for the sphere 
of philosophy to contract as knowledge advances. We refuse to 
regard as philosophical those questions the answer to which can 
be given empirically. But this does not mean that philosophy will 
eventually shrink to nothing. The fundamental concepts of the 
sciences and the general picture of human experience, and of 
reality in so far as we form justified beliefs about it, remain 
within the purview of philosophy, since they cannot from the 
nature of the case be determined by the methods of any of the 
special sciences. It is discouraging that philosophers have not suc- 
ceeded in attaining more agreement in regard to these matters, but 
we must not conclude that, where there is no agreed result, the 
effort has been wasted. Two philosophers who disagree may well 
each be contributing something of great value, though they are 
not yet in a position tb disentangle it completely from error, and 
their rival accounts may be taken as supplementing each other. 
The fact that different philosophers are thus needed to supplement 
each other brings out the point that philosophizing is not only an 
individual but a social process. One of the cases of useful division 
of labour is the emphasis by different people of different sides of a 
question. Very much philosophy is, however, concerned rather 
with the way we know things than with the things known, and 
this is another reason why it may seem lacking in content. But 
discussions as to the ultimate criteria of truth may eventually de- 
termine in their application which propositions we decide in prac- 
tice to be true. Philosophical discussions of the theory of know- 
ledge have had indirectly an important effect on the sciences. 



THE USE OF PHILOSOPHY 

The question which many people will first ask when hearing of 
the subject, philosophy, is What is the use of it? Now it cannot 
be expected to help directly in the production of material wealth. 
But unless we suppose that material wealth is the only thing of 
value, the inability of philosophy to contribute to this would not 
mean that it was of no practical value. We value material wealth 

10 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

not for itself a pile of the paper we call banknotes is not good 
in itself but for its contribution to happiness. Now there is no 
doubt that one of the most important sources of happiness for 
those who can enjoy it at all is the search for truth and the con- 
templation of reality, and this is the aim of the philosopher. Fur- 
ther, those who do not in the interests of a theory rate all pleasures 
as equally valuable and who have experienced this pleasure at all, 
regard it as a pleasure superior in quality to most. Since almost all 
the goods which industry produces other than sheer necessities 
have value only as sources of pleasure, philosophy can well com- 
pete with most industries in utility, when we think how few people 
have whole-time employment as philosophers. It would be unfit- 
ting to grudge such a small expenditure of man-power to the 
subject even if we thought of it only as a source of innocent 
pleasure of a particularly valuable kind in itself (not only of course 
for the philosophers themselves alone but for the people they 
teach and influence). 

But this is not all that can be said on behalf of philosophy. For, 
apart from any value that belongs to it in itself over and above its 
effects, it has constantly had, overlook this though we may, a very 
important indirect influence on the lives even of those who have 
never heard of the subject. For indirectly it filters down through 
sermons, literature, newspapers and oral tradition and affects the 
whole general outlook on the world. The Christian religion was 
made what it is to a considerable extent through the influence of 
philosophy. Ideas which have played such a potent part in general 
thought even at the popular level as the idea that no man should 
be treated only as a means or that government should depend on 
the consent of the governed we owe originally to philosophers. In 
the political sphere the influence of philosophical conceptions has 
been especially great. For instance, the American constitution is to 
a very considerable extent an application of the political ideas of 
the philosopher, John Locke, with a president substituted for an 
hereditary king, and the ideas of Rousseau are admitted to have 
played an enormous part in the French Revolution of 1789. No 
doubt the influence of philosophy on politics is sometimes bad: 
the German philosophers of the nineteenth century have to bear 
some part of the blame for the development of that exaggerated 

ii 



What 'Philosophy is 

nationalism which eventually took such perverted forms, though 
the extent to which they are to blame has no doubt very often 
been much exaggerated and is difficult to determine exactly owing 
to their obscurity. But, if bad philosophy can have a bad influence 
on politics, good philosophy can have a good. We cannot in any 
case prevent politics being influenced by some philosophical con- 
ceptions, and therefore it is very desirable to devote careful atten- 
tion to philosophy in order to see that the conceptions which do 
wield an influence are good rather than bad. What horrors would 
the world have been spared if the Germans had come under the 
influence of a better philosophy instead of that of the Nazis! 

I must, therefore, now take back the suggestion that philosophy 
can have no value even as regards material wealth. A good philo- 
sophy by influencing politics favourably might well help even to 
make us wealthier than if we had a bad one. Again, the enormous 
development of science 'with its consequent practical benefits de- 
pended for its possibility a good deal on its philosophical back- 
ground. It has even been said (though no doubt exaggeratedly) 
that the whole development of civilization could be traced to 
changes in the idea of causation, i.e. from the magical to the 
scientific, and the idea of causation certainly belongs to the sub- 
ject-matter of philosophy. The 'scientific outlook' is itself a philo- 
sophy and was brought into being initially to a large extent by 
philosophers. 

But we should certainly not be in the best mood for a profitable 
study of philosophy if we looked on it mainly as an indirect means 
to material wealth. Its chief contribution is to that intangible 
intellectual background on which the emotional mood and out- 
look of a civilization so much depend. A still more ambitious 
claim is sometimes advanced. Whitehead, one of the greatest and 
most respected thinkers of modern times, describes the gifts of 
philosophy as 'insight and foresight not', and a sense of the worth 
of life, in short, that sense of importance which nerves all civilized 
effort'. 1 He adds 'that when civilization culminates, the absence of 
a co-ordinating philosophy of life, spread throughout the com- 
munity, spells decadence, boredom, and the slackening of effort*. 
The importance of philosophy is based for him on the fact that it 

1 Adventures of Ideas, p. 125. 
12 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

is 'an attempt to clarify those fundamental beliefs which finally 
determine the emphasis of attention that lies at the basis of charac- 
ter'. However that may be, it is certain that the character of a 
civili2ation is greatly influenced by its general view of life and 
reality. This till recently has been provided for most people by 
religious teaching, but religious views themselves have been 
greatly influenced by philosophic thought. Further, experience 
shows that religious views are apt to end in folly unless subject 
to constant review by reason. As for those who discard all re- 
ligious views, they should be all the more concerned to work out 
a new view, if they can, to take the place of religious belief, and 
to work out such a new view is to engage in philosophy. 

Science cannot take the place of philosophy, but itself raises 
philosophical problems. For science itself cannot possibly tell us 
what place in the whole scheme of things is held by the realm of 
facts with which it deals or even how they are related to the 
human minds which observe them. It cannot even demonstrate, 
though it must assume, the existence of the physical world, or the 
legitimacy of using the ordinary principles of induction to predict 
what will probably happen or to pass in any way beyond what has 
actually been observed. No scientific laboratory can demonstrate 
in what sense human beings have souls, whether or not the uni- 
verse has a purpose, whether and in what sense we are free, and 
so on. I do not say that philosophy can solve these problems, but 
if it cannot nothing else can do so, and it is certainly worth while 
at least trying to see whether they are soluble. Science itself, as 
we shall see, is all the while presupposing concepts which fall 
within the subject matter of philosophy. And, while we cannot 
even start science without tacitly assuming answers to some philo- 
sophical questions, we certainly cannot make adequate mental use 
of it for our intellectual development without having a more or 
less coherent world- view. The successes of modern science would 
themselves have probably never been achieved if the scientist had 
not taken from great original philosophers certain assumptions on 
which he based his whole procedure. The 'mechanistic' view of 
the universe characteristic of science during the last three cen- 
turies is derived chiefly from the philosopher Descartes. This 
mechanistic scheme has achieved such wonderful results that it 

13 



What Philosophy is 

must be partly true, but it is also partly breaking down, and the 
scientist may have to look to the philosopher to help him build 
up a new one in its place. 

Another very valuable service of philosophy (this time especi- 
ally 'critical philosophy') lies in the habit it forms of attempting 
an impartial judgment of all sides and the idea it gives of what 
evidence is and what one should look for and expect in a proof. 
This should be an important check on emotional bias and hasty 
conclusions and is specially needed and often specially lacking in 
political controversies. If both sides looked at political questions 
in the philosophical spirit, it is difficult to see how there could 
ever be a war between them. The success of democracy depends 
very much on the ability of the citizen to distinguish good and 
bad arguments and not to be misled by confusions. Critical philo- 
sophy sets up an ideal of good thinking and trains one in remov- 
ing confusions. This is perhaps why Whitehead in the passage 
just quoted says that 'there can be no successful democratic society 
till general education conveys a philosophic outlook'. 

While one should be careful to avoid assuming that men will 
necessarily live up to the philosophy in which they believe, and 
while we should attribute a larger part of human wrongdoing to 
the lack of will to live up to the best ideas we have than to sheer 
ignorance and error, we cannot deny that general beliefs about 
the nature of the universe and of good play a very large part in 
determining human progress or degeneration. Some parts of 
philosophy no doubt have more practical influence than others, 
but we must not make the mistake of assuming that, because some 
study has no apparent practical bearing, it will necessarily be of no 
practical value to study it. It is reported that a scientist who rather 
prided himself on despising the practical viewpoint said of some 
research: "The best thing about it is that it cannot possibly be of 
any practical use to anybody', yet that very line of research turned 
out to lead to the discovery of electricity. Studies in philosophy 
which are apparently practically useless and quite academic may 
eventually come to have all sorts of influence on the world out- 
look, ultimately affecting our ethics and our religion. For the 
different parts of philosophy, the different elements in our world- 
outlook, should all hang together. At least this is the aim not 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

always attainable of a good philosophy. That being so, concepts 
apparently the most remote from practical interests may vitally 
affect others which touch ordinary life far more nearly. 

So philosophy need not fear the question What is its practical 
value? At the same time a purely pragmatic view of philosophy is 
one which I by no means approve. Philosophy is not to be valued 
only for its indirect practical effects but for itself; and the best way 
of securing these good practical effects is to pursue philosophy for 
its own sake. In order to find truth we must aim at it disinter- 
estedly. It may be practically useful when found, but premature 
concern about its practical effects will only handicap us in trying 
to find out what is really true. Still less can we make its practical 
effects the criterion of its truth. Beliefs are useful because they are 
true, not true because they are useful. 1 



MAIN DIVISIONS OF PHILOSOPHY 

The following are commonly recognized sub-classes of the sub- 
ject, philosophy. 

(1) Metaphysics. 2 This is conceived as the study of the nature of 
reality in its most general aspects in so far as this can be achieved 
by us. It deals with such questions as What is the relation be- 
tween matter and mind? Which is primary? Are men free? Is the 
self a substance or only a series of experiences? Is the universe 
infinite? Does God exist? How far is the universe a unity and 
how far a diversity? How far, if at all, is it a rational system? 

(2) To metaphysics (or speculative philosophy, as it is sometimes 
called) there has recently been very often opposed 'Critical Philo- 
sophy*. This consists in an analysis and criticism of the concepts* 
of common sense and the sciences. The sciences presuppose cer- 
tain concepts which are not themselves susceptible of investiga- 
tion by scientific methods and therefore fall in the province of 
philosophy. Thus all sciences except mathematics presuppose in 
some form the conception of natural law, and to examine this is 

1 For my criticism of the 'pragmatist' attitude vide below, pp. 56-7, 66-7. 

2 The term owes its origin to the fact that it was discussed in the work of Aristotle 
which was put next in order after (meta) his work on Physics. 

15 



What Philosophy is 

the business of philosophy and not of any particular science. 
Similarly, we in our most ordinary and unphilosophical conversa- 
tion presuppose concepts which fairly bristle with philosophical 
problems matter, mind, cause, substance, number. It is an im- 
portant task of philosophy to analyse these concepts and see what 
they really mean and how far their application in the common- 
sense fashion can be justified. The part of critical philosophy 
which consists in investigating the nature and -criterion of truth 
and the manner in which we can know is called Epistemology 
(theory of knowledge). It deals with such questions as How are 
we to define truth? What is the distinction between knowledge 
and belief? Can we ever know anything with certainty? What are 
the relative functions of reasoning, intuition, and sense-experi- 
ence? 

The present book will be concerned with these two branches 
of philosophy as constituting its most fundamental and charac- 
teristically philosophical part. Allied to philosophy in the sense in 
which it is handled in this book, but distinct from it and having 
a certain independence of their own, are the following branches 
of study. 

ALLIED BRANCHES OF STUDY 

(1) Difficult to separate from epistemology but still regarded 
commonly as a distinct discipline is Logic. This is a study of the 
different kinds of propositions 'and the relations between them 
which justify inference. Some parts of it have very considerable 
affinities to mathematics, others might equally well be classed as 
belonging to epistemology. 

(2) Ethics or Moral Philosophy deals with values and with the 
conception of 'ought'. It asks such questions as What is the chief 
good? What is the definition of good? Is the rightness of an act 
dependent solely on its consequences? Are our judgments about 
what we ought to do objective or subjective? What is the function 
of punishment? What is the ultimate reason why we ought not to 
tell lies? 

(3) Political Philosophy is the application of philosophy (mainly 
ethics) to questions relating to individuals as organized in a state. 

16 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

It considers such questions as Has the individual rights against 
the state? Is the state anything over and above the individuals in 
it? Is democracy the best form of government? 

(4) Aesthetics is the application of philosophy to the considera- 
tion of art and the beautiful. It asks such questions as Is beauty 
objective or subjective? What is the function of art? To what sides 
of our nature do the various kinds of beauty appeal? 

(5) The more general term Value Theory is sometimes used 
to cover the study of value as such, though this might be put 
under the heading of ethics or moral philosophy. Certainly we 
may think of value as a general conception particular species 
and applications of which are handled by (2), (3) and (4). 



ATTEMPT TO EXCLUDE METAPHYSICS OPEN TO 

OBJECTION THAT WE CANNOT HAVE EVEN 
CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY WITHOUT METAPHYSICS 

Various attempts, some of which will be discussed later, have 
been made to exclude metaphysics as wholly unjustifiable and to 
confine philosophy to critical philosophy and the five allied 
branches of study just mentioned in so far as these can be regarded 
as an account and critical study of concepts of science and practical 
life. This view has sometimes been expressed by saying that philo- 
sophy consists or rather should consist in the analysis of common- 
sense propositions. This, if meant as an exclusive account, is 
clearly going too far. For (i) even if there can be no legitimate 
positive metaphysics, there will certainly be a branch of study the 
business of which it is to refute the fallacious arguments that have 
been at least supposed to lead to metaphysical conclusions, and 
this branch will obviously be part of philosophy. (2) Unless com- 
mon-sense propositions are wholly false, to analyse them will be 
to give a general account of that portion of the real with which 
they are concerned, i.e. to provide at any rate part of the general 
account of the real which metaphysics seeks to give. Thus, if 
minds exist at all and obviously they exist in some sense the 
analysis of common-sense propositions about ourselves, in so far 
as these common-sense propositions are true and it is quite in- 

B 17 



What Philosophy is 

credible that all our common-sense propositions about human 
beings can be wholly false will be giving us a metaphysics of 
mind. It may not be a far-reaching and elaborate metaphysics, but 
at any rate it will involve some genuine metaphysical propositions. 
Even if we say that all we know is merely appearance, appearance 
implies a reality \vhich appears and a mind to which it appears, 
and these cannot themselves be again just appearance, so that we 
are still asserting some metaphysics. Even behaviourism is a meta- 
physics. Of course this is not the same as to say that metaphysics 
in the sense of an elaborate system giving us a great deal of in- 
formation about the whole structure of reality and the things we 
most want to know is or ever will be possible. This can only be 
settled ambulando in trying to establish and criticize the meta- 
physical propositions in question. But, however ardent meta- 
physicians we may be, we cannot do without critical philosophy, 
or at least if we try to dispense with it we may be certain that we 
shall produce very bad metaphysics. For even in metaphysics 
we must start with the concepts of common sense and the sciences, 
having no others on which to build, and therefore if our founda- 
tions are to be in order we must carefully analyse and examine 
these. So we cannot quite separate critical philosophy from meta- 
physics, though of course a philosopher may emphasize one of 
these elements in his thought much more than the other. 



PHILOSOPHY AND THE SPECIAL SCIENCES 

Philosophy differs from the special sciences as regards (i) its 
greater generality, (2) its method. It investigates concepts which 
are presupposed by many different sciences at once besides ques- 
tions which fall altogether outside the purview of the sciences. 
Concepts requiring this philosophical investigation are shared by 
the sciences with common sense, but there are some special prob- 
lems raised or intensified by discoveries in a particular science 
which call for philosophical treatment because they are beyond the 
capacity of this science to discuss adequately, e.g. 'relativity'. 
Some thinkers, e.g. Herbert Spencer, have viewed philosophy as 
essentially a synthesis of the results of the sciences, but this view 

18 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

is not now generally taken by philosophers. No doubt, if philo- 
sophical results can be obtained by synthesizing and generalizing 
from the discoveries of the sciences, this should be done; but 
whether it can be done or not can only be settled by trying it, and 
philosophy has not succeeded in progressing very far or very 
profitably in this direction. The great philosophies of the past 
have consisted partly of an investigation of the fundamental con- 
cepts of thought, partly of "attempts to establish alleged facts of a 
different order from those dealt with by science by methods which 
are likewise quite different from those of science. They have usually 
been influenced more than is commonly apparent on the surface 
by the contemporary state of science, but it would certainly be 
very misleading to describe any of them as in the main a synthesis 
of the results of the sciences, and even anti-metaphysical philo- 
sophers like Hume have been concerned in their philosophy rather 
with the presuppositions than with the results of the sciences. 

Nor must we be too ready to assume that, because a certain 
scientific result or assumption is valid in its own sphere, it can be 
proclaimed without reservation as a truth of philosophy. Thus, 
e.g., it does not follow by any means that because, as recent 
physics seems to have shown, the time of physics is inseparable 
from space, therefore we can lay it down as a philosophical prin- 
ciple that time presupposes space. For this may be only true of 
the time of physics, and true of it just because the time of physics 
is time measured in space. It need not therefore be true of the 
time of our experience, from which the time of physics is an 
abstraction or construction. Science may progress by means of 
methodological fictions and by using terms in an odd sense which 
philosophy has to correct. The term 'philosophy of science' is 
usually applied to the branch of logic which deals in a specialized 
way with the methods of the different sciences. 



THE METHOD OF PHILOSOPHY AND OF 
THE SCIENCES CONTRASTED 

As regards its methods philosophy differs fundamentally from 
the special sciences. Except where mathematics is applied, the 



What Philosophy is 

sciences proceed by empirical generalization, but there is little 
scope for this method in philosophy. On the other hand, the at- 
tempt to assimilate philosophy to mathematics, though more often 
made, has not been successful (except in certain branches of logic 
which have more affinity in their subject-matter to mathematics 
than to the rest of philosophy). In particular it seems humanly 
impossible for philosophers to attain the certainty and clear-cut 
definiteness of mathematics. This difference between the two 
branches of study may be ascribed to various causes. Firstly, it has 
not proved possible to fix the meaning of terms in the same un- 
ambiguous way in philosophy as in mathematics, so that their 
meaning is liable imperceptibly to change in the course of an argu- 
ment and it is very difficult to be sure that different philosophers 
are using the same word in the same sense. Secondly, it is only in 
the sphere of mathematics that we find simple concepts forming 
the basis of a vast number of complex and yet rigorously certain 
inferences. Thirdly, pure mathematics is hypothetical, i.e. it cannot 
tell us what is the case in the actual world, for example, how many 
things there are in a given place, but only what will be the case if 
so-and-so is true, e.g. that there will be 12 chairs in a room if there 
are 5 + 7 chairs. But philosophy aims at being categorical, i.e. 
telling us what really is the case; it is therefore not adequate in 
philosophy, as it often is in mathematics, to make deductions 
merely from postulates or definitions. 

So it is impossible to find an adequate analogy to the methods 
of philosophy in any other science. Nor is it possible to define 
precisely what the method of philosophy is except at the expense 
of grotesquely limiting the subject. Philosophy has not just one 
method but a variety of different methods according to its subject- 
matter, and no useful purpose is served by defining them in ad- 
vance of their application. To do so is indeed very dangerous. It 
has often led in the past to wrongly narrowing the scope of 
philosophy by excluding everything that is not amenable to the 
particular method chosen as characteristic of philosophy. Philo- 
sophy requires a great variety of methods, for it must draw into 
its service and subject to its interpretation all kinds of human 
experience. Yet it is far from being merely empirical* for it is its 
task, as far as possible, to make a coherent picture of these ex- 

20 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

periences and to infer from them whatever can be inferred of the 
reality other than human experience. On the side of theory of 
knowledge, it must criticize all modes of human thought con- 
structively, but any mode of thought which in our ordinary non- 
philosophical reflections at their best appears to us as self-vindi- 
cating must be given a place in the picture and not rejected 
because it differs from others. The criteria for the philosopher 
will be on the whole coherence together with comprehensiveness; 
he must aim at giving a systematic consistent picture of human 
experience and of the world in which as much is explained as can 
from the nature of the case admit of explanation, but he must not 
purchase coherence at the expense of rejecting what in its own 
right is real knowledge or justified belief. It is a serious objection 
to a philosophy if it maintains what we cannot possibly believe in 
ordinary life. Thus it would be an objection to a philosophy if it 
logically led, as some do, to the conclusion that there is no physi- 
cal world, or that all our scientific, or all our ethical, beliefs are 
really quite unjustified. 



PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHOLOGY 

There is one science which has a very special bearing on philo- 
sophy, namely, psychology. Particular psychological theories are 
in practice much more likely to affect a philosophical argument or 
theory for good or evil than are particular theories in a physical 
science. The relation holds in the reverse direction too; except in 
the parts which border on philosophy, psychology is in more 
danger of being affected adversely by mistakes in philosophy than 
is a particular branch of physical science. This is probably because, 
while the physical sciences have reached an established position 
long ago and so had plenty of time to clarify their basic concepts 
for their own purposes, psychology has only emerged as a special 
science recently. Till a generation ago it was usually taught by 
philosophers and was hardly considered as one of the natural 
sciences. Consequently it has not yet had time to complete the 
process of clarification of its fundamental concepts which is needed 
to make them, if not philosophically unassailable, at any rate suf- 

21 



What Philosophy is 

ficiently clear and serviceable in practice for the science in ques- 
tion. The contemporary state of physics suggests that, when a 
science reaches a more advanced stage, it may again tend to be 
involved in difficulties with philosophical problems, in which case 
the period of independence would lie not at the beginning nor at 
the more advanced stage of a science's career but in the long inter- 
mediate phase between the two. Certainly philosophy may be of 
some help in the pending reconstruction of physics. 



SCEPTICISM 

Philosophers have been concerned a good deal with a strange 
creature, the absolute sceptic, but there is of course in fact no such 
person. If there were, it would be impossible to refute him. vHe 
could not refute you, or indeed assert anything, even his scep- 
ticism, without contradicting himself, for to assert that there is no 
knowledge and that no belief can be justified is itself to assert a 
belief. But you could not prove him wrong, for all proof must 
assume something. It must assume some premise or other, and 
also the laws of logic. If the law of contradiction is not true, you 
can never refute anybody by showing that he has contradicted 
himself. A philosopher cannot therefore start ex nihilo and prove 
everything: he must make some assumptions. In particular he must 
assume the truth of the fundamental laws of logic, otherwise he 
could not use any arguments at all or indeed make any significant 
statement. Of these laws the chief are the law of contradiction and 
the law of excluded middle. As applied to propositions the former 
asserts that a proposition cannot be both true and false, the latter 
that it must be either true or false. As applied to things the former 
asserts that something cannot be and not be or have a quality and 
not have it, the latter that it must either be or not be and either 
have a particular quality or not have it. They do not sound excit- 
ing principles, but on them all knowledge and thought depend. 
If to assert something did not exclude its contradictory, no mean- 
ing could be attached to any assertion and none could ever be 
disproved because both the assertion and the disproof might be 
correct. It is true that there are cases where it may be misleading 

22 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

both to ascribe a quality to something and not to ascribe it. There 
are many people whom it would be incorrect to call either bald or 
not bald, but this is because of the absence of an exact definition 
of 'bald', and because 'bald' and 'not bald' have therefore come in 
practice to signify extremes between which there is an intermedi- 
ate class of cases where we should use neither of these terms but 
say 'partly bald' or 'more or less bald'. 

It is therefore not a case of a person neither having a definite 
quality nor not having it. A person must either have or not have 
any particular degree of baldness, but when we say 'bald' or 'not 
bald' it is not clear what degrees these are intended to cover. The 
objections sometimes made to the law of excluded middle seem 
to me to rest on misunderstandings of this type. Similarly, the law 
of contradiction is quite compatible with a man being good in one 
respect and bad in another or being good in the same respect at 
one time and bad at another. 

Philosophy must also accept the evidence of immediate experi- 
ence, but this will not take us so far as might be expected. We do 
riot normally have immediate experience of any minds but our 
own, and the evidence of immediate experience cannot possibly 
tell us that the physical objects we seem to experience exist inde- 
pendently of us. But more of this later. We shall soon find that 
more assumptions than have yet been stated must be made if we 
are to admit that we know what in ordinary life we cannot help 
thinking we do know. We must not however conclude that, be- 
cause we cannot justify a common-sense belief by argument, that 
the common-sense belief is necessarily wrong. It may be that at the 
common-sense level we have a genuine knowledge or justified 
belief which can stand in its own right and does not require philo- 
sophical justification. It will then be incumbent on the philosopher, 
not to prove the truth of the belief, which may be impossible, but 
to give the best account he can of it and to examine exactly what 
it involves. If we use the phrase 'instinctive belief for what we 
take to be evidently true prior to philosophical criticism and what 
continues to appear evidently true in our ordinary life after and 
despite of philosophical criticism, we may say with Bertrand Rus- 
sell certainly not a person who is likely to be accused of being 
over-credulous that there can be no reason for rejecting an in- 



What Philosophy is 

stinctive belief except that it clashes with other instinctive beliefs, 
and that one of the chief aims of philosophy is to produce a co- 
herent system based on our instinctive beliefs amending them as 
little as is possible compatibly with consistency. And, since a 
theory of knowledge can only be based on a study of the actual 
things we know and the way we know them, we can say that, if a 
particular philosophical theory leads to the conclusion that we 
cannot know certain things which we obviously do know or that 
certain beliefs are not justified which obviously are justified, this 
is an objection to the philosophical theory in question rather than 
to the knowledge or beliefs which it assails. On the other hand it 
would be foolish to suppose that all common-sense beliefs must be 
true just as they stand. It may well be the function of philosophy 
to amend them, but not to throw them away or to alter them so 
drastically that they become unrecognizable. 



PHILOSOPHY AND PRACTICAL WISDOM 

Philosophy has been connected with practical as well as theo- 
retical wisdom, as in the phrase "taking things philosophically'. In 
fact success in theoretical philosophy is very far from giving a 
guarantee that one will be philosophical in this practical sense or 
act and feel in the right way in a practical situation. It was a 
favourite doctrine of Socrates that, if we know what is good, we 
shall do it, but this is only true if we include in the meaning of the 
term *know' the realization with adequate emotional vividness of 
what we theoretically know. I might well know or believe that 
to do something I wanted to do would give somebody else, A, 
much more pain than it gave me pleasure and was therefore very 
wrong, and yet I might do it because I did not feel nearly the same 
degree of emotional repugnance at the idea of A suffering pain as 
I did at the idea of myself missing what I coveted. Since it would 
be quite impossible for any human being to feel the sufferings of 
everyone else as much as his own, the possibility of being tempted 
to neglect one's duty is always present and requires to conquer it 
not merely knowledge but the exercise of will. Nor are we so 
constituted that it is always easy to go against a strong desire even 



and Why it is Worth Studying 

for the sake of our own happiness, let alone our own moral good. 
Philosophy is no guarantee of right conduct or of the right adjust- 
ment of our emotions to our philosophical beliefs. And even on 
the cognitive side philosophy cannot tell us by itself what we 
ought to do. For this we require, besides philosophical principles, 
empirical knowledge of relevant facts and ability to predict the 
likely consequences, and also insight into the particular situation 
so that we can apply our principles properly. 

I am not of course saying that philosophy is no help to right 
living, but only that it cannot by itself make us live rightly or even 
decide what is right living. That it can at least throw out valuable 
hints I have already insisted. I should have much more to say 
about the connection of philosophy with right living if I were 
including in this book a discussion of Ethics, the philosophical 
discipline which deals with the good and with right action; but 
we must distinguish theoretical philosophy as an account of what 
is from philosophical ethics as an account of what is good and 
what we ought to do. 

I do not by using this illustration wish to imply that I am a 
hedonist, or a person who holds that pleasure and pain are the 
only factors relevant to the rightness of an action. I am not. 

The extent to which either metaphysics or critical philosophy 
can help us in deciding what we ought to do is very limited. It 
may lead to conclusions which will make it easier for us to bear 
misfortune cheerfully, but this depends on the philosophy, and it 
is unfortunately not a matter of universal agreement among philo- 
sophers that an optimistic view of the world is justifiable philo- 
sophically. But we must follow truth wherever it leads, since the 
mind, once awakened, cannot rest in what it has no justification for 
thinking may not be a falsehood. At the same time we must study 
with respect and not dismiss unheard the claims of those who think 
they have attained inspiring and comforting truths about Reality 
by means that cannot be brought under the ordinary categories of 
common sense. We must not take for granted that the claims to a 
genuine cognition in religious and mystical experience of a differ- 
ent aspect of reality are necessarily to be dismissed as unjustified 
just because they do not fit in with a materialism suggested but by 
no means proved or now even really supported by modern science, 

25 



Chapter Two 

THE <A PRIORI' AND THE EMPIRICAL 



MEANING OF THE DISTINCTION, <A PRIORI' 
CHARACTER OF MATHEMATICS 

IN the theory of knowledge, the first point that confronts us 
is the sharp distinction between two kinds of knowledge 
which have been called respectively a priori and empirical. 
Most of our knowledge we obtain by observation of the ex- 
ternal world (sense-perception) and of ourselves (introspection). 
This is called empirical knowledge. But some knowledge we can 
obtain by simply thinking. That kind of knowledge is called a 
priori. Its chief exemplifications are to be found in logic and 
mathematics. In order to see that 5 +7 12 we do not need to take 
five things and seven things, put them together, and then count 
the total number. We can know what the total number will be 
simply by thinking. 

Another important difference between a priori and empirical 
knowledge is that in the case of the former we do not see merely 
that something, S, is in fact P, but that it must be P and why it is 
P. I can discover that a flower is yellow (or at least produces sen- 
sations of yellow) by looking at it, but I cannot thereby see why 
it is yellow or that it must be yellow. For anything I can tell it 
might equally well have been a red flower. But with a truth such 
as that 5+7 12: I do not see merely that it is a fact but that it 
must be a fact. It would be quite absurd to suppose that 5+7 
might have been equal to n and just happened to be equal to 12, 
and I can see that the nature of 5 and 7 constitutes a fully adequate 
and intelligible reason why their sum should be 1 2 and not some 
other number. It is indeed conceivable that some of the things 
which make the two groups of 5 and 7 might, when they were put 
together, fuse like drops of water, or even vanish, so that there 

26 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

were no longer 12 things; but what is inconceivable is that there 
could at the same time be 5 + 7 things of a certain kind at once 
in a certain place and yet less than 12 things of that kind in that 
place. Before some of the things fused or vanished they would 
be 5 +7 in number and also 12 in number, and after the fusion or 
disappearance they would be neither 5+7 nor 12. When I say in 
this connection that something is inconceivable, I do not mean 
merely or primarily that we cannot conceive it this is not a case 
of a mere psychological inability like the inability to understand 
higher mathematics. It is a positive insight: we definitely see it to 
be impossible that certain things could happen. This we do not 
see in the case of empirical propositions which are false: they are 
not true but might for anything we know have been true. It is 
even conceivable, so far as we can see, that the fundamental laws 
of motion might have been quite different from what they are, 
but we can see that there could not have been a world which 
contradicted the laws of arithmetic. This is expressed by saying 
that empirical propositions are contingent L , but true a priori propo- 
sitions necessary. What we see to be necessary is not indeed that 
arithmetic should apply to the universe. It is conceivable that the 
universe might have been constituted entirely of a homogeneous 
fluid, and then, since there would have been no distinction be- 
tween different things, it is difficult to see how arithmetic could 
have applied to it. What we do see is that arithmetic must be true 
of whatever can be numbered at all. 

We must not be misled here by the fact that in order to come to 
understand arithmetic we originally required examples. Once we 
have learnt the beginnings of arithmetic in the kindergarten with 
the help of examples, we do not need examples any more to grasp 
it, and we can see the truth of many arithmetical propositions, 
e.g. that 3112+ 2467 = 5 5 79, of which we have never had examples. 
We have probably never taken 3112 things and 2467 things, put 
them together and counted the resulting set, but we still know that 
this is what the result of the counting would be. If it were empiri- 
cal knowledge, we could not know it without counting. The 
examples are needed, not to prove anything, but only in order to 
enable us to come to understand in the first instance what is meant 
by number. 



The ( A Priori' and the Empirical 

In geometry we indeed stand more in need of examples than in 
arithmetic, though I think this is only a psychological matter. In 
arithmetic we only need examples at the most elementary stage, 
but in geometry most people need a drawn figure, or at least an 
image of one in their minds, to see the validity of most proofs. 
But we must distinguish between an illustration and the basis of 
a proof. If the particular figure were not merely an illustration but 
the basis of the theorem, the latter would have to be proved by 
measuring it, but a measurement with a ruler or protractor never 
figures in Euclid's proofs. That the proof is not really based on the 
figure drawn is shown by the fact that we can still follow a proof 
concerning the properties of right-angled triangles even if the 
figure used to illustrate it is so badly drawn that it is obviously 
not a right-angled triangle at all. Again, if geometry were empirical, 
it would be a very hazardous speculation from the single example 
before us on the blackboard to conclude that all triangles had a 
property. It might be an individual idiosyncracy of some triangles 
and not others. These considerations should be conclusive of 
themselves, but we might add that recent developments in geo- 
metry have had the effect of much loosening the connection be- 
tween geometrical proofs and the empirical figure. It is possible 
to work out non-Euclidean geometries where we cannot depend 
on figures. 

THE 'A PRIORI' IN LOGIC 

Another important field for a priori knowledge is logic. The 
laws of logic must be known a priori or not at all. They certainly 
are not a matter for empirical observation, and the function of 
logical argument is just to give us conclusions which we have not 
discovered by observation. The argument would be superfluous 
if we had observed them already. We are able to make inferences 
because there is sometimes a logical connection between one or 
more propositions (the premise or premises) and another propo- 
sition, the conclusion, such that the latter must be true if the 
former is. Then, if we know the former, we can assert the latter 
on the strength of it, thus anticipating any experience. To take an 
example, there is a story that Mr. X., a man of high reputation 

28 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

and great social standing, had been asked to preside at a big social 
function. He was late in coming, and so a Roman Catholic priest 
was asked to make a speech to pass the time till his arrival. The 
priest told various anecdotes, including one which recorded his 
embarrassment when as confessor he had to deal with his first 
penitent and the latter confessed to a particularly atrocious mur- 
der. Shortly afterwards Mr. X. arrived, and in his own speech he 

said: 'I see Father is here. Now, though he may not recognize 

me, he is an old friend of mine, in fact I was his first penitent.' It 
is plain that such an episode would enable one to infer that Mr. X. 
had committed a murder without having observed the crime. The 
form of inference involved: The first penitent was a murderer, 
Mr. X. was the first penitent, therefore Mr. X. was a murderer 
is of the famous kind to which logicians have given the name of 
syllogism. The importance of syllogisms has often been exagger- 
ated, but they are as important as any kind of inference, and we 
cannot deny that in many cases a syllogism has given people in- 
formation of which they were not in any ordinary sense aware 
before they used the syllogism and which they did not acquire by 
observation. Inference is only possible because there are special 
connections between the propositions involved such that one 
necessarily follows from others. It is a chief function of logic to 
study these connections, of which that expressed in the syllogism 
is by no means the only one. 

(A syllogism consists of three propositions, two forming the 
premises and the other the conclusion. Each proposition can be ex- 
pressed by a subject and predicate connected by the verb to be, 
the copula, and if we call everything which stands as either subject 
or predicate a term^ there must be three and only three terms in the 
syllogism. The one common to the two premises is called the 
middle term, and it is on this common element that the inference 
depends. The other two, having been connected by means of it, 
occur without it in the conclusion. Thus in the usual example of 
the syllogism All men are mortal, Socrates is a man, .*. Socrates 
is mortal man is the middle term connecting Socrates with mor- 
tality so that we could, even if he had not already died, know that 
he was mortal.) 

29 



The ( A Priori' and the Empirical 



OTHER CASES OF THE 'A PRIORI' 

A priori knowledge, while most prominent in mathematics and 
logic, is not limited to these subjects. For instance, we can see a 
priori that the same surface cannot have two different colours all 
over at the same time, or that a thought cannot have a shape. 
Philosophers have been divided into rationalists and empiricists 
according to whether they stressed the a priori or the empirical 
element more. The possibility of metaphysics depends on a priori 
knowledge, for our experience is quite inadequate to enable us to 
make on merely empirical grounds any sweeping generalizations 
of the kind the metaphysician desires. The term a priori covers 
both self-evident propositions, i.e. those which are seen to be true 
in their own right and those which are derived by inference from 
propositions themselves self-evident. 



THE LINGUISTIC THEORY OF THE 'A PRIORI' AND 

THE DENIAL THAT 'A PRIORI' PROPOSITIONS OR 

INFERENCES CAN GIVE NEW KNOWLEDGE 

At the present time even empiricist philosophers recognize the 
impossibility of explaining away a priori propositions as merely 
empirical generalizations, but they are inclined to the view that 
a priori propositions and a priori reasoning are merely concerned 
with language, and so cannot tell us anything new about the real 
world. Thus it is said that, when we make an inference, the con- 
clusion is just part of the premises expressed in different lan- 
guage. 1 If so, inference would be of use merely for clarifying our 
language and would involve no real advance in knowledge. Some 
inferences are of this type, e.g. A is a father, therefore A is male. 
But are they all? That would be hard indeed to square with the 
pri ma facie novelty of many conclusions. Take, for instance, the 
proposition that the square on the hypotenuse of a right-angled 
triangle is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides. 
Such a proposition can be inferred from the axioms and postulates 
1 This theory is not applied to inductive inference 

3 



The ( A Priori* and the Empirical 

of Euclid, but it certainly does not seem to be included in their 
meaning. 1 Otherwise we should know it as soon as we understood 
the axioms and postulates. The example I gave of the murder 
discovered by a logical argument seems to be another case of a fact 
not known at all beforehand by the reasoner which is discovered 
by his reasoning. Extreme empiricist philosophers contend that 
this appearance of novelty is really illusory, and that in some sense 
we knew the conclusion all along; but they have never succeeded 
in making clear in what sense we did so. It is not enough to say 
that the conclusion is implicit in the premises. 'Implicit' means 
'implied by', and of course a conclusion is implied by its premises, 
if the inference is correct at all. 2 But this admission leaves quite 
open the question whether or not a proposition can follow from 
a different one which does not contain it as part of itself; and since 
we obviously can by deductive inference come to know things 
which we did not know before in any ordinary sense of 'know', 
we must treat the empiricist's claim as unjustified till he has pro- 
duced a clearly defined sense of 'implicit in' or 'contained in' 
which leaves room for that novelty in inference which we all can- 
not help really admitting. In any ordinary sense of 'know' the 
conclusion is not in the cases I have mentioned known prior to 
the inference, and since the premises are and indeed must be known 
before we know the conclusion, it is therefore in no ordinary sense 
of 'part' part of the premises. 

It is indeed sometimes said that the premises include the con- 
clusion in a confused form, but it is obvious that the beginner in 
geometry cannot be said to be aware of Pythagoras 's theorem even 
in a confused form though he may know all the premises from 
which it can be deduced. Nor does awareness of the propositions 
that A was B's first penitent and that B's first penitent was a 
murderer include even confusedly the awareness that A was a 

1 It is no objection to this illustration that Euclidean geometry has not been proved 
true of the physical world, for the proposition in question undoubtedly follows 
from the premises of Euclid and therefore should on the theory we are discussing 
be included as part of them. What is denied by modern scientists is not that the 
conclusion follows from the premises, but that the premises and what follows from 
them ar-e true of the world. 

2 Similarly, the phrase 'is contained in* is sometimes used just to mean 'follows 
from* or 'is implied by* and need not connote that the conclusion is actually part of 
the premises, as would be the case on the literal meaning of 'contained*. 

3 1 



The 'A Priori* and the Empirical 

murderer as long as the premises- are not combined. When they 
are combined therefore something new appears that was not pre- 
sent to consciousness before in any way; there is a new discovery. 
We can also show by definite logical argument that the interpreta- 
tion we are discussing does not enable one to avoid the admission 
of novelty in inference. For, what is it to know something in a 
confused form? It is surely to know some general attributes pre- 
sent in a whole but not others. To be aware of p even confusedly 
must involve discriminating some general attributes in p y and 
those are given in the premises, which are admittedly understood 
in some degree. If we do not discriminate any attributes, the con- 
fusion is too great for argument to be possible at all. Now it is 
admitted that, when we reach the conclusion, we do discriminate 
attributes which we did not discriminate before, even if they are 
alleged to have been contained in the confused whole which was 
present to our minds before we started inferring. It is further 
admitted that the conclusion follows necessarily from the pre- 
mises. Therefore the general attributes which we discriminated 
at the time when we knew only the premises and not the conclu- 
sion must be linked with the attributes we discriminate afterwards 
in such a way that the latter follow necessarily from the former. 
So we still have to admit that sheer a priori inference can enable us 
to discover new attributes. In some cases it may take a good while 
to draw the inference, in other cases it may be practically in- 
stantaneous as soon as the premises are known and combined, 
but whether it takes a long or a short time to draw the inference 
cannot be relevant to the principle. 

Nevertheless, the view that inference cannot yield new conclu- 
sions dies hard, and so it will not be superfluous to bring further 
arguments, (i) 'This has shape' admittedly follows logically from 
'this has size' and vice versa. If the view I am criticizing were true, 
'this has size' would, therefore, have to include in its meaning 'this 
has shape', and 'this has shape' would also have to include in its 
meaning 'this has size'. But this would only be possible if the two 
sentences meant exactly the same thing, which they obviously do 
not. (2) Take an argument such as Montreal is to the north of 
New York, New York is to the north of Washington, therefore 
Montreal is to the north of Washington. If the view I am discuss- 

3* 



The ( A Priori 9 and the Empirical 

ing is true, the conclusion is part of the premises. But it is not 
part of either premise by itself, otherwise both premises would 
not be needed. So the only way in which it could be part of both 
together would be if it were divisible into two propositions one 
of which was part of the first and the other part of the second. I 
defy anybody to divide it in this way. (3) The proposition 'Socrates 
was a philosopher' certainly entails the proposition 'if Socrates 
had measles some philosophers have had measles', but it cannot 
be that the second proposition is included in the first. For the first 
proposition certainly does not include the notion of measles. 

What is really the same view is often expressed by saying that 
all a priori propositions are 'analytic'. A distinction has commonly 
been drawn between analytic propositions, in which the predicate 
is in the notion of the subject already formed before the propo- 
sition is asserted, so that the proposition gives no new information, 
and synthetic propositions in which the predicate is not so con- 
tained and which are thus capable of giving new information. 1 
Analytic propositions are essentially verbal, being all true by defi- 
nition, e.g. all fathers are male. As an example of a synthetic pro- 
position we could take any proposition established by experience 
such as 'I am cold' or 'It is snowing', but empiricists often assert 
that there are no synthetic a priori propositions. That this view 
cannot be justified may be shown at once. The proposition that 
there are no synthetic a priori propositions, since it cannot be 
established by empirical observations, would be, if justified, itself 
a synthetic a priori proposition, and we cannot affirm it as a syn- 
thetic a priori proposition that there are no synthetic a priori propo- 
sitions. We may therefore dismiss off-hand any arguments for the 
theory. Such arguments, whatever they were, would have to involve 
synthetic a priori propositions. Further, the view must be false if 
it is ever true that the conclusion of an inference is not part of its 
premises. For, if the proposition S is Q ever follows validly from 
S is P, the proposition all that is SP is SQ must be true a priori. 
But, unless the concept Q is part of the concept SP, the proposition 

1 This definition would have to be amended slightly to suit modern logicians who 
(1 think, rightly) deny that all propositions are of the subject-predicate form, but 
this would not alter the principle though imparting a complication of detail with 
which we need not deal here. 

c 33 



The ( A Priori' and the Empirical 

all that is SP is SQ cannot be analytic. Therefore our arguments 
against the view that in all valid inferences the conclusion is part 
of the premises expressed in different language are also arguments 
against the view that all a priori propositions are analytic. 

The analytic view seems plausible when we are concerned with 
the simplest propositions of logic and arithmetic, but we must not 
assume that a proposition is analytic because it is obvious. 
Though it may be very difficult to determine precisely where 
analytic propositions end and synthetic propositions begin, we 
cannot use this as a ground for denying the latter. It is very diffi- 
cult to say precisely where blue ends and green begins, since the 
different shades run into each other imperceptibly, but we cannot 
therefore argue that all blue is really green. Taking arithmetic, 
even if there is a good deal of plausibility in saying that 2 +2 is 
included in the meaning of '4', there is none in saying 95 91 or 

__Z 5 afe so include^. Yet, if the analytic view were true, 

* 3 

all the infinite numerical combinations which could be seen a priori 

to be equal to 4 would have to be included in the meaning of '4'. 
Some empiricists, without committing themselves to the view 
that all a priori propositions are analytic, still say these are a matter 
of arbitrary choice or verbal convention. They are influenced here 
by a modern development in the view of geometry. It used to be 
held that the axioms of Euclid expressed a direct insight into the 
nature of physical space, but this is denied by modern scientists, 
and the view is taken that they are arbitrary postulates which 
geometricians make because they are interested in what would 
follow // they were true. Whether they are true or not is then 
a matter of empirical fact to be decided by science. But, even if 
this suggests that the premises of our a priori arguments may be 
arbitrary postulates, this does not make the subsequent steps 
arbitrary. From the postulates of Euclid it follows that the three 
angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. If the original 
postulates are arbitrary, it is not certain that the conclusion is true 
of the real world; but it is still not an arbitrary matter that it 
follows from the postulates. The postulates may well be false, but 
there can be no doubt that //"they were true the conclusions must 
be so, and it is in this hypothetical working out of the consequences 

34 



The 'A Priori* and the Empirical 

of postulates which may not be true that pure geometry consists. 
The a priori necessity of pure geometry is not therefore in the least 
invalidated by modern developments. What is a priori is that the 
conclusions follow from the axioms and postulates, and this is not 
at all affected by the (empirical) discovery that not all the axioms 
and postulates exactly apply to the physical world. (Applied 
Euclidean geometry is possible in practice because it is an empiri- 
cal fact that they approximately apply. The divergencies only show 
themselves when we consider unusually great velocities or dis- 
tances.) 

If not only the postulates but the successive stages in the infer- 
ence were themselves arbitrary, we might just as well infer from 
the same premise that the angles of a triangle were equal to a 
million right angles or to none at all. All point in inference would 
be lost. Dictators may do a great deal, but they cannot alter the 
laws of logic and mathematics; these laws would not change even 
if by a system of intensive totalitarian education every human 
being were persuaded to fall in with a world dictator's whim in 
the matter and believe they were different from what they are. 
Nor can they change with alterations in language, though they 
may be expressed differently. That the truth of a priori proposi- 
tions does not just depend on the nature of language can be easily 
seen when we consider that, even if we do not know any Fijian or 
Hottentot, we can know that also in these languages and not only 
in the languages we know the propositions 5 + 7 12 must be 
true. It is of course true that by altering the meaning of the words 
we could make the proposition we expressed by '54-7 12' false, 
e.g. if I used '12' in a new sense to mean what other people mean 
by 'n', but then it would be a different proposition. I could play 
the same trick with empirical propositions and say truly, e.g., that 
"fire does not burn' or 'there is an elephant in this room' if I used 
'burn' to mean 'drown' or 'elephant' to mean 'table'. This does 
not in the least impair the obviousness of the contrary propositions 
established by experience. Finally, as we argued above that the 
proposition that there can be no synthetic a priori propositions 
would itself, if justified, have to be a synthetic a priori proposition, 
so we may argue that the proposition that all a priori propositions 
are a matter of arbitrary linguistic convention would, if true, have 

35 



The 'A Priori* and the Empirical 

to be itself a matter of arbitrary linguistic convention. It therefore 
could not be vindicated by any argument and would be merely a 
matter of a new usage of words arbitrarily established by the per- 
sons who assert it, since it certainly does not express the usual 
meaning of * a priori propositions'. So we must reject any attempt 
to explain away the a priori as a genuine source of new knowledge. 
If the attempt had succeeded, we should have had to admit that 
philosophy in anything like its old sense was impossible, for 
philosophy clearly cannot be based merely on observation. 

The views we have been criticizing contain the following ele- 
ments of truth, (i) A priori propositions can be seen to be true 
and the conclusions of an inference seem to folldw from their 
premises without any further observation, provided we under- 
stand the meaning of the words used. But to say that q follows 
from p once we understand the meaning of the words is not to say 
that q is part of the meaning of the words used to express p. 
Tollow from' and 'be part of are not synonyms. (2) If q follows 
from p you cannot assert p and deny q without contradicting your- 
self, but this is only to say that in that case the denial of q implies 
the denial of p. It is not to say that q is part of what you assert 
when you assert p, unless we already assume that what is implied 
is always part of what implies it, i.e. beg the question at issue. 
(3) An a priori proposition cannot be fully understood without 
being seen to be true. It may be impossible to understand some- 
thing fully without understanding something else not included in 
it at all, so it may still be synthetic. 

People have been inclined to deny synthetic a priori propositions 
because they could not see how one characteristic could neces- 
sarily involve another, but that this could not happen would be 
itself a synthetic a priori metaphysical proposition. People have 
also thought that it was necessary to give some sort of explanation 
of a priori knowledge, and could not see how this could be done 
except in terms of language. To this I should reply that there is no 
reason to suppose that a priori knowledge requires some special 
explanation any more than does our ability to attain knowledge 
empirically by observation. Why not take it as an ultimate fact? 
Human beings certainly cannot explain everything, whether there 
is ultimately an explanation for it or not. 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 



LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT 

At the same time it is very right to stress the importance of lan- 
guage in connection with philosophical thought, even if this stress 
has iately been carried much too far. Language is not merely a 
means of communicating with others, but is necessary even for 
our own thinking. The function of words in this connection is to 
provide some sensuous imagery for the mind, so to speak, to take 
hold of. I cannot see any logical impossibility in thinking without 
the use of any sort of imagery, but as a matter of empirical fact it 
is very doubtful whether human beings are capable of such a feat, 
at least where the thoughts are at all definite. Actual mental pic- 
tures of the object may serve our purpose when we are dealing 
with a concrete physical thing, but obviously they will not go very 
far in philosophy. Words have the advantage that, while sensual in 
character, being sounds or black marks, they need not be like the 
objects for which they stand and therefore can be used to represent 
effectively concepts which are not themselves at all sensual. In 
abstract thinking words usually -constitute the only imagery em- 
ployed, but this does not mean that thinking is just talking to 
oneself. Clearly, if we are to use words effectively, we must be 
aware not only of words but of the meaning of the words. This 
awareness of meaning may be difficult or impossible to analyse 
adequately, but obviously it must be present since otherwise there 
would be no distinction for us between an abstract argument 
which we understood and a mere set of nonsense-syllables. 

In view of its indispensable necessity for any but the most con- 
crete thought it is easy to see that a consideration of language is 
likely to be very important for philosophy. The meaning of words, 
as used in common speech, is apt to vary in all sorts of ways of 
which it is easy to lose sight, with the result that fallacious argu- 
ments dependent on an ambiguity in the terms occur. I may have 
proved that S is P in one sense of T' but then confuse two different 
senses of P and draw a conclusion that in fact only follows if S is P 
in another sense of P. Or two disputants may be at loggerheads 
mainly because they are using words in different senses and there- 
fore do not understand each other. It is therefore a good general 

37 



The ( A "Priori* and the Empirical 

rule that, when we are confronted with a philosophical question, 
we should first ask what is the meaning of the terms involved. If 
the meaning is not clear, we must then take the various alternative 
meanings that they might have and consider what follows from 
each of these meanings in turn. When we have done this, the 
question may turn out much easier to answer than before, and at 
least many spurces of confusion will have been removed. 

Language may also lead to philosophical mistakes because its 
verbal form gives misleading suggestions as to the structure of 
reality or because two sentences which really do not assert the 
same kind of thing at all are taken to do so because they have the 
same grammatical structure. Again we may fall into error through 
supposing that a word which owes its meaning to its context has 
a meaning in itself apart from the rest of the sentence and so 
stands for some definite entity or other. We do not tend to suppose 
this in regard to words like 'but' or c and', but we certainly tend to 
suppose it in regard to nouns or adjectives. We shall encounter 
examples of these mistakes in the course of the book, but I shall 
just give one now because it illustrates both the last fallacies and 
because it is one which it is specially desirable to understand at 
this early stage in the argument. We have a word 'proposition', 
much used by philosophers, which stands for what we know, 
assert, believe, doubt, disbelieve, etc., and we say that we, for 
example, believe a certain proposition. We are then naturally apt 
to suppose that propositions are separate entities of a special sort 
because these are separate words for them. Also such a sentence as 
'I believe a proposition' has the same grammatical form as 'I 
inhabit a house', 'I break a plate', etc. and therefore suggests that 
a proposition is something quite distinct from the believing, to 
which we do something when we believe it. But, if so, it is extra- 
ordinarily difficult to see what sort of thing it can be. The solution 
seems to be found in the fact that 'proposition' just does not stand 
for any real entity by itself, though 'believing a proposition' does 
so. Yet, provided we do not forget this, it is very useful and indeed 
necessary to talk about 'propositions'. When we do so we are by 
way of abstraction talking about that which certain different 
mental states of believing, doubting, supposing, etc., have in com- 
mon. 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

Again, we must remember that the sole function of language is 
not to communicate information. It has also the functions of ex- 
pressing emotions, commanding, conveying persuasion ('emotive 
functions' in general, as they are called). Sentences which assert the 
same thing objectively may have a quite different emotive tinge. 
I think this distinction has sometimes been run to death by recent 
philosophers, but it is no doubt a useful one. 



THE DEFINITION OF MEANING IN TERMS OF 

VERIFIABILITY AND THE REJECTION OF 

METAPHYSICS 

Another course adopted by many empiricists has been to identify 
meaning with the property of being verifiable (or falsifiable) by 
sense-experience, and to conclude that no metaphysics is possible 
because metaphysics would have to transcend sense-experience. 
Such a view dismisses metaphysical statements not as false or un- 
supported by evidence, but as meaningless. The following are the 
main objections to the verification theory, (i) There are other 
kinds of experience besides sense-experience the evidence of which 
has also a good claim to be heard, e.g. the experience of seeing 
logically necessary connections, ethical experience which tells us 
of values, religious experience. (2) I cannot have sense-experience 
of the past or of other minds, nor can sense-experience by itself 
directly establish any scientific laws. Therefore the strict verifi- 
cationists will have either to interpret statements about such things 
in a very extraordinary way or declare these statements and so 
almost every statement we can make meaningless. They have 
sometimes themselves gone so far as to put forward the view that 
statements about the past were really only statements about the 
possible future evidence which would verify them and that state- 
ments about minds other than their own were really only state- 
ments about their own sense-data, but this is surely a reductio ad 
absurdum of the theory in question. (3) The verification principle is 
not itself verifiable by sense-experience. We cannot tell by sense- 
experience that there is nothing in the meaning of a statement 
which could not be verified by sense-experience any more than we 

39 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

could tell by sight that there are no invisible microbes in this 
room. Therefore the principle is on its own showing meaningless. 
In order to meet such objections it has been suggested that the 
verification principle should be amended so as to make a state- 
ment meaningless only if sense-experience is not at all relevant to 
its probability or improbability, but thus amended the principle 
would not exclude metaphysics. The amount of pain in the uni- 
verse is obviously relevant to the probability of the metaphysical 
proposition that it was created by a good omnipotent God. In fact 
most metaphysicians have based their metaphysics partly on an 
interpretation of and inference from our sense-experience. They 
may have been wrong in doing so, but this depends on the merits 
or demerits of their particular arguments and cannot without beg- 
ging the question be deduced from the general consideration that 
sense-experience is not relevant to metaphysical propositions. 

Many verificationists would consequently now admit that their 
principle was not put forward as a true statement but as merely a 
matter of method, the point of which is simply that in order to 
understand a proposition it is very important to ask how, if at all, 
it could be verified by sense-experience. This need not imply that 
anything that could not be thus verified is not a proposition at all, 
and is therefore not open to the above objections. But a person 
who takes this line must be very careful to avoid slipping back 
into treating the verification principle in his own thoughts as a 
dogma. He will be doing this if he ever draws any inferences from 
it and on the strength of this asserts what he infers as true. For we 
are not entitled to accept anything as true because we have inferred 
it from a premise, unless we know the premise to be true or are at 
least justified in believing it. Provided this caution is observed we 
need not object to the verification method, though we may doubt 
whether it has anything like the importance that is commonly 
attributed to it. Its chief use probably lies in helping one to dis- 
tinguish science, which deals with what is in some sense verifiable 
by sense-experience, from metaphysics; but it is difficult (though 
perhaps not impossible) to define a sense of Verifiable' which will 
leave a place for all scientific propositions and yet exclude meta- 
physics. We have also already seen in the first chapter by an in- 
dependent argument that we cannot have even critical philosophy 

40 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

without some metaphysics. 1 (Of course, if Verification' is not 
limited at all by sense-experience but interpreted in such a way as 
to include every conceivable means of establishing or making 
probable a proposition, everyone may agree that unverifiable 
statements, if not meaningless, at any rate should not be made 
and need receive no attention. But then even the most meta- 
physical metaphysician does not claim that his metaphysics is in 
this sense unverifiable.) 

In general, attempts to establish the impossibility of meta- 
physics founder on the difficulty that we cannot show that meta- 
physics is from the nature of the case impossible without already 
presupposing some metaphysical beliefs. 2 To show that the nature 
of reality is such that we cannot know anything of it, We must 
already make some presuppositions about reality and about the 
ultimate nature of the human mind. How much metaphysics we 
are to admit is another question. The persistent disagreement of 
metaphysicians and the frequent discoveries of fallacies in their 
arguments certainly do not give much encouragement to hope 
that we shall be able to arrive at a system of metaphysics which is 
at once elaborate and securely founded. I think, however, that the 
significance of the perennial disagreement in question may easily 
be exaggerated. It may well be that, when two metaphysicians are 
disputing, what often happens is this. One philosopher asserts the 
truth of p and another the truth of q, p and q being apparently 
quite incompatible. Now presumably the facts are likely to be such 
that some of the criteria required if we are to assert p are present 
and also some of the criteria required if we are to assert q, other- 
wise there would be no dispute. It is in consequence of this that 
there will be both a tendency to assert p and a tendency to assert q. 
In that case we cannot say without reservations that either is right, 
because all the criteria required to justify the assertion are not 
present, but it does not matter whether we say p or q provided we 

1 Vide above, pp. 17-8. 

a The most noteworthy such attempt was made by the great German philosopher 
Kant (1724-1803). His arguments are too subtle and elaborate to discuss here, but I 
think he is open to the objection expressed in this sentence, important as his con- 
tribution in very many respects may be. It should be added that he did not really 
exclude all metaphysics but retained the beliefs in God, freedom and immortality in 
so far as justified by ethical arguments. 

4 1 



The 'A. Priori* and the Empirical 

add the necessary reservations. Both sides may then be right pro- 
vided we look on them not as giving arguments to prove p or q, 
but on 'the q-side' as stating the reservations which have to be 
made if we are to say p and on the 'p-side' as stating the reserva- 
tions which have to be made if we are to say q. The rival philoso- 
phies will then supplement rather than contradict each other, and 
they can thus both be regarded as making a positive contribution 
to the truth. Thus philosophers have often disputed whether 
reality is one or many, but we obviously cannot say that it is either 
without qualification. The pluralist, however, may be regarded as 
giving the points of which we still have to take account if we after 
all decide to say that reality is one and the monist as giving those 
of which we still have to take account if we decide to call reality 
many. I do not think all philosophical controversies can be 
treated exclusively in this way: there are such things as definite 
fallacies and definite contradictions between philosophers, but 
what I have said applies, at least partially, to a good many of the 
disputes between them. 



INNATE IDEAS 

The question whether a priori knowledge is possible must not 
be confused with the question whether there are 'innate ideas', i.e. 
ideas born with one. The theory of 'innate ideas' was put forward 
to account for the occurrence of ideas which did not seem deriv- 
able from sense-experience. The British seventeenth-century philo- 
sopher, Locke, criticizes it on the ground that it is absurd to sup- 
pose that new-born babies have ideas of God or of the law of 
contradiction, but all the advocates of the theory of whom we 
know have expressly denied that they meant to assert this and have 
said that all that was innate was a faculty to form the ideas. 
Locke's criticism, however, has its value as a reminder that, if 
'idea' and 'innate' are taken in their proper senses, the theory is 
false, and a warning that its advocates had not thought out suffi- 
ciently the sense in which they were using innate ideas. The theory 
usually opposed to that of innate ideas asserts that all our ideas 
ultimately derived from sense-experience (including observa- 



The ( A Priori' and the Empirical 

tion of ourselves). Obviously it must be admitted that I can have 
ideas of things which I have never experienced by my senses, e.g. 
centaurs, but it was contended that such ideas were always formed 
by combining in some way ideas thus derived, e.g. in this case the 
idea of a horse's body and that of a man's head, or at least by 
comparing such ideas or abstracting elements in them. But there 
must be at least one idea that is not so derived. Inference is im- 
possible unless we have the idea of logically necessary connection 
between the premises from which we start in our inference and 
the conclusion we reach, and this idea is clearly quite different 
from any which could be given in sense-experience. Other ideas 
which have been, at least plausibly, supposed not to be derived 
from sense-experience are God, good, duty, the laws of logic, sub- 
stance, cause, and the ideas of geometry such as that of a perfect 
circle or square. It is particularly difficult to suppose that moral 
ideas could be derived from sense-experience, but the place for 
discussion of them is a book on Ethics. 

But, if we deny that all ideas are derivable from sense-experience, 
we still need not hold the doctrine of innate ideas. A third alterna- 
tive is to say that the ideas are not made by our mind but derived, 
like empirical ideas, by apprehension of the real, only to add that 
there are other ways besides sense-experience of apprehending the 
real. E.g., we may make three alternative suppositions about the 
idea of cause: 

(i) We may suppose that we are innately so constituted that we 
call up the idea out of our own resources and apply it when we are 
confronted with experiences, such as that of regular succession, 
which suggest it. (2) We may suppose that the idea of causation 
is simply that of regular sequence in time, in which case we could 
easily explain it by sense-experience, since regular sequence is a 
relation which can be discovered by the senses easily enough. 
(3) If we think (as I do) 1 that causation cannot be identified with 
regular sequence or anything else which could be apprehended by 
the senses, we may still avoid the innate theory by maintaining 
that it is a relation in the real which we immediately apprehend by 
some means other than sense-experience on certain occasions, e.g. 
when we cause something to happen by an act of will or when we 

1 Vide below, chap. VIII 
43 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

encounter physical resistance. Having acquired the idea of cause 
in this way, we might then apply it in cases where we do not im- 
mediately experience the relation. This would easily explain how 
we can be in error sometimes about the presence of what we are 
immediately aware of on other occasions. Similarly, if we accept 
the idea of substance as not an object of sense-experience, we might 
explain it either by supposing it innate or by maintaining that each 
person had an intuition of himself as substance and then applied 
the idea thus gained to other minds and material things. It would 
not be necessary to hold that we had this immediate apprehension 
each time the idea of substance or cause was applied, provided we 
had it occasionally. Again, if we can ever by thinking see two 
characteristics to be logically connected, this is sufficient to ac- 
count for the idea of logically necessary connection without sup- 
posing it innate. 

We need not suppose either that the fundamental ideas of logic 
and ethics are innate or that they are derivable from sense-experi- 
ence or ordinary introspection. The fundamental characteristics or 
relations of ethics are apprehended in valuing or appreciating the 
value of something which really has them, and those of logic in 
thinking logically (i.e. apprehending the validity of inferences and 
the formal nature of propositions, etc.), and this does not mean 
that they are or are only characteristics of the experiences of valu- 
ing and of thinking logically. They are characteristics of what we 
value or of that about which we think logically. 



LIMITS OF RATIONALISM 

At the other extreme from empiricism we find an attempt to 
deny that there is any such thing as the merely empirically given. 
This is based on the psychological discovery, true no doubt as far 
as it goes, that what we perceive is always coloured by interpreta- 
tion and cannot be derived simply from the sensations given by 
our sense-organs. E.g. ice positively 'looks cold', though coldness 
is not a quality given by sight; we perceive a cupboard as some- 
thing which has an inside, though we do not see the inside. Sensa- 
tions are supplemented by images and inextricably blended with 

44 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

beliefs and expectations. When we perceive anything we do not 
just apprehend it as it is to the senses now but as a member of a 
class of things and are subtly influenced by our experience of pre- 
vious members. It thus becomes very hard to sort out from our 
total experience anything that is just given without any contribu- 
tion by the mind. But that there is a given element present surely 
cannot be doubted, however difficult it may be to fix precisely 
where it ends and begins? For clearly whatever interpretation 
there is depends on something being given to interpret. No judg- 
ments are purely empirical, if by a purely empirical judgment is 
meant a judgment which involves no ordering or organization 
by the mind; but this does not make our ordinary judgments of 
perception a priori either in the sense of being logically necessary 
or in the sense of not being based on the given at all. Further, even 
in so far as the interpretation goes beyond what is given, it is 
dependent on what was given in past experiences. We see ice as 
cold because we have previously felt it as cold, we apprehend a 
cupboard as having an inside because we have seen the inside of cup- 
boards in the past. All that is non-empirical here is the principle 
of method the mind has in organizing and interpreting the given, 
e.g. we do not know empirically that future cupboards will be like 
cupboards previously examined but we assume they will be so. The 
precise logical character of assumptions of this type is the main 
philosophical problem raised by scientific method and induction. 

The rationalist thinkers of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies tried to reduce sense-experience to a kind of confused think- 
ing, but philosophers to-day would be almost universally agreed 
that this is impossible. Thought as the source of the a priori and 
sense-experience (including introspection of oneself) are quite dif- 
ferent capacities and have quite separate, though both essential, 
functions in knowledge. 

There is one limitation which we must impose on a priori know- 
ledge at least as we know it. It always has the character of being 
primarily hypothetical. What we see a priori is a necessary connec- 
tion between two facts or suppositions, which we express by the 
use of the word 'if in what is called a 'hypothetical' as opposed to 
a 'categorical' proposition. (A categorical proposition asserts 
something unconditionally; a hypothetical proposition asserts only 

45 



The 'A Priori 9 and the Empirical 



what will happen if a certain condition is fulfilled.) '2 + 2=4' means 
that, if there are 2 -(-2 things, there must be 4 things. It does not 
tell us that there are 4 things in a particular place 'or indeed any- 
where at all: that is an empirical proposition. We can indeed know 
negative categorical propositions a priori ^ e.g. that there are no 
round squares or that there are no cases of 4 which are not cases 
of 2 + 2, but to know affirmative categorical propositions purely 
a priori is beyond our capacity. The only case in which it has been 
asserted that we can do this, in the 'ontological proof' 2 of God, I 
regard, with the great majority of modern philosophers, as a mere 
fallacy. This does not mean that we cannot use a priori proposi- 
tions to enable us to obtain information about what actually exists. 
What it means is that we cannot obtain the information by the 
'a priori propositions alone. We require in addition at least one 
empirical premise. When we know a priori that, if p is true, q 
follows, and we also know p empirically, we can infer q, but not 
otherwise. Thus, if we know the empirical premises that there were 
five people in a certain room an hour ago, that seven have entered 
since and none left (and we make the usually reasonable assump- 
tion that none have died in the meantime or miraculously van- 
ished), we can then use an a priori proposition to infer that there 
are now twelve people there. If we have obtained by empirical 
means the measurements of two sides of a triangle and the angle 
between them, we can use an a priori proposition of trigonometry 
to infer the length of the third. Even the most abstract meta- 
physical arguments have some empirical premise, though it may 
be a very general and obvious one such as that something, at least 
myself, exists, or that there is experience of change in time. 



INDUCTION 

The chief use of a priori knowledge is to enable us to make 
inferences. Whenever we can make an inference from p to q, we 

1 I still call a priori propositions primarily hypothetical because the a priori negative 
categorical proposition that there are no cases of SP arises only from the insight that, 
if something is S, it cannot be P. 

2 Vide below, pp. 221-2 

4 6 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

must know, or at least be justified in believing, the hypothetical c if 
p, then q'. For q to follow necessarily from p that hypothetical 
proposition must be a priori; necessary connection is not a matter 
of empirical observation. An important distinction is, however, 
drawn between deduction and induction. Both are inferences, but 
they differ in that deduction proceeds from the more to the less 
general, induction from the less to the more general. Induction in 
all its more characteristic forms is a matter of empirical generaliza- 
tion, i.e. we argue that, because something has proved true in a 
number of observed cases, it will be likely to prove true in similar 
cases that have not yet been observed. The conclusion is not 
(except in very special cases) certain, but it may be highly prob- 
able, and all our rational predictions about the future depend on 
an inference of this kind. Induction has presented very serious 
problems to logicians and philosophers generally. The inference 
in induction is certainly not a merely empirical matter: we use it 
to enable us to forecast the future, but we have not observed the 
future empirically. The whole use of induction is indeed to enable 
us to infer what we have never observed. Therefore some a priori 
principle about the world is required if induction is to be justified. 
The principle must be of such a nature as to justify us in supposing 
that what has happened in observed cases is likely to recur in un- 
observed; but logicians have certainly not hit upon a principle 
which is both self-evident and adequate to justify inductive infer- 
ence. The one which has been most commonly put forward as 
supplying what is needed is the principle that every change has a 
cause, but it would be much disputed nowadays whether this was 
either necessary or sufficient to justify induction. The meaning of 
'cause' itself is also very much a subject on which there are varying 
views. So the justification of induction is one of the worst prob- 
lems of logic. The fact that we must use induction if we are to have 
any science at all is a proof that science cannot be merely empirical 
(even where it does not use mathematics), but we cannot say that 
the conclusion of an inductive inference follows from its premises 
with the same necessity as does the conclusion of a deductive one. 
Most of the propositions we call empirical are not justified by 
mere observation but by that together with induction. This applies 
to all conclusions of science, for these are never statements of 

47 



The 'A Priori 9 and the Empirical 

single observed facts but generalizations about what usually hap- 
pens or inferences from such generalizations. It applies also to all 
our ordinary judgments about physical objects, for we always 
read in more than is actually observed and the only justification 
for what we read in must be found in induction (i.e. we assume 
that objects will have besides the characteristics we actually ob- 
serve a't the time those characteristics which we observed in the 
past in similar objects, e.g. that the ice we see is cold though we 
are not feeling the cold). This does not mean that, whenever we 
observe, we are consciously making inferences. But we can speak 
of 'implicit inferences', meaning that without making conscious 
inferences we hold beliefs on the strength of experiences which 
could be used as premises to justify the Beliefs by explicit infer- 
ences. 

INTUITION 

A necessary, though not always recognized, presupposition of 
inference is intuition. To argue validly A .*. B .'. C we must 
see a connection between A and B and a connection between B 
and C. But how do we know that that connection itself holds? 
We may be able to interpolate further terms, D and E, and say A, 
.*. D, /. B, .'. E, /. C; but we obviously cannot go on in this 
way ad infinitum. Sooner or later we must come to a point where 
we just see immediately that there is a connection, but cannot 
prove this to be so. When we see immediately something to be true 
otherwise than by observing it empirically, we are said to have an 
intuition. No doubt apparent intuitions are often to be explained 
as really implicit or suppressed inferences, but the argument I have 
just given shows that this cannot be so with all cases of intuition. 
Even when we have made explicit all the omitted steps, the logical 
point remains that for it to be possible to infer any one proposition 
from any other we must see the connection between them, and 
this connection cannot always be proved by interpolating fresh 
propositions, yet it must be known somehow. The connection 
may be said to be derived from the fundamental laws of logic, but 
the laws themselves are known intuitively. Further, before we can 
see their validity in the abstract, we must have seen their validity 

48 



The 'A Priori 9 and the Empirical 

in particular cases. All of us have used syllogisms long before we 
knew anything about the rules of syllogistic inference. That was 
because we could see that a conclusion followed from its premises 
without knowing the general principle on account of which it 
followed, as we can move our arms effectively in definite pur- 
posive ways without knowing the laws of physiology which 
govern our motions or the laws of physics which make the 
selected motions the most effective ones for our practical purpose. 
The same applies whether the connection is such as to make the 
conclusion follow with certainty given the premises, or whether 
it is, as in most inductive arguments, such that the premises make 
the conclusion only probable. But, while logicians have easily 
agreed on the general principles governing deduction and we can 
see these to be completely self-evident, neither is the case as re- 
gards the general principles governing induction. Yet though 
neither the plain man nor even the logician is clear as to the 
fundamental laws behind the process, we can see in particular 
cases of induction that the truth of the premises makes the truth 
of the conclusion probable, as we can see that the truth of the 
premises makes the truth of the conclusion certain in particular 
cases of deduction. 'Intuition' as a source of knowledge or justified 
belief is often brushed aside with contempt, but the argument I 
have given at any rate shows that, if there are to be any valid 
inferences, there must be some intuitions. 

Many philosophers have preferred to limit the term 'intuition' 
to cases of certain knowledge, but there are many cases where 
something presents itself to one intuitively as deserving a certain 
degree of credence but falling short of certainty or where an 
intuition has some value but is confused and inextricably blended 
with erroneous assumptions or inferences. These cases are par- 
ticularly plentiful in philosophy. It seems to me therefore prefer- 
able to use the term intuition to cover cases also where certainty 
is lacking. Anyone who dislikes this usage may substitute the term 
'ostensible intuition'. For, whether all 'intuitions' are said to be 
certain or not, we must at least admit that what is taken to be a 
certain intuition is not always really one. It is largely a matter of 
terminology whether we then say that it is not an intuition or say 
that it is an intuition but not certain. But it is clear that there are 

D 49 



The 'A Priori' and the Empirical 

all sorts of degrees of subjective certainty and uncertainty in 
apparent intuitions. Similarly, the a priori in general must not be 
equated with the certain. Empirical propositions may be certain, 
as are many established by immediate experience; and there are 
many cases of apparent a priori insight where we cannot be quite 
certain whether what we seem to see to be a priori true is really 
so. But any uncertainty there is in the a priori lies in the defects 
of the mind that reasons. We can only be uncertain in such matters 
because we are or may be confused. In some cases as in mathe- 
matics the confusion can be removed quite easily, in others as in 
philosophy it can persist for generations. 

The main argument of those who attack the notion of intuition 
is that apparent intuitions are liable to conflict with each other and 
there is then no means of deciding which is right. But this is a 
mistake: we can in fact test them in various ways. We can consider 
whether they are capable of any clear and internally consistent 
statement. We can ask whether they fit into a coherent system 
with the rest of our well-established beliefs. We can also ask 
whether intuitioas of the same kind have been confirmed in the 
past. We can ask whether an intuition stands or falls by itself or 
is a presupposition of a whole number of other beliefs which we 
cannot help holding, as some (though confused) intuition of the 
occurrence of causation or the uniformity of nature seems a neces- 
sary presupposition of all inductive beliefs. We can consider the 
plausibility of giving an alternative explanation of the intuitive 
belief. The result may then be negative or positive. It may be that 
our apparent intuition will evaporate when we think of the ex- 
planation, and then the latter is probably a correct one at least as 
to why we held the belief. Or it may be that the intuition will 
persist unshaken, in which case the explanation is probably at least 
inadequate. We can again consider whether the intuition repeats 
itself when considered in different contexts and different moods or 
with different examples. 

So when two people have conflicting intuitions we need not 
suppose that there is just an irreducible difference of intuitive 
faculty between them and that there is nothing more to be done 
about it. Arguments may well be available which without strictly 
proving either side to be wrong put a disputant into a position in 

50 



The 'A Priori* and the Empirical 

which he can see better for himself whether he is right or wrong 
or at least partially confirm or cast doubt on the truth of his view. 
In general, the clearer we have made ourselves about a subject by 
inferential thought, by analysing the different factors involved and 
by clearing up our terminology, the more likely are we to have 
correct intuitions on the matter if such are available at all. Again, 
intellectual confusions may be revealed which were responsible for 
the truth of the belief in question. Thus a person who really sees 
that A is B may confuse B with C and will then think he sees in- 
tuitively that A is C. Some such conflicts may be caused simply or 
mainly by ambiguities of terminology or the attaching of different 
meanings to some word. And of course we need not deny that 
differences of intuition may sometimes be due on one side or even 
on both to 'wishful thinking' or to the kind of cause which it is 
the business of the psycho-analyst (or of a patient and tactful 
friend) to remove. These remarks are specially applicable to ethical 
disputes. We cannot of course settle all disputes in these ways, but 
neither can we in practice settle all disputes in science. The most 
we can say is that they are soluble in principle, though we may not 
have the ability to hit on the right way of solving a particular dis- 
pute. Similarly, there is no reason to believe that conflicts between 
rival intuitions would not all be capable of a solution if these 
methods were applied aright and with good will on both sides, 
though in fact we cannot so apply them. 



DISTINCTION BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE AND 
BELIEF 

This is perhaps the best place to say a word about the distinction 
between knowledge and belief, which has played an important 
part in philosophical discussion. It is commonly and truly said 
that knowledge is certain and cannot be false, while belief may 
well be uncertain or mistaken. And some philosophers have 
assumed in consequence that we had a special faculty, that of 
knowing as opposed to believing, which was from the nature of 
the case infallible. This does not, however, necessarily follow. It 
may be that knowledge is only always certain and true for the 



The 'A Priori* and the Empirical 

same kind of reason as we have for saying that 'treason never 
prospers'. We can say it never prospers, because if it prospers it is 
no longer called treason. Similarly, it may be that we can only say 
that knowledge is always true because we should decline to call it 
knowledge if it turned out to be false. If I was absolutely certain 
of something and then later on I came to the conclusion that it is 
false or even only doubtful, I do not now say that I knew it but 
was mistaken. I say that I never really knew it at all. The explana- 
tion of this may be simply that 'I knew A' is a compound propo- 
sition including various elements: (i) I was subjectively certain 
about A, (2) A is true, (3) I was objectively justified in being cer- 
tain about A, and it can only be legitimately asserted that I knew 
A if all three conditions were fulfilled. In that case to say that 
what I know or knew is true will be an analytic proposition. We 
shall not be using the word 'know' rightly if we admit that know- 
ledge can be false. Knowledge will therefore be infallible for a 
quite different reason from any for which we might call, e.g., some 
very well-informed person an infallible guide about certain mat- 
ters. We cannot first tell that something is knowledge and then 
conclude that we may therefore rely on it completely. On the 
contrary, we are only entitled to call it knowledge (in the strict 
sense) if we have first seen that we may rely on it completely. On 
the other side it is urged, and there is much plausibility in the 
argument, that if some things were not known as certain nothing 
could be even probable, and it is difficult to see how we could 
know anything with complete certainty if there were not a particu- 
lar state of mind which we have towards certain things that could 
be regarded as from its nature infallible. But it does not seem 
possible to draw up an agreed list of the things we know with 
absolute certainty, and it is by no means clear that there are not 
cases of error which are psychologically indistinguishable from 
cases of knowledge. 



Chapter Three 
TRUTH 

DEFINITIONS OF TRUTH 

PHILOSOPHERS have been like Pontius Pilate, though out 
of more respectable motives much concerned with the 
question what truth is, and it is obviously of great impor- 
tance for our whole philosophical outlook what we take 
as the criterion or criteria of truth. Considering first the question 
of definition, we find three main theories in the field. 



(i) THE CORRESPONDENCE THEORY 1 

This maintains that truth consists in or depends on a relation 
between a belief or piece of knowledge and a fact in the real world. 
This is the common-sense theory in so far as common sense can be 
said to have a theory at all. We ordinarily think that, when we hold 
a belief, say, about the physical world, the belief is made true or 
false not by other beliefs but by something in the physical world 
to which it refers. My belief that this room contains a table is true 
because it corresponds to the facts about the room; the belief that 
there is an elephant in the room is false because it does not corre- 
spond to the facts about the room. I have taken examples from the 
physical world, but the same thing applies to beliefs about minds 
or experiences. My belief that I had toothache yesterday is only 
made true by the fact that I had toothache. 

This theory seems only too obviously true, but there are three 
perversions of it against which we must be on our guard. 

(a) I have used the terms, 'belief or 'judgement' for what is 
true or false. Now this may be understood as referring either to 
1 Sometimes called Accordance'. 
J3 



Truth 

our mental state of believing or to what is believed. But our state 
of believing is plainly not true; a psychological state cannot be 
sensibly called true or false. The theory therefore applies, if at all, 
only to 'belief or 'judgement' in the sense of what is believed or 
'judged'. ('Judgement' is used by philosophers as a term to cover 
both knowledge and belief.) The technical term in philosophy for 
what we judge or believe is 'proposition', and, strictly speaking, 
it is only propositions which can be true. We speak indeed of 
'statements' as true, but they are not true in their own right but 
only because they stand for propositions which are true. Now, 
since in a discussion of this sort it is easy and indeed necessary to 
hypostatize propositions, we are apt to slip into thinking of them 
as entities which have a being of their own quite independent of 
being thought by anybody, and some philosophers have taken 
this view literally. But propositions, taken thus, would be such a 
queer kind of entities that it is better to avoid the view if we can 
possibly do so, and I do not see that it is necessary to regard them 
as anything more than elements in the states of mind of people 
who do what is called 'think of or 'contemplate' the propositions. 
At any rate the correspondence theory is not necessarily com- 
mitted to taking them as anything more than this. In that case 
there would still be facts if there were no minds, but nothing 
would then be true except in the hypothetical sense in which to 
say that S is P is true means that, if a mind were to judge S is P, 
that mind would be judging truly. But, granted that there are 
minds who do judge, the truth of their judgements may still be 
dependent on something which is not a mind, though there would 
not be judgements without a mind. There would be no answers to 
examination questions if there were no candidates, but it does not 
follow from this that whether a given answer is right or not de- 
pends on the candidate. 

() The word correspondence suggests that, when we make a 
true judgement, we have a sort of picture of the real in our mind 
and that our judgement is true because this picture is like the 
reality it represents. But our judgements are not like the physical 
things to which they refer. The images we use in judging may 
indeed in certain respects copy or resemble physical things, but we 
can make a judgement without using any imagery except words, 

54 



Truth 

and words are not in the least similar to the things which they 
represent. We must not understand 'correspondence' as meaning 
copying or even resemblance. 

(c) The theory must not be worded in such a way as to imply 
that we are never aware of the real but only of our judgements or 
propositions. If that were the case, we could never know that they 
did correspond. You cannot tell by inspecting a photograph 
whether it is a good likeness of a person you have never seen. 

The correspondence theory as stated often seemed to fall under 
one or more of these perverted forms, and this aroused in philo- 
sophers the desire to find another theory which would avoid the 
notion of correspondence altogether. 



(2) THE COHERENCE THEORY 

Thus the coherence theory was developed in the nineteenth 
century under the influence of Hegel and the associated school of 
idealists. According to this theory truth is not constituted by the 
relation between a judgement and something else, a fact or reality, 
but by the relations between judgements themselves. This avoided 
the difficulty as to how we could know that judgements correspond- 
ed to something which was not itself a judgement. It was held that 
to say a judgement was true meant that it fitted into a coherent 
system with other judgements. Since coherence admits of degrees, 
it follows from this theory that a judgement can be more or less 
true. No judgement is absolutely true because we never attain a 
completely coherent system, but some judgements are truer than 
others because they approach nearer to this ideal. 

The above is an objection to the coherence theory, because it is 
hard to believe such a conclusion. It would seem that a judgement 
is, strictly speaking, always either true or false and cannot be more 
or less true, and it is surely obvious that '2+2=4' a ^d 'Washing- 
ton is the capital of the United States' are absolutely true. It might 
be replied that the advocates of the coherence theory were not 
using 'truth' in the ordinary sense of the term, but we are looking 
for a definition of the word in the ordinary sense, not in some 

55 



Truth 

exotic sense. 'Truth' in the ordinary sense is such a fundamental 
notion that it is a prime task of the philosopher to search for a 
definition of it in that sense, if one is indeed available. Further, I 
do not know how coherence itself could be defined without 
already presupposing truth. To say A coheres with B is either to 
say that A is consistent with B or that A necessarily follows from 
B, or something more complex definable in terms of consistency 
or of 'necessarily following from'. But these notions themselves 
already presuppose the notion of truth. To say A is consistent 
with B is to say that A and B may both be true; to say that A 
follows necessarily from B is to say that, if B is true, A must be 
true. So it seems that anyone who defines truth in terms of co- 
herence is defining truth in terms of itself, thus committing a 
vicious circle. Finally, it is surely obvious that judgements are 
true not because of their relation to other judgements, but because 
of their relation to something objective which is not itself a judge- 
ment. This brings us back to the correspondence theory of truth. 



(3) THE PRAGMATIST THEORY 

Truth has been defined by 'pragmatists' as standing for beliefs 
which 'work'. Certainly true beliefs in general work better than 
false, but it does not follow that this is what is meant by truth. 
The pragmatist defends such a view on the ground that we cannot 
attain absolute truth and therefore must be content with what 
works. He points out that the object throughout evolution and in 
at least vastly the greatest part of human life has been not theoreti- 
cal truth but practical success, and he insists that theory ought to 
be subordinated to what really counts. No doubt he will agree 
with everybody else that true beliefs must be consistent with each 
other and with experience, but he will say that this is only because, 
if they are not so consistent, they will not work. 

The pragmatist definition of truth is open to the following 
objections, (a) It is quite conceivable that a belief might work well 
and yet not be true or work badly and yet be true. There are very 
many drunkards who would be greatly benefited if they believed 
that next time they took alcohol it would kill them, but this does 

56 



Truth 

not make the belief true, (b) While true beliefs usually work, this is 
usually only because they are first true. It pays to believe that there 
is a motor car coming when this is true because if I do not believe 
it I may be run over, but it only pays because there really is a 
motor car, i.e. because the belief is first true, (c) What works for 
one man may not work for another, and what works for him at 
one time may not work for him at another. Does it follow that it 
has ceased to be true when it ceases to work, or that it is true for 
one man and not for another? The view that reality is a system in 
which everything is completely determined has worked for some 
men and the view that there was undetermined individual freedom 
for others, but both views cannot be true. God cannot both exist 
and not exist even if some men are helped by belief in his existence 
and others hindered. And he cannot have all the characteristics 
which have worked for all believers in all religions, for these are 
not all compatible. If a proposition is true at all, it surely must be 
true for everybody, and not just true for some men for whom it 
works and false for others for whom it does not work? Some 
pragmatists have welcomed such a subjective view of truth as is 
here suggested, but it is surely one that we cannot really accept. 
To take only one instance, if men evolved from animals at all, it 
will always be true that they did so, and will not become false in a 
particular generation when the effects of believing it happen to be 
bad and true again in another, (d) The pragmatist definition of 
truth is open to an objection already brought against the definition 
in terms of coherence, namely, that the truth of a belief depends 
on its relation to something objective not just on its functioning 
as a belief. 



RETURN TO THE CORRESPONDENCE THEORY. THE 
VIEW THAT TRUTH IS INDEFINABLE 

But the correspondence theory while, I think, true of at any 
rate most truths, does not give us much information unless we can 
succeed in defining correspondence, and unfortunately nobody has 
been able yet to give a satisfactory definition. This does not indeed 
destroy the theory, for it may well be that correspondence is in- 

57 



Truth 

definable. But, if this view is taken we shall have to admit that the 
theory has very little to tell us, for it will then have done little 
more than substitute an undefined technical term 'correspond' for 
the ordinary term 'is true'. Its only service seems to be that it has 
called attention to something which is obviously a fact but has 
been overlooked by certain theories, namely, the dependence of 
truth on a relation to something not itself a judgement at all. It 
would surely have been better frankly to admit that truth was in- 
definable and then say what could further be said about it, namely, 
that it was a relation between propositions and facts, without 
claiming to have given a definition and veiled the difficulty by the 
use of a technical term. Further, it may be objected that the corre- 
spondence theory only applies to certain kinds of true propositions 
and not to other kinds. It is hard to apply it to propositions about 
the future, because there is nothing for these propositions to 
correspond to, as the future does not yet exist. It is also hard to 
see ho wit can be applied to those hypothetical propositions where 
neither the protasis nor the apodosis expresses a fact, e.g. if Ger- 
many had won the war Britain would have been ruined, or if I had 
six wives I should have 4+2 wives. There is no fact in the existent 
world to which such propositions correspond, and yet they are 
true propositions. The examples I have given may sound unim- 
portant, but many such hypothetical propositions are of the 
greatest practical importance, since our motive for refraining from 
doing most things that we deliberately refrain from -doing is the 
belief that, if we did them, such and such consequences would 
ensue. This is a belief in a hypothetical proposition such that, 
since we are not going to do them, neither the protasis nor (we 
hope) the apodosis is or ever will be true. 

To say that truth is indefinable is not to say that we cannot 
know anything about it. It is only to say that we cannot analyse it 
in terms of anything else, and this is by no means an unplausible 
statement. It seems that we must admit some indefinables if there 
are to be definitions at all, since we cannot define A in terms of B 
and C, B and C in terms of D and E, and so an ad infinitum. But, if 
there are indefinables, truth seems as likely to be one as is any 
concept. It is such a fundamental notion that it is not in the least 
surprising if it turns out that there is nothing more fundamental in 

58 



Truth 

terms of which to analyse it. Only it must be emphasized that, if 
we are to attach any meaning to an indefinable, as opposed to an 
undefined term, we must be able to point to an experience in 
which the characteristic can be seen immediately to be present. To 
take an example of an indefinable that has commonly been used by 
philosophers, the colour yellow, we cannot analyse yellow in 
terms of anything else, otherwise we could explain sufficiently 
what it was like to a person who had never seen it; 1 but if we are 
not colour-blind, we can know perfectly well what yellow is like 
by seeing it, and this is the only way of knowing it. Can we point 
to an experience that tells us what truth is like in an analogous 
way so that, though we cannot define it, we can understand what 
is meant by the term? Surely we can. For we sometimes know 
something with immediate certainty to be true, if only of our 
present experience. And in doing that we surely see what truth is. 
If we did not, we certainly could not see any particular proposition 
to be true any more than we could see the colour of a yellow thing 
without seeing its yellowness. Having acquired the notion of truth 
in such experiences, we can apply it to propositions the truth of 
which is very much in doubt or is a matter of probable inference. 
But even if truth is indefinable, philosophers may still dispute 
about its relations, its criteria and exactly what it qualifies. 



CRITERIA OF TRUTH 

We shall now turn to the question of the criterion or criteria of 
truth. This question has not always been carefully separated from 
the question of the definition of truth, but I think it ought to be. 
The question, what truth is, is in itself different from the question 
how we are to find out whether a proposition is true. If we know 
that truth is to be defined as A, it may be thought that this at once 
gives us also the criterion of truth, because we could then always 
look for the characteristic A in order to decide whether a pro- 
position was true. But it might well be the case that A was some- 

1 The scientific 'definition* of yellow in terms of wave-lengths is not an analysis 
of what the colour is, but of certain physical phenomena which accompany it. People 
knew what yellow was long before they knew anything about the wave theory of 
light. 

59 



Truth 

thing which we could not thus directly discover but must deter- 
mine by indirect means. For instance, only at the best in a minority 
of cases could we claim to see by direct inspection whether a pro- 
position corresponded to the real, since to do so we should have 
to have an immediate awareness of the latter, whereas most of the 
propositions which we believe are established by inference and 
not thus immediately seen to be true. Yet this admission would 
not necessarily contradict the view that correspondence consti- 
tuted the definition of truth. So we had better handle separately 
the question of the criterion and the question of the definition of 
truth. The only way of determining the criterion or criteria is to 
investigate the different kinds of well-authenticated knowledge 
and belief we have and see what the criteria are that convince us of 
their truth. There is no means of proving a priori what the criteria 
should be apart from such an investigation of what we find we 
must actually believe in ordinary cases. 

We might well speak of 'correspondence' as the criterion of 
truth in cases of straightforward sense-experience or introspec- 
tion. We can then observe the fact in question immediately and 
see whether our judgement corresponds. But, as we shall discover 
later, it is difficult to hold that we ever directly sense external 
physical objects, and in any case most of our judgements about 
them certainly go beyond anything we experience immediately. 

What is to be the criterion of these? It may be contended that 
the best single word to describe it is 'coherence'. Certainly some- 
thing that we may describe as a coherence test is needed to decide 
between rival scientific theories or even to distinguish illusion 
from genuine perception. Many of our sense-perceptions are un- 
hesitatingly rejected just because they do not fit into a coherent 
system. That is the case with dreams. Why do we not believe our 
dreams when awake? Because they do not cohere with the per- 
ceptions of waking life. A dreamt that he was hanged last night, 
but that does not agree (cohere) with the fact that he is still alive. 
I sometimes dream that I am in a place hundreds or thousands of 
of miles away from where I am when I wake, though no known 
means of locomotion can have transported me from there. The 
lack of coherence with waking life would be still more obvious 
if somebody else were in the room at the time I dreamt and could 

60 



Truth 

observe my presence. Again, if we always believed in the sense- 
perceptions even of waking life, we should have to suppose that 
the same physical thing had all manner of different shapes, since 
the shape varies with the position of the observer, and rather than 
do this we reject very many of our perceptions as illusory. In water 
an oar appears bent, but to assume that it is really bent would not 
agree (cohere) well with the fact that we can use it to row effec- 
tively. All this can be cited to show the very important part which 
coherence plays in our actual thinking as a test of truth. It may be 
said to be the sole criterion by which we distinguish illusions and 
correct perceptions. 

A great deal of stress has rightly been laid on the supreme im- 
portance for science of observation, but it may be doubted whether 
there is a single accepted proposition of science which could be 
established by observation alone, and I do not think this is altered 
when we add to observation deductive logic and mathematics. An 
obstinate person could always adopt the course of the opponents 
of Galileo when the latter claimed to have discovered the satellites 
of Jupiter. When they denied the existence of these bodies, 
Galileo challenged them to look through the newly invented 
telescope and see them for themselves. They replied that they 
knew already there were no such satellites and would not look 
through the telescope because, if they did, the devil might make 
them see them although they were not there. This is ridiculous 
enough, but it must be admitted both that the view is logically 
possible and that a similar course is adopted by all of us in regard 
to the objects of dreams and other appearances condemned as 
illusory (except that we do not attribute the deception to the devil 
but to our sense-organs). These objects do not conform to our 
intellectual standards of coherence, and so we just say they were 
not really there, though we have seen them perfectly well. (Of 
course we do not mean they are not real at all. We give them reality 
as a sort of mental images, but not a-s physical things.) Even with- 
out resorting to such heroic expedients as Galileo's opponents, 
most physical theories that have been held at any time could avoid 
outright refutation if a sufficient number of arbitrary ad hoc 
assumptions were made. Take the Ptolemaic theory, for instance. 
If we relied on observation primarily, the right reply to Coper- 

61 



Truth 

nicus's suggestion would be that put by Bernard Shaw in the 
mouth of a medieval soldier: 'The utter fool! Why could not he 
use his eyes?' It may be retorted that the ptolemaic theory, although 
in accordance with experiences such as that of seeing the sun rise, 
was logically incompatible with observations of a more recondite 
order, so that these latter refuted it. But this is not the case: it 
would be possible to maintain the ptolemaic system compatibly 
with the evidence of the senses provided we made sufficient 
arbitrary ad hoc assumptions unconnected by any principle. This 
was what was done in face of the first criticisms of Copernicans, 
but eventually as the number of such assumptions became greater 
the ptolemaic theory became less and less plausible until it was 
quite dead, although never strictly refuted, and this is what 
happens with most discarded theories of science. 

Advocates of the coherence theory are well aware that complete 
coherence must be regarded as an unattainable ideal, but views 
may still be judged according to their greater or less distance from 
it. The nearest approach to it is to be found in mathematics. Here 
the different propositions are so connected that each follows 
necessarily from others and that you could not deny any one 
without contradicting a vast number of others. If we assumed 
that 2+2 was equal to 5 we could, I think, without making any 
further mistake draw conclusions which contradicted every arith- 
metical truth there is about any number. Other sciences cannot 
attain to this degree of coherence, but in any science we assume 
that of two theories, equally compatible with observed facts, the 
one which brings us nearer to this ideal is the more likely to be 
true. To be successful a theory must not be inconsistent with 
empirical facts, but coherence must not be interpreted in terms of 
mere consistency. Two truths might be quite compatible and yet 
quite independent and logically unconnected, e.g. that Washing- 
ton is the capital of the United States and that I have a pain in my 
big toe. A successful theory must not just enumerate logically 
compatible facts without connecting them or causally explaining 
them. It must, if possible, bring them under laws, and the only 
evidence for the laws may be said to be their coherence with 
experience. We bring together into a coherent system what pre- 
viously appeared unconnected by deducing different facts from 

62 



Truth 

the same set of laws, e.g. the fall of apples in an orchard and the 
movements of the stars. We may have no insight into the causal 
laws governing nature, but nevertheless in deciding what these 
laws are we can be swayed only by two considerations. Either we 
must see the laws accepted to be those which can easiest be recon- 
ciled with our experience, i.e. cohere best with it. Or we must see 
that they increase the coherence of our experience by bringing 
different elements of it together under the same law, instead of 
two separate unconnected laws. It is difficult to see what other 
criteria there could be for a scientific law, and these certainly can 
be brought under the heading of the principle of coherence. In 
our psychological interpretation of people's actions and testimony 
we similarly apply the coherence test, accepting the explanation 
which we say "makes the best sense' of their actions. We pre- 
suppose it even in a detective story, for the correct theory as to 
the origin of the crime will be the one which accounts for the facts 
and fits them into a coherent system. The fundamental principles 
of logic themselves can be justified by this criterion on the ground 
that there could be no coherent system at all without these prin- 
ciples. But the argument does not in any way support the view 
that coherence by itself is the sole criterion, but rather coherence 
with experience. This would probably be admitted by most advo- 
cates of the coherence theory, but it may then be urged that 
'coherence with experience' really means 'coherence with pro- 
positions based on experience', so that we have now admitted a 
second set of propositions not themselves based on coherence but 
on the mere fact that we can see them to correspond to our ex- 
perience. The coherence criterion cannot without being thus 
supplemented by the correspondence criterion ever do justice to 
the empirical element in our knowledge. Only we must not think 
of the empirical data as known completely quIteTapart from the 
use of the coherence test and thus serving as an altogether inde- 
pendent starting-point already there in its entirety. In order really 
to know the empirical data, we must have already fitted them into 
some rough kind of system. We cannot know them, still less com- 
municate our knowledge, without classifying them and bringing 
them under universal concepts, and this already presupposes a 
conceptual system in the light of which we make all our judge- 

63 



Truth 

ments and which is tested by its ability to give a coherent inter- 
pretation of our empirical data. We must remember that with the 
exception of proper names almost- every word we use stands for a 
universal concept of one sort or other, and this means that it is 
part of a conceptual system which men have gradually built up in 
order to describe their experiences to each other and interpret 
them to themselves. 

There are other gaps in a purely coherence theory of truth 
besides its inability to deal with empirical data. It is true that the 
coherence theory cannot get on without admitting immediate 
empirical cognitions not just based on coherence. But it is true 
also that it cannot get on without immediate cognitions of a 
different sort. The advocates of the coherence theory reject the 
view that any propositions are self-evident in their own right. 
They would say that the fundamental logical propositions, like 
the law of contradiction, which seem self-evident, are validated 
not by their self-evidence, but by the fact that they are pre- 
supposed if there is to be any knowledge or any coherent system 
at all. Of subordinate principles they would say that they must be 
accepted as true because, although these are not themselves neces- 
sary presuppositions of knowledge, they follow from general 
principles which are. But I find it hard to believe that we only 
know the law of contradiction because we see that without it we 
could have no knowledge or that we only know that numbers 
can be summed because we see that otherwise we could have no 
arithmetic or no consistent arithmetic. But, however that may be, 
there is in any case a definite proof that the coherence theory 
cannot dispense altogether with the notion of self-evidence or 
intuition. Suppose a belief is accepted or a proposition known 
because it coheres with the system. But how do we see that it 
coheres with the system? We might see it as the result of a process 
of mediate inference, but that could not go on adinfinitum. Sooner 
or later we should have to come to a proposition of which we 
could only say that it is evident that it coheres with the others or 
that we just see immediately that it coheres. We may thus apply to 
the coherence test the general argument which I used earlier to 
show that all inference must presuppose intuition. 1 

1 Vidt above, p. 48. 



Truth 

Again, I do not see how, if we were never immediately aware 
of the presence of goodness or badness, rightness or wrongness in 
any particular instance, we could ever establish any ethical pro- 
position by the coherence test. Ethical propositions cannot be 
proved by argument from non-ethical, so some ethical proposi- 
tions must be known immediately if we are to know any at all. 
Finally, I do not see how the coherence theory can give a satis- 
factory account of memory judgements. These are clearly not 
inferences, they are not established, though they may be confirmed, 
by coherence; they are as much given as the data of sense-percep- 
tion. They represent still another kind, and a very important and 
all-pervasive kind of immediate cognitions. 

It seems to me therefore that 'coherence with experience' is not 
a formula adequate to cover the whole of knowledge and justified 
belief. There are other immediate cognitions besides those of 
objects of our present introspection and sense-experience. But a 
parallel formula might be found to cover all cases. We might 
say that the criterion is "coherence with direct cognitions in 
general'. By an 'immediate cognition' or 'direct awareness' I mean 
a 'cognition otherwise than by inference', thus covering alike 
sense-perception, introspection, memory, intuition of the logically 
self-evident and of immediately apprehended ethical propositions. 
To say that correspondence was the sole criterion would be to try 
to bring all criteria under the heading of this direct awareness, but 
the correspondence theory has to admit that we are able to make 
inferences beyond our immediate experience or memory. Similarly, 
the coherence theory has to admit that coherence by itself is not 
the sole criterion, but at least coherence with experience, and, I 
should say, 'coherence with immediate cognitions in general*. 
When this has been admitted, either theory has left a place for the 
other, and the difference between them has become one of relative 
emphasis. 

It is clear in any case that we cannot do with just one criterion 
of truth. Neither sense-experience nor coherence can fulfil this 
role for all truths, if only because there are both a priori a'nd 
empirical propositions. Intuition we have to introduce as a third 
criterion, if only because all inference presupposes intuitions by 
which we see that a stage in the inference follows from the pre- 

E 65 



Truth 

ceding one. Since intuitions are usually concerned with facts of a 
kind that could not be confirmed or refuted by sense-experience 
or memory, coherence provides a specially valuable test for them; 
but coherence is also absolutely essential for building up our 
ordinary conception of the physical world and of human minds. 
Nor can we dispense with memory as a fourth means of attaining 
knowledge and justified belief. Memory is not sense-perception or 
present introspection, nor is it inference, and it can rightly claim 
to be its own adequate, guarantee in a vast multitude of cases. 
Memory, introspection and perception of the immediate object of 
sense may perhaps be all appropriately brought under the corre- 
spondence formula as cases where we just see immediately that 
the propositions believed or known correspond to the facts, but 
it seems less appropriate to apply this formula to knowledge by 
inference. 

The discussion has brought out the fact that there are two 
elements in knowledge and true belief to both of which it is 
essential to give an adequate place in our philosophy, (i) active 
construction and systematizing by the mind, (2) an objectively 
given basis independent of the first element and the foundation of 
its work. Extreme empiricism neglects the former element, most 
forms of the coherence and pragmatist theories the latter. 

Are we to add to the other criteria the pragmatic test of which 
so much is said nowadays? Now no doubt a belief in a true pro- 
position will usually (though not always) work well and a belief 
in a false proposition badly, and therefore practical success may 
commonly serve as a criterion which will at least make it likely 
that the proposition in question is true. But I cannot regard this 
criterion as an ultimate one. How are we to know that a belief 
works badly? Because the consequences which should follow if 
the belief were true do not in fact occur? But this is a direct 
theoretical refutation which every theory recognizes. The point 
which shows the belief false is not its practical bearing, i.e. that it 
injures somebody, but the fact that it conflicts with experience. A 
false belief might be refuted by a conflict with experience of a kind 
which was highly agreeable to the believer, as when he has a 
(pleasant surprise. And it may be urged that we know by percep- 
tion and inference a great many propositions without seeing how 

66 



Truth 

they work at all. To this it may be retorted that, since we do not 
assume all our perceptions to be correct and do not see the canons 
of at least inductive arguments to be logically self-evident, we 
must in judging what we perceive and making inductive infer- 
ences at any rate presuppose certain general principles which can 
only be justified by their working. The question is not whether a 
particular proposition works, but whether it is a consistent deduc- 
tion from the application of principles of inference which have 
worked in dealing with experience and are justified by their 
working. But we may reply that this is a vicious circle. What the 
pragmatist is trying to justify is the belief in induction, i.e. the 
argument from what we have observed to the unobserved, and the 
argument offered to justify it is that the belief has worked in the 
past. But this is no argument that it will work in the future unless 
he already assumes the principles of induction which he is trying 
to justify. And, since he has not yet shown that they will work, 
these principles must be assumed independently of any test by 
their working. We may of course interpret 'working' as 'system- 
atizing empirical facts', but then we shall be falling back on the 
coherence test. The question is: Can the mere fact that some belief 
produces good consequences, apart from any further argument 
which shows that the belief in question would not be likely to 
produce good consequences if it were not true, itself supply a 
criterion of truth? I am not clear why it should. If we were per- 
fectly adjusted to the real, true beliefs would perhaps always work 
better than false, but then nobody can claim that we are perfectly 
adjusted. 



Chapter Four 

MATTER 



r ^ HERE is nothing more obvious, at least to the non- 
I philosopher, than the existence of physical things, yet 
I there are few topics about which more philosophical 
-A- difficulties have been raised, and we are at any rate no 
nearer to a generally accepted proof of the existence of the most 
ordinary physical objects than we are to such a proof of God's 
existence. Before studying the question we all think ourselves to 
be immediately aware of physical objects, and if asked how we 
knew they existed would think it sufficient to say: We see them. 
Most philosophers would, however, hold the view that we are not 
immediately aware of them at all, and there are certainly weighty 
arguments supporting such a conclusion. For (i) empirical evi- 
dence strongly supports the view that what we perceive depends 
for its qualities at least partly on our sense-organs. It is not only 
that we cannot e.g. see without eyes but that, if our optic nerve is 
affected in certain ways, we shall see what is not there. In order to 
see stars it is not necessary to look at the heavens on a dark night, 
it is sufficient to receive a blow on the head. If we get drunk, 
things look double; if we have jaundice, everything looks yellow; 
if we merely, change our position, the things perceived alter 
drastically in shape and size. All this strongly supports the view 
that the objects we immediately perceive, though their nature may 
be causally determined partly by external physical things, depend 
for their existence on our perceiving them. 

(2) What we perceive immediately we presumably perceive as 
it is, but physical objects we commonly do not perceive as they 
are. This seems proved by the fact of illusion. Further, two differ- 
ent people looking at the same thing at the same time from 
different positions in space may see it differently, e.g., as having 

68 



Matter 

different shapes. But the same thing cannot really have two differ- 
ent shapes at the same time. Therefore they are not really seeing 
the same thing. Such arguments have led to the formation of what 
is commonly known as the representative theory of perception. Accord- 
ing to this view what we immediately perceive is not the physical 
object we say we perceive, but a sort of image produced in our 
mind by the latter acting on us through our sense-organs. This 
image has been sometimes called a representation, sometimes an 
idea, sometimes a sense-datum, and sometimes a sensum. The 
view is very paradoxical, but it is hard to meet the arguments in 
its favour. 

If indeed we mean by sense-data only those elements in experi- 
ence which can be ascribed simply to sensation, it may be doubted 
whether we are ever aware of pure sense-data. What we are 
immediately conscious of is probably always or almost always 
mingled with memory and interpretation and not just the result 
of objects acting on our sense-organs at the time. The point of the 
representative theory is not that this immediate object is simply 
given by sensation alone, as the term sense-datum might imply, 
but that it is not to be identified with part of any physical object 
conceived realistically or to be regarded as existing independently 
of being perceived. Whether it is given by sensation alone is a 
question not about the nature of what we perceive but about its 
causation. 

THEORIES OF PERCEPTION 

If we do not hold the representative theory at least about some 
perceptions, there seem to be only three alternatives, each of them 
extremely difficult to credit. The first is to deny altogether the 
existence of physical things independent of human perception of 
them. In this case our theory will no longer be representative 
because there will be nothing behind human ideas or sensa for 
them to represent. This alternative we shall discuss later. The 
second is to assert that everything we ever perceive exists in the 
physical world just as we perceive it. But it seems hardly possible 
to reconcile the existence of all these incompatible things. It is self- 
contradictory that two different colours should be in the same 



Matter 

space at the same time, but if everything that anybody ever per- 
ceives existed independently just as he perceives it, I do not see 
how all these different things and qualities could be fitted into 
physical space without two or more often overlapping in such a 
way that two different colours did occupy the same space. Further, 
the theory would not really achieve its object, because it would 
make at least one perception illusory, i.e. the perception of change 
I have when I see an object grow smaller or change in shape as I 
alter my position. On such a theory this perception would be 
illusory because the different shapes and sizes which I perceived 
as changing into each other would really be all there all the time. 
But if any illusions are admitted the main object of the theory 
is lost, which was to enable us to hold that we always perceived 
directly the physical objects we think we do before we reflect, and 
in order to save what is left of the theory, it seems hardly worth 
while accepting such paradoxes as the objective existence of all 
the objects and qualities ordinarily regarded as illusory. 

The third alternative is to hold that we always perceive physical 
things directly but are mistaken in our perceptions of them. At 
first sight this seems the least paradoxical alternative, but in reality 
it is perhaps the most. For it leads us into holding that our im- 
mediate experience itself is radically mistaken, while the other 
views condemn as mistaken not the experience itself but beliefs 
suggested by it. To make this point clear let us take the case of a 
stick which is really straight but, being partly in water, appears 
bent. On the representative view there is something really bent, 
the representation or sensum; the evidence of my immediate 
experience on this point is not doubted. But on the other theory 
there is nothing really bent at all, only something straight which 
appears bent. I do not see what 'appears' can mean here except 
c is mistakenly taken as bent'. Now we may well go on believing 
that the physical object itself is straight, but if there is one thing 
clear about the situation from our immediate experience it is that 
we really see something bent, from which it follows that something 
bent really exists if only as an image in our mind. If it did not 
exist, we could not see it. We must accept the evidence of im- 
mediate experience, for on this all other empirical evidence 
depends. The error of supposing that we were seeing something 

7 



Matter 

bent when there was nothing bent to see, if an error at all, could 
not be explained as due to an over-hasty and superficial analysis 
of our experience. However carefully and long we look at the 
stick, we see that there is something bent. Further, we should 
have to suppose a like error in all or almost all cases of immediate 
experience. For in all or almost all cases an element of illusion is 
present, if only due to our varying position in space. Most philo- 
sophers would hold that we never can be mistaken as to qualities 
that we immediately experience, but whether this be so or not it 
is at any rate clear that we cannot admit such widespread error as 
all this without plunging into the abyss of an almost total scepti- 
cism. If we cannot trust our immediate experience, is there any- 
thing to which we can give credence at all? 

It seems therefore almost necessary to adopt the representative 
theory as regards at least some cases of perception, but need we 
adopt it in all? Such a partly representative view as is here sug- 
gested may be regarded as the view of common sense. The general 
pre-philosophical attitude seems to be that we perceive the 
ordinary objects of physical life directly, but that things like rain- 
bows, mirror images, or the pink rats seen by a man suffering from 
delirium tremens are only appearances. But few philosophers have 
compromised in this way. The chief objection to the compromise 
is that it is very difficult to find any perception at all where no 
element of illusion comes in, if only because our position in space 
must influence what we see and the structure of the part of our 
body we use in touch must influence what we feel. We may also 
recall how different objects look according as to whether they are 
viewed with a microscope or by the naked eye. 



PHENOMENALISM OR IDEALISM v. REALISM 

But if we adopt a wholly representative theory, the question 
may be asked how we are to justify the belief in external indepen- 
dent physical objects at all. If you ask me why I believe there is a 
table in this room, the natural answer is: Because I see it; but if 
I did not, strictly speaking, see the table but only a representation 
of it, what then? Unless it is admitted that I sometimes at least 

7* 



Matter 

perceive physical objects directly, I cannot compare my repre- 
sentations with the reality in order to determine whether they are 
good likenesses of it or not, and it is certainly at least conceivable 
that my representations might be all illusory and produced by 
quite different causes from those physical objects to which 
common sense attributes them. 

We reach here one of those great dividing-lines between philo- 
sophers which splits them into different schools. Some answer 
these difficulties by maintaining that we can only intelligibly, or 
at least justifiably, talk of matter or 'physical objects' if we inter- 
pret our statements simply in terms of experiences and the laws 
governing experiences. On this view to talk about a table is simply 
to talk about the experiences human beings have when they see, 
touch, or use what we call a table, or at least if we do mean any- 
thing more than that when talking about tables we are making 
assertions which cannot be justified or defended. These philo- 
sophers are called phenomenalists^ or if they combine their view 
with a metaphysics which makes mind fundamental to reality, 
idealists. In this chapter we shall discuss the negative phenomenal- 
ist position rather than the more positive metaphysical idealist 
views often linked with it. 1 The philosophers opposed both to 
phenomenalism and idealism are commonly called r^//>/j\lAx:cord- 
ing to the realist physical objects are quite independent of experi- 
ence and possess at least some of the qualities which the plain man 
and the scientist ascribe to them in a se$se in which this statement 
could not be reduced to a statement about human experience or 
sense-data. Thus the realist would maintain that a coin literally 
has the same property of circularity that I see or some similar 
property 2 even when nobody is looking at it; (the phenomenalist 
that we can only say it has it if we mean by tms that sensations of 
circularity would be produced in people who went through the 
experiences which we ordinarily describe as 'seeing and handling 
the coin' or that our experiences go on as if the coin were circular 
in the realist sense. He may either say that physical objects do not 
exist apart from experience at all or that, if they do, we cannot say 

1 For these vide below, pp. 138-41. 

8 The realist need not commit himself to saying that physical space is just like the 
space we perceive, at least if he holds a representative theory of perception. 

72- 



Matter 

anything about what they are like as thus existing, only about 
their effects on us.~^ 

The view that pKysical objects cannot be conceived as existing 
independently of being perceived was first put forward by 
Berkeley in 1710. At first sight such a view may seem too absurd 
to be worth discussing, as indeed it did to almost all Berkeley's 
contemporaries. But familiarity with it very often removes this 
feeling. We must in any case distinguish between a view which 
seems absurd only because it is in violent conflict with our ordin- 
ary beliefs and a view which is absurd in the sense of being self- 
contradictory and therefore logically impossible. Berkeley's view 
is not absurd in the latter sense, and it might seem absurd in the 
former sense and yet be true. At any rate a discussion of the view 
is essential for many problems of philosophy. Various attempts 
have been made to soften the paradox by those who held it to be 
true, (i) They insist that a good sense can still be given to all the 
statements about physical things ordinarily made by the plain 
man and the scientist if we interpret them in terms of human 
experience. Since the phenomenalist does not deny the occurrence 
of any experiences ordinarily recognized as occurring, he can 
point out that in his view our experience will go on just the same 
as if independent physical things existed; and he will say that he 
does not contradict any verifiable statements of science, since 
scientific statements can only be verified by reference to human 
experiences. We can still even in his view make just the same 
predictions about the sense we shall experience as we can in the 
ordinary view; all we cannot do is to say what physical things are 
like in themselves apart from their effects on us. (2) Berkeley and 
other idealists, while using the phenomenalist arguments, have 
none the less maintained that physical objects were independent of 
human beings, though dependent on mind, because they held 
them to be dependent on a super-human mind. 

Berkeley's principal arguments against realism and indeed all 
those that have subsequently been brought by philosophers may 
be classified as follows: 



73 



Matter 



(i) ARGUMENTS FROM THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 

It is contended that physical objects, if they are known by us, 
must be related to mind, and that we therefore cannot tell what 
they would be like apart from mind, since we cannot know them 
without ipso facto relating them to mind. Some thinkers going a 
step further have said not merely that we cannot know what any- 
thing existing independently of mind would be like but that we 
can positively know that nothing could thus exist whatever it was 
like. They have argued that the conception of something existing 
independently of mind is a self-contradictory one, because even 
to suppose or conceive such a thing would be to bring it into 
relation to mind and therefore contradict the proposition that it 
was independent of mind. If so, we can assert definitely that physi- 
cal objects in the realist sense could not exist with the same 
justification as we can deny the existence of anything self-contra- 
dictory such as round squares or things which were at once blue 
and red all over. These arguments have commonly been re- 
inforced by pointing to the large amount of constructive activity 
done by the mind in framing concepts even when dealing with 
quite simple matters of fact. 

To this realists have replied that, so far from the nature of 
knowledge implying that its object is 'relative to' in the sense of 
dependent on mind, it implies that the nature of the object must 
be independent of the knowing of it, since otherwise knowing 
would distort what we supposed we knew and would therefore 
always falsify itself. They distinguished between 'internal relations' 
which made a difference to the terms related and 'external relations' 
which did not, and insisted that the relation of knowing was 
external at least at one end, i.e. if it did make a difference to the 
knower, it made no difference to the object known. The con- 
structive activity by the mind which their opponents had em- 
phazied they were prepared to admit, but only as a preparation for 
knowing and not as identical with knowing, and they insisted that 
what the mind constructs or alters in the process consists not of 
the object known but of mental concepts distinct from it used as 
tools with a view to knowing it. 

74 



Matter 

In this controversy I am on the realist side. All the idealist 
arguments that I know from the theory of knowledge seem to me 
to involve some definite fallacy. Thus Berkeley argues that I con- 
ceive physical objects and what I conceive is 'in the mind'; but 
this phrase is plainly ambiguous. To say that something 'is in my 
mind' may indeed mean that it is an idea of mine, but it may also 
mean merely that I am thinking of it, which is quite compatible 
with its existing outside my mind. If I say that the quarrel between 
the western Powers and the Russians is very much 'in my mind', 
this is certainly compatible with recognizing the objective exis- 
tence of this quarrel outside me. I am not implying that it is only a 
quarrel in my mind. Again it has been argued that object is relative 
to subject and therefore implies a subject (mind), but it does not 
follow from this that an object cannot exist independently of a 
subject, any more than it follows that, because 'pupil' implies 
'teacher', the men who are my pupils could not exist without a 
teacher. The correct answer is that, as these men could not be 
pupils without a teacher, so physical things could not be objects 
without a subject, but the physical things might still exist without 
a subject as the men might exist without a teacher. 

It is a good test of most of the arguments from the theory of 
knowledge to ask whether, if valid at all, they would apply only 
to physical things or to all objects of knowledge. If the latter is 
the case, they would lead to the conclusion that not only physical 
objects hut other human minds and the laws of logic depended on 
my knowing them, and that surely can be regarded as a reductio ad 
absurdum. Thus when Berkeley argued that physical objects are 
conceived, and therefore existed in the mind, he might equally 
well have argued: I conceive other human beings, what is con- 
ceived is in the mind, therefore other human beings are only ideas 
in my mind. He was not prepared to accept the latter conclusion, 
but if so was he justified in accepting the parallel conclusion about 
physical objects? 

It has been pointed out that the phenomenalist or idealist case 
gains a spurious plausibility from a certain ambiguity in various 
expressions. Sensation, perception, conception, knowledge may 
all be used in two senses, one to mean a mental state of sensing, 
etc., the other to mean what is sensed, etc. Now in the former case 

7J 



Matter 

the words obviously stand for what cannot exist except in a mind, 
but it does not follow that they do so in the latter. Thus when the 
phenomenalist or idealist argues that the notion of physical object 
consists of "sensations', it may be that he is confusing 'sensations' 
in the sense of 'feelings' and 'sensations' in the sense of 'qualities 
sensed'. The former cannot exist independently of mind, but the 
latter might well do so. In order to avoid the risk of this confusion 
it is best to use 'sensation' only in the former meaning, and to 
employ 'sensum' or 'sense-datum' to signify what we sense as 
opposed to the act or state of sensing it. 



(2) ARGUMENTS FROM THE SPECIFIC 
CHARACTERISTICS OF PHYSICAL OBJECTS 

Berkeley also argued and again his arguments have been re- 
peated by most subsequent idealists that when we examine the 
different characteristics ordinarily ascribed to physical things, we 
find they all invoke a reference to experience and are unthinkable 
without this. Thus he contends that taste, warmth, sounds, 
colours are 'sensations', and so on all along the scale. Now I have 
just referred to a confusion between two meanings of 'sensation' 
which is probably responsible for some people's acceptance of 
phenomenalism, and this confusion is relevant to the present as 
well as to the previous argument. Colours, etc., clearly are sensa- 
tions if we mean by that 'something sensed'; but it does not follow 
that they are 'sensations' if we mean by that 'feelings', and there- 
fore that they only exist in a mind. But that is not conclusive. If 
we recognize this and similar distinctions, there can be no verbal 
contradiction in asserting realism; but the phenomenalist or ideal- 
ist might still maintain that on careful inspection it was clear that, 
although we could distinguish sensed qualities like colour from 
sensations in the sense of feelings, we could not separate them. 
We can distinguish but cannot separate the properties of convex 
and concave in a curve or the property of being 4 and that of being 
96 92, and similarly the idealist might say that we can distinguish 
but cannot separate any one of the qualities in question, e.g. 



Matter 

colour from the property of being experienced. (By saying that 
one property is inseparable from another I mean not merely that 
it does not in fact exist apart from the other, but that it could not 
possibly do so.) Whether the qualities ordinarily ascribed to physi- 
cal things are thus inseparable from experience or not is a question 
that can only be settled by considering each case on its merits and 
trying to see if we really can conceive the quality as ever existing 
without being experienced by anyone. The result may be different 
in the case of some qualities from what it is in the case of others. 
One quality given in sensation we indeed all agree in regarding as 
inseparable from consciousness and so as incapable of belonging 
to unconscious physical objects. That is pain. But it does not 
follow that all other qualities given in sensation are in the same 
position. Common sense certainly makes a distinction between 
them, and talks of physical objects as having temperature, colour, 
size, but not as having pain. Proceeding down the scale let us now 
take taste. Most people, I think, would hesitate to say that this 
quality ever belonged to unexperienced objects. We do indeed 
speak of sugar as sweet when it is not being tasted, but by this we 
seem to mean only that it would produce the feeling described as a 
sweet taste if we put it in our mouths. We do not mean that the 
actual sweet taste is itself present in the sugar though nobody is 
tasting it. I should myself not be prepared to say that it is incon- 
ceivable that the taste should be thus present, though I have no 
evidence that it in fact is, but most people would probably dis- 
agree with me even as to its conceivability. But when we come to 
warmth and sound there would be a greater inclination to say that 
the qualities in question could exist independently of being 
experienced, and still more so when we come to colour. Yet it is 
still plausible to say that the nature of a colour is inseparable from 
how it looks, and that therefore the colour could not exist without 
being experienced. But a similar statement seems less plausible in 
the case of shape, size and velocity. 

For this reason and also for others which will become clear 
shortly, many realists make a distinction between primary qualities 
which they conceive as existing in physical objects independently 
of being perceived and secondary qualities which they do not. The 
former comprise such qualities as shape, size, velocity, duration, 

77 



Matter 

texture; the latter such qualities as colour, sound, taste, smell. 1 
Now it has been found that science can explain our experience 
adequately for its purposes without ascribing secondary qualities 2 
to physical objects, but not without ascribing primary. Colour 
vision itself can be explained scientifically without supposing that 
physical objects really have colour, but not without referring to 
the si2e, structure, etc., of the light waves and the things which 
reflect them. Faced with this distinction idealists have brought 
three arguments in order to show that the realist account of prim- 
ary is no more tenable than that of secondary qualities, (a) It is 
pointed out that we are just as subject to illusions in regard to 
primary as in regard to secondary qualities. This argument will be 
dealt with later. () It is argued that primary qualities cannot be 
conceived as existing without secondary and that therefore the 
two are in the same position. This I think is invalid. It is true that 
it would be self-contradictory to suppose that there could be an 
object having only primary qualities. What has shape and size 
must have some other quality or qualities besides. For to talk 
about the shape of a physical object (or of a sense-datum for that 
matter) is only to talk about its boundaries, and there must be 
something within the boundaries. To talk about its size is to talk 
about the extent it occupies, but there must be some quality or 
qualities to occupy the extent. To have motion or velocity you 
must have some qualities which change their position. All the 
primary qualities are really relations, and relations imply terms 
which stand in the relations. Therefore the philosophers like 
Descartes, and probably Locke, who thought that physical objects 
had no qualities but the primary ones must be wrong. It does not 
follow, however, that the other qualities they have need be identi- 
cal with any of the secondary qualities we perceive. It might be 
that the qualities other than the recognized primary ones which 

1 Temperature occupies an intermediate position. As felt warmth or cold it was 
regarded as a secondary quality, as the motion of particles supposed to explain this 
feeling as primary. 

2 I am using 'secondary qualities' in the sense in which Berkeley and subsequent 
philosophers, not in the sense in which Locke used the term. Locke used it to mean 
not the actual seen colour but the power in a physical object to excite the sensation 
of the colour. In that sense secondary qualities do belong to physical objects if 
primary do. 

78 



Matter 

physical objects possessed were quite unknowable to us, though 
they appeared as colour, hardness, warmth, etc. Consequently, the 
realist is committing no logical absurdity if he ascribes primary 
qualities to physical objects but refuses to ascribe secondary. 

(c) Some idealists 1 have had recourse to an argument from 
relations in order to show that primary qualities really imply mind. 
They certainly involve relations, and it is argued that relations 
imply mind. If A and B are related, they are at once separate and 
together in a mysterious way, and it is contended that this com- 
bination of separateness and togetherness is only intelligible if we 
think of A and B as existing for a mind which at once distinguishes 
them and yet holds them together in the same unity of conscious- 
ness. But most philosophers do not now find it evident that rela- 
tions imply mind, and I cannot produce a further argument on 
the subject. 

(d] Many philosophers would claim to see directly that it was 
just as evident that primary as that secondary qualities implied 
mind. But we are here again driven back to something which we 
cannot settle by argument but either see or do not see to be true. 
However, we certainly must not regard the idealist contention 
with contempt in view of the great number of philosophers who 
have found it evident that physical objects could not exist unex- 
perienced while holding in other respects the most varying views. 

I am not discussing here one argument which plays a large part 
in Berkeley, the argument that material substance as something 
over and above its qualities is a quite unintelligible and absurd 
concept. This is an objection to Locke's particular view of matter 
rather than to all forms of realism. A realist need not hold this 
theory of substance. He may hold like Whitehead that physical 
objects are just events or series of events. 



(3) NEGATIVE ARGUMENT 

The most popular and plausible argument against realism is a 
negative one based on the difficulty of justifying realism. We have 
already seen that, if we hold realism, it is difficult for us to avoid 
1 E.g. T. H. Green, Prolegomena to Ethics.* bk. I, ch. I, esp. 26-9 

79 



Matter 

a representative theory of perception, and that if we hold a repre- 
sentative theory it is difficult, since we never see physical objects 
directly, for us to justify realism. Most realists have tried to meet 
the difficulty by an argument to the effect that physical objects 
were necessary to explain our experience causally. But we cannot 
understand by a physical object just an unknown X which causes 
our experience; if we are to understand such objects as common 
sense and science understands them, we must be able to ascribe to 
them more or less definite qualities. Now how can we tell what 
are the qualities of a cause from the qualities of its effects? It is 
commonly agreed that we can do so only because we have in the 
past experienced similar causes producing similar effects, e.g. 
though I have been asleep at night and not seen it rain, I can infer 
that the puddles in the road were caused by rain because I have on 
other occasions seen rain cause puddles. But if the representative 
theory is true, we have never directly experienced physical objects, 
and therefore we cannot know in this way what they are like. Nor 
are we entitled to say that the cause is necessarily like the effect. 
A draught is not even supposed to be like a cold in the head or the 
tearing of my flesh by a knife like the pain it causes. This argu- 
ment is supported by pointing to the numerous cases of admitted 
illusion which suggest that we can never say what the real shape, 
size or colour of any physical object is, even if we admit that they 
have some shape, size and colour. So it may plausibly be contended 
that, if we do introduce the conception of external physical ob- 
jects, we can produce no good reason for saying anything what- 
ever about them. If so, the conception becomes that of an un- 
known X, and it may be questioned whether it can be of any help 
towards the explanation of our experience to postulate an un- 
knowable X. 



CAUSAL ARGUMENT FOR THE EXISTENCE OF 
PHYSICAL OBJECTS 

The phenomenalist arguments have had a very wide vogue both 
among the more rationalistically and the more empirically inclined 
philosophers. The former have regarded them as constituting a 

80 



Matter 

preface to a metaphysics which claimed to show that reality was 
fundamentally mental or spiritual; the latter on the other hand 
have been inclined to be phenomenalist because any other view 
seemed to go beyond what was justified by experience. And 
phenomenalism has recently become popular even among scien- 
tists, or rather those scientists who also aspire to reflect philo- 
tophically on what they are doing. Scientists have recently taken 
very much to talking in terms of actual or possible observers. A 
notable example of this is provided by the theory of relativity 
where the fact that observers travelling at different rates might not 
apprehend the same events as simultaneous is taken as an adequate 
ground for the denial of an absolute objective simultaneity alto- 
gether. We must not, however, go too far in stressing the 
phenomenalist implications of relativity, for the theory after all 
defines simultaneity in terms of objective spatio-temporal relations 
of some kind. 

Let us now consider what the realist can say in his defence. In 
the first place he can produce a more formidable version of the 
causal argument for physical objects than our previous discussion 
suggests. Suppose he argues in this way. It is universally recog- 
nized that, if we can make a great number of detailed predictions 
from a particular scientific hypothesis, and the predictions come 
off, this is a strong argument that the hypothesis or something 
like it is true. The reason for this seems to be that it would be an 
extraordinary and inexplicable coincidence if predictions based on 
the theory all came off by mere chance. Suppose I had a theory as 
to the causes of the weather and on the basis of it predicted that 
it would rain to-morrow. This would arouse little attention 
because in any case it was very likely to rain. Even if it was mere 
guess-work, the prediction that it would rain to-morrow would 
have something like a thirty to fifty per cent chance of being 
fulfilled in the part of the world where I wrote this book, and 
therefore my success in predicting would be no considerable 
argument for the truth of my theory but could easily be regarded 
as a mere coincidence. But suppose I predicted correctly whether 
it would rain or not for every day in the next year. In that case 
experts would have to sit up and take note of my theory. It might 
still not be exactly true, but at any rate something very like it 

F 81 



Matter 

Would have to be true in order to account for my extraordinary 
success in making predictions. It would remain logically possible 
that my success was due to mere chance, but nobody would 
believe this. It would be altogether too improbable a coincidence. 
The improbability may be illustrated in mathematical form. 
Suppose it rains on the average one day in two at the place for 
which I make my predictions. In that case the chances of my pre- 
diction being right on any particular day if it were mere guess- 
work would be |, on two particular days - 2 > on three - 3 etc. By 
the time it had got to twenty-one days it would be already about 
one in a million, and as for my prediction being right by chance 
on every one of the 365 days, the probability of that would be 
.,65 the denominator being a number large enough far to exceed 
that of the electrons in the solar system. Now a vast number of 
predictions are always being made on the basis of the hypothesis 
that physical objects exist and have certain definite characteristics 
like some of those which we under favourable conditions perceive 
when we observe them. These predictions are constantly coming 
off. Far more than 365 are made by me every day and most of 
them are fulfilled. It is true that some of the predictions are* not 
fulfilled, but this can only diminish slightly an improbability 
which is so astronomical that it can suffer enormous diminution 
and yet remain amply sufficient to justify the belief that the success 
of the predictions cannot be attributed to chance. We must 
remember that, where a prediction is not fulfilled, this can always 
be explained as due to a mistake about the particular characteristics 
of certain physical objects and does not suggest that no indepen- 
dent physical objects exist at all. 

So there seems to be ample evidence to support the belief in 
physical objects in the realist sense. For how can the success of 
the predictions be explained unless the beliefs as to physical 
objects on which they are based are approximately true? They 
need not be exactly true, but the truth must be at least sufficiently 
like them to account for the predictions reached by inference 
from them turning out true so often and it would seem to follow 
that the causes of our perceptions must at least be very like what 
we ordinarily think them to be. To put the argument in a slightly 
different way, human experience has been going on for centuries 

Zz 



Matter 

or father millennias as if physical objects existed, and surely 
that makes the belief in these objects a highly probable one. From 
the assumption that, in the absence of any special cause for think- 
ing the contrary, the primary qualities seen by us in a clear light 
from the optimum distance for clear observation really belong to 
physical objects independently of being perceived, men have in 
the course of human history made billions on billions of predic- 
tions which have been fulfilled. Does not this make it extremely 
probable that this hypothesis or something sufficiently like it to 
be legitimately called realism is true? (The realist need not hold 
that physical qualities are exactly like, only in general similar to, 
some of those we perceive.) 

But unfortunately the argument has two serious limitations. In 
the first place, it does not refute a view like that of Berkeley, who 
denied the existence of matter in the sense of a set of unperceived 
bodies in space and attributed our perceptions to the direct action 
of God on our minds. If God thought it well to produce ideas or 
sense-data in us which followed just the order we should expect 
if they had been produced by independent physical objects of the 
type ordinarily postulated by the realist without there being any 
such objects, he could no doubt do so, and it would be senseless 
to talk of a coincidence. The fact that our experience went on as 
if there were independent physical objects would be adequately 
explained by God's intention that it should go on like this. How- 
ever, such a view would not be so different from realism as might 
be supposed. For God must know what he is doing when he gives 
us the sort of experiences we should have if there were indepen- 
dent physical objects, and he would therefore need to have ideas 
of physical objects himself, as Berkeley indeed suggests. Such 
ideas, being quite independent of human beings, and being the 
causes, indirect if not direct, of their perceptions might well be 
regarded as themselves a kind of physical objects in the realist sense 
of the word, and Berkeley, sometimes at least, so regards them. 
However, Berkeley's view cannot be proved or shown to be prob- 
ably true; and against the ordinary phenomenalist who does not 
postulate a God to account for the order of our perceptions the 
argument I have given is in my opinion a very cogent one. It 
seems to me to show that we must suppose the existence of some- 

83 



Matter 

thing over and above human beings and their sensa and, further, 
that we cannot be completely agnostic as to what these external 
things are. The argument from successful predictions does pro- 
vide evidence as to their characteristics. It also shows how we can 
distinguish between illusions and genuine perceptions. We con- 
demn those perceptions as illusory which do not fit into our causal 
system. An oar may appear bent in water but it rows as if it were 
straight; mirror images and rainbows do not act causally like 'real' 
physical objects. This, I think, is the most important criterion on 
the whole, but in most cases of illusion there is either disagree- 
ment between different observers or between the senses of sight and 
touch, in which case we give the preference to that one of the visual 
appearances which does not contradict the appearance to touch. 
It is a significant fact that, provided we take the ordinary realist 
view of physical objects, we can causally explain even the illusions. 
But, unfortunately, even apart from the reservation in favour of 
Berkeley, the argument from successful predictions does not pro- 
vide conclusive evidence for as much as we might think. This 
brings us to its second limitation. This may be expressed by saying 
that it cannot be used as an argument for ascribing secondary, 
only primary qualities to physical objects. Science finds it per- 
fectly possible to make all the predictions it does make without 
assuming that physical objects have any qualities except the prim- 
ary ones, shape, size, motion, velocity, etc. It can even give a 
satisfactory causal explanation of our sensations of colour without 
assuming that physical objects are really coloured, or of sound 
without supposing that sounds exist objectively in the physical 
world. It assumes indeed the objective physical existence of light- 
waves and sound-waves, but it does not ascribe to these waves any 
but primary qualities. So we cannot argue that secondary qualities 
are present in the physical world on the ground of our success in 
predicting, since the predictions are not based on the assumption 
that physical objects have the secondary but only on the assumption 
that they have the primary qualities. The distinction between 
primary and secondary qualities has often been attacked, but there 
is a strong philosophical basis for it in this fact that the ones are 
needed to explain our experience and to make predictions and the 
others not. 

84 



Matter 

It is further argued that we have really no ground for saying 
that even the primary qualities of physical objects are like what 
we perceive them as being, for all that is absolutely needed to 
account for the success of our predictions is that their 'structure' 
should be the same as it appears to be. This requires explanation 
with the help of an imaginary illustration. Suppose I were ab- 
normally constituted so that I saw grass as green but leaves as 
always blue. In that case it would be easy to detect the difference 
because I should deny that grass and leaves were ever the same 
colour and say leaves were like the sky on a fine day. But suppose 
I differed in my perception of colour from other men in such a 
way that I saw the colour I call blue whenever other people saw 
the colour I call green and saw the colour I call green whenever 
other people saw the colour I call blue. Then I could, it would 
seem, never discover the difference, yet it would be a very real 
one. This situation could be expressed by saying that the content 
of my experience was different from theirs in these respects, but 
the 'structure' of my experience the same. Similarly, the sort of 
relations I perceived under the heads of shape and size might 
conceivably be different from those perceived by others without 
our ever detecting it, provided our perceptions, though different, 
corresponded in this regular way. And, similarly, physical objects 
might really have different qualities and relations from those we 
perceive and yet our predictions come off, provided the qualities 
and relations, though different, were arranged in the same kind of 
way. Call the relations of physical things as we perceive them 
r l r 2 . . . and as they really are Vj v 2 . . . . Then we could still make 
successful predictions if whatever appeared to us to be related 
by TJ was really related by v x , and whatever appeared to us to be 
related by r a was really related by v a , etc. That is what is meant by 
saying their structure is the same. 

The above considerations suggest a compromise between real- 
ists and phenomenalists on the following lines. The former might 
admit that we cannot have any ground for saying that physical 
objects are qualitatively like what we perceive; and the latter 
would find it hard to avoid admitting that our perceptions have 
causes, that these causes are external to ourselves, and that our 
success in making predictions strongly supports the view that 

85 



Matter 

there is a resemblance in structure between things as they are and 
things as they appear to us. We might thus conclude that the 
material world as such is unknowable by us, but add that we have 
probable arguments which justify certain beliefs about its struc- 
ture. Perhaps this argument carries the antithesis between content 
and structure a little too far, but it would be generally accepted 
nowadays that we cannot know anything from science about what 
a particle of matter is in itself but only about its relation to other 
particles of matter. 

But another line of argument is possible. If, as seems to be the 
case, the representative theory of perception is true, we can only 
perceive physical objects by the mediation of sense, and we can 
only infer their existence or properties by using some sort of 
causal rgument^from~tEese sensa. Now, since particular causal 
laws can only be estaKUsEeH^Hy experience, it is difficult to see 
how we can pass by a causal argument to something quite different 
in kind from anything we have ever experienced. Further, if sensa 
are to represent physical objects adequately, the latter must con- 
tain in themselves elements which are like the sensa. (Berkeley 
supported his idealism by asking what can be like an idea but an 
idea, and 'idea' is his equivalent of the modern 'sensum' or 'sense- 
datum',) We can only apprehend physical objects in so far as we 
apprehend sensa which we in our ordinary experience of percep- 
tion regard as parts of them, since at the common-sense level we 
do not hold the representative theory; we can only describe them 
in terms of characteristics of sensa; we can only determine their 
positions or characteristics either by taking 'on faith' our sensa as 
giving characteristics belonging to them, or by a causal argument 
from our sensa. All this suggests the conclusion that physical 
objects are best rcga^ejd^jp^ qiialitativeiy'fKe 

sameTih'Tcind as our sensa but existing in JepenJSSfly of Being 
perceived.' It would inHeedi be ridiculous to identify a physical 
thing with a single sensum, but it might well consist of a group of 
entities of the same kind as sensa, only existing unsensed (the 
term 'sensibilia' has sometimes been used for such entities). In 
that case it would really have something like the colour, shape, 
hardness or softness which we under the most favourable condi- 
tions perceive in it. And we could still conceive of it as existing 

86 



Matter 

unperceived by anybody, unless we accept the arguments of the 
idealists. The arguments from illusion against the physical reality 
of secondary qualities do not show that physical objects cannot 
have colour, but only that we cannot decide conclusively what the 
colour is. Realists have usually assumed that physical objects are 
quite different in kind from our sensa, even when they held that 
nothing but our sensa was immediately perceived. But this is an 
assumption they are certainly not justified in making. jjjfej&YS. 
immediate experience only of two kinds of thing, sensa and minds, 
and if so how can we be justified in asserting the existence of a 
third thing generically different from either? The causes of our 
perceptions may be generically different from either sensa or 
minds, but we certainly have no means of discovering that they 
are thus different. 



ARGUMENTS FROM COMMON SENSE. ANALYSIS 
OF PROPOSITIONS ABOUT PHYSICAL OBJECTS 

The next argument for realism is commonly called the argument 
from common sense and is no doubt the most influential. We 
cannot really believe, except for a short time in a philosophical 
discussion, that physical objects do not exist, and it seems un- 
reasonable of philosophers to defend conclusions that nobody 
outside a mental hospital would seriously hold in ordinary life. 
We may not be able to prove the existence of physical things, but 
in the last resort we must accept some beliefs that we cannot 
prove. We cannot abandon our instinctive beliefs altogether if we 
are to have anything left on which to philosophize. The philo- 
sopher may well accept slight amendments to them, but if he has 
to amend them too drastically it is a serious objection to his own 
philosophy. Even Lord Russell has admitted that the only ground 
there can be for rejecting one 'instinctive belief' is that it clashes 
with others, and certainly no one would accuse him of being an 
unduly credulous person, too ready to accept instinctive beliefs. 
Nor can we point to any other instinctive common-sense belief 
with which the belief in physical objects clashes. We cannot prove 
the belief false, the worst we can say is that we cannot prove it true. 



Matter 

To this argument many modern philosophers would reply by 
drawing a distinction between knowing a proposition and know- 
ing its analysis. They would say that we know quite certainly that 
physical objects exist and they would refuse to make this a philo- 
sophical question at all. But although we know the truth of count- 
less propositions about physical objects, they say, we do not know 
how they are to be analysed and the philosophical problem is to 
find their analysis. By 'giving the analysis' they say they mean 
determining exactly what the common-sense statement asserts, not 
criticizing or amending this assertion or giving some additional 
philosophical information not already contained in it. It is an 
inquiry into what people really mean when they make the ordinary 
statements of life. Of course it must be admitted that a person can 
in some sense know what he means without being able to give the 
philosophical analysis of it, but it would be denied that he could 
know in the full sense what he meant without doing this. By using 
this distinction philosophers are enabled to accept the argument 
from common sense, at least seemingly, and yet also to accept 
phenomenalism. For they can say that, although our ordinary 
propositions about physical objects are true, they have to be 
analysed as merely statements about the experiences or sensa 
human beings have under given conditions. In that case we need 
no longer feel that phenomenalism contradicts common sense, for 
common sense is then itself not talking realism at all but pheno- 
menalism. It is then true that there is a table in front of me; but 
this only means that I have visual sensa of a certain describable 
kind and would have tactual sensa of a certain other kind if I went 
through the experience described as touching the table, and that 
other experiences would follow certain causal laws, e.g. the ex- 
perience of seeing books put on the table would be followed by 
the experience of seeing them remain there and not the experience 
of seeing them fall, etc. The phenomenalists would usually admit 
that we cannot hope to give a complete list of the simpler pro- 
positions about actual and possible sensa which constitute the 
analysis of any proposition about a physical object, for this would 
be to give a complete list of all the conceivable criteria which 
might make us likely to think the proposition true and all the 
empirical effects which we might regard as following from its 

88 



Matter 

truth; and this admission is certainly not without its difficulties 
for them. But they would insist that at any rate we can see that the 
analysis has to be in terms of a class consisting of an infinite 
number of such propositions and must not introduce any pro- 
positions which do not refer to human sensa in this way. The 
phenomenalist analysis has the merit of including all that matters 
to our experience, for it does not ex hypotbesi matter to us empiri- 
cally what things are like when nobody is experiencing them. 
And it does not like realism go beyond human experience, a point 
which appeals to the empiricist temper of the age. Consequently, 
even physical science nowadays shows phenomenalist tendencies. 

The view I have just sketched must be carefully distinguished 
from the one I suggested above which analysed physical objects in 
terms of sensa in the sense of holding that they were groups of 
entities like sensa, only existing unsensed. On that view physical 
objects are conceived as actually there all the time whether ex- 
perienced or not; but on the view which I am now discussing, to 
say that they are still there when not actually being perceived is 
only to assert hypothetical propositions about the sensa we should 
have under certain conditions and not to attribute qualities to any- 
thing actually existing. For example, to say that my table was still 
in this room at midnight when there was nobody there is only to 
say that, if a normal observer had looked then in a normal light, 
he would have seen a brown oblong surface, that if he had had 
the experience of putting his hands on the place where he saw it 
he would have felt something smooth and hard, that if he had 
had the experience of putting books on the place he would not 
have had the experience of seeing them fall to the ground, etc. 

Now this seems to me a fatal objection to the theory as an 
analysis of common-sense propositions. It may perhaps be im- 
possible to justify more than this philosophically, but it is surely 
plain that, when we speak of my table as being in the room at a 
time when there was nobody there to observe it, we are meaning 
to ascribe to it the same kind of existence as we are when we talk 
about the table now that there is somebody here perceiving it. 
When I talk about physical things which nobody perceives, I am 
surely talking about what actually exists, not merely about what 
would exist if something had happened which has not happened. 



Matter 

Geologists and astronomers give an account of what the earth 
was like long before there were any living beings on it: surely they 
are saying that the earth actually was in a molten state in those 
days, and not merely talking about the experiences which human 
beings would have had if there had per impossible been any there 
to observe it. There is great interest in an historical account of the 
way in which things actually developed; but what interest could 
there be in asking what would have happened millions of years ago 
if something else had happened which could not possibly have 
happened? When I say that the perceived motion of the hands of 
my watch is caused by the machinery inside, I am surely attributing 
to the machinery an actual existence all the time, and not merely 
meaning, when I make statements about it, that we should have 
perceived something if we had looked, which we did not. The 
machinery is thought to have caused the perceived movements, 
and a cause must surely be something which actually exists, or 
existed at the time it acted as cause. The mere hypothetical fact 
that I should have perceived something //I had looked could not 
possibly be a cause. An event cannot be caused by what has not 
actually happened but only would have happened if something 
else had happened which has not. These arguments may not be 
conclusive as showing that physical objects in the realist sense 
exist, but at least they show that our ordinary assertions about 
them must be analysed not phenomenalistically but realistically, 
i.e. not merely as saying what has happened or would happen to 
our sensa or experience but as saying what actually exists whether 
perceived or not. We might indeed accept the phenomenalist 
analysis as regards some common-sense propositions about physi- 
cal objects. It is more plausible to say that, when we speak of sugar 
as sweet, we are merely saying that if we put it in our mouth we 
should get a sweet taste, and similarly about most other people, 
than that we are saying that the sugar has the sweet taste as an 
actual quality all the time whether anybody is tasting it or not. 
It is perhaps more plausible to say that, when we speak of a coat 
in a closed cupboard as green, we mean merely that a normal 
observer would perceive it as green if he looked in a normal light 
than to say we mean it actually has the colour green now, though 
it is not being perceived by anybody and is in the dark. But if we 

90 



Matter 

accepted this analysis in regard to all the qualities of the sugar or 
the coat, there would be nothing left to cause the sensations of 
colour or taste. 

An important element of truth in the phenomenalist analysis is 
that we must not admit into physical science propositions about 
physical objects which could not be verified by any experience, 
but it does not follow that in order to exist in the full sense 
physical objects need actually be experienced. But the point that 
has most influenced its supporters is that they thought it enabled 
them to say that we knew physical objects to exist. At the common- 
sense level we certainly say this, yet if the realist analysis is correct 
we have seen that it may be doubted whether we really do so. But 
I think the advantage of the phenomenalist analysis here is largely 
illusory. It may be argued indeed that if, when we talk about 
physical things, we are only talking about our sensa, we are talk- 
ing about things which we know exist. But propositions about 
physical objects cannot possibly be analysed merely in terms of 
our own present sensa. If they were, I should have to say that the 
crocodile in my bed about which I dreamt really existed. If we 
take the phenomenalist view, we must analyse them in terms of the 
sensa of normal human observers in general and our own possible 
future sensa under different conditions; and we cannot perceive 
those directly any more than physical objects. To say what other 
human beings perceive is a matter of inference as much as it is to 
say what physical objects are like on the realist view. It is true that 
cases of 'telepathy' occur, but those are far too rare to form the 
basis of our interpretation of the belief in physical objects and are 
certainly not the ground of the vast majority of assertions about 
the physical world. In the absence of telepathy the position in 
regard to our knowledge of other people's perceptions is not very 
different from the position in regard to our knowledge of the 
physical world as conceived by the realist. We have seen above 1 
that, provided the perceptions of other human beings correspond 
uniformly to ours in their variations, we have no scientific means 
of deciding whether they actually do or do not perceive the same 
qualities as we do, so that as with physical objects on the realist 
view so with the perceptions of other human beings we can make 

*p. 85. 



Matter 

very probable inferences as to 'structure* but not as to 'content'. 
If we reject, as I should do, the phenomenalist analysis of 
common-sense propositions about physical objects in the sense in 
which an 'analysis' is claimed to stand for the strict equivalent of 
the proposition analysed, we are then entitled to use the argument 
from common sense for what it is worth on behalf of realism. Till 
this question had been discussed, we were not entitled to do so, 
because till then we could not say whether common sense asserted 
realism. Now it does seem to me that the argument from common 
sense has a great deal of weight. I do not of course suppose that 
on a purely philosophical issue the opinions of common sense 
ought to be preferred to those of the philosopher. That would be 
to ascribe a special authority over philosophy to the opinions of 
those who had not studied philosophy. But the question whether 
physical objects exist and what they are like is not a philosophical 
issue. We do not need the philosopher to tell us that we have 
bodies, that the earth exists, and that iron is heavier than feathers. 
And, if a philosopher asserts that according to his philosophy 
these statements must be false, it is a condemnation of his philo- 
sophy rather than of the statements which he criticizes. Any 
philosophical arguments he can use are surely less certain than is 
the truth of the statements just mentioned by me. Therefore, if 
these statements have to be analysed in a realist and not a pheno- 
mentalist way, this is a strong argument for the philosophical 
truth of realism. 



DIRECT COGNITION OF PHYSICAL OBJECTS 

It is not as if the philosopher could reasonably claim to show the 
common-sense propositions about physical objects to be false. 
The most he can show is that they cannot be proved true or even 
probable. But it might be asked: Do they need a philosophical 
proof? Are not they evident in their own right? The absence of a 
proof does not prove that they are not known without a proof. 
We cannot prove everything. It may be thought that I have already 
ruled out this suggestion by admitting that we do not perceive 
physical objects directly, but it is possible that what we do not 



Matter 

perceive directly we might still know directly. This occurs in the 
somewhat analogous case of memory. I do not perceive by my 
senses what I had for breakfast this morning, yet I remember it. 
When I remember it I know directly what I ate; what I know is 
not the result of an argument but something that is seen as true in 
its own right. If anybody challenges the correctness of my mem- 
ory I may give arguments, but then I shall no longer be appealing 
to memory. In memory I know something to be a fact without 
argument. Or at least, if I do not know it, I have a justified belief 
about it. Often memory amounts only to justifiable belief and not 
to certain knowledge, but in a very important sense it is direct in 
either case. For memory, whether fallible or infallible, is not an 
inference any more than is perception as such. On the other hand, 
it is clearly indirect if we mean by this that what we remember is 
not a direct object of our senses. It does not even seem direct in 
this sense, while perception seems direct but probably is not really 
so. I do not directly sense my past breakfast; I only know it 
through something that arises in my present state, whether an 
actual memory-image of the breakfast (which need not occur) or 
some other modification of my present consciousness; yet what I 
know in memory is the past and not only the present modification 
in question. Now memory is not completely analogous to percep- 
tion, but if we can be directly aware in memory of something that 
we do not directly sense, this shows at any rate that it is not 
absurd to suppose that I might know an empirical fact directly 
without perceiving it directly. If we use the word 'cognize* to 
cover the case where I do not know with certainty but have a 
justified belief based on contemplation of its object, we may put 
our contention by saying that the intuitive conviction we all have 
of the existence of physical objects is based on a direct cognition. 
There are many cases of memory where not certainty but justified 
belief is attained without inference, as well as the cases where 
something is really known in memory, so that we need not dismiss 
the possibility of a direct cognition in cases where it does not give 
what is in the strict sense knowledge. Our direct cognitions may 
be mixed up badly with assumptions and errors and yet contain a 
core, not always easy to pick out, which is cognized correctly. 
Our cognitions of physical things may be genuine, though often 

93 



Matter 

at least and perhaps always partly confused and mistaken, appre- 
hensions of reality. We certainly are convinced when perceiving 
things in the ordinary way that we do apprehend real objective 
facts, and this cannot be refuted, though at the common-sense 
level we do not avoid the confusion between claiming that we 
sense them directly and claiming that we cognize them directly. 
The claim that we have this direct cognition of physical objects 
cannot be seen to be self-contradictory even if we do not perceive 
them directly, and it could only be rejected on the ground of a 
theory of knowledge to the effect that such a kind of cognition is 
impossible. But a theory of knowledge can only be based on the 
kinds of well-accredited cognition we are found to possess. We 
cannot tell a priori that one particular kind of cognition which we 
claim to have is not a possible one, we have not enough a priori 
knowledge of our faculties to say that, and therefore we must base 
our theory of knowledge on a generalization and systematization 
of the particular kinds of successful cognition. Now cognition of 
physical objects is obviously a kind of successful and well- 
accredited knowledge. Therefore, rather than reject it because it 
does not conform to our theory of knowledge, we must base our 
theory of knowledge partly on it. We must not deny it because it 
is unlike other kinds of cognition. Since the objects of cognition 
are very different, ranging from sensa and material things to laws 
of pure mathematics and ethical values, we may expect cognitions 
themselves to be very different from each other in kind. 

Besides appealing to our intuitive conviction we may use two 
other arguments to support the view that we have a genuine and 
direct cognition of physical objects, (i) We are certainly directly 
aware of ourselves, but it may be argued that consciousness of 
ourselves necessarily involves consciousness of a not-self as a 
background with which the self is to be contrasted, and since the 
former awareness is direct the latter must be also. But, since we 
are not directly aware of other minds, the only existing things 
other than ourselves of which we could be directly aware are 
physical objects. 

(2) We certainly suppose at the common-sense level that we 
are directly aware of physical objects in perception, and it is on 
the basis of this supposed direct awareness that we make the pre- 
94 



JAatter 

dictions which I have mentioned and which are so remarkably 
fulfilled. We attribute qualities to physical objects in the first 
instance because we see and feel them to be there. So, if the argu- 
ment from predictions is an argument for physical objects in the 
realist sense, it is also an argument for our intuitive convictions of 
their existence being genuine cognitions. Tested by their results 
the convictions work to such an extent that it would be an extra- 
ordinary coincidence if they were not genuine cognitions of the 
objects about which the predictions are made. The reliability of 
an alleged capacity is to be tested by its results, and here the 
results are very good. 

If we have a direct cognition of physical objects, the position 
in regard to colour is altered. For colour seems as much an im- 
mediate object of awareness as shape, therefore on this score we 
have no ground for denying to secondary qualities the physical 
reality which we attribute to primary, though we cannot in the 
case of secondary qualities supplement this conviction by the 
argument from predictions or any sort of causal argument. It is 
a common mistake that science has refuted the view that physical 
objects are coloured; all it has really done is to show that our 
experience can be causally explained without assuming that they 
are coloured and to add to the difficulties of giving a plausible 
account of what colours they have if they are coloured. Most 
'secondary qualities' other than colour are not regarded even by 
common sense as qualities of the physical objects which produce 
the perceptions of them. At a common-sense level we seem to 
think of sounds and smells as somewhere in the air between us 
and the object which emits them but not like colours as qualities 
actually pervading the surface of the object, while we do not 
ordinarily regard tastes as belonging to objects at all except when 
actually tasted. 

PHYSICAL SUBSTANCE 

We have so far been talking of physical objects simply in terms 
of their qualities, but we ordinarily think of them as substances, 
and as such we regard them as something more than mere groups 
of qualities or even series of events. Yet when we are asked what 

95 



Matter 

this something more is we cannot answer. We suppose that 
beyond the qualities there is something which has the qualities (or 
in which they 'inhere', to use the technical term). But what is this 
something over and above the qualities and relations of physical 
objects? We cannot say. It becomes a mere unknowable X, and 
our failure to know it has been deplored as an instance of the 
weakness of our faculties and of the mystery which shrouds the 
real world. But is it unknowable because of the weakness of our 
faculties, and not rather because we have defined it in such a way 
that it could not be known, even by Omniscience itself? For any- 
thing that could be known about it would have to be Stated in 
terms of qualities and relations. When we have taken these away, 
what is left over in our concept of a physical object is a completely 
vacuous notion and therefore no notion at all, and this may well 
make us sceptical of the substance theory in this form. It does not 
follow that the conception of substance ought to be altogether 
rejected. If it is clear that there is no sense in talking about what 
a substance is apart from its qualities and relations, it is also clear 
that qualities and relations, if they are to have any place in the 
existent world, must be qualities and relations of something. Per- 
haps the answer to our problem is that we ought not to ask 
questions such as: What would qualities be like without substance? 
What are substances apart from their qualities? What are terms 
apart from their relations or relations apart from their terms? Per- 
haps what we should say is merely that the concepts of substance 
and quality are inseparable and correlative, neither being prior to 
the other, but both being necessary parts of our idea of matter. 
And we might treat the antithesis between a relation and its terms 
in the same fashion. At the least a substance is not just any collec- 
tion of qualities but a collection of qualities arranged in a particu- 
lar way very difficult to define. But it does not follow that there is 
something else in the substance when you have taken away the 
qualities. 

The question of substance is one where language has probably 
had a misleading effect. We use one word, a noun, to represent a 
thing and other words, adjectives, to represent its qualities, and 
this suggests that, since different words are used, the element in 
the thing represented by the noun is different from any and all the 



Matter 

elements represented by adjectives. But we need not accept this 
suggestion as metaphysically true or pragmatically valuable. 

The concept of substance is also used to give us a sense of 
stability and unity in change. We think of attributes as changing 
while the thing which has them remains the same, but we are con- 
fronted with the difficulty that we cannot possibly say what the 
permanent element is, unless indeed we can fix on some permanent 
attribute or attributes, in which case it might be objected that we 
are still dealing with the attributes and not with the substance. It 
seems that what we need is a conception of substance not as some- 
thing over and above the attributes but as the unity in which the 
changing attributes are contained. Again, it seems best to think of 
the two opposed concepts not as representing different parts of a 
thing but as correlative ways of looking at a thing, as ordering 
concepts that have their significance and utility only in connection 
with each other. 

Whatever our conception of substance, I do not think we can 
find any metaphysical ground for saying when one substance ends 
and another begins in the physical world. We call the human body 
the same even though its matter has been almost entirely changed 
every seven years, because the form of the whole is preserved. If 
one tile from the roof of a house is replaced, it is still the same 
house. How many tiles and bricks would have to be replaced to 
make it a different house? Or how much exactly would its shape 
have to be altered to produce this effect? Are we to call a book one 
substance or a page or each organic particle in the page? Modern 
science till recently seemed to provide us with permanent un- 
changing substances absolutely distinct from each other in the 
shape of atoms, but the developments in science during the twen- 
tieth century have had the effect of denying the absolute in- 
destructibility of the atom, and of raising very serious doubts 
whether its successor as the ultimate unit of matter, the electron, 
is anything more than a useful mental picture to symbolize certain 
mathematical relations. To conclude with a story for the benefit 
of those who are still inclined to deny the relativity of the con- 
ception of a single substance, it is said that a nobleman once got 
into financial straits and as a result his housekeeper, to save 
money, darned a pair of his black silk stockings with green wool. 

o 97 



Matter 

This process went on till they were all green wool. Now at what 
point did they cease to be the same pair of stockings? It is obvious 
that the answer is a purely verbal matter. Exactly when we say 
that the one pair ended and the other began is a question of 
language, of no philosophical or scientific significance, like the 
question how few hairs a person must have on his head to entitle 
us to call him bald. 



Chapter Five 
MIND 



PRIMARY CERTAINTY OF EXPERIENCE 
REPLY TO BEHAVIOURISM 



^ ^ HE discussion of physical objects should have beert 
I sufficient to counteract the assertion that their existence 
I is the chief and primary certainty. The primary cer- 
JL tainty is experience, and this is not a physical object but 
something mental. When I think I perceive a physical object, it is 
conceivable that I might be dreaming, but I could not even dream 
that I existed without existing. And here by T is meant my mind, 
not my body. It might conceivably be a mere dream or illusion 
even that I had a body, but it could not be an illusion or dream 
that I thought, at least in the wide sense of the term in which I am 
always thinking of something when I am awake at all. And simi- 
larly it could not be an illusion that I experienced. For to believe 
or even doubt that I am thinking or experiencing, I must already 
think and experience. This is the famous argument used by 
Descartes: I think, therefore I am (cogito^ ergo sutri). We may grant 
that the argument as he used it went rather too far. He talked as 
if it established a permanent self, while all it does establish is the 
present existence of a thought as experience. But with the appro- 
priate limitations the argument is valuable as showing the primary 
certainty of experience against those who are disposed to talk as 
if matter alone were real. 

Of course what we cannot practically help holding as certain 
is not limited to what can be theoretically proved such, but if we 
are to get back to the ultimate foundations of belief and know- 
ledge we should ask what is logically certain. This falls into two 
classes, (i) Certain a priori propositions which could not be denied 
without logical absurdity, like the law of contradiction or the law 

99 



Mind 

of excluded middle. (2) My own present existence as a thinking 
being. The certainty has, however, a different foundation in the 
two cases. We can-see that the laws of logic could not conceivably 
be false, but it is quite conceivable that I should not have existed. 
My father might well have never met my mother. What is incon- 
ceivable is that I could deny or doubt my existence without exist- 
ing, and therefore for me, but only for me, such a denial or doubt 
would be self-contradictory. But the logically certain need not be 
co-extensive with the certain. Besides what is logically certain 
there are a number of immediately known propositions which we 
can regard as absolutely certain although there would be no self- 
contradiction in our denying them. In this class I put more 
specific propositions based on introspection. I cannot see any self- 
contradiction in supposing that I might make mistakes in intro- 
spection, and there is therefore no logical absurdity in supposing 
that I might be mistaken now when I judge that I feel warm or 
that I have a visual presentation of a table. But I still cannot help 
being absolutely certain of the truth of these propositions and I 
do not think that I ought to be otherwise. I should not say this of 
all judgements of introspection, but I should certainly say it of 
some. Again I cannot help being absolutely certain of the truth 
of some (though by no means all) of my judgements of memory. 
As we have seen, it is however hardly possible to claim this 
absolute certainty for judgements about physical objects, and, as 
we shall see, there are similar difficulties in claiming it for judge- 
ments about minds other than one's own. 

Descartes' assertion Cogito y ergo sum, is commonly regarded as 
the beginning of modern philosophy and in particular as initiating 
the subjective tendency which has been so characteristic of sub- 
sequent philosophical developments. Since his time philosophers 
have tended more than in earlier days before looking outwards 
first to look inwards in order to form a decision as to the human 
capacity for knowledge, and this tendency has often been carried 
much too far. But he was fundamentally right as to the starting- 
point, though not as to the way in which he used it. It has been 
objected that the cogito implies the existence of something thought 
as much as of a thinker, but there is nothing in the argument 
which proves that what is thought need be independent of the 

100 



Mind 

thinker. It might be just a mental image dependent on my imagin- 
ing it for its existence. 

Descartes' argument brings out the absurdity of 'behaviourism' 
as a philosophy. Some psychologists, who call themselves 'be- 
haviourists', have tried to explain away the concept of mind or even 
mental events in psychology altogether and substitute for it the 
concept of behaviour studied as a physical process. Probably most 
of them merely mean that the observation of outward behaviour 
and not introspection provides the most useful way of acquiring 
data in psychology, but some would go further and put forward 
their behaviourism as a philosophy and not merely a methodology 
of psychology. In that case their position can easily be seen to be 
untenable. Such philosophical behaviourism may mean one of two 
things, (i) It may mean that there are no mental events at all. But 
in that case no one can possibly believe behaviourism to be true, 
for believing itself is a mental event. (2) It may mean that there 
are mental events but these are simply to be identified with 
physiological events. The kind of physiological events with which 
behaviourists identify thinking are usually movements of the vocal 
organs. People often, when they think, move these as they do 
when they talk, only less markedly, and behaviourists have ad- 
vanced the view that this is what always happens when we think, 
and further that this is just what thinking is. Nineteenth-century 
materialists were on the other hand inclined to identify thinking, 
and mental events generally, with processes in the central nervous 
system or brain. In order to refute such views I shall suggest your 
trying an experiment. Heat a piece of iron red-hot, then put your 
hand on it, and note carefully what you feel. You will have no 
difficulty in observing that it is quite different from anything 
which a physiologist could observe, whether he considered your 
outward behaviour or your brain processes. The throb of pain 
experienced will not be in the least like either the act of with- 
drawing your hand or the movement of your vocal organs to say 
whatever you do say, nor would it be like anything described in 
textbooks of physiology as happening in the nervous system or 
brain. I do not say that it does not happen in the brain, but it is 
quite distinct from anything that other people could observe if 
they looked into your brain. The behaviourists pride themselves 

JOI 



Mind 

on being empiricists, but in maintaining their view they are going 
clean contrary to experience. We know by experience what feeling 
pain is like and we know by experience what the physiological 
reactions to it are, and the two are totally unlike. We know by 
experience what thinking is, and we know by experience what 
movements of our vocal organs are, and we see the two to be 
totally unlike. It is not a question of a priori speculative meta- 
physics whether mental and physiological events are to be dis- 
tinguished. The difference is as plainly marked and as much an 
empirical matter as that between a sight and a sound. The physio- 
logical and the mental characteristics I have mentioned may 
conceivably belong to the same substance I shall discuss that 
question in the next chapter but at least they are different in 
qualities, indeed as different in kind as any two sets of qualities. 
The element of truth in behaviourism is that I can only acquire 
knowledge about other minds through their bodily behaviour, 
including under that what they say about themselves. But it is 
only because I interpret their behaviour in terms of my own 
immediate experience of my mental states, not my body, that it 
can give me information of a psychological kind at all. 

We should not regard the conception of the mind as a meta- 
physical hypothesis concerning what lies behind experience, but 
rather as the conception of the different experiences of ourselves 
or some other person as related in a single whole. In this sense its 
existence cannot be denied. A distinction has been made, chiefly 
by theologians, between mind, soul and spirit, but this distinction 
has been avoided by most philosophers and 'mind' used to cover 
the whole of the man's inner nature and not merely his more 
intellectual side. 



DIFFERENT ELEMENTS IN THE MIND 

Now what do we find in our experience? Into what elements is 
it analysable? In the first place we discover a number of sensuous 
elements the qualities of which resemble rather those of physical 
objects as conceived by common sense, than those attributable to 
mind as such. I am referring to sensa and images. These may be 

102 



Mind 

regarded as mind-dependent, but not as qualities of the mind. 
When I look at the sky on a clear day my mind is not blue, when 
I hear the din of a big railway station my mind is not loud. We 
must remember here the distinction already pointed out between 
'sensation' as signifying 'sensing' and 'sensation' as signifying 
'what is sensed'. The former but not the latter is an attribute of 
mind. But certainly, even if they are not attributes of mind, the 
investigation of the sensa and images we have under certain 
conditions, is a major part of the work of psychology. Further 
they, or at least images, are very closely linked with our processes 
of thought. It may be doubted whether we can ever think in the 
least definitely without using some sort of imagery. Words them- 
selves are after all sensuous images of black marks on paper or of 
sounds . 

Turning to the more specifically mental side of ourselves, we 
find that it has been subjected to a threefold classification, repre- 
sented by the distinction between affective, cognitive, and cona- 
tive. By the affective side of our nature is meant the feeling side, 
by the cognitive side the side concerned with knowing, believing, 
reasoning, perceiving, by the conative side that concerned with 
acting, willing, striving, desiring. We must not, however, think 
of it as if the three sides operated quite separately. On the contrary 
practically all mental processes involve all three at once. Except 
perhaps when we are half asleep there are probably no times in our 
life when we are only feeling beings, and certainly none when we 
are only cognitive or conative beings, since the feeling element at 
least must always be present. Thus having an emotion like anger 
or fear involves at once having more or less strong feelings, striv- 
ing in a certain direction, e.g. to escape or get the better of our 
opponent (conative), and recognizing the situation as one of a 
certain character (cognitive). Cognition is essentially linked up 
with conation in the form of striving to attain some end by the 
cognition, if only the end of discovering truth for its own sake, 
and in the form of voluntarily turning the attention in certain 
directions. Attention in its turn is bound up with 'interest', and 
interest with feeling pleasure or its opposite in a pursuit. 

On the other hand, while the three sides of mental activity 
mostly involve each other, a thinker may emphasize one in pre- 

103 



Mind 

ference to the others, and this variation in relative emphasis is one 
of the chief sources of difference between philosophers. Those who 
emphasize the cognitive element most are apt to think of reality as 
primarily something satisfying the intellect, and so as a rational 
system in which there is a reason for everything or for most things 
of importance, and the different parts are all logically connected. 
Others make cognition subject to the conative side and insist that 
cognitions are always primarily means to a practical end. They 
exalt the importance of will at the expense of reason both in their 
estimate of man and in their view of reality in general. The most 
fundamentally real thing to them is given in the awareness of 
activity. Thirdly, the philosophers who derive knowledge ex- 
clusively or almost exclusively from sense-experience might be 
described as making the affective element predominant, since 
sensations are in my opinion best classified as feelings. 1 Hume's 
psychology would be a good example of one which tends to 
reduce everything to feelings. Similarly, in the realm of moral 
philosophy we can distinguish those who make the chief good a 
cognitive state, whether that of contemplation of the supreme 
being or simply that of having clear ideas in general; those like 
Kant who find the chief good in a state of the moral will; and those 
who find it in the feeling of happiness or pleasure. But it seems 
more likely that a right view will do justice to all three sides of 
our nature. 

Some philosophers, while accepting images and sensa, have 
denied the existence of mental acts or processes like knowing, 
believing, willing, etc., on the ground that these are not accessible 
to introspection. The trouble is that we cannot introspectively 
detect such acts by themselves, but that seems to be because they 
are essentially bound up with some object. We cannot know with- 
out knowing something, believe without believing something, 
will without willing something, etc. If so it is not to be expected 
that we can introspect these activities by themselves, but we can 
still have an idea of what they are like because we can see the 
distinction between willing and not willing something, or that 
between believing and doubting the same thing. It does not matter 
if we cannot observe some attribute, A, by itself; we can still know 

1 Many psychologists, however, classify them as cognitions. 
104 



Mind 

what it is like if we can observe the difference between AB and 
CB, and this is how we know what it is like, e.g. to believe. That we 
cannot give an adequate account of the self in terms of images and 
sensa alone may be shown by, for instance, taking the case of 
thought. One can go a certain distance in the interpretation of 
thought by means of images, but in very many cases the only 
discernible images are words. You may be able to think about 
physical things by forming images of them, but if you open a book 
on philosophy or economics at almost any page, you will not find 
a sentence the content of which is capable of being imaged. This 
being so, we are dependent on words for thinking about such 
topics. It seems to be a psychological necessity to have some sort 
of sensuous picture in our mind, but we cannot produce pictures 
that are like the objects about which we think, therefore we em- 
ploy verbal images which can be used to represent some fact 
without needing to be like what they represent. A person who 
wishes to deny any mental events or processes over and above 
sensa and images will therefore have to maintain that thinking 
about philosophy is reducible simply to a combination of verbal 
images. Now he may be right indeed in maintaining that verbal 
images are a necessary condition of such thinking, but he cannot 
be right in maintaining that they are also a sufficient condition. 
For he will then not be able to make any distinction between a 
set of words about an abstract topic which we understand and a 
string of nonsense syllables. If we were dealing with physical 
objects we could often analyse the meaning in terms of non-verbal 
images, but this is not always the case even here. The meaning of 
most scientific theories could not be expressed adequately in terms 
of images of physical objects and even in cases where propositions 
about physical objects could be thus expressed we may understand 
them perfectly well without in fact using the imagery. Some people 
very rarely use any but verbal images. In any case, as I have said, 
in e.g. philosophy and economics (or even politics) the meaning 
of most statements cannot possibly be expressed in terms of 
sensuous imagery which is like the subject-matter of our thought. 
Yet we can understand some statements in philosophy and econo- 
mics. Therefore understanding is something mental which cannot 
possibly be explained entirely in terms of images. It cannot be 

IOJ 



Mind 

explained entirely in terms of verbal imagery, for we must make a 
distinction between using verbal imagery and understanding it; 
and, as we have seen, it cannot be explained in terms of non- 
verbal. 

Attempts have also been made to analyse belief in terms of 
behaviour, thus excluding the need to posit any specific mental 
act or attitude of belief. On this view to believe that A is B is 
to act as if A were B. The view is, however, in my opinion, open 
to several very serious objections. Firstly, what can be meant by 
'acting as if A were B'? Surely nothing but acting as if we believed 
A to be B, in which case belief is being defined in terms of itself. 
If A were B without our believing it to be so, it would not alter 
our actions though it might alter their effects. Secondly, I often 
have beliefs on which I never act. In such cases the theory can only 
be maintained by referring to hypothetical action. But I can tell 
whether I believe something without first having to decide how 
I should act under certain hypothetical circumstances which may 
never be realized at all. I know immediately in many cases that I 
believe something on which I am not at present acting, but it 
cannot be a matter of immediate knowledge how one would act if 
something were to happen which in fact has not happened. For 
instance I believe that Chimborazo is the highest mountain of the 
Andes, and I should therefore refrain from trying to climb it if I 
were in that neighbourhood because I should think it too formid- 
able a task. But I surely cannot identify the belief with this hypo- 
thetical fact. That I should not try to climb Chimborazo is an 
inference and not anything immediately known at all, further it is 
an inference from my belief about the height of Chimborazo as 
premise. It already presupposes the latter belief, which therefore 
cannot be defined in terms of it. And the same with all proposi- 
tions about future or possible actions based on a belief. We cannot 
avoid these criticisms by identifying the action with repeating to 
oneself or others the words which we say express the belief. For 
we might do that without having the belief. Thirdly, the theory 
does not allow for human folly and immorality. We often hold a 
belief quite genuinely and yet because of some strong desire which 
carries us against reason do not act as if it were true. 

It seems equally impossible to analyse desiring, willing, liking, 

1 06 



Mind 

etc., in terms of imagery. So we have two very different kinds of 
attributes given in our immediate experience: specifically mental 
attributes and the attributes of sensa and images. I should say that 
the latter kind could and the former could not be conceived as 
existing unexperienced, but the idealist would contradict the first 
part of this statement. However, no sensible person would deny 
the second part and say that, e.g. pleasure and pain could exist 
unexperienced. 

When we start talking about the more specifically mental side 
it is disappointing how little philosophy and psychology can say 
about it. This is largely because we very soon arrive at character- 
istics which we can know by experience but cannot define further. 
Analysis presupposes unanalysable characteristics and we very 
soon reach these in the process. The unanalysable is of course not 
the unknowable, it is what we know well enough by experience 
but cannot explain in terms of anything else so that a person 
could understand what it was like if he had never had the ex- 
perience. 

DISPOSITIONAL PROPERTIES 

The terms applied to the mind both in psychology and in ordin- 
ary non-scientific conversation are, however, by no means limited 
to actual characteristics. They commonly refer to dispositions or 
capacities. For example, if I talk about somebody's 'beliefs', I am 
certainly not committing myself to the view that he is at the time 
I speak actually thinking of what I say he believes. I am sure that 
I am right in saying that Churchill believes the present govern- 
ment to be bad for Britain, but for anything I know Churchill may 
be asleep at the moment or thinking about something quite differ- 
ent. Therefore, though I use the present tense, I am not speaking 
about the actual present state of mind of Churchill. I am speaking 
about a disposition, by which is meant that I am saying something 
about not what he necessarily does now think but what he would 
think if his attention were turned to the subject. Most of the 
psychological terms we use stand for dispositions and not actual 
states of mind. When we speak of a person knowing, desiring, 
fearing, valuing something, we do not ordinarily mean that he is 

107 



Mind 

at the moment we speak in a state of actual desire, fear, etc., but 
that he has a disposition (tendency) to be so in regard to the 
object in question. (No doubt we must distinguish between long- 
and short-term dispositions, e.g. he is afraid of dogs and he is 
afraid that he will not be able to go out to-day.) But dispositional 
terms have to be defined in terms of actual states. In order to 
understand what 'believe' in the dispositional sense means we 
have to know from experience in ourselves what an actual state 
of coming to believe is like, to understand what 'fear' in the dis- 
positional sense is we must know what it is like to feel an actual 
emotion of fear, etc. It follows that we cannot explain psychologi- 
cal events by referring to dispositions. To explain a man's bad 
temper by a disposition to get angry is only to say that he does 
easily get angry. The only utility in talking like this is that it dis- 
tinguishes the man's general bent from circumstances for which 
we can assign more specific causes. For instance, it implies that a 
particular outburst of bad temper on the part of the man is not 
to be explained adequately by saying that he was tired out and 
therefore 'not himself or that the occasion, though trivial, was 
for him associated with some more important desire the frustra- 
tion of which in most normal men would give rise to some 
symptoms like bad temper. It is important to realize that when we 
talk about dispositions we are only saying what a man does or 
would do, thinks or would think, feels or would feel under certain 
circumstances. For it is all too easy to suppose that when we have 
referred a psychological event to a disposition we have given an 
explanation of it as we have when we refer a physical event to 
some physical machinery. The difference between the two cases 
is that we can form an idea of what the physical machinery is like 
even when it is not producing the event in question. Physical 
machinery can be observed when it is not working, but psycho- 
logical cannot be. The only way in which we can think of a 
disposition is as a law determining or inclining us to have certain 
experiences and perform certain actions. There may be an actually 
existent basis for the law in the mind, but if so we cannot say 
what it is like. We can only form an idea of the mind in terms of 
introspectively observable events, and we cannot introspectively 
observe our dispositions but only their manifestations in experi- 

108 



Mind 

ence. A disposition, as we know it, can only be expressed in terms 
of a hypothetical proposition, i.e. I shall do and feel so and so 
if . . . , and is not anything that actually exists in between its 
manifestations. It is to psychology what a law is to physical 
science, except that it does not allow of precise mathematical 
calculation and that a man's dispositions are laws peculiar to him, 
not common to everybody. Of course the acquiring of even a 
long-term disposition can sometimes be explained, e.g. by ex- 
periences in early childhood, but in order to explain it we have to 
fall back on more permanent and general dispositions, e.g. the 
'instincts'. The ideal of psychology as a science would be to 
explain all dispositions peculiar to an individual by deduction 
from dispositions common to all men together with the peculiar 
environment or physiological heredity of the individual man. 
Whether we think this ideal could conceivably ever be attained 
will depend on our views on issues such as determinism and pre- 
existence, but no doubt a great deal may be done in this way. 



'UNCONSCIOUS' DESIRES 

Dispositions of course need not be conscious: I need not be 
aware of the laws which govern my experience and behaviour. 
But an additional kind of unconscious has figured very largely in 
the writings of modern psychologists. They have produced evi- 
dence to support the view that desires very commonly exist in a 
man without being introspectively observable, and it is not meant 
merely that they are present in the sense in which a desire to over- 
throw the Labour Government is present in Churchill even when 
he is not thinking of the subject at all. In the case of Churchill he 
could no doubt detect the desire by introspection as soon as he 
thought of the subject, but the unconscious desires of the psycho- 
analyst are supposed not to be introspectively discoverable at any 
time, at least until the technique of psychotherapy has been applied. 
Thus it is said that A may hate B without ever being consciously 
aware of feelings of dislike towards B but rather of the reverse. 
It has been even said that desires are normally unconscious, and 
that the Unconscious includes a much greater part of our nature 

109 



Mind 

than what is conscious. Now it is easy to see how a disposition 
can be unconscious. A disposition is only a general tendency to 
act and feel in a certain way or a causal law affecting our actions 
and feelings, and there no doubt are many true generalizations 
about ourselves which we have never made and many causal laws 
affecting us which we have never discovered. But it is a different 
matter to claim that a desire in the non-dispositional sense, i.e. an 
actually existing desire, can be unconscious, and the claim may 
even seem self-contradictory at first sight. If I never experience 
a desire for A, surely, it may be said, I cannot desire A, any more 
than I can have a pain which is never felt. The answer may be 
found in a distinction between two senses of 'conscious' which I 
regard as of very great importance for avoiding confusions. By 
'conscious desire' may be meant a 'felt desire'. In this sense a 
desire, unless the term is used only dispositionally, like any other 
element in our experience, must be conscious. Or the phrase may 
signify a 'desire which is introspectively noticed'. In this sense it 
is plain that all our experience need not be conscious. For even 
the most introspective person is not introspecting all the time, 
and when he does introspect he does not introspect every element 
in his experience. There is always the sense of something more 
beyond what we explicitly notice in our introspections. It may 
therefore without self-contradiction be supposed that we have 
desires which are felt as elements in our experience making their 
contribution to its whole tone but are not picked out and identi- 
fied. It is certainly admitted that the unconscious desires make a 
difference to our total experience, for they make us feel uneasy, 
but the element in our experience to which the uneasiness is 
primarily due may not be sorted out. I may similarly feel physically 
uneasy in a vague way without sorting out the particular sensa- 
tions which constitute my malaise. In this sense the unconscious 
would be part of an experience of which we were more or less 
vaguely conscious as a whole, but would not be distinguished 
from the other parts of this experience and so would not be an 
object of consciousness per se. There is no self-contradiction in 
saying that a desire is unconscious in this sense, or even in the 
rather stronger sense of 'unconscious' in which it signifies not 
merely what is not introspectively observed but what cannot be 

no 



Mind 

so observed. All we can say is that it is very surprising that so 
important an element in experience as these desires should often 
be inaccessible to introspection, but this is a paradox and not a 
contradiction. I do not indeed think that all the cases of 'uncon- 
scious desires' detected by psychologists need be brought under 
this heading. In some cases the desire may have been introspec- 
tively observed at times by the person who has it, but he may have 
forgotten what he observed; in others what the man fails to be 
aware of may not be the presence of an element in his experience 
but the effects or causes of the latter. For instance, when a psycho- 
logist says of a man who gives away large sums of money and 
thinks very highly of himself on this account that he is really 
unconsciously motived by desire for applause, what he means, if he 
is sensible, is probably not that the man had no conscious desire 
for applause, but that he did not realize that this desire was a main 
cause Of his actions. Or when a psychologist says that somebody's 
philanthropy is really a sublimation of the sex instinct, he may 
mean merely that his philanthropy was caused by events of a 
sexual character such as an unfortunate love-affair, not that he has 
unintrospected feelings of a sexual character towards the objects 
of his philanthropy. Indeed for the purposes of psychology as a 
natural science and for the purpose of effecting cures it may be 
that all the psychologist need assume is that men have unconscious 
desires in the sense of acting as if they had such desires, leaving 
it an open question whether they really had them without intro- 
spectively noticing them, whether they noticed them at times but 
failed to remember them, or whether they did not have them at 
all but were led by some unknown cause, e.g. an obscure physio- 
logical brain-state, unintentionally to simulate the effects of desires 
which they did not have. Of course great practical and theoretical 
importance must be attached to the fact that our introspections 
and memories can be drastically limited by what we wish not to 
know and that this may occur even against our conscious will, 
though I think the extent to which it happens has been very much 
exaggerated. We may however admit that the larger part of our 
mind is "unconscious' if that means "is not introspectively dis- 
criminated'. And we must remember that dispositions need not 
be conscious at all. 

in 



Mind 



SELF-IDENTITY AND THE CONCEPTION OF 
THE SELF AS A SUBSTANCE 

But what is the mind or self? Most people would have the feel- 
ing very strongly, if challenged, that it was not merely a set of 
experiences connected by causal laws but at least a relatively per- 
manent substance. This view is backed by the following argu- 
ments. 

(i) Knowledge presupposes self-identity. For knowledge is 
always of a multiplicity, a, b and c, but to compare or connect a, 
b and c the same being that knows a must know b and c. If there 
is to be consciousness of a connected argument, the same self 
which recognizes the premises must recognize the conclusion, and 
this takes time. Therefore the self must preserve its identity in 
time. (2) A thought implies a thinker distinct from any thought. 
Thoughts are only events, but could a mere series of events know 
anything? (3) Memory tells me that the same *F who does so-and- 
so now did so-and-so in the past. But the past events are all over 
and not now in existence, therefore the self cannot be reduced to a 
series of events. 

These are important arguments, but on the other hand it is very 
hard to form any idea of what a self existing as a 'substance' over 
and above its experiences could be. We are here confronted with 
similar difficulties to those which we encountered when we asked 
what a physical substance was over and above its qualities and 
relations. 1 Does the substance behind my experiences (or the Pure 
Ego, as it is sometimes called) change or not? If it changes, I am 
no longer myself; if it does not change, it is not what I understand 
by 'I', for I certainly always think of myself as capable of changing 
and, I hope, improving. 

The case for a pure Ego is, however, stronger than the case for 
a physical substance in the sense of a substratum over and above 
its qualities. For, in the first place, we have the above-mentioned 
arguments for the pure Ego which obviously could not be applied 
to a merely physical substance. And, secondly, while we certainly 
cannot claim ever to perceive a physical substance as such in 

1 Vide above, p. 96. 
112 



Mind 

distinction from its qualities, we may with some plausibility claim 
to be immediately aware of a pure Ego over and above its experi- 
ences. In memory I am immediately aware that something 
happened to me in the past, i.e. that the being to whom it happened 
was the same Ego as I now am, yet the experiences now and then 
are different. This is an important point. The notion of a pure Ego 
or any substance over and above its qualities could not be defined 
in terms of anything else, so how can I know at all what it is like, 
and if I have no idea of what it is like, how can I attach any mean- 
ing to statements about it? Ex hypotbesi the pure Ego cannot be 
analysed in terms of its qualities and relations, for it is different 
from these. Its nature therefore must be incapable of analysis, but 
if so our knowledge of what it is must depend on a unique and 
irreducible experience, and we can only attach meaning to the 
term if we can point to such an experience. Now we certainly do 
seem to have some experience of the T which we do not have of 
anything else, but it is extraordinarily difficult to be clear what we 
are immediately aware of when we have the experience. It may be 
claimed that we are thus aware of a substance over and above its 
experiences, but it may also be held that all we are immediately 
aware of is a unique and unanalysable relation between our experi- 
ences, and this seems easier to conceive. The conception of a pure 
Ego would be less difficult than it is if we could regard a disposi- 
tion as some actual quality other than our experience which caused 
or tended to cause the experiences. We could then think of the 
Ego as distinct from its experiences and yet give it a content by 
ascribing to it the dispositional properties in question. But un- 
fortunately we can form no idea of a dispositional property except 
a hypothetical one. The only actual qualities we can ascribe to a 
mind are experiences, yet we hesitate to identify the self with its 
experiences, especially as it is apparently not always having ex- 
periences. But if we think of it as something apart from its experi- 
ences, we are back at the notion of a substance over and above its 
qualities. The problem is therefore one of the hardest of philo- 
sophy: thinkers are groping after an intermediate alternative 
between that of an unchanging substance-Ego over and above its 
experiences and that of a self which is merely a string of experi- 
ences, but they have not succeeded in finding one capable of clear 
H 113 



Mind 

statement. We must not, however, try to gloss over the difficulties 
on either side of the question. We cannot solve the problem 
satisfactorily by making the body the substance, for as we have 
seen, similar difficulties arise about substance in the physical 
world. As we have also seen, the case against making a physical 
object something over and above its characteristics is stronger than 
the similar case against the self-substance regarded as purely 
mental. So to make the body the substance of the self would still 
be to reduce it to a number of connected events. But the question 
of the relation between the mind and the body I am deferring to 
the next chapter, and so shall pass on now. 

If we reject the pure Ego theory, we shall still have to face the 
question what the relation is which constitutes a self. My experi- 
ences are related in some way to those of many other human 
beings, but it is clear that, even if there is no substance-self over 
and above experiences, there still is at least some very special 
relation between experiences which holds when the experiences 
belong, as we say, to one self. In that case they will belong in the 
sense of being actually parts of the self. They will belong in a 
sense analogous rather to that in which a brick belongs to a house 
than to that in which the house belongs to its owner. Only the 
different parts of which I am thinking are successive in time rather 
than co-existent in space, although I do not mean to deny that 
there are co-existent elements in the self. (It has occasionally been 
disputed, but it must happen whenever we compare two objects, 
for our thoughts of them must occur simultaneously.) Now, if the 
pure Ego view is rejected, what relation can reasonably be said to 
make two experiences parts of one self? Mere causal connection 
or resemblance is not enough. Different minds may affect each 
other causally, and I now resemble myself as I was when I was a 
baby less than I resemble most grown men. Nor can we say that 
what 'belonging to the same self means is 'being attached to the 
same body'. If that were the case, it would be verbally self-contra- 
dictory to assert survival of bodily death, and whether the latter 
is a fact or not, certainly its assertion is not self-contradictory like 
saying that I at once am and am not the same self. Further, I can 
remember many experiences in the past as mine without remem- 
bering anything definite about the state or appearance of my body 

114 



Mind 

knd therefore without being aware of my body as the Same tody 
that I now have. Yet if 'belonging to the same self meant 'being 
attached to the same body' I could not know that two experiences 
were related in the former way without knowing that they were 
related in the latter. Similar objections apply to the attempt to 
find self-identity in a similarity of organic sensations. Attempts 
have also been made to define self-identity in terms of memory, 
but I think these involve a vicious circle. To remember an experi- 
ence is already to know that it was mine, and I cannot make an 
experience mine by knowing that it was mine. So if we adopt a 
view of the self according to which its identity is constituted not 
by a single substance over and above its experiences but by a 
relation between the experiences, it is probably best just to say 
that the relation is unique and indefinable. We must not, however, 
in any case think of the various experiences which make up the 
self as just existing one after the other and unaffected internally 
by the relation which unites them. The relation between different 
experiences of what we call the same self is in any case radically 
different from the relation between members of a mere aggregate 
like a heap of stones. It is so close that they could not conceivably 
be what they are without belonging to a whole of this particular 
kind, i.e. a self, while a stone might quite well not belong to a 
heap at all. Also in any case it is misleading to speak of the self as 
a series of events, since these events are only abstractions from a 
continuous process. 

Considerable attention has been attracted by certain cases of 
abnormal psychology where it looked as if a self had actually split 
into two or more different selves, present in the same body and 
taking turns to dominate it. Whether this was really so is difficult 
to say, and there are certainly not enough even apparent cases of 
this to make sweeping generalizations, but such instances do 
suggest, though they are very far from proving, the possibility 
that self-identity is much more a matter of degree than we are 
usually prepared to admit. We are all familiar with sayings such 
as 'He was not himself last night' or 'He was quite like a- different 
person', and when we reflect how different we can feel and be in 
different moods and different environments, we can easily con- 
ceive a series of intermediate cases between the normal man and 



Mind 

the extreme cases of dual personality. There is the difference that 
in his varying moods the normal man still retains memory, but 
perhaps this too is no more than a difference of degree. It is a well- 
known psychological fact that, e.g. in a gloomy mood it is more 
difficult to think of cheerful things and vice versa, so presumably 
it will be more difficult also in such moods to remember them. 
Increase this difficulty indefinitely, and you have the case of the 
man who cannot remember one set of facts at all so that there is a 
complete breach in the personality. If the appearances of multiple 
personality be accepted at their face value, they rather make 
against the pure ego theory, but not conclusively so, for there is 
no way of proving that a pure ego may not split up, although it 
has been generally supposed that it could not do so, and in any 
case they are too rare to provide an adequate foundation for a 
theory. 

Earlier philosophers have often tried to prove the immortality 
of the soul from the premise that it is a substance. They thought 
that substance as such must necessarily be permanent and that 
consequently a substance could only in the natural course be 
destroyed by being broken up into its parts, which were them- 
selves substances. This fitted in well with the view that the atoms 
of which physical objects were made were themselves indestruc- 
tible. What we usually call physical substances are really groups of 
substances and therefore can come to an end by separation of their 
parts. But the destruction of a simple substance would be a differ- 
ent story, and this was supposed a priori impossible (at least with- 
out a special miraculous act on the part of God). Now it was 
argued that the soul must be a simple substance because otherwise 
we could not account for the unity of thought. In order to have 
the thought 'wolves eat lambs' a single being must apprehend all 
three of its terms. If one being thought of wolves, another of 
eating, and a third of lambs, this would by no means constitute 
the thought that wolves eat lambs. Few philosophers would now 
use this as an argument for immortality. It ddes bring out an im- 
portant point, the essential unity of thought; but to show that the 
mind functions as a unity, which is certainly true, is not to show 
that it is ih itself a single 'substance'. Further, it would be generally 
doubted nowadays that we knew the a priori proposition that a 

116 



Mind 

simple substance must be permanent, and as regards the physical 
world the conception has been largely dropped. There may be 
good ethical and religious arguments for survival of bodily death, 
and there may be empirical arguments -derived from psychical 
research, but we cannot claim to know enough about the nature 
of the self for us to venture on a metaphysical demonstration of 
this. Neither can we have a metaphysical demonstration of its 
negative. 

All this brings out the point that the modern tendency is to 
answer questions about the unity of the self not in terms of unity 
of substance but in terms of unity of function. It may be con- 
tended in its support that the arguments for the unity of the self 
are really arguments from the unity of our experience and there- 
fore do not apply to a supposed substance apart from its experi- 
ences. The tendency was started mainly by Kant, who insisted 
that the argument from the unity of knowledge showed that the 
self functioned as a unity in knowing objects, but not that the self 
was a unity apart from its relation to its environment of known 
objects. The contents of our awareness at any one time are con- 
nected by a unique relation, the unity of consciousness, which 
does not relate to anything else. Our own experiences and mental 
states at different times are likewise related in a way in which no 
two selves ever are. What I do and how I feel are uniquely in- 
fluenced by what has happened to me in the past in a direct way 
in which nothing else could influence me. If I have learnt some- 
thing I tend to remember it, but I do not tend to remember some- 
thing because somebody else has learnt it; I may be influenced by 
the good and evil fortune of others, but only if / first know of it; 
I am disappointed if 7 do not obtain what I desire, but not if 
anybody else fails to do so, unless through sympathy I have 
formed a desire of my own that he should fulfil his desire; I 
cannot literally feel another's pain, though I may feel a similar 
pain or a painful feeling of sympathy with his pain. In all these 
simple empirical ways and many others each self can be seen to be 
a unique unity without invoking trans-empirical metaphysics to 
support this conclusion. The self also no doubt contains a great 
deal of diversity, and the unity varies greatly in degree, but it is 
undoubtedly there as an empirical fact except in the very rare 



Mind 

cases of "dual personality'. It is not incompatible with conflicts in 
the self, on the contrary the very conflicts presuppose it. There is 
a struggle between two desires of mine just because they both 
impel me, the same person. The sting of these conflicts just lies 
in the fact that the same person cannot do two incompatible things, 
e.g. eat his cake and have it. The fundamental separation of differ- 
ent selves is brought out most clearly in the difficulties of com- 
munication which prevent our knowing even whether another 
man sees the same colour that we see and in the impossibility of 
literally sharing the feelings of another, however strong may be 
our links with him in friendship and love. Everyone must, 
humanly speaking, fight his own battle alone. Matthew Arnold 
expressed an important truth when he said: 

Yes: in the sea of life enisled, 

With echoing straits between us thrown, 

Dotting the shoreless watery wild, 
We mortal millions live alone. 1 

Some philosophers have contended that the distinction between 
different human selves is not by any means so fundamental as it 
seems and have even argued that it is best to regard them just as 
different manifestations or modes of one and the same mind, 
meaning not merely that they were created by one mind, as is 
held by the ordinary theist, but that they just are one mind, 
strictly speaking. This does not seem to me to do justice to the 
empirical facts of individuality which I have cited. If there is a 
fundamental separation anywhere in the universe, it seems to me 
to lie between the different minds. The upholders of a contrary 
view cite the cases of co-operation and love and contend that 
what we really care about, or at least ought really to care about, is 
not our individual welfare as separate beings but the triumph of 
causes which transcend our personality. But it may be retorted 
that the value of co-operation and love lies just in the fact that 
they involve unity between different selves. The closest love pre- 
supposes difference; in the, sense in which a man loves others and 
in the sense in which this love is of great value he cannot be said 
to love himself. It is the unity in difference, not mere unity, that 

1 To Marguerite, (Oxford Book of English Verse, p. 891.) 
118 



Mind 

is of value here. And the same with co-operation in general: the 
point of co-operation lies in the fact that each man makes his 
specific different contribution to the good of the whole. 

In a socialist age the value of individuality must not be ignored. 
It would not be good for all to be alike; we must all look at life 
through our own, somewhat different spectacles, and it is good 
that we should. On the other hand, we can only realize our in- 
dividuality through intercourse with others. To realize even our- 
selves adequately we must be unselfish, and even the most selfish 
of us is willy nilly dependent for nine-tenths of what he knows 
and does on others and has his life incessantly moulded by his 
relations to them. To be ourselves we must concentrate our atten- 
tion on things other than ourselves. But this must not be allowed 
to obscure the other, the individualistic side of the antithesis. Man 
is fundamentally a social being, and he is also fundamentally an 
individual being. To hit on the right course to do justice to both 
facts is perhaps the chief problem both of politics and of practical 
ethics. 

However, mind is revealed not only in strictly individual ex- 
periences but in the great constructions by co-operative mind 
which have deVeloped in the course of civilization. These may be 
regarded as objective manifestations of mind, super-individual 
not in the sense of having a separate being over and above the 
thoughts and experiences of the individuals in whom they are 
realized, but in the sense that they can be studied historically as a 
whole in which what is important is not the individuals who made 
the contribution but the development of the idea. Examples of 
these manifestations of mind are science, art, philosophy, law. 
We must realize that a study of these provides us with at least as 
good a clue to the nature of mind as does ordinary psychology. 

KNOWLEDGE OF OTHER MINDS 

A problem that has troubled philosophers a good deal, though 
certainly not the plain man, is how we can know of the existence 
of minds other than our own. The term solipsism (from solus ipse) 
has been used to stand for the view of a person who should 
believe in his own existence but not in that of any other mind. It 

119 



Mind 

may be doubted whether such a view has ever been seriously 
held, but logically it is hard to disprove it conclusively. As the 
cogito, ergo sum makes clear, I am immediately aware of my own 
mind, but I do not seem to be thus aware of the minds of others, 
even those I know best. There no doubt are cases of telepathy, 
but these need not be regarded and, I think, are best not regarded, 
as involving direct awareness of another's mind or experience. 
One mind may in telepathy, intentionally or unintentionally, 
cause another to have thoughts or experiences similar to its own 
without the second mind being immediately aware of the first, as 
on the representative theory of perception a physical object causes 
us to have certain sensa and thereby know the object without our 
perceiving it directly. In any case conscious telepathy is far too 
rare a phenomenon for it to be possible to base our knowledge of 
other human beings on it. I have this knowledge, and yet like the 
majority of people have had no conscious experience of telepathy 
and derive my information about the latter phenomenon solely 
from hearsay, i.e. from first assuming the existence of other minds 
and believing what they tell me. We are therefore confronted with 
difficulties similar to some of those which arose when we con- 
sidered how to justify the belief in physical objects. 

Various suggestions have been made to overcome these diffi- 
culties: (i) It has been suggested that we all of us really are some- 
times immediately aware of other people's minds or experiences, 
although this immediate awareness is mixed up with a great many 
other beliefs not based on direct awareness and is therefore not 
recognized as such. But it would be odd if we were frequently 
immediately aware of something without ev^n seeming to our- 
selves to be so. (2) An argument from analogy has very commonly 
been used to justify the belief. Other people's physical bodies are 
like our own, a mind is attached to our own body, therefore it is 
argued that a mind is probably attached to the other bodies of the 
same kind we see. Although there is some force in this argument, 
it certainly seems inadequate to bear the weight put on it and give 
anything in the remotest degree approaching the certainty we feel 
about the matter, particularly as the analogy for each of us is 
based on only a single instance, our own self. It would be hard to 
find any other case in which we regarded an argument from a 

1 20 



Mind 

single instance as a very strong argument from analogy. But two 
stronger arguments remain. 

(3) We may argue that our experience constantly goes on as if 
purposes other than our own were at work and does this on such 
a scale that it would be fantastic to suppose that the purposes were 
not really present. Once we have admitted that it is extremely 
probable that there are purposes other than our own operating 
we have admitted that there are probably other minds, for purpose 
is inconceivable except in mind. To the suggestion that the pur-, 
poses in question might be unconscious purposes of my own I 
might reply by asking what could be meant by saying they were 
purposes of my own. I am not introspectively aware of them, they 
are often incompatible with my conscious purposes, they are as a 
whole very much more pervasive and influential than my con- 
scious purposes and can achieve many feats of genius that would 
be absolutely beyond any capacities shown in my conscious life, 
and they are related causally to bodies other than my own in a 
similar way to that in which my conscious purposes are related 
to my own. They are excluded from the characteristic unity which 
constitutes myself, for the various relations I have mentioned a 
few pages back as constituting such a unity are lacking, e.g. they 
make ingenious physical machines and have therefore presumably 
learnt how to make them but I qua conscious never knew how to 
make the machines. They are certainly excluded from the unity of 
consciousness which characterizes my conscious mental processes. 
I should, if I adopted this line of argument, have to draw a very 
sharp distinction between the conscious and the unconscious part 
of my mind and assign far more importance to the latter than to 
the former. But, once I had made all the necessary admissions, it 
may be doubted whether I should be saying anything more than 
that there are different minds in the ordinary sense but they are all 
one and the same mind in some metaphysical sense, a view which 
has been maintained by philosophers whom no one would regard 
as solipsists at all. 

(4) We may use an argument similar to that which we used 
about physical objects. A great many of the predictions I make 
are based on my beliefs as to the mental states of others and these 
predictions are on the whole fulfilled in a remarkable fashion like 

121 



Mind 

the predictions based on my beliefs about physical objects. So we 
have again a very strong argument in favour of the beliefs on 
which they are based being approximately true. 

Even these two arguments would not, however, refute a theory 
about other human minds such as Berkeley put forward about 
physical things. Granted a single other, sufficiently powerful and 
intelligent, mind besides my own, like Berkeley's God or Des- 
cartes' demon, that other mind might give me all the sensa and 
experiences I have and yet make them such as if there were a great 
many other minds, though there was in fact only one. I know no 
logically adequate refutation of that view, though I have no doubt 
that it is false. But, if we are to be sceptical, we might go still 
further. I do not know how to refute by argument the view that 
I came into existence in the last minute and all my seeming 
memories are illusions. 

We must carefully distinguish an account of the arguments in 
favour of the existence of other minds from an account of the 
processes by which we come to form our beliefs about them. I am 
not suggesting that I or anybody else originally came to believe in 
other minds through using the arguments I have mentioned. The 
existence of his mother is not for a baby a hypothesis to explain 
the success of his predictions. The belief in other minds is too 
natural and instinctive for it to be possible to account for it by 
argument at all. But, however the belief originated, there is the 
question how we are to justify it and this is the question under 
discussion. 



122 



Chapter Six 

THE RELATION OF MATTER AND MIND 



GIANTED mind and matter, there are still many problems 
about the relations between them, whether we are 
thinking of the human body and mind or of the rela- 
tions between matter and mind in general. Taking the 
first problem first we find two main issues of controversy: (i) 
Do a man's body and mind interact? (2) Are his body and his 
mind the same or different substances? 



INTERACTION OF BODY AND MIND 

The affirmative answer to the first question may seem too 
obvious to call for discussion, but to be a philosopher one should 
be an adept at casting doubts on the apparently obvious, and the 
seeming interaction has been in fact very commonly questioned. 
However, if it is rejected, some other way must be found of ex- 
plaining the empirical facts which show that there is at the least 
a very frequent correlation between certain bodily and certain 
mental events. The most popular way of doing so in modern times 
has been to assert that the bodily and the mental correspond to 
each other because they are different attributes of the same sub- 
stance. So the first and second questions have a certain connection, 
and the main theories on the subject have commonly been classed 
as (i) interaction theories, which both assert causal interaction 
and assert that body and mind are different substances, (2) paral- 
lelist theories which deny interaction and explain the appearance 
of it by saying that the series of bodily and the series of mental 
events in a man correspond (run parallel) not because there is a 
causal connection between them but because they are different 
sides of the same thing. But it is perfectly possible to assert both 

123 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

that body and mind are the same substance and that there is causal 
interaction between bodily and mental states. It would also be 
possible to assert that body and mind are different substances and 
do not interact, only there would then be a great difficulty about 
explaining the appearance of interaction, unless we were prepared 
like some seventeenth- and eighteenth-century philosophers to 
attribute it to the intervention of God. 

Before discussing this matter it is well to have certain points 
clear which must rank as quite established, (i) Bodily and mental 
processes are at any rate different qualitatively even if they should 
turn out to be only different aspects of the same substance. I have 
already insisted on this point in combating Behaviourism. 1 Throbs 
of pain are not at all like nervous impulses, thoughts not at all like 
the movements of the vocal organs or the vibrations in the brain 
which are all that could be observed by the physiologist. We can 
observe both bodily and mental qualities and we can see them as 
a matter of purely empirical observation to be quite different. 
Therefore, if we identify body and mind, all we can sensibly mean 
is not that bodily and mental qualities are the same but only that 
they are different qualities of the same substance. 

(2) Bodily and mental events accompany each other according 
to regular laws, whether we explain this by causal interaction or 
in some other way. Dozens of these laws are known to us at the 
common-sense level, though with a certain lack of exactitude, e.g. 
the law that if a man burns himself he generally feels pain, and 
physiologists have some evidence of a much more widespread 
correlation than is apparent to the ordinary observer. The prin- 
ciple that there is a complete correlation between bodily and mental 
events so that a characteristically different change in the brain 
accompanies every different mental event, in which many physio- 
logists have believed, outruns immensely anything that has been 
or, as far as we can see, ever could be scientifically established, but 
it would be unwise to found any positive theory on our inability 
at the present time to suggest even on what general principles the 
correlation could be worked out. If the correlation is an empirical 
fact, it is however important to realize that it is compatible with 
any of the main philosophical theories.. The complete correlation, 

1 Vide above, pp. 101-2. 
124 



The delation of Matter and Mind 

if it occurs, might be due to the interaction of two different sub- 
stances, or to the mutual causal influence of two different sets of 
qualities in the same substance, or to the same substance appearing 
under parallel non-interacting aspects, or simply to the action of 
God if you like that type of explanation. 

(3) However much has been said about the advance of brain 
physiology, it remains true that we can know a great deal more 
about the psychological than about the physiological antecedents 
of most mental events, and can make predictions about thejn 
much more effectively from the former than from the latter set of 
data. Since the brain is not normally observed and can hardly be 
observed when a man is conscious, prediction from brain-states is 
impossible except in a few cases when a whole big area of the 
brain has been destroyed or injured, and prediction of future 
mental events from past outward behaviour is usually only 
effected by the indirect process of going back to the mental states 
which we suppose accompanied or immediately preceded the out- 
ward behaviour and onward directly from them to the future 
mental events we predict. We do not argue directly from a man's 
past actions to his future actions, but suppose, e.g. that his hon- 
ourable conduct in the past is the expression of honourable inten- 
tions and therefore expect it to continue. 

The common-sense doctrine of interaction has been attacked 
mainly on two grounds. Firstly it is urged that the alleged causal 
connection is inconceivable because the terms between which it is 
supposed to hold are too unlike each other. The notion that the 
mind can affect the brain has been compared contemptuously to 
the notion that the coaches of a train could be held together by a 
friendly feeling between the driver in the front and the guard in 
the rear. This argument, however, loses much of its force when we 
realize that even in the case of two ordinary admittedly interacting 
physical things we are unable to see why they should be causally 
connected in the way they are. The explanation of this is disputed: 
some philosophers would say that it is just a fact that they are so 
connected, and not anything having a reason which a mind could 
see, others that there is an intelligible connection to explain their 
interaction, only we do not possess sufficient intelligence and 
knowledge to discover it. But the fact of our inability cannot be 

125 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

denied, whatever its explanation may be, therefore it no longer 
seems to constitute a special objection to interaction between 
body and mind, that we cannot see the connection. Further if, as is 
generally admitted by realists, we cannot know anything about the 
internal nature of matter, it is difficult to see how we can claim to 
decide what it can or cannot cause. Nor is it clear that we know 
a priori that cause and effect cannot be unlike. 

The argument has sometimes been amended so as to take a 
somewhat different form. It is said that in any other case of causa- 
tion the terms linked by it are also related in other ways within a 
system. Two interacting physical objects are both in space and so 
in the spatial system, and a mental event which directly affects 
another occurs in the same mind, but there is no such common 
system to which both body and mind can be said to belong and 
therefore they do not fulfil the precondition without which 
causation is impossible. There are again various things that may 
be said in reply. We do not know 'a priori that membership of such 
a system is a necessary presupposition of all causal connection, 
and even if it is we may reply that bodily and mental events are at 
any rate both in time and that mental events are in some way 
spatially localized. Or the contention may be contradicted in a 
more outright fashion by asserting that we are directly aware not 
of body and mind as separate things but of the two as constituting 
a special unique whole, and that this provides the union in a 
common system said to be required. I do not know whether such 
union in a system as is suggested is really a prerequisite of causa- 
tion or not, but certainly we seem to start by being aware of body 
and mind* together rather than of a separate body and a separate 
mind. The distinction between bodily and mental has to be learnt 
as we grow up and requires a considerable feat of abstraction, 
though this does not alter the fact which I have emphasized that 
we can by inspection see bodily and mental characteristics to be 
radically different. 

But, secondly, the main motive for the denial of interaction has 
been the desire to preserve a complete water-tight mechanical 
system. The assumption that all physical causation is explicable in 
terms of the Newtonian laws of motion or something very similar 
has worked exceedingly well in science for centuries, and scien- 

126 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

tists have therefore naturally been very reluctant to admit any 
causation which did not accord with it. However the objection is 
less plausible nowadays, since the internal progress of physics 
itself has brought us up against the limits of this kind of causal 
explanation even in the inorganic world, though many physiolo- 
gists and biologists still assume its universality in their own sphere. 
The specific form which this objection to interaction took was 
usually based on the principle of conservation of energy. Accord- 
ing to this principle the total amount of energy (actual and poten- 
tial) always remains constant in quantity in any physical change 
and can only be redistributed among different bodies, from which 
it follows that the mind cannot add new energy to bring about a 
movement of the body or the body divert energy from the physical 
world to bring about a change in the mind. But this only disproves 
interaction if we assume that all causation involves the transmis- 
sion of energy from the cause to the effect, and this assumption 
cannot possibly be proved. It is not true even of the inorganic 
world, e.g. the movements of the string make no difference to 
the energy of a pendulum but alter the direction and velocity of 
its motion; and even if it were true of the inorganic world, that 
would be no good reason for supposing that it must be true of the 
interaction of body and mind if this takes place at all. Mental 
characteristics are very different from merely bodily characteris- 
tics, and so there is no reason to suppose that the mode of causa- 
tion they exercise is not very different too. 

It is not possible, I think, to produce conclusive arguments on 
the other side either, but I cannot help thinking that the onus 
probandi is altogether on the opponents of interaction. According 
to all the ordinary empirical criteria which we accept in other cases 
bodily processes are causally related to mental and vice versa, and 
therefore it seems only reasonable to accept this evidence unless 
there is a strong argument against it. Further, the parallelist, as we 
shall see, can only explain the correlation between physical and 
mental events, which is an empirical fact, by introducing meta- 
physical hypotheses of a far-reaching and not very plausible kind. 

Of one alternative to interaction we can dispose in a more con- 
clusive fashion. In the late nineteenth century "materialists' put 
forward the doctrine of epipbenomenalism, according to which 

127 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

bodily events cause mental but mental cause neither bodily nor 
even other mental events. This view is open to the following 
objections: (a) Nobody can ever be justified in believing epipheno- 
menalism. For, if it is true, it entails the conclusion that the belief 
in it is due only to physiological changes in the brain of the 
believer and never to the awareness of any good arguments for it, 
since coming to be aware of an argument is a mental event. 

(b) Unless his physical actions were affected by his deliberate 
intentions, it is quite incredible that a person could produce an 
elaborate work like Hamlet or Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. But 
if they are thus affected, physical processes are affected by mental. 
The argument must not be misunderstood. The epiphenomenalist 
does not assert that Shakespeare could have produced Hamlet if 
he had not gone through mental processes. Even on the epipheno- 
menalist theory that would not be the case, for the theory admits 
that mental processes accompany, and must according to the laws 
of nature accompany, the physical as their effects. The complex 
brain changes necessary for the production of Shakespeare's 
Hamlet could not have occurred without the corresponding 
changes in Shakespeare's consciousness even on that view. (Of 
course I am referring here to causal and not to logical necessity.) 
But the epiphenomenalist does deny that these mental processes 
can themselves have any effect on anything physical, and is thus 
debarred from supposing that Hamlet's mental processes, though 
existent, had any part in causing Shakespeare to write what he did 
write, an odd conclusion enough, and one which makes the 
intelligent and purposive character of the work quite inexplic- 
able, in fact an incredible coincidence. For it is then not caused 
by any purpose or intelligence whatever, directly or indirectly, 
but merely by physical motions. 

(c) That epiphenomalism is false is assumed in all practical life. 
In deciding what we are to do we must always make the assump- 
tion that our will and motives can affect our physical actions, and 
it is silly to adopt a philosophy the denial of which is implied by 
us every time we do anything voluntarily. 

(J) Since the physiological events in question are admittedly 
accompanied by mental processes, it is arbitrary to say that they 
are the sole cause of any subsequent mental events and that the 

128 



The Kelation of Matter and Mind 

mental processes which accompany them have nothing to do 
with causing the latter to occur. Why pick out one element of the 
antecedent like that and attribute everything to it? 

Objections (a\ (), and (i) also apply to some but not to all 
forms of parallelism. One remark must be added: there is a widely 
held view which equates causation with regular sequence or con- 
comitance. If this view be true, interaction must certainly be 
accepted as a fact, for there is no doubt that there is a regular 
sequence or concomitance between many physical and many men- 
tal events, e.g. getting burnt and feeling pain, willing to move 
one's arm and moving one's arm. (No doubt there are exceptions 
to these regularities, but there are few regularities we can find 
anywhere absolutely without exceptions.) But I shall not use this 
argument, as I do not believe that causation can be reduced to 
regular sequence or concomitance. 



ARE BODY AND MIND THE SAME SUBSTANCE? 

Let us now turn to the second question, the question whether 
the body and the mind are the same or different substances. At 
first sight the view that the mind is best regarded as an attribute 
of the body is a highly plausible one. We have one substance here, 
the body, it may be argued, why posit an additional one? We have 
mental attributes certainly, and these are different from bodily 
attributes, but may they not still both belong to the same sub- 
stance? And, if so, is there any need to posit an additional substance 
beyond the body itself? A reason which has probably been in- 
fluential in leading people to reject a one-substance view is that 
mental attributes are not in space in the sense in which physical 
objects are. They seem to be localized vaguely, usually in the 
brain, 1 but they are not extended or spread out in space. If they 
were it would be good sense to say that my thought of God at this 
moment was 0-74 inches across, while we are quite clear that we 
cannot say things like that, not because we cannot in practice 

1 Th s may be only the result of our upbringing. The Greeks did not locate thought 
in the brain but in the midriff, so they can hardly have experienced it as so obviously 
localized in the former as it seems to modern man. 
I 129 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

measure our thoughts spatially, but because in principle they are 
incapable of such measurement. Similarly it seems on principle 
impossible for a thought of mine to be 9*47 inches from a thought 
of yours, as it is intrinsically impossible for a thought to be yellow 
or a virtue rectangular. It must therefore be admitted that mental 
characteristics are in an important sense non-spatial, but it is not 
clear that we know a priori that a spatial object cannot have non- 
spatial attributes. The view has also been rejected on the ground 
that the unity of thought was incompatible with its being an 
attribute of the body, for the matter of the human body is divi- 
sible. But one may reply by means of the distinction already made 
between being a single substance and functioning as a unity. A 
number of different substances like the atoms composing a physi- 
cal object might in producing certain effects function as a unity. 
For example, a billiard ball is composed of a vast number of 
physical particles, yet when it strikes another it acts as a unity. If 
we say that our body is the substance of which our mental 
characteristics are attributes, we shall have to remember that it is 
not really a single substance; but there is nothing to prevent a 
group of substances taken together from having attributes which 
never belong to its members singly at all. A house has attributes 
which do not belong to any of the individual bricks, etc. of which 
it is composed, and the same is still more obviously true of the 
human body in relation to its cells. It might well be still more the 
case in regard to mental attributes. 

If one rejects interaction, the view in question has the advantage 
of explaining the regular concomitance of physiological and men- 
tal events. But the view is not incompatible with causal interaction 
between the physical and the mental side of the one substance. 
Different attributes of the same substance may certainly interact. 
Nor is the view 'materialistic' in the sense of necessarily implying 
that the material attributes are of primary importance. It was in 
fact somewhat misleading to describe this view as the view that 
the mind is the attribute of the body. For, if the latter has mental 
as well as material attributes, it is no more or rather less appropri- 
ate to speak of it as the body than as the mind-body or body-mind, 
unless we mean to imply that the material attributes are more 
important than the mental. We had better talk of the View that 

130 



The delation of Matter and Mind 

body and mind are the same substance' without speaking of one 
side rather than the other as the substance. 

But when we ask what can be meant by saying that body and 
mind are the same substance, the difficulties thicken. It is not 
meant that bodily and mental attributes or events are literally the 
same, otherwise we fall into the absurdities of behaviourism. 
What is meant then? In order to answer this question we must 
consider the meaning of 'substance'. Now theories of substance 
fall into two kinds, those which define substance in terms of ai 
relation between successive events constituting the substance and 
those which define it in terms of a substratum over and above its 
characteristics and the events happening to it. If we adopt the 
former, relational view of substance, it is incumbent on us to 
explain clearly what the relation is which makes body and mind 
one substance, and this has never been done. We must remember 
that it will be nonsense to say that body and mind are the same 
substance if the relation which makes of a mind one substance is 
different from the relation which makes of a body one substance, 
yet there is no relation which has been suggested as doing the 
former that is capable of doing the latter. Felt continuity of ex- 
perience, for instance, which has sometimes been put forward as 
the relation in terms of which a self is to be defined is obviously 
a relation between mental events and not between physical. To 
say that what is meant by saying that two mental events belong 
to the same self is that they are attached to the same body will not 
help, for the whole problem is in what sense they are attached to 
the body. 

If, on the other hand, we adopt the view of substance as a sub- 
stratum over and above its attributes, we are confronted with the 
fact that in that case we can form no idea of the substance of at 
any rate our body. It is arguable that we are immediately aware in 
introspection of a pure Ego over and above its experiences, but 
if we adopt that view we must either renounce any one-substance 
theory or identify the substance of the body also with our Pure 
Ego, which would give the theory a quite different form. If, on 
the other hand, we deny the Pure Ego, we can form no intelligible 
notion at all what the one substance is. The substance of both body 
and mind would be completely unknowable to us, and it does not 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

seem a subject capable of profitable discussion whether there are 
one or two unknowables. 

The only intelligible form of the one substance theory left 
seems to be that according to which the mind is the reality and 
the body (or brain) the appearance. This view has fairly often 
been held, though we do not hear much of it nowadays. It is at 
least capable of giving an understandable account of the relation 
between body and mind, but it has the disadvantage of being un- 
tenable without far-reaching metaphysical assumptions which 
there is little or no ground for making. For we could hardly hold 
that human bodies alone of material objects were the appearances 
of something psychological; we should have to extend the theory, 
and make the whole of the physical world the appearance of some- 
thing mental or quasi-mental, thus adopting 'panpsychism', or the 
view that everything, even inorganic matter, is really alive. The 
more popular view which makes the body rather than the mind 
the substance has never been made intelligible, plausible though 
it may seem till we have investigated the notion of substance. 

A possible view is that the question whether two events or 
attributes belong to the same substance is one the answer to which 
depends on several criteria and which therefore could not be 
answered with a firm Yes or No unless all the criteria were present 
or absent, but is a matter of degree and convenience, further that 
there is no substantial unity or relation constituting self-identity 
over and above these criteria. In that case whether we ought to 
speak of -the mind and the body as one substance or two would 
become in a sense a verbal question. If we thought of the great 
qualitative difference between bodily and mental events, of the 
differences between the causal laws which govern the one and 
those which govern the other, of the fact that bodily states can be 
observed by anyone and mental states only by a single individual, 
of our ability to predict facts about a man's state of mind with 
great probability from our psychological knowledge of him when 
we cannot predict them from his brain-states, we should speak of 
the body and mind as different substances. On the other hand, if 
we dwelt on the dependence of mind on body for its experiences, 
actions, and even thoughts, and wished to treat them together in 
science, as physiological psychologists do, we should speak of 

132 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

them as the same substance. We could no longer say that one of 
these views was right and the other wrong, only that one termino- 
logy was more convenient than the other. But in that case the 
question whether we called the body and the mind the same or 
two different substances would have no metaphysical significance, 
but merely be an issue between two ways of describing the same 
empirical facts. We could not for instance possibly conclude that 
the mind could not survive bodily death merely because for cer- 
tain purposes it was useful to treat it as an attribute of the body. 



SURVIVAL 

An upshot of the discussion is that it is not possible to give a 
philosophical disproof of survival. The apparent dependence of 
mind on body is a prima facie argument against it, but if there are 
religious, ethical or empirical reasons for accepting survival, the 
facts can easily be interpreted in accordance with it. It may still 
be that the mind really only uses the body as an instrument and 
can find other instruments or even do without such instruments 
altogether when the body dies. If we take such a view, we must 
indeed not overlook the very close connection between mind and 
body, but we must neither overlook the fact that we can see no 
necessary connection, we cannot see that mental processes are im- 
possible without bodily. On the contrary it was just our inability 
to see any connection between them that provided one of the 
arguments often brought against interaction. We do not see in the 
least why the mind need have a body at all, and if we are unable 
to see this we must not claim to see that it could not do without 
one after death, although if we accept survival we may reasonably 
think it more likely that the soul takes on some other sort of body 
than that it at once undergoes such a drastic transformation in its 
mode of life as would be involved in ceasing to have any body 
whatever. On the other hand, if we speak of the body as merely , 
the instrument of the soul, empirical facts drive us to make two 
admissions which rather tone down the force of our statement, 
(i) The instrument may drastically affect its user. Illness and in- 
juries to the brain affect intellect and character. In such cases the 

133 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

brain has a resemblance to an old-fashioned cannon which was 
very liable to blow up and wound the man who employed it. But 
this does not necessarily make the brain part of or one with its 
user nor exclude the possibility of the latter suryiving it and re- 
covering from these effects after bodily death. (2) The brain is, at 
least under present conditions, an instrument necessary not only 
for expressing our thoughts in action and speech to others, but 
even for private thinking. It does not necessarily follow that it 
will always be so, any more than it follows that, because windows 
are necessary for me to see the sky now, I shall be unable to see 
the sky wfyen I go out of doors because there are no windows. 
The philosophical theory of the relation between body and mind 
should be neutral on the question of survival. Against their close 
causal connection should be set their great qualitative dissimilarity. 
It is not part of the scope of this book to discuss the alleged 
empirical evidence for survival produced by 'psychical research', 
cut we have certainly no a priori grounds for rejecting it with 
bontempt, and the evidence is at least such that, if anybody is 
inclined to believe in survival on ethical or religious grounds, he 
need no longer admit that empirical facts support the contrary 
view more than his own and need not hesitate on that account. 
For the prima facie suggestions of mortality are now countered by 
evidence which, if it does not conclusively prove, at least finds 
its easiest and most natural explanation in survival of bodily death. 
I refer to the communications, afterwards verified, of truths which 
were known to the dead man in his lifetime but to no other living 
person and of which the medium could not possibly have acquired 
knowledge in any normal way, to the extraordinary display by 
mediums of all the mannerisms and characteristic behaviour of the 
dead man down to his handwriting, and to the 'cross-communica- 
tions' in which two messages given by different mediums un- 
known to each other's conscious mind are found to be unintelli- 
gible when taken by themselves but perfectly intelligible and 
specially associated with the dead man when combined. I did not 
say that these proved survival, since they might conceivably be 
explained by telepathy and pre-cognition, but I think it is cer- 
tainly fair to say that survival at any 'rate provides the easiest and 
most natural explanation, though not necessarily the right one. 

134 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

At any rate the evidence is such as greatly to lessen the antecedent 
improbability of survival, which otherwise might deter many 
from accepting it on ethical or religious grounds. 



THE MIND CONCEIVED AS THE 'FORM' OF THE BODY 

An intermediate position between the one and the two sub- 
stance theories was adopted by Aristotle, and was largely taken 
over by St. Thomas Aquinas and incorporated in the official 
Roman Catholic theology. According to this the mind is not an 
independent substance but the 'form' of the body. Here it is 
necessary to say a word about the Aristotelian antithesis between 
form and matter, which must not be just identified with the 
physical matter of the scientist. Everything in the world of men 
consists of these two elements. Matter is in itself indeterminate 
and valueless. It is in its own nature quite unintelligible, so that 
we cannot know anything about it as such but only about the 
forms combined with particular matter, but it provides the in- 
dividualizing factor, that which distinguishes different members 
of the same species. There is no such thing as pure matter existing 
by itself, but in the process of development or production one 
thing may be relatively to another as matter to form. So things 
may often be arranged in a series of grades in which each is matter 
to the one above and form to the one below. Thus grass would be 
form relatively to the inorganic materials it absorbs, the flesh of 
sheep form relatively to the grass, a cooked dish form relatively 
to the raw meat, the human body form relatively to the cooked 
meat, and the human mind form relatively to the body. The form 
is always superior to its matter; and might even be called its cause, 
since Aristotle insisted that in an important sense the cause of a 
thing was to be found in its end rather than in its origin. Its end, 
its form was the reason for it existing, the 'final cause'. Yet the 
form could not be realized in existence without the matter, and 
one would therefore have thought that the Aristotelian doctrine 
was incompatible with a future life (though Aristotle 'does not 
express himself clearly on the matter). 

St. Thomas and his followers, however, think that a body is 

135 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

supplied for the mind by miracle on the day of judgement, but 
they admit that in the meantime the souls of the departed, though 
conscious, are in an 'incomplete state'. The theory is, however, 
hard to reconcile with any sort of mental, conscious existence, 
even an incomplete one, apart from the body. Nor is it easy to see 
in what sense / shall on this theory persist after the day of judge- 
ment if I have a different body, or in what sense the new body 
could be said to be the same body as the old; and the Thomist 
philosophy seems still committed to the obscure notion of a sub- 
stance over and above its attributes. Nor does the description of 
the relation of mind and body as that of the form to matter seem 
capable of being more than at best an illuminating analogy. The 
relation between mind (or mental state) and body is quite different 
from any relation of form and matter in the physical world. The 
mind is not the shape of the body as a statue is the shape imposed 
on a block of marble, and though the analogy of a tune to the 
instrument with which it is played is perhaps more plausible it 
cannot t>e adequate unless we are prepared to accept epipheno- 
menalism, which the Thomists certainly are not. 



THE RELATION OF MATTER AND MIND IN 
THE UNIVERSE AS A WHOLE 

Besides the question of the relations between the human body 
and the human mind there is the more general question of the 
relation of matter and mind in the universe as a whole to discuss. 
Various 'idealist' arguments stated in the chapter on Matter are 
relevant here, as is the philosophical case for Theism to be dis- 
cussed in the last chapter of the book. An argument germane to 
the issues that have just been before us is to the effect that mind 
cannot possibly have originated from and therefore been caused 
by a purely material universe. This bears a certain analogy to the 
argument that our body and our mind are too unlike each other 
to interact, but is stronger. In dealing with the argument against 
interaction I asked how, if, as is generally admitted, we do not 
know anything about the internal nature of matter, we can possi- 
bly know what it can cause and what it cannot, but on this occa- 

136 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

sion there i^s a reply to this objection which was not available 
before. Those who reject a priori the view that mind can be pro- 
duced by matter are certainly thinking of matter as unconscious 
and a fortiori without intelligence or power to act with a purpose 
in view, and they find it incredible that consciousness, thought, 
purpose could be produced by a cause which was quite devoid of 
these qualities. Also they may find it incredible that a world which 
was intrinsically valueless could by itself produce effects, mental 
states, which are of value. These difficulties do not arise as regards 
interaction between a body and a mind already in existence, except 
perhaps when we awake from a dreamless sleep, for in ordinary 
interaction the whole cause of a physical state is never mental or of 
a mental state physical. How I feel when I am pricked by a pin 
depends not only on the physical stimulus but on my immediately 
preceding mental state, e.g. on whether I was expecting the prick. 
It is harder to believe that consciousness should have originated 
from something which had no traces of the quality than that this 
quality in something which already has it should be merely modi- 
fied by the influence of something which does not possess it. The 
principle that what is in the effect must have been in the cause 
cannot be pushed too far, since the effect certainly need not be 
quite like the cause, but when applied to exclude the appearance 
ex nihilo of a quite new kind of quality it has considerable plausi- 
bility. Some philosophers have therefore used this argument in 
order to support the view known as panpsychism according to 
which even inorganic matter is all the time faintly conscious. It is 
suggested that, just as we commonly suppose animals to have a 
kind of consciousness, only inferior in quality and intensity to 
ours, so we should suppose plants to have a lower grade of con- 
sciousness still, and inorganic matter a still lower without being 
totally devoid of feeling. This does not, however, remove what 
difficulty there is in the appearance of new kinds of qualities, for 
if it is hard to conceive consciousness as originating from the 
unconscious, it is almost as hard to conceive purpose as originat- 
ing from what had no purpose and rational thought from what 
was completely irrational. It would therefore seem more consis- 
tent to use the argument to support theism, the view that we 
ultimately owe our existence to a rational and purposing mind, 

137 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

than merely panpsychism. According to most forms of theism it 
is not merely that God originally created the world but that it is 
dependent on him for its continued existence all the time, so that 
he can be regarded as part (though not the whole) of the im- 
mediate cause of every event that happens, if we use 'cause' in a 
wide sense, as philosophers generally do, to include all the neces- 
sary conditions, and we should not have to say that even the im- 
mediate cause of the origin of a human mind at birth was wholly 
material. I certainly should not like to rest the case for theism on 
this causal argument alone, but it might help to support others. 

Many thinkers have called the qualities of mind and life emergent 
properties, by which they meant that they emerge from but are 
not explained by what went before. This is certainly so at the level 
of human knowledge, but if it is merely meant that the causation 
of these qualities is unintelligible to us, this is the case not only as 
regards them but as regards all instances of causation in the 
physical world. The assertion of the 'emergence theory' must be 
viewed as mainly a denial of the principle that a new kind of 
quality cannot come into being, but those expositions of the 
theory I have read have usually left it obscure whether the emer- 
gence of the new qualities was supposed to have causes but causes 
which did not render them intelligible or whether it was supposed 
not to be caused at all. 

The idealist holds matter to be dependent on mind on the 
ground that it is reducible to experience or that 'its esse is percipi'. 
This view, if accepted, leaves various alternative theories open, 
within idealism, (i) Berkeley makes physical objects dependent 
on God's mind, which enables him to reconcile his theory with 
the common-sense view that they are independent of human 
minds. 

(2) The thinkers known as absolute idealists or absolutists insist 
that physical objects are not dependent on particular human 
minds? but on Mind as such, while they differ from Berkeley in 
making this Mind not transcendent but immanent. Berkeley held 
that, although God created finite minds, he had a consciousness 
separate from theirs, but an absolutist would not regard the 
Absolute Mind as a centre of consciousness over and above finite 
minds. It would be incorrect to say that it was merely an aggre- 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

gate of the finite minds, for this would err both in giving the 
priority to finite minds and in not doing justice to the unity of the 
universe, which is very different from a mere aggregate like a heap 
of stones. On the contrary the finite minds depend for their being 
and whole character on their participation in the unity of the 
whole, the Absolute, and are so intimately related together in this 
whole that, viewed in the light of the Absolute, which is the right 
point of view, they are radically different from what they seem to 
be as experienced by us in their separateness. The different minds 
are, quite strictly speaking, one in so far as they co-operate and 
have qualities in common, and their thoughts, in so far as true, 
must be regarded as not merely similar to but as actually being the 
thoughts of the Absolute Mind. In so far as we think rightly, Mind 
as such is thinking in us; in so far as we think wrongly, it is 
because we are thinking merely as private individuals and there- 
fore diverging from this on account of our individual peculiarities. 
So the truth about physical objects is the view which mind as 
such takes and from its nature must take of the objective side of 
experience. As for the criterion and definition of truth, both would 
usually be held by the thinkers in question to be coherence. Object 
and subject exist together and cannot be separated, though we can 
abstract from any peculiarities not common to mind as such, i.e. 
we cannot say what an object apart from all subjects or a subject 
who knew no objects would be like, but we can say what an 
object is like apart from any particular subject. We can form no 
idea of the physical except in terms of experience, and we must 
think of truth not as consisting in correspondence to something 
outside of and independent of thought but as immanent in the 
thought process itself in so far as the latter consistently fulfils its 
own nature. It is impossible to summarize adequately in a page 
one of the subtlest systems of philosophy that the world has 
known, but this is the best I can do. The case for it is too com- 
plicated to give here; but in so far as it depends on the contention 
that matter could not conceivably exist unexperienced, I have 
already expressed my view that the arguments for the contention 
are invalid and it can only be accepted, if at all, on the strength of 
intuitive insight. Absolute idealism is rare now, but it was on the 
wjiole the dominant school of philosophy in Germany in the first 



The delation of Matter and Mind 

half of the nineteenth century and in Britain at the end of the 
century, and since climates of opinion in philosophy are liable to 
change and it appeals to a very important side of human nature, 
it may well revive some day. The tendency to absolutism in poli- 
tics which sometimes accompanied it, especially in Germany, is 
not a necessary result of this branch of philosophy. There is noth- 
ing in the nature of reason which need require us to treat the nation 
state as the Absolute on earth on which the individual depends. 

(3) Some idealists would just fall back on panpsychism* In that 
case physical objects do not depend for their existence on a mind 
to which they are objects but are themselves feeling, experiencing 
beings, though at a very low level. It is argued that we do not 
know what the internal nature of matter is, and that therefore 
what science tells us may well be a set of propositions about 
relations of units which are themselves mental; in fact if we are to 
form any idea of what matter is itself we can only do it in terms of 
feelings or mental experience generally, since this is the only thing 
of which we have knowledge. Further, the view accords with the 
arguments supporting parallelism (for whatever they are worth) 
and with the argument that consciousness could not have origin- 
ated from unconscious matter. N6ne of these arguments, how- 
ever, seem to me at all strong. It may be that if we are to form a 
notion of the inner nature of matter at all, we must do it in terms 
of concepts derived from introspection of our psychical states, 
but how do we know that this notion will apply to matter? We 
may have no other concepts in terms of which to think it, but 
need its nature be limited by what we can think? Further, it may 
be contended that it is not true that the only objects of immediate 
experience are our mental states, we also experience sensa im- 
mediately and we may more plausibly conceive physical objects 
in terms of these. 

(4) Some would just say that physical objects were mere 
abstractions from human experience and leave it at that. If this 
is put forward as a metaphysics, it differs from any other very 
drastically in making everything in the universe a mere function 
of human experience. 

(5) A less dogmatic idealist will admit, that our experience of 
physical objects does depend on something outside humanity, but 

140 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

will deny that we can know anything about what that something 
is like. This was the view adopted by Kant, who would, although 
he lived later than Berkeley, be generally regarded as the founder 
of idealism because he had and Berkeley had not many disciples. 
But, when we introduce something essentially unknowable into 
our philosophy at all, it is difficult to avoid either making it com- 
pletely superfluous or involving ourselves in implications incon- 
sistent with its alleged unknowableness, and Kant's disciples soon 
abandoned his unknowable thing-in-itself altogether, accusing 
their master of having committed both mistakes. (5) Would in any 
case, not being metaphysical, be more appropriately called 'pheno- 
menalism' than 'idealism'. 

An idealist metaphysics cannot be established by purely nega- 
tive arguments to the effect that we cannot prove the existence of 
physical objects or know what they are like. That would tell us 
nothing positive about the nature of the universe or the place of 
mind in it. To enable us to say that the universe is mental or that 
mind is predominant in it positive arguments are needed. These 
may be based on the theory of knowledge or on the contention 
that the esse of matter is or involves percipi. I have said a little 
about both kinds of argument in Chapter Four and must leave it 
at that. But we must remember that the vast majority of those 
who have given to mind the predominant place in reality have not 
been idealists in the philosophical sense. They have not believed 
that the nature of matter is such as directly to involve an experi- 
ence or mind on which it depends, but for various other reasons 
they have believed in God and therefore believed that matter was 
ultimately dependent on mind or 'spirit' for its existence. 'Ideal- 
ism' has been used by some philosophers so as to include all such 
theistic views, and 'mentalism' used instead of 'idealism' in the 
narrower philosophical sense, but this is not the established usage. 



MEANINGS OF MATERIALISM 

To turn to the opposite extreme, the term materialism may be 
understood in many different ways, (i) If it means that nothing 
exists but matter and material properties, then it involves be- 

141 



The Relation of Matter and Mind 

haviourism and is obviously false. (2) Towards the end of the 
nineteenth century it was generally used for the view also called 
epiphenomenalism, according to which mental events are caused 
entirely by bodily and have themselves no share in -causing either 
bodily or even other mental events. (3) It is often used simply 
for the view that mental attributes are attributes of the body, not 
of a separate substance, which need not entail behaviourism or 
epiphenomenalism. (4) It is also used to mean simply that mind 
originated from matter. (5) As used by Berkeley, and by Berkeley 
almost alone, it stands for realism, the view that matter exists 
independently of being perceived or experienced. Like the "plain 
man' I am a materialist in the fifth sense. Materialism in the other 
four senses I have already criticized. In fairness to the materialist 
it should be added that materialism in none of them need carry 
with it the implication that only what are usually called material 
values (roughly, those which can be bought by money) are worth 
seeking. 

Dialectical Materialism, the philosophy of communism, calls 
itself ( materialism because it makes matter primary, but opposes 
itself to 'mechanistic materialism' . which recognizes only the 
quantitative side of matter. Dialectical materialism insists on 
quality as well as quantity (certainly an improvement), on the 
essential importance of change, on the presence of contradictory 
attributes reconciled in a higher synthesis, and on the close con- 
nection of thought and action. But we must not assume, as do 
most of its supporters, that there is any logical connection between 
communist economics and politics on the one hand and, on the 
other, this communist philosophy of the universe. Communists 
have thought that religion encouraged conservatism and therefore 
tended to oppose it, but there is nothing logically inconsistent in 
a communist being also a theist or idealist. He rould still maintain 
the communist political and economic theory; and conversely a 
man might without logical inconsistency believe in dialectical 
materialism and yet oppose the communist application of it to 
economics and politics. Dialectic materialism may therefore be 
considered on its own merits as a philosophy without introducing 
political issues, but philosophers who are not communists in 
politics generally think these merits small. 

142 



Chapter Seven 

SPACE AND TIME 

ABSOLUTE v. RELATIVE THEORY 

WHILE talking of things in space and time I have 
yet talked of space and time themselves as such, 
and I must now hasten to repair this deficiency. It 
should be realized, however, that the subject is far 
too difficult for anything faintly approaching adequate treatment 
to be possible in an elementary work on philosophy. The first 
question is whether space and time really are anything over and 
above the things and events in them. Space has commonly been 
looked on as a vast receptacle including the whole physical world, 
and a similar conception has been applied to time, only here, since 
time is always passing away, one is at a loss for a metaphor. 
This is known as the absolute theory of space and time. The view 
is supported by language: we do not speak of things merely as 
spatial but as 'in Space', not merely as temporal but as 'in Time'. 
We do not regard any other properties in this fashion; we do not, 
for instance, think of all red things as in one big c Red', as we think 
of all spatial things as in one big Space. The absolute theory is, 
however, very hard to defend. If we ask what space is like apart 
from things in space or what time is like apart from events in 
time, we find that our concept of them seems to fade away for lack 
of material and become completely vacuous. We can imagine an 
empty space surrounded by physical things, for we can envisage 
the concrete things as having a relation of distance and there being 
no other objects between them. But can we form an idea of an 
empty space outside the whole physical universe and surrounding 
it? Further, there can from the nature of the case be no empirical 
evidence for the view of any ordinary kind. Such evidence would 
lie either in perception or in a causal argument. But we certainly 

143 



Space and Time 

never perceive absolute space and time, only things i# 's$ice and 
time; and it is an essential part of the usual form.<5f tl^fHoctrine 
that space and time cannot act as causes, so wt^tfe cj^barred from * 
using a causal argument. Yet the view has" bejrffc very widely 
accepted by philosophers as well as by the'pl^in man. The chief 
reason for its acceptance by philosophers jtt?6s, I think, the fact 
that it seemed required by physics, since|$TOiout it scientists were 
unable to state adequately the Newtopfen laws of motion. This 
reason has now disappeared. Modern physics itself, under the 
influence of Einstein's discoveries,- no longer requires but is rather 
incompatible with an absolute view of space and time. And it is 
difficult to see how the scientists could be opposed here by the 
philosophers. 

It is best then to regard space and time as simply ways of look- 
ing at the spatial and temporal properties and relations of things 

and events, not as some weird kind of entities over and above the 

f *' 
things and evefits. This is known among philosophers as the 

relative theory of space and time (to be carefully distinguished from 
the scientific theory of 'Relativity', which besides implying the 
denial of absolute space and time involves a great many more 
specific scientific propositions about spatial and temporal relations 
with ^which we need not trouble ourselves). We are familiar in 
experience with spatial properties and relations such as size, 
shape, distance, and when we assert propositions about space as in 
pure geometry we are making general statements about these. We 
need not ouppose that, when we are talking about a vacuum, we 
are talking about something positive, space between the boundar- 
ies of the vacuum; all we need understand by it is that these 
boundaries have a relation of distance without there being any- 
thin^ at all between. The relative theory involves the rejection of 
absolve points. Points are only to be regarded as abstract limits 
which we approach as we divide but never reach. It also involves 
the rejection of absolute motion. Motion becomes simply a change 
of position relative to other objects except in so far as the notion 
of force is involved. Thus, if I walk twenty miles, it is just as true 
to say that everything else has moved twenty miles relatively to . 
me as that I have moved twenty miles relatively to it, except in so 
far as the use of the verb 'move' is meant to imply that the motion 

144 



Space and Time 

is caused by the exercise offeree on the part of its subject. In that 
case the difference is obvious: you, though sitting still, have 
changed your position by twenty miles relatively to me just 
as I have relatively to you, but you do not feel tired and I do. 



BEARING ON PHILOSOPHY OF MODERN PHYSICS 

It is not possible to say much here about the other philoso- 
phical bearings of modern changes in physics. To give an adequate 
account of them would require very high qualifications not only 
in philosophy but in science, and these I do not possess. Nor if I 
did could I say much that would not overstep the proper function 
of an elementary philosophical treatise of this kind and make im- 
possible demands on my readers. An important philosophical 
implication alleged is that time is inseparable from space. But, as 
Bergson has taught us, we must draw a clear distinction between 
the time of physics and the time of living experience. The time of 
physics is time as measured in terms of space and therefore already 
assimilated to space. What is true of it need not be true of the 
time of our psychological life, time as we experience it. This is 
brought out still more clearly by a consideration of something 
else which is sometimes said, namely, that time is 'the fourth 
dimension'. Time may be regarded as the fourth dimension in the 
sense that in order to fix the position of events completely, i.e. in 
space and time, we need four logically independent pieces of in- 
formation, just as we need three in order to fix the position of an 
object in space at a given time. It also may be regarded as the 
fourth dimension in the sense that for the purposes of graphs it 
can be treated like a dimension of space. We can represent in a 
graph, say, the increase in the depth of a river in relation to its 
distance from its source, and we might represent in the very same 
graphical form the increase in depth relative to the development 
of seasonal changes. The same line in a graph might be used to 
stand either for advance in space or for passage of time. But if we 
mean by speaking of it as the fourth dimension that time bears the 
same relation to each of the dimensions of space as they bear to 
each other, this is certainly not true. Two things may be the same 

K 145 



Space and Time 

distance apart in any of the three spatial dimensions as two other 
things are in any other, e.g. I can say that A is a foot above B and 
C a foot to the left of D on the floor, but it would be nonsense 
to say that A was as far away from B in one of the spatial dimen- 
sions as event C was from event D in time. The four spatial 
dimensions are completely homogeneous with each other in the 
sense that there is no intrinsic difference between the nature of a 
relation in one and in another. It is arbitrary which. we call the 
length and which the breadth of an object, and it is only not 
arbitrary which dimension we call height because we define height 
relatively to the earth's surface, i.e. not because of any intrinsic 
difference in the relation but because we have taken a particular 
physical object as a standard. But it is far from arbitrary whether 
we say two objects are distant in space or in time, since there is an 
intrinsic difference between any spatial relation and the relation of 
before or after in time. Time also differs from space in being irre- 
versible; we cannot move backward in time^It is therefore very 
wrong, at least philosophically if not scientifically, to assimilate 
time to space although we cannot rule out the possibility that they 
may fit together in some spatio-temporal system. Two things 
which are not at all like each other may yet be combined in a sys- 
tem just because being different they are needed to supplement 
each other, and this may be the case with space and timeTf 

In general we must be very cautious about transferring direct 
to philosophy statements made in a science. It may well be that 
the statements, though useful scientifically, are only true in a 
'Pickwickian' sense, i.e. a sense quite different from the literal one. 
This almost certainly applies to such assertions as that space is 
curved or that the universe is four-dimensional, and it is possible 
that it may apply even to the statement that physical space is non- 
Euclidean. It may be very difficult to decide whether one is using 
some expression in a Pickwickian sense, and if so in what sense. 
It would, however, be safer to make up our mind that Euclid's 
axioms and postulates probably do not apply to the physical 
world. This discovery bears a considerable share of the responsi- 
bility for the heightened distrust of the a priori to-day, but as I 
have remarked before it does not cast doubt on the internal a 
priori necessity of pure geometry. It remains a matter of a priori 

146 



Space and Time 

Dwledge that if the premises (the postulates and axioms of 
clid) were true the conclusions would follow, and further we 
yw a priori the negative categorical proposition that there is 
:hing in existence which both conforms to the premises and 
*s not conform to the conclusions of Euclid. No a priori know- 
ge that we have, whether outside geometry or inside it, is both 
rmative and categorical. We have seen earlier how a priori 
Dwledge can be both hypothetical and, even practically, valu- 
ed By a combination of a priori hypothetical knowledge with 
empirical premise we can derive an affirmative categorical con- 
sion. We have not the empirical premise that the physical world 
Euclidean, but we have the empirical premise that it approxi- 
tes to this very closely except when we are dealing with very 
at distances or very great velocities, and so we can make a 
cess of applied Euclidean geometry in spite of Einstein's 
coveries. 



THE PROBLEMS OF INFINITY 

J^e may now turn to a perennial philosophical problem, the 
>blem of infinity. The trouble is that we seem driven to think 
space and the physical world both as finite and as infinite, and 
lilarly with time and events in time. They cannot be both, and 
y must be one or the other, yet whichever alternative we take 
are subject to serious criticism from the other side. A situation 
ere what seem to be the only two possible alternatives are both 
lally objectionable has been called an antinomy since Kant, 

worked out four antinomies in an attempt to prove that 
itradictions could only be avoided by making the world in space 

1 time 'appearance'. Antinomies arise in connection both with 
alleged infinite extent and the infinite divisibility of spaced/time 

1 everything in them. They have repeatedly throughout the 
tory of philosophy been used as arguments against the reality 
space and time, and therefore have been very important for 
taphysics. The approach seems very negative, but it has some- 
les been the starting point of an elaborate positive metaphysical 

1 Vide above, p. 46. 
147 



Space and Time 

doctrine of what reality was like. Taking the first of the antin- 
omies stated by Kant, it is argued that, if an infinite period of time 
has elapsed 1 or an infinite series of events has occurred before the 
present, an infinite series will have completed itself and this is 
self-contradictory. E.g. the infinite series of events prior to noon 
to-day is now over and past, it is therefore completed, thoughjoj 
course the longer series of all cvcntsjnjitnc, of which it is a part, 
islrtill continuing. But an infinite series is from the nature of the 
case one which cannot be completed. To this it has been retorted 
that a series may be completed at one end and yet infinite at the 
other. For example, the series of negative whole numbers ends 
with i and yet it is infinite because it has no beginning. Might 
this not be the case with past events in general? This does not 
seem to me, however, to remove the difficulty. For it must still be 
granted that, if the series of events has no beginning, it follows 
that an infinite number of events will have occurred in succession 
before any given time. Similarly if time had no beginning, even 
though events had, it follows that an infinite number of periods 
of time of any given length will have so occurred. But whatever 
has occurred is past, completed, finished. Therefore we still have 
the contradiction of a completed infinite. It is true, mathematicians 
do not define the infinite as what cannot be completed, but they 
certainly admit that an infinite number could not conceivably be 
enumerated, though they do not define the infinite in such a way 
as to make this a straightforward tautology^ Now to deny that an 
infinite number of things could conceivably be enumerated surely 
involves denying that they could all have occurred in succession, 
for if they had so occurred they could conceivably have been 
enumerated. If a mind had been present, it could have numbered 
each event as it happened*! ajn not therefore satisfied that Kant's 
argument has % been r&utea^DUt I must admit that most people 
with whom I have discussed it seem, unlike myself^o findthe 
above answer a satisfactory one. There is a similarp^zieaDOut 
the infinity of the world in space and space itself. 

In the last generation there have been great developments in 
the philosophy of mathematics and particularly in the treatment of 

1 Kant himself does not use the argument against the infinity of time but against 
the infinity of events. 

148 



Space and Time 

the concept of infinity, but without doubting the value of these 
in the realm of mathematics itself, I must express doubt whether 
this shows it possible for an infinite number of things to exist or 
an infinite number of events to have occurred. We cannot argue 
that, because there can be infinite numbers in mathematics, an 
infinite number of events can happen, any more than we can argue 
that there might be a negative number of events because you can 
have negative numbers in mathematics. 

If in view of the argument I have mentioned we assert the world 
to be finite in space and to hav a beginning in time, we have to 
face either one of two objections according to whether we make 
space and past time themselves infinite or finite. If we make them 
infinite, then we must suppose an empty time before the world 
began and an empty space all round the world. This would com- 
mit us to the absolute theory of space and time according to which 
they have a being by themselves apart from the things in space 
and the events in time, and it may be doubted whether this is 
tolerable. Space apart from extended things and time with no 
change in it seem empty concepts, really meaningless. If, on the 
other hand, we deny the infinity pot only of matter in space and 
events in time but of space and past time themselves, we are faced 
with the difficulty that we can hardly think of them as finite with- 
out thinking them as having a boundary, but to think of them 
as having a boundary is to think more space and time beyond 
the boundary. Modern physicists indeed speak of space as finite but 
unbounded. However this is a very difficult conception and in- 
volves the highly problematic idea of a fourth dimension to 
which three-dimensional space is related as the two-dimensional 
surface of a sphere is to space as a whole. Further, in any case it 
still leaves unsolved the problem, of time, to which it is not 
applied. That the conception may be of value if taken as meaning 
that the mathematics of the physical world bears certain analogies 
to that of surfaces of three-dimensional objects I have no wish to 
deny. 

There is also an antinomy regarding divisibility. Every part of 
space must be conceived as itself divisible into further spaces, and 
this seems to imply that every piece of matter must be similarly 
divisible ad infinitum. Now it is very hard to think of an infinite 

149 



Space and Time 

number of pieces of matter or parts of space as constituting 
together a finite volume. Further, the complex seems logically to 
presuppose the simple, yet this infinite divisibility excludes the 
possibility of any simple parts of matter. Electrons may be physi- 
cally indivisible, but they are not logically so. Whatever size they 
are said to bel we can always conceive parts of them smaller than 
the whole, although it may be impossible for physical reasons to 
split them. There is a similar antinomy as regards the divisibility 
of time and of events in time, although Kant, curiously enough, 
does not use this antinomy. 

Where difficulties about infinity are easiest solved is in the case 
of future time. Suppose somebody believed that time had a begin- 
ning but will go on for ever. He would not be obliged to suppose 
that a time would ever arise when anyone could say that an infinite 
period had elapsed, so the contradiction of an actually completed 
infinite need not trouble him. We may compare the case of count- 
ing: we can go on counting adinfinitum (not of course in practice, 
but in the sense that there is nothing in the nature of number to 
stop us), but it does not follow that it is conceivable that anybody 
could ever truthfully say he had counted an infinite number. 

Now it seems to me that this provides the clue to the solution 
of all the antinomies I have mentioned, 1 although its application 
is somewhat more doubtful in the other cases. The typ6 of solu- 
tion I am suggesting has the authority both of Aristotle and Kant, 
though like the former and unlike the latter I believe it to be 
compatible with realism. The contradiction arose because we 
seemed driven to suppose something infinite and yet to suppose it 
completed. But what if the infinite is only potential, not actual? 
It would then mean not that there is an infinite number of things, 
but only that we could go on indefinitely. 

Take first the infinity of space. It is very generally accepted 
nowadays, I think rightly, that space is not to be regarded as some 
positive entity surrounding and containing matter, but only as a 
sum or system of certain properties or relations of material objects. 
But what then can be meant by saying that space is infinite? Need 
it mean anything more than that, however far matter extends, it 

1 1 do not wish to apply what I have to say here to Kant's third and fourth anti- 
nomies, which are not primarily concerned with space and time but with causality. 

I 5 



Space and Time 

always might extend further. In that sense there is no contradic- 
tion in the assertion of infinity, for it does not amount to saying 
that there is some actual thing, space, extending infinitely, but 
only that we, or matter, might go further and further. In this sense 
we can say that space is infinite while the material world is finite. 
Modern scientists speak of not only matter but space as finite 
(though unbounded), but they can hardly be denying that there is 
space outside the world in my sense, since they admit the possi- 
bility and indeed the actuality of the world's expansion. Limits 
may be set to this expansion by causal laws, but not by the nature 
of space as such, therefore in the potential sense space may still be 
regarded as infinite. The world has always room to go on expand- 
ing, but the 'room' need not be held to be something actually there 
prior to the expansion. 

Similarly, it may be suggested that matter is infinitely divisible^ 
not in the sense that there are an infinite number of parts of it 
actually existing, but only in the sense that, however far we 
divide, there is nothing in the nature of spatial properties to pre- 
vent us from dividing further still. We could not conceivably ever 
be in a position to say: We have found an infinite number of parts, 
but only We can go on dividing indefinitely. The problem of the 
infinite divisibility of time and events in time might be tackled in 
the same fashion. 

What about the problem of past time which, as I have said, is 
more difficult than that of future time? It does not seem to me 
a priori impossible that time should have had a beginning; but 
might we not hold that time existed before the beginning of events 
in the sense that, however far back the beginning goes, there is 
nothing in the nature of time which jmplies, that earlier events 
could not have occurred? We need not in that case suppose any- 
thing actual, empty time, before the first event occurred. The solu- 
tion certainly involves serious difficulties as regards the causation 
of the first event, but it seems that as regards this question serious 
difficulties must arise on any theory. An infinite regress of causes 
seems to me no easier a supposition than a first event which 
was either not caused at all or caused by some non-temporal 
factor. 



Space and Time 



DIFFICULTIES ABOUT MAKING TIME 'UNREAL' 

As I said, these antinomies about infinity have often been used 
as a ground for denying the reality of space and time. It was said 
that they showed space and time to be self-contradictory, and what 
is self-contradictory could not be real. With the reality of space 
and time went that of everything spatial and temporal, so the 
whole world as we know it was reduced to mere appearance. The 
terms, unreal and appearances, have, however, been used in 
different senses. One would expect such a statement as 'Time is 
unreal' to mean 'All statements ascribing temporal characteristics 
to anything are false'. In that case all such ordinary statements as 
'I had breakfast before lunch' or C A arrived at n a.m.' would be 
just false. They would not need to be all equally false, i.e. equally 
removed from the truth, but they would be false. Now this is a 
very hard view seriously to hold, and most philosophers who 
denied the reality of time have avoided or evaded it. Thus Kant 
holds that temporal statements are true but true only of appear- 
ances. In this way he thinks he can avoid having to admit that 
temporal judgements are false.) But I do not think his position 
can be consistently maintained. It is one thing to say that state- 
ments about physical things relate only to appearances, and 
another to say that all temporal statements do so. For what is 
meant by saying that something is merely an appearance? It is not 
to deny its existence altogether otherwise we could not make 
any true affirmative statements about appearances but to say 
that it exists only for our experience. Therefore to say that the self 
we perceive in time in introspection is an appearance is to say that 
we experience it in time, though it does not really exist in time, 
but if we can even experience it in time, something temporal is 
real, namely our experience/ We cannot rid ourselves of anything 
by calling it an appearance; if it is anything at all, even only an 
experience, it as such still falls within the real. Experience is as 
real as the physical objects of the realist, if a different kind of real 
thing. I therefore think Kant's position an untenable compromises 
If we take the arguments for the self-contradictoriness of time in 

152 



Space and Time 

earnest, we are then driven back to the first view that all our judge- 
ments about even our own experience are false in so far as they 
involve temporal predicates. We cannot consistently say both that 
they are true and that they are not true of the real but only of 
appearances. We must maintain frankly that we are under an 
illusion, not only in supposing that independent physical objects 
are spatial and temporal, but in supposing that we experience any- 
thing spatial and temporal at all. In that case all empirical judge- 
ments ever made are wrong in fundamental points to an enormous 
and incalculable degree, because time is so very much the stuff of 
our experience that we have not the slightest idea what our ex- 
perience would be like if we took it away. If we admit that much 
illusion, we are very near to absolute scepticism. We should have 
to abandon physical science, because, if we are as subject to 
illusions as all that, we can have no right to put the slightest trust 
in those perceptions of our immediate sense-data on which, 
whether we take a phenomenalist or a realist view of the physical 
world, all our scientific conclusions outside mathematics must be 
ultimately based. We should have lost any basis for an idea even 
of our own mental life, since all our thoughts, volitions, feelings 
are essentially bound up with temporal change. Even if I had no 
reply at all to the arguments against time, it would therefore seem 
to me far more likely that there was some undetected flaw in the 
arguments than that time was unreal. It may well be that our 
common-sense conception of time is somewhat wrong, but its 
amendment cannot reasonably be carried to such a point as to 
make all our temporal judgements fundamentally false. 



OTHER ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE REALITY OF TIME 

McTaggart, a modern Cambridge philosopher, used a different 
kind of argument against the reality of time, and he, unlike Kant, 
went so far as to admit frankly that our perceptions of ourselves 
in introspection are illusory in so far as they involve time. He 
argued in this fashion. 1 Every event has the characteristics of past- 

1 Nature of Existence ; vol. ir, ch. 33, v. 'Broad Examination of McTaggart' s 
Philosophy y vol. u, pt. i, ch. 35. 



Space and Time 

ness, presentness and futurity. Thus at noon my lunch is a future 
event, at i p.m. it is present, and at 2 p.m. it is past. But pastness, 
presentness and futurity are incompatible. There is a reply to this 
so obvious as to seem to make the argument not worth the least 
discussion, namely, that there would only be a contradiction if the 
same event were past, present and future at the same time, 
whereas in fact it has only been shown to be past, present and 
future at different times. The argument has only been stated at 
all by making use of the non- temporal present. What is really 
meant is, suppose I am speaking at i p.m., that my lunch was a 
future event at 12, is a present one now, and will be a past one at 2. 
But McTaggart rejoins that, e.g. 'an event was future' only means 
that at some moment of past time it is (in the non-temporal sense 
of is') future, etc. But then you have, he says, the same difficulty 
about the moments. Every moment is future, present and past. If 
we reply that the moment e.g. is future, and will be present and 
past, we have again to analyse this in terms of moments, thus giving 
an infinite regress. Dunne, an amateur philosopher whose writings 
have aroused a considerable interest in England in the last twenty 
years, uses a similar argument, but he does npt think the infinite 
regress which results to be vicious, but on the contrary rejoices 
in an infinite series of times, trying to make it a ground for believ- 
ing in our immortality. In any case the argument seems to me 
easily refuted. Firstly, McTaggart does not justify his view that 
the pastness of events, etc. has to be defined in terms of moments. 
On the contrary it would seem that moments must be defined in 
terms of events by which they are dated. This is obviously -the 
case if the absolute view of time, is false; but even if the latter view 
be true it would still follow, for on the absolute theory time is 
homogeneous and so there can be no means of distinguishing one 
part of time from another except by reference to events. Secondly, 
in any case moments are not present, past and future in the same 
sense as events. To say of an event that it is past is to say that it 
has happened, but moments do not happen in the same sense of 
'happen'. Therefore, even if the pastness etc. had to be analysed 
in terms of moments, it would not follow that the pastness etc. 
of moments had to be analysed in terms of other moments. 
Thirdly, McTaggart has no right to assume that what is meant by 



Space and Time 

a sentence with a temporal verb must be expressible by a sen- 
tence without one. On the contrary this is not what we should 
expect if time is, as seems to be the case, something quite 
unique. 

The difficulty about time which seems most impressive to me 
is this. The present is all that is real. The past has ceased to exist, 
and the future does not yet exist. We may talk at any rate of the 
past as still having a sort of being, but it clearly does not exist in 
the same sense as the present. It is no comfort to a hungry man 
that he has eaten meals in the past, whereas a meal in the present 
would be a very distinct comfort. The present is clearly real in a 
sense in which nothing else is, and this is, so to speak, the trost 
real sense of 'real'. Yet, strictly speaking, the present is only in- 
finitesimal. If it lasted for even a thousandth of a second, by the 
time we had reached the second half of this tiny period the first 
half would not be present but past; and this would be so however 
much smaller we made the period in question. So it would seem 
to follow that the quantity of what really is is infinitesimal, which 
is absurd. The only solution I can suggest is that we must regard 
as the real present what psychologists call 'the specious present', 
i.e. the minimum period of which we can be conscious otherwise 
than as an element in a longer period, and look on the strict 
present as a mere mathematical abstraction like a geometrical 
point. An indivisible moment of time without duration cannot be 
regarded as a reality, still less as all the reality there is. The diffi- 
culty, however, arises that such a view seems to leave everybody 
with an individual time of his own and deny the common time 
altogether. For there is no reason to suppose that everybody's 
specious present has the same duration, in which case what is 
present for me at a given time could not be said to be present for 
you at the same time. 



MYSTICISM AND TIME 

The unreality of time has sometimes been asserted on the 
ground of mystical experience. If the mystic really means to say 
that propositions such as 'I had breakfast before lunch to-day' or 



Space and Time 

*I am awake at present' are false, we must reject his view outright. 
The propositions he is denying possess a certainty greater than 
any which even on the most favourable view we could ascribe to 
the assertions of mysticism. But most mystics have probably not 
intended to say anything of the kind. They certainly had some 
experience of time different from the ordinary, and seemed to 
themselves to be in touch with something which transcended the 
temporal aspect of reality in a way in which things of every day 
life do not; but not being a mystic myself I am unable to obtain 
an understanding of what they meant. Apart from mystical ex- 
perience, I do not think it at all true to say, as some thinkers 
especially of the Hegelian school have said, that time is not of 
fundamental importance to any of the things we value most and 
therefore relatively unreal in the sense of unimportant. This may 
be true of mystical experience and of the love of God, but surely 
not of love in its human forms, moral qualities, coming to know, 
and human aesthetic experiences in general. Yet these are of great 
value on almost any ethical view. The temporal factor is of the 
greatest importance in all goods which depend on the overcoming 
of obstacles. Progress of the highest sort is a great good, but time 
is certainly an essential constituent element in it; and if the time 
order were reversed so that the better state to which we progress 
came before instead of after the worse state from which we start, 
it would be not good but bad. On the other hand there is a 
security, permanence and peace not to be found in the time order 
for which the human soul craves, but if there is a non-temporal or 
super-temporal reality which satisfies this craving its nature cannot 
be grasped by anyone but the mystic, and to get rid of time, if we 
could, would be to lose values as well as gain them. 



ALLEGED PRECOGNITION 

A serious puzzle as regards time is presented by alleged cases 
of c precognition', i.e. foresight of the future, not by inference 
from the past based on previous experience, but by direct vision 
such as we have in memory. The cases in which such foresights 
have been verified by subsequent experience are too numerous 

156 



Space and Time 

for it to be in the least reasonable to attempt to explain them away 
as mere coincedences. Yet how can anybody be directly aware of 
the future, seeing that the future is not yet there for him to be 
aware of it? The occurrence of precognition has therefore led 
some to deny the reality of time. But before taking such a drastic 
step we should need to have exhausted all other possible explana- 
tions; and even in that case rather than adopt a course which 
would make all our experience illusory it would be preferable just 
to admit that with our present resources the phenomenon cannot 
be explained. As a matter of fact in a field of abnormal psychology 
where everything is still unknown we can have no idea what the 
possibilities might be. One suggestion I might make in this con- 
nection as my personal view. The evidence for pre-cognition is 
that certain people's beliefs or dreams or imaginations, call them 
a^oag, correspond to the future events b^^ too closely for it to 
be reasonable to dismiss this as a mere coincidence. Now corre- 
spondence between a and b may be explained in three different 
kinds of way. (i) a may cause b. This does not seem to explain 
most cases of alleged precognition. It may indeed satisfactorily 
explain some, but in most such cases it is hard to suppose that the 
person who had the precognition, either intentionally or uninten- 
tionally, played any part in causing the event which he precog- 
nized. It is often an event which to all appearances resulted entirely 
from the actions of other people. (2) b may cause a. This seems 
outright impossible with precognition, for b, the future event, is 
not yet in existence. Thirdly, they may have a common cause. 
The putting on of winter overcoats corresponds to the falling of 
the leaves, but neither causes the other; they are both caused by a 
third circumstance, the increasing cold. Since the second explana- 
tion seems on principle impossible and the first explanation would 
in most cases be silly, I think we are driven to suppose that 'pre- 
cognition' is mostly to be explained in some way which falls under 
the third heading. In most cases of alleged pre-cognition we have 
indeed no idea what the common cause could be, but we cannot 
possibly reject the suggestion on this ground. On no view have 
we an idea as to the causation of precognition. If it is a direct 
vision of the future, we have no way of explaining causally why 
the vision occurs with some people and not with others and on 

157 



Space and Time 

Some (by no means specially important or useful) occasions and 
not on others. And if there is no strong positive objection to the 
solution, we ought to accept it rather than make the incredible 
supposition that the future is already present. 



158 



Chapter Eight 
CAUSE 

IMPORTANCE OF CONCEPT 

A CONCEPTION which has played a very great part both in 
/% science and philosophy is that of cause. It is indeed some- 
/ "% times said that science nowadays is able to dispense with 
JL JL cause, but what the people who say this have in view is 
some metaphysical conception of cause with which they do not 
agree. In one sense at least science cannot possibly dispense with 
cause, neither can the practical man. It is essential both to science 
and to practice that we should be able to go beyond what has 
actually been observed and make inferences from it, whether in 
the form of generalizations as to what usually happens or predic- 
tions as to particular facts. Now, whatever else the concept of 
cause involves, it involves this, that we can pass from what has 
happened in observed cases to what is likely to happen in cases 
which have not been observed, and this is absolutely necessary 
if we are to have any science at all or if we are to take any sensible 
practical steps. This has always been a difficulty for the empiricist: 
it cannot possibly be a merely empirical matter to predict, as 
science does, for we have not empirically observed the future 
which we predict. Not that the topic is without difficulties for the 
rationalist also, as we shall see shortly. However in modern philo- 
sophy it was hardly questioned till the time of Hume that we knew 
a priori the principle that every change had a cause (with the pos- 
sible exception of those involving "free wilP with which we shall 
deal later 1 ), and that this principle was a necessary presupposition 
of science. Even Hume did not, as he is often supposed to have 
done, reject it, but merely raised philosophical difficulties which 
he thought made it impossible to justify or defend it. The mini- 

1 Vide chap. DC. 



Cause 

mum sense of the principle of causation which must be accepted 
if we are to have science is then that the repeated occurrence of 
a certain kind of event under certain conditions is generally evi- 
dence which makes it likely that similar events will repeat them- 
selves under similar conditions. Without assuming this much we 
can never make any scientific predictions whatever or pass from 
the observed to the unobserved. 



REGULARITY THEORY 

Let us now consider philosophical theories of what the nature 
of causation is or, if you prefer to put it that way, what is meant 
by the term 'cause'. The philosopher who is inclined to be an 
empiricist will be likely to adopt a view on this topic which 
identifies or approximates to identifying causation with regular 
sequence, since regular sequence is something that can be observed 
empirically. He will indeed have to assume one principle which 
he cannot justify empirically, namely, that what has succeeded a 
certain kind of event regularly in the past is also likely to do so in 
the future, but the regular sequence or Regularity' view at any 
rate makes the minimum concessions to the non-empiricist. 'A 
causes B', if A and B stand for classes of events, will then mean 
that B usually or always follows A. This view is by no means 
identical with the common-sense view of cause, as is shown by 
the fact that, if it were true, there would be no more special con- 
nection between the striking of a match and the flame which 
followed it than between the striking of the match and an earth- 
quake which might also occur just afterwards. It would merely 
be that the striking of a match is usually followed by a flame and 
not usually followed by earthquakes, and that would be all. We 
could not then say that the striking made the flame follow. All 
intrinsic necessary connection between cause and effect, all active 
power on the part of the cause is denied. On this view to give a 
cause is toto genere different from giving a reason, it does not in the 
least help to explain why the effect happened, it only tells us what 
preceded the effect. So it is clear that the regularity view stands in 
very sharp contrast to the common-sense view of causation, 

1 60 



Cause 

though this does not necessarily refute the regularity view. Des- 
pite this the latter theory, or something very like it, is distinctly 
popular to-day. It agrees well with the modern empiricist trend, 
since it makes causation something that can be empirically ob- 
served and goes as far as one can towards eliminating the a priori. 
And it is in accord with one fact about causation. Whether causa- 
tion is merely regular sequence or not, it is clear that at least in the 
physical world we cannot see any intelligible connection between 
cause and effect which explains why the latter must occur if the 
former does so. The chemist may bring propositions such as that 
wood burns under more general principles about the nature of 
matter from which they could be deduced, but these more general 
propositions themselves are not of such a kind that we can see at 
all why they should be true, we only find that empirically in fact 
they are true. 

But there are other respects in which the theory is less plausible. 
First, it presents serious difficulties when we start talking about 
the causation of single events. *I caused the flame by striking the 
match' might be interpreted as meaning: 'Striking a match by me 
was followed by a flame, and an event of the second class usually 
does follow an event of the first/ But what about events the 
causation of which is much more complex such as wars and econo- 
mic depressions? Nobody has succeeded in discovering a really 
satisfactory formulation of statements about the causes of these in 
terms of the regularity view. If we say that Hitler's invasion of 
Poland caused the second world war to break out when it did we 
no doubt mean that the war followed it, but the rest of what we 
mean is not that wars always or usually follow invasions of Poland, 
it is something much more specific. 

Another difficulty about the regularity view is that there are 
cases of regular sequence which nobody would call cases of causa- 
tion. For instance, the sounding of a hooter at 8 a.m. in London 
is regularly followed not only by men going to work at that 
factory in London but by men going to work at a factory in Man- 
chester which also opens at 8 a.m. Yet everybody would say that, 
while the arrivals at the factory in London were caused by the 
hooter in that factory, the arrivals at Manchester were not. 

These difficulties might possibly be met by minor amendments 

L 161 



Cause 

of the theory, others are more serious. The theory seems particu- 
larly inapplicable in the case of psychology. For instance, when 
I believe something for a reason, surely my mental state is really 
determined by the apprehension of the reason and is not merely 
one of a class of mental states which usually follow the apprehen- 
sion of similar reasons. If that is all, the belief is not reasonable; 
for it to be reasonable it must not merely follow on the appre- 
hension of the reason but be determined by the intrinsic character 
of the reason. Again it is surely incredible that, when I will an 
acrion, the action is not determined by my will, or that to say it 
is 'determined' here merely means something like c it is a kind of 
action which follows most or all states of mind like my own at the 
time in certain specific respects'. Again for memory to be possible 
one would think that my present state of consciousness must be 
genuinely determined by, not merely follow on, the past event 
remembered. There can be no trusting my memory of yesterday's 
events if it was not really determined by the events said to have 
been remembered. 



ENTAILMENT THEORY 

All this should make one hesitate very much before accepting 
the regularity theory merely because it is the simplest and keeps 
closest to what is empirically observed. It seems that besides regu- 
larity we must introduce the notion of determination and neces- 
sity. There is a sense, it seems, in which the effect not merely does 
but must follow the cause, and this depends on the specific nature 
of the cause as such. Can we say anything more to make clearer 
what it is in which this necessity consists? There is another case of 
necessity, a clear one, which it is tempting and, I think reasonable, 
to take as at least an analogy. That is the necessity underlying valid 
inference. Where a conclusion follows logically from a premise, 
this must be because the fact expressed by the premise is so con- 
nected with the fact expressed by the conclusion that the former 
could not possibly occur without the latter occurring. This is 
logical necessity. The theory according to which the connection 
between cause and effect is the same as or very like that of logical 

162 



Cauit 

necessity may be called the rationalist or the entailment theory o 
causation ('entailment' being the relation between the premises 
and the conclusion in an argument where the latter follows 
necessarily from the former or between the objective fact ex- 
pressed by the premises and by the conclusion). 

The entailment theory is a theory of philosophers, but it cer- 
tainly is more closely akin to the common-sense view than is a 
purely regularity theory, and though one should not say that 
causation is just entailment, there is a good case for saying that it 
involves the entailment relation or else something very similar. 
It is also true of course that an effect does follow regularly its 
cause; the regularity theory is not mistaken in what it asserts but 
only in what it denies. The entailment theory was almost universal 
among philosophers till the nineteenth century (though they did 
not use that name). The first leading philosopher to question it 
was David Hume (1711-76), and at the time his views found little 
favour, though to-day the regularity theory is the one most com- 
monly advocated. 

However, it seems to me that there are two strong arguments 
for the entailment theory. These may be added to the arguments 
already given against the regularity theory, which did not by them- 
selves suggest another theory to put in its place. The first is that 
we can after all make legitimate inferences from cause to effect. 
How could we do this if the cause did not in a very important 
sense entail the effect? The relation need not be exactly the same 
as the entailment which occurs in formal logical reasoning, but 
it must at least be analogous to it in the important respect that it 
justifies the conclusion. It would be a very odd kind of inference 
in which we were allowed to draw conclusions from premises 
which in no way entailed their conclusions. This argument gives 
the main, though usually unexpressed, reason why philosophers 
have so often believed in the rationalist (or entailment) theory of 
causation. I do not of course in using this argument mean to irr ply 
that a persop must consciously assume the entailment theory 
before he can see that a particular induction is justified, only that 
the theory is logically presupposed if inducton is to be justified. 
We do not know the ultimate logical presuppositions of our 
thinking, at any rate till we become philosophers. 



Cause 

The second argument is as follows. The occurrence of regulari- 
ties is in any case a fact of experience. For instance, whenever 
solid objects are left unattached in mid-air they fall to the ground 
(with certain reservations to cover aeroplanes, etc.). Now, if it 
were not explained in any way, it would be an incredible coinci- 
dence that this should happen so constantly. It would be like 
having all the trumps in one hand at bridge several times running, 
or more improbable even than this. But what explanation could 
there be except that the nature of the bodies or the nature of the 
physical universe as a whole somehow entailed their moving in 
that way? If causation merely means regular sequence, to say that 
A causes B gives no explanation of the regular sequence of B on 
A, it merely affirms that B thus succeeds. Only if the cause is a 
reason for the effect, will it explain why this repeated regularity 
occurs, and the facts surely cry out for an explanation, since the 
alternative is to leave it as a mere coincidence which would be 
incredibly unlikely. But how can the cause be a reason for the 
effect if its nature does not somehow involve the effect? In that 
case the latter will logically follow from, i.e. be entailed by the 
former, or at least the relation will be very closely analogous to 
that of logical entailment. 1 

The following are the main objections brought against the en- 
tailment theory, (i) We cannot see any logical connection between 
cause and effect. This must be admitted as regards the physical 
world at least. We do not see any ultimate reason why water and 
not oil should put out a fire or why we should be nourished by 
bread and not by stones. No doubt a scientist could in a sense give 
reasons for these laws by explaining, e.g. that stones are too hard 
to digest and that bread contains nitrogenous matter in an organ- 
ized form in which it is not present in stones; but the reasons of 
the scientist only amount either to interpolating intermediate 
causes so that he explains how A causes B by pointing to an inter- 
mediate link C, i.e. something which appears between A and B, 
or to showing that the generalization to be explained is just an 

1 Some people prefer not to use the term 'entail' of the connection between facts 
but only of the connection between propositions, but we cannot avoid admitting 
that, if two true propositions are necessarily connected, the facts for which they 
stand must also be necessarily connected. Whether we are to call this necessary con- 
nection between facts 'entailment' or not seems to me only a verbal question. 

164 



Cause 

instance of a wider generalization itself founded on experience, 
e.g. that no animals can extract nutriment direct from inorganic 
matter. In neither case does he tell us anything which amounts to 
more than a statement that events of a certain kind occur under 
certain circumstances; he does not explain why they occur. This is 
made clearer by comparing the conclusions of other sciences with 
those of mathematics. In the latter alone do we see not merely as 
an empirical fact that the conclusion is true but why it must be 
true. No causal law about the physical world even appears to us 
as logically necessary like the laws of mathematics; we cannot 
prove any such law a priori, but only establish it as an empirical 
generalization. However the fact that we cannot see any necessary 
a priori connection behind causal laws is no proof that there is not 
any. Till comparatively recently most of the logically necessary 
connections of mathematics had not been discovered by any 
human being, but they no doubt held all the same in prehistoric 
days as much as to-day. We cannot set limits to what is in nature 
by our ignorance. It would be very different if we were not only 
unable to see any necessary connection between cause and effect 
but were able to see positively that there is no such connection. 
Some philosophers think that they can see this, and if so they are 
justified in ruling out the entailment theory, but in the absence 
of this positive insight the negative argument is only of light 
weight. 

(2) The relation between cause and effect is in one respect at 
least different from that holding in any generally recognized case 
of necessary connection, i.e. cause and effect are not, normally at 
least, simultaneous, but occur at different times. This of course 
again does not prove that necessary causal connection cannot 
occur, but only somewhat lessens the plausibility of the conten- 
tion that it does. But if there are good positive reasons to suppose 
it occurs, the fact that it is unlike what happens in other cases is 
no adequate ground for rejecting the reasons in question. 

(3) It is objected that in cases of a priori reasoning we attain 
certainty, but in cases of causal reasoning only probability. This 
may, however, be explained compatibly with the entailment 
theory. In the first place we never know the whole cause. What 
common sense calls the cause is only the most striking part of a 



Cause 

vast complex of conditions all of which are relevant to the exact 
manner in which the effect occurs. But, even if the whole cause 
entails the whole effect, this gives no reason to suppose that a part 
of it, which is all we know, will do so. The best we can do is to 
conclude on the ground of previous experience that the factors in 
the cause of which we are not aware are unlikely to be of such a 
kind as to counteract the others and prevent the occurrence of 
something like the expected effect. Secondly, since we cannot see 
the necessary connection directly even if it is there, we are in any 
case bound to proceed by employing the recognized methods of 
induction, which can logically only yield probability not cer- 
tainty. For in the absence of direct insight into it, we can only 
arrive at conclusions as to when it occurs indirectly by considering 
what regularities normally occur and inferring from those what 
are most likely to be the laws underlying them, as on any other 
view of causation. 

The entailment theory is of course incompatible with the view 
which we earlier rejected that all logically necessary propositions 
are verbal or analytic in a sense which would make what is en- 
tailed part of what entails. Since the effect is a different event from 
and not part of the cause, the two cannot be necessarily connected 
unless some propositions not analytic in this sense are a priori. 
Propositions about causation may be analytic in some cases, where 
something has been defined in terms of its causal properties, but 
this cannot always be so. If we define a species of thing in terms 
of one causal property, it will be a synthetic proposition that 
members of the species have any other cau,sal property they may 
possess. 

So far I have spoken as if it were common ground that we 
could never have insight into causal entailments, but I should not 
be ready to admit this. It seems to me true of the physical world, 
not of the world of psychology. Our insight that the death of a 
beloved person will tend to cause grief or that insults will tend 
to cause annoyance does not seem to be based merely on experi- 
ence. We seem also to see a priori that the cause will tend to 
produce these effects. There is surely something in the thwarting 
of a desire which entails a tendency to produce pain. Even apart 
from experience it would not be as reasonable to expect that the 

166 



Cause 

death of a beloved person would cause the lover to jump from 
joy. We must indeed admit that we can at the best only see a 
causal tendency in these cases. If A loves B now, it is not certain 
that he will grieve if B dies, for by the time this has happened he 
may have gone mad or quarrelled with B so violently as to rejoice 
at his death. But we can see, it seems, that the nature of love is 
such as to tend strongly in the direction mentioned and not in the 
opposite one. That we can only say what its tendency is and not 
predict with certainty that this will be fulfilled on a given occasion 
is presumably because the situation is always very complex and 
we cannot know that there will not be factors which counteract 
the tendency in question. It may further be argued that we can 
easily explain why we should not see entailments in the physical 
world even if they are really there. For, firstly it is generally held 
that the internal nature of matter is quite unknown to us, and how 
can we tell whether what is quite unknown to us does or does 
not entail something? In psychology alone are we immediately 
aware of the internal nature of the object with which we are 
dealing, namely rnind, and here we can reasonably claim to see 
that certain causal entailments hold, as we have just noted. 
Secondly, we never are in a position to give the whole cause, and 
it would be the whole cause that entailed the effect, not a part of it. 
Incidentally it is not necessary to the entailment theory to suppose 
that there are any causal laws which by themselves would be self- 
evident even to God. It may be that any causal law depends for its 
evidence on the whoJe system to which it Belongs, as many have 
argued to be the case even with the ^/r/or/^ropositions of mathe- 
matics. It may be that water would not freeze in the way it does 
in a universe where the chemical constitution of water was the 
same but the general world system different. The arguments I have 
used would be compatible even with any law we can discover 
being only statistical. It has been suggested that the laws of physics 
do not apply to each single particle but are only statistics about the 
way in which most particles move, but there still must surely, it 
seems, be some reason in the nature of things why so many more 
particles move in one way than in another way. 

Whether we are to maintain or reject the entailment theory 
depends largely on our attitude to the problem of induction, 



Cause 

Modern logicians generally have tried to solve the problem of the 
validity of induction without assuming the entailment theory of 
causation and generally admit that they have failed. They have 
not, even according to themselves, shown why we are entitled to 
make inductive predictions in advance of experience. The main 
trouble is that there is no reason why we should think that A 
will be followed by B in the future merely because it has been so 
in the past. But if we suppose that the repeated experience in the 
past is an indication of something in the nature of A which entails 
B, that will be a good reason for expecting B to follow on future 
occasions also, even if we do not see why the assumed entailment 
should hold. No detailed theory of induction has been worked 
out on this basis, but it is significant that modern logicians who 
will not admit the entrailment theory of causation have (usually 
according to their own admission) failed to produce any rational 
justification of induction. Nevertheless it has seemed so odd to 
many philosophers that there should be a relation of logical 
entailment between different events that they would rather admit 
all our induction to be irrational than save its rationality in such a 
fashion. Yet we cannot really suppose it irrational to believe that 
if we jump from a height we shall fall; and even if we say that all 
induction is in some sense irrational, it will still be incumbent on 
us to explain the distinction between scientific inductions nd those 
inductions which would be accepted by no sensible person. What 
is the difference between the two kinds if they are both irrational? 

It has been said that inductive arguments, though not rational 
in the same way as deductive arguments, are rational in some 
other way. It is easy enough to say this, but difficult to grasp 
what this sense of 'rational' could be. Inductive arguments are 
after all inferences, and for an inference to be valid the conclusion 
must follow from the premises. But for this to be so the premises 
must entail the conclusion, or at the very least be connected with 
it by a relation closely analogous to that of logical entailment. It 
is difficult to escape this argument. Nor have those who try to 
meet the difficulty by saying that induction is rational but rational 
in a different sense from deduction succeeded in defining the sense 
in which induction is rational. They have either left it undefined 
or defined it in terms of practical utility. In the latter case an in- 

168 



Cause 

ductive inference is rational if it is of a kind which is practically 
useful. But this seems hardly to solve the problem. It is clear that 
in order to act in a practically useful way it is not enough to do 
what has proved useful in the past unless this is an indication that 
it is likely to be useful also in the future, and it is just as much an 
induction to infer that something will have good practical results 
in the future from the results it has had in the past as it is to infer 
that something will be true of future events because it has been 
true of past. 

It seems to me therefore that there is a strong case for the en- 
tailment theory of causation. But I must admit that this is not the 
opinion of the majority of contemporary philosphers. It is in any 
case a very important issue metaphysically. One of the most 
fundamental differences there are in philosophy is between those 
who think of the world as a rationally connected system and those 
who regard it as a mere collection of brute facts externally related, 
and which side we take in this controversy will depend chiefly on 
whether we, consciously or unconsciously, assume the entailment 
view of causation or not. One of the chief issues in philosophy 
through the ages has been that between monism and pluralism, 
between those who look on the unity of things as more important 
and those who give a more fundamental position to their plur- 
ality; and we shall certainly regard the world as much more of a 
unity if we adopt than if we do not adopt the entailment view of 
causation. If that view is true, everything in the world will be 
united in a logical system, since everything is causally connected 
with everything else either directly or indirectly. If that view is 
true, everything in the world will be a unity in a very important 
sense, for the very nature of a thing will also involve the other 
things with which it is causally connected. 

ACTIVITY THEORY 

There is a third view of causation which is now generally 
known as the activity view. We are certainly apt to think of cause 
as a kind of depersonalized will, and some philosophers have 
thought that the key to the philosophical conception of causation 
lay in the notion of will. This view was taken by Berkeley. He 

169 



Cause 

argued that for a cause to produce something it must be 'active* 
and assumed that activity involved willing. He therefore contended 
that the only possible cause was a being possessed of will and 
used this as his chief argument for the existence of God, whom he, 
denying the material world in a realist sense, made the direct 
cause of everything which could not be attributed to the causa- 
tion of human minds. Other philosophers, e.g. Locke, while 
admitting that material things could be proximate causes, insisted 
that, since causation ultimately involved will, the only ultimate 
cause must be mind or spirit. They could argue that, though a 
physical object once started in motion might move and otherwise 
affect other physical objects, it could not itself originate motion. 
We cannot think of a chair as getting up and moving about the 
room of its own accord, and if it apparently did we should feel 
forced to suppose either that it was moved in an unknown way 
by some mind external to it or that it was itself animated by some 
sort of rudimentary mind. In this fashion the activity view of 
cause has often been used as the basis for an argument to the 
existence of God in order to get the motion started origirtally. 
There are however forms of the activity view which would not 
involve such an argument. It might be held that the activity pre- 
supposed by causation was not conscious rational volition, but 
some kind of semi-conscious striving such as we commonly sup- 
pose to occur in the lower animals and which we might then 
extend in a still more rudimentary form to what we call inanimate 
objects. The activity theory of causation would then involve 
panpsychism but not necessarily theism. Or we might go further 
still in the direction of attenuating the idea of activity, and say 
what is involved in causation is a quality which we experience 
consciously when we will but which can exist without being ex- 
perienced in any way. It might in that case occur in objects which 
are in the full sense inanimate and might be supposed to constitute 
the essence also of their totally unconscious causality. 

Again, the activity view has sometimes been combined with 
and sometimes given as an alternative to the entailment view. In 
modern times Prof. Stout 1 has first argued for the entailment view 
and then argued that the only instances in which we can conceive 

1 Procetdings of Aristotelian Soc. supp. y vol. xrv, pp. 46 flf. 
170 



Cause 

how the cause could entail the effect are instances where will or at 
least some sort of conation (striving or aiming at ends) is present, 
not necessarily in what we call the cause itself but in or behind the 
whole process. This then becomes an argument either for theism 
or panpsychism. 1 The chief difficulty about this argument is to be 
sure whether it is really the case that the cause can entail the effect 
only if conation is present or merely that we can conceive how it 
could only if conation is supposed present. The cases I have 
mentioned in which we did seem to see causal connection directly 
and any other instances I could have given are cases in which 
conation is in some way present, but the fact that we can seq 
causal connection only in such cases does not necessarily prove 
that it is only present in such cases. Others would oppose the 
activity view to the entailment view as providing an alternative 
account of the causal necessity which the regularity view errs in 
denying. They think of the effect as following necessarily in the 
sense of being forced by the cause but not in the sense of being 
logically entailed by it. This notion of forcing is certainly involved 
in the usual common-sense view of causation, but the common- 
sense view also involves the notion of explanation or reason, which 
can only be interpreted in terms of the entailment view as far as 
I can see. That the entailment view is, however, not a complete 
account of the common-sense view can easily be seen in the 
following way. Entailment, if it occurs, works both ways: it is 
just as true that the cause can be inferred from the effect as that 
the effect can be inferred from the cause, and so if inference pre- 
supposes entailment it will be just as true that the effect entails 
the cause as that the cause entails the effect. But there is certainly 
a sense in which we think of the cause as necessitating or deter- 
mining the effect but do not think of the effect as necessitating or 
determining the cause. Causation is regarded as a one-sided or 
irreversible relation. If I hit somebody in the face and gave him a 
black eye, the black eye would be produced by my blow in a sense 
in which the black eye certainly did not produce the blow, and we 
think of the future as necessitated by the past in a sense in which 
we should never think of the past as necessitated by the 

* V. Stout, Mind and Matter, bk I ch, 2-4 



Cause 

future. But it is impossible to give arguments to show that 
this element in our ordinary conception of causation applies 
to the real world, so the activity view must remain inadequately 
grounded. 

It may be further asked how we form the idea of causation at 
all. On the regularity view the answer is simple: all that causation 
means is regular sequence, and it is obvious that we can observe 
regular sequence. On the entailment view the situation is more 
complex. If it can be claimed that we even occasionally see some 
causal entailments, we might derive our idea from those we see 
and then could easily apply it also in cases where we do not our- 
selves see an entailment but suppose there must be some cause. 
Or it might be held that the entailment element in our common- 
sense view of causation was derived from the analogy of non- 
causal arguments, where we do admittedly see entailments. On 
the activity view of causation the idea of cause is usually held to 
be derived from the experience of volition. It is supposed that, 
when we voluntarily move a part of our body, we &re, at least in 
some cases, immediately aware of our will causing our body to 
move. 1 The chief objection to this is constituted by the circum- 
stance that an act of will never moves a part of the body by direct 
causation, but only by means of a number of intermediate links 
in the nervous system. Now it is difficult to hold that we can see 
directly C to cause E where C does not cause E directly, but only 
causes an intermediate term D (a set of vibrations in the nervous 
system), which then produces E without our being aware of D 
in the least, for we have only learnt of D not through the experi- 
ence of willing in ourselves but through the reports of physio- 
logists. It is less difficult, however, to hold that we can be im- 
mediately aware of our will as cause not of physical motion but 
of changes in our mental states, as when we will to attend to 
something. If we reject the regularity view but cannot explain 
how our idea of what there is in causation beyond regularity is 
derived, we can still fall back on the theory that it is an innate idea, 
but we should avoid this if possible. 

1 The common objection that an act of will does not always produce motion, since 
we may be struck with paralysis, might be met by saying that we could still be aware 
in some cases of our will as at least tending to produce motion. 



Cause 



EVIDENCE OF CAUSATION 

We shall leave the question of universal causation to the next 
chapter, where we shall discuss the problem of human freedom, 
which seems to many incompatible with it. That causation, 
whether universal or not, occurs may, I think, be established by 
the same arguments as we used earlier for a particular view of 
what causation is like, the entailment view, and the arguments 
might be accepted as evidence for causation by some who would 
not go so far as to admit that they were evidence for the entail- 
ment view. Thus it is an argument for causation that inductive 
inference generally presupposes some causal connections in the 
world if it is ever to be justified; and it is also an argument for 
causation that, if we did not admit any causes to account for them, 
we should have to regard the observed regularities, of which 
experience furnishes us with many, as mere coincidences, whether 
or not these are also arguments for a particular view of causation. 
For it is immensely improbable that there should be such an 
extraordinary run of coincidences, and it is incredible that all 
science and all the inductive inferences we make in ordinary practi- 
cal life should be unjustified. It has been objected to the argument 
from coincidence, that the notion of probability or improbability 
already presupposes causation so that the argument becomes a 
vicious circle; but this seems to be refuted by the fact that the 
notion of probability can be applied in mathematics, where 
causation does not occur. But there is in any case a certain lack 
of ultimacy about these arguments which does not leave one 
quite satisfied. One would have hoped that such a fundamental 
principle for our reasoning and life as causation could have been 
established in a different way. The argument could not of course 
in any case possibly prove that everything had a cause, only that 
there were some instances of causation in the universe. 



Cause 



DIFFICULTIES ABOUT THE APPLICATION OF 

Tm? PBTNrTPT.K OF QATISATJTY 

I have already indicated that what we usually call the cause of 
an event is not the cause, strictly speaking. Suppose a man killed 
by being shot through the head. We should ordinarily speak of 
the murderer as having caused his death by firing the pistol; but 
this event only produced death indirectly by first causing a series 
of intermediate events in the intervening atmosphere (stages in 
the bullet's motion). At any point in this intermediate process the 
bullet might have been arrested or deflected, and then death 
would not have occurred. We cannot therefore strictly speak of 
the firing of the pistol as the true cause. The cause would have to 
be the last stage in the intermediate process in question. But what 
would be the last stage? The stage at which the functioning of the 
brain (or heart) was brought to a standstill? But here we have no 
longer the cause of death but death itself, the effect, and since 
time and any process in time is indefinitely divisible we can never 
lay our hands on and specifiy the strictly immediate cause. Simi- 
larly, whatever happens depends partly on the environment as well 
as on the more obvious cause factors. If the air had become com- 
pletely unbreathable first, the shot would not have killed the man 
even if the bullet had gone through his brain, because he would 
have been dead already; and if the condition of the atmosphere 
immediately before had been even slightly different, though he 
would have still died from being shot, the condition of his body 
at death and therefore the total character of the event described 
as his death would have been slightly different. For to describe 
his death as the effect of firing the shot as the cause is really to 
make a very vague statement. It was not merely firing the shot 
but firing the shot under such and such conditions which brought 
about the man's death, and the effect of this total event was not 
merely the man dying, but the man dying in such and such a 
precise way. Death is a general description of a very large class of 
different bodily events (ignoring the mental side here for the sake 
of simplicity) and any difference in the condition of his body, 

174 



Cause 

however slight, would be a difference in this event. (Strictly 
speaking, the total effect would also have to include a great many 
other much less striking factors besides his death which we ignore 
on account of their relative unimportance, e.g. the displacement 
of air produced by the shot.) Arguments c^thisjdnd have_often 
led philosogjiers to say.hat__the^only true cause of any^ventjs 
the whole previous state of the universe. Of cours^ a momentary 
state is a mere abstraction, so what must be meant is some short 
section of the whoIFworlctlpTc^^Tnim^diately preceding. Fur- 
ther it would be recognized that it was equally true that the effect 
of this whole section was not any isolable event or events but the 
whole subsequent world process. These conclusions might have 
to be modified in view of the time needed for the transmission of 
light, which prevents changes in the remoter bodies being part 
of the immediate cause, but at any rate far more than we can ever 
give account of would have to be included in the total cause of 
any event. 

But that will be of little help to scientists. In order to predict 
or use causal arguments either for theoretical or for practical pur- 
poses we must be able to single out some parts in the whole 
universe from others and regard them as at least specially relevant 
to the effects predicted. It may be that everything had some causal 
connection with the death of the man, but at least we can pick 
out the firing of the pistol as more relevant than the ticking of the 
clock on the mantelpiece or millions of other things that one 
could name. It is said that every time we nod our head we shake 
all the stars, but this does not worry astronomers. The causal 
influence, though there, is so slight as to be practically negligible. 
Which events are likely to be specially relevant is largely deter- 
mined by previous experience, but we are also influenced con- 
siderably by certain assumptions about causation which can only 
be regarded as a priori in character. 



ADDITIONAL ASSUMPTIONS 

Of these a priori propositions about causation commonly believed 
or expectations as to what kinds of events are likely to be causes 



Cause 

we may mention the following. Distinct doubt has been cast on 
some in recent years, (a) It is assumed that mere space or time as 
such cannot be causes. No doubt an alteration of position in space 
may have very important effects. It would make a great deal of 
difference to my comfort if I shifted my position and sat in the 
fire, but then the unpleasant effects would be due not to the mere 
fact that I occupied a certain position in space but to my changed 
relation to certain objects in space., the burning coal, etc. It is 
assumed universally that there are no ultimate causal laws of the 
form if A moves to such and such a position in absolute space 
so and so will happen, or the mere lapse of such and such a period 
of time will produce such and such effects. If a change of position 
in space does seem to produce effects, we always assume that 
there must be some physical object causing the change even if we 
cannot detect it; and similarly, if without any apparent physical 
change mere lapse of time seems to produce an effect on some- 
thing, we assume that the effect is really due to a physical change 
which had remained undetected. This attitude may be defended 
on the ground that time and space are nothing in themselves, only 
the relations of things and events, or, even by somebody who held 
the absolute theory, on the ground that mere differences of position 
in space and time can never be causally relevant since every part 
of space and time is like every other except in so far as the objects 
and events present in the space and time are different, (b) A less 
moderate assumption than this is frequently made, namely, that 
no part of the cause can be separated by space or time from the 
effect except where there is an intermediate chain of causes 
between the two. Thus for A to affect B at a distance something 
must travel from A to B, and for a past event A to be even part 
of the cause of an event B occurring some time afterwards there 
must be an intermediate process of change caused by A and having 
as its immediate effect B. This proposition has less claim to self- 
evidence than (i), but has been very generally held. It has led to 
such unproved postulates as the ether' to account for bodies at a 
distance in space acting on each other and the theory of brain- or 
mind-traces to account for memory, which would otherwise in- 
volve the direct action on a present state of a past event, i.e. the 
event remembered, (c) It has till recently generally been assumed 

176 



Cause 

on a priori grounds that causally determined change is always 
continuous and does not proceed by jumps. That is, for something 
to increase in quantity or degree from A l to A n it must pass 
through all the intermediate degrees or quantitative determina- 
tions, and for something to move in space from one position to 
another it must pass through all the intermediate spaces. But the 
quantum theory in physics involves the rejection of this principle. 

(d) It is universally assumed that, other things being equal, an 
event is more likely to be relevant to the production of another 
event if it is near to that event in space and time than if it is 
remote. By assumption (b) it can indeed only be indirectly rele- 
vant if distant at all, but even indirect relevance may be very 
important, so (d) is not superfluous. The indirect causal influence 
of remote events is by no means wholly excluded, but in the hope 
of finding a cause attention is primarily directed to those events 
which are not remote. 

(e) It is generally assumed that A is more likely to exercise a 
causal influence on B if there is some affinity in kind between 
A and B than if there is not. If put in the dogmatic form that the 
cause must be like the effect, this principle is very dubious, but it 
may be of greater value if put in terms of probability. 

Whether these principles are strictly true or not, they have 
played a very important role in science and have to a large extent 
worked. Science depends on observation, but mere random 
observation would be of little use to the scientist. He must have 
an idea what to look for if he is to observe with effect. We are 
helped here by a distinction Kant drew between 'constitutive' 
and 'regulative' principles. The former assert that something is 
objectively true; the latter merely direct us to act as //"something 
were true. 1 In order to find out the cause of something we need 
clues where to look. Then we can test by experiment or repeated 
observation which of the possible events suggested by the clues 
are likely to have been causally relevant to events of the kind we 
are wishing to explain. We need not assert that it is impossible 

1 This is not the only meaning Kant attaches to 'regulative* principles. He describes 
the proposition that God exists as 'regulative', yet he certainly regards 'the proposi- 
tion as objectively true and one that we are entitled to believe to be objectively true. 
But I think it is what he generally means by 'regulative* principles when he is talking 
of science. 

M 177 



Cause 

that the principles I have mentioned should be violated, but it 
cannot be denied that they have been found very useful in suggest- 
ing where to look for causes. It is hard to see indeed why they 
should have worked as well as they have if there be no objective 
foundation for them, but this foundation might be stated in terms 
of probability. We should not say dogmatically that the cause 
always resembles the effect, but it may still well be true that in a 
given case, other things being equal, it is much more likely to do 
so than not, and that therefore it is rational to investigate first the 
possible causes which resemble the effect before we investigate 
those which do not. And similarly with the other principles, 
except, I think, the first, which does seem to me definitely true 
a priori. It may well be that these principles are not universally 
followed in nature but are much more commonly followed than 
not, at least with the type of events the scientist investigates and 
we encounter in daily life; 1 and if so it will, other things being 
equal, be more probable that any particular event in question will 
conform to them than not. Whether this is the meaning, the 
ground, or the consequence of their being more probable would 
be disputed, but at any rate the two more frequent occurrence 
and greater probabilitynormally go together. In deciding the 
causes of something it is undoubtedly not strict certainty but 
probability on which we have to act. 



MECHANISM 

The principles which thus guide men in deciding what causes 
what do not necessarily remain constant from age to age. A prin- 
ciple very generally accepted by scientists between Descartes and 
the present day, but now much more subject to question, is that 
of mechanism. This may take a more and a less extreme form. In 
its more extreme form it asserts that every change in the physical 

1 It might be objected in the case of the principle of continuity that, since accord- 
ing to the quantum theory, this does not hold for the electron, cases of its violation 
arc much more numerous and indeed universal, but it is at least true that things qua 
ordinarily observable normally act in a way like that which would follow from the 
principle of continuity. 

178 



Cause 

world could be predicted by a being with sufficient intelligence 
who knew the position of all the atoms at some previous time 
simply by applying the laws of motion. This recognizes only 
one kind of causation in the physical world and implies that mental 
events cannot cause or take part in causing any physical changes 
whatever. It implies, further, that none but primary qualities of 
matter can be real or at least have any causal efficacy. This view 
has been very commonly held in scientific circles, but scientists 
would certainly not be so dogmatic about it to-day. At a sub- 
atomic level it has certainly broken down, since Newton's laws 
of motion have had to be revised, and physicists cannot now even 
conceive what causal laws can determine a particular electron to 
take one course rather than another. 1 Yet many physiologists and 
biologists still believe that mechanical explanation in their sphere 
will ultimately prove sufficient. 

In its less extreme form the principle of mechanism asserts 
merely that every effect can be causally explained by resolving it 
completely into different factors and connecting them by causal 
laws with different factors in the cause. To many people this has 
seemed self-evident or identical with the principle of causation 
itself, yet it makes two assumptions which are by no means 
obviously true. One is that, if the effect consists of factors a, b, 
c, and d, its characteristics can be derived simply by summing 
these factors. But it seems at least very doubtful whether any 
exhaustive account of the characteristics or states of a living 
organism can be given by merely putting together the character- 
istics or states of the different living cells which make it up or of 
the chemical substances of which these cells are wholly composed. 
It is by no means self-evident that the corresponding assumption 
is true even of inorganic matter. The other assumption is that the 
different factors, which make up the whole of an event at any 
moment, if the former assumption be correct, can be treated as 
isolable from each other. In that case there will always be a law 
connecting any factor in the cause, x, with y, a factor in the effect, 
that will hold irrespective of whatever happens to the other fac- 
tors, or whether they are present at all. This assumption may like- 
wise be doubted without absurdity. The laws may only apply with- 

1 Vide below, p. 182 ff. 



Cause 

in a wider system or whole and be modified according to what 
happens to the other factors in that whole. 

This is relevant to the famous controversy between mechanism 
and vitalism in biology. The vitalists hold the view that a mechan- 
istic explanation of the growth and functioning of living organ- 
isms was on principle impossible, and conceived the alternative 
as the postulation of some extra Vital' factor which limits and 
controls the mechanism. But they have not succeeded as yet in 
giving any intelligible account of that factor; and it may well be 
that, even if the vitalists are right in asserting the impossibility in 
principle of a mechanical explanation, the solution does not lie in 
the admission of some additional non-mechanical factor, some 
special force of a new kind. It may lie rather in the acceptance of 
a kind of causation not recognized by the mechanist, a kind to 
which the two assumptions mentioned in the previous paragraph 
do not apply. 

It may be said on behalf of the mechanistic principle, in its 
more moderate form, that it is only in so far as it be applied that 
we can have a really satisfactory science, but after all we need not 
suppose that the world is made entirely for the convenience of 
scientists. Even if the mechanistic principle is not true of the 
world altogether, it must be, at any rate in regard to the parts 
with which we deal, sufficiently near the truth to account for 
the success of science in using it. But approximate truth is not the 
same as absolute truth. Whether in fact organisms can be adequ- 
ately dealt with on mechanical lines to the satisfaction of the 
biologist is a scientific not a philosophical question, but the philo- 
sopher may still do very useful work in trying to develop a clear 
conception of the issue between the two different kinds of 
causation. 

There is, however, in addition, the teleological difficulty which 

has led to the acceptance of the argument from design. 1 The 

trouble is that there is much in an organism that seems capable 

of explanation only by purpose, yet there is no mind attached to 

the organism which seems capable of the elaborate planning 

involved. Driesch, a famous modern biologist turned philosopher, 

postulated in order to account for this the existence of -a being 

1 Vide below, p. 225 ff. 

1 80 



Cause 

between mind and matter which he called an 'entelechy'. But 
Driesch's view is open to the objection that in order to account 
for the purposive character of organisms in this way we should 
have to suppose not a being below the rank of mind, as he sup- 
posed, but one in intelligence far above the cleverest human 
engineer. There are more cells in a human brain than there are 
inhabitants of the world, and each one is far more complex than 
any human machine. Therefore the entelechy he posits to run the 
machinery of our body, our own mind not consciously doing it, 
would have to be far more intelligent than we are; and the same 
would have to apply to the entelechies even of lower animals. 
That such intelligent beings are present in them is difficult to 
credit, and it was certainly not Driesch's intention to view them 
in that light. His entelechies were supposed to be not super- 
human but sub-human. 



181 



Chapter Nine 
FREEDOM 



r ^HE most intractable perhaps and certainly the most 

I humanly important philosophical problem connected 

I with causation is that of human freedom. The subject 

JL- has been debated mainly in connection with ethics and 

especially with the question of responsibility. It seems a necessary 

condition of responsibility for our actions that these should be 

free, yet this seems hard to reconcile with something else that we 

are also strongly inclined to believe, namely, that everything is 

caused. 



IS CAUSATION UNIVERSAL? SCIENCE AND 
INDETERMINISM 

It must, however, at once be said that the proposition that 
everything is caused is not clearly self-evident in the sense in 
which the fundamental principles of logic are and that no proof 
of it has been devised which is generally acceptable to philoso- 
phers. Till recently it was generally regarded as obviously true 
by scientists, and the whole scientific climate favoured the belief; 
but now this scientific climate has changed dramatically. Scientists 
now often say that the movements of the electron are undeter- 
mined, and since every physical thing is composed of electrons 
this would ultimately make all physical motion undetermined. 
This, however, is going too far, at least when put forward as a 
dogmatic truth. It may easily be shown that science cannot prove 
anything to be undetermined. Science can only prove something 
in two ways, (i) by observation, (2) by showing that to postulate 
it gives the best causal explanation of observed phenomena. Now 
absence of causal determination is not something that can possibly 

182 



Freedom 

be observed, and to postulate that something was causally un- 
determined obviously could not give the best causal explanation 
of any phenomenon. Science therefore cannot possibly establish 
indeterminism. The scientist may point out that we have no means 
of discovering what the causes are which determine electrons to 
take one path rather than another, but he is not entitled to say 
that therefore they are not determined by any causes. In fact two 
at least of the greatest physicists, Einstein and Planck, are still 
determinists, though they put determinism forward as a philo- 
sophic and not as a scientific opinion. On the other hand, if science 
cannot prove indeterminism, neither can it prove determinism. 
It cannot possibly predict every event in detail from its causes; 
the sphere of detailed reliable predictions is in fact very limited. 
This should be remembered by psycho-analysts, who sometimes 
talk as if they had shown that our whole character was determined 
by what happened in early childhood. They may be able to show 
that events in early childhood are very important for character 
formation, but they cannot possibly show that everything in a 
man's character is determined by them. To show this they would 
have to be able in a vast number of cases successfully to predict 
in advance from these events in detail, e.g. how far the person 
would resist each temptation. And if holders of the materialist 
theory of history really mean which I doubt whether they usually 
do that a man cannot go against his material interests or what 
he takes to be his material interests, they are certainly contradict- 
ing obvious facts of experience and going beyond any evidence 
which they could possibly supply. Has a rich man never volun- 
tarily given up wealth for the general weal or a nation been moved 
by nationalist fervour against what it takes to be and what really 
are its material interests? 

What the recent developments in science do show is that the 
whole causal scheme on which we based our account of larger 
objects cannot be applied to electrons and we know of none to 
replace it. But that it would apply was an assumption which we 
had no right to expect would be fulfilled. We cannot take for 
granted that laws which are suitable for dealing with planets can 
be satisfactorily applied to the tiniest and most elementary par- 
ticles of matter, any more perhaps than we can take for granted, 

183 



Freedom 

as the mechanist often does, that the same causal laws exactly will 
apply to living organisms and to the inorganic molecules of which 
they are ultimately composed. It was worth while trying both 
assumptions out in order to see whether and how far they worked, 
but no one was ever justified in asserting dogmatically that they 
must always be true or even always work. All the same, the fact 
that the movements of electrons are not caused in the way we 
used to think and that we cannot think of another way does not 
prove that they are not caused at all. On the other hand it must be 
admitted that, since determinism cannot be in any case proved, the 
prima facie plausibility of it has been lessened by recent scientific 
discoveries. A generation ago scientists thought they had know- 
ledge of causal laws which, granted a being had sufficient calculat- 
ing power, would enable him to predict all subsequent physical 
events from earlier events. They thought they knew, at any rate in 
general, for the physical world how determinism could be worked 
out, although they did not lay sufficient stress on the fact that they 
had not discovered similar laws for the mental world or for the 
connection between the physical and mental worlds. Now even 
in physics, their stronghold, the determinists have had to admit 
that they have no longer the slightest idea how determinism could 
be worked out. Human ignorance as to this has no tendency to 
prove that determinism could not be worked out, but it is taking 
the recent developments rather too lightly to say that they mean 
merely that we do not know the causal laws by which everything 
physical could be predicted, they mean rather that we do not see 
at all even what sort of laws they could be. However, since we have 
no scientific knowledge of anything about matter except its 
'primary qualities', which are really only external relations, our 
ignorance does not provide the slightest reason for thinking there 
cannot be such laws. What determines an electron to take one 
course rather than another might lie in the real qualities which 
appear to us as colour or other 'secondary qualities' or in some 
further qualities which do not appear to us in any form. It is 
logically impossible that matter could have no qualities but those 
we call primary, for the latter are really only relational properties, 
and relations imply something related the nature of which must 
be constituted by qualities which are not relational or at any rate 

184 



Freedom 

not merely relational. And if they have others besides the 'prim- 
ary qualities', these others may well have some causal efficacy, 
which we are not in a position to detect, since we are not aware 
of the qualities. 

It is in place here to make an additional remark about the recent 
scientific developments. Scientists have laid down what is known 
as the 'principle of indeterminacy' about electrons. According to 
this principle the position and momentum (i.e. ma'ss x velocity) 
of an electron could not both be determined exactly. The nearer 
we came to exactness in determining one, the more inexact an 
account of the other should we have to give. Now, as has often 
been pointed out, this indeterminacy must not be confused with 
indeterminism. To say that something cannot be exactly deter- 
mined in the sense of specifying precisely what it is is not the same 
as to say that it cannot be completely determined in the sense of 
causally determined. 'Determined' in the first sense rather means 
'determinate', and the noun 'indeterminacy' used to signify the 
situation is in fact derived from the adjective 'indeterminate'. It 
may however be contended that, if the positions of electrons are 
really 'indeterminate', they must be also causally undetermined, 
since we cannot have causes fixing exactly the position of some- 
thing that cannot have an exact position to fix. Yet to talk of the 
electron as really having no exact position seems to come peril- 
ously near to nonsense. Surely anything in space must either 
occupy a certain region of space or not occupy that region? Can 
there be any third alternative, provided the thing in question and 
the region are adequately defined? The principle of indeterminacy 
may, however, be interpreted in two ways both of which make 
perfectly good sense and neither of which implies the impossi- 
bility of causal determinism. The first way of interpreting it is as 
meaning that there are causal laws which make it impossible for 
us not only at the present stage of science, but on principle and 
for ever, to determine accurately both the position and the 
momentum of an electron. These would be connected with the 
unique position of light. In order to observe the electrons we 
should have in some way to use light, and owing to the extreme 
smallness of electrons we could not do so without shifting the 

185 



Freedom 

electron. We must therefore always be in regard to electrons in 
the same position as we should be in regard to the temperature of 
anything if in order to use a thermometer we had always to hold 
it in our hand and were unable to make any allowance for the 
effect of the heat of our hand. No development in the art of mak- 
ing more and more powerful microscopes could overcome this 
deficiency. But, if this is all that the principle of indeterminacy 
means, it does not imply that electrons cannot have an exact 
position or momentum, it only means at the most that there are 
causal laws which prevent these from ever being measured 
exactly. It does not even in fact show this, for it cannot exclude 
the possibility of their being determined by some method which 
no human being has ever yet thought of, or perhaps ever will 
think of, which would not be subject to these defects. . But, 
secondly, the principle may be interpreted as meaning something 
rather more radical. It may be that the position and momentum 
of the electron cannot be determined, not because there are causal 
laws which hinder its observation, but because it is the sort of 
thing that cannot have an exact position or momentum. Scientists 
used to think of atoms as little hard balls with relatively huge gaps 
between them, and the same conception was at first applied to the 
electron; but nowadays most physicists would admit that this is 
just an inadequate picture of truths about the structure^of matter 
which cannot really be pictured but only stated in mathematical 
form. In that case the electrons are not to be regarded as real 
physical things like stones, chairs, etc. It is sometimes said that the 
electron's position cannot be determinate because it is where its 
influence is and the latter extends over the whole universe in some 
minute degree, so that no precise limits can be set to it; but this 
is to give up the conception of the electron as a real physical thing 
and make the term a manner of speaking about causal laws. 

It remains true that we cannot see even on principle how deter- 
minism could be worked out for the inorganic world, and this 
applies still more clearly to the realm of minds. In the first place 
our causal explanation of physical changes is based to a large 
extent on the fact that different physical things are made of and 
can be split up into the same elements, which can exist apart from 
their compounds and still act according to the same physical laws 

1 86 



Freedom 

when thus separated. But there is obviously nothing corresponding 
to this in psychology. You cannot separate, for example, a man's 
anger from the rest of him and study it in isolation. Secondly, there 
seems no possibility of a precise measurement of mental states. 
This seems to exclude any method of predicting them in the least in- 
telligible to us. If determinism is a fact it must be on principle poss- 
ible to predict not only, for example, that a man will be angry on a 
given occasion, but exactly how angry he will be. Now we cannot 
predict what cannot be stated, and to state the degree of anger 
exactly we should need numerical terms. It is by measurement of 
things and subsequent application of mathematics on the basis of 
this that physical science makes its successful detailed predictions. 
Yet I do not see on principle how one could numerically measure 
psychological states as such, though one might measure their 
physiological concomitants. 

But, although we may have no idea how determinism is to be 
worked out, we certainly have an inclination to regard it as self- 
evidently true. That this is so may be shown as follows. Suppose 
I had been in a room alone and some article were to have changed 
its position. Then suppose on my being asked what caused this I 
replied: Terhaps it had no cause', would not most people think 
me almost insane, if they believed the answer to be seriously 
meant? That we have the tendency I have mentioned is not in- 
compatible with the fact that we also have a strong tendency to 
believe something incompatible with universal causality, namely 
that some events, i.e. acts of human free-will, are not caused. It is 
notorious that the same man may have a tendency to believe and 
even actually believe two incompatible propositions. And most 
philosophers have taken the proposition that every event is com- 
pletely determined as self-evident, with or without a proviso, 
about which they obviously felt difficulty, in regard to human 
free-will. Hume won his philosophical fame by raising difficulties 
about this more than by any other single contribution of his, but 
even he admitted that he could not help believing the proposition 
that every event was caused. His point was not that it must be 
rejected, but that, though we could not help believing it, it could 
not be justified or defended. I think it would be correct to say 
that between classical times and the present engeration serious 

187 



Freedom 

doubts about the universality of causation in the inorganic world 
were hardly ever felt by philosophers. Considerable weight must 
be attached to our tendency to regard the principle of universal 
causation as self-evident, though it must be admitted that its self- 
evidence does not possess the certainty attaching to the principles 
of logic, and that no proof of it has been given which has won 
anything like general acceptance among philosophers. Yet it is 
very hard to believe that things could happen without causes. 

It might seem as though universal causation could at least be 
defended as a necessary presupposition of science. Science deter- 
mines what are the causes of given kinds of events by observing 
what events do or do not precede events of the kind in question, 
but it may be argued that this procedure presupposes that there is 
some cause of the event. We determine the cause by what is essen- 
tially a method of elimination, but if we conclude that C is the 
cause of E by eliminating the other alternatives A, B, D, this 
obviously presupposes that there is some cause of E. Otherwise 
the elimination of A, B, D as possible causes would still leave open 
a second possibility, namely that there was no cause of E. This 
is an alternative which nobody, and especially no scientist, accepts 
in dealing with the ordinary physical phenomena encountered by 
us, whatever may be his attitude in regard to the freedom of the 
human will or the mystery of the electron. If determinism is thus 
a necessary presupposition of science, this will indeed be a strong 
argument in its favour; but it may be replied that all science needs 
to presuppose is not that there is in fact some cause of every event, 
but the practical postulate that we ought always to look for a 
cause. In this way we shall have the best chance of finding what 
events are caused. The postulate will be justified in practice if 
events are mostly mainly determined by causes, even if they are 
not always or completely so determined. 



CERTAIN PREJUDICES ABOUT DETERMINISM 

No doubt the indeterminism among electrons, if such occurs, 
is very different from the freedom of human beings, and it is 
largely on moral considerations that the case for indeterminism 

188 



Freedom 

at the human level has been based by its advocates. It is well to 
begin the discussion of this topic by dispelling certain prima facie 
objections to determinism which cannot be regarded as anything 
more than confusions. On being first confronted with determinism 
one is apt to think of it as if it meant that we were compelled to 
do whatever we did by something outside ourselves. That cer- 
tainly would be incompatible with the minimum freedom neces- 
sary for any sort of ethics, but this is not what the determinist 
means. He only maintains that a man's actions are determined by 
his own character together with his circumstances, so that he 
must have done what he did, his character and circumstances 
being what they were. He may reply that a man's character just is 
the man, and it is no lack of freedom to be determined by oneself; 
on the contrary freedom lies in .^-determination as opposed to 
determination by something else. He need not draw the practical 
conclusion, which has often confusedly been drawn from deter- 
minism, that it does not matter what we do because what happens 
is determined in any case. For, even if the future is always deter- 
mined, this does not prevent our will being one of the causes 
which determine it, and thus it docs matter what we will to do. 
If a father refuses to give medicine to his sick child on the ground 
that, if he is fated to die, the medicine will do no good, and if he 
is fated to recover the medicine will not be needed, he has over- 
looked the possibility that, even if the child's death or recovery 
be determined, among the causes that determine it may be just the 
act of the father in giving or not giving the medicine. Again 
determinism is not incompatible with what we call change of 
character. 'Character' may be used in a narrower and in a wider 
sense. In the former it stands for the habits according to which a 
man acts in a given part of his life, and in that sense of 'character' 
it is certainly an empirical fact that a man may change his charac- 
ter. But the determinist will say that he can only do so because of 
some more fundamental cause in his nature. All bad men would 
not be converted by the influence that converts any particular one; 
for him to be so affected he must have been the sort of man who 
would first go through a course of 'sowing his wild oats* and then, 
when he came under a certain influence, change violently. If so, 
that was part of his character in a wider sense, as it is part of the 

189 



Freedom 

nature of, for example, water, to change its original properties 
drastically when exposed to great heat or cold. 

Again determinism does not necessarily mean that the man is 
determined by bodily conditions only or that his physical actions 
are the result of exclusively mechanical causation. There are 
mental causes too. Nor does it mean that there is no sense of 
'could' in which a man could have acted in a way different from 
that in which he actually did act. Clearly the determinist can 
distinguish between cases in which a man is physically pushed 
and cases in which he acts as he chooses, and he may say that free 
action consists in the latter. He need not say that a man who 
voluntarily and deliberately jumps into a river in order to save 
another's life is no more free than one who is precipitated into 
the water by the collapse of a bridge. In one case what he prefers 
or chooses is quite irrelevant; in the other the action is caused by 
his choice, and would have been different or would not have 
occurred at all if he had chosen differently or not made the effort 
of choice. The question at issue is not whether we could or could 
not ever have acted differently, but in what sense of 'could' we 
could have done so. The indeterminist sense of 'could' is an 
absolute one; the determinist sense is a relative one. The deter- 
minist usually holds that we could have acted differently in the 
sense that we should have acted differently if our choice or act of 
willing had been different; the indeterminist asks whether we 
could also have chosen differently and insists that for us to be 
really free it must have been possible for us also to choose differ- 
ently, everything else being the same including our own nature. 
The determinist would say that to assert freedom in this sense was 
nonsense or at least incompatible with a well-established principle, 
that of causality. 

On the other hand determinists often talk as if the indeterminist 
meant that causation had no part at all to play in mental life. It 
obviously has; and if it were not so, we could never make any 
of the predictions about human behaviour on which our whole 
practical life depends. If I did not assume that the prospect of 
earning money had any causal influence on human beings, it 
would be senseless for me even to go into a jhop and try to buy 
something. The indeterminist need not suppose that our actions 

190 



Freedom 

and states of mind are unaffected by causes. All he need maintain 
is that they are not completely determined by causes. Suppose I 
commit some sin, say, tell a lie. The indeterminist need not and 
must not deny that my action is affected by causes. However bad 
a man I might be, I should not have told the lie at all if I had had 
no motive for it, i.e. if my state of mind had not been causally 
affected by any desire. And external circumstances must have been 
such as to stimulate the desire and to bring it about that I thought 
that lying presented the only or most convenient way of realizing 
my desire. That is the work of causation. Nor need the indeter- 
minist deny that, if I have often lied in the past, or if I have had a 
bad upbringing or bad friends, this will have a causal influence on 
my present state of mind. All he need hold is that these causes do 
not necessitate the lie. What he must say is that, when I sin, the 
causes might be just what they are and yet I might not have com- 
mitted the sin; otherwise I should not be responsible for it and 
therefore it would not be sin. He will admit that past wrong- 
doing makes me more likely to sin, but he will deny that it makes 
this inevitable except in the rare cases when persistent indulgence 
in a fault such as drug-taking has reduced a man below the level 
of a responsible human being in respect of the fault in question. 
Nor need the indeterminist maintain his view as regards all human 
states of mind and all the aspects of mental life. All he need main- 
tain is that we are free as regards acts of will. Those events in 
our life which do not involve a specific act of will may all be deter- 
mined. 

'Pragmatists' and 'existentialists' often maintain that not only 
our actions but our beliefs are or may be undetermined, but this is 
open to objections which do not affect a more moderate indeter- 
minism that applies only to actions. It may be objected that, for 
me genuinely to believe something, my state of mind must be 
determined by the evidence as it appears to me. I can act against 
what seems to me my duty, but I cannot hold a belief against 
what seems to me true, though it may well through error be 
against what is really evident or true. Tragmatists' have no doubt 
been right in emphasizing that our beliefs are very often affected 
by our volitions, though I think they have carried this well 
beyond the point of exaggeration, but the influence is indirect, not 

191 



Preedom 

direct. I cannot by a deliberate act of will force myself to believe 
something as I might deliberately force myself to do something 
physical; but if I want to believe something I can by an act of will 
avert my attention from the arguments against it while dwelling on 
those in its favour, or I can deliberately act as if the belief were 
true, and either course will be liable indirectly to produce in time 
a tendency genuinely to hold the belief in question. Similarly, if 
I like or dislike somebody, I cannot by an act of will at once make 
myself cease doing so and take the opposite attitude, but I may by 
acts of will indirectly affect my emotional attitude. Thus, if I set 
myself voluntarily to do good to somebody I dislike, I may come 
to dislike him less and perhaps even to like him. But I may quite 
well fail even in this indirect attempt to arouse a liking, still more 
a real affection, for him, and still more is it the case that there are 
many beliefs which no voluntary action on my part could possibly 
lead to my holding, however indirectly, because they go too much 
against my natural intellectual disposition or because they too 
obviously conflict with empirical facts. 

It has sometimes been claimed that we can see immediately that 
we are free in the indeterminist sense of 'free', but this view has 
usually and, I think, rightly been rejected by philosophers. It is 
at any rate plausible to hold that we can immediately see our will 
to be a cause, if not of physical movements, at least of mental 
events; but it does not seem to me at all plausible to hold that we 
can see immediately that our will is not an effect. 



ETHICAL ARGUMENTS 

A more serious case for indeterminism is based on the argument 
from ethics. Again, however, the case is liable to be much over- 
stated at any rate. The consistent determinist can still believe in 
ethics in the sense of believing that some states of affairs are good 
and some bad. That something is determined need not make it 
indifferent in respect of value: the fact that toothache is deter- 
mined does not prevent its being an evil. Now, if some states of 
affairs are good and others bad, clearly actions too can be dis- 

192 



Freedom 

tinguished as fight or wrong, at least in the sense of desirable 1 or 
the reverse, according as they promote good states of affairs or 
bad. And we can again distinguish between those actions which 
produce their good or bad effects through accident, so to speak, 
i.e. through the occurrence of unforeseen consequences, and those 
in which the good or bad effects are intended. The agent will be, 
even on the determinist view, responsible for the latter in a sense 
in which he is not responsible for the former, since they depend 
on his will. And there will still be a point in blame and even 
punishment on the determinist view. For, where bad effects pro- 
duced by a person depend on his will, their occurrence is an indi- 
cation that he is likely to produce bad effects in future also. These 
effects must be prevented, and experience shows that we can 
sometimes, though not always, modify a person's volitions by 
blame, punishment or threat of punishment, so that he ceases to 
produce the evil effects in question. An adequate reason for dis- 
tinguishing acts of volition from other causes such as disease or 
unavoidable ignorance may be said to lie in the fact that we can 
only apply the above treatment to the former and not to the latter. 
But the indeterminist will still contend that, while some goods 
and evils may be determined, an action can never have the quality 
of moral goodness or of moral badness if determined. He will 
insist that the sense we have of remorse and shame for an act just 
derives. its sting from the fact that we could have acted differently 
then, whatever our previous actions and states of mind may have 
been. Kant, though not himself an indeterminist, states the case 
against the view that all our actions are determined by previous 
events very effectively when he says that, even if the causes are 
our own past acts, we cannot alter the past now and so are never 
free now if this determinism is true. The indeterminists, and Kant 
himself, add this further argument. It is all very well to say that 
we are free if our actions spring from our own character, but how 
did we get our character? Presumably it was the result of environ- 
ment and heredity. In so far as it was due to the former it was 
admittedly not due to ourselves, in so far as it was due to the 
latter, it was again not due to ourselves but ultimately to our 

1 i.e. not merely desired, but such that it is rational to desire their occurrence. 
N 193 



Freedom 

parents or God. So how can we be responsible for it and therefore 
the actions that spring from it? Even if we suppose that we lived 
in some other realm before birth, this only puts the question 
further back. Whenever we began to exist, our existence and 
original nature must on the determinist view have been brought 
about by some causes; and since we did not exist before, these 
cannot lie in us. Even if we make the fantastic supposition that we 
always existed and never began to exist, this only produces a sort 
of vicious infinite regress. Every act of mine was determined by 
previous causes and therefore, it may be argued, I can never be 
or have been free at any given time because, whatever time I take, 
my actions then were determined by earlier ones which I could not 
alter once they had been performed. 



ACTION AGAINST THE STRONGEST DESIRE 

An argument on which indeterminists often lay much stress is 
that determinism is incompatible with the apparent fact that one 
can act against the strongest desire. We sometimes not nearly so 
often as we ought in the case of most of us, but still sometimes 
perform actions of which we should say that they were not really 
at all what we wanted most to do at the time. These atfe the cases 
of hard choice, where it costs us an effort to do what we decide to 
do because in doing it we have to go against a strong desire, 
while if we had acted otherwise we should not have had a struggle 
against our desires. No doubt we should not do anything at all 
(except mechanically out of habit) if we had no desire to do it 
whatever either for its own sake or for its consequences. Even 
when a man sacrifices everything for conscience' sake, he clearly 
would not do so if he had no desire at all to do what his conscience 
approves. Even if he dislikes all the consequences of his action, 
he must have some desire to do his duty for duty's sake. Some 
philosophers like Kant would refuse to call this motive a desire, 
but even Kant has to admit that it is analogous to a desire. Now 
it does not seem much to matter whether we say that it is not a 
desire but analogous to one or say that it is a desire but admit, 
as we should again have to, that it is very different from other 

194 



Freedom 

desires. The question is then not whether we can act without any 
desire at all, but whether we can act against the strongest desire. 
It might seem that, if determinism is true, we must always act 
according to the strongest desire; and this has been used as an 
argument against determinism. If the premise is right, it is a 
formidable one, since empirical facts certainly seem inconsistent 
with the view that we can never act against the strongest desire; 
but I think myself that the determinist may meet the objection by 
pointing out an ambiguity in the phrase 'strongest desire'. This 
phrase may mean (i) the desire which prevails, and in that case it 
will obviously be impossible to act against it. For, if we act 
against a given desire, it will ipso facto not be the desire which 
prevails with us. But in that case to say that we cannot act against 
the strongest desire will be merely to enunciate a verbal proposi- 
tion with which everybody would agree. But (2) what "action 
against the strongest desire' usually means is 'action against the 
desire we feel most strongly'. Now to say that we cannot act 
against the strongest desire in this sense is by no means a tauto- 
logy, but it is by no means evident even on the determinist view 
that it is true. For, even if we know that our actions are always 
completely determined by some causes or other, this does not 
settle the particular causal laws by which they are determined; 
and it is by no means evident that the causal efficacy of a desire is 
in proportion to the keenness with which it is felt by us. To say 
that it is in proportion to this is to assert an alleged causal law, and 
propositions about causal laws are usually, if not always, far from 
evident a priori, at least to human beings. Certainly this one is. 
Further, it seems as clear that it contradicts empirical facts as does 
almost anything in psychology. Our only evidence for or against 
a psychological generalization is derived from two sources (a) 
introspection, (V) the behaviour and statement of others. Now on 
most mornings it is quite clear to introspection that, when I get 
out of bed, I am not yielding to the desire which I feel most 
strongly at the moment. It is further clear that the hypothesis that 
other people always act according to the desire which they feel 
most strongly is not adequate to explain their behaviour, e.g. to 
pass from a trivial to a grave instance, it is quite inadequate to 
explain the behaviour of martyrs who have endured tortures 



Freedom 

rather than betray what they thought to be the truth. .And it is 
far from agreeing with vast numbers of reports of others on their 
own experience. It is incompatible with the well-authenticated 
fact of moral struggle. Though a drunkard must often feel some 
desire to avoid at any rate the bad effects of drunkenness, there is 
a very significant difference between the cases in which he acts in 
accordance with that desire and the cases in which he acts in 
accordance with the desire to drink. If he does not drink he has 
to 'fight' against his desire to drink, but if he drinks you never 
hear of him having to 'fight' against his desire to remain sober. 
And a special moral significance and moral worth is attached to 
those actions which involve fighting against the desire we feel 
most strongly. It may be retorted that in such a case the desire 
we feel less strongly is really stronger, since otherwise it would 
not move us to act; but what is the measure of the 'real' strength 
of a desire? We cannot employ a dynamometer to settle this 
question. The only way of measuring a desire is either by the way 
it feels or by its effects on action. But if we fall back on the latter 
method, we are really only asserting that we cannot act against the 
desire according to which we act. It seems to me that the plausi- 
bility of the view that we always act according to the strongest 
desire depends mainly on a confusion between this tautology, if 
'strongest desire' is taken to mean 'the desire which prevails', and 
the causal proposition that we always act according to the desire 
which we feel most strongly. The proposition that we must always 
act according to the desire which prevails is evident but says 
nothing except that we cannot act without some desire (which 
may be admitted); the second proposition says something much 
more significant, if it be true, but is far from evident and is not 
supported empirically. But to say that we can act against the 
strongest desire is not to say that determinism is false; it is merely 
to say that desires do not always produce effects in proportion to 
their felt keenness. Our actions may still be produced by causal 
Jaws of some sort, even though this particular causal law does not 
universally hold of them. The fact of action against the strongest 
desire cannot therefore, I think, be used against determinism. 



196 



Freedom 



DETERMINISM AND RESPONSIBILITY 

Another argument, which many indeterminists use, is connected 
with punishment. The determinist, as we have seen, can justify 
punishment on utilitarian grounds. It may deter people from 
committing crimes and it may possibly make the person punished 
less likely to repeat his offence, but most people feel that this is 
not an adequate account of punishment. There is also the notion 
of desert. We have the feeling that a man deserves to be punished 
just because he has done wrong and not for ulterior consequences. 
This has led to some very unsatisfactory and even barbarous 
theories of retributive punishment; but if we reject it altogether, 
it is difficult to see how we can defend the horror we feel at the 
punishment of the innocent on utilitarian grounds. Now this 
feeling is specially connected with the belief that the man could 
have acted differently. It is, for reasons which do not themselves 
presuppose the determinist position, a doubtful question whether 
a non-utilitarian view of punishment can be maintained, but it 
certainly is an ethical belief which we seem to see instinctively to 
be true prior to philosophical reflection. 

In any case, whether we accept such a view of punishment or 
not, we cannot escape from the notion of a special responsibility 
for those actions we have done voluntarily, and at least at the 
common-sense level this notion is inseparably linked up with 
absence of causal determination. The determinist may give an 
account which does far more justice to ethics and even to moral 
responsibility than would have seemed possible for him to do at 
first sight, but he cannot completely reconcile his view with the 
ethical views of the plain man. Our decision on the issue between 
determinism and indeterminism will therefore depend a great deal 
on what view we take of ' common-sense ethics*, by which I mean 
the ethical views that a good and rational man will seem to see 
himself bound to regard as true apart from specifically philo- 
sophical reflection. If the philosopher must accept such views in 
toto y he must certainly be an indeterminist. But it would be un- 
reasonable to suppose that such common-sense views are neces- 



Freedom 

sarily always exactly right if only because they differ from age to 
age and from land to land, though on the other hand some con- 
siderable weight must be attached to such a widespread ethical 
belief as that about responsibility to which I have referred, and 
this weight will be greatly increased for a philosopher who finds 
that after careful philosophical reflection he cannot himself get rid 
of the belief. The question will then be whether determinism 
logically involves a sufficiently great divergence from the ethical 
views which we cannot help holding in our best moments to con- 
stitute a serious objection to it. It is in a way a question of degree. 
On the one hand we have no right to expect that the common- 
sense conceptions of responsibility will be exactly right; on the 
other we should certainly be justified in rejecting determinism if 
it were shown to be incompatible with any tolerable system of 
ethics. Determinism cannot after all be proved, and we know some 
ethical propositions, such as that it is wrong to ignore the interests 
of others, with almost as much certainty as we know anything. 
But is it a question of contradicting the fundamental presupposi- 
tions of ethics or of merely amending slightly a concept as difficult 
as that of responsibility? The determinist may contend that his 
view is quite compatible with responsibility in a sense in which 
it fulfils most of the ethical purposes required of it. Let us now 
see how he can develop his case. 

We have already seen that, since on any view some acts produce 
desirable results and some undesirable, the determinist can point 
to a perfectly good sense in which some acts are preferable to 
others. Now for the production of preferable acts a good will is 
particularly desirable. We have seen that blame and punishment 
may be justified even on the determinist view as means to the 
production of this or at least to the improvement of a bad. Now 
let us understand by 'blaming' a man (morally) for an action say- 
ing or indicating that the action shows badness of will. This is 
by no means an unplausible definition of moral blame. We can 
now at once see a sense of "could* in which it is obviously a neces- 
sary prerequisite of just moral blame that the man blamed could 
have acted differently. For, unless the commission or omission of 
the action depended at least partly on the man's will, it is obvious 
that the omission of it could not possibly be an indication of bad- 

198 



Freedom 

ness of will. It might be an indication of some other defect, e.g. 
physical weakness or stupidity, but it could not be an indication 
of the specifically moral defect, which is a defect of will. To say a 
man morally ought not to have done something then implies that 
he could have acted differently in the sense that the action would 
have been prevented by a difference in his will, either by his will- 
ing instead of not willing to do something or vice versa, or by his 
willing more strongly and persistently than he did. This gives the 
determinist sense of 'could': it is perfectly intelligible and can be 
shown to be implied by moral obligation. But, the indeterminist 
asks, granted that the man could have acted differently if he had 
willed differently, could he have willed differently? The deter- 
minist may reply that the question is an illegitimate one (on his, 
not of course on the indeterminist, view of responsibility). For, 
if we define 'could' as before, the question whether a man could 
have willed differently becomes: Would a difference in his will 
have made a difference to his will? To say that it would is a tauto- 
logy. The determinist can say that it remains true that a man's will 
sometimes is bad, however he got it, and that to blame him mor- 
ally is just to say that it is bad. Even if he just inherited it, a bad 
disposition of will is bad. 

Is this position ethically satisfactory? An objection sometimes 
brought by the indeterminist is that it would be wrong to blame 
two men equally for committing the same offence if one had had 
a good home and education and the other a bad, and that this 
implies that in so far as the badness of a man's will is determined 
it is not to be regarded as blameworthy. To this the determinist 
may reply that at the most the argument would show not that it is 
not blameworthy in so far as determined but only in so far as 
determined by circumstances external to the agent. And he may 
explain and justify our attitude by saying that the same action 
would be indicative of much greater depravity of will if per- 
formed by a man who had had the advantages of a good home and 
education than if performed by somebody who had had the corre- 
sponding disadvantages. And if indicative of greater badness of 
will, it should even on the determinist view be blamed more. 

The indeterminist may also bring this objection. Suppose the 
case of a man who by habitual indulgence in a drug weakens his 

199 



Freedom 

will. At any time, however far he has developed this habit, it will 
be true to say that he would cease to take the drug if he willed 
with sufficient strength and persistence to do so. Therefore on the 
determinist definition of 'could' it will always be the case that he 
could have ceased taking the drug. It will always be true that a 
certain change in his will would have stopped the habit. Yet 
everybody would agree that a time might arrive in which his will 
was so affected by the bad habit that he could not give up the 
latter. It is impossible in practice to decide when that time has 
arrived with anyone, probably even for the man himself, but it 
does seem clear that, when once it has arrived, the man is no 
longer to blame for taking the drug. He is of course to blame for 
his previous acts of taking the drug which brought him to this 
hopeless pass, but once he is in such a state it does seem that he 
cannot be blamed for going on taking it. This seems to show that 
there are cases in which a person is not to blame for an act even 
though it is still true that a difference in his will would have led 
to his acting differently, and that therefore for a man to be morally 
blameworthy it is required not merely that he could have acted 
differently in the determinist sense but in some more absolute 
sense of 'could'. It does not seem sufficient that he should have 
been able to act differently if he had willed with sufficient force 
and persistence; what seems needed is that he should also have 
been able so to will. 1 To this the determinist might reply by draw- 
ing another distinction. He could say that it all depends on what 
prevents him from willing rightly. A hard act of will requires a 
very considerable degree of mental concentration. Now if the 
drug habit has brought the man into such a physical and psycho- 
logical condition that he simply cannot attend effectively, in the 
same sort of sense as I could not attend effectively to my philo- 
sophical work if I had been several nights without sleep or if I had 
just heard that I had incurable cancer, then he is not to blame, for 
his action is then no longer indicative of a present bad will any 
more than I could be morally blamed for laziness because I failed 
to attend to my work under the conditions specified. But suppose 
the man in question defended himself as follows: I admit that my 
physiological constitution is as yet unimpaired by the drug. I 

1 C. D. Broad, Determinism, Indeterminism and Liber tarianism> pp. 11-12. 
2OO 



Freedom 

admit that I have as much power of concentration as any normal 
person. My judgement is quite unclouded, so that I am perfectly 
aware of the harm that I am doing and how wrong it is to do it. 
But owing to persistent indulgence in the drug I have come to be 
the sort of person who prefers gratifying his desires to acting 
rightly, and therefore I continue taking the drug, since it is now 
my nature to do so. Is this to be taken as an excuse? Should he 
not still be blamed, not only for his past acts which have brought 
him to this condition, but for his subsequent continuance in the 
habit of taking the drug? This suggests that it is not mere deter- 
mination but determination by factors other than the state of a 
man's will which is incompatible with moral responsibility. 

It should of course be admitted by either party that there are 
degrees of responsibility, and that the blameworthiness of a wrong 
action is lessened in proportion to the strength of the temptation 
which led to its commission. On this account the blameworthiness 
of the successive actions of the drug-addict would diminish as the 
habit acquired a firmer hold and the craving to take the drugs 
became stronger. There are indeed some wrong actions, such as 
betraying one's friends in order to avoid the most excruciating 
tortures, for which we should hardly blame a man, not because 
we do not think them to show a defect in his state of will com- 
pared with the ideal, but because we believe that the vast majority 
of other men would have shown a similar or worse defect under 
similar conditions. We find, however, that men who have a very 
high ideal often blame themselves bitterly, where nobody else 
would dream of blaming them for such actions. We do not blame 
insane people; but the ground for this can hardly lie in our 
believing their actions to be all determined. With most insane 
there is no more evidence for this than there is in the case of 
normal man. The common attitude towards them should be based 
rather on our inability to decide which of their actions imply 
moral badness and in what degree. They may do the most atro- 
cious things and yet be morally as good as or better than the 
average man. Indeed it may be a mark not of moral badness but 
of goodness on the part of an insane man to commit a murder; 
because as the result of a delusion which he cannot help having 
he genuinely believes it to be his duty. It would then' be wrong 

201 



Freedom 

to punish him for it, both for this reason and because there is no 
ground for thinking that punishment will improve his condition. 

The determinist will end with a counter-attack. He will argue 
that it is not determinism but indeterminism which is incom- 
patible with responsibility. It is easy enough, he will say, to see 
how I can be responsible for a wrong action if it follows from a 
bad character, i.e. from something bad in me. But in that case it 
will be determined; and it is more difficult to see how I can be 
responsible if the act is not determined by my nature, does not 
spring from anything in me. The determinist may therefore 
plausibly occupy almost exactly the reverse position to the in- 
determinist. The indeterminist says that I can only be morally 
responsible for my actions in so far as they are undetermined; the 
determinist retorts that I can only be responsible for my actions 
in so far as they are determined. 

Another argument that the determinist may use is this. If we 
imagine a perfect being it does not matter for the purpose of 
this argument whether such a being actually exists or not his 
nature would have to be such that he always inevitably did what 
was right and therefore he would never be free at all in the sense 
of the indeterminist. Yet such a being would obviously be more 
and not less free than we are. If so, determinism cannot be in- 
compatible with freedom. 

In view of these arguments it is not hard to see why many 
philosophers have been satisfied with determinism. Yet we must 
emphasize that the principle that every event is completely deter- 
mined by causes has not been proved and is not clearly self- 
evident. We cannot even conceive a way in which determinism 
could plausibly be worked out in detail for the mind; 1 and even 
if it be true of the material world, doubtful as this may be nowa- 
days, mind and matter are sufficiently different for us to have no 
good ground for concluding by analogy that it is true of mind. It 
is therefore perfectly reasonable for anyone who thinks deter- 
minism hopelessly incompatible with ethics to reject it outright. 
If he does this, he will not be contradicting anything which we 
are entitled to believe with anything like the degree of certainty 

1 Vide above, pp. 186-7 
202 



Freedom 

with which we can believe some propositions of ethics. There 
remains, however, the question whether indeterminism is really 
required by ethics. 

Probably the great majority of people who consider the question 
do not feel that determinism does full justice to the conception of 
moral responsibility, whether they reject determinism on that 
account or whether they prefer to amend their conception of 
responsibility. The indeterminist will, if he is wise, admit that 
determinism can be worked out in a way compatible with a great 
deal in ethics, but he will insist that on this point it breaks down. 
He will admit that some things may be good, e.g. happiness or 
knowledge, or bad, e.g. pain or ugliness, although they are deter- 
mined; but he will deny that actions can be good or bad in the 
specifically moral sense (though they can be useful or harmful) 
unless they are undetermined. He will emphasize the connection 
between the experience of remorse and the consciousness that I 
might have acted differently in spite of my past habits and innate 
disposition and was not just badly constituted, so constituted that, 
my character being what it was, I could not act differently. And he 
will play as his strongest card the argument that, if determinism 
is true, my character is originally determined in its entirety not 
by myself but by my ancestors and that I am therefore not respon- 
sible for it. To the argument that I cannot be responsible for 
actions, which do not spring from my character he may retort that 
character is not to be regarded as a positive set of qualities separ- 
able from what I do and experience. We cannot form any idea of 
kindness as a quality of character over and above the willing of 
kind acts. The indeterminist may therefore contend that a man's 
acts are not determined by his character, because his character is 
merely a name for the kind of free acts he performs. To the argu- 
ment from the conception of a perfect man indeterminists would 
differ in their replies. Most would probably retort that such a man 
would indeed always do what is right but would not be con- 
strained by his character to do so. Such indeterminists would 
attribute undetermined free will even to God. Others would, 
however, admit that such a perfect man, or at least a god, would 
be determined, but would say that for beings at our imperfect 
level freedom and so the precondition of moral value lay in in- 

203 



Freedom 

determinism. A really perfect being might enjoy freedom in a 
higher sense and not need this freedom, but for us it was the only 
real freedom. 



ATTEMPTED INTERMEDIATE SOLUTIONS 

The decision between the rival claims of the determinist and 
the indeterminist is of course a matter where different philo- 
sophers give very different answers. As I have indicated, the issue 
turns largely on the degree to which we think it permissible to 
diverge from our common-sense instinctive ethical beliefs on the 
question of responsibility. But we must not suppose that the only 
alternatives are the acceptance of indeterminism and the admission 
of the view that everything we do is completely determined by 
preceding events. There are intermediate alternatives which have 
been put forward as solutions. Desperate attempts have in fact 
been made to arrive at a conception of psychological causation 
which avoids the objections of either side. These mostly take the 
form of contending that, although acts of will are determined, 
they are not determined by previous events. The advantage of 
such a solution lies in this circumstance. It seems, on the one hand, 
as if the mere fact that our action is determined by something in us 
should not be incompatible with our being free but is rather a 
necessary presupposition of our being free. But, on the other 
hand, there is the objection that, if our actions are all completely 
determined by past events, we are never free now because we 
cannot alter the past. The solution in question would be in accord 
with the determinist argument based on the first point and yet 
escape the indeterminist objection based on the second point. Ajid 
certainly 'character', which is said by the determinist to determine 
our actions, cannot just be identified with any series of past events. 
But it is extraordinarily difficult, and so far has proved impossible, 
to work out a clear idea of this causation which is not causation 
by the past alone. It must, however, be pointed out in favour of 
the view that we seem constrained to admit on grounds quite 
independent of ethics that a mental state can sometimes be deter- 
mined by something which is in no wise a past event. When I 
know something, my mental state is presumably determined by 

204 



Freedom 

the fact which I know. 1 1 should be Joy no means in the same state 
if I did not know it. Yet what I know is by no means always a 
past event. In mathematics, for example, it is not an event at all. 

Another solution offered is to the effect that the problem de- 
pends on the supposition that the cause necessitates in the sense 
of compelling the effect, whereas it only necessitates it in the sense 
of justifying an inference from which the effect would necessarily 
follow. It is just as true that the past can be inferred from the 
future as that the future can be inferred from the past, it is argued, 
yet nobody thinks that therefore we were not free in the past 
because our past acts were necessitated by the future. Why there- 
fore should one think that our future acts will not be free because 
necessitated by the past? But, while it is certainly impossible to 
prove that the past necessitates the future in any sense other than 
the one just mentioned, yet most philosophers find it difficult to 
get rid altogether of the notion of the future as being necessitated in 
some other sense in so far as it is determined by causation, and this 
solution is therefore very far from having given general satisfaction. 

One solution which suggests itself to me as a possibility is this. 
The determinist argues that responsibility implies determination 
by something in the agent and so by his character; the indeter- 
minist argues that on the determinist view a man cannot be free 
or responsible because his character is ultimately determined not 
by himself but by his ancestors or by God. Suppose we accept 
both arguments: then we arrive at the conclusion that a man's 
acts are determined by his character (together with his circum- 
stances), but that the man's character is not completely deter- 
mined by anything, each man being in some degree a genuine new 
beginning. In that case we seem to escape both the indeterminist 
and the worst determinist difficulty about responsibility. We can 
then hold that a man's actions follow from his character without 
thereby making them ultimately the product of something other 
than the man himself. Only we must not think of character as a set of 
qualities over and above the actions and states' of mind in which it 
finds expression but rather as just a set of laws governing the latter. 

1 It may be objected that it need not be known directly, but in that case we can 
argue that our state of mind is determined by the facts (which likewise need not be 
events in time but may be logical or mathematical laws) from which we infer it. 

205 



Chapter Ten 

MONISM v. PLURALISM. UNIVERSALS 



T 



DEGREES OF MONISM 

' ^HE issue between determinism and indeterminism is 
one of the issues between the type of view which is 
called monistic and the type which is called pluralistic 
in philosophy. No precise definition of these terms is 
possible, the difference between the two kinds of view being a 
matter of degree; but we may say that a monist is a person who 
emphasizes the element of unity in the universe more, a pluralist 
one who emphasizes more the element of plurality. Undoubtedly, 
if indeterminism is true, the world is less of a unity than if every- 
thing is rigidly determined so that nothing could be different 
without other things being so. And in general, since the monist 
will tend to emphasize the whole at the expense of the individual, 
the element of order at the expense of the element of spontaneity, 
and the pluralist will tend to lay the emphasis in the^reverse 
direction, the latter is on the whole more likely than the former to 
do justice to human freedom. We cannot assume that, because a 
person is pluralistic in general in his philosophical outlook, he 
will necessarily be an indeterminist, or that because he is monistic 
on the whole he will necessarily be a determinist, but there is 
certainly a general tendency in this direction. 

Only there are all sorts of degrees of monism and pluralism. 
The extremist kind of monism asserts that everything is just One 
and there is nothing more to be said about it. In that case every- 
thing practically that we experience would have to be a sort of 
illusion because everything is certainly not just one as it appears 
to us. Less extreme forms assert that everything is one substance 
though with different attributes (Spinoza), or a single experience 
(Absolute Idealism), or one logical system (the coherence theory). 
The pluralist maintains that the cosmos is made up of a number of 

206 



Monism v. Pluralism 

disconnected entities not necessarily bound up with each other, 
so that they could quite well exist apart. Theism, as ordinarily 
believed, may be regarded as a form of monism since it admits that 
the world is created and controlled by a single all-powerful mind. 
But it stops short of more thorough-going forms of monism in 
that it gives human minds a kind of relative independence, hold- 
ing them not to be included in, though created by and dependent 
on, the divine mind. The view according to which God actually 
includes in himself, and does not merely create, everything there 
is is commonly known as pantheism. Christian thought has often 
tended in the direction of pantheism, but before this point was 
reached the movement has always been condemned as unortho- 
dox. But orthodox Christianity itself, since it asserts the absolute 
dependence of everything on a single omnipotent mind and a 
single purpose, goes very far in the direction of monism, even 
when this is toned down by the admission of the undetermined, 
though very limited, freedom of the human will. The view of 
'Manichaeism' which makes the devil an independent rival of 
God, and not a being created by Him but fallen and allowed for 
God's good purposes to exercise his free-will till his own inevit- 
able defeat, is of course much less monistic. Relatively few philo- 
sophers have adopted an at all radically pluralist view till very 
recent times. Leibniz (1646-1716) is often described as a pluralist 
because he denied that the different beings in the universe inter- 
act, but it seems to me that he would have been more appropriately 
described as on the whole a monist. For he supposed all other 
beings to have been created by a single one, God, in such a way 
that there was a harmony and rigid correspondence between them 
in a single system in which everything was determined by God's 
purpose down to the smallest detail. Extreme pluralism is asserted 
by Bertrand Russell who thinks that 'the universe is all spots and 
jumps, without unity, without continuity, without coherence or 
orderliness or any of the other properties that governesses love'; 1 
but in another sense in an earlier work he calls himself a monist 
because he puts forward the theory that there are not two irredu- 
cibly different kinds of substance, body and mind, but that 
everything we know is made of one kind of stuff. 
1 The Scientific Outlook, p. 98. 
20 7 



Monism v. Pluralism 



FACTORS MAKING AGAINST PLURALISM 

The relative unimportance of pluralism at most periods may be 
ascribed to various causes: (i) To believe in one God is itself to 
adopt a fairly monistic view of the universe, and the belief in one 
God has been general in most periods we study historically. (2) 
What I have called the entailmerit theory of causation has gener- 
ally, consciously or unconsciously, been assumed, and this theory 
carries with it a considerable degree of monism. If two things 
entail each other, they necessarily belong together and cannot be 
separated, and though everything does not itself cause and there- 
fore entail every other particular thing, everything we know is at 
any rate either directly or more or less indirectly causally con- 
nected. (3) There is a natural tendency, very strong in some 
human beings and present in some degree in most, to regard it as 
intellectually, and in other ways too, more satisfying to think ot 
the universe as a unity than as a plurality. This tendency is specially 
marked in many highly religious minds, and its strong develop- 
ment is one of the chief features which differentiate what is com- 
monly known as mysticism from other types of religion. The great 
mystics have claimed that they could be immediately awate of an 
enormously greater unity between things than any which appears 
on the surface or even any which is recognized in non-mystical 
forms of religion. They do not claim to reach their position 
entirely by intellectual argument, and often regard the intellect 
with considerable contempt, but they still frequently use highly 
abstract intellectual arguments as a means of approach. The most 
intellectual type of mystic is represented by Spinoza (1632-77). 
He claims to give a strict logical proof of his philosophical doc- 
trines, but he seems also to be laying claim to an insight which he 
could only attain by appreciating the force of these arguments but 
which, once he has attained it, is capable of carrying him beyond 
anything that he could prove by argument. Most mystics would 
not give so important a place as Spinoza does to rational proofs, 
but they have very commonly paved the way for their mysticism 
by the use of arguments which purported to disclose contradic- 

208 



Monism v. Pluralism 

tions in the world of everyday life. By showing the latter world to 
be self-contradictory and therefore unreal, they thought they 
could prepare the way for the vision and acceptance of what they 
thought on the strength of their mystical insight to be the true 
reality. 

The entailment theory of causation has been discussed already, 
and the question of theism will be discussed in the last chapter. 
The more general arguments used in favour of monistic views 
turn more than anything on the nature of relations and are on the 
whole too subtle for discussion in a book of this type. The monists 
have commonly thought that two different things could only be 
related if they formed a unity so that they could not ulti- 
mately be separated. From this they have drawn two alternative 
conclusions. Some have inferred that, since everything is related 
in some way to everything else, the universe as it stands must be 
regarded as a very closely knit unity. Others have contended that 
the world as we experience it is clearly not such a unity, and have 
concluded that relations are 'unreal', being the imperfect expres- 
sion of a unity too close to be adequately described in relational 
terms. For such thinkers the world of daily life is appearance just 
because it is not a close enough unity to satisfy us intellectually 
and spiritually. In reply to these arguments more pluralistically 
inclined thinkers have drawn a sharp distinction between mere 
relation and logical connection. It does not seem to me that the 
monists have succeeded in showing that the mere fact that two 
things are related proves that they are connected logically so that 
the one could not have existed without the other or so that the 
existence of the relation necessarily followed from the existence 
of the terms. On the other hand, it is possible that something 
rather like the monists wish to prove might be established in- 
directly not from the nature of all relations as such but from the 
entailment theory of causation. If the cause entails the effect 
logically and every event is caused, every event is logically depen- 
dent on and necessitated by the rest of the universe as a whole, 
so that if we knew all the other facts and had sufficient intelli- 
gence, we should see that the event could not possibly have been 
different from what it was. And even if we combined the entail- 
ment view of causation with indeterminism, we should have at 

O 209 



Monism v. Pluralism 

any rate to admit that causality was sufficiently pervasive to make 
the world, not indeed a thorough-going logical system, but some- 
thing very like one, though with certain gaps owing to human 
free will. Further, it seems much more difficult to draw a sharp 
distinction between the internal nature of a thing and its relations 
than pluralists have usually supposed. What would be left of me 
if you took away all my relations to everybody and everything 
besides myself? 

PLURALISM AND PRACTICE 

But, even if there are philosophical grounds for assuming that 
everything is logically corrected with everything else so that 
nothing could conceivably have been different everything else 
being what it is, it must be admitted that at any rate we cannot 
see the logical connections in question. Further, whatever the 
relation between different things, it must vary greatly in degree 
of closeness. If all the relations of a thing are relevant to it, they 
certainly cannot all be equally relevant. We certainly could not 
get on at all in practical life or in science if in making fore- 
casts and in describing the nature of a thing we could not 
ignore most of them. Otherwise the complexity of the premises 
needed would require superhuman knowledge and su>erhuman 
intelligence, and we could make no use of them in inferences. 
Whatever may be the ultimate truth philosophically, practically 
we must be pluralists. And it does seem that the fact that 
we are constrained to be pluralists in practice can hardly be 
without any relevance to the ultimate truths even of philosophy. 
On the other hand we must not carry this too far. Since we have 
to treat things as related as well as separate, this pluralism must 
be tempered even in practice by a considerable degree of monism. 

A word may be said here about the political influence of monism 
and pluralism. Monism has often, though by no means always, 
been associated with views which exalt the state at the expense of 
the invididual and do not look kindly on individual freedom in 
political life. This connection must not, however, be regarded as 
a necessary one. For it does not follow that because the individual 
is absolutely dependent on the universe as a whole, therefore the 

210 



Universal* 

ties which bind him to the state compared to the ties which bind 
him to other human individuals or to societies other than the state 
should be particularly strong. We cannot, from a general proposi- 
tion about the unity of everything that is, conclude that unity 
ought to be realized in a particular way in human life, thus deduc- 
ing our politics from our metaphysics. There is nothing in the 
nature of things which entails that the national state is not a mere 
piece of political machinery but the representative of the Absolute 
on earth. If everything is really a close unity metaphysically, it 
is obvious that this unity is compatible with great disunity in the 
political sense, since such disunity is often an empirical fact. And 
I do not see how we can draw an inference from the supposed 
ultimate metaphysical unity as to just how much of this disunity 
we ought to tolerate in the political sphere. If we could, the argu- 
ment would certainly tell against rather than in favour of the 
nation-state, since greater unity would obviously be secured by 
a world-state. It might, however, well be and in fact often is 
contended by monists that what is valuable is not abstract unity 
but unity in diversity, and in that case the highest unity would 
depend on the richest display of individual diversity. The whole 
would be best if it was made up of the freest individuals with the 
fullest life, and the individuals would be best and happiest if in 
such a whole they devoted themselves freely to the service of the 
whole. Nor need monism lead to the conclusion that there is 
anything in the state over and above the individual citizens. The 
unity on which the monist insists need not be something over and 
above its parts but rather constituted by its parts. 



THE ARGUMENT FOR OBJECTIVE UNIVERSALS 

A metaphysical argument that has probably had a great deal of 
influence in favour of monism is derived from the doctrine that 
different particulars have universals in common, which is held by 
monists to point to their essential unity on the ground that every- 
thing, having something in common with everything else, shares 
a part of its being with everything else. This brings one to a very 
common, subtle and difficult topic of philosophical controversy, 

2H 



Universals 

which it is perhaps most appropriate to discuss here. It is strange 
and significant that hardly any of the words we use with the 
exception of those called 'proper names' stand for particular things. 
They stand for kinds of things, or for qualities, relations or actions, 
which do not exist by themselves at all. But, while one sees plenty 
of particular tables or particular men, one never sees a table in 
general or a man in general. For what then do such universal 
terms stand; and if they do not stand for anything in the world, 
what is the point of using them? This is the problem of universals. 

The natural answer to the question is that they stand for what 
a number of particular things have in common, and it is this com- 
mon element which is called by philosophers a universal. Those 
who accepted this suggestion were called 'realists' in the Middle 
Ages, and the term is still sometimes used. This usage should, 
however, be carefully distinguished from the sense of 'realist' in 
which the term stands for somebody who believes in the indepen- 
dent existence of physical objects. The two usages have no con- 
nection. Realism was opposed traditionally to two rival theories, 
Nominalism and Conceptualism. The nominalists made universals 
a matter of language: according to them there was nothing uni- 
versal in the world but only in the language we used of it. The 
only universal things were words (and perhaps other signs), and 
they were made universal only by being used of a number of 
different particular objects. The conceptualists, on the other hand, 
regarded universals as thoughts in the human mind. They agreed 
with the nominalists as against the realists in refusing to give them 
a place in objective reality, but they Insisted that they could not 
be merely a matter of nomenclature, which might be quite arbi- 
trary, and concluded that they must at any rate be universal con- 
cepts in the mind that uses the words. It was for these universal 
concepts and not for anything external to the mind using them 
that the words stood. % 

The main (and, I think, conclusive) argument for some form of 
realism against these views is that, if there were no such things 
as objective universals, our language and thought, constantly 
using universals as they do, would not apply to the real world. 
There would be no point in calling New York, London, Paris, 
Philadelphia all towns, if they had nothing in common, and if they 

212 



Universal* 

have something in common, that something is presumably an 
objective universal. This argument is very serious, since every 
sentence we use consists to a very large extent of universal terms. 
If these universal terms did not apply to anything beyond our 
language or our thoughts, how could such a sentence ever be 
true of the world? Our arguments all depend on connections 
between universals. If universals were not objectively real, how 
could we then prove anything at all of reality? Even if we should 
take a phenomenalist view of physical objects, we must surely 
hold that, when we make judgements in psychology, our judge- 
ments are true of something over and above the thoughts in our 
own mind at the time we make them. But how could they be so, 
if there did not exist real universal qualities to which these terms 
referred? If they do not exist in an independent physical world, 
surely they exist at least in the real men and their experiences and 
are not merely a sort of mental fiction in the mind of the person 
who uses the universal terms of other men. 

The conceptualists and nominalists would usually meet this 
argument by asserting that a general term or concept has objective 
reference simply because it applies to a number of resembling 
particulars. We can usefully employ the word * table' to give true 
propositions about the real because the objective things to which 
the word is applied in fact all resemble each other. But to give 
such an answer is to admit at least one universal, resemblance. And 
if we admit one, we might as well admit others. As a matter of 
fact it is already implicitly to admit a great number. In order to 
apply our different universal terms significantly we should have to 
distinguish different kinds of resemblances. Mere 'resemblance' is 
far too vague, since everything resembles everything else in some 
respect or other. We should have therefore to admit one kind of 
resemblance between things in respect of which we apply the 
term 'table' and others in resp^ft of which we apply the terms 
'house', 'man', 'tree', etc. For every universal term we should have 
to admit a different kind of resemblance. But we might just as 
well admit an objective universal characteristic corresponding to 
each term as admit all these objective resemblances. I said 'as well', 
but in fact it would be definitely better. For it is by no means clear 
that there are all these different kinds of resemblances. We cannot 

213 



Universal* 

by inspection detect a difference between the kind of resemblance 
there is between two tables and the kind there is between two 
chairs, or between the kind that holds between two blue things 
and the kind that holds between two red things. But, while we 
cannot distinguish a vast number of different kinds of resemblances 
by inspecting the resemblance itself as a relation, we can easily 
distinguish a vast number of characteristics in respect of which 
different things may be said to resemble each other. We can 
differentiate blue and red clearly, but we cannot differentiate 
clearly the kind of resemblance there is between two blue things 
from the kind of resemblance there is between two red. While of 
course admitting that resemblance is a universal, we had better 
therefore base our theory of universals in general not primarily on 
different kinds of resemblance but on different kinds of qualities 
and other relations. I do not see how this argument can be adequ- 
ately met. We must indeed grant the conceptualist that we can 
only be aware of universals through processes of thought, but 
this does not prove that they are mental or not independent of us. 
Incidentally, the argument has brought out one important point 
which is apt to be forgotten, namely, that all universals are not 
qualities. Some like resemblance are relations, and we must not 
try to reduce all relations to qualities. 

We must not, however, push the above argument too far. We 
must not suppose that there is one and just one distinct universal 
in the objective world corresponding to every term with a distinct 
meaning used by us. We do not have words for all the distinctions 
in experience and in the objective world but only for a sufficient 
number to suit our purposes, for instance, we are far from having 
names for all the distinct shades of colour there are. Again, the 
universal terms we apply are not each applied to a class of things 
because those things have one single quality in common which we 
could point out corresponding to the word. With class terms we 
find rather that the members of the class are distinguished from 
other classes not by the possession of a single quality but by a 
complex of qualities and relations which vary within certain 
limits. There is no single quality which is the same in all men, all 
trees, all fish, etc., and which can constitute the definition of any 
of these terms. 'Rational animal' has been put forward as a defini- 

214 



Universal* 

tion of man, but it is quite certain that the degree and kind of 
rationality and animality varies greatly from man to man. And, 
if we, as is indeed more appropriate, add to the definition bodily 
form, we are confronted with the fact that all men differ in this 
respect also. All we can say is that we should cease to call a being 
a man if he differed too drastically, but we cannot determine 
exactly at what point it would be right to do so, any more than 
we can say exactly how many hairs a man has to have on his head 
for it to be legitimate to deny that he is bald. Again, most at least 
of our adjectives stand not for a single quality but for any quality 
of a certain kind. We may legitimately call the same thing scarlet, 
red, and coloured, but we must not therefore conclude that the 
thing has one quality, colour, another red, and another scarlet. 
Its colour just is its redness, and there is no quality, colour, in it 
besides the red. Similarly, its scarlet just is its redness, and the 
particular shade of red it has is scarlet. Every coloured thing 
possesses (under specific conditions as to light) a particular shade 
of colour, and everything the shade of which falls within a certain 
class we call scarlet, everything the shade of which falls within a 
certain wider class including the former we call red, etc. There are 
no words at all for completely specific shades of colour except 
perhaps 'pure white'. 



THE ARGUMENT FROM THESE TO MONISM 

This brings me to the argument from universals for monism. 
While it is true that, if our thought is to have any validity and 
application, the notion of universals must express an important 
feature of the real, I do not think we need suppose that this neces- 
sarily means that different things coming under the same universal 
must literally have a part of their being in common. If they have, 
this is indeed a strong argument for monism, since all or most 
things have universals in common. But to suppose that it is so is 
perhaps to commit the mistake of not adequately appreciating 
what a different sort of tiling is being said when we speak of 
universals from what is being said when we speak of'particulars. 
This is shown by the fact that, while it would be complete non- 



Universal* 

sense to speak of the same particular thing as existing both in 
China and America, if we were referring to an individual entity, 
it is by no means nonsense to speak of the same universal as exist- 
ing in both places. When we admit the objectivity of universals, 
we must not think of the universal as a part of a particular, that 
would be to make it itself a particular. Universals do not even exist 
in the sense in which particulars do, and we must not think of the 
assertion of them as though it expressed the discovery of a new 
kind of existent, but rather as a more illuminating way of talking 
about and so looking on particulars. 

Yet the argument I have given for realism remains valid as 
showing that there must be an objective foundation for our 
universal judgements and our use of universal terms in the nature 
of the particular. Particulars are not just unqualified particulars, 
and in respect of their qualities and relations some particulars are 
like other particulars. This likeness and their possession of these 
qualities or relations are objective facts if anything is so. Indeed, 
if we took away all facts about universals we should thereby take 
away all facts about particulars also. Particulars are nothing apart 
from their qualities and relations. 



PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEM HOW WE CAN 
THINK OF UNIVERSALS 

I have not yet referred to what is perhaps the best-known dis- 
cussion of the problem of universals, that by Berkeley. 1 The 
latter's account has often been regarded as necessarily implying 
a denial of objective universals, and was possibly so regarded 
even by himself, but I think this mistaken. We should distinguish 
carefully two problems about universals, the problem of their 
objective being and the problem of what we are doing when we 
think of them. It was the latter and not the former question that 
Berkeley was discussing, a question of psychology and not a ques- 
tion of metaphysics. What he said in answer to the psychological 
question was that we can only think of universals by using a par- 
ticular image to stand for a class of particulars. In support of this he 

1 Principles^ Intro. 

216 



Universah 

pointed to the obvious fact that we cannot have, for example, an 
image of a triangle which is neither scalene, isosceles nor equil- 
ateral or is all these at once, or of a man who is no particular size; 
and his may well be a true doctrine psychologically. But it does 
not necessarily carry with it the conclusion that universals are not 
objectively real. They are not particulars, but for us to grasp them 
they may still have to be represented by particulars. As a matter of 
fact Berkeley's account already presupposes the objective reality 
of universals, whether he realized it or not. For there is no point 
in using a particular image to stand for a class of particulars unless 
the members of this class have the same or similar attributes, and 
these attributes, or the relations of resemblance between them, or 
rather both, are universals. Where Berkeley is in difficulty is in 
regard to those universals, such as figure commonly in philo- 
sophy, which being non-sensible cannot adequately be imaged. 
We may, however, still hold the doctrine that we cannot think 
without the help of particular sensuous images, provided we 
recognize that the role of such images is commonly played by 
words. Words are themselves sensuous images, whether we 
picture them as written or as spoken, but they differ from the 
images of which Berkeley was thinking in that they are usually 
not in the least like the objects they represent. They are therefore 
a very useful device for thinking of things which could not or 
could not conveniently be imaged. Whether we can think without 
any images, at all is a disputed question among psychologists; but 
even if we cannot, this does not debar us from thinking of what, 
like God or the laws of logic, we cannot image in the sense of 
constructing a sensible likeness of it in our mind. For, instead of 
an image which is actually like the object of thought, we can use 
one, a word, which is not like it but can still stand for it in our 
thinking. Without using either words or other images it is at least 
hard, and perhaps quite impossible, to carry on a definite train of 
thought of any length, and many people commonly think in words 
even of sensible objects instead of imaging the latter. We must, 
however, be on our guard against a confusion here. We must not, 
because we cannot or can hardly think without using words or 
other images, suppose that thinking consists merely in having 
images. If so, there would be no distinction between saying to 

217 



Universal* 

oneself a set of nonsense syllables and thinking out an abstract 
argument which we understood. In both cases the only images are 
words. What else there is in our mind it is one of the hardest tasks 
of psychology to describe, but we are perfectly well aware that 
there is something. For we are conscious not only of uttering or 
imaging but of understanding the words. Even when we use 
images other than words, as Berkeley himself realizes, we do not 
apply the whole content of the images but can abstract at least in 
the sense of attending to some features of the image and ignoring 
others. Thus in proving a proposition about all triangles we may 
have a mental image of a triangle which is equilateral or use such 
a triangle as an illustration on a blackboard, and we can do this 
quite well without implying that all triangles are equilateral. In 
such cases we are clearly therefore attending to the figure in our 
mind or on the board only as triangular and not equilateral. It is a 
well-known fact that I can see a physical object without attending 
to all its characteristics, and I may do the same with an image. The 
important thing is that I must not assume in the proof any pro- 
perty, such as equilaterality, which is not common to all triangles. 
If I do, my proof will not be valid for all triangles. 

The necessity of universals for thought is one of the reasons 
why a purely empiricist psychology is untenable. In order to arrive 
at any propositions at all we have not merely to accept what is 
given in sense-experience but to abstract from it universals. No 
proposition can just assert a particular state without ascribing to 
it qualities or relations, i.e. universals. 



UNIVERSALS OUTSIDE THE EXISTENT WORLD 

We must then recognize universals as having being at least in 
the particulars which are instances of them. Are we, with some 
distinguished philosophers, to go further and say they have also 
a being in themselves over and above the particulars in which they 
are exemplified? One of the chief differences between Plato and 
Aristotle was that the former gave an affirmative, the latter a 
negative answer to this question. The distinction is expressed 
technically by saying that Aristotle believed only in universalia in re, j 

218 



Universal* 

Plato in universalia ante rem. The chief argument for the Platonic 
view is that we can intelligently assert and even know the truth of 
hypothetical propositions which do not apply to anything actually 
existing. The question then arises what they are true of. For them 
to be true they must be true of something. But there are no exis- 
tent facts of which they are true, they say not what actually is but 
only what would be a fact if something were the case which is 
not. This leads to the conclusion that they are true simply of 
relations of universals, and that the universals have therefore a 
being even without being realized in particulars. For, if they had 
not, how could anything be true of them? Further, with a priori 
propositions, even when in fact they apply to existents, their truth 
is surely logically independent of whether anything to which they 
apply exists or not. That two million plus two million equals four 
million would surely be true even if the total number of things in 
the universe were less than four million. That 2+24 cannot just 
mean that every existent 2+24. It must mean too that there is 
something in the nature of twoness which entails this, and that 
would be the case even if there were no actual instances of two 
and never had been or would be any. It is a fundamental and 
generally accepted doctrine of modern logic that an a priori pro- 
position cannot be affirmative existential, i.e. assert the existence 
of something, and that no affirmative existential proposition can 
be deduced from it alone. But if the truth of an a priori proposi- 
tion were dependent on the existence of particulars to which it 
applied, it would be affirmative existential in character, i.e. assert 
or imply the existence of the particulars in question. But if the 
truth of such propositions does not depend on whether anything 
exists of which they are true, on what does it depend? Surely they 
must then be true of universals which are not realized in the world 
of particulars but are still real and objective? 

The difficulty about this view is that it is difficult to attach any 
meaning to the assertion that universals have a being apart from 
particulars. They clearly do not exist in the sense in which parti- 
culars do; we do not encounter universal men in space and time, 
only individual men. So if we accept the above argument, we have 
to make a distinction and say 'they have being without existing* 
or 'they do not exist but they subsist*. But it is not at all clear 

219 



Universals 

whether we can attach any meaning to subsisting or having being 
without existing. When we have subtracted the notion of existence 
from being, there seems to be nothing left. Or, if there is any 
meaning in the statement at all, it seems to reduce itself to a mere 
restatement in technical terminology of the reasons given for hold- 
ing it true. If this is so, to say, for example, that perfect goodness 
subsists is simply to say that some affirmative propositions about 
perfect goodness are true, whether anything perfectly good 
exists or not, and this does not solve but merely states the prob- 
lem. The fact may be admitted, but to invent technical terms to 
describe it does not tell us how it can be a fact, and that was what 
we wanted to know. So I cannot say that I find the alleged solu- 
tion satisfactory. If we could be sure that -'subsist' had a clear 
meaning apart from 'exist' it would be all right, but as it is it 
seems to be like a cheap verbal dodge. On the other hand I do 
not know how to answer the arguments for subsistence. I do not 
think that anything approaching a solution has been found yet 
for this problem about universals. It must be admitted, however, 
that in saying this I am presupposing something which I hold to 
be true but which many philosophers would reject, namely that 
the truth of a proposition consists in or depends on its relation to 
objective facts distinct from any proposition. The argument pre- 
supposed that, for propositions about universals to be trufe, there 
must be universals independent of the propositions, the truth of 
the latter consisting in a relation to these. This assumption would 
not be universally accepted by philosophers. A person who 
defined truth as coherence between judgements would not make 
it, nor would s6me pragmatists. Further, it would be less difficult 
to maintain such views about hypothetical propositions than it 
would be to put them forward as a general theory of all truth. 
But I should not myself accept such a solution, partly because I 
find it very hard to believe that hypothetical propositions are true 
only in a quite different sense of 'true' from that in which cate- 
gorical propositions are true, and partly because I do not think 
it escapes all, though I think it escapes some, of the objections to 
the coherence or pragmatist theories of truth. 



220 



Chapter Eleven 



GOD 

WE have left to the last the philosophical question 
of most extreme importance, both theoretically 
and practically, namely that of the existence of 
God. By 'God' I shall understand in this chapter 
a supreme mind regarded as either omnipotent or at least more 
powerful than anything else and supremely good and wise. It is 
not within the scope of a purely philosophical work to discuss the 
claims of revelation on which belief in God and his attributes has 
so often been based, but philosophers have also formulated a great 
number of arguments for the existence of God. 



THE ONTOLOGICAL ARGUMENT 

To start with the most dubious and least valuable of these, the 
ontological argument claims to prove the existence of God by a 
mere consideration of our idea of him. God is defined as the most 
perfect being or as a being containing all positive attributes. 1 It is 
then argued that existence is a 'perfection' or a positive attribute, 
and that therefore, if we are to avoid contradicting ourselves, we 
must grant the existence of God. The most important of the 
objections to the argument is to the effect that existence is not a 
'perfection' or an attribute. To say that something exists is to 
assert a proposition of a very different kind from what we assert 
when we ascribe any ordinary attribute to a thing. It is not to 
increase the concept of the thing by adding a new characteristic, 
but merely to affirm that the concept is realized in fact. This is 

1 'Positive' (i) enables us to exclude evil attributes on the ground that they are 
negative, (2) implies the infinity of God, for there would be an element of negativity 
in him if he possessed any attribute in any limited degree, i.e. superior degrees would 
be denied of him. 

221 



one of the cases where we are apt to be misled by language. 
Because 'cats exist' and 'cats sleep', or 'cats are existent' and 'cats 
are carnivorous', are sentences of the same grammatical form, 
people are liable to suppose that they also express the same form 
of proposition, but this is not the case. To say that cats are carni- 
vorous is to ascribe an additional quality to beings already pre- 
supposed as existing; to say that cats are existent is to say that 
propositions ascribing to something the properties which con- 
stitute the definition of a cat are sometimes true. The distinction is 
still more obvious in the negative case. If 'dragons are not existent 
animals' were a proposition of the same form as 'lions are not 
herbivorous animals', to say that dragons are not existent would 
already be to presuppose their existence. A lion has to exist in 
order to have the negative property of not being herbivorous, 
but in order to be non-existent a dragon need not first exist. 1 
'Dragons are non-existent' means that nothing has the properties 
commonly implied by the word 'dragon'. 

It has sometimes been said that 'the ontological proof is just 
an imperfect formulation of a principle which no one can help 
admitting and which is a necessary presupposition of all know- 
ledge. This is the principle that what we really must think must 
be true of reality. ('Must' here is the logical, not the psychological 
must.) If we did not assume this principle, we shoulcj never be 
entitled to accept something as a fact because it satisfies our best 
intellectual criteria, and therefore we should have no ground for 
asserting anything at all. Even experience would not help us, since 
any proposition contradicting experience might well be true if the 
law of contradiction were not assumed to b$ objectively valid. 
This, however, is so very different from what the ontological 
proof as formulated by its older exponents says that it should not 
be called by the same name. And in any case the principle that 
what we must think must be true of reality could only be used to 
establish the existence of God if we already had reached the con- 
clusion that we must think this, i.e. had already justified the view 
that God exists (or seen it to be self-evident). 



1 We can of course say that dragons are not herbivorous if we are merely making 
a statement about the content of fictitious stories of dragons. 

222 



God 



THE FIRST CAUSE ARGUMENT 

The cosmological or first cause argument is of greater importance. 
The greatest thinker of the Middle Ages, St. Thomas Aquinas 
(circ. 1225-74), while rejecting the ontological argument, made 
the cosmological the main intellectual basis of his own theism, and 
in this respect he has been followed by Roman Catholic orthodoxy. 
To this day it is often regarded in such circles as proving with 
mathematical certainty the existence of God. It has, however, also 
played a very large part in Protestant thought; and an argument 
accepted in different forms by such varied philosophers of the 
highest eminence as Aristotle, St. Thomas, Descartes, Locke, 
Leibniz, and many modern thinkers certainly ought not to be 
despised. The argument is briefly to the effect that we require a 
reason to account for the world and this ultimate reason must be 
of such a kind as itself not to require a further reason to account 
for it. It is then argued that God is the only kind of being who 
could be conceived as self-sufficient and so as not requiring a 
cause beyond himself but being his own reason. The argument 
has an appeal because we are inclined to demand a reason for 
things, and the notion of a first cause is the only alternative to the 
notion of an infinite regress, which is very difficult and seems even 
self-contradictory. Further, if any being is to be conceived as 
necessarily existing and so not needing a cause outside itself, it is 
most plausible to conceive God as occupying this position. But 
the argument certainly makes assumptions which may be ques- 
tioned. It assumes the principle of causation in a form in which the 
cause is held to give a reason for the effect, a doctrine with which 
I have sympathy but which would probably be rejected by the 
majority of modern philosophers outside the Roman Catholic 
Church. Further, it may be doubted whether we can apply to the 
world as a whole the causal principle which is valid within the 
world; and if we say that the causal principle thus applied is only 
analogous to the latter the argument is weakened. Finally, and this 
I think the most serious point, it is exceedingly difficult to see how 
anything could be its own reasons. To be this it would seem that 
it must exist necessarily a priori. Now we can well see how it can 

223 



God 

be necessary a priori that something, p, should be true if something 
else, q, is, or again how it can be necessary a priori that something 
self-contradictory should not exist, but it is quite another matter 
to see how it could be a priori necessary in the logical sense that 
something should positively exist. What contradiction could there 
be in its not existing? 1 In the mere blank of non-existence there 
can be nothing to contradict. I do not say that it can be seen to be 
absolutely impossible that a being could be its own logical reason, 
but I at least have not the faintest notion how this could be. The 
advocates of the cosmological proof might, however, contend that 
God was necessary in some non-logical sense, which is somewhat 
less unplausible though still quite incomprehensible to us. 

Can the cosmological argument, clearly invalid as a complete 
proof, be stated in a form which retains some probability value? 
It may still be argued that the world will at least be more rational 
if it is as the theist pictures it than if it is not, and that it is more 
reasonable to suppose that the world is rational than to suppose 
that it is irrational. Even the latter point would be contradicted 
by many modern thinkers, but though we cannot prove the view 
they reject to be true, we should at least note that it is the view 
which is presupposed by science, often unconsciously, in its own 
sphere. For, as we have seen, practically no scientific propositions 
can be established by strict demonstration and /or <. observation 
alone. Science could not advance at all if it did not assume some 
criterion beyond experience and the laws of logic and mathe- 
matics. What is this criterion? It seems to be coherence in a rational 
system. We have rejected the view that this is the only criterion, 
but it is certainly one criterion of truth. For of two hypotheses 
equally in accord with the empirical facts, scientists will always 
prefer the one which makes the universe more of a rational 
system to the one which does not. Science does this even though 
neither hypothesis is capable of rationalizing the universe com- 
pletely or even of giving a complete ultimate explanation of the 
phenomena in question. It is sufficient that the hypothesis adopted 
brings us a step nearer to the ideal of a fully coherent, rationally 
explicable world. Now theism cannot indeed completely ratiqnal- 

1 It is one of the objections to the ontological proof that it claims to find a contra- 
diction in God not existing. 

224 



God 

ize the universe till it can show how God can be his own cause, 
or how it is that he does not need a cause, and till it can also over- 
come the problem of evil completely, but it does come nearer to 
rationalizing it than does any other view. The usual modern 
philosophical views opposed to theism do not try to give any 
rational explanation of the world at all, but just take it as a brute 
fact not to be explained, and it must certainly be admitted that 
we come at least nearer to a rational explanation if we regard the 
course of the world as determined by purpose and value than if 
we do not. So it may be argued that according to the scientific 
principle that we should accept the hypothesis which brings the 
universe nearest to a coherent rational system theism should be 
accepted by us. The strong point of the cosmological argument is 
that after all it does remain incredible that the physical universe 
should just have happened, even if it be reduced to the juxta- 
position of some trillions of electrons. It calls out for some further 
explanation of some kind. 



THE ARGUMENT FROM DESIGN 

The ideological argument or the argument from design is the argu- 
ment from the adaptation of the living bodies of organisms to 
their ends and the ends of their species. This is certainly very 
wonderful: there are thousands of millions of cells in our brain 
knit together in a system which works; twenty or thirty different 
muscles are involved even in such a simple act as a sneeze; 
directly a wound is inflicted or germs enter an animal's body all 
sorts of protective mechanisms are set up, different cells are so 
cunningly arranged that, if we cut off the tail of one of the lower 
animals, a new one is grown, and the very same cells can develop 
according to what is needed into a tail or into a leg. Such intricate 
arrangements seem to require an intelligent purposing mind to 
explain them. It may be objected that, even if such an argument 
shows wisdom in God, it does not show goodness and is there- 
fore of little value. The reply may be made that it is incredible that 
a mind who is so much superior to us in intelligence as to have 
designed the whole universe should not be at least as good as the 

P 225 



God 

best men and should not, to put it at its lowest, care for his off- 
spring at least as well as a decent human father and much more 
wisely because of his superior knowledge and intellect. Still it 
must be admitted that the argument could not at its best establish 
all that the theist would ordinarily wish to establish. It might 
show that the designer was very powerful, but it could not show 
him to be omnipotent or even to have created the world as 
opposed to manufacturing it out of given material; it might make 
it probable that he was good, but it could not possibly prove him 
perfect. And of course the more unpleasant features of the 
struggle for existence in nature are far from supporting the 
hypothesis of a good God. 

But does the argument justify any conclusion at all? It has been 
objected that it does not on the following ground. It is an argu- 
ment from analogy, it is said, to this effect: animal bodies are like 
machines, a machine has a designer, therefore animal bodies have 
a designer. But the strength of an argument from analogy depends 
on the likeness between what is compared. Now animal bodies are 
really not very like machines, and God is certainly not very like a 
man. Therefore the argument from analogy based on our experi- 
ence of men designing machines has not enough strength to give 
much probability to its conclusion. This criticism, I think, would 
be valid if the argument from design were really in the main an 
argument from analogy, 1 but I do not think it is. The force of the 
argument lies not in the analogy, but in the extraordinary intricacy 
with which the details of a living body are adapted to serve its 
own interests, an intricacy far too great to be regarded as merely 
a coincidence. Suppose we saw pebbles on the shore arranged in 
such a way as to make an elaborate machine. It is theoretically 
possible that they might have come to occupy such positions by 
mere chance, but it is fantastically unlikely, and we should feel no 
hesitation in jumping to the conclusion that they had been thus 
deposited not by the tide but by some intelligent agent. Yet the 
body of the simplest living creature is a more complex machine 
than the most complex ever devised by a human engineer. 

Before the theory of evolution was accepted the only reply to 

1 Hume's criticisms of it in the famous Dialogues concerning Natural Religion depend 
mainly on the assumption that it is such an argument. 

226 



God 

this argument was to say that in an infinite time there is room for 
an infinite number of possible combinations, and therefore it is 
not, even apart from a designing mind, improbable that there 
should be worlds or stages in the development of worlds which 
display great apparent purposiveness. If a monkey played with a 
typewriter at random, it is most unlikely that it would produce an 
intelligible book; but granted a sufficient number of billions of 
years to live and keep playing, the creature would probably even- 
tually produce quite by accident a great number. For the number 
of possible combinations of twenty-six letters in successions of 
words is finite, though enormously large, and therefore given a 
sufficiently long time it is actually probable that any particular one 
would be reached. This may easily be applied to the occurrence of 
adaptations in nature. Out of all the possible combinations of 
things very few would display marked adaptation; but if the 
number of ingredients of the universe is finite the number of their 
combinations is also finite, and therefore it is only probable that, 
given an infinite time, some worlds or some stages in a world 
process should appear highly purposeful, though they are only the 
result of a chance combination of atoms. The plausibility of this 
reply is diminished when we reflect what our attitude would be to 
somebody who, when playing bridge, had thirteen spades in his 
hand several times running according to the laws of probability 
an enormously less improbable coincidence than would be an 
unpurposed universe with so much design unaccounted for and 
then used such an argument to meet the charge of cheating. Our 
attitude to his reply would surely hardly be changed even if we 
believed that people had been playing bridge for an infinite time. 
If only we were satisfied that matter had existed and gone on 
changing for ever, would we conclude that the existence of leaves 
or pebbles on the ground in such positions as to make an intelli- 
gible book no longer provided evidence making it probable that 
somebody had deliberately arranged them? Surely not. And, if 
not, why should the supposition that matter had gone on chang- 
ing for ever really upset the argument from design? Of course the 
appearance of design may be fortuitous; the argument from design 
never claims to give certainty but only probability. But, granted 
the universe as we have it, is it not a much less improbable 

227 



God 

hypothesis that it should really have been designed than that it 
should constitute one of the fantastically rare stages which showed 
design in an infinite series of chance universes? Further, that 
matter has been changing for an infinite time is a gratuitous 
assumption and one not favoured by modern science. 1 

But now the theory of evolution claims to give an alternative 
explanation of the adaptation of organisms that removes the im- 
probability of which we have complained. Once granted the 
existence of some organisms their offspring would not all be 
exactly similar. Some would necessarily be somewhat better 
equipped than others for surviving and producing offspring in 
their turn, and their characteristics would therefore tend to be 
more widely transmitted. When we take vast numbers into 
account, this will mean that a larger and larger proportion of the 
species will have had relatively favourable variations transmitted 
to them by their parents, while unfavourable variations will tend 
to die out. Thus from small beginnings accumulated all the extra- 
ordinarily elaborate mechanism which now serves the purpose of 
living creatures. 

There can be no question for a properly informed person of 
denying the evolution theory, but only of considering whether 
it is adequate by itself to explain the striking appearance of 
design. If it is not, it may perfectly well be combined with the 
metaphysical hypothesis that a mind has designed and controls 
the universe. Evolution will then be just the way in which God's 
design works out. Now in reply to the purely evolutionary ex- 
planation it has been said that for evolution to get started at all 
some organisms must have already appeared. Otherwise the 
production of offspring and their survival or death in the struggle 
for existence would not have come into question at all. But even 
the simplest living organism is a machine very much more com- 

1 Strictly speaking, what is required by those who put forward the objection in 
question to the argument from design is not necessarily that matter should have 
been changing for an infinite time but only for a sufficiently long, though finite, 
time. But the length of time allowed by modern science for the development of the, 
earth and indeed for that of the whole universe does not in the faintest degree 
approach what would be needed to make the appearance of organized beings as a 
result of mere random combinations of atoms anything less than monstrously 
improbable. 

228 



God 

plex than a motor car. Therefore, if it would be absurd to suppose 
inorganic matter coming together fortuitously of itself to form a 
motor car, it would be even more absurd to suppose it thus 
coming together to form an organism, so without design the 
evolutionary process would never get started at all. Nor, even 
granting that this miracle had occurred, could the evolutionists 
claim that they had been altogether successful in removing the 
antecedent improbability of such an extensive adaptation as is in 
fact shown by experience. It has been urged that, since we may go 
wrong in a vast number of ways for one in which we may go 
right, the probability of favourable variations is very much less 
than that of unfavourable; that in order to produce the effect on 
survival required a variation would have to be large, but if it 
were large it would usually lessen rather than increase the chance 
of survival, unless balanced by other variations the occurrence of 
which simultaneously with the first would be much .more im- 
probable still; and that the odds are very great against either a 
large number of animals in a species having the variations together 
by chance or their spreading from a single animal through the 
species by natural selection. The arguments suggest that, so to 
speak, to weight the chances we require a purpose, which we 
should not need, however, to think of as intervening at odd 
moments but as controlling the whole process. The establishment 
of the evolution theory no doubt lessens the great improbability 
of the adaptations having occurred without this, but the original 
improbability is so vast as to be able to survive a great deal of 
lessening, and it does not remove it. 

Some thinkers would regard it as adequate to postulate an 
unconscious purpose to explain design, but it is extraordinarily 
difficult to see what such a thing as an unconscious purpose could 
be. In one sense indeed I can understand such a phrase. 'Uncon- 
scious' might mean 'unintrospected' or 'unintrospectible', and 
then the purpose would be one which occurred in a mind that 
did think on the matter but did not self-consciously notice its 
thinking. But this sense will not do here, for it already presupposes 
a mind. To talk of a purpose which is not present in any mind at 
all seems to me as unintelligible as it would be to talk of rectangles 
which had no extension. The argument from design has therefore 



God 

to my mind considerable, though not, by itself at least, conclusive 
force. It is also strange that there should be so much beauty in 
the world, that there should have resulted from an unconscious 
unintelligent world beings who could form the theory that the 
world was due to chance or frame moral ideals in the light of 
which they could condemn it. It might be suggested that a mind 
designed the organic without designing the inorganic, but the 
connection between organic and inorganic and the unity of 
the world in general are too close to make this a plausible 
view. 

The counter argument from evil is of course formidable, but 
I shall defer discussion of it to a later stage in the chapter, as it is 
rather an argument against theism in general than a specific 
objection to the argument from design. I must, however, make 
two remarks here. First, it is almost a commonplace that the very 
large amount of apparent waste in nature is a strong prima facie 
argument against the world having been designed by a good and 
wise being. But is there really much 'wasted'? A herring may 
produce hundreds of thousands or millions of eggs for one fish 
that arrives at maturity, but most of the eggs which come to grief 
serve as food for other animals. We do not look on the eggs we 
eat at breakfast, when we can get them, as 'wasted', though the 
hen might well 'do so. It is certainly very strange that a good God 
should have designed a world in which the living beings can only 
maintain their life by devouring each other, but this is part of the 
general problem of evil and not a specific problem of waste in 
nature. Secondly, the occurrence of elaborate adaptations to ends 
is a very much stronger argument for the presence of an intelli- 
gence than its apparent absence in a good many instances is 
against it. A dog would see no purpose whatever in my present 
activity, but he would not therefore have adequate grounds for 
concluding that I had no intelligence. If there is a God, it is only 
to be expected a priori that in regard to a great deal of his work we 
should be in the same position as the dog is in regard to ours, and 
therefore the fact that we are in this position is no argument that 
there is no God. The occurrence of events requiring intelligence 
to explain them is positive evidence for the presence of intelli- 
gence, but the absence of results we think worth while in particu- 

230 



God 

lar cases is very slight evidence indeed on the other side where we 
are debating the existence of a being whose intelligence, if he 
exists, we must in any case assume to be as much above ours as 
the maker of the whole world would have to be. The existence of 
positive evil of course presents a greater difficulty to the theist. 



OTHER ARGUMENTS FOR GOD 

Besides the specific argument from design there is a general 
argument which on the whole impresses me more strongly. When 
I consider the physical world as a whole, its order, its beauty, its 
system strongly suggest that it is a product of mind, or at any rate 
that the least inadequate category for interpreting it is mind. It 
displays the characteristics which we expect in and regard as 
essentially connected with a high-grade mind and its products. 
And in particular the characteristic of beauty has made very many 
feel as though they saw through it not only the wisdom but the 
supreme goodness of God. 

The cosmological argument and the argument from design have 
often been supplemented or even replaced by other arguments 
based on the nature of causation. Two I have already mentioned, 
namely, the argument that causation involves will 1 and the argu- 
ment that it is incredible that conscious rational mind should have 
originated from unconscious irrational matter. 2 The latter seems 
to depend mainly on the assumption that the effect cannot possess 
quite new kinds of properties which are not present in the cause. 
A stronger argument seems to me to be that it is exceedingly 
difficult to see how we can be entitled to have faith in our intellec- 
tual processes at all if they originally spring from unconscious 
matter alone. The case seems clearest if we start by thinking of 
the epiphenomenalist. According to him the only cause of a 
mental event is a physical change in the brain. In that case we do 
not believe anything because we have good reasons for it, but 
only because something has changed in our brain. It would follow 
that all our beliefs were unjustified, and this has already been used 

1 Vide above p. 170, 2 Vide above, pp. 136-8. 



God 

by me as an objection to epiphenomenalism. Most opponents of 
theism are, however, not epiphenomenalists. They believe that 
mental processes can play a part in causing other mental, and even 
bodily, processes. But, if they believe that these, even ultimately, 
originate solely from an unconscious, or at least (even if pan- 
psychism be true) an unintelligent, matter incapable of purposes 
and itself not directed or created by a purposing mind, it may be 
argued that they are only putting the difficulty further back. Have 
we any guarantee 'that we are so constructed that our mental pro- 
cesses are any more likely to be right than wrong if they were the 
result originally of mere unpurposed accidents? 1 For us to be 
entitled to accept any of the results of our thought on any subject, 
must we not therefore assume that our mental processes, and the 
bodily ones on which they depend, are originated for a purpose 
and a purpose we can trust? It may thus be contended that a cer- 
tain faith is needed even to be a scientist or a critical philosopher; 
we must trust the universe so far as to believe that it has not made 
us such as to be irretrievably misled in our thought by the nature 
of our minds or bodies, and is it consistent to assume this in the 
sphere of thought without also assuming that it is in general 
trustworthy? If we must, in order to escape complete scepticism, 
treat the universe as if it were made with a good purpose at least 
as regards our thinking, is this not an argument for taking up the 
attitude that its purpose is also conducive to the fulfilment of the 
best moral ideals that can be conceived? The pre-supposition of 
this argument is simply that we cannot be thorough-going scep- 
tics. It will not appeal to anybody who is prepared to adopt the 
position of complete scepticism about everything; but is there 
such a person? Even confirmed agnostics about religion and meta- 
physics are very far from being complete sceptics about science or 
about their sense-experience, yet even this much departure from 
scepticism involves assumptions as to the validity of their mental 
processes which are hard to square with their beliefs as to the 

1 Someone might reply that a species of beings whose faculties are not so con- 
structed that they could find out truths about the world or at least act as if they had 
found them out would soon become extinct; but this reply like any other argument 
must already presuppose the reliability of our mental processes and therefore cannot 
be used to justify trust in the latter without a vicious circle, 

232 



God 

origin of the latter. Nor does it seem an adequate reply to the 
argument merely to assert agnosticism as to the ultimate origin 
of the human mind. If we are not entitled to say anything more 
than that, are we entitled to trust our minds at all, since we have 
ex hypothesi no justification for thinking that they have been con- 
structed for the purpose of attaining any truth? We cannot argue 
that they may be trusted merely because trusting them has worked, 
because we can only decide whether they have worked or not by 
using our minds and therefore by already trusting them. (The 
argument is not of course intended to imply that God created 
each man's mind specially at birth, only that the whole world- 
process on which we depend is subject to divine guidance.) 

If the view about matter known as idealism is accepted on 
general philosophical grounds, it may be used to provide an addi- 
tional argument for the existence of God, as it was by Berkeley. 
The idealist, having by means of his arguments reached the con- 
clusion that matter necessarily involves mind, may then argue that 
we must believe it to be independent of human minds and must 
therefore suppose a super-human mind on which it depends for 
its existence. The conclusion is based on two premises one or the 
other of which has been accepted by the great majority of philo- 
sophers. The great majority of philosophers have either been 
idealists so far as to believe that matter logcially implies mind or 
realists so far as to believe that matter is independent of our minds. 
Nor are the two premises, though not usually combined, in them- 
selves incompatible with each other. The difficulty is to establish 
the first premise by arguments which will not refute the second. 
For most of the arguments used by idealists are of such a character 
as to show, if valid at all, not merely that physical objects imply 
dependence on some mind or other, but that they imply depen- 
dence on the human mind or are mere abstractions from human 
experience, or at least that, if they exist independently of us, we 
are not justified in making any assertions about them. An idealism 
based on such arguments could not consistently be used as a 
ground for theism. There are, however, some idealist arguments 
which do not have this effect and the idealist who was also a theist 
might rely on those. 

253 



God 



MORAL ARGUMENTS. ETHICS AND RELIGION 

Turning to moral arguments for the existence of God, we must 
remark at the start that such arguments necessarily presuppose 
certain views as to ethics. If we regard ethical propositions as 
simply statements about what emotions and mental reactions 
human beings have as a matter of fact under given conditions, 
I do not see how we can possibly use ethics as a basis of any valid 
argument for the existence of God. Still less can we do so if we 
regard our ethical words as merely expressing the speaker's emo- 
tions and not anything objectively true at all. To put this in 
technical terms, any ethical argument for the existence of God 
must presuppose a theory of ethics which is not 'naturalist' or 
'subjectivist', i.e. which regards ethical words neither as express- 
ing concepts analysable simply in terms of a natural science such 
as psychology or biology nor as simply expressions of the state 
of the speaker as an individual without objective validity. It is a 
precondition for using ethics as a ground for theism that we should 
neither regard it as merely a branch of psychology nor adopt a 
sceptical view of its claim to objective validity. Whether a natur- 
alist or subjectivist view of ethics should be taken is a question 
for the special branch of philosophy known as ethics or moral 
philosophy, a study of which is not included in the purpose of 
this book; and I can only say here that it seems to me quite clear 
on purely ethical grounds, that no such views should be adopted. 
This decision is independent of their metaphysical repercussions. 

The main objections to naturalism in general may be summed 
up as follows: (i) It is clear that no ethical proposition is simply 
equivalent to a collection of psychological statistics. To say that 
all or most people's reactions to something are favourable is not 
to say that it is good or right. (2) The goodness or badness of 
anything which is' good or bad follows necessarily from its nature, 
but the attitude of human beings to it might quite conceivably be 
different from what it is. (3) Whatever empirical property, e.g. 
being desired or liked, is put forward as a definition of 'good' or 
'obligatory', it is clear that the question whether anything that is 
good (or obligatory) has that property is not merely a question of 



God 

definition but a question of fact, goodness and the property still 
appearing as different concepts and not as synonyms. (4) The 
naturalist definitions leave out the essential nature of obligation. 
The 'ought' is different from the 'is'. 

The subjectivist view that ethical judgements are merely ex- 
pressions of the speaker's own attitude is open to similar objec- 
tions and also to others peculiar to itself. Thus, if the view were 
true, no two persons would ever mean the same thing when they 
made an ethical judgement, nor would even the same person mean 
the same thing at different times. Further, if I judged something 
to be good and you judged it to be bad, our judgements would not 
be logically incompatible; and when I judged, e.g. that Hitler 
acted badly, I should not be talking about Hitler at all but only 
about my own psychology. Nor could ethical judgements be even 
supported by arguments (except perhaps ones which had the 
effect of disclosing new facts about the speaker's psychology). 

Granting then that our ethical judgements have objective 
validity and are neither mere expressions of the speaker's subjec- 
tive attitude nor purely factual statements about men's attitudes in 
general, can we use them as the basis of a good argument for the 
existence of God? We must not suppose that we can have no 
ethics without a theology or that a man cannot do right unless he 
believes in God. The latter proposition is contradicted by em- 
pirical facts; and the former is incompatible with our ability to see 
the truth of ethical propositions without presupposing theological. 
We can surely see that it is bad, e.g. to inflict pain unnecessarily by 
merely considering the question on its own merits without first 
having to presuppose the existence of God. Further, we could 
only rationally deduce ethics from theology by first deciding what 
actions were right and then assuming that God, being good, 
would wish us to do those actions, and such a line of argument 
obviously presupposes that we already have a conception of 
ethics. Even those who accept their theology solely on the 
strength of revelation as Christians can have little justification for 
doing so if they do not first assume at least that Christ is good, and 
this would already presuppose our possession of ethical criteria 
which enable us to realize independently of theology that He is 
good. 

235 



God 

But it does not follow from this that we may not be justified 
in drawing theological conclusions from our ethics. Because 
ethics cannot be derived from theology, it does not follow that 
theology, or a large part of it, cannot be derived from ethics; and 
many attempts have been made in this direction. The best known 
is that of Kant. The latter's argument, shorn of excrescences, is 
to this effect. We are bound by the essential nature of morality to 
form an ideal of a supreme good which cannot be completely 
realized in this life. Further, since we are dependent not only on 
our own efforts but on the co-operation of nature, we must 
suppose, if the ideal is to be capable of realization at all, not only 
that we survive bodily death but that nature is controlled in such 
a way as to subserve the ideal in a future life or lives, as well as in 
this. This we can only conceive if we think of the world as con- 
trolled by a morally perfect being having adequate power and 
wisdom to adjust it to the supreme end, i.e. if we accept the belief 
in God. The belief in God is therefore vindicated for Kant 
because without it we should have to regard the moral law as 
sending us on a wild-goose chase, i.e. commanding us to seek 
what could never be achieved. This argument cannot be regarded 
as logically conclusive but has some probability value. Kant him- 
self in a later work, and many other thinkers, have argued from 
the existence of the moral law to a law-giver, God. This argument 
has also been used: The moral law is objective. In what, then, does 
it reside? Certainly not in the physical world. Nor only in the 
minds of men. An ethical proposition such as that it is better to 
forgive one's enemies than to hate them might be true even at a 
time when no human being realized its truth at all. Yet it is im- 
possible to see what else the moral law could reside in but a mind. 
Therefore we must postulate a super-human mind. Such argu- 
ments have the advantage, if valid, of directly establishing not 
only the existence, but the perfect goodness of the supreme mind. 
A being in whom the whole moral law resided could hardly fail 
to be perfectly good. Apart from its realization in such a mind the 
moral law would be merely a hypothetical fact to the effect that if 
we did so and so it would be right, and it may be argued that such 
a mere hypothetical non-existent abstraction could not have the 
authority we know in our hearts it has. I do not think we can 



God 

regard any of these arguments as logically conclusive, but they do 
at least give some support to their conclusion. 

The supreme authority of the moral law is certainly best ex- 
plained if it can be thought of as -bound up with the essential 
structure, the fundamental groundwork of the real, thus implying 
that this is spiritual. On the other hand we must not think of it as 
being the arbitrary product of God's will. It is incredible that even 
God could make the wanton infliction of pain good by willing it, 
any more than he could make z-\-z equal to 5, whether we think 
of the moral law as something independent of God which limits 
him or (a more usual religious conception) as immanent in God. 
In the latter case he still could not violate or alter it, because he 
would thereby be contradicting his own nature. 

The connection between ethics and religion is close, though 
the former is certainly possible without a conscious belief in the 
latter. Indeed the attitude of any man, in so far as he is good, to 
the moral law is significantly like the attitude of the religious man 
to God. To both is ascribed an absolute and unconditional auth- 
ority and a sanctity which transcends any other values. It may be 
argued that, if we do not worship God, we must worship the 
moral law and that is unworshippable because it is a mere abstrac- 
tion. On the other hand to reject ethics because one could not 
believe in the existence of God would in any case be unjustified, 
because, while some ethical propositions such as that we ought 
to consider other people's happiness as well as our own are about 
as certain as anything can be, we cannot give at nearly that 
degree of certainty to the belief that ethics entails God. If two 
beliefs which we are inclined to accept are incompatible we must 
accept the more certain, and therefore if we decide theism to be 
false we must reject the view that ethics entails theism rather than 
the view that some ethical propositions are true. 

It is sometimes said that God might be good and yet not act 
according to our ethical standards. But there are only two alter- 
natives here: either our ethical propositions are false, or a good 
being, in so far as he is good, must act in accord with them, 
though he may also act in accord with others which we do not 
know. No doubt some ethical propositions commonly believed 
are false or partly false, but in so far as our ethical propositions are 



God 

true, to say that a good God might still not act in accordance with 
them is like saying that for a perfectly wise God 5+7 might not 
be equal to 12. If anything is evident in ethics, it is th^c love arid 
benevolence are better than hate and indifference, and therefore 
we may be quite confident that a good God will love and concern 
Himself closely with the welfare of the beings dependent on Him. 
The argument is: God is good, goodness entails love, therefore 
God loves. 

In order to appreciate the strength of the theistic case it is not 
sufficient to look at each argument separately. We need also to 
consider their cumulative, force. It would often be admitted even 
in religious circles that each argument, considered by itself, 
stopped far short of cogent proof, and yet held that the arguments 
taken all together constituted a very strong case indeed. While it 
would of course be impossible to estimate the probability given 
by such arguments mathematically, we may illustrate by this means 
how probability can be increased by different converging lines of 
argument. Suppose an argument which by itself only made its 
conclusion twice as probable as not, i.e. gave it a probability of 
|. Suppose four more, independent arguments which had the 
same effect. Then the probability of the conclusion being false 
relatively to the arguments taken together would be only (^) 5 , 



-L 
243 . 



THE 'ARGUMENT FROM RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE' 

It may be very much doubted, however, whether all these argu- 
ments would inspire a real faith in God, though they might lead 
someone to intellectual assent to his existence as a probable 
hypothesis, unless the man's heart were touched by some experi- 
ence not the result wholly of argument or even describable 
fully in intellectual terms. This brings one to the so-called argu- 
ment from religious experience, on which in Protestant philosophical 
circles the main stress is now usually laid. It is, strictly speaking, 
however not an argument but a claim to intuitive awareness, at 
least in any form in which it deserves very much attention philo- 
sophically. The mere existence of religious emotion could hardly 

238 



God 

of itself constitute a valid ground for asserting the existence of 
God, but what is meant by the appeal to religious experience is 
usually the claim in states where this religious emotion is present 
to have a direct apprehension, not based on inference, of the 
existence and to some extent the nature of God. There is a clear 
difference between a religious emotion and a religious belief, as 
there is between, e.g. a mere feeling of happiness and a belief that 
something good has happened or is going to happen; and there is 
no doubt that both religious emotion and religious belief are 
present in very many cases where the belief is not founded mainly 
on argument, even on bad arguments. The only question is 
whether one is justified in accepting as true such an intuitive belief 
apart from the arguments, i.e. in regarding it as a genuine intui- 
tion. We have seen that we cannot dispense with intuition in our 
theory of knowledge, 1 so the mere fact that the claim is an appeal 
to intuition does not discredit it. It has, however, been objected 
that the assertion of an intuitive conviction can be of no help in a 
discussion on the ground that, if I have the conviction already, 
I do not need to be convinced of it, while, if I do not have it, the 
mere statement of the fact that somebody else has it will be no 
ground for my accepting it apart from any argument he may give. 
But suppose this situation: A man has a confused and rather feeble 
intuitive conviction of God. He is aware that what seems to him a 
reliable intuition may not really be so, and he would certainly not 
be justified in placing any considerable faith in the intuition if he 
thought himself to be the only person who had it. But if he finds 
that it is very widespread and possessed in a stronger and clearer 
degree by very many men who in other respects quite especially 
deserve the titles of good, wise and great, this may well justify 
him in trusting it. This is a very common situation, I think, as 
regards religious intuition. We must not suppose this intuition 
to be limited to a few great mystics; it is in some (though a much 
lesser) degree possessed by the plain man who says I cannot 
prove, but I feel there is a God', when in saying this he is really 
sincere. By 'feel' he does not mean 'has an emotion'. It would 
not make sense to say 'I have an emotion that'. The word is only 

1 Vide above, p. 48. 



God 

a synonym for 'believe' or at least for some particular way of 
believing. The fact that very many people have an intuition is 
indeed hardly likely to convince anyone who has no glimmering 
of it himself, but even such a person will be unreasonable if he 
takes it for granted that those who have it are necessarily wrong 
because he has not got it himself. He may well be relatively to them 
in the same position as a tone-deaf man is relatively to a musician, 
though it must be admitted that you can hardly expect him to 
accept its truth merely on their authority. But if a person has the 
conviction in a weaker degree, he may justifiably confirm it, that 
is, hold the probability of its truth to have been strengthened, by 
appealing to the authority of those who have it in a higher degree. 
Intuitive religious conviction has been so widespread and such 
a dominating factor in the thought of many, we might indeed say 
'most', who were in other respects obviously among the greatest 
and best of mankind, and so much the basis throughout history of 
a whole extraordinarily persistent, fertile and fundamental side of 
life and thought as to constitute a strong prima facie case for the 
view that there is at least a great deal in it. 

In very many cases the intuitive conviction is attained or main- 
tained after a very prolonged meditation on the question and 
exercises a tremendous transforming influence on the believer's 
whole life and conduct. It further seems to him 'to. make sense' 
not only of his own life but of the whole universe. Those who 
have had it very strongly have been able to make it the basis of a 
serenity and goodness which in many cases might be described 
as almost superhuman, and for vast multitudes the worthwhileness 
of life and the ability to bear misfortune worthily and to live un- 
selfishly have seemed to depend, for themselves at least, on the 
experience in question. We must not indeed think of religious 
intuition as consisting in the seeing of certain definite clear-cut 
propositions to be self-evident as in logic. Such a claim would be 
very hard to defend. What presents itself to intuition must rather 
be regarded as something confused needing further clarification 
and analysis. The content of a genuine intuition may also be mixed 
up with other elements which have really been accepted on the 
strength of authority and, perhaps falkcious, reasoning. Only in 
such ways can we account for the differences between intuitions. 

240 



God 

We must also of course insist that the intuitive faculty requires 
training and is capable of development. 

Religious beliefs are after all only in the same position as other 
fundamental beliefs in not being strictly provable. By 'fundamen- 
tal belief I mean a belief presupposed by a whole important 
department of human thought. When we consider belief in 
memory, in an external world, in minds other than one's own, in 
induction, in ethics, we are driven back to something which we 
either cannot prove at all or at least cannot prove in a way which 
wins general agreement among philosophers, yet we continue 
unflinchingly to hold the beliefs. It is doubtful whether it is 
possible to give a more plausible case for the reliability of induc- 
tion or for the existence of the physical world than it is for the 
existence of God, only the ability to cognize God is less widely 
distributed or at least less widely developed than the ability to 
cognize the physical world and see the validity of inductive 
inferences. 

The main positive objections to the claims of religious intuition 
are made by dogmatic empiricists who assert that knowledge is 
limited to sense-experience, but as we have seen 1 this dogma 
cannot be proved. There must be some intuition if there is to be 
inference at all, and there is no way of determining by a priori 
argument in what fields intuition is or is not possible. Any argu- 
ment .against it must therefore be an empirical generalization, 
which would need to be of this form: No veridical cognition of 
class A occurs. Veridical religious intuition, if it occurred, would 
be a veridical cognition of class A. Therefore it does not occur. 
But the major premise cannot be established as a universal 
generalization without first assuming that religious intuition is 
not veridical, so the argument begs the question unless the major 
premise means merely that no veridical cognition of class A other 
than religious intuition occurs. In that case it becomes only an argu- 
ment from analogy to the effect that religious intuition is so very 
different from any other cases of cognition which can be regarded 
as veridical that its claims to be veridical should be dismissed. But 
if the religious man is right, we have every reason to expect that 
religious cognition will be different from any other kinds of 
1 Vidt above, pp. 39-42 

Q 241 



God 

cognition, since its object and the relation of its object to us are 
so very different. He himself usually most strongly emphasizes 
the difference when he speaks about it. So the argument must be 
regarded as a very weak one, even if it could be shown that there 
are no other authenticated cases of cognition in the least analogous 
to religious intuition. 

It is, however, objected that apparent religious intuition can 
be explained by psychology. All beliefs must have psychological 
causes and so can be explained psychologically I do not think 
there is room for undetermined free-will in the sphere of belief at 
any rate so it depends on the nature of the explanation whether 
it shows the belief to be unjustified. Now no doubt the causal 
explanations given by e.g. anti-religious Freudians are of such a 
kind that we can say that any belief caused in such a way would be 
unjustified, and in general we may say that a belief due simply to a 
desire to hold the belief must be unjustified for the person who 
thus holds it. But the psychologist can have no means of proving 
that the beliefs are due to the causes he suggests. He can only 
point out certain factors which might lead people to hold a 
religious belief even if it were false. The most he can say is that 
the religious man may have been prejudiced by. his desires, not 
prove that he has been, and the risk of being thus prejudiced by 
one's desires is present in the case of any argument Which leads to 
a pleasant belief (and by one's fears in any argument which leads 
to an unpleasant one). We are not obliged to abandon all argu- 
ments which lead to such conclusions because we may have been 
prejudiced, though we ought to do our level best not to be pre- 
judiced. The same applies to apparent intuitions. And the theist 
can retort that, if there are some factors which would make a man 
likely to hold a belief in God even if it were false, there are others 
which would make him likely to reject the belief even if it were 
true. For (i) prima facie appearances are very much against it. 
There is a complete absence of direct evidence for it in everyday 
experience, and whatever our ultimate decision as to the problem 
of evil, there can be no doubt that prima facie the existence of evil, 
at least on the scale on which it does exist, seems completely in- 
consistent with the creation and control of the world by a per- 
fectly good omnipotent God. (2) We are most of our life absorbed 

242 



God 

in everyday concerns of this world which make it very difficult 
for us to get away from them sufficiently to concentrate our full 
energies on an attempt to 'find religion', and relatively few people 
have the zeal to do that. Few, if any, who have done it have ulti- 
mately failed in the attempt, and a person who has not tried is 
certainly not justified in taking for granted that those who have 
made the effort are deluded in the view that they have succeeded. 
So if the atheist can explain how people can be theists even if 
theism is false, the theist can explain rather more plausibly how 
people can be atheists or agnostics even if theism is true and 
capable of discovery by intuition. 

So the religious man, provided he has faced the difficulties and 
retains his intuitive conviction unimpaired after having honestly 
asked himself whether it may not be merely due to his desire to 
believe, need not be much worried by the doubts of the psycho- 
logist, unless indeed he insists on claiming absolute certainty for 
the belief in God^ which would in any case be unreasonable. He 
may be wrong, but he need not have an uneasy feeling that he is a 
fool for holding the belief. A study of theory of knowledge can 
show that we cannot expect to prove everything and that it is 
legitimate to have a faith in intuitions if certain conditions are 
fulfilled, especially if we also do our best to use our powers of 
inference about the subject. To a man who knows the belief from 
the inside, so to speak, the psychological explanations offered will 
probably appear just puerile and absurd. 

We may add that it is by no means such a simple task as might 
be thought to explain religion by a reference to wish fulfilment. 
Religious beliefs are by no means always pleasant to the person 
who holds them or is on the verge of doing so. The acceptance of 
religious beliefs has often exposed those who adopted them to 
terrible persecution, it has often intensified their sense of sin till 
this became agonizing, it has inspired the dread of hell. I do not 
wish for a moment to countenance the morbid exaggerated sense 
of sin or the belief in eternal hell which have been far too often 
prevalent in religious circles, but am merely citing these to show 
that we cannot explain religious conviction simply by the desire 
to believe what is pleasant, because the beliefs have often been 
acutely painful. People who have undergone religious conversion 

Q* 243 



God 

have commonly represented themselves as fighting against the 
new belief for a long time till they adopted it. The psychologist 
is of course not beaten yet; he may have a theory to account for 
the beliefs indirectly as, e.g. masochistic, but he can only do so by 
making his explanation highly elaborate and far-fetched, and the 
more complex he makes his explanation the less probable it 
becomes. The position would be much more favourable for him 
if the religious beliefs people adopted were uniformly such as 
would naturally be most pleasant to them and made no unwelcome 
demands on them. No doubt in the case of a particular person the 
belief in God may be explained by the desire to believe and the 
belief is then unjustified for the person in question. But that this 
is so with all intuitive religious beliefs is a very far-reaching 
assumption which cannot possibly be proved or even supported 
by arguments, the most that can be maintained is that it impossible 
that they should have been so caused. This is all that I can say 
about the question in general: no doubt we should find a good deal 
more to criticize if there were space to go into the particular 
explanations given in detail. 

But of course great caution is necessary in accepting ostensible 
religious intuitions as giving the exact truth. It is difficult to 
separate intuition from what is due to authority or to argument; 
and although we are not entitled therefore to dismiss all intuition, 
the differences between beliefs held intuitively by different people 
in different religions may well be explained on these grounds. 
However the fact that a person is already familiar with a certain 
doctrine need not exclude the possibility of his being able later 
to verify it by an intuitive insight which he did not have when he 
was first taught it, and in many cases the experience has led a man 
to embrace views which he never held before. 

What, then, does religious intuition establish, if anything? We 
must clearly be very doubtful about it when it is put forward as a 
justification for believing without argument the peculiar doctrines 
of particular sects. But when we are concerned with the most 
fundamental beliefs of religion the position is different, and a good 
intuitive basis can be claimed for at least two such religious beliefs. 
The first is the belief in the fundamental goodness of reality, by 
which I mean that goodness somehow preponderates, not that 

244 



God 

some things are not bad. This belief is essential to religion in the 
sense that without it a religious attitude to reality could not be 
justifiable. For religion is an attitude either to reality as a whole or 
to the fundamental principle or being on which reality is based, 
and it could not be desirable still less, as religion holds, the 
supreme good to enter into a relation of communion or worship 
with what was not good. The value claimed for their experience 
by religious people is inseparably bound up with the value of its 
object. What I have said here is not necessarily contradicted by 
religions which stress the badness of this world, because they have 
asserted or suggested the supreme goodness of a more ultimate 
reality behind this bad world. Buddhism, despite its alleged pessim- 
ism, regards everything as morally governed by the law of justice 
or Kharma, and believes in a 'Nirvana* which 'most scholars now 
think usually means not annihilation but. a supremely good 
positive state. This rather than the evil phenomenal world repre- 
sents for the Buddhist ultimate reality, and this most or all human 
beings will eventually attain. 

The second belief to which I refer is that in a personal God, or 
at least a God who is best conceived as personal relatively to us. 
It certainly cannot be contended that all deeply religious men have 
believed in such a God, but it may be contended that the religious 
attitude essentially involves emotions and states of mind which 
have only a point and sense as directed towards a being conceived 
as having attributes which we can only think of as personal. I am 
referring to love, adoration, gratitude, devotion. These are all 
parts of the normal religious attitude to God, and they are all 
states of mind which imply essentially as their object a being 
having at least consciousness and the capacity for deliberate 
benevolence. This does not of course mean that a man like 
Spinoza who had no place for the doctrine of the personality of 
God was not religious, only that he was inconsistent in adopting 
an attitude which was not in accord with his metaphysics. (Simi- 
larly I should not call, e.g. Eddington a bad scientist because I 
disagreed with his theory as to the philosophical assumptions 
necessary for science. I should only say that his science was in- 
consistent with his philosophy.) To the belief in a personal God 
it is, however, objected that God must be conceived as so much 



God 

above us that we cannot reasonably apply to him such a category 
as personality, involving. as it does, in the only forms in which we 
know it, limitations incompatible with deity. The difficulty about 
this is that, if we do not think of God in personal terms, there is 
no higher category in terms of which we can think Him, and so 
we shall not be able to form any conception of Him at all, or else 
think of Him as a sort of non-conscious force, which will be to 
make Him sub-personal rather than super-personal. We may say 
at least that to think of God in personal terms is the least mis- 
leading way we have of thinking of Him, and that to accord with 
religious intuition God must in some form possess all that is of 
value in the essential attributes of personality, though they may 
of course be combined with other attributes which are quite 
beyond our power of comprehension. In the direction of ascribing 
personality to God even Christian orthodox theology does not go 
further than this. Perhaps the difference is one less of kind than of 
degree of emphasis, for the mystic who believes in an impersonal 
God would surely admit that the analogy of personality had some 
value, though it was not to be taken literally, and most Christian 
theologians would presumably admit that it is rash to say that 
personality in God is to be conceived as more than analogous to 
personality in ourselves. In addition to the beliefs I have men- 
tioned there seems to be an awareness of a quality of 'holiness' 
quite unique and irreducible to other values. 

In describing these beliefs as fundamental to religion I do not 
mean that people could not psychologically take up a religious 
attitude without holding them. People can commit all sorts of 
inconsistencies. What I mean is that such an attitude would be 
irrational and unfitting in the sense in which it is irrational and 
unfitting to praise what is bad or to be arigry with an inanimate 
thing. Some people contend that the value of religion lies solely 
in the psychological states it engenders and their moral effects, and 
that these might remain whatever one's metaphysical beliefs; but 
it may be retorted that, if the objective beliefs are unjustified, to 
advocate such a religion is equivalent to urging one to live in a 
fool's paradise. It is hardly possible and is certainly not worthy 
of a rational being to maintain a lasting emotional state of con- 
fidence in the universe if he recognizes that the confidence is 

246 



God 

without any objective foundation, and it should surely be for the 
religious man a great sin to go on worshipping what he recog- 
nizes to be unworthy of worship. 

Of the two beliefs I have mentioned the first is commonly in- 
ferred by Christians from the second, but has by very many people 
especially in the East been held without it. It is necessary if the 
sense of peace and security characteristic of the religious life are 
to be maintained and is the most important element in the intuition 
of the mystic. The second belief will entail the first if we think of 
God as morally good and dominating the world to such an extent 
as at least to secure the ultimate triumph of good over evil, and 
this is of course the usual view of the theist. Indeed most theists 
would go further and say that God must be conceived as com- 
pletely omnipotent if the religious consciousness is to attain 
satisfaction. God seems to be intuited not only as good but as 
absolutely supreme. 



THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 

But it is objected that the existence of a good and omnipotent 
God is incompatible with the fact of evil. Such an objection could 
not indeed at the worst disprove the existence of God, because 
God might be conceived as limited by external obstacles of some 
kind so that he could not prevent the evil, but such a conception 
of God is in any form in which it has yet been put forward very 
unsatisfying to the religious mind and would only be acquiesced 
in if absolutely necessary. It does in fact seem to conflict with 
religious intuition. It is not therefore a matter for surprise that 
strenuous attempts have been made to suggest some solution of 
the problem which would preserve God's omnipotence. A course 
adopted sometimes has been to declare evil unreal, but if this 
solution means what it says it is clearly intolerable. For it contra- 
dicts either our most certain judgements of introspection or our 
most certain judgements of ethics. If we say that we did not really 
feel che pain we thought we felt or commit the sins we thought we 
committed, then we are contradicting some of our most certain 
judgements of introspection and memory. If we say that we really 



God 

felt the pain and really committed the sins but that these are not 
really evil, we are contradicting the most certain judgements of 
ethics. 

A more common and less unpromising solution is to say that 
much evil is necessary for the attainment of a greater good. This 
might be thought to imply a limitation of the omnipotence of 
God, but when philosophers have attributed omnipotence to Him 
they have usually not meant that He could do things which were 
logically impossible such as make 2 + 2 equal 5 or create a being 
who was both a man and not a man in the same sense of 'man'. 
Certainly, if God is omnipotent in this sense, the problem of evil 
is insoluble. In that case we can never argue that the creation of a 
world containing evil is justified as a means to a greater good. For 
a god who was omnipotent in that sense could have produced the 
good without the evil even if the former necessarily depended on 
the latter. But it seems pretty clear that such a conception of God's 
omnipotence is self-contradictory in any case. If we suppose the 
existence of a power to do self-contradictory things we are already 
postulating something self-contradictory. But what has usually 
been meant by calling God omnipotent is not that He could do 
anything whatever, but that He could do anything which was not 
logically impossible and that he was not limited by anything out- 
side Himself. God might well be omnipotent in thi&. sense and yet 
be incapable of producing some kinds of goods without some 
evil. Similarly He might be omnipotent in this sense and yet be 
incapable of producing certain goods without incurring the 
possibility of evil. 

The last sentence brings one to a very widely adopted solution 
of part of the problem of evil. It is said that, if man is to be a 
moral being, he must have freedom and this freedom implies the 
absence of complete determination even by God. But in so far as 
man has undetermined freedom, there can from the nature of the 
case be no guarantee against his abusing the freedom. If there 
were, he would be determined to do right, and not undetermined. 
God could not therefore prevent men from sinning without taking 
away their freedom and thus destroying most of what is of value 
in them. This enables one to avoid admitting that God is the 
author of sin. He merely permits it, as He must if man is to have 

248 



God 

the freedom to act morally. Even if indeterminism is accepted, 
this will however hardly solve the whole problem, since there are 
many evils which cannot be traced to the abuse of human free- 
will. 

In order to deal with these evils we must therefore fall back on 
the supposition that the actual occurrence of certain evils and not 
merely their possibility is justified because it is necessary for the 
production of good, 1 and this will be for a determinist the only 
way of solution for all evils. Now it is a fact that there are many 
kinds of good, including some, perhaps all, of the highest we 
know, which could not be attained without the occurrence of evil. 
How could there be moral good without temptation and obstacles 
and therefore without some evil, at least in the form of pain and 
thwarting? How could there be courage without pain, difficulties 
and danger? How could there be love of the highest kind we know 
if there were never the slightest occasion for sympathy and self- 
sacrifice? Not all the goods we know but very many involve for 
their realization evil. And a world which involved these latter 
goods might well be better than a world which did not in spite 
of the attendant evil. We must have evil to conquer if we are to 
have the very great good of conquering it. There may be other 
kinds of love and virtue such as superhuman beings might be 
conceived as enjoying which do not involve any evil, but if so 
they will be different in kind from ours, and the more different 
kinds of good the better. That might even supply an explanation 
for the theist why God created us, namely, there is something 
that we can do which even God could not do of Himself with- 
out us, i.e produce the kind of goods which involve evil. And if 
the evil is really necessary for their production and does not out- 
weigh their goodness, this would justify the production of evil. 
The theist need not indeed suppose that God specially intervened 
to produce each evil as a means to a greater good. He need only 
suppose that it is to the good that there should be some evils of a 
certain kind and some general laws relating to them, even though 
by accidental interplay or the badness of men these may some- 
times yield a particular evil which does not carry with it a corre- 
sponding good. This solution would not deny the reality of evil. 
1 Unless we are prepared to ascribe free will, e.g. to disease germs and volcanoes. 

249 



God 

Evil is there to be conquered; for it to be a real conquest of real 
value we must have real evil. Nor should the solution discourage 
us from fighting against evil, for evil can only be a means to the 
good if fought against and conquered. 

It must be added, however, that, in view of the magnitude and 
distribution of the evil in the world, such a solution of the prob- 
lem of evil cannot be regarded as in the least degree plausible un- 
less there is survival of bodily death. If we take this life alone, it is 
surely incredible that the world can have been produced by a 
perfectly good and omnipotent God. This is a strong argument 
for a future life if we accept theism, and I cannot see any theoreti- 
cal objection to postulating such a life. Another argument is that 
we must conceive of a really good God as loving the personalities 
He creates, and if He loves them how could He allow their 
annhilation? 

The evil in this world is undoubtedly terribly great, but we 
cannot possibly know how great the evils are which are needed 
for the attainment of the best. The greatest goods of character are 
realized in combating the greatest evils. Nor is it fair to expect the 
theist to show how each particular evil is conducive to the good; 
even if his view is true, it is not to be expected that a human being 
could possibly see this about each particular evil with the limited 
knowledge at his disposal. Some people find the suffering of the 
innocent the greatest problem, but a universe in which happiness 
was always in exact proportion to goodness would hardly be one 
conducive to disinterested action, nor would a good man, in so 
far as he was really good, grudge equal happiness to others less 
good than himself. 1 The belief in an omnipotent and perfect God 
cannot therefore be dismissed as necessarily impossible because of 
the problem of evil. 

A great many other problems arise in connection with the con- 
cept of God which have been much discussed in the past by 

1 The suffering of animals raises special difficulties because animals are not usually 
regarded as capable of morality, and therefore requiring freedom, nor as immortal; 
but, if we cannot solve the problem, it is one of those problems of which we can say 
that, even if there be a solution, we could not expect to see it. For we do not know 
what an animal's experience is like and so cannot see whether there are not any goods 
in an animal's life, besides mere pleasure, to which the pain might be a necessary 
means. 

250 



God 

theologians and philosophers. Such discussions must in general 
not be deprecated but encouraged: it is one of the finest occupa- 
tions of man to form as clear an idea of the fundamental reality as 
we can. But in discussing them the theist must always remember 
that God is far above any ideas of Him we can form. In order to 
avoid excessive dogmatism there is needed some conception such 
as that of analogical senses put forward by St. Thomas Aquinas or 
that of regulative ideas put forward by Kant. The former held 
that, because God was a being of quite a different nature from 
ours, no concept could be applied to him in the same sense as it 
could to us but only in an 'analogical' sense; the latter insisted that 
we could never have 'constitutive' but only 'regulative* ideas of 
God, meaning that we could not form clear definite concepts of 
God as we could of scientific objects but only highly inadequate 
and formal ones, and could not prove the applicability even of 
those in any strict sense of 'prove'. The working out of both these 
doctrines by the philosophers in question is liable to much criti- 
cism in detail, but something of the kind is certainly needed in 
order to make clear the limitations of any human concepts of 
God. 

Philosophy of religion is not religion, but if I am right the 
former can be used to defend the latter. Philosophy can be em- 
ployed, if not to prove conclusively the fundamental truths of 
religion, at any rate to work them out, to defend them against 
attack, and to use them to make a fairly coherent picture of the 
universe thus providing a partial justification. If so, none can 
deny the great practical importance of philosophy, even if we are 
careful not to identify religion with the theoretic acceptance of 
certain dogmas and are not prepared to go so far as those who 
assert that only a return of religion can save civilization from com- 
plete collapse. At the same time religion and philosophy must 
both be regarded as something more than means to social good. 
If we are not prepared to respect them each in their own right, 
then we shall not discover the truths which they contain nor will 
they ever acquire the full utility of which they are capable. The 
best results are not obtained by those who are always thinking of 
utility and aim too directly at results. 

251 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



CHAPTER II 

B. RUSSELL, Problems of Philosophy, ch. v-xi (London, Home Univer- 
sity Library). 

J. LOCKE, An Essay on the Human Understanding, bks. I and iv.(Princc- 
ton University Press, and London, Humphrey Milford). 

A. N. WHITEHEAD, The Function of Reason (Princeton University 
Press, and London, Humphrey Milford). 

On verification principle: 

A. J. AYER, Language, Truth and Logic (London, Gollancz). 

J. WISDOM, 'Metaphysics and Verification' in Mind, vol. XLVII, 
p. 452 ff. 

On intuition: 

R. I. AARON, The Nature of Knowing (London, Williams & Norgate). 

A. C. EWING, Reason and Intuition (London, Humphrey Milford). 
For more advanced work: 

Readings in Philosophical Analysis, ed. H. Feigl and W. Sellars (N.Y., 
Appleton Century-Croft). 

B. BLANSHARD, The Nature of Thought, vol. n, ch. 28-5.0 (London, 

Allen fcf Unwin). 

C. D. BROAD, 'Are there Synthetic a priori Truths?' Proceedings of 

Aristotelian Society Supp. vol. xv. 
M. R. COHEN, Reason and Nature (Rahway, N.J., Quinn & Boden Co., 

and London, Kegan Paul). 
H. W. B. JOSEPH, An Introduction to Logic (Oxford University Press, 

England). 
C. I. LEWIS, An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation (La Salle and 

London, Open Court Publishing Co.). 
J. R. WEINBERG, An Examination of Logical Positivism (London, 

Kegan Paul, and New York, Harcourt, Brace & Co.). 



CHAPTER III 

W. P. MONTAGUE, The Ways of Knowing, pt. i (New York, Macmillan 
Co., and London, Allen & Unwin). 



Bibliography 

B. RUSSELL, The Problems of Philosophy, ch. 12, 13 (Home University 

Library). 
On pragmatism: 
W. JAMES, Pragmatism (New York, Longmans Green). 

C. S. PEIRCE, Collected Papers, V (Harvard University Press). 

R. B. PERRY, Present Philosophical Tendencies, ch. 9 (New York, Long- 
mans Green). 
For more advanced study on coherence: 

A. C. EWING, Idealism, ch. 5 (London, Methuen). 
BOSANQUET, Implication and Linear Inference (London, Macmillan). 
BRADLEY, Essays on Truth and Reality (Oxford University Press). 

B. BLANSHARD, The Nature of Thought, vol. n, ch. 25-7. 

CHAPTER IV 

BERKELEY, Principles of Human Knowledge and Three Dialogues between 
Hylas and Philonous. 

C. D. BROAD, Perception, Physics and Reality, ch. i, 3, 4 (Cambridge 

University Press, England). 

J. LAIRD, A. Study in Realism (Cambridge University Press, England). 
G. E. MOORE in Contemporary British Philosophy, 2nd series, ed. J. H. 

Muirhead (New York, Macmillan Co., and London, Allen <Q? 

Unwin). 

B. RUSSELL, Our Knowledge of the External World, Lects. 3 and 4 (Lon- 

don, Allen & Unwin). 
G. F. STOUT, Mind and Matter, bks. 3 and 4 (Cambridge University 

Press, England). 
For more advanced study: 
H. H. PRICE, Perception (London, Methuen). 

C. D. BROAD, Scientific Thought, pt. n (London, Kegan Paul; New York, 

Harcourt, Brace & Co.). 

The New Realism, ed. E. B. Holt (New York, Macmillan Co.). 
A. O. LOVEJOY, The Revolt against Dualism (New York, Norton). 

CHAPTERS V and VI 
In general: 

J. LAIRD, Problems of the Self (London, Macmillan). 
H. H. PRICE, 'On Knowledge of 'Other Minds', in Proceedings of 

Aristotelian Society, vol. xxxii, and in Philosophy, vol. xm. 
J. WISDOM, Mind and Matter, pt. i (Cambridge University Press, 

England). 



Bibliography 

For more advanced study: 

G. F. STOUT, Manual of Psychology (London, University Tutorial Press). 
J. WARD, Psychological Principles (Cambridge University Press, Eng- 
land). 

B. RUSSELL, The Analysis of Mind (London, Allen & Unwin, New 

York, Macmillan Co.). 

C. D. BROAD, The Mind and its Place in Nature , (London, Kegan Paul). 

F. R. TENNANT, The Soul and its Faculties , ch. 5,6 (Cambridge Uni- 

versity Press). 

G. RYLE. The Concept of Mind, (Oxford University Press). 

CHAPTER VII 

B. RUSSELL, Our Knowledge of the External World, Lects. 5-7 (London, 

Allen <2f Unwin). 

M. F. CLEUGH, Time (London, Methuen). 
For more advanced study: 
KANT, Critique of Pure Reason, chap, on Antinomy. 

C. D.' BROAD, Scientific Thought (London, Kegan Paul; New York, 

Harcourt, Brace & Co.). 

CHAPTER VIII 

HUME, Treatise, bk. i, pt. 3 (London, Allen & Unwin). 

B. RUSSELL, Our Knowledge of the External World, Lect. 8 -(London, 

Allen & Unwin). 

C. D. BROAD, Perception, Physics and Reality, ch. ^ (Cambridge Uni- 

versity Press, England). 

A. C. EWING, Idealism, ch. iv, sect. 3 (London, Methuen). 
Proceedings of Aristotelian Society Supp., vol. xiv, articles by G. F. Stout 

and C. D. Broad. 

B. BLANSHARD, The Nature of Thought, vol. n, pp. 495-5 13. 

CHAPTER IX 

W. JAMES, 'The Dilemma of Determinism' in The Will to Believe 

(New York, Longmans Green). 
H. RASHDALL, Theory of Good and Evil, vol. n, bk. 3, ch. 3 (Oxford 

University Press, England). 
R. E. HOBART, c Free Will as involving Determination' in Mind, vol. 

XLIII, p. i 



ftibliograbhy 



W. D. Ross, Foundations of Ethics, ch. x (Oxford University Press, 

England). 
C. A. CAMPBELL, Scepticism and Construction, ch. iv, v (London, Allen 

& Unwin). 

A. E. TAYLOR in Contemporary British Philosophy r , 2nd series, ed, J. H. 

Muirhead (London, Allen & Unwin). 

CHAPTER X 

BERKELEY on universals, Principles , Introduction. 

PLATO, Republic, vi, 503-vn, 521. 

BERTRAND RUSSELL, Problems of Philosophy, ch. 9, 10 (Home Univer- 
sity Library). 

R. I. AARON, Our Knowledge of Universals (London, Humphrey Mil- 
ford). 

H. H. PRICE, Thinking and Representation (London, Cumberlege). 

On relations from pluralistic point of view: 

W. JAMES, Essays in Radical Empiricism. 

From moderately monistic: 

B. BLANSHARD, The Nature of Thought, vol. n, ch. 21, 22. 

CHAPTER XI 

BUTLER, Analogy. 

HUME, Dialogues concerning Natural Religion. 

KANT in Watson 9 s Selections, pp. 195-222 and 289-349. 

LOTZE, Outlines of the Philosophy of Religion. 

J. M. E. McTAGGART, Some Dogmas of Religion (London, Arnold). 

H. H. FARMER, Towards Belief in God (London, S.C.M. Press). 

A. E. TAYLOR, Does God Exist? (London, Macmillan). 

W. R. WRIGHT, A Student's Philosophy of Religion (New York, 

Macmillan). 

E. S. BRIGHTMAN, A Philosophy of Religion (New York, Prentice-Hall). 
E. A. BURTT, Types of Religious Philosophy (New York, Harper). 
For more advanced reading: 

THOMAS AQUINAS, Summa contra Gentiles, bks. i, in. 
A. N. WHITEHEAD, Religion in the Making (New York, Macmillan). 
G. F. STOUT, God and Nature, (Cambridge University Press). 



Index 



Absolute, the, 138-40 

theory of space and time, 143-4, 

i 7 6 

Accordance v. Correspondence 
Action, philosophy and, 24-5 
Activity theory of causation, 169- 

7* 
Aesthetics, 17 

Affective side of our nature, 103- -4 
Analysis, philosophical, 17-18, 

88 ff. 
Analytic: synthetic propositions, 

33ff ; > 166 

Antinomies, 147-53 
A. priori ', ch. II passim 
Appearances, 132, 152-3 
Aristotle on form: matter, 1 3 5 

on the infinite, 1 5 o 

on universals, 218 
Arithmetic, 26-7, 34, 62 
Arnold, Matthew, 118 
Axioms, of Euclid, 34-5, 146-7 

Behaviourism, 101-2 

applied to belief, 106 
Belief: knowledge, 51-2, 93 

as psychological state, 104 ff. 

undetermined? 191-2 
Bergson, on time, 145 
Berkeley, on matter, 73 ff., 83-4, 
138 

on God, 83 V 

on causation, 169-70 

on universals, 216 ff. 

use of 'materialism', 142 



Body: mind, 101-2, 114-15, 123- 

36 

Brain, 124, 125, 128, 132 
Broad, Prof. C. D., 200 
Buddhism, 245 

Cause, ch. VIII passim 

importance of idea, 12, 159 
origin or idea, 43-4, 172 
general principle that every 

change has a cause, 182 ff. 
metaphysical argument based 
on, 136-8, 170-1, 208, 209- 
10, 223-5, 231 

Causal argument for physical ob- 
jects, 80-7 
Causal correction between body 

and mind, 123-9 
Causation and freedom, ch. IX 

passim 

Certainty, 49-50, 51-2, 99-100 
Change: permanent, 97 
Christianity, n, 207 
Cognitive side of our nature, 103- 

4 

Coherence, 55-6, 60-6 
Colour, subjectivity or objectivity 

of, 76, 86-7, 9> 95 
Common sense: philosophy, 15, 

17-18, 23-4 

argument for realism from, 87 ff. 
view of causation, 160, 171 
ethics and philosophy, 197-8 
Communism, 142 
Conative side of our nature, 103-4 



lnde> 



Conceptualism, 212 fF. 
Consciousness, meaning of term, 

no 

Conservation of energy, 1 27 
Continuity in change, 177 
Contradiction, law of, 22-3, 64 
Correspondence theory of truth, 

53-5, 57~9 6 3> <>5> 66 
Cosmologiqal argument, 223-5 
Criteria of truth, 5 9-67 
Critical philosophy, 14, 15, 18 ff. 

Deduction v. Conference 
Democracy, 14 
Descartes: influence of, 13 

his cogito^ 99, 100, 101 

his view of physical world, 78 
Design, argument from, 225-31 
Desire: unconscious, 10911 

action against strongest, 194- 

6 

Determinism, ch. IX passim 
Dialectical materialism, 142 
Direct cognition, 64-6, 92-5 
Direct perception, 68-71 
Disagreement among philo- 
sophers, 10, 41-2, 50-1 
Dispositions, 107-9, 145 
Dreams, 60, 61, 99 
Driesch, H., 180-1 
Dunne, J. W., 154 

Electron, 97, 185-6 
Emergent properties, 138 
Empirical knowledge: a priori^ 26 

ff-> 44-5 
Empiricists: rationalists, 30 fT., 81, 

218, 241-2 
Entailment theory of causation, 

162-9, 208, 209 
Entelechy, 181 



Epiphenomenalism, 1279 
Epistemology v. Knowledge 

Theory of 
Ethics: 16, 25, 65 

and determinism, 192 fT. 

and theology, 234-8 
Euclid v. Geometry 
Evil, problem of, 247-50 
Evolution and design, 228-9 
Excluded Middle, law of, 22-3 
Existential propositions, 221-2 
Existentialists, 191 
Experience v. Empirical Know- 
ledge, Sense-experience 

Feeling, 104 

Form: matter, 135-6 

Freedom, ch. IX passim^ 9 

Geometry, 28, 34-5, 43, 146-7 
Given, the, 44-5 
God: ch. XI passim 

arguments for, 68, 137-8, 170, 
221 ff. 

and idealism, 83 

personal, impersonal, 245-6 
Good, knowledge of, v. Ethics 
Green, T. H., his argument for 
idealism, 79 

Hegelians, 55, 156 
Hume: 19 

on cause, 159, 163 

his psychology, 104 

his criticism of argument from 

design, 226 

Hypothetical propositions, 45-6, 
58, 219-20 

Idealism, 72 fT., 138-41, 233 



Index 



Illusions, 68-71, 84, 87 
Imagery and thought, 37, 102-3, 

105, 216-18 

Immediacy v* Direct Cognition 
Immortality v . Survival 
Indefinables, 58-9 
Indeterminacy, principle of, 185-6 
Indeterminism, ch. IX passim 
Individualism: socialism, 119, 211 
Induction, 46-8, 57, 67, 167-9 
Inference, 30 fF., 46 fF. 
Infinity: problems of, 147-53 

of God, 221 n. 
Innate ideas, 42-4 
Interaction, between body and 

mind, 123-9 

Introspection, 100, 104 ff., 110-11 
Intuition, 4851, 64, 65-6 

in religion, 238-47 

Judgements, meaning of term, 54 
truth of, ch. Ill passim 

Kant, on metaphysics, 41 n. 

on the self, 117 

on the antinomies, 147-53 

on freedom, 193 

on the distinction between con- 
stitutive and regulative, 177 

on God, 177 n., 236, 251 

his idealism, 141 

on ethical motive, 194 
Knowing, acts of, 104 fF. 
Knowledge: theory of, 16; ch. II, 
III passim ', 74-6, 94 

belief, 51-2, 91, 118-19 

of the good, 24-5 

Language, and thought, 34-5, 37- 

9, 217-18 
Laws, of nature, 63, 167, v. Cause 



Leibniz, 207 

Locke: on innate ideas, 42 

on physical things, 78 

on causation, 170 

on God, 170 

political influence of, 1 1 
Logic, 16, 28-9, 144 

laws of, 22-3, 63 
Love, 1 1 8, 156, 167, 249 

Materialism, 101-2, 127-9, I 3~ I > 

141-2, 183 
Mathematics, 20, 26-8, 34 fF., 62, 

148-9 
Matter: chap. IV passim 

relation to mind, ch. VI passim 
in Aristotelian sense, 135-6 
McTaggart, on time, 153-5 
Meaning, 38 

and verification, 39-42 
Mechanism, 178 fF. 
Memory, 64, 66, 93, 115, 122, 

162 

Mental acts, 104 fF. 
Metaphysics, 15 

attempts to maintain impossi- 
bility of, 17-18, 30 fF., 39-42 
Methods of philosophy, 18-21 
Mind: ch. V passim 

its relation to matter, 74 fF., ch. 

VI passim 
knowledge of mind other than 

our own, 91-2, 102, 119-22 
Monism: pluralism, 169, 206 fF., 

215-16 

Moral arguments for God, 234-7 
Moral Philosophy v. Ethics 
Motion, absolute, relative, 144-5 
Multiple personality, 115-16 
Mysticism, 155-6, 208-9, 238 fF., 
246 



258 



Index 



Naturalism, in ethics, 234-5 
Necessary propositions, 2(5 S. 
idea of necessary correction, 43, 

44 
necessity in causation, 162 ff., 

171, 205 
Nominalism, 212 ff. 



Omnipotence, of God, 247 ff. 
Ontological argument, 221-2 
Organisms, 180-1, 184, 225 ff. 



Panpsychism, 137, 140, 171 
Parallelism, between body and 

mind, 123 ff., 129, 140 
Perception, direct: representative 

theories of, 68-71 
Personality, in God, 245-6 
Phenomenalism, 72 ff., 88 ff. 
Philosophy, nature of, ch. I passim 
Physical objects v. Matter 
Physics, 22, 145-6, 149, l6 7, ^4 
Physiology, 124-5 
Plato, on universals, 218 ff. 
Pluralism: monism, 169, 206 ff., 

215-16 
Political philosophy, function of, 

16-17 
Politics, philosophy and, 11-12, 

14, 140, 142, 210-11 

Pragmatism, 15, 56-7, 66-7, 191 
Pre-cognition, 156-8 
Present, specious, 155 
Primary: secondary qualities, 77- 

8,79,85, 184 

Probability, 82, 165-6, 173, 238 
Propositions, states of, 54 
Psychical research, 134 
Psycho-analysis, 109-11, 183 



Psychology, 21-2, ch. V passim* 
128 

causality in, 162, 166-7, 186-7 

and religion, 242-4 

v. Mind 

Punishment, 193, 197 
Purpose, in the universe, 225-35 

Qualities: on Stance, 96 

Rationalists: empiricist, 30 ff., 44 

ff., 80-1 

rationalist theory of causation,, 
163 ff. 

Realism, as theory of physical ob- 
jects, 72 ff. 
as theory of universals, 212 ff. 

Regularity view of causation, 160 
ff. 

Regulative principles, 177-8 

Relations: terms, internal, extern- 
al, 74 

and monism, 209-10 
supposed to invoke mind, 79 

Relativity, scientific theory of, 81,. 

145-7 
Religion, philosophy and, 13, clu 

XI passim 
religious experience, argument 

from, 238-47 

Representative theory of percep- 
tion, 68-71, 80, 
Russell, Lord, on common-sense 

beliefs, 23, 87 
on monism, 207 



Scepticism, 22 ff., 231-3 
Science: philosophy, 9-10, 12, 13 

14, 18-22 
methods of, 47-8, 61 ff. 



Index 



bearing of its modern develop- 
ment in philosophy, 81, 97, 
145-7, J 49> l6 7> 182-6 
and phenomenalism, 73, 91 
presuppositions of, 1 59-60, 163, 

175-80, 188, 210, 224 
Secondary: primary qualities, 77- 

8, 85-7, 95, 184 
Self-identity, 112-18 
Sense data or senses, 69 fT., 86-7, 

89 

v. Given, the 

Sense-experience, 44-5, 60 fT., 69 
as criterion of truth and mean- 
ing, 39 ft, 72 fT. 
innate ideas, 42-4 
serving: sensa, 75-6, 103 
v. Perception 
Socrates, 9, 24 
Solipsism, 119-22 
Space, 129-30, 143-5 1, 176 
Spencer, Herbert, 18 
Spinoza, 206, 208, 245 
Stout, G. F., on cause, 170-1 
Structure: content, 85-6, 116 
Subjectivism, in ethics, 235 
Subsistent entities, 219-20 
Substance: of physical objects, 95 
ff. 

of self, 112-18 
body and mind same substance? 

129-33 
idea of, 44 

Survival, of bodily death, 116-17, 
133-5, *3 6 > 250 



Syllogism, 29 

Synthetic a priori propositions, 33 
ff.; 1 66 



Teleology, in organisms, 180-1 

225 fT. 

Telepathy, 120 
Thomas Aquinas, views of body: 

mind, 135-6 
on God, 251 

Time, 19, ch. VII passim y 176 
Truth, ch. Ill passim 



Unconscious, the, 109-11 
Universals, 211 ff. 
Use, of philosophy, 10 ff., 24-5, 
251 



Values, 156, 249 

v. Ethics 

Value, Theory, 17 
Verification principle, 39-42 
Vitalism: mechanism, 180-1 



War, 14 

Whitehead, on importance of 
philosophy, 12, 14 

Will, and cause, 162, 172 
freedom of, 189 ff. 

Wisdom, practical, and philo- 
sophy, 24 



260 



