THE BOOK WAS 
DRENCHED 



- z 



gj<OU_1 60397 >m 
| * 



OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 



Call No.> Accession No. 



This book should be returned on or before the date 
last marked below. 



Maiiy commentaries on Kant's 
great book, Critique of Pure 
brief as well as extern 
are available to the general 
teaser or the beginner in Kant. 
Most Histories of Philosop y 
also contain brief accounts of 
the contents of the book. There 
is, however, no book available 
for those who do not need 
detailed criticism or comments 
on the Critique but only wan 
a plain objective account of the 
entire work. The present book 
seeks to fill this gap; it 
tries to do in English what 
Messer has ddne in German, 
namely, giving a fair and faith- 
ful idea of the main argu- 
ments of Kant's work in their 
Strength and weakness. The 
author docs not claim that it will 
|lkelp to solve any of the knotty 
problems of Kant's thought and 
meaning, but he does claim 
$$iat a careful reader of it will 
get a food grounding in Kant's 
and his Critical 




students who 

study the great philo- 

will find this book 
>rtictilarly useful. 



A HANDBOOK 

TO KANT'S 
CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 



BY 



RASVIHARY DAS, M A., Ph. D. 

UNIVERSITY OF CALCUTTA 
AUTHOR OF 'THE PHILOSOPHY or WHITEHKAD* 




HIND KITABS LIMITED 

PUBLISHERS : : BOMBAY 



First published, 1949 

COPYRIGHT 



PRINTED BY V. KULKARNI, AT BHAGIRATHI PRESS, 71, GOVT, 
GATE ROAD, PAREL, BQMBAVj AND PUBLISHED BY HIM FOR 
HIND KITABS LTD., 261-263, HORNBY ROAD, FORT, BOMBAY, 



To 



Professor K. C. BHATTACHARYA 



in sincere gratitude 
and affection 



PREFACE 

There is no dearth of books on Kant in English, and 
to add another to the existing legion seems to demand an 
apology. And my apology is this. In the Histories of 
Philosophy we have very brief accounts of the contents 
of Kant's great book Critique of Pure Reason. We 
have also extensive commentaries, such as those of Prof. 
Kemp Smith and Prof. Paton. There are smaller commen- 
taries too, but none avoid being critical or seek to give a 
plain objective account of the entire Critique. If a 
general reader or a beginner in Kant, who does not need, 
and is not in a position to profit by, any criticism of the 
Kantian position, wants to have a sufficiently full account 
of the kind of matters discussed in Kant's book, there is 
at present no book in English, as far as I know, which 
will exactly answer this purpose. My book is intended 
to meet the need of such elementary students and general 
readers. It is certainly not meant for experts or serious 
students who should go directly to Kant's own work. I 
should be happy if my book served any purpose as a 
preliminary reading. 

I have merely tried to do in English What August 
Messer has done in German, in his /Com men far zu 
Kants Kritik der reinen Vernurift, for students of 
Kant. I cannot hope that I have been as successful as 
Messer. But it is true that his book has been my guide. 

I cannot pretend that my book will help to solve 
lany of the knotty problems of Kant's thought and 
meaning. But I do hope that a careful reader of my 
book will have a fair and faithful idea of the main argu- 
ments of Kant's work in their strength and weakness. 



VHi PREFACE 

In preparing this book I have been greatly indebted 
to Prof. Kemp Smith's Commentary and to his valuable 
translation. Prof. Paton's Commentary came out after I 
had practically written out my book, but I have made 
certain changes in it in the light of his commentary. I 
have already mentioned Messer. I consulted certain 
other expositors also, such as Watson and Kuno Fischer, 
and derived much help from them. 

I am thankful to my friend Mr D. Y. Deshpandc 
who prepared the Index and helped me with several use- 
ful suggestions. 

Calcutta University 

May, 1948 R. Das 



A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW 

Critique of Pure Reason has two main divisions: A. Tran- 
cendental Doctrine of Elements and B. Transcendental 
Doctrine of Method. 

A. Transcendental Doctrine of Elements is divided into two parts : 

1. Transcendental Logic and 2. Transcendental Dialectic. 

1. Transcendental Logic has two parts : (i) Transcendental 

Aesthetic and (ii) Transcendental Analytic, 
(i) Transcendental Aesthetic deals with Sensibility and its 

pure forms (Space and Time). 

(ii) Transcendental Analytic deals with the Understanding 
and its Categories (Substantiality, Causality, etc.) 

These forms and categories are supplied by the mind out of 
itself. They are transcendental and not empirical, in the sense 
that they are necessary conditions of experience and are not derived 
from experience. 

2. Transcendental Dialectic deals with Reason and its Ideas 
(God, soul and the world as a whole). These Ideas are not neces- 
sary for knowledge, but for systematization of knowledge. They 
are called Regulative in contrast to the forms and the categories 
which are called Constitutive inasmuch as the latter constitute, 
or form essential part of, objects of knowledge, whereas there arc 
no actual given objects to which the Ideas of Reason may apply 
although we may use these Ideas merely to systematize our know- 
ledge of objects. 

Aesthetic and Analytic explain how knowledge is possible 
in Mathematics and Physics. Dialectic makes clear how we get 
no knowledge proper in Metaphysics which deals with super-sensible 
objects like God, Soul and the world. In fact these are no real 
objects, as they never come within experience. The world seems 
to be there, but the world which is there is only a series of phe- 
nomena, endlessly running from past to future. There is no such 
given thing which is the world as a whole, 

B. Transcendental Doctrine of Method explains Kant's metho- 
dology or the formal conditions of a System of Pure Reason. 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Preface . . . . . . . . . . vii 

A Bird's-Eye View . . . . . . ix 

TITLE . . . . . . . 1 

Kant's Preface to the First Edition . . . 2 

Kant's Preface to the Second Edition . . 6 

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . 11 

I. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF ELEMENTS 
Part I. TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC . . 20 

Introductory . . . . . . . . 20 

Section I. Space . . . .22 

Section II. Time . . . . 26 

General Observations on the Transcendents! Aesthetic . . 32 

Part II. TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC .36 

Introduction . . , . . . . . 36 

Division I. TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC . .40 

BOOK i. Analytic of Concepts . . . 41 

CHAPTER I. The Clue to the Discovery of all Pure Con- 
cepts of the Understanding ... . 41 

CHAPTER IT. The Deduction of the Pure Concepts of 

the Understanding . . 48 

First Edition . . .51 

Second Edition , . . . 64 

BOOK ii. Analytic of Principles . . .79 

Introduction: Transcendental Judgement in General . . 80 

CHAPTER I. The Schematism of the Pure Concepts of 

the Understanding . , . . 81 

CHAPTER Jl. System of all Principles of the Under- 
standing . . . . 86 
Section 1, The Highest Principle of all Analytic 

Judgements. . . . 86 



CONTENTS XI 

PAGE 

Section 2. The Highest Principle of all Synthetic 

Judgements. . . . 87 

Section 3. Systematic Representation of all the Syn- 
thetic Principles of the Understanding 89 

1. Axioms of Intuition . . . . 90 

2. Anticipations of Perception . . . . 92 

3. Analogies of Experience . . 95 

4. The Postulates of Empirical Thought in 
General . . . . . . 105 

Refutation of Idealism . - . . Ill 

CHAPTER III. The Ground of the Distinction of all Ob- 
jects in general into Phenomena and Noumena 11 7 
APPENDIX. The Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection. . 122 
Division II. TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 127 
Introduction . . . . . , . , 127 
BOOK I. The Concepts of Pure Reason . . . . 132 
BOOK II. The Dialectic Inferences of Pure Reason . . 136 
CHAPTER I. The Paralogisms of Pure Reason . . 137 
The Paralogisms in the First Edition. . . . 138 
The Paralogisms in the Second Edition . . 147 

CHAPTER II. The Antinomy of Pure Reason . . 155 

Section 1. System of all Cosmological Ideas . . 156 

Section 2. Antithetic of Pure Reason . . . . 159 

First Conflict . . . . . . 160 

Second Conflict . . . . . . 162 

Third Conflict . . . . . 163 

Fourth Conflict . . . . . 163 

Section 3. The Interest of Reason in these Conflicts 165 
Section 4. The Absolute Necessity of a Solution of the 

Transcendental Problems of Pure Reason 166 
Section 5. Sceptical Representation of the Cosinological 

Questions in the Four Cosmological Ideas 167 
Section 6. Transcendental Idealism as the key to the 

Solution of Cosinological Dialectic , . 168 



[ii CONTENTS 

PACK 

Section 7. Critical Solution of the Cosmologicol Con- 
flict of Reason with itself . . . . 169 
Section 8. The Regulative Principle of Pure Reason 

in its application to the Cosmological Ideas 171 
Section 9. The Empirical Employment of the Regu- 
lative Principle of Reason . . . . 173 
I. Solution of the First Antinomy. . . . 173 
II. Solution of the Second Antinomy . . 174 

III. Solution of the Third Antinomy . . 176 

IV. Solution of the Fourth Antinomy . . 180 
Concluding Note on the whole Antinomy of Pure Reason 182 

CHAPTER 111. The Ideal of Pure Reason . . . . 182 

Section 1. The Ideal in general . . . . 182 

Section 2. Thd Transcendental Ideal . . . . 184 

Section 3. The Arguments of Speculative Reason in 

Proof of the Existence of a Supreme Being 186 

Section 4. The Impossibility of an Ontological Proof 187 

Section 5. The Impossibility of a Cosmological Proof 190 
Section 6. The Impossibility of a Phy si co-theological 

Proof . . . . . . 194 

Section 7 . Critique of all Theology based on Specu- 
lative Principles of Reason. . . . 196 

Appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic. The Regu- 
lative Employment of the Ideas of Pure Reason. . 196 

II. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

CHAPTER l. The Discipline of pure Reason . . 209 

CHAPTER n. The Canon of Pure Reason . . 223 

CHAPTER 11 J. The Architectonic of Pure Reason , . 228 

CHAPTER iv. The History of Pure Reason . . 232 

INDEX . . . . . . . . 233 



THE TITLE 

CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON 

The term 'critique' means criticism or 'the passing 
of critical judgements'. The significance of the adjective 
'pure* lies in the fact that the reason which is to be 
considered in this book is to be taken as independent of 
experience. The term 'reason' has a technical meaning 
as distinguished from the term 'understanding'. Here 
it is used in the sense of that faculty which supplies the 
a priori elements of our knowledge. 

'Critique of Pure Reason' then means the passing of 
critical judgements upon pure reason; but it may be also 
taken to mean the passing of critical judgements by pure 
reason. The meaning of the expression most consonant 
with the aim and achievement of the treatise would be 
'criticism of pure reason by itself. Pure reason is the 
subject as well as the object of criticism. 



K. C.. 



KANT'S PREFACE (First Edition) 

Human reason is troubled by certain questions, which 
it cannot avoid, because they spring from its own nature , 
and which at the same time it cannot answer, because 
they transcend its power. 

The difficulty is not of its own creation. It starts 
with principles which are amply verified within expe- 
rience, and one does not suspect that their use will be 
illegitimate in any case. One such principle is the law of 
causality which says that every event must have a cause. 
The validity of this law is well proved in experience. 
But as we go on asking for cause, we find that the 
causal chain cannot be completed. We therefore take 
our refuge in a first cause to which we believe the causal 
series leads. But in so doing, we fall into obscurity and 
contradiction, because we do not understand how the 
first cause was led to begin its causal o peration. As the 
first cause goes beyond all experience, we cannot verify 
any of our assertions with regard to it, and so our con- 
troversies about it cannot be decided by any test of 
experience. Metaphysics is the science which treats 
of super-sensible entities and is full of endless and 
inconclusive disputes. 

There was a time when metaphysics was highly res- 
pected, but it had come to be discredited in Kant's time* 

At first dogmatists ruled in metaphysics. By a 
dogmatist Kant understands a philosopher who naively 
believes, without a critisim of our faculty of knowledge, 
that we can know everything and answer every question. 
Kant says that the rule of the dogmatists was despotic, 
by which he means that dogmatists answered every doubt 
in the truth of their doctrines by mere bold assertions 



KANT'S PREFACE (FIRST EDITION) 3 

without critical examination. But as one assertion could 
be met by an opposite assertion people began to doubt 
whether it was at all possible to arrive at any sure 
knowledge in philosophical matters, and so dogmatism 
gave place to scepticism. But scepticism never proved 
a sufficient check to dogmatism. It seemed at one time 
as if Locke's Enquiry into Human Understanding would 
bring these disputes to an end by tracing the origin of 
our metaphysical ideas to common experience. But as 
the psychological account of the empirical origin of our 
metaphysical ideas was not in fact true (as Kant showed 
later), the dogmatic procedure in metaphysics continued 
in spite of Locke. People became indifferent to meta- 
physical questions, not because they did not consider 
metaphysical knowledge to be of any value, but because 
in the state of metaphysics then obtaining, they des- 
paired of such knowledge. The indifference then was not 
due to levity but mature judgement, and was a call to 
reason to undertake an examination of itself as regards 
its capacity to know things independently of all ex. 
perience. As metaphysics claims to give such a priori 
knowledge, which is independent of all experience, the 
criticism of reason will decide whether metaphysics is 
possible at all, and if possible, what is the ground of its 
validity and how far it can go. All these must be 
decided once and for all, and according to principles. 

Kant believes himself to have supplied such a 
criticism of reason. He has given a survey of metaphy- 
sical questions and shown how reason falls into apparent 
self-contradiction and how this can be avoided. Kant 
claims that there is not a single metaphysical question 
which has not been solved in the Critique or, at least, 
to the solution of which the key has not been supplied. 



4 KANT'S PREFACE (FIRST EDITION) 

Pure reason is such a perfect unity that if its principle 
is found insufficient to solve one single legitimate 
problem, its capacity to solve others cannot then be 
trusted. This claim to completeness is not however 
extravagant, becasue Kant's proposed criticism is con- 
cerned with pure reason alone which cannot hide itself, 
and his claim is in fact more modest than the claim of 
those who profess to give us metaphysical knowledge 
about God and soul. 

Kant is concerned to ascertain how far reason can go 
without any assistance from experience, that is, the 
extent of our a priori knowledge. Such knowledge 
must be necessary. The survey of a priori knowledge 
also must hold good a priori and must be an example 
of apodeictic certainty. The knowledge which the 
Critique is designed to supply must be therefore 
absolutely certain, so that there can be no room for 
opinion or difference of views with regard to what it 
says. But in the Transcendental Deduction which 
Kant has provided in the second chapter of the 
Analytic and which occupies the most important place 
in the whole work and has cost its author the greatest 
labour, he has said certain things with regard to which, 
it seems, different views may be held. Now the 
Deduction has two sides, objective and subjective. The 
objective side explains how the a priori concepts of the 
understanding are valid of objects. This is really 
essential to this whole work and there is nothing doubt- 
ful about it. The subjective side seeks to investigate 
the understanding itself and find out how it comes to be 
possible. This part, although important, is not essential, 
because our main question is what and how much 
reason and understanding can know without the help 



KANT'S PREFACE (FIRST EDITION) 5 

of experience, and not how the faculty of thought 
(understanding) comes to be possible. The sub- 
jective part may appear to resemble an hypothetical 
enquiry for the cause of a given effect in regard to 
which different opinions may be held. If for this 
amount of apparent uncertainty, the subjective part is 
rejected, the full force of the objective deduction, which 
is really essential, will still remain unaffected. 

So far as regards certainty. As regards clearness, 
Kant says that he has amply provided for discursive 
or logical clearness which can be attained through 
concepts, but he has not been able to provide for 
intuitive or aesthetic clearness which can be given by 
examples and illustrations. This is not altogether to be 
regretted, because examples and illustrations would have 
increased the bulk of the work and would have made it 
difficult for us to arrive quickly at a conspectus of 
the whole. 

As the Critique deals with the a priori elements of 
knowledge, it prepares the way for a real metaphysics 
which will be nothing short of an inventory of all our 
a priori possessions (all that can be known by pure 
reason) systematically arranged. As reason, in such a 
metaphysics, is concerned with itself and dispenses alto- 
gether with experience, which might add anything to it, 
it can give us a complete survey and can be sure that 
nothing has been left out of consideration. 

Such a metaphysics Kant promises to give us under 
the title Metaphysics of Nature. While the Critique 
is concerned only with the fundamental a priori concepts 
(e. g. causality) and their complete synthesis, metaphysics 
will deal also with derivative concepts ( such as force, 
activity, etc.) derived from causality. 



KANT'S PREFACE (Second Edition) 

Whether or no any branch of rational knowledge is 
proceeding on the sure path of a science can be deter- 
mined by its results, If it is compelled frequently to 
retrace its steps and if the workers in it follow no 
commonly agreed plan, then we may be sure that it is 
not on the secure path of a science, but is merely groping 
at random. If, on the contrary , it makes steady progress 
without having to retrace its steps, and there is agree- 
ment among its various workers, we conclude that it is 
proceeding in a scientific way. 

Judged by this standard, metaphysics shows a very 
disappointing result. It makes no progress and there is 
no agreement whatever among its workers. That logic 
has been from the earliest times on the right path is clear 
from the fact that since Aristotle it has not had to 
retrace a single step. 

Mathematics and physics are good examples of 
science. But they arrived at the royal road of science 
through a revolution in their way of thought. And the 
revolution consisted in this that the object to be known 
was no longer presupposed as given ready made in 
experience, but was constructed. If one constructs a 
triangle making its three sides equal, then it follows from 
the construction that the triangle is equiangular. If 
anything is to be known a priori with certainty, for 
example, in respect of a geometric figure, it can only be 
what follows necessarily from what we ourselves have 
put into the figure in drawing it according to our concept. 
Who brought about this revolution in mathematics 
we do not know. 

The revolution in physics is not so old as in mathe- 



KANT'S PREFACE (SECOND EDITION) 7 

matics. We know its originators. Bacon, Galileo, and 
Torricelli may be named in this connexion. They did not 
content themselves merely with observing what was 
given in experience. They introduced experiment. The 
essence of experiment lies in this that we ourselves bring 
about processes whose laws we are to determine. Thus 
here the object to be studied is as it were constructed by 
us. By means of experiment we compel nature to produce 
processes in which we are interested and thus to answer 
our question as to the causal conditions under which they 
take place. 

Can we raise metaphysics to the status of a science 
through a revolution in the mode of our thought ? This 
is the great question of Kant. He thinks he has brought 
about such a revolution, and he compares his achieve- 
ment to the revolution brought about by Copernicus in 
astronomy. People before Copernicus thought that the 
sun and the stars moved the round the earth. But Co- 
pernicus, with a view to explaining certain changes in the 
positions of heavenly bodies, introduced the hypothesis 
that the earth itself moved. People before Kant thought 
that our knowledge had to conform to its object s; Kant 
tried the hypothesis that the objects conformed to our 
ways of knowing. By this hypothesis he cculd explain hew 
we could have a priori knowledge of objects. So long 
as one supposed that knowledge conformed to, or 
simply copied, objects which were given ready made in 
our experience, one could not explain how any a priori 
knowledge was possible. But if the objects conformed 
to our ways of knowing, that is, if they were determined 
by our faculty of knowledge, then to the extent they 
were so determined, they might be known even prior 
to experience. 



KANT'S PREFACE (SECOND EDITION) 

Kant does not doubt that there are cases of a priori 
knowledge which are, for instance, supplied by mathe- 
matics and physics* This fact of a priori knowledge can 
be explained only by his hypothesis. One has to make 
an experiment with this hypothesis in the spirit of science, 
and the experiment succeeds as well as could be desired. 

But the Critique, although it shows how a priori 
knowledge is possible in regard to objects of possible ex- 
perience, shows at the same time that the scope of our 
knowledge is limited to such objects only. It shows that 
we know objects as appearances, as they are or may be 
given in our experience, but we cannot know things in 
themselves, which are not and cannot be given in any 
experience. Metaphysics claims to give us knowledge of 
super-sensible entities like God and soul, that are never 
objects of any possible experience. Kant shows that 
such knowledge is not possible. What transcends the 
limits of experience is the unconditioned, and if the un- 
conditioned were to be an object of knowledge, then 
since an object has to conform to the conditions of 
knowledge, the unconditioned would be conditioned by 
our knowledge, which would be a contradiction. But 
although theoretical knowledge is denied of the super- 
sensible, we may still have practical knowledge of it, 
such as is needed by morality and religion. 

It might be supposed that the Critique restricts our 
knowledge and has only a negative value, inasmuch as 
it warns us not to go beyond the limits of possible ex- 
perience. But this would be a mistake. The Critique 
in fact has not restricted but extended the scope of our 
knowledge (taken in a wide sense). For to suppose that 
everything must be known theoretically is to suppose 
that we must be confined in our knowledge within the 



KANT'S PREFACE (SECOND EDITION) 9 

limits of sensibility (because sensibility is the basis of 
theoretical knowledge). But when we suppose that there 
are things which cannot be theoretically known, we extend 
the scope of our knowledge along the line of practical 
reason. 

Further, the value of the Critique is not merely 
negative but positive also. By placing God and freedom 
beyond the scope of theoretical reason, the Critique has 
secured them against all attacks of atheists and sceptics, 
because theoretical reason cannot say anything about a 
matter which falls beyond its scope. To say that the 
Critique has no positive value is as good as to say that 
policemen render no positive service, because they merely 
prevent people from doing any violence. 

Kant thus believes that his Critique has rendered a 
valuable service to morality and religion, and explains 
it by a reference to the question of the freedom of the 
will. An act of will, as considered by the science of 
psychology, is like any other natural process causally 
determined. And so, if the scientific way were the only 
way of regarding things, then there would be no freedom. 
But morality requires freedom in the strict sense of the 
term. If the will could be known exhaustively in the 
scientific way, we find there would be no room for free- 
dom, and so none for morality too. Kant saves the 
situation by supporting that the will, as known by 
science (theoretical reason), is an appearance among other 
appearances and is determined, but as a thing in itself 
given by practical reason it is free. We cannot of course 
assert two such contradictory predicates as free and unfree 
of one and the same thing, understood in the same sense. 
Thus although we cannot (theoretically) know freedom, 
we can think and believe it, when there are practical 

K. c. . . 2 



10 KANT'S PREFACE (SECOND EDITION) 

grounds for such a belief, because the very idea of freedom 
does not involve any contradiction. To think of the will 
as part of nature and as free would be a contradiction. 

Similarly in the case of God and the immortal nature 
of oui soul. Although we cannot know them scientifically, 
we may still think and believe them when there are 
practical reasons for such a faith. Kant therefore says 
that he has removed (theoretical) knowledge in order to 
make room for faith. 

This negation of knowledge is no actual loss; for the 
arguments which the metaphysician uses to prove God, 
freedom and immortality are too subtle to be intelligible 
to the great mass of ordinary people, and so the know- 
ledge which metaphysics claimed to provide was really 
unavailing to them. 

As nothing can be positively proved in the super- 
sensible sphere, so nothing can also be denied, Thus our 
faith in God, freedom and immortality has nothing to 
fear from atheists and materialists. 

Kant refutes scepticism, which despairs of all know- 
ledge, by showing that knowledge of objects as appearances 
is quite possible. Subjective idealism, which holds that 
the world is a mere idea and is not as real as ourselves, 
is refuted by showing that the idea of the empirical 
self is correlative to that of the objective world, and both 
are equally real. 

Kant is not opposed to the dogmatic procedure of 
reason, but only to dogmatism which presumes to know 
things without a previous criticism of our faculty of 
knowledge. When such criticism has done its work, then 
philosophy has indeed to proceed dogmatically, i. e. 
deduce its doctrines from established principles. 



INTRODUCTION 

I. The Distinction between Pure and Empirical 
Knowledge. 

All our knowledge no doubt begins with experience, 
but is not wholly derived from experience. Knowledge 
consists of impressions derived from experience, together 
with other elements supplied by the faculty of knowledge 
from within itself. " This leaf is green " is a piece of 
knowledge. The mere green impression of the sense 
represents no knowledge, till it is organized by the ideas 
of substance ( leaf ) and quality ( green ) supplied by the 
understanding. Our faculty of knowledge however cannot 
work unless it gets its material from sense-impressions. 

Now the question is whether there is any knowledge 
which is independent of all experience. Such knowledge 
would be a priori knowledge, in distinction from a poste- 
riori or empirical knowledge which is derived from 
experience. ** Every change has its cause " is an instance 
of a priori knowledge, because we cannot learn from 
experience that every change has its cause, since all 
changes do not come within our experience. But 
although this piece of knowledge is a priori it is not 
quite pure, because it involves the idea of change which 
can be learnt only from experience. We want to know 
whether there is any pure a priori knowledge which is 
independent of all experience whatever. 

Note : The word 'experience* is used in different 
senses. In a narrow sense it stands for sense-impressions 
only. In a wider sense it stands for our empirical knowledge, 
consisting of sense-impressions together with the ideas applied 
to them. In the latter sense it contains both a priori and 
a posteriori elements. 



12 INTRODUCTION 

II. We are in Possession of Certain Modes of 
a priori Knowledge. 

Necessity and universality are the two sure marks 
of a priori knowledge. From experience we can only 
learn what a thing is, but not what it must be. Similarly 
from experience we can only learn that a thing is such 
and such, so far as our observation goes, but not that 
it is such universally. So if there is any knowledge 
which possesses necessity and universality, that knowledge 
must be a priori, seeing that these characteristics 
(necessity and universality) cannot be derived 
from experience. 

It is easy to show that we know many judgements 
which are necessary and universal, and therefore, a priori. 
All the propositions of pure mathematics are a priori. 
And the proposition "every change has its cause", which 
is assumed in everyday life and underlies natural science, 
is also a priori. Hume was wrong in supposing that the 
causal principle is derived from experience, because the 
causal connexion is universal and necessary and so cannot 
be derived from experience. 

///. Philosophy stands in Need of a Science of the 
a priori. 

We have just seen that there are a priori elements 
of knowledge in both science and mathematics. Besides 
these we have the a priori concepts of God, freedom and 
immortality, to which nothing whatever corresponds in 
our actual experience. Metaphysics is concerned with 
these a priori concepts and professes to give us knowledge 
about them knowledge which we value far more highly 



III. NEED OF A SCIENCE OF THE A PRIORI 13 

than any empirical knowledge. 

The procedure of metahpysics has been so far 
dogmatic, that is, it has offered us supposed knowledge 
about super- sensible things without a previous enquiry as 
to whether and how far we can know anything a priori 
without any help of experience. In fact, however, such an 
enquiry into the possiblity, limits and value of a priori 
knowledge is urgently needed if metaphysics is to be freed 
from the doubt and uncertainty which would otherwise 
fall to its lot. For metaphysical knowledge cannot be 
verified in experience, and we cannot be sure whether 
we have any valid knowledge in metaphysics or merely 
meaningless assertions . 

Kant's Critique of Pure Reason is meant to supply 
this science of the a priori which philosophy needs. 

The reason why this critical enquiry was not so long 
undertaken by metaphysics is to be found in the fact that 
it was misled by the example of mathematics and that 
much of its work was merely analytical. Mathematics 
gives us a splendid example of how far we can go in 
a priori knowledge without any aid from experience* 
But the a priori knowledge of mathematics is knowledge 
in so far as it can be exhibited in intuition. As the 
intuition needed for mathematics is pure intuition, it was 
not distinguished from a bare concept. This misled 
metaphysics into supposing that no intuition or expe- 
rience was needed for knowledge. 

The other circumstance which misled metaphysics 
was the fact that it was engaged mostly in analysing 
concepts which we already possess and for such analysis 
no reference to experience was necessary. Such analysis 
of course does not add anything to one's knowledge but 
only clarifies the ideas one already possesses. Metaphysics 



14 INTRODUCTION 

however also made assertions which were not mere 
analyses of concepts but added new concepts to the 
given concepts, and that without any support from 
experience. That is to say, it also made synthetic 
a priori judgements. Kant therefore now proceeds 
to discuss the distinction between analytic and 
synthetic judgements. 

IV. The Distinction between Analytic and Synthetic 
Judgements 

When in a judgement we join a predicate to a 
subject, the predicate is either already contained (although 
covertly) in the subject or it is not so contained. In an 
analytical judgement the predicate is contained in the 
subject or is part of the meaning of the subject. The 
judgement "all bodies are extended" is analytic, because 
the idea of extension is already contained in the idea of 
a body, and the judgement does nothing but analyse our 
conception of a body. We have not to refer to experience 
in order to enable ourselves to make such judgements. 
They are a priori and based on the principle of identity 
or the principle of non-contradiction. In the example 
given above we find extension is identified with body 
and we should contradict ourselves if we were to say that 
bodies are not extended. 

A judgement in which the predicate represents a new 
idea not already contained in the idea of the subject, is 
called synthetic. Thus the judgement c * all bodies are 
heavy " is a synthetic judgement inasmuch as the idea 
of weight is no part of the meaning of a body. This 
judgement does not merely analyse our concept of a body, 
but makes an addition to our knowledge of it. 



V. SYNTHETIC JUDGEMENTS A PRIORI 15 

It has to be noted here that by the meaning of a term 
we are not to understand what is associated with it in 
the mind of this or that individual. Otherwise a person 
might always think of bodies as heavy and so for him 
the judgement c< all bodies are heavy" would yield no new 
knowledge. By the meaning of a term we should under- 
stand a common scientific meaning which is not different 
for different individuals. Such meaning of the term body 
includes extension, impenetrability, etc., but not weight f 
This is why the judgement "all bodies are heavy" 
is synthetic. 

There are of course synthetic a posteriori judge- 
ments in which the connexion between subject and predicate 
is grounded in experience. Thus although by an examina- 
tion of the idea of body, we cannot trace any connexion 
between body and weight, we can nevertheless learn from 
experience that weight is connected with body. 

There are however synthetic a priori judgements 
also. "Every event has a cause" is such a judgement. 
It is synthetic because the idea of cause is not contained 
in the idea of something that happens, which we call an 
event. This judgement is not only universal but also 
necessary, and cannot therefore be derived from experi- 
ence. So it is a priori. The main task of Kant is to 
explain the possibility of such judgements. 

V. In all Theoretical Sciences of Reason Synthetic 
a priori Judgements are contained as Principles 

1. All mathematical judgements are synthetic. All- 
mathematical judgements, at least those of pure mathe~ 
matics, are necessary and therefore a priori, because 
necessity cannot be derived from experience. They are 



16 INTRODUCTION 

also synthetic- It might be supposed that an arithmetical 
proposition like 7+5=12 was merely analytical, but that 
would be a mistake. The idea of 12 is not by any means 
contained in the idea of the sum of 7 and 5, which merely 
says that the two numbers, 7 and 5, should be combined 
into one, but says nothing as to what that one number 
may be. We cannot get the idea of twelve merely from 
the ideas of 7 and 5, nor from that of their combination. 
It is only with the help of intuition, that is, by referring, 
say, to our five fingers or to five points and adding them 
one by one to 7 that we get 12. The judgement therefore 
is synthetic. 

The fundamental judgements of pure geometry also 
are synthetic. The judgement, for instance, that the 
straight line between two points is the shortest is synthe- 
tic, because the idea of the shortest distance is not 
contained in the idea of the straight line. Here too 
intuition is needed to make the synthesis possible. 

2. Natural science (physics) contains a priori syn- 
thetic judgements as principles. That in all changes of the 
material world the quantity of matter remains unch anged 
is a fundamental proposition of science. This is an a 
priori proposition because it is taken to be necessary by 
science. It is also synthetic, because the idea of per- 
manence (remaining unchanged) is no part of the meaning 
of matter which signifies only occupation of space. 

3- Constituted as we are, we cannot help asking 
questions about God, future life, etc. This is due to 
the nature of human reason itself. Metaphysics, there- 
fore,, in spite of all its failures, is an indispensable 
science and ought to contain a priori synthetic know- 
ledge. For its business is not merely to analyse our a 
priori concepts of things, but to add to our a priori 



VI. THE GENERAL PROBLEM OF PURE REASON 17 

knowledge, and this can be done only through a priori 
synthetic judgements. Thus metaphysics consists, at least 
in intention, entirely of a priori synthetic propositions. 

VI. The General Problem of Pare Reason 

The proper problem of pure reason is formulated in 
the question, How are a priori synthetic judgements 
possible ? The only philosopher who came nearest to 
envisaging this problem was David Hume, but even he 
did not conceive the problem in its generality, but con- 
cerned himself exclusively with the principle of causality. 
He attempted to show that the principle of causality was 
in fact derived from experience and was wrongly 
supposed, under the influence of habit, to be a neces- 
sary principle. If he had conceived the problem in its 
generality, he would have realized that it was wrong to 
deny the possibility of synthetic a priori propositions, 
seeing that even pure mathematics, which undoubtedly 
contains such propositions, would in that case have to 
be denied. 

Both pure mathematics and pure science, by the fact 
of their existence, preclude the question whether they are 
possible. We can merely ask and try to understand how 
they are possible. 

Metaphysics does not exist as an established 
science. As soon as our reason attains to a certain 
degree of maturity it is impelled to raise questions which 
cannot be answered by experience nor by any principle 
derived from it. This tendency to metaphysics is in- 
herent in human reason and we have to ask : How is 
metaphysics as a natural disposition possible ? 

But since all attempts to answer metaphysical 
K. c . . 3 



18 TRODUCTION 

questions, such as for instance, whether the world has a 
beginning or is there from eternity, have always met 
with contradictions. Our reason cannot rest satisfied 
unless we can determine whether it is at all possible for 
us to know anything in the metaphysical field. So the 
last question arising out of the general problem is : 
How is metaphysics as a science possible ? The question 
really means whether and in what sense the metaphy- 
sical problems raised by human reason can be solved at 
all. It is the aim of the Critique to provide an 
adequate answer to this question. 

VII. The Idea and the Division of the Critique of 
Pure Reason 

What Kant proposes to give us in his Critique is 
only an introduction ( propaedeutic ) to the system of 
pure reason or metaphysics proper. 

He is undertaking a transcendental enquiry. By 
' transcendental * he understands all knowledge which 
is occupied not so much with objects as with our 
knowledge of objects in so far as such knowledge is 
possible a priori. Transcendental enquiry thus means 
only an epistemological enquiry into the a priori. 

Kant says that he is not going to offer a complete 
system of transcendental philosophy, although his 
Critique contains all that is essential in such a philo- 
sophy. A complete system of transcendental philosophy 
would have to give an exhaustive analysis of the whole 
of a priori human knowledge. In the Critique no 
doubt there is "a complete enumeration of all the 
fundamental concepts that go to constitute such pure 
knowledge. " But there is no exhaustive analysis of all 



VII. IDEA AND DIVISION OF THE CRITIQUE 19 

these concepts nor a complete survey of those that can 
be derived from them. In the Critique the analysis is 
carried only so far as is requisite for the complete exa- 
mination of knowledge which is a priori and synthetic. 
Great care has been taken to include only those concepts 
which are wholly a priori. Even the highest principles 
and concepts of morality which are no doubt quite 
a priori are not included in it, because in a systematic 
consideration, they would involve such empirical concepts 
as these of pleasure, pain, desire, inclination, etc. 

The Critique is first divided into a Doctrine of 
Elements and a Doctrine of the Method. The 
Doctrine of Elements is divided into Aesthetic and 
Lo&ic, and Logic is further divided into Analytic 
and Dialectic, 

Substantially the Critique consists of three parts, 
Aesthetic, Analytic and Dialectic, dealing respectively 
with sensibility (intuition), understanding and reason, and 
showing in the first two parts, how pure mathematics and 
pure science of nature are possible, and in the last part, 
how metaphysics is impossible. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF 
ELEMENTS 

PART I 

TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 
1. Introductory 

The term 'aesthetic', according to the present usage, 
is connected with the beautiful, but Kant, following the 
meaning of the Greek root from which the word is derived, 
uses it in the sense of the theory of sensibility. The 
purpose of this section is to separate the a priori 
elements in our sensibility and to point out their signifi- 
cance for knowledge. These a priori elements are found 
to be space and time, which are thus also the a priori 
forms of all that can be given to us intuitively. In order 
to bring this out, Kant begins with some very useful 
and important definitions. 

Intuition is an apprehension which relates itself 
immediately to the given objects. Prof. N. K. Smith 
has expressed this definition of Kant after clearing it of 
all ambiguity, in the following words : " Intuition is the 
immediate apprehension of a content which as given is 
due to the action of an independently real object upon 
the mind." 

Sensibility is the capacity to receive or obtain re- 
presentations when objects act upon (affect) us. Repre- 
sentation is taken in the sense of any cognitive state. 
Sensation is the effect in the mind produced by the 
object when we are affected by it. An empirical intuition 
is an intuition which relates itself to its objects only 
through sensation* All our intuitions ( i. e. intuitions we 
men can have ) relate to their objects only through 



INTRODUCTORY 21 

sensation, i. e. are empirical. 

The object of an empirical intuition when it is not 
yet determined through any categories is called appear- 
ance. Appearances are to be distinguished from phe- 
nomena which too are objects of empirical intuition but 
determined through categories. Appearances are mere 
objects of sensation, but they become phenomena when 
they are also thought in terms of categories. 

The matter of appearance is what * corresponds to 
sensation', i.e. what corresponds to the subjective act 
of sensing; it is the content felt or sensed. The form of 
appearance is that in which the content of sensation is 
ordered. That in which the sensed content is ordered is 
not itself given through sensation. It lies a priori 
in the mind. 

When I see a patch of colour, which I have not yet 
determined as the colour (quality) of anything (sub- 
stance), I have a mere appearance. This appearance 
includes both matter and form. What is given through 
sensation and could not otherwise be obtained, the 
particular sensed in the present case, is the matter of 
appearance, but the space in which the colour is seen is 
its form, and this is not derived from sensation or 
experience but is a priori. 

The pure form of sensibility in which all sensed 
contents are ordered, is called pure intuition. When 
from the representation of a body, we take away all 
that has been contributed by thought such as substan- 
tiality, quality, etc., and also what is given by sensation 
as hardness, colour, etc., we find something still remain- 
ing, namely extension and figure. These belong to pure 
intuition, which is not derived from experience, but 
exists in the mind a priori as a mere form of sensibility. 



22 TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 

There are two pure forms of intuition, space and 
time. When it is said that they He ready in the mind, 
we are not to understand that we possees them as full- 
fledged notions before all experience. They are innate 
only as capacities of the mind to develop these notions 
out of itself on the occasions of suitable experience. 

Section I 
SPACE 

2. Mataphysical Exposition of the Concept of Space 

The Metaphysical expositions of space and time 
purport main!}' to show, first, that space and time are not 
derived from experience but are a priori, and, secondly, 
that they are 'intuitions' and not "concepts'. Space and 
time are treated seperately and first comes space. 

There were originally five arguments in the meta- 
physical exposition, but the third argument was dropped 
from it in the Second Edition and was merged in the 
transcendental exposition, thus giving only four argu- 
ments to the metaphysical exposition. 

The first argument says that " space is not an 
empirical concept which has been derived from outer 
experiences. ." Our outer experiences are experiences of 
things in space. We cannot suppose that we get the 
idea of space only when we have had such experiences, 
because such experiences presuppose the idea of space, so 
that the idea of space must already be there if we are to 
have any outer experiences. Instead of these experiences 
making the idea of space possible, it is the idea of space 
which makes these experiences possible. Therefore the 
idea of space is not derived from experience. 

The second argument shows that the idea of space 



CONCEPT OF SPACE 23 

is a priori because it is a necessary idea and necessity is a 
mark of the a priori. That the idea of space is necessary 
is shown by the fact that although we can imagine the 
the absence of all objects in space we cannot imagine the 
absence of space itself. If the first argument presents 
the negative position that space is not empirical, the 
second argument says positively that it is a priori. 

The third argument proves that space is not a 
discursive or general concept but a pure intuition. We 
cannot represent several spaces but only one space. 
When we speak of many spaces, we simply mean parts 
of one and the same space. Arid the mode of knowledge 
that relates itself directly to a single individual is intui- 
tion and not conception. Moreover, the so-called parts of 
space are not given first, out of which one may suppose 
the one single whole space to be constructed. Space is 
never constructed in that way. It is the parts that 
arise as limitations of one space which is presupposed by 
them and is given first. If space were a concept, the 
parts would have preceded the whole. It is only in an 
intuition that the whole can precede the parts. Space 
therefore is an intuition and not a concept. 

The fourth argument establishes the same point, 
viz. that space is not a general concept but an intuition. 
Space is represented as an infinite given magnitude. If 
spSfee were a general concept, abstracted from particular 
instances of space, then nothing could have been deter- 
mined as regards its magnitude, far less could we say that 
it was infinite. Because being a generalized concept, it 
would have to be equally present in all instances which 
might be of very different magnitudes; and no one deter- 
mined magnitude, far less an infinite magnitude can be 
equally present in things of different magnitudes. 



24 CONCEPT OF SPACE 

Moreover a generalized concept has an infinite 
number of instances under it, but they are not contained 
within it. The particular horses are never part of the 
generalized concept horse, whereas in the case of space, 
the particular spaces are mere parts of the one space. 
Therefore space is not a concept, and so it must 
be an intuition. 

3. Transcendental Exposition of the Concept of 
Space 

If the metaphysical exposition has shown that space is 
an a priori intuition, the transcendental exposition 
shows that it is on this view of space that a priori syn- 
thethic knowledge, such as we find in geometry, 
becomes intelligible. 

Geometry determines the properties of space 
synthetically and yet a priori. We have already seen 
how geometrical propositions are synthetic. This shows 
that space must be an intuition, because from mere 
concepts we never derive any synthetic knowledge. 

Moreover, geometrical propositions are one and all 
necessary propositions. The three angles of a triangle 
do not merely happen to be equal to two right angles as 
an empirical fact, but we know that they must be 
so. Now necessity is a mark of the a priori andUso 
space to which geometrical propositions relate must be 
a priori. We thus see that the a priori synthetic 
character of geometrical knowledge is explicable only on 
the supposition that space is an a priori intuition. 

Since geometry is applicable to objects of experience, 
we can determine their properties even before actually 
experiencing them. We can thus anticipate experience. 



CONCLUSIONS FROM THE CONCEPTS OF SPACE 25 

This is intelligible only if we suppose that space exists as 
a form of our sensibility, that is, as the subjective form of 
outer experience. We are subjectively so constituted 
that whatever is to be an object of outer experience has 
to be represented as spatial and so necessarily illustrating 
the properties of space determined by geometry. 

4. Conclusions from the above Concepts 

Space does not represent any property or relation of 
things in themselves, ( far less does it represent a thing 
in itself), for if it belonged to things in themselves, then 
we could know it only through experience, and no 
a priori intuition of it would have been possible. It is 
absurd that we should know, of things in themselves, 
relations or properties prior to all experience as we 
do of space. 

" Space is nothing but the form of all appearances 
of outer sense. " It belongs to us as the subjective 
condition of our sensibility. We know we can intuit 
only when we are affected by objects through sensation 
and we cannot know any object of outer sense without 
representing it as in space. 

Space does not represent any actual character of 
things in themselves but only the form of their 
appearance to us as objects of intuition. If they are to 
appear to us, they must appear in space. The form of 
their appearance, being due entirely to the constitution 
of our subjective being, can be known a priori even 
before the perception of actual things. 

There is thus no space in itself, there is only a re- 
presentation of space. But this does not amount to say- 
ing that space is merely imaginary or is not true of 
K. c. . .4 



26 TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 

objects of experience. Although it is a subjective condi- 
tion, it is a condition to which all human understanding 
is subject and is not peculiar to this or that individual. 
It is true of all subjects of outer experience. There can 
be no object of outer experience which is not in space. 
This means that space is empirically real. But from 
transcendental or epistemological consideration, we find 
that apart from all relation to our consciousness, it has 
no existence at all as a thing in itself; it is so far merely 
ideal, i. e., it exists merely as a form of our consciousness. 
This is what is meant by the transcendental Ideality 
of space. 

The ideality of space would be misunderstood if it 
were conceived after the analogy of sensible qualities like 
colour, taste, etc. The sensible qualities are not proper- 
ties of things in themselves. They depend on the cha- 
racter of our physical organs and may be different with 
different individuals. But space is the same for all. The 
sensible qualities can be known only through empirical 
sensation and no a priori intuition of them is possible, 
whereas there is an a priori intuition of space. The 
great difference between space and sensible qualities can 
be traced to the fact that space is relative to the nature 
of our sensibility which is the same for all men, and 
sensible qualities are relative to physical organs which are 
pifferent for different individuals . 

Section I 
TIME 

5. Metaphysical Exposition of the Concept of Time 

The arguments on Time follow those on space, with 
slight variation. The first argument says that time is* 



CONCEPT OF TIME 27 

not an empirical concept, because the idea of time, which 
might be supposed to be derived from our experience of the 
co-existence and succession of things is already presup- 
posed by such experience and cannot therefore be derived 
from it. If we have no notion of time, we cannot expe- 
rience things as successive or simultaneous. The idea of 
time does not follow but precede such experience. It is 
therefore a priori. 

The second argument draws the same conclusion 
from the fact that although we can think away all appear- 
ances and thus conceive time as empty, time as the 
universal condition of their possibility cannot itself be 
removed. It seems possible to think the absence of time. 
What seems therefore to be meant by Kant is that we 
cannot think of the possibility of appearance without 
presupposing the being of time. 

The third argument, as Kant himself says, properly 
belongs to the transcendental exposition and will be better 
explained there. 

The fourth argument shows that time is not a 
discursive or general concept, but an intuition. There is 
only one time and what are sometimes spoken of as many 
times are really parts of one and the same time. The 
mode of knowledge proper to a single individual is intuition 
and not concept. Moreover the proposition that different 
times cannot be simultaneous is synthetic and therefore 
cannot be derived from a concept. "It is immediately 
contained in the intuition and representation of time." 

The fifth argument also shows that time is an intui- 
tion. The parts of time can be conceived only as limita- 
tions of one (infinite) time. It is therefore such that the 
whole precedes the parts. According to Kant, in conception 
the parts recede the whole whereas in intuition the 



28 TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 

whole precedes the parts. Time therefore is an intuition. 

6. Transcendental Exposition of the Concept of 
Time 

The purpose of the transcendental exposition is to 
show that some synthetic a priori knowledge is made 
intelligible by the view of time or space maintained in 
the metaphysical exposition. We know that time has 
only one dimension and that different times are only 
successive and not simultaneous. We treat these proposi- 
tions as axioms and know them with apocle ic tic certainty 
Further, they are also synthetic. Since they are synthetic 
they must be based on intuition and cannot be derived 
from mere concepts, and since they are necessary 
(apodeictic), we know that they cannot be derived from 
experience. They must therefore be based on a priori 
intuition. It is because the metaphysical exposition has 
shown that time Is such an a priori intuition that we can 
understand how synthetic a priori knowledge contained 
in these axioms is possible. This is what the third 
argument really shows. 

Kant has further referred to change and motion. 
Both these notions involve contradictory ideas and would 
not be intelligible from more concepts. We cannot 
understand the presence as well as the absence of the 
same property in one and the same thing (change), nor the 
presence as well as the absence of the same thing in one 
and the same place (motion). It is the intuition of 
time that renders these ideas intelligible by showing that 
presence and absence of the same thing or property do 
not contradict each other when they occur one after the 
other, i. e. in time. Thus the ideas of time developed 



CONCLUSIONS FROM THE CONCEPTS OF TIME 29 

in the metaphysical exposition and (as an a priori intui- 
tion) explains the body of synthetic a priori knowledge 
contained in the science of mechanics. 

7. Conclusions from the above Concepts 

Time is not something self-subsistent, nor is it an 
objective determination of things. If it were self-subsis- 
tent, it would be something actual without being an 
actual object, an infinite nothing. If it were characteris- 
tic of things in themselves, we could not know it, as we 
certainly do, prior to the experience of objects. Hence 
time merely represents a subjective condition under 
which alone intuition is possible for us. 

Time is the form of inner sense. It represents the 
way in which our inner experiences are ordered (i. e, 
successively ) and does not represent any characteristics 
of outer appearances, such as shape, position, etc. We 
represent time by a line progressing to infinity, which like 
time is of one dimension. Time differs from a line in 
that the parts of a line are simultaneous,, but the parts 
of time are never simultaneous. Kant thinks the fact 
that time can be represented by a line (in outer intuition) 
is a further proof that time is an intuition. 

Whereas space is the formal condition of all outer 
appearances, time is the formal condition of all appear- 
ances, whether inner or outer. Because even outer expe- 
riences ultimately represent certain inner experiences of 
the mind which require time as their formal condition. 
Thus time, though it directly conditions only inner 
appearances, indirectly conditions all appearances. So all 
appearance is in time. 

Time like space is empirically real, but transcen- 



30 TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 

dentally ideal. Time is an inalienable aspect of all objects 
in so far as they appear to us. It is thus quite objective. 
But when abstraction is made of our faculty of intuition 
time reduces itself to nothing. Apart from our faculty of 
knowing, it has no being as a thing in itself or as a real 
property of things in themselves. It is then merely ideal, 
that is, belongs to our faculty of knowledge and not to 
things in themselves. Both space and time are thus 
subjective as well as objective. They are quite objective 
inasmuch as they are true of objects of experience as 
such and are not peculiar to this or that individual, At 
the same time they are also subjective in the sense that 
they are only a part of the conditions of our knowledge 
and not a property of things in themselves. 

The subjectivity or ideality of time should not be 
confused with that of sensible qualities. The sensible 
qualities are no doubt ideal, and when they are abstracted, 
the real objects of experience in which they inhere are 
still supposed to exist. But when abstraction is made of 
time there remains no objects of experience at all. 

ELUCIDATION 

People find it difficult to believe that time is not 
absolutely real, because even though we may deny all 
outer appearances with their change, we cannot deny 
change in our own subjective experience which is directly 
evident. And change is possible only in time. Hence they 
conclude that time must be absolutely real. 

Kant readily grants that time is certainly real, but 
only as the form of our inner intuition. If we are to 
appear to ourselves we can do so only as in time. But 
apart from the condition of our appearing to ourselves, 



ELUCIDATION 31 

i. e. of inner intuition, time has no reality. That people 
have greater difficulty in accepting the ideality of time is 
due, according to Kant, to the fact that (subjective) 
idealism has already familiarised them with the view that 
all outer appearances are illusory. Kant's view however 
is that the other appearances as appearances are as in- 
dubitable as the inner appearances. 

The transcendental ideality of space and time leaves 
our empirical knowledge of the world wholly unaffected. 
For our empirical knowledge they are quite real and no- 
thing can appear to us which is not subject to the condi- 
tions of space and time. 

The Kantain view of space and time explains how 
synthetic a priori knowledge, such as we have in mathe- 
matics, is possible. The Newtonian view of them as 
independent and absolute realities or the Leibnizian view 
of them as empirical concepts abstracted from our con- 
fused experience of the relations of real things is open to 
one serious objection or another. The Newtonian view 
requires us to believe in the existence of two eternal, 
infinite, self-subsistent non-entities. But it has the merit 
of making mathematics possible, for since space is uni- 
versal, geometrical propositions can be applicable to all 
things. The Leibnizian view lacks this merit and makes 
a priori knowledge of mathematics impossible, because 
for it space is merely an empirical concept. But then on 
this view our understanding can judge of supersensible 
entities without being hampered by spatial limitations 
(which pertain to sensee-xperience only). This is a merit 
which is not enjoyed by the Newtonian view for which 
sqace is infinite and universal and would leave no room 
for supersensible knowledge (e. g. knowledge of God) 
unaffected by its limitation. 



32 TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 

It is the contention of Kant that his view combines 
the merits of both the Newtonian and the Leibnizian views 
without sharing the defects of either. It makes synthetic 
a priori knowledge possible and at the same time does 
not make all knowledge subject to the conditions of space 
and time, because these are conditions of sense experience 
only and need not affect any supersensible knowledge. 

8. General Observations n the Transcendental 
Aesthetic 

I. The upshot of Kant's teaching in the Aesthetic 
is that space and time are only forms of our sensibility 
and have no independent existence apart from our 
faculty of intuition. Whatever we know through them 
is an appearance. Appearances do not exist in them- 
selves., but only in us. What the object may be in itself, 
apart from all relation to our knowledge, we do not and 
cannot know. Our knowledge is confined to appearances 
only. It may become ever so clear, but it will never 
reach beyond appearance. 

This implies a distinction between appearance and 
things in themselves. But the Kantian view of the 
distinction is fundamentally different from the Leibnizian 
and the Lockian views on the subject. The Leibnizian 
view is that we know things in themselves in our 
conceptual apprehension through the understanding and 
that in our sensuous apprehension we know the same 
entities in a confused manner. According to this view, 
sensibility differs from thought only in clearness, and it 
would seem that our sense-knowledge which now gives 
us only appearance would, if rendered sufficiently clear, 
amount to knowledge of things in themselves. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 33 

Kant rejects this view as being obviously wrong. If 
sensuous knowledge were only conceptual knowledge 
become confused, then the knowledge of the ethica 1 
concept " right " which a layman has, would be 
sensuous, since it may be said to be confused 
in contrast to the clear conceptual knowledge of the 
same thing by a professor of ethics. But it is 
absurd that we should have a sensuous knowledge 
of an ethical concept. Moreover, according to 
Kant, as we have seen, our intuition of things, even 
when raised to the highest degree of clearness, gives 
only appearance and can never yield knowledge of 
things in themselves. The Lockian view of the distinc- 
tion between appearance and things in themselves may 
be illustrated by the distinction between the coloured 
appearance of the rainbow and the drops of rain of 
which it actually consists. This distinction is really the 
distinction between the primary and secondary qualities 
and may be justified from the standpoint of physical 
science. What is to be noticed in this connexion is that 
the distinction falls entirely within appearance in which 
both the coloured appearance and the round shapes of 
the raindrops are given. Kant's distinction goes deeper, 
and marks out on the one hand, all that is given within 
experience (appearance) and, on the other, what from the 
nature of the case can never be so given (things in them- 
selves) . For Kant the whole world of space and time is 
an appearance, and so for him the drops of rain (with all 
their spatial characteristics), which are for Locke things 
in themselves, are equally an appearance. 

Kant believes that his view of space and time is not 
a mere plausible hypothesis but absolutely certain, 
because the synthetic and a priori knowledge of geometry 
K. c. . .5 



34 TRANSCENDENTAL AESTHETIC 

can be explained only if space is an a priori intuition. 

II. Kant further supports his view of the ideality of 
space and time by showing that our representations of 
space and time contain nothing but relations, such as those 
of side~by~sideness ( in the case of space ) and succession 
(in the case of time). No things in themselves or real 
existence can be known merely through relations. 

It is not merely through outer sense that we get 
appearance; through inner sense too we get nothing but 
appearance. The self we know is not the self as it is in 
itself but only as it appears to the inner sense and there- 
fore only as conditioned by the form of its intuition. 

III. When it is said that both by outer sense and by 
inner sense we know only appearances and not things in 
themselves, we should by no means understand that these 
appearances are illusory. The objects of our experience 
are given, and only because their qualities (spatial and 
temporal) are dependent on our modes of intuition, they 
are called appearances. What is illusory is really not given 
at all, and is peculiar to the particular individual who is 
under illusion. The appearances on the other hand are 
given and are the same for all normal individuals. The 
illusory is merely ideal and altogether lacks empirical 
reality, which is not the case with appearances. 

It is not the ideality of space and time but their 
absolute reality that would tend to reduce the objects of 
experience to mere illusion. The view which regards space 
and time as absolutely real, not only makes eternal and 
i nfinite non-entities of them but makes them the necessary 
conditions of existence of all things, so that space and 
time are supposed to exist even when things do not. As 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 35 

a consequence, not only would the reality of outer things 
be denied, as was done by Berkeley, but even our own 
existence as dependent on a self-subsistent non-entity 
(time) would be rendered illusory. When space and time 
are regarded not as conditions of the existence of things, 
but as conditions of our knowledge, they cannot affect 
the reality of anything at all. 

IV. When we think of God not only as inaccessible 
to our sensible intuition, but also as having no sensible 
intuition himself, we deny in fact that space and time 
are conditions of his being and knowledge. If space and 
time were real conditions of the existence of all things 
they would condition the existence of God also. 

Moreover, of things which are spatial and temporal 
only sensible intuition is possible. That is to say, we 
have to be affected by them in order to know them. But 
God does not know things through sensible intuition. He 
does not need to be affected by the previously existing 
thing in order to know them. Things exist in being known 
by God and thus God has no sensible but intellectual 
intuition of them. In granting intellectual or creative 
intuition to God, we imply that space and time are not 
characters of things in themselves but only conditions of 
our sensible knowledge. We need not suppose that they 
are peculiar to human sensibility only. They would be 
true of any intuition which is sensible and derivative 
(because derived from the existence of things) and not 
intellecual and original (because creative) like the 
intuition of God. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE 
OF ELEMENTS 

PARl II 
TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 

INTRODUCTION 
I. Logic in General 

Our knowledge springs from two sources, sensibility 
and understanding. The term sensibility stands for the 
capacity of the mind to receive impressions, and the 
term understanding for the capacity of the mind to supply 
concepts out of itself, to be applied to impressions 
received through sensibility. The ideas of receptivity and 
spontaneity are associated respectively with sensibility 
and understanding. We are thus both passive and active 
when we know. 

Sensibility gives us intuitions and understanding gives 
us concepts. Intuitions and concepts are not themselves 
cognitions. They are mere elements of knowledge which 
only in their combination constitute a case of actual 
knowledge. Both are equally necessary. Concepts require 
some content (intuition) given through sense, and intui- 
tions require to be brought under some concept or category 
if they are to form part of any actual knowledge. 
c 'Thoughts without content" ( i. e. concepts without 
intuitions) "are empty, and intuitions without concepts 
are blind." Sensibility and understanding must combine 
in order to give rise to knowledge. But they cannot inter- 
change their functions. Understanding cannot intuit, just 
as sensibility cannot think or conceive. The science of 
the rules of sensibility in general, which is called Aesthe- 
tic, is to be distinguished from the science of the rules of 



LOGIC IN GENERAL 37 

understanding in general, which is Logic. Having dealt 
with the former first, Kant now proceeds to deal with 
the latter. 

Now logic may be general or particular. General logic 
deals with the absolutely necessary laws of thought with- 
out which the understanding cannot operate at all. It 
deals with these laws in abstraction from the differences 
in the objects to which our thought may be directed. 
Particular logic deals with the rules of valid thinking in 
regard to a particular class of objects. These rules do not 
hold good universally but obtain only in a particular 
science. As instances of particular logic we have the 
logic of history, the logic of physics, etc. 

General logic again may be pure or applied. Pure 
general logic does not take into account the empirical 
conditions under which the understanding actually works . 
It deals with a priori principles and draws nothing from 
experience or empirical psychology. Applied logic how- 
ever takes into account the subjective conditions which 
either hinder or help valid thinking. It deals with atten- 
tion, conviction, doubt, source of error, etc. and derives 
much help from empirical psychology. If pure logic deals 
with thinking in the abstract, applied logic deals with 
thinking in the concrete- 

II. Transcendental Logic 

The logic which is classified in the previous section 
may be called ordinary logic. But Kant is not directly 
concerned, in his Critique, with ordinary logic, general 
or particular, pure or applied. He is chiefly interested to 
develop a new science, called Transcendental Logic. 
General pure logic abstracts from all objects. "It assumes 



38 TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 

indeed that all objects must conform to its laws but this 
assumption plays no part in the science itself."* Trans- 
cendental logic abstracts from all empirical objects, but 
not from all objects whatever. It is concerned to determine 
the origin, limit and validity of our a priori know- 
ledge of objects. General logic deals with the laws of 
the understanding in themselves; transcendental logic 
deals with the laws of the understanding in so far as they 
apply a priori to objects. General logic applies to empi- 
rical as well as to pure rational knowledge. Transcendental 
logic has nothing to do with empirical knowledge. 

III. The Division of General Logic into Analytic 
and Dialectic. 

Truth may be taken to mean agreement of knowledge 
with its object. Knowledge is false when it does not agree 
with the object to which it is related, although it may 
contain something which is valid of other objects. It 
is thus clear that there cannot be any general test of 
truth which would apply to all knowledge whatever its 
object may be. Because such a general test would have 
to abstract from all particular objects, but it is always 
some specific object that is the content of knowledge and 
its truth concerns only this particular content. A general 
and sufficient test of truth cannot therefore be supplied. 

Logic, however, in so far as it expounds the necessary 
and fundamental rules of the understanding, supplies a 
formal and negative criterion which all knowledge, if it 
is to be true, must satisfy. No knowledge is valid which 
violates the logical rules- But even when it satisfies the 

* See N. Kemp Smith: A Commentary on Kant's Critique 
of Pure Reason, p. 171. 



THE DIVISION OF GENERAL LOGIC 39 

demands of logic, it may not be in agreement with its 
object and so although its form is correct, it may be 
materially false. Logic thus defines only the formal and 
negative conditions of truth and it cannot go any further* 

General logic, in so far as it analyses the funda- 
mental and necessary laws of thought, may be called 
Analytic. This part of logic supplies us with the 
negative test of truth. In examining any knowledge we 
must first apply this test and see whether knowledge is 
formally right. But logic cannot guarantee material 
truth and so with the help of logic alone we cannot 
make any judgement regarding objects. Thus mere 
logic cannot help us to extend our knowledge. But 
sometimes general logic, which is a canon of judgement, is 
wrongly used as an organon to give us new knowledge.* 
General logic thus wrongly employed is called Dialectic. 

Dialectic, among the ancients, was nothing but the 
logic of illusion, a sophistical art to give the appearance 
of knowledge to the most unfounded assertions. Kant 
considers it beneath the dignity of philosophy to give 
instruction in this art and proposes to use the term 
Dialectic in the sense of Critique of Dialectical Illusion. 

IV. The Division of Transcendental Logic into 
Transcendental Analytic and Dialectic 

Without intuitions no objects can be given to us 
and without concepts no objects can be thought. Both 
are necessary for knowledge. Having dealt with the 

* ( ** By a canon Kant means a system of a priori principles 
for the correct employment of a certain faculty of knowledge. 
By an organon Kant means instruction as to how knowledge may 
be extended, how new knowledge may be acquired. " N. K. 
Smith, ibid. p. 170. 



40 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

pure forms of intuition (space and time) in the Trans- 
cendental Aesthetic, Kant comes to deal with the 
pure concepts of objects or the categories in the Trans- 
cendental Analytic. The categories are the forms of 
objectivity and without them no knowledge would be 
possible, because knowledge would then have no object. 
But whereas it is legitimate and proper to apply the 
categories within the realm of experience in which alone 
any object can be given to us, we are sometimes tempted 
to apply the categories beyond the sphere of possible 
experience. Transcendental Dialectic considers such 
unjustifiable use of the categories. Actually, however, in 
that part of the Critique which bears the name of 
Dialectic, Kant gives us a criticism of the dogmatic 
metaphysical theories, which disregard the Kantian prin- 
ciple that both intuition and concept are necessary for 
knowledge and venture with the help of understanding 
alone ( without the aid of sensuous intuition ) upon 
synthetic a priori judgements. 

Division I 
TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

Tsanscendental Analytic is concerned with pure 
understanding. It analyses all our a priori knowledge 
into the elements which the understanding by itself can 
yield. It is essential that the concepts thus reached 
should be pure and not empirical; that they should 
belong to thought and understanding and not to sensi- 
bility and intuition; that they should be really funda- 
mental and not derivative; and finally, that they should 
cover the entire field of pure understanding. The under- 
standing is an independent self-complete unity and so its 



ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTS 41 

concepts too must together form a systematic unity. 
The systematic unity of the concepts will be a test 
for the correctness of the analysis. 

The Analytic requires two parts, one dealing with 
the concepts and the other with the principles of pure 
understanding. 

BOOK I 
ANALYTIC OF CONCEPTS 

The task proposed for the Analytic is not an analysis 
of the known and given concepts with a view to the 
explication of their meanings, but of the faculty of the 
understanding itself, in order to find out the a priori 
concepts which make objective knowledge possible. The 
understanding is the faculty of thought, i. e. of objecti- 
fying what is given in sensuous intuition. Such thinking 
is made possible by the use of certain pure concepts 
which can be discovered only by an examination of the 
understanding itself which is their only and real home. 



CHAPTER I 

THE CLUE TO THE DISCOVERY OF ALL 
PURE CONCEPTS OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

Kant begins here what is known as the metaphy- 
sical deduction of the Categories. The concepts as 
they arise from the understanding, which is an absolute 
unity, are connected with one another according to a 
principle, and this supplies us with a rule which enables 
K. c.. .6 



42 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

us to determine their respective places and systematic 
completeness in an a priori manner. We have to find 
out what this rule or principle is. It is found in the next 
section to be connected with the nature of the act of 
judging. 

Section I 
The Logical Employment of the Understanding 

The understanding is a non-sensuous faculty of know- 
ledge, and so different from sensibility. Since intuitions are 
given to sensibility only, the understanding cannot know 
by intuition. But we know either by concepts or by 
intuitions and there is no third way. So the understanding 
is that faculty of knowledge which operates with concepts. 
The understanding is a faculty of judgement. The only use 
the understanding can make of concepts is to judge by 
means of them. Judgement is the function of the under- 
standing and concepts are essentially connected with 
judgement. Just as intuitions depend on affection, 
concepts depend on function. By function is meant the 
unity of the act or rather the unitary act of bringing 
several representations under one common representation. 
In every judgement we use a concept which is true of 
many representations and refer it to something given in 
intuition. Thus I may judge: " This is a table". Here 
the concept 'table' is not only true of what is given in 
my present intuition, but it is true of many other 
representations. Since judgement gives us the essence of 
the understanding, a survey of the different species of 
judgements will help us to find out the fundamental 
functions of the understanding, and so the ultimate 
categories. 



LOGICAL FUNCTION OF THE UNDERSTANDING 43 

Section II 

The Logical Function of the Understanding 
in Judgement 

Kant accepts with seme modification, from the for- 
mal logic of his time, the division of judgements according 
to quantity, quality \ relation and modality. Judge- 
ments under each of these heads are further sub-divided 
into three classes. According to quantity judgements are 
divided into Universal (All S is P), particular (Some Sis 
P) and Singular (This S is P); according to quality into 
Affirmative (S is P ), Negative (S is not P) and Infinite 
(Sis not -P); according to relation into Categorical 
(S is P), Hypothetical (I/ S is P; Q is R), and Disjunc- 
tive (S is either P or Q); and according to modality 
into Problematic (S may be P), Assertoric (S is P) and 
Apodeictic (S must be P). 

In ordinary logic singular and infinite judgements are 
not separately considered. They are treated respectively 
as universal and affirmative judgements. But Kant points 
out that the amount of knowledge we get in a universal 
judgement cannot be yielded by a singular judgement, the 
former holding good of a whole class, the latter only of a 
single individual. The infinite judgement also is not pro- 
perly affirmative. It does not say what the subject 
exactly is. The subject (S) is excluded from a certain 
sphere (P), but the sphere (not - P) in which it is included 
is practically infinite as it includes an infinite number of 
things. This is why the judgement is called infinite. 

In the categorical judgement we consider only two 
concepts (subject and predicate); in the hypothetical we 
consider two judgements. The two judgements entering 
into the hypothetical judgement may in themselves be true 



44 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

or false. What is really considered is their logical sequence, 
In the disjunctive judgement we consider two or more 
judgements in relation to one another. The judgements 
in a sense are opposed to each other, in so far as the one 
excludes the others, but they together cover the whole 
of a common sphere, each taking up a part of it, and 
what is left out by one has to be placed in the others. 
That is, our entire knowledge of a subject-matter finds 
expression in the alternative judgements which constitute 
the disjunctive judgement. 

The modality of a judgement does not concern the 
content of the judgement. It rather concerns the relation 
of the content to our thought. When, e. g. we pass from 
the problematic to the assertoric judgement, nothing is 
added to the content of the judgement. We only think 
of the same content differently. 

Section III 
Pare Concepts of the Understanding, or Categories 

General logic forms its concepts analytically by abs- 
traction from representations which may be given empi- 
rically. From our experience of several objects we can 
form, by analysis and abstraction, the concepts 'table*, 
'hardness', 'roundness*, etc. Transcendental logic abs- 
tracts from all empirical content but not from all 
content whatever. It has before it the manifold 
of pure a priori intuition contained in space and time, 
and the pure concepts of the understanding with which 
the transcendental logic is concerned are formed 
synthetically in reference to this pure manifold. The 
manifold as such is known without the operation of 
thought upon it. If this is to be known, it is necessary 



THE CATEGORIES 45 

that the manifold should "be gone through in a certain 
way, taken up, and connected". This act of combining 
and relating, which is the essential function of the un- 
derstanding, is called synthesis by Kant- Without this 
synthesis there would be given in space and time a 
manifold of mere sensation but it would not be ordered 
and connected. It would not be represented as causally 
or otherwise connected and would indeed constitute no 
object for us. It would be a mere chaos. But 
constituted as we are, we have no conscious experience of 
this chaos or unrelated bare multiplicity. We have there- 
fore to suppose that the manifold of sense, the original 
chaos, is synthesized for us by blind, unconscious 
imagination. This function of the understanding, exercised 
unconsciously, has to be formulated in terms of concepts. 
Kant believes that the synthesizing function of the 
understanding which makes objects for us by combining 
and relating the ultimate data of sense, is one with the 
function of judgement. So the different kinds of judge- 
ments represent the different synthetic functions and 
thus the table of categories is derived from the table of 
judgements found in ordinary logic. The following table 
gives the different kinds of judgements and the categories 
corresponding to them. 

TABLE OF CATEGORIES 

I II 

Of Quality Of Quantity 

Universal Unity Affirmative Reality 

Particular Plurality Negative Negation 

Singular Totality Infinite Limitation 



46 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

III 

Of Relation 

Categorical Inherence and Subsistence (Substance and 

Accident) 
Hypothetical Causality and Dependence (Cause and 

Effect) 
Disjunctive Community (Reciprocity between agent 

and Patient) 

IV 

Of Modality 

Problematic Possibility and Impossibility 
Assertoric Existence and Non-existence 
Apodeictic Necessity and Contingency 

The term Category is borrowed from Aristotle who 
made the first attempt to find out these fundamental 
concepts. He did not however deduce his categories 
from any single principle, but merely selected them "as 
they came his way", and so he could not be sure of 
their completeness. But as Kant deduces his categories 
from one single principle, namely the faculty of judgement 
or thought, he thinks that he has succeeded in finding 
out all the fundamental categories (twelve in number) 
which underlie our experience. 

These are only the primary concepts of the pure 
understanding. Besides these there are pure derivative 
concepts also, which can be derived by combining the 
categories with one another or with the modes of pure 
sensibility (Space and Time). They would need to be 
considered in a complete system of transcendental 



THE CATEGORIES 47 

philosophy, but as Kant is writing only a critical essay 
he is content with merely pointing out that there are 
such derivative concepts. 

The categories classified under four heads may be 
divided into two groups called mathematical and 
dynamical. The mathematical categories, i. e. the 
categories of quantity and quality, are concerned with 
the objects of intuition. The dynamical categories, i. e. 
the categories of relation and modality are concerned 
with the existence of these objects in their relation to 
each other or to the understanding. The categories of 
the first group have no correlates, while those of the 
second group have, that is, each of the latter consists 
of a pair of concepts such as Substance and Accident, 
Cause and Effect. 

It is also to be noted that under each head we have 
a three-fold division, and not a division by dichotomy, 
and that the third category in each class results from a 
combination of the first with the second. Thus Totality 
means only Plurality considered as Unity. But in this 
account the third category should not be regarded 
as derivative, because even the combination of the first 
with the second in order to give rise to the third requires a 
special act of the understanding which is different from the 
act that is exercised in the case of the first or the second 
category. The third does not result merely from the pre- 
sence of the first and the second. The concept of number, 
for instance, which belongs to the category of Totality, is 
not always possible when we have simply the concepts of 
Unity and Plurality. We have both Unity and Plurality 
in an infinite series of units, but it is no number. 

We have already seen how the concept of Community 
is derived from the disjunctive judgement, which at first 



48 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

sight may not seem to be possible. 

In the metaphysical text books of the middle ages 
the real is spoken of as 'one', 'true* and 'good'. But 
these concepts are not found in Kant's table of categories' 
and so it might be considered defective. But Kant shows 
that these concepts only signify the logical demands of 
our knowledge of object; they to not express any neces- 
sary determinations of the object and are not therefore 
categories in Kant's sense. 

CHAPTER II 

DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF 
THE UNDESTANDING 

Section I 

The Principle of a Transcendental Deduction 
in General 

The term Deduction is taken from legal literature 
where it is used in the sense of proof of right or establish- 
ment of legal claim. Deduction thus means nothing but 
the demonstration of the validity of a legal claim; and 
when used in an epistemological context, in connexion 
with the categories, it comes to mean the demonstration 
of their objective validity. The transcendental deduc- 
tion has to show therefore how the a priori categories, 
though not derived from experience, are still valid of the 
objects of experience. This deduction is to be distin- 
guished from empirical deduction which merely shows how 
we, as a matter of fact, come to acquire a concept 
through experience and reflection, without explaining 
whether or not it is valid of anything. Empirical deduc- 
tion is thus concerned with the fact of our possessing 



TRANSCENDENTAL DEDUCTION IN GENERAL 49 

certain concepts and not with their objective validity. 
Empirical deduction however is not possible of a priori 
concepts, because they are not derived from experience. 
Experience only supplies the occasions on which the mind 
by its free spontaneous activity brings forth these con- 
cepts out of itself. We may investigate, as Locke has 
done, how on the occasion of particular sense-impressions 
our faculty of knowledge is called into action and yields 
universal concepts. But an account of such derivation of 
concepts is not deduction proper, because it does not 
consider their objective validity. 

We have two kinds of concepts which relate to objects 
in a completely a priori manner. They are: (i) space and 
time as forms of sensibility and (ii) the categories of the 
understanding. We have just seen that the only deduction 
possible of a priori concepts must be transcendental. Now 
the question is whether such a deduction is essential. In 
the case of the a priori forms of sensibility, i. e. space 
and time, it was not necessary to supply a transcendental 
deduction because space and time being forms of sensibi- 
lity, if any object is to be given to our sensibility, it can 
be given only in space and time. Thus there remains 
no room for the question whether space and time are 
applicable to objects of sense, and so the need for a 
deduction to validate their objective application does 
not arise. The case of the pure concepts of the under- 
standing is different. They belong to the understanding 
and not to sensibility and claim to determine all objects 
whatever, quite apart from all conditions of sensibility. 
They are applied to supersensible metaphysical entities 
like God and self, inasmuch as we think of them as 
substances and causes. As these concepts do not depend 
on experience, we cannot find in a priori intuition 

K.C...7 



50 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

any object in which their synthesis may be grounded. 
And naturally we are doubtful whether and how far they 
are valid of objects. Thus a transcendental deduction 
of the categories becomes quite necessary. 

Such a deduction, however, is particularly difficult 
because objects can be given (in intuition) without yet 
being subjected to the categories of the understanding. In 
the case of intuition we know that nothing can be given 
which does not conform to the forms of sensibility, that 
is, which is not spatial and temporal, or at least tempo- 
ral. So here the given necessarily conforms to the forms 
of sensibility. But since there may be appearances quite 
apart from the categories we cannot know that the 
objects must conform to the categories and are not 
sure whether the categories are objectively valid. The 
transcendental deduction seeks to solve this problem. 

Transition to the Transcendental 
Deduction of the Categories 

There are only two ways possible in which the agree- 
ment between our representations and their objects can 
be understood. Either the representations are produced 
by the objects or the objects are produced by the 
representations. The first is the explanation offered by 
empiricism and obviously cannot be true of our a prior/ 
ideas which are not derived from experience. We have 
therefore to adopt the second alternative when we are 
concerned to understand the nature of the a priori 
categories. But we should realize that in knowledge there 
can be no actual production of objects by ideas except in 
the case of realization of some purpose. The a priori 
concepts produce the objects only in the sense that they 
make it possible for us to know anything as an object. 



GROUNDS OF THE POSSIBILITY OF EXPERIENCE 51 

"Now there are only two conditions under which the 
knowledge of an object is possible. First, Intuition^ 
through which it is given though only as appearance; 
secondly, Conception, through which an object is thought 
corresponding to this intuition/' We have already 
seen how it is the a priori forms of space and time that 
condition all givenness. We have seen, that is, if any thing 
is to be given, it must be given in space and time. Space 
and time thus make possible its givenness. We are now 
going to see in regard to the categories whether they are 
the conditions of all objectivity. Kant is undertaking to 
show that if anything is to be known as an object, it must 
be known in terms of the categories. The categories 
are the most general concepts of object and without 
them no object can be thought. So if we take experience 
in the sense of scientific experience, implying knowledge of 
objects, given through sense and thought, the categories 
"must be recognized as a priori conditions of the 
possibility of experience* '. 

Locke and Hume tried to derive the pure concepts 
of the understanding from experience. But such empirical 
derivation cannot be reconciled with the synthetic a priori 
knowledge given by mathematics and physics and is not 
therefore acceptable. 

THE DEDUCTION OF THE PURE CONCEPTS OF 

THE UNDERSTANDING 

(First Edition) 

Section II 
The a priori Grounds of the Possibility of Experience 

The problem of the transcendental deduction is to 
establish the objective validity of a priori concepts, that 



52 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

is, to show how the categories, which in a sense originate 
in the mind, can yet be true of the objects given in expe- 
rience. This is the subject matter of the so-called objec- 
tive deduction. But the deduction has another side which 
consists in the determination of those subjective activities 
which underlie all objective knowledge. These activities 
do not belong to the empirical subject and cannot be dis- 
covered by psychological introspection. They are dis- 
covered by the transcendental method as presupposed in 
all experience. These generative sources of our experience 
or knowledge of object are discussed in the so-called 
subjective deduction which was dropped, in spite of its 
obvious interest and importance, from the Second Edition 
as not quite essential to the main object of the 
Critical enquiry. 

To understand the deduction which Kant offers of 
the synthetic activities that make experience possible or 
generate knowledge, we should have clearly in view the 
character of our knowledge itself. We should realize first 
of all that knowledge is essentially a whole or a unity. 
When ideas come and go without any relation to one 
another, we have no knowledge in the proper sense of the 
term. We have no knowledge without intuition, and intui- 
tion always offers us a manifold because intuition for us 
is always in space and time, and what is spatial and 
temporal must be divisible, i. e. a manifold. But even 
a manifold is a manifold because of a combination, other- 
wise it would not be realized as many. Thus the mani- 
fold, as a synopsis or unity, implies a synthesis, i. e. an 
act of the mind which combines the manifold. The 
receptivity of intuition must be combined with the 
spontaneous activity of the understanding to yield us 
knowledge. "Now this spontaneity is the ground of a 



SYNTHESIS OF APPREHENSION IN INTUITION 53 

three-fold synthesis which must necessarily be found in 
all knowledge; namely, the apprehension of repre- 
sentations as modifications of the mind in intuition, their 
reproduction in imagination, and their recognition in 
concept." These syntheses are the original synthetic 
activities of the mind which give rise to knowledge. It is 
only when these have taken place that knowledge arises. 

1. The Synthesis of Apprehension 

in Intuition 

We should bear in mind that all our representations, 
whether outer or inner, empirical or a priori, belong as 
modifications of the mind to inner sense, and so are 
subject to time which is the form of inner sense. They 
must all therefore be ordered and related in time. 

Every intuition presents us with a manifold, and it 
can be represented as a manifold only in so far as the 
mind can distinguish in it elements which have occurred 
one after another. A representation which is contained 
in a single moment and in which there is no temporal 
sequence, can never be a manifold but an absolute 
unity. The unity of intuition, in which a manilold is 
given, requires that this manifold should be run through 
and held together, otherwise there will not be one 
intuition. This act of running through and holding 
together a manifold given in an intuition is called the 
synthesis of apprehension. It is because of such 
a synthesis that a manifold can be contained in a 
single representation. 

Space and time are also manifolds and their ^pre- 
sentations too require such a synthesis. Only space and 
time being a priori representations, we have a pure 
synthesis of apprehension in respect of them. 



54 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

2. The Synthesis of Reproduction in Imagination 
The synthesis of apprehension requires the co-opera- 
tion of another synthesis in order to give us the complete 
representation of an object. The manifold has no doubt 
to be run through and held together. But since the parts 
of the manifold come one after another, by the time we 
arrive at the last part, the earlier parts are not actually 
present before us. What then are we to hold together 
and how? It is necessary therefore that when we intuit 
the last part we should be able to reproduce the earlier 
parts in imagination, so that all the parts together may 
constitute a whole. Without this reproduction we can- 
not experience any object. If, for instance, in drawing a 
line in thought we always dropped out of thought the 
preceding representations, i. e. the earlier parts of the 
line, and did not reproduce them as we advanced to the 
succeeding ones, no complete representation of a line 
would at all be possible. Even the most elementary repre- 
sentations of space and time would not be possible without 
the synthesis of reproduction. "The synthesis of appre- 
hension is thus inseparably bound up with the synthesis 
of reproduction" which "is to be counted among the 
transcendental acts of the mind". The faculty to which 
this act belongs is called the transcendental faculty 
of imagination. 

3 The Synthesis of Recognition in a Concept 

The synthesis of apprehension and the synthesis of 
reproduction are not sufficient to give us that unity of 
representations which constitutes an object. As we go on 
apprehending the parts of an object the earlier parts 
may be reproduced in imagination, but such reproduction 
would not be of any use unless we recognized the 



SYNTHESIS OF RECOGNITION IN CONCEPT 55 

reproduced parts to be the same as what we apprehended 
before. When a representation is reproduced in imagina- 
tion, it must be recognized as identical with what we pre- 
piviously apprehended, if such reproduction is at all to 
serve the purpose of knowledge. As a pre-condition of 
knowledge Kant therefore adds to the two synthesis 
already explained the third synthesis of recognition. 
This recognition implies the identification of the represen- 
tations which are first apprehended with those that are 
later reproduced. Every recognition implies some identi- 
fication. This is exactly what happens in conception. A 
concept is a representation in which a number of represen- 
tations have become one. So this synthesis is called the 
synthesis of recognition in a concept. 

Just as intuitional apprehension is due to sense, and 
reproduction is due to imagination, recognition is due to 
my consciousness which remains the same throughout all 
changes of my states. If my consciousness too became 
different with my different states, then two representa- 
tions occurring at different points of time could never be 
identified. My empirical consciouness is certainly 
changing along with my states from moment to moment. 
And consequently the synthesis of recognition is not 
possible through this consciousness. For it we require a 
consciousness which remains ever the same in spite of all 
difference in empirical states. This consciousness, in 
distinction from empirical consciousness is called pare 
or transcendental- Kant calls it apperception. It is 
this which enables us to recognize the identity of several 
representations. This pure consciousness also implies 
that our self in some sense remains the same in spite of 
all change in our empirical states. Mere consciousness 
without the self is scarcely intelligible. So the pure 



56 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

consciousness is more exactly determined as the pure 
original self-consciousness, which Kant variously calls the 
transcendental unity of self- consciousness, the 
synthetic unity of apperception,* etc. The unity of 
self-consciousness is thus the highest and last ground of 
our knowledge of object. Without this no unification, 
and so no objective knowledge, is possible. 

We thus see that in knowing any object we are 
conscious of the unity of several representations, and this 
unity is grounded in the unity of self-consciousness. But 
we have no seperate consciousness of the self by itself as 
remaining always the same. My self-consciousness is 
really at the same time the consciousness of the synthetic 
unity of all my representations. "1=1" is of course 
an analytical proposition. But " Ithe unity of all 
representations" is a synthetical principle which is the 
basis of all knowledge. 

What then is an object of knowledge which we are 
accustomed to regard as standing outside and indepen- 
dent of knowledge and to which knowledge is supposed 
to correspond? If the object remained outside knowledge 
we could not possibly determine its character. It would 
at best be a mere indeterminate X. But the object of 
knowledge is always something determinate. We have to 
do ultimately with our own representations and the 
object, if it is to be anything knowable, must be consti- 
tuted somehow by these representations. 

There is an element of necessity associated with our 
notion of object. When we are free to have any repre- 
sentation we like of a thing, it is not an object of know- 
ledge to us. We are merely imagining it. When we know 
an object, our representations of it are quite restricted* 
* 'Apperception' ordinarily means 'self-conscious perception/ 



CATEGORIES AS KNOWLEDGE A PRIORI 57 

For example, when I know an orange, I cannot represent 
it as round and black, or now as round and then as black. 
I have necessarily to represent it as yellow and round. 
This means that my representations constitute an object 
when they are associated with one another according to a 
rule, i.e. in the manner required by a concept or a cate- 
gory. They should be such as can enter into a synthetic 
unity. The objectivity of my representations does 
not mean their reference to some thing outside them, 
but only their necessary connexion with one another f 
which again means nothing but their connexion 
according to a rule. 

All necessity is traced in the last resort to some trans- 
cendental ground. The necessary connexion of representa- 
tions, which constitutes their objectivity, rests on the fact 
that they are so connected for pure or tanscendental 
consciousness. It is this consciousness, as we have seen, 
which connects our representations synthetically and 
makes them objects. 

4. Preliminary Explanation of the Possibility of the 

Categories as Knowledge a priori 

There is only one experience and in it all our percep- 
tions stand in a thoroughgoing and orderly connexion with 
one another. When we speak of different experiences, we 
really mean our various perceptions; and all of them 
must fall within one general experience. The unity of ex- 
perience rests on the trascendental unity of self-concious- 
ness which synthesizes or combines our representations 
according to concepts (i.e. in terms of substance and attri- 
bute, cause and effect, etc.) and makes them objects. That 
which makes experience possible also makes objects 
possible. Experience and object are correlative and they 
K. c.. .8 



58 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

depend on the unity of self-consciousness. 

Now the categories are the concepts according to 
which representations are sythesized. In other words, 
it is in terms of the categories that we think of the objects 
of possible experience. Herein consists their objective 
validity. There would be no objects without synthesis 
and the categories are the modes of synthesis. For example, 
the categories of cause and effect or of substance and 
attribute are nothing but the ways in which representa- 
tions are united with one another. Without such 
synthesis no experience and no object would be possible. 

It is impossible to derive these pure concepts of the 
understanding from experience, not only because they are 
the presuppositions of experience and without them expe- 
rience itself, from which they are to be derived, would not 
be possible, but also because experience, however far it 
may be extended, can never yield necessity and univer- 
sality which are associated with these concepts. (E. g. 
whatever happens requires universally and necessarily 
something else as its cause.) 

We are supposed sometimes to bring together differ- 
ent appearances under a law through the empirical rule 
of association. Hume tried to explain even the law of 
causality in this way. But how is this association itself 
possible? This is supposed to rest objectively on an 
affinity in the appearances themselves. But we do not 
understand what this affinity of appearances is that 
makes them come necessarily under unchanging laws. 

This affinity is more easily explicable on the Kantian 
view. All appearances as representations belong ultimately 
to the transcendental unity of self -consciousness. This 
original unity of self-consciousness enters into all synthe- 
ses of representations. The affinity of appearances on this 



THE UNDERSTANDING, AND OBJECTS IN GENERAL 59 

view means nothing but the fact that they are transcen- 
dentally united in one consciousness. The empirical unity 
is only a consequence of this transcendental affinity. The 
unity of consciousness thus really constitutes the objec- 
tive bond among diverse representations. 

It may be thought a wonder that objective nature 
should conform "to our subjective ground of apperception" 
but the wonder ceases when we remember that the nature 
we are concerned with is not a thing in itself but "an 
aggregate of appearances" which are after all represent- 
ations of our own mind. And there is no wonder that 
representations should conform to the conditions of the 
representing mind. 

Section III 

THE RELATION OF THE UNDERSTANDING TO 

OBJECTS IN GENERAL AND THE POSSIBILITY 

OF KNOWING THEM A PRIORY 

Kant does not really make any new point in this 
section. He merely attempts a more systematic statement 
of the points he has already made in regard to the 
transcendental deduction in the previous section. 

The possibility of experience rests on three subjective 
sources of knowledge, namely, sense, imagination and 
apperception. As generative conditions of experience, 
they are of course transcendental and a priori, and 
Kant is primarily interested in them only as transcen- 
dental grounds of our experience. But they have also an 
empirical employment, that is, function in respect of 
given appearances. In empirical employment sense works 
in perception, imagination, in association and reproduc- 
tion, and apperception in recognition. But we can also 



60 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

know a priori how all experience must be grounded in 
them. 

The ultimate ground of all experience is the unity of 
apperception or self-consciousness. Experience with all 
its representations or appearances must belong to some 
consciousness, and that consciousness must be the same 
in respect of all the items of its experience. If we had 
a separate and different self for each different fragment 
of experience, then the experience would be in no sense 
one experience and so no experience at all. Thus the 
identity of self is the primary condition cf expe- 
rience. We do not and cannot learn from experience 
that the self in ail experience must be identical with it- 
self, nor is it meant that we actually know a self which is 
so identical. All that is meant is that if we are to 
understand how experience is possible we have to grant 
such an idetity of self-consciousness as a pre-condition 
of experience. The empirical self no doubt changes from 
moment to moment, but its having any experience 
depends ultimately on the fact that there is a transcen- 
dental identity of self-consciousness in which all items 
of experience are combined. The unity of self-conscious- 
ness is the ultimate synthetic principle which is at the 
root of all synthetic knowledge. One representation can 
be combined with another, because in occurring in expe- 
rience, they are already united in the unity of self- 
consciousness. 

The unity of apperception presupposes the synthesis 
of imagination. The unity of apperception is significant 
only k in respect of a manifold which is combined by it or 
in it, and the manifold of representations, which must be 
in time, cannot be had all at once, that is, as a manifold, 
without the help of imagination. Imagination is that 



THE UNDERSTANDING, AMD OBJECTS IN GENERAL 61 

faculty of the mind which gives us a manifold. 
We of course speak of the manifold of sense and we are in 
a sense right. But mere sense by itself cannot give us a 
manifold. Perceptions of sense take place separately and 
singly, and so sense by itself is not competent to give us 
a manifold which certainly requires a synthesis or combi- 
nation, and sense, which is passive, cannot effect a 
synthesis. This is the work of imagination. The unity 
of apperception functions in respect of the manifold 
provided by imagination with the help of sense . Whatever 
we know is a manifold and absolute simples are never 
objects of our knowledge and experience. Thus we find 
that it is imagination which ultimately provides us with 
the objects of knowledge, because without imagination 
and its synthesis no manifold is possible. So this imagin- 
ation to whose transcendental functioning we owe all 
objects is called the productive imagination, which is 
to be distinguished from the empirical imagination which 
is merely reproductive. When we have experienced some 
objects, we can reproduce them in imagination. But 
there is a prior functioning of imagination which is 
transcendental and which in a sense generates objects for 
us. Before anything can be constituted into an object of 
experience for us, this productive imagination must have 
already played its part as a synthesizing activity. 
Reproductive imagination follows, and is based on, 
experience; productive imagination precedes, and is the 
ground of experience itself. We have apperception on one 
side and sense on the other; imagination is intermediate 
between them and acts as a link. Imagination gathers 
up what is offered by sense and submits it to the unity 
of apperception, and there emerges the object 
of experience. 



62 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

The unity of apperception in relation to the synthesis 
of imagination is the understanding. The objects of 
sense become the objects of the understanding through 
the imaginative synthesis. There are certain peculiar 
modes in which all possible appearances can be synthesized 
by the imagination for the understanding. They are 
part of the constitution of the understanding, so that if 
the understanding is to know any appearances, it must 
know them in these modes. These are the categories. 
Since they are inherent in the nature of the understanding 
and are not derived from experience, we can know 
a priori that these categories must be true of all possible 
objects of experience. The categories are the ways in 
which appearances are synthesized by the imagination for 
the understanding and made into objects of experience. 
We know therefore that if anything is to be an object of 
experience, it must submit to the categorial synthesis, 
which is as good as to say that the catgories have 
necessary objective validity. 

When appearances are associated with one another, 
we assume that there must be some objective ground for 
it. This objective ground, which may be called their 
affinity, is found ultimately in the fact that the appearances 
so associated belong to one and the same consciousness. 
The unity of apperception is thus the ultimate ground 
that makes appearances associable with one another. 

If the above account of the genesis of knowledge is 
true, then the unity and order, which are characteristic 
of experience and are found in nature, are derived ulti- 
mately from the constitution of our understanding itself. 
The unity of nature and experience is a reflection of the 
unity of self-consciousness and the intelligible orderliness 
of nature is due to the categorial synthesis of 



THE UNDERSTANDING, AND OBJECTS IN GENERAL 63 

the understanding. 

The understanding may be described as the faculty 
of rules. We know it busies itself with appearances only 
in order to discover some rule in them. But the most 
fundamental rules (categories) according to which appear- 
ances are combined and made into objects of experience 
come from the understanding itself. It is thus that the 
understanding in a sense makes nature. 

It is not of course meant that particular empirical 
laws of nature can be derived from the understanding. 
For them we have to study the natural phenomena and 
not the understanding. But the natural laws are only 
specifications of the most general laws of the understanding 
which find expression in the categories. Whether a or b 
is the cause of c we have no means of knowing except by 
a study of nature; but the law of causality is derived 
from, and found in, the understanding itself. 

That the objects of experience should conform to the 
laws of the understanding may sound strange, but it 
need cause us no surprise when we remember that by 
objects only appearances are meant and not things in 
themselves. The appearances are dependent on the mind 
to v/hich they appear and they have therefore to accommo- 
date themselves to the laws of the mind. It is because 
the objects of experience are only appearances that 
any a priori necessary knowledge of them is possible. 
If they were things in themselves, no a priori necessary 
knowledge of them would be possible. Of things in them- 
selves which are independent of the mind we could know 
nothing prior to experience, and even through experience 
we could get no necessary and universal knowledge 
because, as Kant repeatedly points out, experience is 
incompetent to yield such knowledge. But of objects 



64 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

of experience, since they are only appearances to the 
mind, we can know beforehand how they are necessarily 
determined by the conditions of our sensibility (space and 
time) and of our understanding (categories), because 
only as so determined can they appear at all and be 
objects of any possible experience. 

THE DEDUCTON OF THE PURE CONCEPTS 

OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

(Second Edition) 

Section II 
The Possibility of Combination in General 

Through sensibility we are given merely a manifold 
of impressions which, when combined in various ways, 
become obejcts for us. The combination of a manifold 
can never come to us through the senses. It is the work 
of thought or the understanding. The combining act 
whether conscious or not, is called synthesis. Since 
combination cannot be given by the object, it follows 
that, if we represent anything as combined, we must have 
previously combined it ourselves. Combination or syn- 
thesis is "an act of the self-activity of the subject", and 
can be executed by the subject alone.* 

Every combination implies a unity besides the 
manifold which is combined and the act of combining, 
All combining is uniting. The idea of combination is 

* We have just said that combination is the work of thought 
or understanding; and we are now saying that it can be executed 
only by the subject or self. Ihe fact is that thought or understand- 
ing is not to be conceived as distinct from the subject. We may as 
well say that a manifold is combined by the self as thinking or 
understanding. To think or to understand is to combine. 



ORIGINAL SYNTHETIC UNITY OF APPERCEPTION 65 

possible only when the idea of unity is added to that 
of the manifold. But the unity we are speaking of here 
is not a product of combination but what lies at the 
basis of combination itself. Combination is possible, and 
can take place at all only when there is a self-identical 
unitary combining principle. Combination or synthesis 
thus presupposes unity. 

The unity which is presupposed in all synthesis is 
more general than, and different from, the category of 
unity, which is only a mode of synthesis and is therefore 
of a lower kind than the most general unity pre-supposed 
in all synthesis. This unity it is which makes under- 
standing itself possible, because understanding is the 
faculty of judgement and every judgement is a synthesis 
and this unity lies at the basis of all syntheses. 

The Original Synthetic Unity of Apperception 

The highest unity is the unity of self-consciousness 
which underlies all synthesis. We have seen that combi- 
nation is the work of the self. Combination is thus due 
to me, but I can combine only my representations and 
the representations are mine only when they are one and 
all capable of being brought under or related to one 
consciousness. I may not be always conscious of them 
as mine, but if they are to be mine, in which case alone 
can they be combined by me, they must belong to one 
consciousness. It must be possible for all representa- 
tions to be accompanied by I think, otherwise there 
would be representations which would not be thought 
and would mean really nothing. We thus see that the 
unity of self-consciousness is the supreme principle under 
which all the thinkable must be brought and which 
makes thinking itself possible. 
K. c.. .9 



66 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

Kant has given different names to this unity of self- 
consciousness. He calls it pure apperception to distin- 
guish it from empirical apperception, or again original 
apperception, because it generates the representation / 
think which must be able to accompany all other 
representations but is also not itself accompanied by any 
further representations. It is also called the transcen- 
dental unity of self-consciousness, in order to indicate 
the possibility of a priori knowledge arising from it. 

The empirical consciousness, which accompanies dif- 
ferent representations is in itself diverse, and is without 
relation to the identity of the subject. It gets related to one 
subject in so far as the subject conjoins one representation 
with another and is conscious of their synthesis. There 
is thoroughgoing identity of consciousness throughout 
these representations in so far as they can be synthesized. 
Kant has expressed this idea by saying that the analytic 
unity of apperception is possible only under the presup- 
position ot a certain syntheic unity. In other words, the 
identity of self-consciousness is not by itself possible or 
intelligible; only in so far as a certain manifold of given 
representations is synthesized is there identity of self-cons - 
ciounsness. I am conscious of myself as identical in rela- 
tion to different representations, because I call them mine 
and take them thus as already brought under a unity. 
This means that I am conscious of a necessary a priori 
synthesis under which all representations that are given 
to me must stand. This is called the original synthetic 
unity of apperception. 

The Principle of the Synthetic Unity is the Supreme 

Principle of all Employment of the Understanding 

The Transcendental Aesthetic has shown that the 



EMPLOYMENT OF THE UNDERSTANDING 67 

manifold of sensible intuitions must fall under the forms 
of space and time and we have now learnt that the 
manifold of intuition, if it is to be thought at all, must 
come under the synthetic unity of apperception, i.e. must 
belong to the consciousness of some identical self. 

Even the consciousness of space is not possible 
through mere sensibility without the synthetic activity 
of the understanding. As has been shown, space and 
time are intuitions, not concepts. A concept (e.g. 
white ) is found contained in many different representa- 
tions ( many white things ), whereas space and time 
contain spatial and temporal parts, but are not them- 
selves contained in them. Space and time as tvell as 
their parts are composite manifolds and we require there- 
fore a previous synthesis of them if we are to be conscious 
of them as unities. 

It is the synthetic unity of apperception that makes 
any use of the understanding possible. The under- 
standing is the faculty of knowledge. There is no 
knowledge without object. But what is an object ? " An 
object", according to Kant, " is that in the concept of 
which the manifold of a given intuition is united. " A 
table, for instance, is an object, because in the concept 
of it, the manifold consisting of colour, shape, etc. is 
united. But all unification demands the unity of con- 
sciousness which can combine different elements into a 
unity. The object is thus seen to depend on the syn- 
thetic activity of the self. Without the synthetic unity 
of apperception no object can be constituted and so there 
can be no relating of any given representation to any 
object which knowledge demands. Thus the very 
possibility of understanding and knowledge depends on 
the synthetic apperception. 



68 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

Space itself gives no knowledge but only supplies the 
manifold of a priori intuition for possible knowledge. If 
we are to know anything in space, e.g. a line, the syn- 
thetic activity of the understanding is necessary. We 
have to draw it in thought, that is, synthesize its diffe- 
rent parts into a unity and then only can we know 
it. Thus the synthetic unity of consciousness is a 
necessary condition for anything to be an object for 
human understanding. 

This condition is valid for human understanding 
only, which knows by thinking, and not for every possi- 
ble understanding. For an understanding which knows 
intuitively, which through its mere representation brings 
the object of the representation into being, no special act 
of synthesis is necessary. 

The Objective Unity Of Self -Consciousness 

The transcendental unity of apperception, through 
which the given manifold is combined into an object, and 
which is thus responsible for the constitution of the 
object, may be called objective. This objective unity 
of consciousness is different from the subjective unity of 
consciousness. The objective unity is responsible for the 
objectification of the given manifold and it is the same in 
all individuals; the / think which accompanies all ideas 
is the same in all cases. But the manifold is empirically 
given ultimately in the subjective experiences of each 
individual. The inner subjective experiences are described 
by Kant as determinations of the inner sense. There is a 
unity in these experiences in so far as they are the sub- 
jective experiences of one individual. This is the sub- 
jective unity of consciousness which is empirical in 
character and may be different in the case of different 



LOGICAL FORM OF ALL JUDGEMENTS 69 

individuals according as they come under different cir- 
cumstances and their representations are differently com- 
bined. This empirical subjective unity of consciousness 
depends on the original objective unity. It is because of 
the original objective unity of apperception that my 
inner experiences can be combined at all, even if they are 
combined differently from other people's experiences. 
Even time, which is the form of all inner experiences, is a 
unity because of the original transcendental synthesis. 

"Only the original unity is objectively valid" says 
Kant; which means that the transcendental unity of 
apperception is universal and necessary. There is no such 
necessity and universality in the subjective synthesis of 
different people. A certain word suggests one thing to one 
man and a different thing to another. 

The Logical Form of all Judgements consists 
in the Objective Unity of Apperception of 
the Concepts which they contain 

"Judgement" is usually defined as the representation 
of a relation between two concepts. But this definition 
does not bring out in what exactly the asserted relation 
consists. Two concepts may get associated with one 
another through reproductive imagination. But no judge- 
ment expresses such accidental association of ideas. On the 
contrary, it expresses some objective connexion between 
ideas. When, for instance, I judge: "Bodies are heavy", 
I do not mean that the two representations (body and 
heavy) are found together in empirical intuition or that if 
I support a body I feel an impression of weight. I mean 
on the contrary that the two representations are connec- 
ted in the object. The copula "is*' is used to distinguish 
the objective unity of given representations from their 



70 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

subjective unity. No doubt the two representations may 
always go together in our subjective experience, but that 
is not what is meant by the judgement. It asserts their 
objective connexion and that is possible only on the basis 
of the objective unity of apperception which enables us 
to think objective connectedness or make representations 
into objects. 

All Sensible Intuitions are subject to the Categories 
as Conditions under which alone their Manifold 
Contents can come together in one Consciousness 

The manifold given in a sensible intuition is 
necessarily subject to the original synthetic unity of 
apperception. The unity of the intuition demands that 
the manifold given in it should be subject to the unity 
of apperception. If the manifold is not brought under 
one apperception, we do not see how the intuition of it 
can be one intuition. But to bring the manifold of given 
representation (whether intuitions or concepts) under one 
apperception is exactly the logical function of judgement. 
The manifold then in so far as it is given in an empirical 
intuition must be determined in respect of one of the 
logical functions of judgement if it is to be brought under 
one consciousness. Now the categories are nothing but 
these logical functions of judgement in so far as they 
determine the manifold of a given intuition. Thus it 
follows that the manifold of a given intuition is 
necessarily subject to the categories. The long and the 
short of the argument seems to be that the manifold has 
to be combined in being brought to one consciousness, 
and the categories are the modes of combination; there- 
fore, since the manifold must be combined (otherwise it 
would not be known at all), it is necessarily subject to 



THE CATEGORIES AND OBJECTS 71 

the categories. This means that the categories have 
objective validity. 

The above argument gives the gist of the transcen- 
dental deduction. Kant has proved that the manifold 
of intuition is subject to the categories; but he admits 
that it must be given to intuition prior to the synthesis 
of understanding and independently of it. That is to say, 
the manifold is given before the categories are applied to 
it, but how it is given is left undetermined. Our under- 
standing thus merely combines the stuff given to intuition. 

The Category has no other Application in 
Knowledge than to Objects of Experience 

To know and think are not one and the same. 
Knowledge involves two factors, concept and intuition. 
The concept or the category has to be applied to the 
content given in intuition in order to constitute know- 
ledge. Without the content supplied by intuition the 
concepts remain mere thought and cannot amount to 
knowledge. Now the only intuition possible for us is 
sensible intuition, and so in order to give knowledge to 
us the pure concepts of the understanding must be 
applied to the objects of the senses. Even mathe- 
matical concepts, which are concerned with pure 
intuition (space and time) cannot by themselves give 
us knowledge. They give us knowledge only in so 
far as they are applicable to empirical intuition, i.e. to 
things in space and time. Thus the categories give us 
knowlege only through their application to objects of 
empirical intuition, i.e. to things given through sensation 
in space and time. If the things are not actually 
experienced, they must at least be capable of being 
experienced if the categories are to be validly applied to 



72 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

them. The categories have no application, at least in 
the interest of knowledge, to things that are not objects 
of possible experience. In plain words we can know 
only what can bs sensed. 

The pure forms of sensibiliy, space and time, can be 
applied only to the objects of sensible intuition. The 
pure concepts of the understanding have a wider scope 
inasmuch as they can be applied to objects of intuition 
in general, whether the intuition be like ours or not. But 
as a matter of fact we can apply the categories only to 
the kind of sensible intuition of which we are capable, 
and they have meaning for us only in their application 
to such intuition. We may indeed think of an object of 
a non-sensible intuition, but we can describe it only 
negatively (as non-spatial and non-temporal, etc.), and 
can never be sure that it is real. 

The Application of the Categories to Objects of 
the Senses in General 

It is already clear that the essence of the understanding 
is synthesis or combining. The categories are nothing 
but modes of synthesis. Taken by themselves they are 
mere forms of thought by which alone we cannot know 
any determinate object. The synthesis of the manifold 
which the categories effect is purely intellectual in the 
sense that it is an affair of the understanding. The 
synthesis is also called transcendental because it is the 
basis of our knowledge of objects. It is the synthetic 
unity of apperception which in the form of categories 
applies to objects in general. Even without actually expe- 
riencing an object we can say that it must come under 
the unity of apperception and submit to the synthesis 



THE CATEGORIES AND OBJECTS 73 

of the categories.* The synthesis of the categories is thus 
the ground of the possibility of a priori knowledge. 

Now although we know that the categories of the 
understanding must be applied to the manifold given in 
intuition in order to give us knowledge, we do not yet 
understand how this is possible. The difficulty arises in 
this way. The understanding has to combine the mani- 
fold in its own characteristic ways (i. e. apply the cate- 
gories), but the manifold is given in intuition, and the 
intuition is different from undertanding. How can the 
understanding then combine something which is not avai- 
lable to itself? The problem is tackled in the theory 
of Schematism. Meantime Kant suggests that the syn- 
thesis of the understanding is made possible by a tran- 
scendental synthesis of imagination, which is also called 
figurative synthesis. This synthesis, being synthesis, is 
effected by the understanding (because nothing else can 
combine), but with the help of imagination, unlike the 
intellectual synthesis which is done by the understanding 
alone. In order to effect this figurative synthesis, the 
understanding does not need to go out to the manifold 
which can be given only to sensible intuition. There lies 
in us a certain a priori form of intuition (time) and 
through it the understanding determines the inner sense 
in accordance with the synthetic unity of apperception. 
The understanding acts on the inner sense and gives it a 
determination which conditions all objective appearance, 
This is the first application of the understanding which is 
the ground of all its other applications. We have to realize 

* The unity of apperception and the synthesis of the 
categories are not two different things. The categories are the 
ways in which intuitions are united in one apperception. The 
unity of apperception shows itself in categorial synthesis. 

K. C...10 



74 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

that what we can experience must ultimately come to 
us through inner sense, i. e. as subjective experiences. 
Time is the form of inner sense, and hence all our expe- 
riences are subject to time. And the understanding can 
think the objects of experience in terms of the categories 
because it has already determined the inner sense in 
accordance with the synthetic unity of apperception and 
the inner sense is thus made to present its objects as 
ready, as it were, to receive the stamp of the categories. 
The manifold can be thus synthesized in terms of the 
categories because there is a foregoing synthesis of imagi- 
nation, which is the same thing as the determination of 
the inner sense by the understanding. Kant illustrates 
this point by the example of a line. He says that we can- 
not think a line without drawing it in thought. This 
drawing of the line in thought is the imaginative synthe- 
sis which is the pre-condition of our thought of the line 
as an object. And the imaginative synthesis is no- 
thing but the determination of the inner sense by the 
understanding. It is imaginative because it represents a 
drawing which is not actual. Whenever thus we know 
anything there is first an imaginative or figurative syn- 
thesis, and then only arises the knowledge of the thing as 
a determinate object. 

The imagination which is thus instrumental in 
providing objects for our thought is called productive 
and is to be distinguished from the reproductive imagi. 
nation which only brings together ideas according to 
empirical laws, i.e., the laws of association. The produc- 
tive imagination, as the basis of all objective experience, 
belongs to transcendental philosophy, while the re- 
productive imagination falls within the scope of 
empirical psychology. 



THE CATEGORIES AND OBJECTS 75 

Kant takes this opportunity to explain why we can 
know ourselves only as appearance and not as we are. 
Kant lays emphasis on the distinction which must be 
already clear, between the unity of apperception and the 
inner sense, and his theory is that we know ourselves only 
through the affections of the inner sense by ourselves. 
But the inner sense is not a transparent medium that can 
enable us to see a thing as it is. The inner sense has 
its own form to which all that can be given to it must 
submit and so when the inner sense represents any object 
to us, the object does not stand out in its naked 
character, but only under the garb which the inner sense 
puts upon it. In other words even through inner sense 
we get nothing but appearance. Kant does not explain 
how the thinking self is taken to be one with the self 
that is given as appearance. He merely says that this 
problem is no more or less difficult than the question 
how the self can be thought as object at all. 

Now although the self known through inner sense 
may be an appearance, it might be supposed that the 
self is known as it is in the unity of apperception. But 
according to Kant, even in the unity of apperception we 
do not know the self as it is. He says that "in the 
synthetic original unity of apperceptiou I am conscious 
of myself not as I appear to myself, nor as I am in my- 
self, but only that / am. This representation is a 
thought, not an intuition." Thus in the unity of 
apperception we have a thought of the existence of the 
self, but this thought never amounts to knowledge unless 
it is joined to a given intuition. The only intuition 
possible of the self is the intuition of the inner sense, 
and we have seen that through the inner sense, although 
we may know the self, we know it only as an appearance. 



76 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

Thus we have either knowledge of the self as an appear- 
ance or mere thought of the self which is not knowledge. 

Transcendental Deduction of the universally 
possible Employment in Experience of the 
pure Concepts of the Understanding 

Kant proceeds to explain how the understanding 
not only prescribes laws to nature, but even makes nature 
possible. By 'nature' is understood not a system of things 
in themselves existing independently of us, but only the 
world of appearances. Nature then is constituted by 
the objects of empirical knowledge. Thus to explain how 
experience is possible is the same thing as to explain how 
nature is possible. So if we show that it is the under- 
standing which makes experience possible, we show that 
the understanding makes nature possible. Now experience 
is nothing but ** knowledge by names of connected 
perceptions", and since in every perception there is 
synthesis in terms of the categories, the categories are 
conditions of the possibiliy of experience. No perception 
is possible without the synthesis of apprehension, which 
means combination of the manifold in an empirical 
intuition by imagination, and imagination depends for the 
unity of its synthesis on the understanding which, there- 
fore, lies at the root of all experience. The synthesis of 
imagination is not sufficient to make the manifold our 
object ; it requires for this purpose the synthesis of the 
understanding in terms of the categories. 

It seems there is a two-fold synthesis. First there is 
a synthesis involved even in intuition, and then there is a 
further synthesis by thought in terms of the categories. 
We have seen that in order to be known an object must 
be both sensed and thought, sensed in space and time, 



EMPLOYMENT OP CATEGORIES IN" EXPERIENCE 77 

and thought in terms of the categories. Now space and 
time are not mere forms of intuition, they are themselves 
intuitions, each containing a manifold of its own, and so 
they cannot be represented without a unification or syn- 
thesis. Thus it is plain that the representations of space 
and time and their parts as unities require synthesis- So 
In merely intuiting a thing as spatial or temporal there is 
already involved a synthesis, and the thing thus intuited 
has further to be conceived in terms of the categories and 
then only does knowledge arise. The first is the synthesis 
of imagination which, as we have seen, takes place in 
accordance with the unity of apperception and the catego- 
ries, and thus prepares the raw material of sensations for 
the intellectual synthesis of the understanding. We see 
here how imagination works as a link between sense and 
understanding. Kant illustrates these points by two 
examples. 

When I perceive a house, a thing in space, "the 
necessary unity of space and of outer sensible intuition 
in general lies at the basis of my apprehension, and I draw, 
as it were, the outline of the house in conformity with this 
synthetic unity of the manifold in space. M The house 
consists of different parts and they must be combined into 
a unity in order to give us the representation of a house 
or, more strictly, our several sense -impressions have to be 
combined in order to obtain the representation of a 
house, and this is done by the synthesis of apprehension. 
This synthesis is not arbitrary, but is "in conformity with 
the synthetic unity of the manifold in space." Now this 
synthetic unity when abstracted from the form of space 
is found to have its seat in the understanding as the 
category of quantity ( synthesis of the homogeneous ). 
The synthetic apprehension of perception must conform 



78 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

to this category. 

Similarly when I perceive the freezing of water, I 
apprehend two states of water (liquid and solid) in 
temporal sequence, and this synthetic apprehension is in 
conformity with the synthetic unity of the manifold in 
time. This unity when abstracted from the form of time 
is found to be the same as the category of cause and effect, 
(more correctly, ground and consequent), to which our 
perception of an event must conform. 

Thus we see how experience, and therefore nature, are 
subject to the categories of the understanding. Since 
nature is taken here as appearance and not as a thing in 
itself, there is nothing absurd in the supposition that it 
should be subject to the conditions under which alone it 
can appear, the forms of sensibility (space and time) and 
the categories of the understanding. It is because of 
these that we can make a priori judgements about nature. 
It is however not to be supposed that everything about 
nature can be learnt from the categories. We can learn 
from the categories only what is involved in the idea of 
nature in general ; the special laws of nature, although 
subject to the categories, have to be learnt from experience 
only. 

When it is found that our experience conforms to the 
categories of the understanding, there are three possible 
hypotheses which can explain this fact: (1) Either the 
categories are derived from experience; or (2) experience 
is dependent upon the categories; or (3) both experience 
and the categories are independent of each other, but 
through divine ordinance, the laws of nature as a matter 
of fact agree with the categories which in themselves are 
nothing but subjective dispositions. Kant rejects the 
first alternative, as it does not explain the elements of 



THE ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES 79 

necessity and universality in our judgements. He rejects 
also the third alternative, because it sets "no limit to the 
assumption of pre-determined dispositions to future 
judgements", and sacrifices the element of necessity 
which is essential to the categories, because the third 
hypothesis turns the categories into subjective disposi- 
tions which means that although we have to think in 
terms of them, there is no guarantee that there are any 
such necessary objective connexions. Kant accepts the 
second hypothesis that it is the categories which make 
experience possible. 

TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

BOOK II 
THE ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES 

Logic in its Analytic deals with concepts, judgements 
and inferences corresponding to the three higher faculties 
of knowledge, understanding, judgement and reason. As 
formal logic abstracts from all contents, it can include 
the consideration of reason in its analytic part; we have 
merely to analyse the procedure of reason in order to 
find out what are its valid rules, without any reference to 
its object. But transcendental logic does not abstract 
from all contents and as it is found that the transcenden- 
tal use of reason is not objectively valid, reason is exclud- 
ed from the logic of truth, i. e. the Analytic, and a 
separate part, under the title of Dialectic, is found for it. 

In Book I of the Analytic, Kant was concerned with 
the discovery (metaphysical deduction) of the a prior 1 
concepts and the demonstration of their objective validi- 
ty (transcendental deduction). In Book II he will be 



80 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

concerned to deduce from the categories those a priori 
principles or judgements which underlie our objective 
experience. In this way, he shows how synthetic a priori 
judgements are possible. But their validity is confined 
only within experience, that is, they are true of appear- 
ances only and not of things in themselves . 

INTRODUCTION 

Transcendental Judgement in General 

The understanding is elsewhere defined as the 
faculty of j ud&emzn t, but here, as in the previous 
section, a distinction is made between understanding and 
judgement. In fact they are now treated as separate 
faculties. Understanding is defined as "the faculty of 
rules", and judgement as "the faculty of subsuming under 
rules, that is, of distinguishing whether something does 
or does not stand under a given rule/ 1 Our understand- 
ing may be easily instructed in abstract general rules, 
but where in concrete cases the rules are to be applied 
we must judge for ourselves. We may learn from others 
various general rules with great precision, but in order to 
decide whether in our actual experience an occasion has 
arisen for the application of any of the rules we know we 
have to depend entirely on ourselves. It is the work of 
our judgement. "It is the specific quality of the so-called 
mother-wit; and its lack no school can make good." In 
this connexion Kant makes the interesting observation 
that stupidity may co-exist with great learning. 

It is clear that general logic, which abstracts from 
all contents, can provide no rules for the exercise of judge* 
ment. But the case is different with transcendental 
logic which does not abstract from all contents. It 



SCHEMATISM OF THE PURE CONCEPTS 81 

possesses a content in the pure forms of sensibility, and 
"can also specify a priori the instance to which the rule" 
given in the pure concept of the understanding, "is to be 
applied". 

In the Analytic of Principles Kant proposes first to 
define the sensuous conditions under which alone the 
pure concepts of the understanding may be employed. 
This is the problem of the schematism of the pure under- 
standing, dealt with in the first chapter. In the second 
chapter he proposes to deal with the synthetic judgements 
or principles which under these conditions follow a priori 
from the pure concepts and are at the basis of all our 
objective knowledge. 

CHAPTER I 

THE SCHEMATISM OF THE PURE CONCEPTS 
OF THE UNDERSTANDING 

Knowledge arises when the categories are applied to 
sensible intuitions, that is when sensible intuitions are sub- 
sumed under categories. Subsumption implies some 
common character. When, for instance, a plate is sub- 
sumed under the concept circle, we find that a common 
element, roundness, is present in them both. But there 
seems to be nothing common between a sensible intuition 
and an intellectual category, and so, if nevertheles a 
category is to be applied to a sensible intuition, it is clear 
that we are in need of a third something .which will 
mediate between them and make the application of an 
intellectual category to sensible intuition possible. This 
third something is the transcendental schema. 

The schema is nothing but a transcendents! deter- 
mination of time. Time is eminently fitted for tne work 
K. c,..ll 



82 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

of mediation between, the category and what is sensibly 
given. It is like the category because it is pure, and as a 
form of intuition, it is also contained in whatever is given 
empirically. Time, as the form of the inner sense, gives 
us the condition of all sensibility. If anything is to be 
intuited sensibly, it must be intuited in time. So a deter- 
mination of time is a determination of the condition of 
sensibility. Thus by a determination of time we get an 
a priori determination of the sensible content itself. So 
if there are determinations of time according to different 
categories, we get corresponding determinations of the 
sensible contents to which the categories may be easily 
applied. 

Our problem was to understand how the categories 
are applicable to sensible content. We now -see that, by 
determining the condition of sensibility, time, or inner 
sense, in accordance with the categories, we get an a 
priori determination of the sensible content in such a way 
that the categories can by easily applied to it. The 
categories are applicable to sensible content because, in 
being sensed, it has been already so determined (by 
imagination) as to be fit for categorical synthesis. We 
thus see how the schema or the determination of time 
according to the categories makes possible the application 
of the categories to sensible intuition. 

The schema may as well be described as the repre- 
sentation of the procedure of the understanding by which 
the sensibility is so determined as to give us a content 
suitable for the application of the cotegories. The schema 
of a concept enables us to have a sensible image of the 
concept, but it (schema) is not the image itself. The 
schema is more general than the image. If we put dowjg 
five points one after another, we can have an image of 



SCHEMATISM OF THE PURE CONCEPTS 83 

the number five; but the method by which this Image 
is produced, namely, the successive combination of units 
into a whole, is the same whether the number be five or 
hundred. "This representation of a universal prodedure 
of imagination'*, says Kant, "in providing an image for 
a concept, I entitle the schema of this concept." We 
thus see clearly how the image is different from the 
schema. The image is a particular object, the schema is 
a general procedure of the understanding in producing 
objects of a certain kind (image corresponding to a con- 
cept). The image is a product of the empirical faculty 
of reproductive imagination; the schema is a product of 
the pure a priori productive imagination. In schejna- 
tizing a category we do not try to reproduce in imagination 
what we have experienced before but we attempt an 
original synthesis of imagination according to a rule of 
unity given by the category. No image is ever adequate 
to a concept. We can never have, e.g., an image of a 
triangle which will possibly represent triangles of different 
kinds, but we can have a schema of the triangle which 
represents the self-same procedure of the understanding in 
drawing in imagination triangular figures in space.-' 
The schema is "a rule of synthesis of the imagination** 
which is illustrated in many images. 

The categories are themselves modes of synthesis, and 
when they are schematized, we have to conceive them as 
so determining the inner sense that whatever is sensibly 
intuited, (since sensible intuition is ultimately subject to 
the condition of the inner sense), is capable of being 
brought under them. The synthesis of a category is 
merely logical, quite abstract and general; the synthesis 
of a schema is relatively concrete as it is restricted to the 
condition of sensibility, time- The schema of a particular 



84 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

category stands for the same kind of synthesis as the 
category itself, only with this modification that it is 
understood in reference to time. The categories conceived 
or interpreted in relation to time or, as one writer has 
graphically said, "sunk in time"* are the schemata. The 
schemata are products of the transcendental synthetic 
imagination which not only produces objects for us (by 
combining sense -intuitions), but, in yielding us objects a^ 
temporal unities, even generates time itself as a unity or 
or a principle of unification. 

Let us now consider the schemata of some of the 
categories. 

The schema of magnitude or quantity is number. 
Number means the successive addition of homogeneous 
units. In sensible experience we can never have quantity 
without the successive combination of homogeneous units. 
More precisely, number is the schema of the category of 
totality. It is to be noted that number is not taken here in 
the arithmetical sense. It is the name of a kind of synthe- 
sis found in the successive addition of homogeneous units. 

The schema of reality is filled (by sensation) time ; 
the schema of negation is empty time ; the schema of 
limitation is degree or intensive magnitude, i.e., more or 
or less of sensation during a certain time. 

The schema of substance is persistence in time ; the 
schema of causality is ordered succession in time ; the 
schema of community is the reciprocal relation of 
co-existing objects. 

The schema of possibility is compatibility of a thing 
with the general conditions of time; the schema of actua- 
lity is existence of an object at a determinate time; the 
schema of necessity is existence of an object at all times. 
Reininger: Kant: Seine Anhanger and seine Gegner', p. 101. 



SCHEMATISM OF THE PURE CONCEPTS 85 

We see thus that schematism at every stage has to 
do with time. In the schema of quantity we have, so to 
say, the generation of time itself, for this schema gives us 
the synthesis of successive apprehensions of an object ; 
and time is nothing but a synthesis of succession. In the 
schema of quality we have the synthesis of sensation with 
time or the filling of time. But this is not filled in the 
same way by all different appearances. There are some 
determinate relations between appearances. Either one 
appearance remains while others change (substance), or 
one appearance is followed by another (causality), or they 
are present together (community). Thus in the schema 
of relation we have to do with the order of time, as in 
those of quantity and quality we have to do with the 
series of time and the content of time respectively. Lastly, 
in the schema of modality we get what may be called the 
comprehension or scope of time, for in this schema we 
know how the existence of an object is grasped in time, 
whether at any time (possibility), or at some determinate 
time (actuality) 9 or at all times (necessity). 

The categories themselves are nothing but logical 
functions of the understanding without any objective 
content, and therefore are not usable for purposes of 
knowledge. Only when they are schematized do they 
become fit for such use- Substance, for instance, means 
logically only what can be used as a subject and never as 
a predicate. But this concept is of no use to us, unless 
we know what it is that can be used as a primary suject. 
We get this in the schema of substance. Thus our actual 
knowledge is determined by schematized categories or sche- 
mata. The term category is sometimes used also for the 
schema or the schematized category, but then we should 
note its distinction from the pure form of understanding. 



CHAPTER II 

SYSTEM OF ALL PRINCIPLES OF PURE 
UNDERSTANDING 

In the previous chapter Kant has considered the 
general conditions under which alone the pure concepts 
of the understanding can be used for synthetic judge- 
ments, i. e. can be applied to objects of experience. He 
is now going to consider the synthetic a priori judge- 
ments which are possible under these conditions. JThese 
a priori judgements are called principles because they are 
not grounded in any higher judgements, but other judge- 
ments are grounded in them. Still, they require to be 
proved; otherwise they might be considered mere 
''surreptitious assertions". They cannot be proved in an 
objective fashion but admit of a subjective proof in the 
sense that our knowledge of objects can be shown to 
presuppose them. 

Although Kant is directly concerned with the princi- 
ples of synthetic judgements only, he considers the 
prniciple of analytic judgements also, in so far as it can, 
by contrast, clarify our understanding of the former. 

Section I 
The Highest Principle of all Analytic Judgements 

The principle of non-contradiction is a universal ne- 
gative condition of all judgements. It says that "no pre- 
dicate contradictory of a thing can belong to it". 1 What- 
ever may be the content of a judgement, it cannot be 
true if it contradicts itself, that is, if it asserts a predi- 
cate which is inconsistent with its subject. But a judge- 



HIGHEST PRINCIPLE OF ALL SYNTHETIC JUDGEMENTS 87 

ment need hot be true when it is merely free from self- 
contradiction. The judgement "the Earth is flat" does 
not involve self-contradiction and is yet false. But in the 
case of an analytic judgement which merely analyses a 
given concept, the principle of non-contradiction supplies 
us with a sufficient test of truth. It is true if it does not 
contradict itself. This principle is sometimes formulated 
as "it is impossible that something should at one and 
the same time both be and not be/' Kant considers 
this formulation defective because, in his opinion, a .pure 
formal principle of logic should have no reference to time 
which is inconsistent with its obsolute generality. 

Section II 
The Highest Principle of all Synthetic Judgements 

In a synthetic judgement we advance beyond a given 
concept and relate it to what is not already thought in it. 
So by mere thinking or considering the judgement by it- 
self we cannot determine whether it is true or false. If it 
is to give us real knowledge it must refer to an object 
that is, or can be, given in experience. Thus experience, 
actual or possible, gives meaning to a synthetic judge- 
ment. It is only on the basis of experience that we can 
relate one representation with another which is not con- 
tained in it or related with it by identity or contradiction. 
The principle of the possibility of experience then is the 
principle of all synthetic judgements. * 'Experience, how- 
ever, rests on the synthetic unity of appearances, that is, 
on a synthesis according to concepts of an object of 
appearances in general." Without connectedness or 
unity there is no experience in the real sense of the term. 
This implies that the representations should be connected 



88 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

according to rules (categories) and should conform to the 
transcendental unity of apperception. Since the repre- 
sentations must be given in experience, they also imply 
the forms of intuition. Thus the conditions of the 
possibility of experience are the forms of intuition (space 
and time), the categories (schemata), and the unity 
of apperception. 

Synthetic judgements in every case refer to expe- 
rience. Synthetic a priori judgements are possible in so 
far as they are concerned with what is necessa^ for the 
possibility of experience. Since the necessary conditions 
of experience must be illustrated in all experience, we can 
make a priori judgements relating these conditions to a 
possible experience. The highest principle of all synthe- 
tic judgements is formulated by Kant thus : "Every 
object stands under the necessary conditions of synthetic 
unity of the manifold of intuition in a possible 
experience/' There is no object properly speaking which 
is unrelated to an}?- possible experience and which will 
not submit to the forms of intuition and understanding. 
The object must fall within some experience, that is, it 
must belong to a unity of apperception. Also there is 
no object in which there is no synthesis of imagination, 
some combinations of a manifold according to a rule 
(schema). Moreover, the object must be given and in 
being given it submits to the forms of intuition. These 
are the conditions of experience itself. In fact the 
conditions of the possibility of experience in general are 
likewise the conditions of the possibility of the objects 
of experience. That which makes experience possible also 
makes objects possible. This is why the synthetic a priori 
judgements which are concerned with the conditions 
of experience are said to have objective validity. 



REPRESENTATION OF SYNTHETIC PRINCIPLES 89 

Section III 

Systematic Representation of all the Synthetic 
Principles of Pure Understanding 

The understanding is the source of principles which 
demand that an object must conform to the rules, with, 
indeed no objective knowledge is possible. The element 
of necessity associated with the laws of nature is due to 
the fact that they illustrate the application of the princi- 
ples of the understanding to special cases in the field of 
appearance. The laws of nature in so far as they are 
merely empirical nan have no element of necessity in 
them. They derive this element from the principles of 
the understanding which they illustrate and which are 
certain before all experience. 

Principles which are merely empirical may be easily 
distinguished, by reason of the'r lack of necessity, from 
the principles of pure underetanding which are necessary. 
But the fundamental propositions of mathematics may not 
be so easily distinguished; still they should be distingu 
shed from the principles of pure understanding as these 
are derived from pure concepts, while the fundamental 
propositions of mathematics derived from pure intuition. 
Nevertheless there are some principles of pure under- 
standing on which the objeccive validity of mathematical 
science is based and these may be called mathematical 
principles. 

As in the case of categories, Kant makes a four-fold 
division of the principles. These are : I. Axioms of In- 
tuition, II. Anticipations of Perception, III. Analogies of 
experience, and IV. Postulates of Empirical Thought 
in general. The Axioms and anticipations are called 
mathematical, while the Analogies and Postulates are 

K. C...12 



90 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

called dynamical. 

The mathematical principles determine the conditions 
of intuition and so the absolutely necessary conditians of 
any possible experience. They are thus unconditionally 
necessary. The dynamical principles determine how we 
must think the existence of an object in relation to 
others. They too are no doubt necessary but only under 
the condition of empirical thought. If we are to think of 
the existence of an object as determined by other objects, 
we have necessarily to think in terms of the dynamical 
principles. But these and other characteristics of the 
principles will be clear when we have studied the princi- 
ples themselves. 

I 

AXIOMS GF INTUITION 

Their principle is: All intuitions are extensive 
magnitudes. Or, as it is expressed in the First Edition : 
All appearances are, in their intuition, extensive 
magnitudes. 

All objects of experience must be first of all intuited, 
and they can be intuited only as in space and time, be- 
cause space and time are the forms of our intuition. But 
to be in space or in time is to be extended. What is not 
extended cannot be said to be in space or time. To be 
extended really means to consist of parts which are put 
together one after another. This is the case with all 
spatial and temporal wholes, however small they may be. 
A line, however small, can be understood or perceived 
only as it is drawn in thought. That is to say, starting 
from a point we have to produce a line part after part 
and synthesize these parts into a whole if we are to have 



AXIOMS OF INTUITION 91 

the idea of a complete line. This is the case with a tem- 
poral whole also. By extension Kant means both spatial 
and temporal extention. He seems to think that a whole 
of parts can be perceived only as the parts are put 
together one after another. The objects which we can 
intuit are such wholes, whether they are external objects 
in space or successions of events occurring in time. This 
means that in the perception of objects the schema of 
number is involved, for this also means the imaginative 
synthesis of homogeneous units. Kant does not mean to 
say that there are no unextended objects ; he only means 
that if they are to be perceived they be must extended. 

The pure figures in space with which geometry deals 
are synthetic constructs. The figures are understood as 
they are produced or drawn in thought. All the universal 
and necessary judgements of geometry are thus synthetic. 
Arithmetical judgements, e,g. 7 4- 5 = 12, are, as we have 
already seen, also synthetic. But according to Kant 
arithmetical judgements are singular whereas those of 
geometry are universal. 

Mathematics has objective validity because the objects 
of perception are subject to the condition of pure intuition 
with which mathematics deals. What holds good of pure 
intuition holds good also of the object of empirical percep- 
tion, which cannot violate the conditions of pure intui- 
tion. We have seen that at the basis of the mathematical 
sciences of geometry and arithmetic there is the synthetic 
function of the understanding. The schema of number 
is involved in constructing both geometrical figures and 
arithmetical aggregates or numbers. And the objects 
of ordinary perception as extended magnitudes are also 
constructed in the same way, thus making it possible for 
mathematics to be applied to them. 



92 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

Mathematics applies to objects of experience because 
the objects are only appearances. If they were things in 
themselves, no such synthetic a priori judgements as 
mathematics supplies would be possible of them. We have 
either to deny the objective validity of mathematics 
or to accept the position that the objects of experience are 
only appearances. Kant accepts the latter alternative. 

II 

THE ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTIONS 

Their principle is: In all appearances the real, 
which is an object of sensation, has intensive 
magnitude, that is degree. 

All synthetic a priori principles are in a sense 
anticipations because they assert something of appear- 
ance independently of experience. But this principle is an 
anticipation in a special sense because it concerns sensa- 
tion about which we can learn only from experience. 
Whether a thing is red or white, hard or soft, we can 
learn only from actual experience. But although it is 
impossible to know prior to experience what the content 
of a sensation would be, we can know this about it quite 
a priori that whatever be its nature it will have an 
intensive magnitude or degree. 

Perception is an awareness in which sensation is 
involved, and we know that what corresponds to sensa- 
tion is the real, or that the real is the object of sensation. 
The real is the sensible which alone is perceived. And 
Kant says that if anything is to be perceived, it must 
have intensive magnitude or degree, that is, it must 
have a quality which admits of being more or less. 
What we perceive may be light or sound or something 



THE ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTIONS 93 

else* But whatever it be, it must be something of which 
there can be more or less. The sound we perceive is 
loud or low, the colour bright or faint. When we have 
an apprehension through sensation, the moment of time 
at which the apprehension takes place is/as it were, filled 
by the sense-quality. But there is no necessity that it 
should be filled in one uniform way always. On the 
contrary, there is the opposite necessity that there should 
be an infinite variety of ways in which it can be filled, 
beginning from a null point in which the sensation is 
absent, to any conceivable higher degree. 

An extensive magnitude is possible by the synthesis 
of many constituent parts which are first given. But an 
intensive magnitude is not generated in this way. A loud 
sound is not a synthesis of many low sounds. The sort 
of synthesis necessary in the case of extensive magnitude 
is not possible in the case of a sensation, because it takes 
place at one moment, and there is no temporal succession 
in which the parts may occur and be synthesized. How 
do we then know the magnitude of a sensible quality ? 
We know it in this way: When there is a sensation of a 
particular intensity, we can imagine many others which 
would have a place between it and the zero point in the 
scale of intensity. In the case of all magnitudes we have 
to do with a multiplicity in unity. In the case of exten- 
sive magnitude the many parts are prior and are actually 
given, and the unity of the whole is constructed out of 
them. In the case of intensive magnitude, the whole (of 
sensation) or unity is given and the multiplicity is 
imagined in the grades through which the given sensation 
can approach the null point. Between a given sensation 
and no sensation we can imagine many others which are 
less and less intense than the given sensation. Thus a 



94 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

sensation however faint always has an intensive magnitude 
or degree which can always be diminished. "Between 
reality and negation there is a continuity of possible reali- 
ties and of possible smaller perceptions/' Reality for 
Kant means what corresponds to sensation and negation 
means absence of sensation. 

In this connexion, Kant explains his notion of con- 
tinuity. "The property of magnitudes according to 
which no part of them is the smallest possible, that is, no 
part is simple, is called their continuity." Space is thus 
continuous because between any two points, however near 
one another they may be, there is space which can be 
further divided. Similarly in the case of time. However 
small an interval of time may be, there will always be 
others which are smaller than it. It is to be noted that 
space is not made up of points nor is time of instants. 
"Points and instants are only limits, that is, mere 
positions which limit space and time. 51 They presuppose 
space and time which are limited by them and which are 
therefore prior to them and are given in intuition. 

We find the same continuity in intensive magnitude 
also. Every sensation has a degree which is never the 
smallest. Between any two sensations of different degrees 
we can imagine others which will be less than the one and 
more than the other. Thus all appearances, in their 
extensive and intensive aspects, that is, in their spatial 
and temporal character and in their sensible character, 
are continuous magnitudes. 

Kant points out in this connexion that an empty 
time or an empty space can never be proved from 
experience. For we can never perceive any such space 
and time, because perception always requires some 
sensible quality. The natural scientists of Kant's time 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 95 

used to suppose that any difference in quality was 
explicable only by a like difference in the quantity of 
matter. Kant on the contrary holds that there is no 
such correlation between extensive and intensive 
magnitudes- According to the scientists of those days 
difference in sensible quality is due to the difference in 
the way in which space is filled by matter. According to 
Kant space may be rilled in the same way, even when 
the qualities are different. A difference in intensive 
magnitude or quality does not mean a corresponding 
difference in the rilling of space. "Thus a radiation 
which fills a space, as for instance heat, can diminish in 
its degree in infinitum, without leaving the smallest 
part of this space in the least empty." The point in 
Kant's argument seems to be that matter has both 
cxtensity and intensity and not merely extensity. 

Ill 

ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 

Their principle is : Experience is possible only 
through the representation of a necessary connexion 
of perceptions. 

We have seen that without connectedness or unity 
there is no experience in the real sense of the term. We 
get no doubt one perception after another; but mere 
succession of perceptions without any rule or connexion 
among them does not constitute experience. It is only 
when we conceive the perceptions to be bound together 
according to certain rules that we may be said to get 
knowledge of objects through them. If the perceptions 
came in any fashion they chose and remained altogether 
arbitrary and accidental, they would determine no objects 



96 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

for us and would not amount to experience. At the same 
time we cannot say that there are any necessary con- 
nexions given. No necessity is ever seen in any percep- 
tions. The necessary connexions are effected by our 
understanding and they are ultimately due to the syn- 
thetic unity of apperception. Still they are objectively 
valid in the sense that without them no objective 
experience is possible. 

Now all appearances are in time and are perceived in 
time. Every perception takes place through the successive 
apprehensions of particular sensations and represents a 
time-sequence. Appearances are objectified when they or 
their perceptions are necessarily connected. Since these 
are all temporal, their necessary connexions too represent 
necessary time-relations, and these are of three different 
kinds according to the three modes of time, viz., duration, 
succession, and co-exist ance. The three analogies of 
experience give us the three rules of necessary connexion 
by which we organize our perceptions into objective 
experience. 

We have to understand why they are called analo- 
gies. The term analogy has a special sense in mathe- 
matics. If 5 is to x what 2 is to 4 then we know that x 
is 10. This is analogy by which we determine a fourth 
term from three given terms. Kant uses the term analogy 
in a different sense. In an analogy of experience we 
have a rule by which we are enabled to determine not an 
un-given term, but only the relation to a term not given. 
When it is said that a given event stands to an antecedent 
event as effect to cause, we merely determine the relation 
of the given event to.the antecedent event, but we do not 
thereby know the antecedent event itself. According to 
some these principles are called analogies because they 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 97 

express in time-relation what correspond or are analogous 
to the necessary connexions of the categories of the under- 
standing. We know that the analogies correspond to the 
categories of relation. 

The axioms of intuition and the anticipation 
of perception determine the possibility of an appearance 
or perception. Without extensive and intensive mag- 
nitudes nothing can appear to us. So they may be 
called constitutive principles. The analogies do not 
condition the possibility of perceptions or appearances. 
Perception would not be impossible without the analo- 
gies, although they certainly enable us to organize the 
perceptions into objective experience. So these analogies, 
as also the postulates of empirical thought, may be 
called regulative principles, inasmuch as they only serve 
as rules to order or organize our perceptions or appear- 
ances. (Kant uses these terms constitutive and regula- 
tive in a different sense in the Dialectic where all these 
principles are referred to as constitutive, in contrast with 
the ideas of reason which are there called regulative.) 

Kant adds that the analogies like other principles 
are applicable to appearances only and not to things in 
themselves. 

A. FIRST ANALOGY 

Principle of the Permanence of Substance 

In all change of appearances substance is 
permanent, and its quantum in nature is neither 
increased nor diminished. 

"All appearances are in time." They co-exist with 
one another or succeed one another. Co-existence and 
succession are time-relations, and they are intelligible 
K. c.. .13 



98 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

only in reference to a standing time. All changes of 
appearance occur in time which itself does not change. 
Time is the substrate of all temporal appearances and 
to us all appearances are temporal. But time by itself is 
never perceivable by us. We must therefore find in the 
appearances themselves something that represents time, 
i. e. remains permanent and makes the co-existence and 
succession of appearances intelligible. This something 
which makes change intelligible and is not itself liable to 
change may be called substance. Being unchangeable it 
can neither increase nor decrease. 

All our apprehension of the manifold of appearances 
is necessarily successive. We cannot apprehend a mani- 
fold all at once; we must apprehend it part by part* 
The manifold however as an object may be co-existent as 
well as successive, but from our mere successive apprehen- 
sion we cannot determine its objective character, that is, 
co-existence or succession, unless there is in it something 
that persists and remains the same amidst change. 

Simultaneity and succession are the only relations in 
time and they are possible only in the permanent. The 
permanent is thus required to make time-relations possible. 
Time is an essential element in our experience. We can 
experience only appearances which are in time. Our 
experience thus presupposes the permanent as the under- 
lying ground of all appearances. Without the basis of the 
permanent the appearances would not be in time and not 
being in time, they would not be experienced by us at 
all. Thus the idea of the permanent or substance is seen 
to be quite necessary to the possibility of experience. 

We should not express the principle by saying that 
substance is permanent, for that would be a tautology, 
for substantiality and permanence mean the same thing. 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 99 

We should rather say : "In all appearances there is some- 
thing which is permanent." This is a synthetic judgement 
(because the idea of appearance does not contain the idea 
of permanence), which is true a priori of experience. 

From the above it is clear that change requires 
permanence and, paradoxical as it may sound, it is the 
permanent alone that can change. That which comes 
into being or passes out of being is not what changes ; 
but change is properly predicated of that which remains 
the same after something else has come into being or 
passed out of being. It is only on the basis of some 
underlying permanent substance that such alteration or 
change can take place. The substance itself does not come 
into being or pass out of being, but only its states or 
modes of existence. 

This principle may seem to militate against the theory 
of creation. But in fact there is no opposition between 
them, because the theory of creation refers to things in 
themselves, whereas the principle of substantiality refers 
only to appearances within the field of actual or possible 
experience. 

If new things or substances could come into being, 
the unity of experience would be lost and so there would 
be properly no experience at all. We can experience 
only in one time. We cannot conceive of different 
times. But the unity of time requires the identity of 
the underlying substratum on the basis of which all 
temporal changes can take place. Time itself can run 
its course only in the breast of the permanent. We 
should not even know time if the permanent were not 
there to show it forth. But the abrupt beginnings of 
substances would give rise to different times which would 
render our experience meaningless. The point of the 



100 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

argument seems to be as follows : 

We require a standing something in reference to 
which we can perceive succession or change. But this 
standing something cannot be time itself, because time 
by itself cannot be perceived . This standing something 
is substance which represents as it were the standing 
time. So the birth of a new substance would mean the 
birth of a new time, which is inconceivable to us and 
which, if it happened, would destroy the unity of 
experience and make it meaningless. 

It is not, however, meant that there is no change. 
Change certainly there is, but it occurs only on the basis 
of some underlying substance. What is permanent is 
the substance and what is transitory is a mode of its 
existence which may be called its acciden t. A substance 
may pass through many modes and new modes may 
arise in it, but the substance remains the same. The 
accidents do not enjoy independent being, nor is the 
substance really bereft of all its accidents. The accidents 
merely determine positively the existence of the 
substance. 

B. SECOND ANALOGY 

Principle of Succession in Time in accordance 
with the Law of Causality* 

All changes take place in conformity with the 
law of the connexion of Cause and Effect. 

Kant enunciates here the principle of causality; and 

* This is the name given to the Analogy in the Second Edition. 
In the First Edition it is called The Principle of Production 
and its principle is stated as : * 'Every thing that happens, 
i.e. begins to be, presupposes something upon which it 
follows according to a rule." 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 101 

the proofs he offers of it are his answer to Hume's 
cirticism of the causal principle. 

Kant gives several proofs of this principle. The main 
point in them all seems to be that succession in the object 
or objective succession can be understood only as causally 
connected. The principle of causality thus instead of 
being derived from our experience of succession, as Hume 
supposed, is presupposed by such experience. Let us 
see how this is so. 

We can apprehend a manifold only successively ; the 
representation of one part must follow the representation 
of another part. But although the apprehension of a 
manifold is always successive, we cannot say that the 
manifold itself is in every case successive. A house for 
instance is a manifold, and in order to apprehend it we 
have to begin with one part and end with another. We 
may begin with the roof and end with the basement. But 
the different parts of the house which are perceived 
successively are not themselves successive. The parts are 
not supposed to follow one another in time, but are 
supposed to exist at the same time. Certain manifolds, 
however, are themselves successive. When we per- 
ceive a ship moving down a stream, its movement con- 
stitutes a manifold which is perceived successively and we 
know that the different positions of the ship along the 
stream are themselves successive. The perception of the 
different positions of the ship is successive as well as the 
perception of the different parts of the house, but whereas 
there is no succession in the parts of the house, there is 
succession in the positions of the ship. Now the question 
is : How are we able to make this distinction between 
two manifolds both of which are perceived successively 
but only in one of which is the succession taken to be 



102 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

objective? The succession in the perception of a house is 
merely subjective corresponding to no succession in the 
object, whereas the succession in the perception of the 
movement of a ship is taken to correspond to a succession 
in the object. What is it that makes succession objective 
in the one case and not so in the other ? 

Kant points out that in the one case our successive 
apprehension follows no fixed order, while in the other 
case it is bound to a fixed order. In perceiving a house, 
we may begin with the roof and end with the basement, 
or we may as well begin with the basement and end with 
the roof. In the case of the movement of a ship, we can 
perceive it only in one order. We perceive its position 
higher up the stream first and its position lower down 
the stream only afterwards, and cannot perceive its lower 
position first and higher position afterwards. Subjective 
succession is reversible, objective succession is not so. 
There is no rule which necessarily determines the order of 
succession when it is merely subjective, but such a rule 
prevails when it is objective. It is the presence of a. 
rule necessarily determining the order of succession 
that makes it objective. When there is such a rule we 
understand that the succession is objective in the sense 
that what follows can occur only when what precedes it 
has taken place and not otherwise. This means that the 
condition of being for every event or happening is con- 
tained in that which precedes it, so that it cannot take 
place unless what precedes it has already taken place, 
and also must follow upon it. This rule is the rule 
of causality* 

If there were no such rule which determined necessary 
sequence we should be unable to distinguish between 
subjective and objective successions. We should then 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 103 

have no right to assume any succession in the object and 
could not say that anything actually happens or follows 
upon anything else. That would make experience 
impossible in which objective succession or happening of 
events is clearly assumed. Thus it is clear that ex- 
perience presupposes a law regulating succession; and we 
cannot suppose that the law is derived from the ex- 
perience of succession. If it were so derived, it would be 
a mere empirical law and no genuine universal validity 
would belong to it, so that its validity might sometimes 
be questioned. But we can raise no question about the 
validity of a law without which experience would not be 
possible. The actuality of experience proves the validity 
of the law. We no doubt gain a clearer idea of the law 
through experience, but that is because the law is already 
there at the basis of experience- 

It is a necessary law of time that every moment is 
determined by its predecessor, so that we can never arrive 
at a later moment without passing through the moment 
that precedes it. Now, time is never experienced in and 
by itself. It is experienced only in successive events 
which constitute the manifold of temporal appearance, 
and so the essential characteristics of time must be 
capable of being represented in terms of appearance. The 
above law of time that every successor is determined by 
its predecessor, when understood in terms of appearance 
becomes the law of causality. Since every appearance 
must be subject to the condition of temporality, i.e. must 
be capable of being subsumed under time, and since it is 
essential for time that what succeeds must be determined 
by its predecessor, it seems plain that every appearance 
that succeeds must be determined by what precedes it. 
If time could be perceived by itself, we could understand 



104 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

events as later and earlier by directly relating them to 
later and earlier moments of time. But since time by 
itself is not perceptible at all, we can understand an event 
as later than another only in the sense that it is causally 
determined by the earlier one. 

We perceive that appearances follow one another. 
In so perceiving we are really connecting two appearances 
in time. But connecting is not the work of mere sense or 
intuition; it is brought about by the synthetic faculty of 
imagination. In fact, the synthesis of imagination is 
implied in all empirical knowledge. But in the imagina- 
tive synthesis I am only conscious that one state has been 
put before another, but I do not thereby know whether 
in the object the order of the states is so determined. As 
time itself is not perceived, we cannot determine the 
objective order of succession or precedence between the 
states by empirical observation. The fact that we perceive 
one state after another cannot decide anything because 
even when they are co-existent, we have to perceive them 
one after another. If we are to conceive the relation 
of succession between two states as objectively deter- 
mined, we have to think of the relation as determining 
necessarily which of them should be placed before and 
which after, without their being .able to interchange their 
relative positions. What is earlier objectively has 
necessarily to be put before its successor. Such necessary 
connexion cannot be given by perception; it has to be 
supplied by the understanding. Objective succession 
which is essential to our experience is thus possible only 
through a determination of the understanding which is 
conceived as the relation of cause and effect. Experience 
or empirical knowledge of appearances is possible only in 
so far as we subject the succession of appearances to the 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 105 

law of causality. 

We may summarize the position in this way. 
Experience, in which succession is undoubtedly involved, 
implies objectivity, and succession in the object is possi- 
ble only through a necessary connexion. The necessary 
connexion is the relation of cause and effect. This 
relation, because it is necessary and is a connecting, can- 
not be given by sense, but is the work of or is supplied 
by the understanding. The understanding thus makes 
experience possible by its causal synthesis, and it is 
therefore a mistake to suppose that we can derive the 
causal principle, however illegitimately, from experience. 

It may be pointed out here once again that the 
primary function of the understanding, according to Kant, 
is not merely to clarify by analysis our notion of the 
object which may be conceived to be wholly given, but 
rather to make the object itself by creative synthesis 
out of elements which are scarcely known to us at all. 
(The elements are taken by some to be our unsynthesized 
sensations, by others as noumenal factors. In either 
case v/e can claim no knowledge of them in the proper 
sense of the term.) 

A difficulty arises here. It has been held that there 
is causality wherever there is objective succession. But 
in many cases we find that the cause and the effect are 
co-existent and there is no succession between them. 
When there is a burning stove in a room, the room be- 
comes heated. Here the cause and the effect, namely 
the stove and the heat in the room, are simutaneous. 
Kant solves this difficulty by pointing out that causality 
does not require any lapse of time between the cause and 
the effect, but only an order of time between them. 
The order is such that when the cause has occurred the 
K. C...14 



106 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALIYTC 

effect must also occur, and not vice versa- When a 
leaden ball is placed on a soft cushion a depression occurs; 
but if somehow there is a depression in the cushion, the 
leaden ball does not appear. Thus although there need 
be no time-interval between cause and effect, there is 
undoubted sequence between them. 

Causality leads to the notion of activity, and that in 
its turn to the idea of substance. For, in order to produce 
an effect, a thing must be active and only a substance 
can be active. To produce an effect is to produce a 
change of appearance. The change can be ultimately 
grounded in a subject that does not itself change. If 
that were to change, then other actions and another 
subject would be necessary to account for this change. 
Thus a changeless or permanent substance is ultimately 
the cause of any effect. 

The causal relation is a relation in time, in which 
what precedes is the cause of what follows. The state 
of the world at this moment is the cause of the state of 
the world at the following moment. But in the infinite 
time-series there is no next member. Between any two 
members, a third can always be found. This is the 
meaning of the continuity of the series. This also 
means that there is no interval of time which is abso- 
lutely the smallest. There can always be smaller and 
still smaller intervals. From this we understand how a 
cause does not produce its effect suddenly. Just as there 
is no jump from one moment of time to another, but 
only a continuous passage, so a process of causal effectua- 
tion covers a certain interval of time throughout which 
the process is continuous. Some time, however short, is 
thus required to produce a definite effect. 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 107 

C. THIRD ANALOGY 

Principle of Co-existence in Accordance with the 
Law of Reciprocity* 

All substances, in so far as they can be per- 
ceived to co- exist in space, are in thoroughgoing 
reciprocity. 

The question to be decided by this principle is how 
two or more objects can be regarded as co-existent when 
we can perceive them only in succession. We have seen 
in the case of the second analogy that when there is 
objective succession, the order of perception is irrever- 
sible. So when the order is reversible, that is, when of 
two objects we can indifferently perceive whichever we 
choose first and the other afterwards, we understand 
that there is no objective succession and so they are 
co-existent. When a number of things are co-existent we 
can perceive them in any order. This is possible because 
there is no one-sided determination between them as in 
a causal series in which our perceptions of objects can 
follow only in one order- 

If there is no one-sided determination, should we 
suppose that there is mutual determination? We have to 
answer, Yes, because without such determination the 
time-position of an object in respect of another object 
cannot be determined. Time by itself is not perceived 
and so the time-position of an object in respect of another 
cannot be directly seen. It can be determined only by 
the action of one object upon the other. If the action is 
one-sided or causal, the objective time-relation is 

In the First Edition, Principle of Community : "All 
substances so far as they are co-existent stand in thorough- 
going community, that is, in mutual interaction.*' 



108 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

succession. If the action is reciprocal, the objective time- 
relation is co-existence. To say that there is neither one- 
sided nor mutual determination between two objects is to 
say that they are neither successive nor co-existent, that 
is to say, that they are not in one time, which to us is 
inconceivable. 

Two or more objects are said to be co -existent when 
they exist at the same time, that is, when the time of the one 
is also the time of the rest. For their co-existence some- 
thing more is needed than their mere existence, and that 
is their mutual determination. When a number of objects 
reciprocally determine one another to be what they are, 
we cannot say that any one of them is either antecedent 
or subsequent to any other ; and so by mutual reference 
the time-position of each may be determined to be the 
same as that of the rest. Thus the principle of reciprocity 
determines objective co-existence just as the principle of 
causality determines objective succession. Co-existence of 
objects is certainly involved in our experience, and as 
this cannot be given by sense, we require for its determina- 
tion a principle of understanding which is here called the 
principle of reciprocity or community* 

We perceive the world as existing in space. Now 
since all parts of space are co-existent, the world too has 
to be conceived as consisting of parts which are co-exis- 
tent and this is possible only when there is a thorough- 
going determination among all the parts. We thus arrive 
at the notion of a unity of the world in which no part is 
separated or let loose from all the rest. 

It would seem that according to Kant the time- 
relation is dynamical and is not separable from spatial 
co-existence. This seems to agree very much with the 
modern notion of Space-time. 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 109 

IV 

THE POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT IN GENERAL 

FIRST POSTULATE 

That which agrees, in intuition and concepts, with 
the formal conditions of experience f is possible. 

The categories of modality (possibility, actuality, 
and necessity) are different from all other categories in 
that they do not determine anything in the object. The 
categories of quantity and quality determine the contents 
of the objects of experience, and the categories of relation 
determine the relations of these objects to one another ; 
but the categories of modality determine only the relation 
of the objects to the understanding, that is, they express 
the different attitudes of the knowing subject to the 
object. The characterization of any object as possible, 
actual, or necessary does not add anything to our notion 
of the object. The principles of modality therefore do 
not explain how the objects of experience are constituted 
but only how we are to use the concepts of possibility, 
actuality, and necessity in regard to them. 

An object can be regarded as possible only when it 
agrees with the formal conditions of experience. Kant 
has already determined the conditions which make 
experience possible. They are the forms of intuition, i. e. 
space and time, and the categories of the understanding. 
What makes experience possible is exactly what also 
makes objects possible. There is no experience which is 
not an experience of some object and nothing is an object 
which is not given, or is not capable of being given, in 
experience. Hence it follows that we can conceive of an 
object as possible only when it conforms to the conditions 



110 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

of space and time and the syntheses of the understanding. 
It used to be supposed that an object was possible 
only if it could be conceived, i. e. was free from self- 
contradiction. Kant does not agree with this rationalistic 
notion of possibility and he points out that although 
the idea of two straight lines enclosing space does not 
involve any self-contradiction, it cannot still be regarded 
as possible. There is nothing in the idea of a straight 
line as such to show that it should not meet another 
straight line at more than one place. Still the idea of 
two straight lines enclosing space is not possible, because 
it is not in conformity with the conditions of perception. 
Possibility then, according to Kant, is not mere conceiv- 
ability, as Leibniz and others supposed, but should mean 
conformity to the forms of thought and intuition which 
make experience possible. 

SECOND POSTULATE 

That which is connected with the material 

conditions of experience, that is, with 

sensation, is actual, 

A thing cannot be determined as actua' merely from 
the fact that it conforms to the conditions of experience. 
That only decides its possibility. To be actual, a thing, 
besides being possible in the above sense, must be 
connected with perception. Kant does not of course 
mean that we must actually perceive a thing in order to 
determine it as actual. We know there are many things 
in the world which are actual and which yet we either 
do not or cannot perceive. This postulate does not 
demand that all actual things must be immediately 
perceived, but only that they must be either immediately 



ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE 111 

perceived or connected with what is so perceived in 
accordance with the principles of empirical connexion 
described by the analogies. That is to say, a thing, in 
order to be actual, must be either given in direct percep - 
tion or be capable of being reached through legitimate 
inference from what is given in perception. We may 
even say that what is perceived or is capable of being 
perceived is actual. This might seem to limit unduly 
the range of actuality to a very narrow field, for there 
are many things which we take to be actual and which 
yet are not capable of being perceived by us. To 
obviate this difficult y, we should understand "capable of 
being perceived" not in the sense of being perceivable by 
us with the present constitution of our sense organs, but 
in the sense of being perceivable by means of sense organs 
when they are suitably developed to the appropriate 
degree of fineness. 

This position of Kant that actual things are perceiv- 
ed goes against the idealistic position that we do not 
meet with reality in external perception. So at this stage 
he deems it proper to offer a Refutation of Idealism. 

REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 

The idealism which he refutes is described by him as 
material idealism, meaning thereby an idealism which 
either doubts or denies the existence of material things 
given in external perception. Accordingly there are two 
varieties of it, called pro blematic idealism and dogma- 
tic idealism, associated respectively with the names of 
Descartes and Berkeley. Idealism in either form believes 
in the existence of the self, but the existence of external 
objects is doubtful and indemonstrable, according to one 



112 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

view (problematic idealism), and false and impossible 
according to the other (dogmatic idealism). Kant's 
refutation consists in showing that our knowledge of the 
self implies the knowledge of external objects and so I 
cannot consistently maintain that I know that I am, but 
do not know whether the external things exist. 

So Kant puts forward the thesis : 

The mere but empirically determined conscious- 
ness of my own existence proves the existence of 
objects in space outside me. 

And he substantiates this thesis by the following 
arguments. I am conscious of my own existence as deter- 
mined in time. The self can be known only through inner 
intuition, and time is the form of that intuition. To know 
the self in time is to know it as changing, and this is 
possible only when we have the perception of something 
permanent, in contrast with which any temporal deter- 
mination is intelligible. Thus it is clear that when I 
know the self in time, I must know something permanent. 
The permanent cannot be found in me, not only because 
nothing permanent is intuitable in the empirical self, but 
also because the permanent required here is for the 
purpose of determining by contrast the temporal character 
of the self itself. "Thus perception of this permanent is 
possible only through a thing outside me and not through 
the mere representation of a thing outside me; and con- 
sequently the determination of my existence in time is 
possible only through the existence of actual things which 
I perceive outside me." It is thus clear that the conscious- 
ness of my existence is necessarily bound up with the 
consciousness of what makes time-determinations possible. 
And if it is true, as Kant holds it is, that it is the con- 
sciousness of things in space that renders time-determina- 



REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 113 

tions possible, then it must be conceded that the know- 
ledge of my existence gives at the same time the knowledge 
of other things outside me. 

Idealists assume that the only immediate experience 
is inner experience, i.e., the experience of the different 
states of the self, from which, in a more or less illegitimate 
way, the outer things are only inferred. Kant reverses the 
whole position and shows that outer experience is really 
immediate and is presupposed by inner experience. 

Kant does not here go back upon his position that the 
representation I am accompanies all thought, and is the 
presupposition of all experience, inner or outer. But he 
contends that this representation is merely intellectual and 
lacks all elements of intuition, and therefore does not 
amount to any knowledge of the self. Without the 
element of intuition there is no knowledge, properly so 
called ; and therefore if the self is to be known it must be 
known through some intuition. Now the only intuition 
proper here is the inner intuition, the form of which is 
time; therefore if we are to know the self, we must know it 
as in time. But such knowledge is possible only through 
the knowledge of things in space; therefore when we 
assert any knowledge of the self we have also to admit 
the knowledge of things in space. 

But the fact that the knowledge of outer things is 
necessary for the knowledge of the self does not mean 
**that every intuition and intuitive representation of outer 
things involves the existence of these things, for their 
representation can very well be the product merely of the 
imagination (as in dreams and delusions)." Such repre- 
sentations, however, would be only reproductions of pre- 
vious perceptions and these perceptions would require for 
their possibility the reality of outer things. "All that 

K. C..J5 



114 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

we have here sought to prove is that inner experience in 
general is possible only through outer experience in 
general. Whether this or that supposed experience be 
purely imaginary, must be ascertained from its special 
determinations and through its congruence with the 
criteria of all real experience." 

THIRD POSTULATE 

That which in its connexion with the actual is 
determined in accordance with universal conditions 
of experience f is (that is, exists as) necessary. 

We are concerned here with what Kant calls 
material necessity, that is, with necessity concerning 
sensible objects. The existence of a sensible object can- 
not be determined completely a priori. Without the 
help of experience, merely by thinking, we can never 
determine the existence of a sensible object, that is to say, 
we can never know where and when it should exist and 
what intuitable character it should possess. So from 
mere concepts we cannot determine the necessity of any 
sensible object. But relatively to an object given in 
experience we can determine the necessary existence of an- 
other object, if we know that the given object stands to 
the other object in the relation of cause and effect. We 
know that the effect follows necessarily from the cause, 
so that the existence of one object (effect) is rendered 
necessary by the existence of another (cause), when they 
are causally related. Thus we know an object to be 
necessary when we know it to be related to another 
object, given in experience, as effect to cause. 

It should be noted here that this necessity obtains 
only in a context of experience. Apart from a relation to 



POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT 115 

experience, we are not aware of any necessary connexion. 
Only within the field of possible experience we know an 
object to be necessary when, and so far as, it is the effect 
of a cause given to us in experience. Even within this 
field the necessity does not extend to things as sub- 
stances, which are never effects, but only to their states 
which alone can happen or come to exist. Thus it is 
clear that the law which says that whatever happens is 
determined a priori through its cause is valid only with- 
in the field of possible experience. 

These principles of modality are called postulates 
not in the sense of propositions taken to be immediately 
certain without justification or proof. The term 
** postulates " is used in the mathematical sense. When 
the mathematician says; "Describe a circle with a given 
line from a given point," he does not say anything to be 
proved or disproved, but makes a demand to intuit a 
given concept. This is a postulate of intuition, which 
is nothing but a practical proposition, showing us how 
we get the intuition of a given concept. In the same 
way, the principles of modality make the demand that 
we should synthesize experience or elements in experience 
in some particular ways, and thus they show us how 
the concepts of possibility, actuality, and necessity are 
generated and how we empirically think or judge of 
objects from the stand- point of experience. This is why 
they are called "postulates of empirical thought". 

Every one of the principles of the understanding 
(Axioms, Anticipations, etc. ) implies that its opposite 
is impossible. The law of continuity negatively expressed 
says that there are no jumps in nature (non-datur 
saltus). From the continuity of magnitude and change, 
we know that there are no gaps in nature (non-datur 



116 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

hiatus). From the law of causality and necessity, it 
follows that there is neither chance nor blind fatality. 
Since whatever happens happens according to a law, 
there is no room for blind chance (non da fur casus), 
and whatever necessity there is, being conditioned and 
so intelligible, there is no blind fatality (non datur 
fatum). 

GENERAL NOTE ON THE SYSTEMS OF 
THE PRINCIPLES 

Kant again emphasizes that mere categories do not 
make possible any synthetic a priori judgements. The 
categories, which are mere forms of thought, require 
intuitions in order to constitute knowledge. 

One might suppose that we know, from mere con- 
cepts, without the aid of intuition, that what is 
contingent is produced by a cause, but a little reflection 
will show that the proposition is analytilical and gives 
no real knowledge in Kant's sense, because the term 
contingent is already understood in the sense of what 
is produced by a cause. 

Kant shows further that not only intuitions but 
outer intuitions are needed to give validity (objective 
reality) to the categories. It would not be possible for 
us to know whether there was anything in reality corres- 
ponding to the notion of substance, if we had not intui- 
tion of matter in space, for by inner intuition, as we have 
seen, nothing permanent can be apprehended. Similarly 
in the case of causality. In order to know that in reality 
there is causal effectuation, we require the corresponding 
intuition of change. But change is not intelligible at all 
without the outer intuition of motion. Change implies 



DISTINCTION BETWEEN PHENOMENA & NOUMENA 117 

contradictory states in the being of one and the same 
thing which our understanding cannot grasp, and it is 
first made comprehensible only by the intuition of motion 
of a point in space, which, being the same, is yet seen in 
different places. In the same way Kant shows that we can 
understand the community of substances implying their 
action and reaction upon one another, only because we 
intuit substances in space which already contains external 
relations that can serve as the conditions of the possibility 
of mutual action. It follows from all this, as Kant has 
shown in his Refutation of Idealism, that we cannot 
know even ourselves without the help of outer intuition. 

Kant concludes the whole discussion by pointing out 
again that c 'all principles of the pure understanding are 
nothing more than principles a priori of the possibility 
of experience'', that they apply and relate to experience 
alone, and that outside experience they have no validity 
or meaning. 

CHAPTER III 

THE GROUND OF THE DISTINCTION OF ALL 

OBJECTS IN GENERAL INTO PHENOMENA 

AND NOUMENA 

The categories and principles of the understanding are 
not, it is true, borrowed from experience, but are produced 
by the understanding out of itself. But they have yet no 
other use than that of being applied to experience. By 
themselves they constitute, as it were, only a frame- work 
which has to be filled by matter drawn from sense- 
experience. Apart from such matter or content, which 
in the case of us men can be supplied ultimately by sense- 
intuition only, the categories and principles of the under- 



TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

standing have no objective meaning or significance. Their 
sole use is to organize or systematize our experience and 
so they apply only to objects within experience. That 
which transcends our experience cannot be determined 
by any of the categories or principles of the understanding. 
They thus apply only to appearances and do not apply 
to things in themselves. Kant expresses this fact by saying 
that the categories have only an empirical use and have 
no transcendental use. Indeed, Kant shows that the 
categories have no meaning or significance unless we can 
make them sensible, unless that is, we can point to the 
corresponding objects in sense-intuition. All categories 
and principles, however high the degree of their a priori 
possibility, must after all be related to the empirical 
intuition. Without such relation they are quite empty. 
Just as sense-intuitions are made intelligible only through 
the application of the categories and principles of the 
understanding, these latter too acquire their significance 
only from such application. These are after all meant to 
be used in our thinking, and if we are to think and not 
merely to imagine, we must have some object given to 
us. Without this object there can be no thinking and so 
no scope for the categories. But the object can be given 
to us only through sense-experience, and hence it is clear 
that the principles of the understanding have their scope 
entirely limited to the sphere of sense-experience. The 
principles in fact merely interpret what is given in sense - 
experience. They do not describe the real properties and 
relations of things in themselves apart from all relation 
to sense-experience. The synthetic a priori principles of 
the understanding describe only the forms of objects of 
possible experience, and so the utmost the understanding 
can achieve is to anticipate the form of a possible 



DISTINCTION BETWEEN PHENOMENA & NOUMENA 119 

experience in general ; it cannot give us a priori synthetic 
knowledge of things in general. Kant is therefore content 
to call that part of his treatise which treats of these 
principles an Analytic of pure understanding and lays no 
claim to the proud name of Ontology. 

The categories themselves, however, do not mean that 
they are the forms of sensible things. They can be in a 
way understood apart from the conditions of sensibility. 
They are therefore said to have a transcendental 
significance, but no transcendental use. What is meant 
is that the categories, which are really the ways of 
combining the manifold, have a meaning of their own, 
which has no necessary reference to the manifold of 
sense with which alone we are acquainted. This is their 
transcendental significance. But this meaning does not 
enable us to make use of the categories anywhere else 
except within the limits of possible sense-experience, for 
the simple reason that the manifold to be combined by 
them is available for us only within sense -experience. 
This is how they have no transcendental use. 

However, the categories are only forms of thought 
and, unlike the forms of intuition, are not dependent on 
our sensibility. We may well imagine that there are things 
which are merely objects of thought and are not given 
to sense. If what is given to us in sense-experience is 
called appearance or phenomenon, then by contrast 
with it, what is not so given, but is merely thought, may 
be called noumenon. The very idea of appearance 
carries us to the idea of something that appears. What 
appears must be something in itself in order that it may 
appear in our sense-experience. The sensed appearance 
must be referred to some unsensed being which is thought. 
Thus we make a distinction between objects of sense or 



120 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

phenomena and objects of thought or noumena. Now 
the question is whether our categories are applicable to 
noumena. We have just said that from the idea of 
appearance we are led to think of that which appears 
without any reference to the conditions of appearance. 
But it should be understood that our idea of something 
that underlies appearance is not at all definite like the 
idea of any given appearance. We merely think of it as 
an indeterminate something outside the range of our 
sensibility and can form no definite idea of it which might 
amount to knowledge. 

The term Noumenon can be understood in two 
senses. In the negative sense it is understood only as 
what is not given to our sense-intuition, and in the positive 
sense it stands for an object of non-sensuous or intellec- 
tual intuition, i. e. of an intuition which is totally different 
from ours (our intuition being always sensuous). It is 
only in a negative sense that the term is useful or signifi- 
cant for us. As we have no power of intellectual intuition, 
the noumena cannot be given to us and so we cannot 
apply our categories to them. Our categories are signifi- 
cant as forms of thought only in respect of materials 
supplied by sense. We understand their meaning only in 
terms of spatial and temporal appearance. So they can- 
not be applied to noumena and we have no positive 
knowledge of them. 

Noumenon in the negative sense is very useful as a 
limiting concept. The concept of a noumenon is quite 
valid because it suffers from no self-contradiction. We 
can never claim that sense-intuition is the only possible 
mode of intuition, and so we cannot say that what is not 
so intuited is nothing at all. This concept enables us to 
limit our knowledge to the sphere of sense -experience. If 



DISTINCTION BETWEEN PHENOMENA & NOUMENA 121 

we had no idea of noumenon, we could supposed that our 
sensibility covers the entire field of reality. But when we 
can think of something not intuitable through sense, we 
understand thereby the limitation of sense-intuition. The 
understanding thus gets a sort of extension beyond the 
sphere of sense inasmuch as it can posit something (i. e. 
noumenon) beyond sense-experience. This, however, does 
not result in any actual extention of its knowledge, be- 
cause the unsensed noumenon can be thought only as 
something unknown, and so the actual knowledge we can 
ever attain through understanding is always confined 
within the sphere of appearance or sense-experience. 

When we say that sense represents objects as they 
appear and understanding represents objects as they are, 
the latter expression should be understood only in an 
empirical sense, and not in a transcendental sense as 
applicable to things in themselves. To know, through 
understanding, objects as they are, is to know them as 
objects of experience ( i. e. as appearances in thorough- 
going connexion with one another ). In no case do we 
know them as they may be apart from all relation to a 
possible experience. 

Sensibility and understanding only in combination 
can determine objects for us. If we separate them we 
get either mere intuitions or mere concepts, and in both 
cases mere representations which cannot be related to 
any determinate object. 

The view seems to be that sensibility gives us mere 
appearances and they are understood as objects when 
conceived as systematically connected with one another 
in terms of the categories. This seems to be the meaning 
of the statement that sensibility gives us appearance and 
by understanding we know the object as it is. By the 
K. c..,16 



122 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

"object as it /s" we understand merely what it must be 
for consciousness in general, and not for this or that 
individual, knowing under some peculiar subjective 
conditions. 

APPENDIX 

THE AMPHIBOLY OF THE CONCEPTS OF 
REFLECTION 

The outcome of the Analytic is that we know only 
appearances and do not know the things in themselves. 
The concepts of the understanding are applicable to 
appearances only, that is ? are valid only within the 
sphere of sense-experience. The understanding by itself 
can give us only empty concepts which never amount to 
knowledge. For knowledge we require content as well as 
concept, and content for us can be supplied by sense- 
experience only. Sensibility and understanding are two 
distinct faculties of knowledge both of which are 
equally necessary. 

This result of Kant's philosophy stands in marked 
contrast with the Rationalistic philosophy of his time 
which drew its inspiration form the teachings of Leibniz, 
Leibniz believed that we could know reality by mere 
thought, i. e. by the understanding alone. In fact he 
did not recognize in sensibility any distinct faculty of 
knowledge, but only a confused form of the under- 
standing itself. In this Leibniz was wrong and fell 
a victim to the fallacy which Kant calls the 
Amphiboly of the Concepts of Reflection. The 
word * 'amphiboly" literally means double meaning, 
and when treated as a fallacy, it signifies the wrong 
application of concepts, which are valid in one sphere, to 



AMPHIBOLY OF THE CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 123 

another sphere in which they are not valid at all. There 
are certain concepts in reflection in terms of which we 
relate our representations to one another. These are 
(i) identity and difference, (ii) agreement and opposi- 
tion, (111) inner and outer , and (iv) determinable and 
determination (matter and form). When the representa- 
tions are intellectual or belong to the understanding, these 
concepts will be true of them in a sense in which they 
will not be true of sensuous representations. Leibniz 
understood these concepts in reference to intellectual 
representations, in which no element of sense was present $ 
and took them to be true in the same way also of sensuous 
representations. Therein lay his mistake. What was true 
of mere ideas or noumena was taken by him to be true of 
sensible contents or phenomena as well ; and this was 
unjustified. Kant points out Leibniz's mistake under four 
heads corresponding to the concepts enumerated above. 

1. Iden tity and Difference. Leibniz maintained 
that if in the ideas of two things, we cannot discern any 
difference, then the two things are identical. This he 
asserted in his famous principle of the Identity of Indis- 
cernibles. And in fact when we view things from the 
standpoint of the understanding alone, and find the same 
characteristics in two things, we cannot but take them to 
be identical. Kant therefore points out that the Leibni- 
zian principle is quite true so long as we abstract com- 
pletely from the sensuous conditions of existence. How- 
ever, as soon as we take these conditions into consideration, 
the principle fails to justify itself. There is nothing to 
distinguish two cubic feet of space from each other, so 
long as we are concerned with mere ideas of them. Still 
no two cubic feet of space are identical. Similarly two 



124 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC 

drops of water may be perfectly alike and we may not 
find any difference between them which can be grasped 
by the understanding without the help of sense-experience, 
and still the two drops will not be identical. Leibniz was 
thus wrong in asserting of all things, sensible and intelli- 
gible alike, what is true only of intelligible things. 

2. Agreement and Opposition. The only form of 
opposition in the sphere of the pure understanding or the 
realm of concepts is that of logical contradiction. A can 
be opposed only by not- A. An affirmation can be 
opposed only by a corresponding negation. Since the 
understanding can view reality only as pure affirmation, 
reality as represented by the understanding cannot con- 
tain any negation in it, and so it is easy to see the truth 
of the Leibnizian view that realities cannot conflict with 
one another. But although this view may well be true of 
the intelligible world, it is quite false of the actual world 
disclosed in sense-experience. Here two forces equally 
real, acting in opposite directions, do come in conflict and 
may nullify each other. 

3. The Inner and the Outer. The inner as con- 
ceived by the understanding is something that has no 
relation with, and is not dependent upon anything other 
than itself. It must be self-subsistent and not subject to 
any external influence. This is the notion of substance 
which Leibniz entertained. It follows from this notion 
that substance should allow of no such determinations as 
those of position, magnitude, contact or motion, for all 
involve external relations. But when substance is relieved 
of all these determinations, how are we to conceive it 
at all ? The only alternative left open to Leibniz was to 



AMPHIBOLY OF THE CONCEPTS OF REFLECTION 125 

conceive it after the fashion of our own selves which 
have their inner determinations in the form of representa- 
tions or ideas. This gives us the notion of a monad or 
spiritual substance, self-subsistent and independent, 
receiving no influence from without and exercising none 
in its turn on others- A noumenon apprehensible to pure 
understanding alone may answer to this description. But 
in the field of appearance which alone is open to our 
knowledge, this notion is quite inapplicable. The sub- 
stances we know of in space are all conceived through 
external relations, that is, in terms of their relations to 
other objects external to them. We know matter or 
substance in space through its attraction, repulsion or 
impenetrability, and all these involve external relations. 
Leibniz made no radical distinction between noumenon and 
appearance and applied the notion of monad even to 
material objects. He considered even sensible objects as 
ultimately composed of spiritual monads which he had 
conceived through mere understanding without any 
reference to sense-experience. He thus committed the 
fallacy of Amphiboly. 

4. Matter and Form. The concepts of matter 
and form are indispensable to the understanding. By 
"matter" we understand that which is to be determined, 
and "form" is the determination. Viewed in the light 
of pure thought, we clearly see that matter must be 
already something determinable so that any determina- 
tion of it may be possible. 

Leibniz understood space as a form of external 
relation among substances, and time as an order of 
dynamical sequence in their states. (Our perceptual 
space and time are, according to Leibniz, nothing but 



126 TRANSCENDENTAL ANALIYTC 

confused representations of a certain relation among 
substances and an order among their states). The sub- 
stances already exist in order that any relation among 
them or order in their states may be possible. Matter 
(substance) in this view must precede form (space and 
time). This would no doubt be the case if the pure 
understanding could relate to objects immediately and 
space and time were determinations of things in them- 
selves. But as a matter of fact, Kant contends, we only 
determine objects as appearances in sensible intuition. 
Space and time are nothing but the forms of our sensi- 
bility, and whatever we sensibly intuit is altogether 
determined by these forms. These forms do not super- 
vene upon objects which already exist, but on the 
contrary, the forms of intuition as part of our subjective 
constitution must already be there if any appearance of 
sensible objects is to be possible. 

The fundamental mistake of Leibniz lay in the fact 
that he did not recognize any radical difference between 
uderstanding and sensibility, and did not therefore takes 
into account the peculiar conditions of our sense - 
experience. Leibniz intellectualized all appearances, just 
as Locke committed the opposite mistake of sensualizing 
all concepts of the understanding. Leibniz judged even 
of appearances, i. e. objects of sense -experience, only in 
terms of pure thought, and we can easily see how he was 
bound to go wrong when we reflect that many elements 
enter into our sense- experiences which do not enter into 
thought and are not deterrninable. 



TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC 

Division II 

TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 
INTRODUCTION 

I. TRA NSC END ETNA L ILLUSION 

Dialectic is described as a logic of illusion. Now 
illusion is to be distinguished from both probability 
and appearance. Probability gives us some truth, 
although the truth it gives is imperfect, because based on 
insufficient grounds. It is however not deceptive. And 
appearance is objective. But illusion is not anything 
in the object itself. It occurs in our judgement about an 
object, that is, in the relation of an object to our under- 
standing. The senses do not err, because they do not 
judge. And even understanding, in proceeding according 
to its laws and in making its judgements, does not err, un- 
less it is influenced by sensibility and is led to regard what 
is merely subjectively necessary as an objective fact, 

We are concerned here not with empirical illusion, 
such as the bent appearance of a straight stick half 
immersed in water, but with the transcendental illu- 
sion. When for instance one asserts that the world must 
have a beginning, one is a victim to this kind of illusion. 
There may be, and indeed is, a subjective demand in us 
to envisage the world as a rounded whole. We are 
misled by this subjective necessity to regard the object 
itself as so constituted. Herein lies the illusion. There 
is a natural tendency in us to apply, beyond the sphere 
of all possible experience, certain principles which have 
their origin only in the subjective demand of our reason 
to connect our ideas of reality in a particular way. This 



128 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

leads to transcendental illusion, and because it arises from 
a natural tendency in us, it is scarcely avoidable. 

Transcendental illusion differs from logical illusion 
(the illusion of formal fallacies) in this, that it persists 
even when it is clearly shown to be illusory, whereas a 
logical illusion disappears as soon as we realize its illusory 
character. Logical errors are committed through in- 
advertence and can be avoided with sufficient care. But 
we are all naturally prone to transcendental illusion 
which cannot be avoided even by the most intelligent. 

Transcendental Dialectic does not therefore aim at 
curing us of transcendental illusion, but merely at 
demonstrating the invalidity of t ran scendent judgements 
and at warning us against their deceptive character.* 

II. PURE REASON AS THE SEAT OF 

TRANSCENDENTAL ILLUSION 

A. REASON IN GENERAL 

Reason is conceived here as distinct from the under- 
standing. Reason is called the faculty of principles 
whereas the understanding is the faculty of rules. In 
their logical use, the understanding and reason give us 
judgements and inferences respectively. 

Knowledge from principles is only that knowledge 
in which the particular is apprehended in the universal 
through concepts. We get such knowledge in a syllogism 

* By transcendent judgements are meant judgements in which 
we pass beyond the limits of possible experience. We have learnt 
that the principles of pure understanding are valid only within 
experience and have no application beyond the limits of experience. 
"A principle, on the other hand, which takes away these limits, or 
even commands us actually to transgress them, is called 
transcendent." 



THE LOGICAL EMPLOYMENT OF REASON 129 

in which the major premise represents the universal from 
which the conclusion (particular) is deduced with the 
help of the minor premise. We are led to the conclusion 
through mere concepts, and no appeal to intuition or 
experience is necessary. 

The so-called principles of the understanding do not 
represent knowledge from concepts. The principle of 
causality, e. g. that which says that whatever happens 
must have a cause, does not establish itself through mere 
concepts but is valid only as a necessary condition of 
possible experience. Principles in the true sense must 
represent synthetic knowledge from concepts and should 
not refer to sense-experience. The universal propositions 
which the understanding yields are principles in a relative 
sense and should properly be called rules. For principles 
in the true sense we require a different source which is 
called reason. 

The rules or concepts of the understanding apply to 
appearances and bring about a unity which is necessary 
to experience. They have thus an empirical use. The 
principles of reason are not directly applied to experience 
or to any object. They are applied to the rules of the 
understanding and confer a unity upon them. The unity 
so obtained is merely ideal and is altogether different 
from the unity of the manifold of experience which the 
understanding effects. 

B. THE LOGICAL EMPLOYMENT OF REASON 

There is a distinction between what is immediately 
known and what is merely inferred. We immediately 
know that there are three angles in a triangle, but it is 
only by inference that we know that they are equal to 

K. C.. .17 



130 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

two right angles. We may however become so accustomed 
to the inference that we fail to distinguish it from 
immediate experience as in the so-called deception of the 
senses, where what is merely inferred is taken to be 
immediately perceived. 

Inference may be immediate or mediate. Kant 
prefers to call immediate inference, inference of the under- 
standing; and mediate inference inference of reason (syllo- 
gism). In the latter kind of inference, the understanding 
gives us a rule in the major premise (All men are 
mortal), and then by means of our faculty of judgement 
we subsume in the minor premise something known under 
the condition of the rule (So and so is a man), and 
finally, we determine what is so known (i. e. as man) by 
the predicate of the rule (mortal) quite a priori through 
reason (So and so is mortal). 

Just as starting with a rule (major premise), with the 
help of a minor premise, we can arrive at a particular 
judgement (conclusion), so in the opposite direction too, 
starting with a given judgement, we may try to discover 
a rule from which under certain conditions the given 
judgement as well as many others will follow. Reason 
can thus seek to bring the manifold knowledge of the 
understanding under the smallest number of principles 
and thereby to unify it as far as possible. 

C. THE PURE EMPLOYMENT OF REASON 

The question now is whether the principles or the 
forms of unity which reason introduces in its effort to 
bring about a unification of our knowledge of the under- 
standing, are objectively valid or they have only a sub- 
jective use in ordering our ideas. Kant points out that 



THE PURE EMPLOYMENT OF REASON 131 

reason is concerned with the understanding and its judge- 
ments, and has no direct concern with intuition or the 
matter of experience supplied by it. The understanding 
through its categories and principles orders or unifies the 
manifold supplied by intuition. Reason seeks to unify the 
concepts and the judgements of the understanding. Pure 
reason thus relates itself to objects not directly but indi- 
rectly through understanding. We find already in syllogism 
that there is no appeal to intuition. This goes to suggest 
that reason is concerned with forms of unity which are 
not given. 

We have seen that reason in its logical employment 
seeks to find out the universal condition of its judgement, 
a rule from which the given judgement as well as many 
others may follow. This search for the universal implies 
that reason is concerned to discover the unconditioned 
in which all conditioned knowledge of the understanding 
may attain its unity and completion. 

But the unconditioned is not anything that can be 
found within experience. So the principle of reason, which 
impels us to discover an unconditioned unity for our 
conditioned knowledge, is properly to be called transcen- 
dent inasmuch as it bids us go beyond the limits of ex- 
perience. This principle is synthetic because it connects 
the conditioned with what cannot obviously be derived 
from it, viz. the unconditioned. The main question of the 
Transcendental Dialectic is to decide whether the con- 
cepts and principles of pure reason, as distinct from those 
of the pure understanding, have any objective validity. 



BOOK I 
THE CONCEPTS OF PURE REASON 

The concepts of the understanding are obtained by 
reflection, but the concepts of reason can be obtained 
only by inference. The concepts of the understanding 
"contain nothing more than the unity of reflection upon 
appearances" which must belong to a possible experience . 
As they constitute the intellectual form of all experience, 
they can always be shown to be valid in experience. That 
is not the case with the concepts of reason which go 
beyond all experience. The unconditioned, for instance, 
with which the concepts of reason are concerned, can be 
reached by reason only in its inferences from experience 
and is not itself an object of possible experience. 

The concepts of pure understanding are called 
categories and in distinction from them the concepts of 
pure reason are called Transcendental Ideas. 

Section I 
The Ideas in General 

Kant refers to Plato's doctrine of Ideas and follow- 
ing Plato's use of the term Idea for super-sensible arche- 
type, which are only imperfectly represented by things of 
the world, he proposes to restrict the use of the term to 
concepts of reason. He deprecates the use of the term for 
any representation whatever. Ordinarily even the repre- 
sentation of a colour, e. g. red, would be called an idea, 
but according to Kant such use is highly improper. 
For him the most general term is representation^ which 
becomes perception when joined with consciousness. 
Perception, again, when it is subjective, is to be called 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 133 

sensation and when it is objective, knowledge. Know- 
ledge consists of intuition and concept. Concepts be- 
longing to the understanding are notions or categories, 
and those belonging to reason are Ideas. Thus red is not 
even a notion, far less an idea. 

Section II 
The Transcendental Ideas 

Just as the categories of pure understanding were 
derived from the logical forms of judgement, so the con- 
cepts of pure reason are sought to be derived from the 
logical forms of inference. From the three kinds of syllo- 
gism, categorical, hypothetical and disjunctive, Kant 
professes to deduce the three forms of the unconditioned 
which reason offers in order to guide and complete the 
work of the understanding. By going regressively from 
episyllogism to pro-syllogism we seek the unconditioned 
which ultimately will explain the conditioned knowledge 
given in a particular judgement. 

Reason always seeks for the explanation of things, 
and no explanation can be final which merely works with 
the conditioned because the conditioned will always 
demand something else by which it is conditioned, so 
that we cannot be satisfied until we reach the 
unconditioned. 

The three species of syllogism categorical, hypothe- 
tical and disjunctive lead us to the unconditiond in three 
different forms ; "first, to the subject which is never itself 
a predicate ; secondly, to the presupposition which itself 
presupposes nothing further ; thirdly, to such an aggregate 
of the members of the division of a concept as requires 
nothing further to complete the division". As Professor 



134 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

Kemp Smith points out, Kant in fact obtains these trans- 
cendental ideas by combining the concept of the uncondi- 
tioned with the categories of relation, i. e. with substan- 
tiality, causality and community. 

These ideas are fundamentally different from the 
categories of the understanding, in that the categories are 
always illustrated in experience, but the Ideas of Reason 
have no corresponding use within experience. We can 
always point to a substance or a cause within experience, 
but the unconditioned can never be found within experience 
for the simple reason that whatever falls within experience 
is conditioned. Thus the objective use of the Ideas is 
transcendent, i. e. it oversteps the limits of experience. 
But they are not on that account to be considered as 
arbitrary fictions of our mind; they are, on the contrary, 
necessary and natural products of reason. Since there are 
no objects within experience which correspond to them, 
we may speak of them as mere Ideas, but we should not 
regard them as empty and superfluous, because although 
they do not themselves stand for any objects, they never- 
theless guide the understanding in its knowledge of 
objects. Moreover, they serve as transitional links between 
the spheres of theoretical and practical Reasons, bet- 
ween the sphere of scientific knowledge and that of moral 
activity, as will be shown later. 

Section III 
System of the Transcendental Ideas 

There are three possible relations in which all our 
representations must stand, viz. first , in relation to the 
thinking subject, secondly, in relation to objects as 
appearances, and thirdly, in relation to objects of thought 



SYSTEM OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS 135 

in general. All pure concepts are concerned with the syn- 
thetic unity of representations. The transcendental Ideas, 
which are nothing but the pure concepts of reason, are 
concerned with the unconditioned synthetic unity of all 
conditions. In correspondence with the three relations 
stated above, the transcendental Ideas are: (i) the abso- 
lute unity of the thinking subject (Soul), (ii) the absolute 
unity of the series of conditions of appearances (Cosmos), 
and (iii) the absolute unity of all objects of thought in 
general (the being of all beings, God). 

With the Idea of the soul we render all subjective 
phenomena intelligible to ourselves; with the Idea of the 
cosmos we explain all objective experiences; and the Idea 
of God is necessary to explain the co-operation of mind 
and external nature in one experience. They together 
thus form a system. 

It is neither possible nor necessary to give an objec- 
tive deduction of these Ideas, as they have no objective 
application. A subjective deduction, however, is provided 
when they are traced to three logical forms of inference. 

The Ideas are in a sense categories made absolute. 
The soul is substance, the world the absolue totality of 
causes, and God the absolute totality of all beings in 
reciprocal relation (the being of all beings). 

As Kant specially discussed immortality in con- 
nexion with the soul, and freedom in his theory of the 
world, God, freedom and immortality (in the place 
of God, soul and the world ) have come to be regarded 
as the proper subjects of metaphysical enquiry. 



BOOK II 

THE DIALECTICAL INFERENCES OF PURE 
REASON 

Although a transcendental Idea is a necessary 
product of reason, we have properly speaking no concept 
of its object that can be intuited and exhibited in a 
possible experience. The object corresponding to a 
transcendental Idea does not fall within any experience, 
and so it is better to say that we have no knowledge, 
but merely a problematic concept of it. 

But how do we come to have Ideas of things which 
we do not know ? We are led to them by some neces- 
sary inference of reason. " There will therefore be 
syllogisms which contain no empirical premisses and by 
means of which we conclude from something which we 
know to something else of which we have no concept, 
and to which, owing to an inevitable illusion, we yet 
ascribe objective reality/' The conclusions may even be 
called rational, "since they are not fictitious and have 
not arisen fortuitously, but have sprung from the very 
nature of reason/" We cannot avoid them, although we 
may be able to teach ourselves that they are not valid. 

By three kinds of pseudo-rational inference we get 
the transcendental Ideas of the soul, the cosmos and 
God, which used to form the subject-matters of the 
three parts of metaphysics known respectively as 
Rational Psychology, Rational Cosmology and 
Ra tional Theology. Kant calls the first kind of in- 
ference about the soul the Paralogism of Pure Reason, 
the second kind of inference about the world the 
Antinomy of Pure Reason, and the third kind of 
inference about God the Ideal of Pure Reason. It 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 137 

is now his business to expose the fallacies lurking in 
these inferences. 

CHAPTER I 

THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 

A logical paralogism is a fallacious syllogism. A 
transcendental paralogism is one in which an invalid 
conclusion is drawn from a transcendental ground. The 
transcendental ground used in rational psychology is the 
concept or the judgement / think. Although it has not 
been included in the list of transcendental concepts' 
there is no doubt about its transcendental character. It 
is in fact the vehicle of all concepts, including the trans- 
cendental ones. The concepts are concepts only as 
accompanied by / think. It is this / think which 
makes even transcendental concepts possible. Substance, 
cause, etc. really mean "I think substance", "I think 
cause ", etc. Since J think is involved in every category, 
it is not separately mentioned in the list of transcendental 
concepts. 

I think is the sole basis on which are founded all 
the doctrines of rational psychology, viz. (i) that the 
soul is substance, (ii) that it is simple, (iii) that it is a 
unity, and (iv) that it is in relation to possible objects 
in space. There is no other basis for the teachings of 
rational psychology than this simple and in itself empty 
representation. It is not properly a concept but a bare 
consciousness which accompanies all concepts. 

Although / think is realized only subjectively in my 
own consciousness of object, I transfer it to all thinking 
beings, and make it the basis of universal judgements 
about them, because I can have no representation of 

K . C. . . 1 8 



138 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

thinking beings through outer sense, and can think of 
them only in terms of my own consciousness. 

It has to be noted that the I think which serves as 
the basis of rational psychology contains no empirical 
element whatever. It does not represent any knowledge 
about the soul that can be obtained through inner sense 
or by internal observation. If it were empirical in 
character, neither knowledge of what does not belong to 
possible experience nor any apodeictic knowledge about 
thinking beings could be derived from it. 

/ think in fact does not represent any thought but 
the pure apperception which accompanies all concepts 
and is the basis of all knowledge, but it is not itself any 
knowledge. 

THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 

(First Edition) 
FIRST PARALOGISM : Of Substantiality 

The first paralogism says that the soul "(I)" is a 
substance, because it is the absolute subject of all our 
judgements and cannot be used as a predicate of any other 
thing. By"substance"we understand only that which is the 
absolute subject of our judgements and never a predicate. 

It is true that we cannot but regard the self as 
substance because the "I" is present in all thoughts as 
their subject. The thoughts are its determinations, but 
the self cannot be used to determine any other thing. 
But the category of substance here has clearly no objec- 
tive meaning, because there is absolutely no intuition in 
the representation of the "I" which can serve as the 
support of the category. We know from the Analytic 
that categories have objective meaning, only as applied 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 139 

to the manifold of intuition. I think does not represent 
any intuition, but merely consciousness without which no 
thought is possible. The *' I " is merely the logical 
subject of all thoughts, but does not stand for any 
underlying thing which is given by any intuition and 
which can be distinguished from other objects. 

The self is first thought of as substance in order to 
justify our further thought about it as a persistent entity 
which does not in any manner arise or perish. But this 
is not proper. What is legitimate is that when we have 
an intuition of something permanent in experience, we 
should apply the category of substance to it. We should 
not reverse the process and deduce the property of 
permanence from the notion of substantiality. 

We thus find that rational psychology is wrong in 
making a metaphysical substance out of a logical 
subject, and in applying the category of substance in 
the absence of all necessary intuition. 

We may, however, think of the self as substance 
provided we refrain from drawing any inference from the 
notion of substantiality with regard to the self, such as, 
e. g. that the self is immortal. We have to remember 
that the concept here signifies a substance in idea and 
not in reality. 

SECOND PARALOGISM : Of Simplicity 

In the second paralogism, it is sought to be proved 
that the self is a simple entity on the ground that its 
action cannot be regarded as the concurrence of several 
things acting. If the self were a composite entity, its 
action, which is thinking, would be the co-operative 
action of its different parts. 



140 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

It is no doubt true that thinking requires absolute 
unity. If the representations, which are united in 
thought., belonged to different beings, they would never 
make a whole thought. The self must be an absolute 
unity and only as such can it make any thought possible. 
But this only means that the unity of self- consciousness 
is a necessary condition of all thought. The thinking 
self can be represented only as a unity. But rational 
psychology is wrong in passing from this logical unity of 
the subject in representation to the actual simplicity 
of the soul in reality. The unity of self-consciousness is 
a necessary subjective condition of all experience, but it 
does not describe the actual character of an actual thing 
which we may call our soul. 

Rational psychology is anxious to maintain the simpli- 
city of the self in order to prove its difference from matter 
and thus to save it from the fate of destruction or dissolu- 
tion which attends everything material. But even though 
we grant that the self is simple, this is not sufficient to 
establish its difference from matter. There is no point in 
distinguishing the self as a thing in itself from matter 
which is merely outer appearance, because the distinction 
is too obvious. But that which underlies matter or 
material appearance can never be known to be incapable 
of having representation, thought, etc. That which under- 
lies outer appearance and, through the affection of the 
outer sense, comes to be represented as spatial and mate- 
rial may yet be, as noumenon, the subject of our thoughts. 
Thus we see that rational psychology even when it illegi- 
timately asserts that the self is simple, cannot establish 
that the self is altogether different from matter, and it is 
precisely with a view to establishing this difference that 
the simplicity of the self was sought to be proved. 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 141 

THIRD PARALOGISM : Of Personality 

The third paralogism seeks to prove that the soul 
is an abiding personality on the ground that it is con- 
scious of its numerical identity at different times. 

Here again the unity of self-consciousness is made 
the basis of the conclusion that the self remains identical 
with itself through passage of time. The argument fails, 
because the unity of self-consciousness is a condition of 
all thought, from which nothing can be inferred as to 
whether in fact there remains a substantial self identical 
with itself throughout all its experiences. The logical sub- 
ject of knowledge has always to represent itself as identi- 
cal with itself. It says 7 think in respect of all thoughts. 
But this identity of representation cannot mean the 
factual identity of the underlying self. Kant makes his 
point clear by an illustration. An elastic ball impinging on 
a similar ball in a straight line communicates its whole 
motion to it and so in a sense passes on its whole state 
to it. Now if, after this analogy, we conceive a series of 
substances of which the first communicates its represen- 
tations together with the consciousness of them to the 
second, thus passing on its state to it, and the second to 
the third, and so on, then the last substance would be 
conscious of the states of all the earlier substances as its 
own, but this would not really prove that one and the 
same substance was there throughout in all those states. 

Kant's point seems to be that although the thinker 
always refers to himself as "I" and his consciousness of 
himself is not different at different times, this identity of 
consciousness, despite the identity of the word "I" by 
which that consciousness expresses itself, cannot prove 
the identity of the underlying being who has this con- 



142 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

seriousness. The experiencing subject may really change 
continuously without thereby causing a change in the form 
of his experience or in his self -consciousness. So, converse- 
ly, from the identity in the form of experience or from the 
identity of logical subject, which is the same thing as the 
identity of self-consciousness, we cannot infer the identity 
of the subject which actually passes through experience. 

FOURTH PARALOGISM : Of Ideality 

This paralogism is concerned more with the nature 
of the objects of external perception than with the nature 
of the soul. It is argued that what we directly perceive 
is the self and its states, and so the external objects, 
falling altogether outside the self, cannot be directly 
perceived, and can only be inferred from our perceptions. 
We are directly aware of our own perceptions and we infer 
external bodies as the cause of those perceptions. But 
such inference cannot give us certain knowledge. When 
the external objects are not directly known, we cannot 
determine whether the cause of our perceptions lies in us 
or outside us, seeing that an effect may be due to more 
than one cause. There is no such uncertainty as regards 
the knowledge of the self and its states which are directly 
revealed to our inner perceptions, whereas the existence 
of w all objects of the outer senses is doubtful, since they 
are only inferred and the inference may well be wrong. 
This uncertainty about the existence of external objects 
is called the ideality of outer appearances, and the 
doctrine which maintains this ideality is called Idealism. 

In exposing the fallacy in this argument, Kant offers 
a refutation of Idealism in this sense. He points out 
that external objects are as directly known as our inner 
states and there is no question of inference about them. 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 143 

Neither through inner sense nor through outer sense do 
we know things in themselves. By both we get only re- 
presentations and about them we have no doubt what- 
ever. But we should only remember that both the kinds 
of representations, inner and outer, give us only appear- 
ances. The self which is known through inner sense, and 
its states, are as much an appearance as external objects 
known through the outer senses. External objects are 
thus only appearances and so nothing but a species of 
representations which exist in us. Thus what Kant refutes 
is not Idealism as such, but only empirical idealism 
which is favoured by rational psychology and which 
permits us to doubt the existence of external objects. 

Rational psychology, in favouring empirical idealism, 
conceived of external objects as things in themselves 
which cause our perceptions, and only as so conceived do 
they appear to be of doubtful existence. Kant points out 
that external objects are mere appearances and as appear- 
ances they are not doubtful at all. Empirical idealism is 
based on a confusion between appearance and reality 
which rational psychology fails to notice* Against empi- 
rical idealism Kant supports empirical realism in that 
he grants the undoubted existence of external objects as 
appearances. This he does, it appears, in the interest of 
a higher idealism which he calls transcendental idea- 
lism and according to which even outer appearances are 
mere representations which exist in us. But if they exist 
in us, how do we call them "outer" ? They are "outer" 
only in the sense that they consist of representations 
which relate their objects in space in which all things are 
external to one another. But space itself is in us, and so 
the outer appearances are not transcendentally outside but 
only empirically so. 



144 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

CONSIDERATION OF PURE PSYCHOLOGY AS A WHOLE 

Whatever may be the nature of the self in itself, in 
its earthly career it finds itself in an embodied state. So 
the relation between body and soul is of peculiar impor- 
tance for rational psychology. In fact there are three 
questions involved here: (i), as to the possibility of com- 
munion between soul and body; (ii), as to the beginning 
of this communion, i.e., about the soul in and before 
birth; and (iii), as to the end of this communion, L e 
about the soul in and after death. When the soul and 
the body are conceived as two substances, altogether 
different in nature, we are undoubtedly faced with the 
serious problem of understanding how they are com- 
bined in a single subject, and how the states of the one 
are correlated with the states of the other. / am a mind 
that thinks as well as a body that moves. When there is 
a change in my bodily state, there arises a change in my 
mental state, and vice versa. 

The communion between soul and body can be under- 
stood in three different ways, (i) It may be that the 
body acts on the mind and the mind acts on the body; 
and each by so acting produces changes in the other. 
This is the theory Interactionism (or the theory of 
physical influence, as Kant calls it), held by Descartes. 
But when matter and soul are conceived as totally 
different from one another, it is found very difficult to 
comprehend how the one can act upon the other. So it 
is thought that the communion between them is brought 
about by a third agency. Whenever there is a change 
either in mind or in body, God intervenes and produces a 
corresponding changeiin the other. This is Occasionalism 
or the theory of supernatural intervention, developed 



THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 145 

by the followers of Descartes. But why should we suppose 
that God acts every now and then ? He may have 
originally fashioned matter and spirit in such a way that 
whenever there is a change in the one, there occurs a 
change in the other also. This is the theory of pre-es^a- 
blished harmony propounded by Leibniz. 

Whatever may be the merits of these theories as 
solutions of the problem in hand, Kant points out that 
the problem itself is totally misconceived, and rests, like 
other dialectical questions of rational psychology, on a 
transcendental illusion which confuses appearances with 
things in themselves. Both through inner sense 'and 
outer sense we get nothing but appearances. The self 
which exists in time, and is known through inner sense, is 
as much an appearance as the objects of outer sense 
which exist in space. Space and time are nothing but 
the forms of our sensibility and nothing that exists in 
them can be anything but subjective appearance. So 
long as we take inner and outer appearances as 
appearances, i.e. as representations, there appears nothing 
absurd or strange in the association of these two kinds 
of appearances. But as soon as we hypostatize these 
appearances and think of them as things in themselves, 
exclusive of one another, we fall into all kinds of diffi- 
culties in conceiving the relation between them. 

But even when the external things are not conceived 
as things in themselves, but as appearances only, there 
remains a problem. The real problem of the communion 
between mind and body, between the thinking and the 
extended, is this : how is outer intuition or the intuition 
of space possible in a thinking subject ? If we call the 
thinking subject understanding and the intuition sensibi- 
lity, the question comes to this : How are sensibility and 
K. c.. .19 



146 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

understanding connected with one another? But no human 
being can possibly answer this question, as no one can find 
out the common root of sensibility and understanding. 

Although Kant finds only fallacies in rational 
psychology, he is not interested in denying its conclusions 
or in maintaining propositions which would be opposed 
to the conclusions of rational psychology. That would 
be inconsistent with his Critical stand-point. His objec- 
tion against rational psychology is not dogmatic but 
Critical. He would have been dogmatic if he either 
merely denied the assertions of rational psychology or 
opposed those assertions by other assertions of his own. 
Without doing anything of the kind, he merely points 
out that the arguments by which rational psychology 
seeks to justify its conclusions are fallacious. He does 
not question the conclusions themselves, but only the 
validity of the grounds on which they are based. This 
is the peculiarity of his Critical objection. 

When rational psychology says that the soul is 
immortal, Kant does not corne forward to say that the 
soul is not immortal. He only says that the theoretical 
proof offered for this thesis is insufficient. Kant himself 
is a believer in the immortality of the soul, not as a fact 
that can be known theoretically but as a postulate of 
moral experience. Similarly when rational psychology 
asserts that matter has only doubtful existence, and thus 
rejects materialism, Kant does not oppose it by saying 
that materialism is true. He says no doubt that the 
existence of matter is not doubted, but by matter he 
understands only an appearance and not a thing in itself, 
as materialism takes it to be. It is essential to materialism 
to regard matter as ultimate reality, but Kant never sub- 
scribes to such a view. When in the Aesthetic he reduced 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 147 

space to a subjective form of sensibility, he definitely 
denied reality to matter which can exist only in space. 

The main concern of rational psychology is with the 
knowledge of the self and it supposes that it knows the 
self as a simple, self-identical substance. In other words, 
rational psychology asserts that the self can be known as 
an object, for the category of substantiality, and in fact 
all categories, are objective categories. Kant points out 
that what we really have is the unity of self-consciouness 
which is a subjective condition of all objective knowledge 
and that it is nothing but an illusion to regard this sub- 
jective condition of knowledge as the knowledge of an 
object. Self-consciousness is a necessary condition of objec- 
tive knowledge, but it is not itself any objective knowledge, 
especially when what is absoultely necessary to objec- 
tive knowledge, viz. intuition, is altogether lacking. 

THE PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 
(Second Edition) 

In the Second Edition of the Critique we have a 
briefer but more pointed treatment of the Paralogisms 
and of the other questions connected therewith than in 
the First Edition. It is pointed out that the proposition 
from which rational psychology starts, in so far as it is 
valid, is an analytic proposition; but in drawing its 
desired conclusions from it, rational psychology turns it 
into a synthetic proposition of much wider scope, for 
which there is no warrant. Rational psychology is based 
on the proposition / think which really stands for mere 
thought or the unity of consciousness. This by itself can 
never amount to knowledge unless there is some given 
intuition or matter of thought to which this can be 



148 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

applied. It is a fundamental point of Kant 's philosophy 
that thought and intuition must be combined in order to 
give rise to knowledge. But in self-consciousness we have 
mere thought and there is no intuition of the self to 
which it can be applied. We have no intuition of the self 
because all our intuitions are sensible and the self is not 
an object of sense. Thus we can have no knowledge of 
the self in the real sense of the term "knowledge". 

First Paralogism (Substantiality): The " I " 
which thinks is of course the subject in all thought. 
This is an analytical proposition; but it cannot mean 
that I, as object, am for myself a self-subsistent 
being or substance. We require for the application 
of the category of substance some intuition which is 
altogether lacking here. 

Second Paralogism (Simplicity) : That the " I " 
(of / think) is a simple subject and is not a plurality 
follows from the nature of thought itself (and hence 
it is an analytical proposition) ; but this does not mean 
that the self is a simple substance. The intuition necessary 
for the application of this category cannot be supplied 
by mere thought, with which alone we are concerned here. 

Third Paralogism (Personality): That the " I " 
in all thoughts is the same can be obtained from the 
analysis of / think, but the unity of self-consciousness 
is no intuition and can justify no application of the 
concept of substance. 

Fourth Paralogism (Immortality) : It is again an 
analytical judgement to say that J am distinct from 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 149 

all other things, including my body, because by other 
things I understand what I can distinguish from myself. 
But the fact that I can distinguish myself from my 
body cannot mean that I can exist apart from my body 
or that I am immortal. 

Thus we see that merely from an analysis of self- 
consciousness as a condition of thought in general we can 
derive no knowledge whatever about the self as object. 

If rational psychology were right, if, i.e., synthetic 
a priori judgement were possible in regard to the 
self, which is not given in any intuition, then the 
whole Critique would be falsified, because according 
to it synthetic a priori judgements are possible only 
in regard to objects of possible experience, for which 
intuition is indispensable. The whole argument of rational 
psychology can be reduced to a syllogism which, when 
examined carefully, will be found to involve the fallacy 
of ambiguous middle or the sophisma figuree 
dictionis, as Kant prefers to call it. 

The syllogism is as follows :- 

That which cannot be thought otherwise 
than as subject does not exist otherwise than as 
subject and is therefore substance. 

A thinking being considered merely as such 
cannot be thought otherwise than as subject. 

Therefore it exists only as subject, that is as 
substance. 

In the major premise we speak of a being that 
can be thought in general, that is, in every relation, 
and so can be given in intuition also, but in the 
minor premise we speak of it only as it regards itself 
as subject in relation to thought alone and not also 
in relation to intuition. In fact " thought " in the 



150 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

two premises is taken in two different senses. In the 
major premise it relates to an object in general and 
therefore to an object that may be given in intuition. 
In the minor premise it means no more than relation 
to self-consciousness. In the second sense it does not 
stand for the thought of any object, but merely for 
"the relation to self as subject". In the major pre- 
mise "thought' * means real thought; in the minor pre- 
mise it means only the form of thought and not 
actual thought. 

Refutation of Mendelssohn's Proof of the 
Permanence of the SouL 

Mendelssohn took the simple nature of the soul 
for granted, and argued that the soul connot pass out 
of existence either gradually or suddenly. Its gradual 
disappearance would mean the disappearance of one 
part of the soul after another and this would contra- 
dict the fact of its simple nature which consists in 
having no parts. The soul cannot also cease to exist 
suddenly, because if it ceased suddenly to exist, "there 
would be no time between a moment in which it is 
and another in which it is not, which is impossible." 
The continuity of time requires that one moment 
should continuously, and not abruptly, pass into another 
moment. The sudden cessation of an existence would 
occassion an abrupt break. 

Kant replies to this argument by saying that al- 
though we may grant the soul to be simple, having 
no multiplicity of parts, this would only mean that it 
has no extensive quantity, but would not prevent it 
from having intensive quantity. Although the soul may 
have no parts, it may have a degree of reality that 
can be gradually diminished. So the soul need not pass 



PARALOGISMS OF PURE REASON 151 

out of existence suddenly, for it may very well do so by 
a continuous diminution of its intensive reality. Kant 
points out in this connexion that even consciousness has 
always a degree and all that constitutes the existence 
of the soul can be, qualitatively speaking, more or less.* 

Kant further shows that the position taken up 
by rational psychology leads necessarily to idealism 
or at least problematic idealism. When rational psy- 
chology claims to know the self as a spiritual self- 
subsistent entity, it means that the existence of outer 
things is not in any way required to determine the 
existence of the self in time, and so the assumption 
of their existence turns out to be quite gratuitous 
for which no proof can be given. Kant's position on 
this point is that the existence of the outer world 
is as certain as the existence of inner experience, for 
we can know our inner experience only in relation to 
outer things. Both inner experience and outer things 
are however equally appearances, 

If we start with the category of existence and take 
it as given in the judgement / think, then even pro- 
ceeding analytically we can very well see how the 
constitution of the self cannot be explained in materia- 
listic terms. Since appreciation, which constitutes the 
essence of the thinking subject, is an act of absolute 
unity, the self as thinking must be determined as a 
simple subject. Such a subject can have no place in 
space, i. e., it cannot be materialistically conceived, 
because nothing that exists in space can be simple. 
Whatever exists in space is a manifold. (Points are 
merely limits and not anything that can, at parts 
constitute space.) 

* See ant e f "Anticiptions of Perceptions", pp. 92-95 



152 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

To deny materialism is not however to affirm the 
spiritualistic hypothesis that the self is a spiritual 
substance. There appears nothing persistent in our in- 
ner intuition to which the category of substance can 
be properly applied. Thus the questions regarding the 
constitution of the self and its possible survival of bodily 
death must remain theoretically unanswerable. 

Rational psychology then does not exist as a 
doctrine which can extend our knowledge of the self, 
but still it is valuable as a discipline, in that it holds 
speculative reason in check and makes both soulless 
materialism and groundless spiritualism impossible for it.* 

Kant emphasizes the point that rational psychology 
confuses the purely intellectual representation of the "I" 
with an intuition of it and wrongly applies to this sup- 
posed intuition the category of substance. The forms of 
intuition (space and time) and the forms of thought 
(categories) are made possible by the self (as the unity 
of apperception), but it cannot itself be conceived in these 
forms. When we think of the self as immortal or as exist- 
ing beyond death, we are thinking of it as existing in 
time, and in thinking of it as a substance we are apply- 
ing to it a category of thought. But in this we are 
making an illegitimate use of the forms of intuition and 
thought, which are proper only to the object intuited 
and thought, not to the intuiting and thinking subject. 

Although theoretical reason cannot prove that the 
soul is immortal, it cannot also prove that it is not 
immortal. So if on the grounds of practical reason or 
moral experience we are led to believe in the immortality 

* Doctrine is positive and Discipline is negative in its 
effect. The former seeks to extend our knowledge and the latter to 
warn us against mistakes and illusions. It holds in check our 
natural tendency to transgress, or deviate from, certain rules. 



CONCLUSION OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL PARALOGISM 153 

of the soul, theoretical reason can raise no valid objection 
against our belief. Indeed, on grounds of Reason, which 
is not merely theoretical but practical also, we are led to 
believe in an order of ends which extends beyond the 
limits of experience and of life and therewith in our own 
existence as going beyond these limits. 

CONCLUSION OF THE SOLUTION OF THE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PARALOGISM 

The fundamental mistake of rational psycholgy lies 
in the fact that it confuses the abstract concept of the 
"I" as pure intelligence with the idea of a substantial soul 
separate from the body. It is on account of this confusion 
that we are led to believe that we have knowledge of the 
self as substance, when in fact what we have in thought 
is simply the unity of consciousness. 

How the communion is possible between the spatial 
physical body and the soul which has no being in space, 
raises a problem of peculiar difficulty; but the diffi- 
culty vanishes when we consider that the two kinds of 
objects (body and soul) are heterogeneous only as appear- 
ances, and that the thing in itself underlying material 
appearances may not be different in character from 
the underlying ground of spiritual phenomena. 

GENERAL NOTE ON TRANSITION FROM 
RATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY TO COSMOLOGY 

We have said above that the represensation of 

the self as well as that of the outer world is an 

appearance. It would however be a mistake to suppose 

that the self even in thought, i. e. in the proposition 

K. c.. .20 



154 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

/ think, is an appearance. The empirical self known 
through various mental states is no doubt an appear- 
ance. But when we think of self merely as a thinking 
subject we are not presented with an appearance. 
Thought by itself is merely the logical function which 
spontaneously combines the manifold of a possible 
intuition and does not exhibit the subject of conscious- 
ness as appearance. In thought I do, not represent 
myself to myself either as a thing in itself or as an 
appearance. I merely think of the self as I would think 
of any objet in general in abstraction from its mode 
of intuition, and consequently there is no appearance. 
If I still represent myself as subject of thought or 
ground of thought, I do not accept for myself the 
category of substance or that of cause which can properly 
be applied only to sensible appearances. In so far as I 
think, the c ' I " that thinks is no mere appearance; "in 
the consciousness of myself in mere thought I am the 
being itself, although nothing in myself is thereby 
given for thought/' The proposition / think, in so 
far as it is taken as equivalent to " I exist thinking", 
is no mere logical function, but determines the exis- 
tence of the subject. But we cannot know the subject 
as noumenon, for which intellectual intuition would 
be necessary which we do not possess. 

The attempts of rational psychology to extend our 
knowledge of the self, independently of empirical intui- 
tion, beyond the field of experience, have proved a 
failure. But in moral experience we may find "ground for 
regarding ourselves as legislating completely a priori in 
regard to our own existence and as determining this 
existence". In moral consciousness there is a spontaneity 
which seeks to determine our existence independently of 



ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 155 

empirical intuition. We freely choose to be what we 
ought to be without any reference to the conditions of 
empirical existence. But we have still to recognize that 
although on the strength of moral consciousness we take 
the self as related to the intelligible or ideal world, this 
never amounts to a theoretical knowledge of the self, 

CHAPTER II 
THE ANTINOMY OF PURE REASON 

The dialectical inferences of rational psychology 
about the nature of the soul have been found to be 
fallacious. Kant is now going to consider the cosmo- 
logical ideas, ideas in regard to the objective synthesis 
of appearances with which rational cosmology is 
concerned. These ideas are found to be no less fallacious. 
The fallacy of psychology is called the paralogism of pure 
reason; that of rational cosmology the antinomy of pure 
reason. And there is an interesting difference between the 
two. In a paralogism of pure reason we have a one-sided 
argument supporting the idealistic conclusion about the 
nature of the soul. But in an antinomy of pure reason 
we have two arguments of equal validity and cogency, 
supporting conclusions which are diametrically opposed 
to each other. We cannot say that of two such opposing 
arguments one is right and the other is wrong, 
because both of them are equally reasonable, and they 
proceed from the nature of human reason itself, and are 
not due to any blunder or personal inadvertence. Since 
human reason itself leads to such contradictions, we may 
either become quite sceptical about its capacity to give us 
knowledge about supersensible matters (such as the un- 
conditioned unity of apperances, dealt with in rational 



TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

cosmology), or we may dogmatically assert one position 
only, disregarding the counter-position which is equally 
reasonable* In either case it would mean the end of 
sound philosophy. 

Section I 
System of Cosmo logical Ideas 

In connexion with these ideas two points have to be 
noticed. In the first place we have to understand that 
reason does not really generate any concept. All 
concepts are of the understanding and they are converted 
into transcendental Ideas when they are made absolute. 
We know that the categories of the understanding have 
their proper significance only in reference to possible ex- 
perience. But when this limitation to possible experience 
is taken away, and the categories are made absolute or 
free from the limitation, we get transcendental Ideas- 
And this is done in the following way: 

For a given conditioned, reason demands absolute 
totality on the side of the conditions which are presup- 
posed by it. Anything conditioned is made possible by its 
conditions and so when something conditioned is given, 
reason demands that the entire sum of conditions nece- 
ssary for it must also be given. The totality of condi- 
tions, since there is no other condition to determine it, 
may be called the unconditioned. The transcendental 
Ideas are thus nothing but categories extended to the 
unconditioned. 

The second point is that categories are not capable of 
yielding us a concept of the unconditioned. We get such 
a concept from those categories which are concerned 
with the synthesis of a series of conditions subordinated 



SYSTEM OF COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS 157 

to, not co-ordinated with, one another and are generative 
of a given conditioned. It is only when there is a 
series of conditions, one member conditioning another 
and leading finally to a given conditioned, that we 
demand a totality of conditions for the explanation of 
the given conditioned. The series conditions may run 
forward to other consequences beyond the given condi- 
tioned, but that part of the series which consists of the 
consequences of the given conditioned is not pre-supposed 
by it. What it pre-supposes is the totality of conditions 
that have gone before it and have conditioned it. And so 
the totality demanded by reason is to be understood in res- 
pect of them only. Thus the idea of totality of conditions 
applied to time concerns time only in so far as it is past. 

The table of ideas is arranged in accordance with the 
table of categories. Under Quantity we find that the 
idea of totality can be applied to time and space. Any 
given present can be understood only as preceded or con- 
ditioned by the time that has gone before it. When the 
present is given, all its past is thereby pre-supposed as 
already given. The past time constitutes a series of con- 
ditions leading to the present and can therefore yield a 
transcendental concept. Space does not constitute a series 
like time, but is an aggregate. But in understanding any 
limited space or part of space, we have to pre-suppose 
other spaces (parts) which limit it. Thus there is a pro- 
gression of limits of higher extent and a series is generated 
to which the idea of totality may be applied. 

Under Quality, only reality in space, i. e. matter, 
comes into consideration. Its parts are regarded as its 
internal conditions and the parts of these parts as its 
remote conditions. We can well imagine the process of 
division carried to the utmost, till we reach parts tha} 



158 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

cannot be further divided, and are therefore quite simple 
and not composite. Here we have thus a series of con- 
ditions and an advance to the unconditioned. 

Of the categories of Relation, only the category of 
causality yields us a transcendental Idea. Neither the 
category of substance nor that of community can be 
so treated as to involve a series of conditions subordinated 
to one another. The accidents or properties are not 
subordinated to the substance but are merely the ways or 
modes in which the substance exists. The substances in 
community or in reciprocal relation are merely an aggre- 
gate and do not form a regular series. There remains only 
the category of causality; and for a given effect there is 
always a series of causes leading to the effect, and we can 
well apply the notion of totality to the series. 

Under Modality, we find that the accidental in 
existence may be regarded as conditioned, pointing to a 
condition under which it is necessary and this again may 
point to a higher condition, and thus there may be a 
series of conditions in whose totality the necessary un- 
conditioned is to be found. 

Kant thus believes that guided by the division of 
categories he has been led to the four cosmological ideas, 
demanding absolute completeness concerning (1) composi- 
tion, (2) division, (3) origination of appearances, and 
(4) dependence of existence of the changeable (accidental) 
in the field of appearance. The ideas relate themselves 
to appearance and not to things in themselves. 

What reason really seeks in the totality of the series 
of conditions is the unconditioned. There are two ways 
in which the unconditioned may be conceived: (1) It 
may be conceived as consisting of the entire series in 
which all the members are conditioned and only the 



ANTITHETIC OF PURE REASON 159 

totality of them is unconditioned. (2) The uncondition- 
ed may also be conceived only as a part of the series 
which stands under no other conditions but to which all 
the rest of the series are subordinated. On the first view 
the series is without limits and can be called infinite. 
On the second view there is a first member of the series 
which, according to the four-fold division of cosmological 
ideas, represents either the beginning of the world (time), 
or the limit of the world (space), the simple (reality) or 
absolute self-activity (causalit3')> r absolute natural 
necessity (in respect of accidental existence). 

These ideas are called cosmologies 1 because they 
relate to the world or the field of appearance, and not to 
noumena* They are so far not transcendent , but still 
they may be regarded as transcendent because they re- 
present a totality or synthesis which is never given 
within experience. 

Sec tion II 
Antithetic of Pare Reason 

If thetic means a body of positive judgements, anti- 
thetic may be taken to mean a body of negative judge- 
ments in opposition to a positive thetic. Kant however 
uses the term antithetic to include both kinds of 
assertions. 

Our reason cannot remain content with anything 
short of the unconditioned and is impelled to make asser- 
tions about the sum total of things beyond the scope of 
all possible experience. These cannot be definitely proved 
to be true or false- Judgements of opposite import can 
be maintained with equal plausibility in respect of each of 
the cosmological ideas discussed above. The judgements 



160 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

arc not arbitrary, but arise from the nature of human 
reason itself. The conflict of these transcendental judge- 
ments constitutes the Antinomy of Pare Reason. As 
both sides appear equally reasonable, neither having a 
better claim to our acceptance than the other, we seem 
to be faced with a perpetual controversy which in fact we 
find illustrated in that part of pre-Kantian metaphysics 
which went by the name of rational cosmology. Kant 
proposes to enquire whether the object of the controversy 
is not a deceptive appearance. 

His method of procedure which consists in "watching 
or rather provoking a conflict of assertions'* with the 
view of discovering the point of misunderstanding. It is 
called by him the sceptical method. The sceptical 
method which aims at right knowledge and therefore pre- 
supposes the possibility of such knowledge, is altogether 
different from scepticism which dispairs of all knowledge. 
Kant points out that the sceptical method is essential to 
transcendental philosophy, and can be dispensed with in 
other fields of enquiry, such as mathematics, experi- 
mental philosophy (empirical sciences) and ethics, because 
in them other means of removing error are available 
within experience, whereas in transcendental philosophy 
which ventures beyond all experience, no appeal to 
experience will serve any purpose. 

First Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas 
Thesis: (a) The world has beginning in time, and 
Ob) is also limited as regards space. 

Proof: (a) Let us assume that the world has no 
beginning in time. Then up to any given moment, an infi- 
nite time must have elapsed, that is to say, an infinite 
series of the states of the world must have completed 



ANTITHETIC OF PURE REASON 161 

itself and come to an end. But from the nature of the 
case, an infinite series can never come to an end. There- 
fore the world cannot be beginningless in time. 

(b) As regards this point also, let us suppose 
that the world is not limited in space- The world 
will then have to be conceived as an infinite given 
whole of co-existing elements. But such a whole, 
which is not given in intuition, will have to be cons- 
tructed by successive synthesis of its parts. But an 
infinite whole would require infinite time to complete 
the synthesis of its parts, and we should never have 
it as a given whole. The world cannot therefore be 
infinite in extent, but must be limited in space. 

Antithesis: (a) The world has no beginning in 
time, and (b) no limit in space- It is infinite as re- 
gards both time and space. Proofs:- (a) If the world 
had a beginning in time, it would be preceded by an 
empty time in which it did not exist. But no begin- 
ning is possible in empty time, because there is abso- 
lutely no reason why a beginning should be made at 
a particular moment rather than at some other mo- 
ment, all moments being equally empty. Since no 
beginning in time is possible, we have to suppose 
that the world has no beginning in time. 

(b) If the world were limited in space, there 
would be space beyond the world. The world should 
then be related to this empty space which would 
prescribe limits to the world. But empty space is no 
object (space being only a form of appearances and 
not by itself an appearance), and so no relation of 
the world to it is possible. The world, therefore, can- 
not be limited in space. 



162 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

Second Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas 

Thesis: Every composite substance in the world is 
made up of simple parts, and nothing but the simple 
or what is composed of the simple exists anywhere. 

Proof: Supposing that composite substances are 
not made up of simple parts and there is no substance 
that is simple, then if we think away composition, all 
substances would be also thought away, and nothing 
would remain, But since substances do exist and cannot 
be thought awa} 7 , the supposition that composite sub- 
stances are not made up of simple parts must be false. 

Composition is here understood as an accidental 
relation into which things enter, but which is not essential 
to their existence , so that they may very well exist out- 
side this relation. We can understand the existence of 
composite substances or the composition of substances 
in this sense only when we grant in thought the prior 
existence of simple substances. 

Antithesis: No composite thing in the world is 
made up of simple parts, and there exists nothing simple 
anywhere. 

Proof: All composition of substances is possible 
only in space, and a space occupied by a composite sub- 
stance must have as many parts as the parts of the 
composite substance. Now since the parts of space are 
not simple but are themselves spaces, the parts of a 
composite substance cannot be also simple, because, as 
occupying space, they will always contain a manifold of 
elements external to one another. 

Nothing ever presents itself to our external or 
internal perception which does not contain a manifold, 
and so it is concluded that nothing simple exists anywhere 
in the world. 



ANTITHETIC OF PURE REASON 163 

Third Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas 

Thesis: Causality according to the laws of nature 
is not the only causality which can explain all the 
appearances of the world. To explain these appearances 
we have to suppose that there is also a free causality. 

Proof: If causality according to the laws of nature 
were the only causality, then whatever happened would 
presuppose a previous state as its condition, and this pre- 
vious state would itself be conditioned by some other 
state going before it. In the series of cause and effect 
there would be no cause which was not the effect of, and 
thus conditioned by, some other causes. We should thus 
get no complete cause but only subordinate causes. But 
the law of nature demands that for everything that 
happens there should be a cause sufficiently determined. 
We must therefore assume a complete cause, which 
produces its effect without itself being conditioned by 
some other cause. In other words, we must assume a 
free cause. 

Antithesis : There is no freedom. Everything hap- 
pens in the world solely according to the laws of nature. 

Proof : If there were a free causality, it would 
produce a series of changes without being determined 
thereto by anything else. This would mean that there is 
a state of the cause (by which a change is initiated) which 
has no causal connexion with its antecedent state. This 
goes against the law of causality and would destroy the 
the unity of experience. Therefore, freedom is a chimera 
of thought and is not to be met with in any experience. 

Fourth Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas 

Thesis : An absolutely necessary being belongs to 
the world either as its part or as its cause. 



164 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

Proof : The sensible world exists in time and 
therefore contains a series of changes each of which is 
conditioned by what precedes it. Without such a series 
of changes, time itself cannot be represented. Now the 
conditioned, for its complete explanation, requires a 
complete series of causes rising up to the unconditioned 
or what is absolutely necessary. What is itself condi- 
tioned is not a complete explanation of what is condi- 
tioned by it. So an unconditioned or absolutely nece- 
ssary being is presupposed by the series of changes found 
in the world. But a necessary being can condition the 
series of changes only by being antecedent to it in time. 
That is to say, it must fall within the same temporal world. 

Antithesis : An absolutely necessary being exists 
neither in the world nor outside it as its cause. 

Proof : Let us suppose that a necessary being <& xists 
in the world ; then it must be either a part of the series 
of changes or the whole series. That is, we have to sup- 
pose either that the first member of the series is uncondi- 
tioned and necessary, which conditions all other members , 
or that the series as a whole is necessary, although every 
member in it is contingent. The first supposition goes 
against the dynamical law of determination of all appear- 
ances in time, and the second supposition contradicts 
itself, because a series of changes cannot be necessary 
when no single member of it is necessary. 

Let us now suppose that an absolutely necessary 
cause of the world exists outside it. Now this necessary 
being, as it must initiate the series of changes in time, 
must itself act in time and acting in time it must fall 
within the world of appearance, which goes against 
our supposition. Thus a necessary being exists neither 
in the world nor outside it. 



THE INTEREST OF REASON IN THE ANTINOMIES 165 

Section III 
The Interest of Reason in these Conflicts 

The Antinomies of Pure Reason are concerned 
with matters that are of paramount interest to men. As 
we have seen, they deal with such questions as whether 
the world has a beginning, wether the soul is simple and 
therefore immortal, whether the will is free, and whether 
there is a primordial being, God, from whom the world 
derives its existence. These questions affect the vital 
interests of men, moral and religious; and one would make 
any sacrifice to gain sure knowledge on these subjects. 

Kant finds that there are after all only two parties, 
one of which supports the thesis under each head, and 
the other the antithesis. The first party, which supports 
the thesis, represents the dogmatism of pure reason, 
while the other party, upholding the antithesis, is wed- 
ded to the principle of pure empiricism. The interests 
of religion and morality are served by the first party in- 
asmuch as it is in favour of God, freedom and immorta- 
lity. The interests of science and knowledge are served 
by the other party, inasmuch as it is loath to leave the 
field of experience and recognizes no principle which 
transcends experience. 

However, the first party goes wrong when it vainly 
claims to prove, and thus to know, what is obtained 
through faith and is never to be found within experience . 
The second party similarly goes wrong when it flatly 
denies what is not amenable to empirical observation, 
and thus, in the interest of extreme empiricism, tends to 
destroy the validity of moral principles. Mere empiricism, 
although it subserves the purpose of true and verifiable 
knowledge, cannot satisfy us, not only because it goes 



166 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

against our moral and religious interests but also because 
it can offer nothing final for our understanding. It leads 
us in endless regress from one conditioned state to an- 
other and never yields us the unconditioned. So our 
intellect finds no resting place and fails to understand 
any phenomenon completely or to achieve a completed 
view of the world which would be satisfactory to reason. 

Section IV 

The Absolute Necessity of a Solution of the 
Transcendental Problems of Pure Reason 

There are certain branches of knowledge in which 
questions may very well arise which we are unable to solve. 
In natural sciences, for instance, in which we are concerned 
with phenomena that are not wholly dependent on us and 
certainly involve elements outside us, we may be unable 
to answer many questions for lack of sufficient data. 

But in transcendental philosophy we are not concerned 
with objects given from outside, but only with concepts 
offered by pure reason, and in regard to them there can- 
not be any problem insoluble to that same reason. In 
transcendental philosophy the very concept which enables 
us to raise the question also provides the object to which 
the question relates, and we cannot therefore plead igno- 
rance with regard to it. However, it is only in regard to cos- 
mological questions that we can demand positive answers. 
When the questions relate to transcendent objects like the 
self or God, as in rational psychology and theology, we 
can say that they are not questions at all, as they refer to 
no objects that can be given. Here "No answer" is the 
answer. But in rational cosmology we are concerned with 
the objects of experience (appearances) and their syn- 



COSMOLOG1CAL PROBLEMS 167 

thesis. The cosmological problems arise from the fact 
that we conceive the synthesis of appearances in its abso- 
lute completeness. The problem will be solved when we 
make clear to ourselves the exact significance of the idea 
which stands for such absolutely complete synthesis of 
the objects given in experience. The synthesis of appear- 
ances given in experience is only partial and relative, and 
in view of this fact, we have to find out the meaning of 
the idea which postulates absolute completeness in the 
synthesis. We have only to guard ourselves against that 
amphiboly or error which transforms our idea into a 
supposed representation of a given object and thus 
makes it an object that can be empirically known. 

Section V 

Sceptical Representation of the Cosmo- 
logical Questions 

Dogmatic answers to the cosmological questions 
raised by the antinomies would bring no real enlightent 
ment to us because, on examination, it would be found 
that the answers, whether affirmative or negative, are 
equally "empty of sense''. Whatever validity we may 
claim for the ideas, they should be understood in re- 
ference to the objects of experience, but when we try to 
interpret the ideas in this reference , we fail to give them 
any exact meaning, because there are no possible objects 
yielded by experience, which will exactly correspond to 
the ideas, whether we take them as meant by theses or 
by the antitheses. If we think of the world as having 
no beginning or being without any limit, we obviously ge 
an idea which far transcends the limits of all empirical 
concepts. There is no concept of the understanding by 



168 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

which a beginningless or limitless world can be represented 
If, on the other hand, we think of the world as having 
beginning in time or as being limited in space, we are 
constrained to posit something beyond the world whicl 
would condition or limit the world. We may think anc 
regard the world as infinitely divisible or as composed o 
simple parts. We may think of it as admitting no free 
causes or as being of the opposite character. In every case 
we find that the cosmological idea does not fit the world 
of experience from which alone it can derive its meaning 
and significance. The cosmological idea is either toe 
large or too small for any concept of the understanding. 

Section VI 

Transcendental Idealism as the Key to the 
Solution of the Cosmological Dialectic 

Kant thinks that the key to the solution of the 
cosmological problem is to be found in his Transcenden- 
tal Idealism, according to which whatever is objectively 
given to us, in external or internal perception, is an appear- 
ance and has 110 independent existence. An appearance 
is after all a representation which cannot exist apart 
from, or independently of, the representing rnind. It is 
to be distinguished from the thing in itself which exists 
independently of our representation and to which we 
may suppose our representation to be due. 

Transcendental Idealism is not to be confused with 
empirical idealism which denies the existence of outer 
things only and retains the existence of the objects 
of inner perception (mental states). For Transcendental 
Idealism, the objects of both inner and outer perceptions 
are equally appearances and the outer objects have as 



COSMOLOGICAL DIALECTIC 169 

good a title to (impirical) reality as the inner states. 

Ultimately our perceptions are real and whatever can 
be connected with them by empirical advance is 
also real. The past is real only in the sense that it is 
connected through unbroken steps with our present 
experience. If anything not within our present expe- 
rience is supposed to be real now, it is because we 
believe we can encounter it in a possible empirical 
advance from our present experience. In any case we 
have always to deal with appearances and they are 
distinct from things in themselves, of which no experience 
is possible. Only the conditioned is to be met with 
within experience and the unconditioned, for which the 
Idea of Reason stands, can be no object of experience 
and so no objective reality should be ascribed to it. 

Section VII 

Critical Solution of the Cosmologic&l Conflict of 
Reason with itself 

Kant points out the fallacy in the argument which 
underlies the cosmological antinomies. The argument is as 
follows : If the conditioned is given, the whole series of 
all its conditions is also given; the objects of the senses 
are given, therefore the whole series of all their conditions 
is also given. The major premise holds good of things in 
themselves. It is only when the conditioned is a thing in 
itself or independently real, that we can legitimately say 
that, when the conditioned is given, all its conditions 
are given. In the minor premise we are speaking of the 
objects of the senses which are only appearances and are 
not therefore things in themselves or independently real. 
They exist in so far as we perceive them. When these are 
K. c.. .22 



170 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

given, we cannot legitimately say that all their condi- 
tions are likewise given. The antecedent conditions of any 
given appearance are not given at all. They exist as 
appearances only in so far as we regressively construct 
them in thought. When an appearance is given, a task 
no doubt is set to our mind to reach out in thought to 
some other appearance as its condition. But the condi- 
tioning appearance is not given and has no existence save 
in our mental construction of it in regressive thought 

The above argument is thus fallacious, because the 
conditioned given has different senses in the major and 
minor premises. In the former it refers to what is inde- 
pendently real and in the latter to mere appearance. Kant 
calls this fallacy Sophisma figurae dictionis (the fallacy 
of deceptive expression). We can very well think of the 
absolute totality of conditions in terms of things in 
themselves, when we take them to be given, as in the 
major premise in the above argument without any tem- 
poral limitation. The things in themselves are not subject 
to time. But we cannot think of the absolute totality of 
conditions which are appearances, because the members of 
this series, being appearances, have to be reached succes- 
sively in time one after another and are not given and do 
not exist except as so reached through successive regress. 

The thesis and the antithesis in each case are sup- 
posed to contradict each other, so that it might appear 
that one of them must be true. But when each of the 
two conflicting assertions is based on an illegitimate pre- 
supposition, both of them may alike be false. This is 
really the case here. When it is said that the world is 
finite (thesis) or that it is infinite (antithesis), both the 
propositions are false, because they imply that the world 
as a thing in itself has a determinate magnitude, finite or 



COSMOLOGICAL DIALECTIC 171 

infinite; and it is illegitimate to apply any category and 
so the category of magnitude to a thing in itself. If we 
conceive the world as a thing in itself, then it is illegiti- 
mate to apply the category of magnitude to it. If we 
think of itas appearance, then it is wrong to suppose 
that the series of the appearances, which constitute the 
world, can ever be given in its entirety to be determined 
either as finite or infinite. Kant describes such conflict 
between two propositions both of which can be false as 
dialectical opposition. 

In the four-fold antinomy of pure reason we find only 
dialectical opposition and no real contradiction. What 
makes the thesis and the antithesis alike false is the 
underlying illegitimate presupposition that the idea of 
absolute totality, which holds good of things in them- 
selves, is applicable to the world of appearance also. 

In Kant's opinion, the discussion of the antinomies 
supports the view that the world of space and time is an 
appearance only. If the world existed as an independent 
whole, i. e. a thing in itself, it would be either finite or 
infinite, but the arguments for the thesis show that it is not 
infinite, and the arguments for the antithesis show that it 
is not finite. The world is thus neither finite nor infinite, 
which means that it is not a thing in itself or indepen- 
dently real. The world then consists only of appearances 
which are nothing outside our representations. Thus we 
get here a confirmation of the doctrine of Transcendental 
Idealism propounded in the Transcendental Aesthetic. 

Section VIII 

The Regulative Principle of Pure Reason in its 
Application to the Cosmological Ideas 

The idea of totality in regard to conditions, implied 



172 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

by what is given as conditioned, does not signify any- 
thing given in the object, but only something set as a 
task. The principle of pure reason in this regard does 
not hold as an Axiom that the totality is to be thought 
of as actually given in the object, but only as a Problem 
in the sense that, for anything conditioned, one has 
always to search for the series of conditions as if they 
could all be found completely. It thus does not state a 
fact but prescribes a rule as to how the understanding 
should proceed. As such, 110 doubt, it is quite valid, as 
one can see from the fact that our understanding never 
rests satisfied with conditions which are themselves condi 
tioned, but always pushes its enquiry beyond them under 
the idea that the series of conditions should be completed. 
This rule does not tell us whether the unconditioned or the 
series of conditions as completed exists anywhere, but it 
tells us merely how the empirical enquiry into conditions 
of things is to be carried on. The rule is regulative 
only and is devoid of objective significance. Space, time, 
and the categories, as conditions of possible experience, 
constitute the object of experience, but this rule merely 
guides our understanding in its empirical enquiry and so 
is only regulative and not constitutive. We should 
commit a great mistake if we ascribed objective reality 
to the idea of totality, which is valid only as an ideal to 
be followed by the understanding in empirical enquiry. 

Kant makes a distinction between Regressus in 
infinitum and regressus in indefinitum. When a whole 
is given in empirical intuition, the regress in the series of 
its conditions, i. e. its parts, may be carried on in infi- 
nitum. ( It is to be understood that a whole is condi- 
tioned by its parts and when a whole is given, its parts 
are also given, but the division of these parts to infinity 



SOLUTIONS OF THE ANTINOMIES 173 

is not given.) When however we have to trace out the 
higher conditions of a member of a series, the regress is 
only of an indeterminate character ( in indefinitam ). 
But in neither case can we conceive that the series of 
conditions as infinite is given in the object. It would 
have been so, if we were dealing with things in them- 
selves and not with appearances. 

Section IX 

The Empirical Employment of the Regulative 

Principle of Reason, in respect of all 

Cosmological Ideas 

We can now see the positive significance of that 
conflict of reason with itself which is illustrated in the 
antinomies. We should be wrong, no doubt, if we applied 
the idea of totality as objective to appearances. But 
nothing but good will result from our using this idea as a 
demand on our understanding to carry forward its 
investigation of empirical phenomena to the farthest 
possible extent. A principle, which would otherwise be 
dialectical, will be thus converted into a doctrinal 
principle. That is, instead of being deceptive, it will 
lead to fruitful results, 

/. Solution of the First Antinomy 
The first antinomy concerns itself with the question 
whether the world has a beginning in time or an extreme 
limit in space. The question is significant when we 
conceive the world as a whole. But the world as a whole 
does not exist as an object of experience. It is a mere 
Idea of reason. The unconditioned, which would limit 
the world and round off the series of appearances, can 



174 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

never be experienced. What we ever perceive and 
experience is in time and space, and therefore, has always 
something prior to it and going beyond it. The world 
which means the world of appearance given to perception 
has therefore no beginning in time and no extreme 
limit in space. 

But this does not mean that the world is infinite in 
magnitude. We have to keep clear before our view what 
we have got from the Idea of reason here. We have 
merely a rule that beyond any condition given in 
experience, we have to look for a further condition 
determining the given condition. We rever have the 
whole object given to us, so that we might determine its 
quantity, whether finite or infinite. The regress in 
the series of conditions does not proceed in infinitum 
but in indefinitum. The series is not infinitely extended 
but only indefinitely extensible. We thus see that 
both the thesis and the antithesis of the first antinomy 
are wrong. The world is neither finite nor infinite in 
extent. It can be only indefinitely extended. 

//. Solution of the Second Antinomy 
When a whole is given to us in intuition, we know 
that its parts are also given at the same time, (because 
the whole contains the parts), and that its division or the 
regress from the conditioned (whole) to the conditions 
(parts) proceeds in infinitum and not in indefinitum. 
But to say that a whole is infinitely divisible is not to say 
that it consists of an infinite number of parts. To say 
that a thing consists of an infinite number of parts is to 
say that it is infinitely divided (and not merely that it 
is infinitely divisible). But when a whole is given, its 
division into parts, whether finite or infinite, is not given 



COSMOLOGIGAL DIALECTIC 175 

at the same time* The whole contains the parts, no 
doubt, but not the division into parts. Such division 
realizes itself only in the actual analysis of the whole into 
parts. Thus although space or what is presented in space 
is infinitely divisible, we cannot say that it consists of an 
infinite number of parts. 

The division of a spatial whole can be continued as 
far as we like, and we shall never arrive at any final 
parts. But this does not mean that everything in the spatial 
world is complex. To be complex is to consist of parts. 
But the parts, as parts, emerge only in the actual decom- 
position of the whole and never before it. As we are 
dealing with the world of appearance, and not with 
things in themselves, we have to realize that parts exist 
only in our devision of a whole, and never in themselves. 
Thus it is again wrong to say that the World or anything 
in it, consists of a finite or infinite number of parts. 

The Distinction between the Mathematica.1- 
- Transcendental and Dynamical- 
Transcendental Ideas 

In the first two antinomies, which are called 
mathematical, we are concerned with series that con- 
tain only homogeneous members. In fact we are there 
concerned with the mathematical category of quantity, and 
only what is homogeneous can be brought under it. In 
the remaining two antinomies, which are described as 
dynamical, we are concerned with notions that may be 
different in character or heterogeneous. Neither the ideas 
of cause and effect nor those of necessity and contingency 
are required to signify things of the same kind. The 
mathematical ideas combine what is homogeneous, but the 



176 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

dynamical ideas may connect even what is heterogeneous. 
The cause may very well be altogether different in kind 
from the effect, and similarly the necessary from the 
contigent. 

From this there arises a welcome possibility. 
Whereas in the mathematical antinomies both the 
thesis and antithesis have to be denied as being false, 
in the dynamical antinomies both may be true, the 
thesis applying to the things in themselves, and the 
antithesis applying to the world of appearance. 

III. Solution of the Third Antinomy 
The category of causality is essential to our 
knowledge of things given in experience. As applied 
to experience it means that whatever happens has 
a cause which precedes it in time. But the cause itself, 
being an existence in time, is something that comes 
into being and is not eternal, and therefore requires 
a cause going before it. In this way we get, in the 
empirical field, an endless causal chain which cannot 
be completed. But reason cannot rest satisfied with 
an essentially incomplete, endless series. Reason 
therefore forms the idea of a free cause which acts 
spontaneously without being caused by anything else. 
The free cause cannot exist in time, since whatever is in 
time must have a cause going before it, and a free cause 
by definition is not caused by anything else. We have 
thus two sorts of causality: (1) causality according to 
nature, which is involved in our knowledge of any 
natural event, and (2) free causality. Natural causality 
is illustrated by all appearances, which must always 
stand in some temporal sequence, and without such 
sequence we cannot understand any appearance at all. 



COSMOLOGICAL DIALECTIC 177 

But what about free causality? We do not of course 
meet with free causes in the realm of appearances, 
where every cause is, in its turn, an effect of some 
other cause. Thus our experience of the world or nature 
gives us no evidence of freedom. But our moral expe- 
rience presupposes freedom or free causality. There is 
nothing good or bad, moral or immoral, in a thing 
which happens with absolute necessity in the course of 
nature. We can credit any being with moral worth 
when and only when we suppose that he can by him- 
self spontaneously initiate a series of effects without 
being determined to it by any other external cause. If 
we deny the transcendental Idea of Freedom, which 
is offered by reason and is not derived from any ex- 
perience, we have to deny moral experience also. But 
how can we accommodate freedom in a world which 
is guided by natural laws? 

Now 'if the world of experience were the reality, there 
would be no room for freedom. But we know that the 
world of experience consists of mere appearances, which 
must have grounds not given to experience. These 
grounds are the things in themselves. Every event, which 
is an appearance, has an intelligible ground and an 
empirical cause. Time is a form of appearance only and 
so it does not apply to things in themselves. The causa- 
lity of an intelligible ground in respect of any effect is 
not determined by any antecedent cause, because 'before' 
or 'after' or time itself has no meaning with regard to it. 
This causality is quite free. We thus see that for an 
empirical effect there may be two causes, a free intelli- 
gible cause ( in the world of things in themselves ) which 
is neither before nor after nor simultaneous with it, and 
an empirical cause ( In the world of appearances ) , which 
K. c. . . 23 



178 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

precedes it in time and is again caused by something else. 
We are thus enabled to understand that both the thesis 
and the antithesis may be true, the former in respect of 
things in themselves and the latter in respect of appear- 
ances. God may be the free cause of the series of ap- 
pearances which constitute the world, and we as moral 
agents may be the free causes of our actions, while any 
event within nature is bound up with its antecedent con- 
dition by natural causality. 

Possibility of Harmonizing Free Causality with 
Natural Necessity 

It is a little difficult to understand how an event can 
be subject to two-fold causality, both free and necessary. 
If an event can be explained by natural causality by refe 
rence to its antecedent events which necessarily lead to 
it as their effect, what need or justification is there for 
introducing here any causality that cannot be verified 
within experience ? Kant tries to meet this difficulty by 
pointing out that we do not get a complete comprehen- 
sion of an event by reference to other events only. They 
are all mere appearances which are not possible without 
some transcendental ground. Everything that happens, 
or is in nature has a two-fold character. First it is a 
member of a series of appearances, and secondly, it is 
grounded in a transcendental object. As an appearance, 
it is no doubt determined by other appearances, but for 
being what it is, it is also dependent on the transcenden- 
tal object which lies at its foundation. It should be 
clear that although we are speaking of causality in both 
connexions, the causality of the transcendental object in 
respect of an appearance is very different from the causa- 



COSMOLOGICAL DIALECTIC 179 

lity of an appearance in respect of another. We can trace 
an effect to its cause in the natural field, but we cannot 
in a similar way trace an effect to its super -sensuous 
cause. Still we cannot ignore the demand for such a 
cause, because the appearances themselves not being 
self-explained, we require a transcendental ground which 
may be supposed to determine them to be what they are 
in their character as appearances. 

Explanation of the Cosmological Idea of Freedom in 
its Connexion with Universal Natural Necessity 

But evidently the hypothesis of a transcendental 
ground cannot be verified in experience. Within expe- 
rience we find that natural causality rules universally and 
there is nothing in the world which is exempt from this 
rule. Still, we can suppose that this causal relation itself, 
found everywhere in the world of appearance, may be 
due to some transcendental or noumenal condition. That 
the appearances are what they are, with their spatial and 
temporal form and causal connexion, may be due to 
some noumenal ground. That this supposition is not at 
all extravagant, but even necessary, Kant tries to show 
by referring to our moral experience. 

Man with his birth and death is a natural existence. 
He is part of nature, and all his actions are natural 
events, explicable by natural causes, like other events. 
But man is not wholly a creature of nature. Through 
apperception he is aware of himself not only as a sensible 
existence, but also as possessing certain faculties, such as 
understanding and reason, which are not empirical but 
intelligible in character. Especially reason as practical 
gives evidence of something which forms no part of 



180 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

nature. In nature we may discover what was, is, or will 
be; but nowhere in nature can we find any indication of 
what ought to be. Ought expresses a kind of necessity 
which is nowhere found in nature. Our moral action thus 
reveals a causality which goes beyond nature. An action, 
so far as it is merely a natural process produced by natural 
causes, is neither moral nor immoral. It is moral only 
when it is determined by the ideal of reason which is 
certainly not a natural agency. 

All our moral judgements presuppose belief in a 
free cause. We cannot praise or blame a man for actions 
that are merely products of natural causes. When, e. g- 
we condemn a man for any moral offence, we do not take 
into account the natural causes that have led to it. We 
do not consider the bad education and the inherited dis- 
positions to moral offence which might have operated as 
natural causes of the offence. We consider the moral 
agent as absolutely free and by himself able to start a 
new series of effects. Without a belief in freedom, moral 
judgement has no meaning. 

The above arguments do not prove, and they are not 
meant to prove, that there are actually free causes. 
They only show that there is nothing absurd in the idea 
of free causality and that it is quite compatible with our 
view of nature as thoroughly governed by natural causes. 
We should only recognize that the idea of free causality 
is a Transcendental Idea, and the third antinomy of 
reason is due to the illusion which would apply this Tran- 
scendental Idea to the empirical field, i. e. the world 
of appearances. 

IV. Solution of the Fourth Antinomy 
The fourth antinomy differs from the third only in 



COSMOLOGICAL DIALECTIC 181 

the fact that in it we are concerned with the uncondi- 
tioned existence of a substance, while in the third we are 
concerned with unconditioned causality only. But the so- 
lution of this antinomy is the same as that of the third 
antinomy. We are made to realize that both the thesis 
and the antithesis may be true, the former in respect of 
the intelligible ground which underlies the world of 
sense, and the latter in respect of the world of sense itself. 
Everything in the world of sense is contingent- 
Every appearance depends on some other appearance as 
its cause, and we can never meet with the unconditioned 
in the world of appearance. But this thoroughgoing 
contingency of all things in nature does not preclude the 
possibility of an intelligible ground, which is absolutely 
unconditioned and on which the world of sense depends. 
It is a fact that nothing in the world is unconditioned 
and the unconditioned can never come within experience. 
But this fact does not mean that the unconditioned is 
nowhere real. The world of sense is a mere appearance 
and it cannot be self-grounded. However far we may 
trace the series of appearances, from effect to cause, we 
shall never come across any member that can be regarded 
as the unconditioned cause of all others. Every member 
in the series of appearances has a preceding member. So, 
for a complete explanation such as our reason demands, 
we have to take a leap beyond the series of appearances, 
and conceive a non-empirical ground which, without 
being a member of the series at all, conditions the whole 
series. We do not assert that such an intelligible ground 
exists or that we can ever know anything about it. We 
merely say that the hypothesis that such a being is the 
ground of the world of sense, is not contradicted by the fact 
of the thoroughgoing contingency reigning in the world. 



182 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

Concluding Note on the whole Antinomy of 
Pure Reason 

So long as our ideas concern only the unconditioned 
totality of sensible appearances they are still cosmologi- 
cal; but when they relate to the unconditioned outside 
the world of sense, they cease to be cosmological and 
become transcendent. This is the case with the idea 
which has given rise to the fourth antinomy. We are led 
by it beyond all appearances and think of a being who is 
outside of nature and experience. The understanding 
presents the world as a series of contingent appearances, 
and we are constrained to think of something which 
terminates the series and is absolutely different from all 
appearances. But how are we to think of this self- sub- 
sistent reality of which there can be no experience? We 
make use of the pure concepts of things in general in ab- 
straction from the forms of sense and, by analogy, form the 
Idea of an absolutely necessary being. The concept of an 
absolutely necessary being (God) is the subject of enquiry 
in the next chapter of the Transcendental Dialectic. 

CHAPTER III 
THE IDEAL OF PURE REASON 

Section I 
The Idea in General 

The categories of the understanding by themselves 
do not represent any objective reality. In themselves 
they are mere forms of thinking. They represent 
objective reality and are really significant only when 
they are applied to appearance or to material supplied 
by our sensibility. They are then exhibited in concreto. 



THE IDEA IN GENERAL 



183 



The Ideas of Reason also refer to appearances, but since 
they aim at an absolule completeness that can nowhere 
be found in concreto they do not represent any objective 
reality. The ideas are thus further removed from 
objective reality than the categories. But the Ideal of 
Pure Reason is still further removed from objective 
reality than even the Ideas, for it refers to no appearance 
at all and yet stands for "an individual thing determin- 
able or even determined by the idea alone*'. 

Our ideas and ideals have no creative power, in the 
sense that they cannot by themselves bring into being 
what is signified by them. Still, as regulative prin- 
ciples they can guide our activities. Such for example 
are our moral concepts. Virtue and wisdom are ideas, 
but the Wise Man of the Stoics is an ideal, because 
by the term "Wise man" we understand an indivi- 
dual being who is in complete conformity with the idea 
of wisdom. The idea gives the rule and the ideal serves 
as the archetype. 

The ideal exists only in thought and has no 
objective reality. It cannot properly be represented in 
any appearance, not even in a romance. But it should not 
on that account be regarded as a figment of the brain, 
It supplies us with an indispensable standard of reason 
by which we judge ourselves, and in the light of which we 
try to reform ourselves, although we can never reach it. 

The ideals of reason are to be sharply distinguished 
from the ideals of imagination, such as, for instance 
a painter may be supposed to carry in his head- Such 
ideals are formed out of the materials supplied by diverse 
experiences, in accordance with no definite rules and 
never attain to any very definite form. The ideal of 
reason, on the contrary, is regarded as completely deter- 



184 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

minable according to a priori rules and contains nothing 
that is drawn from experience. 

Section II 
The Transcendental Ideal 

If we are to know any one thing quite definitely, we 
have to know, in a way, all that is possible in general. 
Whatever exists is completely determined, and we can 
determine a thing completely only by applying to it all 
the possible positive and negative predicates. But where 
are we to take these predicates from ? They can be 
obtained only from the sum-total of all possible predi- 
cates. Thus it seems that in order to know any one thing 
in particular, we have to compare it with the sum-total 
of all possible predicates and select from this sum-total, 
for positive and negative assertion, whatever predicates 
are suitable to the particular thing in question. 

But what is this sum-total of all possible predicates ? 
Does it contain both positive and negative predicates ? Is 
it itself quite determined ? Is it an individual being or 
a mere aggregate ? 

We have to realize first of all that negation is never 
a primary fact. No negation is by itself intelligible which 
is not based on the opposite affirmation. Only when we 
know what is light, can we know darkness which is the 
negation of light. A man born blind cannot conceive 
darkness because he has no notion of light. All negations 
are thus derivative. Mere negations do not determine 
anything. Even when a thing is determined by both 
positive and negative predicates, it is the positive predi- 
cates or the realities that constitutes the basis of such 
determination. We can say what a thing is not, only on 



THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAL 185 

the basis of what it is. The sum- total of all possible predi- 
cates, in reference to which alone all determination becomes 
possible, is thus a totality of positive predicates or realities. 
This is the sum-total of all realities. All predicates for 
the determination of any finite thing are drawn from it. 
And it is not itself indeterminate. Out of every possible 
pair of contradictory predicates, the one that expresses 
reality belongs to it, and it is thus determined to absolute 
particularity or concreteness by all these infinitely nume- 
rous positive predicates. It is the source of all determina- 
tion of all finite realities. It is their ground and not an 
aggregate of them. All finite realities are copies or 
ectypes of which it is the prototype or ideal. We may 
call it the being of beings or the first being. 

We can easily see that this is really the Transcenden- 
tal Ideal because rt is determined by the idea alone. 
When we hypostatize or personalize this ideal, we think 
of it as God. But although we are inevitably led to this 
hypostatization, we cannot say that we are justified in 
hypostatizing what is merely in ideal of reason. It can 
at best be described as a transcendental illusion and it 
occurs in this way: We know that an empirical thing is 
real only in the context of experience, i. e. in relation 
with other empirical things or appearances. Thus the 
totality of all appearances is the ground of the reality 
of any appearance. Now what is true of an empirical thing 
is supposed, through a transcendental illusion, to be true 
of things in themselves. The ground of their reality is 
supposed to be the totality of all reality which is then 
conceived as God. There is a three -fold mistake here. 
First, we carry over to things in themselves what is true 
only of appearances. Secondly, we forget that experience 
is never given in its totality (collective unity), but only 
K. c. . . 24 



186 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

in parts ( distributively ). Thirdly, the totality of reality 
or the collective unity of all things in themselves is 
confused with an individual single thing and conceived 
ultimately as an intelligent thing in itself or Godf. 

Section III 

The Arguments of Speculative Reason in Proof 
of the Existence of a Supreme Being 

We are certainly wrong in thinking of the ideal of 
reason as actually existing, but there is a special reason 
for committing this error. Whatever we meet with in 
experience is conditioned and has a contingent existence. 
Our understanding by its very nature cannot rest content 
with what is merely conditoned and contingent. It 
demands an unconditioned and necessary being to serve 
as the ground of all conditioned and contingent appear- 
ances. And the being of beings, as we have described 
the transcendental ideal to be, which is the sufficient 
ground of all others, appears most fitted to fulfil this 
demand of the understanding. One therefore thinks 
that the highest reality is not merely an ideal, but 
enjoys necessary existence. We want an unconditioned 
and necessary being to provide sufficient ground for 
all contingent existences, and our concept of the highest 
reality seems to answer all that is needed for such a 
ground. What is a mere logical concept is thus trans- 
formed into a divine existence. 

Kant points out that there are only three possible 
ways in which the existence of God may be sought to be 
proved. We can argue (i) from experience., or (2) from 
mere concepts. When we argue from experience, we may 
argue (a) from the definite experience of some particular 



ONTOLOGICAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD 187 

things, or (b) from the indefinite experience of anything. 
Thus (1) from the particular character of things found 
within experience, namely from their adaptation to cer- 
tain ends, we can infer the existence of God as their cause. 
This is called the physico- theological or teleological 
proof of God. (2) Secondly, from anything that is given 
in experience, and which is always conditioned, we may 
conclude the existence of God as unconditioned and 
necessary. This is called the cosmological proof. (3) 
Thirdly, from the mere concept of God we may deduce 
a priori the existence of God. This is called the onto- 
logical proof. Kant proceeds to discuss these proofs one 
by one in the reverse order. 

Section IV 

The Impossibility of an Ontological Proof of 
the Existence of God 

It is supposed that we have the idea of an absolutely 
necessary being, and that the existence of such a being 
follows from our mere idea of it. Kant shows first of all 
that such a necessary being cannot really be conceived, 
and even if it could be conceived, its existence would 
not follow from the concept of it. 

Whenever we think of anything as necessary, we 
have to think of conditions which render it necessary. 
Whatever is necessary is so only under certain conditions. 
But when we remove all conditions and try to think of 
something as absolutely or unconditionally necessary, we 
fail to secure any intelligible content. When all conditions 
are removed, as is required by the idea of the uncondi- 
tioned, we cannot then significantly think of anything as 
necessary. 



188 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

The examples of what is absolutely necessary are al- 
ways judgements, such as those of Geometry. It is abso- 
lutely necessary that a triangle should have three angles. 
"But the unconditioned necessity of judgements is not the 
same as an absolute necessity of things." The so-called 
absolute necessity of a proposition like t( A triangle has 
three angles" is only a conditioned necessity. The above 
proposition does not say that three angles are there uncon- 
ditionally, but that they exist only under the condition 
that a triangle exists. If we are to think of a triangle, we 
have to think of it as having three angles. That a triangle 
has three angles is an identical judgement. Of such a 
judgement we cannot reject the predicate while retaining 
the subject, because that would give rise to a contradic- 
tion. But no contradiction would result if we r eject both 
the subject and the predicate, because nothing would be 
left to be contradicted. Although it is a contradiction to 
deny three angles of a triangle, it is no contradiction to 
deny the triangle together with its three angles. Similarly, 
"God is omnipotent " is an identical judgement and it 
would be a contradiction to deny omnipotence to God. 
This only means that if we once grant the existence of< 
God, we cannot deny omnipotence of him. But without 
any contradiction whatever we can deny the existence of 
God together with all his omnipotence. If existence 
formed part of the content of any concept, as the pro- 
perty of having three angles forms part of the meaning of 
a triangle, the denial of existence in reference to such a 
concept would involve a contradiction. The idea of God 
does not include existence as an element, and so it is no 
contradiction to say that God does not exist. 

It is however supposed that the idea of God con- 
ceived as ens realissiznum (the highest reality) contains 



ONTOLOGICAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD 189 

existence as an element in it, and so it would be a contra- 
diction to deny the existence of God. Against this view 
Kant contends that existence forms no part of the con- 
cept of any object whatever. No concept either gains or 
loses anything in content by the addition or subtraction 
of existence. If there is any defect in any concept, 
then the appropriate object of that concept even when 
it exists, will equally show that defect, and will not 
be rid of it by the fact of its existence. If in any 
existing object we find anything more than what is 
contained in the concept of it, then we know without 
a doubt that the concept is of some other object 
and not of the object we are considering. This shows 
that existence does not add anything to the content of 
any idea. We find that a hundred possible thalers are 
not a whit less than a hundred real thalers. 

When existence adds nothing to, and so is not a part 
of, the content of an idea, it is clear that existence can- 
not be used as the predicate of an analytical proposition. 
There is no idea by a mere examination of which ws can 
say whether the object of it exists or not. All our existen- 
tial judgements are synthetic and we can learn only from 
experience what things exist. We may possess the most 
perfect idea of the supreme being, but the question will 
still remain whether this being exists. 

It is quite plain that we cannot assert the existence 
of a sensible object from our mere idea of it. If we are 
to assert existence of it, it must be either itself actually 
perceived or be connected by empirical laws with what is 
actually perceived. Existence has no meaning for us, ex- 
cept in relation to possible experience, The concept of a 
supreme being is an Idea of pure reason and is never 
presentable in experience. It is a mere idea, and it can 



190 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

never help us to know what exists or is even possible in 
fact. For such knowledge we must turn to experience. 

Kant is not saying that God does not exist. His po- 
sition is that we do not know that God exists and that it 
is impossible to derive this knowledge from the mere idea 
of God. We can never pass from the idea of a thing to 
its existence, because existence is not a part of the content 
of any idea, 

Section V 

The Impossibility of a Cosmologies 1 Proof of the 
Existence of God 

In the ontological proof there is no reference to any 
experience; the argument is completely a priori. The 
cosmological proof refers to experience, though not to 
any particular experience, and is not completely a priori. 
It proceeds in this way: If anything exists, then there must 
also exist an absolutely necessary being. Now I at least 
exist, therefore the absolutely necessary being also exists 
The argument does not refer to any specific experience, 
but any experience or the experience of anything will 
serve its purpose. Since the object of all possible expe- 
riences is called the world, the argument is described as 
cosmological. This is also described, as by Leibniz as 
a proof from the contingency of the world (a con tingen- 
tia mundi), since what it says in substance is that 
because everything in the world is contingent, anything 
in it presupposes a necessary being as its basis or cause . 

Since whatever is experienced is contingent, the 
necessary being presupposed by experience must be 
beyond all experience. Experience therefore cannot help 
us in determining the characteristics of the necessary 



ONTOLOGICAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD 191 

being. We cannot learn from experience which among all 
possible things it is that contains in itself the condition 
of absolute necessity. To learn this we must turn to our 
a priori concepts, and when we do so, we find that there 
is one and only one concept which satisfies the condition 
of absolute necessity or determines a thing completely, 
without referring us to anything beyond itself. This is 
the concept of the ens realissimum. Since our under- 
standing cannot remain satisfied with contingent existen- 
ces, we know, according to the demand of reason, that 
there must be some being which enjoys necessary exis- 
tence. This does not suffice for us to identify this being. 
But the concept of the ens realissimum gives us the 
idea of a being that contains no borrowed reality and 
depends on no other being, it being the highest reality 
itself. We know thus that the absolutely necessary 
being is to be thought through the concept of the ens 
rea/iss/mum, or in other words, that a supreme being 
necessarily exists. 

The nerve of the argument is constituted by the 
identification of the necessary being with the ens realis- 
simum. Unless the concept of the ens realissimum 
answered the conditions of necessary existence, we could 
not determine in fact the absolutely necessary being 
presupposed by our contingent experience. But if the 
concept of the highest reality, or the most real being, is 
so far adequate that from an examination of the concept 
alone we know that it suffices for necessary existence, 
then we might simply deduce necessary existence from 
the concept of the highest reality. This is exactly what 
the ontological argument maintains. And if that argu- 
ment is found to be invalid, the cosmological argument, 
is no less invalid. It is even worse than the ontological 



192 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

argument, because it professes to prove the existence 
of the highest reality on the basis of experience, and so 
in a manner different from that of the ontological argu- 
ment, but in actuality it merely repeats the ontological 
argument itself and so illustrates a case of a mere igno- 
ratio elenchi. 

Besides, this proof is based on several unwarrantable 
assumptions. First, in inferring a necessary being from 
the contingent it makes use of the principle of causality 
which is assumed to be valid in respect of the whole 
sensible world or outside the sensible world, whereas in 
fact it is valid only within the sensible world. The 
necessary being stands outside the world and experience, 
and it is inferred as the cause of the world. But how do 
we know that the causal principle holds good outside 
the world ? 

Secondly, when we infer a first cause, we assume it 
to be impossible that there should be an infinite series of 
empirical causes. But the series of empirical causes may 
very well be infinite and so need not necessitate any 
transcendental first cause- 

Thirdly, it is assumed that the unconditioned is the 
absolutely necessary, but in fact when we have removed 
all conditions, we have removed at the same time the 
idea of necessity, because it it the conditions which make 
anything necessary, and when there are no conditions, 
there is no necessity. 

Discovery and Explanation 

of the Dialectical Illusion in all Transcendental 
Proofs of the Existence of a Necessary Being 

If the cosmological argument is so fallacious, how is it 



DIALECTICAL ILLUSION IN THE TRANSCENDENTAL PROOFS 193 

that our mind is so prone to make use of this argument 
to prove the existence of God? This requires explanation 
and the explanation is found in the fact that what is 
prescribed merely for the guidance of our understanding 
in its empirical investigation is, through a transcendental 
illusion, taken to characterize a real fact. Or, as it is 
technically put, a regulative principle is mistaken for a 
constitutive one. 

The main point in the cosmological argument is that 
if anything whatever exists, then something must necessa- 
rily exist. On the other hand, we cannot think of a 
single determinate thing as in itself necessary. Everything 
is contingent. There is a contradiction between these 
two propositions: (a) something is necessary and (b) 
everything is contingent. This shows that necessity and 
contingency cannot be taken as objective characteristics 
of things in themselves. They may be regarded as sub- 
jective principles of reason and may be taken to express 
complementary rules for the guidance of the understanding. 
They do not contradict each other when they are regarded 
as merely heuristic and regulative. 

The first rule, viz. that something exists by absolute 
necessity, means that we should never rest content with 
anything relative and contingent, but should carry on our 
investigation ever further and further, as if something 
absolutely necessary were to be found at the end. The 
second rule, which says that everything is contingent, 
demands that we should not regard any determination in 
things as ultimate, but should always try to trace it to 
something else. Even extension and impenetrability, 
which make up matter, should not be regarded as final 
and there should always remain a possibility of their 
further derivation from something else. Thus the 
K. c.. .25 



194 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

understanding in its scientific research is guided by this 
two-fold command of reason. 

The former rule, which urges us to trace empirical 
phenomena to more and more ultimate grounds, as // 
there were at the end something absolutely final which 
would complete the search, is helpful merely as stating 
an ideal which we should do well to pursue in our scienti- 
fic investigation. But through an inevitable mistake this 
regulative precept is taken to be a statement of fact, and 
the absolutely necessary being or the ens realissimum, 
which is nothing but a subjective ideal to inspire our 
scientific research, is regarded as an objective existence. 
This is how a regulative principle is converted into a con- 
stitutive one. That the conversion is quite illegitimate 
is quite evident from the fact that we cannot even con- 
ceive unconditioned necessity, because necessity without 
condition is not at all intelligible 

Section VI 

The Impossibility of the Physico- 
Theological Proof 

The physico-theological proof or, as it is otherwise 
called, the teleo logical proof, does not start from mere 
concepts or from experience in general, but from some 
particular experience of the world. We find var'ety, or- 
der, purposiveness and beauty in the world, and as these 
cannot be explained by any natural causes, we feel justi- 
fied in inferring from them the existence of God as their 
sufficient cause. Kant describes this argument as the 
oldest, clearest and most suited to the common under- 
standing of man. This argument undoubtedly possesses 
a great persuasive force. Any doubt as to the existence 



THE PHYSICO-THEOLOGICAL PROOF 195 

of God raised in our mind by subtle and abstruse 
speculation is readily dispelled, Kant says, "by one glance 
at the wonders of nature and the majesty of the univere". 
But in spite of its appeal to common human understand- 
ing, the argument cannot be regarded as theoretically 
valid or logically cogent. At least it gives no apodeictic 
certainty. 

The argument points out that there are everywhere 
in the world clear signs of order in accordance with 
a purpose. This purposive order cannot be due to the 
blind working of the mechanical laws and cannot be ex- 
plained by anything in the things themselves. The order 
therefore has to be conceived as imposed on the things by 
some intelligent agency outside them. As there is unity 
in the reciprocal relations between the different parts Of 
the universe, the intelligent cause of the world is not 
many but one. 

The argument assumes that nature working freely by 
itself is incapable of producing the harmony and order 
observable in the world; but this may well be doubted. 
The argument really proceeds after the analogy of works 
produced by human skill and intelligence, such as houses, 
ships and watches, and so at best can prove an artificer 
of the world and not a creator of it. God is shown to be 
necessary only for the orderly form of the world and not 
for the being of the substance on which that form is 
imposed. He, like a human artist, only fashions the 
material lying ready to his hand, ( which may well 
hamper him in his work), but does not freely create the 
material itself. 

Moreover, the cause we infer can be only proportionate 
to the effect from which it is inferred. The world is in- 
deed great and the order and purposiveness in it is also 



196 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

great, and this can be due, we suppose, to a being who 
is very wise and powerful. But a being very wise and 
powerful is not determinate enough to be identified with 
God. Great wisdom and great power are things very 
different from omniscience and omnipotence. 

No argument drawn from experience can be adequate 
for a being who falls entirely outside experience and is 
represented to us only by an idea of reason. The teleolo- 
gical argument regards order and purposiveness in things 
as contigent, and in inferring a necessary cause for them 
it falls back upon the cosmological argument. And that 
argument (cosmological), we have seen, is but the ontologi- 
cal argument in disguise. If any proof is at all possible 
of a transcendent being like God, the only proof is that 
of the a priori ontological argument. 

Section VII 

Critique of all Theology based upon Speculative 
Principles of Reason 

The knowledge of the original being or God may be 
based either on revelation or on reason. Rational theo- 
logy aims at giving us knowledge of God based on rea- 
son. Rational theology may be distinguished into trans- 
cendental theology and natural theology. Transcen- 
dental rational theology does not take into account any 
empirical concepts, but by a consideration of purely 
a priori concepts, arrives at the notion of God as the 
original being or the being of beings. Natural theology, 
from a consideration of the order and harmony exhibited 
in the world, comes to the idea of a God who, through 
understanding and freedom, creates the world. Transcen- 
dental theology leads to deism and natural theology to 



RATIONAL THEOLOGY 197 

theism. For the deist there is only a first cause of the 
world, but the theist requires an author of the world. 
Although for the deist the first cause is not further deter- 
mined as intelligent or free, he may be allowed to believe 
in a God, but it is only the theist who believes in a 
living God. 

Knowledge may be theortical or practical. In theo- 
retical knowledge the object of knowledge is something 
that exists. In practical knowledge we are concerned 
not with what is, but with what ought to be. We know 
there are practical or moral laws which are absolutely 
unconditional or necessary. These laws presuppose the 
existence of God as the ground of their obligatory power. 
The moral laws thus require us to postulate the existence 
of God. But this can never amount to a theoretical 
knowledge of the existence of God. It gives us only a 
practical faith for the guidance of our moral activities. 

Theoretical knowledge may be of two kinds, specula- 
tive and scientific. Speculative knowledge concerns an 
object of which there can be no experience, whereas 
scientific knowledge or the knowledge of nature, as Kant 
calls it, is concerned only with objects which can be 
given in a possible experience. 

It is plain that by a speculative employment of rea- 
son we cannot prove the existence of God. We may be 
able to form the most perfect idea of God, but since God 
is not an object of a possible experience for us, we have 
no means at our disposal to assure ourselves that the 
object of this perfect idea actually exists. We cannot 
arrive at the existence of God from the contingency of 
things in the world, because if we were to do so, we 
should be extending the principle of causality beyond its 
legitimate sphere, which is experience. Cause has no 



198 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

meaning outside experience, and so God, who is never 
experienced, cannot properly be conceived of as the cause 
of the world. Moreover, by causality we trace one happen- 
ing or a state of things to an earlier state of things. It is 
the state of things that is contingent. That things 
themselves are contingent or that substance or matter is 
contingent we do not know. So our notion of an actual 
creator of things is unjustified. Even if we somehow con- 
nect God with the series of contingent phenomena which 
constitute the world, God would, in that case, be a 
member of the series and likewise contingent, and so not 
God at all. Rational theology is thus quite impossible- 
We have to content ourselves only with a faith in the 
existence of God as a postulate of moral experience* 
And this is not knowledge. 

We may here refer to the original question of Kant: 
how are synthetic a priori judgements possible ? The 
Aesthetic and the Analytic have shown that such 
judgements are possible and valid within experience. 
Their validity is confined within the field of possible 
experience. When we assert the existence of God, we 
assert a synthetic a priori proposition and such a pro- 
position cannot be at all valid, because what it asserts is 
not a possible object of experience. 

But although the existence of God cannot be proved 
by any theoretical means, it cannot also be disproved. 
It is thus that room is made for faith* even when 
knowledge is denied. 



APPENDIX TO THE TRANSCENDENTAL 

DIALECTIC 
The regulative employment of the ideas of 

Pure Reason 

We have seen how the Ideas of pure reason give rise 
to certain illusions which we cannot avoid. The Ideas are 
as natural to reason as the categories are to the understan- 
ding. And it is the view of Kant that whatever is ground- 
ed in the nature of our powers (undertsanding and rea- 
son) must be appropriate to their right employment. The 
Ideas lead to illusion because they are put to a use which 
is not proper to them. To take these Ideas for concepts of 
real things, transcending all experience, is an entire mis- 
take. But they may have a proper use within experience. 
We have to find this out. And for this we should first 
realize that the Ideas do not directly relate to objects 
at all. It is the understanding that deals with objects, 
and reason has concern only with the understanding 
and its synthetic activities. If it is the business of the 
understanding to synthesize or combine phenomena by 
means of its concepts (e. g. causal connexion), and make 
them into objects, it is the function of reason to combine 
the syntheses of the understanding into a unity or whole 
by means of its Ideas which aim at absolute totality. 
The understanding by itself makes only distributive or 
partial unities, and it is only through the Ideas of reason 
that a collective unity or the unity of a whole is set up 
to it (understanding) as the goal of its activities. The 
Ideas are not, like the categories, concepts of objects. 
They do not constitute objects, as do the categories, 
and are not therefore constitutive but only regulative. 
That is, they direct (regulate) the understanding towards 



200 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

a goal or an ideal point upon which all its series of con- 
cepts in their completion converge. This point lying quite 
outside the bounds of all possible experience is not any- 
thing real, but a mere idea, focus imagin amis; still, it 
serves to give the concepts the greatest possible unity 
and extension. 

The idea of a whole, which thus reason gives, helps us 
to unify and systematize all knowledge obtained through 
the understanding. This Idea of a whole makes into 
a system what would otherwise remain a mere contingent 
aggregate. All our scientific enquiries are carried on with 
the Idea that there is such a whole or system. This Idea 
is not derived from nature, but nature on the contrary 
is interrogated according to it. We are not to suppose that 
this Idea represents any objective unity. It represents 
only an ideal of knowledge which we strive to attain 
through the efforts of the understanding. Thus it serves 
only as a rule for the understanding. 

This Idea of a systematic unity of the manifold of 
knowledge may thus appear to be a subjective, logical, or 
methodological principle which merely demands the 
greatest possible unity in our knowledge. But in fact it is 
a transcendental principle of reason in virtue of which 
a systematic unity is necessarily assumed a priori as be- 
longing to the objects. It is no doubt only a logical maxim 
which says that we should seek for systematic unity in 
our knowledge of nature. But this logical maxim is based 
on transcendental principle, and this principle finds ex- 
pression in the familiar assumption that in spite of the 
infinite variety of particular things, they can be subsumed 
under various species which in their turn can be brought 
under fewer and fewer genera of greater and greater 
extension. 



APPENDIX TO THE TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 201 

Now, if the things in the world were so utterly diffe- 
rent from one another that there could be no similarity 
and affinity between them, we should be altogether un- 
able to frame any concepts and our understanding would 
be paralysed. We have therefore to assume unity and 
affinity in the objects. This is described by Kant as the 
principle of homogeneity. This principle, we should 
note, is subjective and methodological on the one hand, 
and objective and transcendental on the other. It is sub- 
jective and methodological because it is meant to guide 
our scientific inquiry. It is objective and transcendental 
because it is presupposed in the object and is not de- 
rived from experience, but makes an a priori demand on 
experience to conform to it. 

This principle of homogeneity is matched by another 
principle in virtue of which we are always led to look for 
species under species. This is called the principle of 
specification. According to it every genus must specify 
itself in different species and these again in more specific 
sub-species, and so on. If the principle of homogeneity 
leads us from variety to unity, the principle of specifica- 
tion leads us from unity to variety. 

There is .not merely unity but also variety in nature. 
This principle is equally transcendental and equally 
necessary for the development of our understanding. 
Where there is mere identity as well as where there is 
mere difference, there is no scope for the understanding. 

Besides these two principles, we have another 
principle, the principle of affinity or continuity. 
According to this principle there are no abrupt jumps in 
nature from one species to another, but only gradual 
transition* This means that between any two species or 
sub-species there are always other intermediate species 
K c.. .26 



202 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

possible. This principle requires us to took always for 
intermediate species between any two species to serve as 
the link between them. This principle like the other two 
is also transcendental, because it is not derived from our 
experience (viz. the experience of the world as a system), 
but it is according to this principle that our experience is 
systematized. This principle is in a sense the cause, and 
not the effect, of our systematic knowledge. 

But the continuity of forms which this principle 
prescribes is not to be discovered actually anywhere in 
nature. In the first place, the actual species in nature 
are all separated from one another and constitute what 
is called a quantum discretum. If we follow the 
principle literally, there should be an infinity of inter- 
mediate species between any two species, which is 
impossible. This principle tells us in a general manner 
that we should seek for grades of affinity, but gives no 
definite indication as to how far and in what manner we 
should prosecute the search. 

However, it is clear that understanding and reason 
co-operate to build up the system of our scientific know- 
ledge. The knowledge of the understanding must be 
already there. Reason comes in to organize and extend that 
knowledge in accordance with regulative ideas of mani- 
/o/dness (specification), affinity (homogeneity), and unity 
(continuity). The principles corresponding to these ideas 
are like the principles of the understanding synthetic and a 
priori. But although they are valid in a way in respect of 
the object, the objective validity of these principles of 
reason cannot be demonstrated by a transcendental 
deduction. These should therefore be regarded as heuris- 
tic principles, i. e. as aiding us in discovery, and as so 
conceived they can be used with much profit. Since 



FINAL PURPOSE OF THE NATURAL DIALECTIC 203 

their objective validity cannot be proved, they had 
better be described as maxims than as principles. 

All thinkers are not influenced in the same way by 
these ideas (rnanifoldness, affinity and unity). One 
may have more, and another less, interest in one or other 
of these regulative ideas. And much useless controversy 
would be avoided if these were properly regarded as giv- 
ing us merely maxims for the guidance of our scientific 
enquiry, and not as yielding objective insight into the 
nature of things. 

The Final Purpose of the Natural Dialectic of 
Human Reason 

The Ideas of reason do not by themselves lead to 
error or illusion. They do so only when they are wrongly 
employed. As belonging to reason itself they must have 
a proper use which does not involve error or illusion. 
If they are to have any sort of objective validity, we 
should be able to give a deductian of them. But the 
sort of transcendental deduction we could provide in the 
case of the categories of the understanding is not possible 
in the case of the Ideas of reason. The Ideas do not 
characterize and determine objects as do the categories; 
they give us only the points of view from which we should 
seek to determine the character and constitution of the 
objects of experience. If we are to extend and systema- 
tize our empirical knowledge, we find these Ideas quite 
indispensable, because they help us to give a systematic 
unity to our knowledge, and even to make discoveries 
which would otherwise be impossible. Herein consists 
their transcendental deduction which shows their legiti- 
macy as regulative principles. 



204 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

How are we to use these Ideas? The Ideas of God, 
soul and the world as a whole do not of course represent 
any objective realities which we can possibly know. But 
we are nevertheless aided in our enquiries in different 
fields of psychologjr, theology and cosmology if we pro- 
ceed as if there were objects like the soul, God, or the 
world as a whole. Only for the purpose of our empirical 
enquiry we assume in idea (but do not posit in reality) 
these transcendental objects and we find that the as- 
sumptions are really helpful. 

We have seen that the Idea of the world involves us in 
antinomies. The Ideas of God and the soul do not in- 
volve any contradiction and are therefore logically possible. 
But this logical possibility cannot justify the assertion 
that they actually exist. And when we assume them, 
we do not assume them in themselves absolutely. What 
they may be in themselves we have not the slightest 
idea. But we assume them only in relation to appear- 
ances, and conceive this relation after the analogy of the 
relation between one appearance and another. We thus 
think of God after the manner of a real substance which 
is the cause of all things. But we have not the least 
notion as to the inner possibility of his perfection or the 
necessity of his existence. We are justified in thinking 
of God only in relation to experience, (and cannot assume 
God or the soul as existing absolutely), solely with a 
view to its complete and systematic unity. We can know 
the world, given in experience, better in its unity and 
systematic connexion, if we regard it as the creation of a 
God. Similarly we are aided in our psychological know- 
ledge of the inner states and appearances, if we regard 
them as the expressions of a simple immaterial soul. 

It should be clear that the concepts of reality, sub- 



FINAL PURPOSE OF THE NATURAL DIALECTIC 205 

stantiality and causality, which are applicable only to 
appearances, do not describe any entities like God or the 
soul, entirely distinct from the world of sense. The out- 
come of the whole Transcendental Dialectic is that 
pure reason in its Ideas is concerned merely with itself 
and not with any things in themselves. The Ideas do 
not signify any objective reality. Their sole significance 
consists in the fact that they bring together to systematic 
unity what we know piecemeal through understanding. 
An Idea of reason then merely systematizes or unifies 
our empirical knowledge. But when reason thinks of 
this unity, it ascribes at the same time an object to the 
Idea. The object, however, is entirely undetermined for 
us as regards its constitution. It helps us merely to 
envisage the whole body of knowledge from a unitary 
point of view and serves as the schema of the regulative 
principle. 

Thus the Idea of the soul does riot signify a real en- 
tity which is the actual ground of all the mental states, 
but represents only the schema of a regulative idea by 
means of which all our inner experiences are unified and 
systematized. The sole function of the Idea is the unifica- 
tion of our psychical experiences, as distinguished from all 
outer experiences. The soul does not represent a reality, 
but an ideal schema in terms of which our psychical 
experiences are systematized. The systematization is 
best attained when we regard the mental states or 
psychical experiences as if they were grounded in a single 
persistent spiritual substance, called the soul. The soul 
in itself is not thereby known, nor are the hypotheses of 
its generation, extinction and rebirth at all justified. 

The Idea of the world in general means the absolute 
totality of conditions in nature. The series of conditions 



206 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

from which appearances are derived is endless and so the 
totality of the series is never realized within experience. 
It can serve only as a rule which should guide our expla- 
nation of empirical phenomena. The rule is that in the 
explanation of any particular phenomenon we should 
refer to further and further conditions as // the series 
of conditions in itself were infinite. We should not rest 
satisfied with any particular condition, but should push 
our enquiry ever further. 

The third transcendental Idea is that of God. This 
idea does not presuppose an actually existing being, but 
merely demands that we should regard the world in its 
systematic inter -connexion as // it originated from a sin- 
gle all-sufficient being, as if it were the purposive crea- 
tion of a supreme intelligence. That everything in nature 
subserves some purpose is not of course established by 
observations that have been so far made. But the hypo- 
thesis that everything in the world has a purpose immen- 
sely helps our study of nature and its connexions. We can 
better understand and connect phenomena when we view 
them teleologically and can even make discoveries while 
looking for ends. This view cannot also do any harm, for 
at the worst we should only find a physical connexion 
when a teleological connexion was looked for. 

It is in this way that the Ideas of reason can be 
properly used as regulative principles in our scientific 
enquiries with great advantage. But if we overlook this 
restriction of the ideas to mere regulative use and regard 
them as being constitutive in character, we are led into 
grave errors. The first error of this kind which arises 
from our regarding an idea of reason as being constitu- 
tive rather than regulative is called ignava ratio or 
slothful reason. By it we are led to dispense with the 



FINAL PURPOSE OF THE NATURAL DIALECTIC 207 

trouble of a proper scientific- explanation of a phenomenon, 
and we try to explain it by merely referring it to a divine 
decree. This means only the sluggishness of our reason. 

The second error is called perversa ratio or the 
error of putting the cart before the horse. The proper 
course of scientific enquiry is that we should seek for 
systematic connexions everywhere in nature under the 
guidance of the idea that the world is a purposive crea- 
tion. The purposive creation of God means nothing but 
the systematic connexion of things in nature which has 
to be found out by proper scientific research. But under 
the influence of this error, we reverse the order and 
think of God as already existing and imposing purposive 
and systematic unity forcibly on things. What has to be 
proved is here simply presupposed as being already there. 

It was asserted in discussing the antinomy of reason 
that the questions raised by reason should admit of an 
answer. What is the answer to the question : Is there 
any ground of the world distinct from it ? The answer is: 
Yes, because the world is a sum of appearances, and there- 
fore there must be a transcendental ground of these 
appearances. If it is asked whether the ground of the 
world is to be conceived as substance, real, necessary, etc., 
the answer is that these concepts have meaning only 
within appearance and cannot be applied to things in them- 
selves. Can we not think of the world-ground as an intelli. 
gent author (after the analogy of our own intelligence 
which is an empirical concept) ? We may and indeed must 
do so; but we should be careful not to suppose that we 
thereby know the unknown ground of the world as in 
itself intelligent. 

"AH our knowledge begins with intuitions and from 
them proceeds to concepts and ends with ideas.*' Sensi- 



208 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC 

bility, understanding and reason have all their respective 
a priori elements, viz., the pure intuitions of space and 
time, the categories and the Ideas; and although they 
hold good independently of experience and may even 
appear at first sight to scorn the limit of all experience, 
still our knowledge can never extend beyond the field of 
possible experience. 



TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF 
METHOD 

In the Transcendental Doctrine of Elements 
(consisting of the Aesthetic, the Analytic and the 
Dialectic), Kant has considered, as it were, the materials 
out of which the edifice of knowledge is built and has also 
determined for what sort of edifice the available materials 
are sufficient. He has found that the building does not reach 
up to the heavens, but remains on the low level of expe- 
rience. He has found that we cannot know super-sensible 
realities, but only objects which fall within possible 
experience. He is now going to consider, in the Trans- 
cendental Doctrine of Method, as it were, the plan of 
the building. He will be concerned to determine the 
formal conditions of a system of pure reason, and will 
treat of a discipline, a canon, an architectonic and 
finally, of a history of pure reason. 

CHAPTER I 
THE DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON 

Discipline here means the compulsion which 
restrains and finally removes the constant tendency to 
disobey certain rules. Our reason suffers from the tendency 
to go beyond all intuition and so requires this discipline. 
No discipline is needed for reason in its empirical employ- 
ment, because in this it is always subjected to the test of 
experience. Nor is any discipline of reason needed in 
mathematics, because here the concepts of reason have to 
be exhibited in concre to in pure intuition and we are 
thus guarded against their possible wrong use. But in 
the transcendental employment of reason, i. e. in 
K. C.. .27 



210 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

metaphysics, no such correcting factor being present, the 
discipline is very necessary. 

Section I 

TTie Discipline of Pure Reason in its Dogmatic 
Employ men t. 

Mathematics gives us a splendid example of how we 
can extend our khowledge without the help of experience. 
Encouraged by this example, philosophy may likewise 
hope to attain to sure knowledge by adopting the method 
of mathematics. The mathematical method, by which 
apodeictic certainty is attained, is the same thing as the 
dogmatic method of philosophy by which the same sort of 
certainty is sought to be reached. Kant's position is that 
the method of mathematics is not applicable in philosophy 
and so the Doctrine of Method as Discipline should 
forbid any such dogmatic use of reason in philosophy. 

The method of mathematics cannot be adopted in 
philosophy because there is an essential difference between 
mathematical and philosophical knowledge. "Philoso- 
phical knowledge is the knowledge gained by reason 
from concepts, mathematical knowledge is the know- 
ledge gained by reason from the construction of 
concepts." To construct a concept is to exhibit a priori 
the intuition which corresponds to the concept. For the 
construction of a concept an intuition is necessary which 
is non-empirical and universal in significance. We thus 
construct a triangle by representing by imagination in 
pure intuition the object which corresponds to it, or also 
by drawing it on paper in accordance with the pure 
intuition of it. We get in the latter case an empirical and 
particular intuition, but it has an a priori and universal 



DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON-DOGMATIC EMPLOYMENT 211 

significance; a priori, because there is nothing here 
borrowed from experience, and universal because, as it 
corresponds to a concept (a universal representation), 
what is true of it must be true of all other instances also 
which come under the concept. 

The philosopher, merely by analysing the mathema- 
tical concepts, is quite unable to bring forth anything 
new. But the mathematician, since he constructs the 
objects of these concepts in intuition, is able to arrive at 
new knowledge about them. The philosopher can of 
course frame analytical propositions by analysing the con- 
cepts; but the question here is of synthetic propositions 
which require the help of construction in pure intuition. 

The mathematical concepts already involve pure in- 
tuition and so the construction of their objects is quite 
possible, and we can very well make synthetic judgements 
about them, But the concepts of philosophy do not con- 
tain any intuition at all. They are only the syntheses of 
possible iutuitions. They represent the ways in which pos- 
sible intuitions are to be connected with each other. The 
concepts, like those of substance and quality, and cause 
and effect, for example, are empty of all intuitional 
content and represent only the form according to which 
what is given in intuition is to be connected and con- 
ceived. We know that both intuition and concept are 
necessary for knowledge. As mathematical concepts them- 
selves contain a priori intuition, it is possible to derive 
knowledge from them. But since philosophical concepts 
are devoid of all intuitional content, it is impossible to 
derive any synthetic knowledge from them. 

Still the temptation to follow the mathematical method 
in philosophy is great, because both mathematics and 
philosophy deal with a priori concepts, and it is imagined 



212 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

that what has led to excellent results in one field may be 
equally fruitful in the other also* Kant seeks to supply an 
effective antidote to this temptation by showing that de- 
finitions, axioms and demonstrations, on which mathema- 
tical knowledge depends for its exactitude, are not possible 
and cannot at all be used in the same sense in philosophy. 

1. Definitions : According to the mathematical 
notion, to define a thing is to represent the complete con- 
cept of it. In this sense neither empirical nor a priori 
concepts can be defined in philosophy. As regards the 
empirical concepts, we can never be sure that we have 
exhaustively known all the essential characteristics that a 
thing possesses. The a priori concepts such as substance, 
cause, etc. are in a sense given to the mind, since they 
are not framed by it, and we cannot define them in the 
strict sense, because we can never know for certain that 
we have been able to make a correct and complete 
analysis of them. It is quite otherwise with mathemati- 
cal concepts which in a sense contain their objects, and 
no question arises as to whether the object corresponds 
to the concept defined, because the object is as it were 
made through the definition. "Mathematical definitions 
make their concepts, in philosophical definitions concepts 
are only explained. 9 ' This is why mathematics can 
begin with definitions, whereas philosophy can only end 
with them. We can make ourselves clear about philoso- 
phical concepts only after a philosophical enquiry > and 
so if philosophical definition means clear exposition, we 
can get definitions only at the end of philosophy. 

Mathematical definitions can never err, since the 
objects are made what they are through the definitions 
and there can be no question of their not agreeing with 
them. The definitions at worst may not be precise. 



DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON-DOGMATIC EMPLOYMENT 213 

But philosophical definitions are always liable to error, 
because they are either too wide or too narrow, the 
essential characteristics enumerated being either too few 
or too many. 

2. Axioms : Axioms are synthetic a priori princi- 
ples, in so far as they are immediately certain. They 
are quite possible in mathematics, because mathematics 
constructs its concepts in intuition and so can both make 
synthetic a priori judgements about the object intuited 
and be certain of their truth through intuition. The 
a priori intuition involved in the construction of mathe- 
matical concepts accounts for both the possibility of 
synthetic a priori judgements and their immediate cer- 
tainty. But no such intuition is involved in philosophical 
concepts and so the principles derived from them cannot 
be immediately certain. The synthetic a priori princi- 
ples in philosophy are concerned with such concepts 
(devoid of intuitional content), and so a proposition like 
"Whatever happens has a cause" cannot be immediately 
certain, but requires a deduction, that is, a proof of its 
objective validity. We thus see that axioms, such as are 
used by mathematics, are not possible in philosophy. 

3. De onstrations : A demonstration strictly 
peaking is an apodeictic proof in so far as it is intuitive. 

From experience we merely learn what a thing is, and 
not that it could not be other than what it is. Conse- 
quently no empirical grounds will ever suffice to yield an 
apodeictic proof. And from a priori concepts too we can 
never obtain intuitive certainty or demonstrative evidence. 
Demonstrations are possible in mathematics alone which, 
by virtue of its construction of concepts in pure intuition, 
can give us intuitive certainty. 

A dogma is a synthetic proposition directly derived 



214 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

from concepts, but in the whole domain of pure reason 
in its merely speculative employment, no synthetic 
judgement is to be found which is directly derived from 
concepts. Philosophy, so far as it is the speculative em- 
ployment of pure reason, can have therefore no dogmas 
as its special subject matter, and all dogmatic methods, 
whether borrowed from mathematics or specially invented, 
are quite out of place here. 

Section II 

The Dicipline of Pure Reason in respect of its 
Polemical Employment 

We have seen that there can be no dogmatic employ- 
ment of pure reason, that is, there is no place for dogma- 
tism in philosophy. We are now to see whether there can be 
any polemical and sceptical employment of pure reason, 
that is, how far polemic and scepticism are justified in 
philosophy. What are we to understand by these terms? 

When a dogmatic assertion is made in metaphisics, it 
is generally met by a counter -assert ion of the opposite 
import, and so the dispute starts. To be a party to this 
dispute and maintain one position positively against the 
other would be to proceed dogmatically. But without 
positively maintaining one position, one may simply 
attack the position of one's opponent and try to show 
that it is unjustified. This is polemic. It says that one 
party to the dispute, namely the dogmatic opponent, is 
wrong. Scepticism goes a step further and maintains that 
both the disputants are wrong, that the assertion and the 
counter-assertion are equally unjustified. "By the polemi- 
cal employment of pure reason," says Kant, "I mean 
the defence of its propositions as against the dogmatic 



DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON POLEMICAL 215 

counter-propositions through which they are denied." But 
he adds that the contention is not that its own assertions 
are not false, but only that the opposite assertions can- 
not be made with apodeictic certainty. He later on says: 
"By the defence of propositions I do not mean the addi- 
tion of fresh grounds for their assertion, but merely the 
nullifying of the sophistical arguments by which our op- 
ponent professes to invalidate this assertion/' So in a 
polemic we do not so much affirm our own position as 
deny the position of our opponent. Is there any scope for 
polemic in philosophy? And is it justified? 

The self-contradiction of pure reason was treated in 
the section on the Antinomies and it was found there 
that this self-contradiction of pure reason was due to a 
misunderstanding. It was because what were appearances 
were treated as things in themselves that reason was in- 
volved in self-contradiction. When interpreted properly, 
the thesis and the antithesis could be reconciled with 
each other and so there is no real self-contradiction. But 
when the question is about God and soul, if one affirms 
their existence and the other denies it, there appears to 
be a real contradiction here, because God and the soul 
can be regarded always as things in themselves, and we 
cannot say that the affirmation relates to reality and the 
denial to appearance. But even here, strictly speaking, 
there is no real self-contradiction of reason, because 
neither the affirmation nor the denial can be proved, and 
so both are equally unjustified. So although we cannot 
claim any knowledge about God and the soul, our faith 
remains unshaken, because nobody can prove that God or 
the soul does not exist. The faith is necesssary for our 
moral well-being and stands unaffected by all theoretical 
attacks. But at the same time it is vain to attempt to 



216 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

defend this faith with a show of theoretical reasons. 

Properly speaking, there cannot be any real polemic 
of pure reason, because when we are faced with the ques- 
tion of the existence of God or the immortality of the 
soul, we are concerned with ideas of reason, and from 
them alone it can never be made out whether their objects 
exist or not. So long as we proceed only dogmatically, 
the dispute is bound to arise and remain endless. In its 
dogmatic procedure, reason is in a state of nature or 
anarchy, as Hobbes would say, and it is when the Criti- 
que has done its work by establishing the rights and 
limits of pure reason, that we can hope for any final 
judgement and peace. 

Scepticism too is not a reasonable position in 
philosophy. It says that we cannot know and should 
not therefore side with any party, but should maintain 
the position of neutrality and doubt. But how can it 
establish that we are incapable of attaining any know- 
ledge ? We cannot establish this by pointing to parti- 
cular facts of our ignorance. This can be established 
only by an enquiry into the sources and limits of our 
knowledge itself. But our position then is no longer 
merely sceptical but Critical. 

Hume is rightly regarded as the most representative 
sceptic. He remained a sceptic to the end, and did not 
advance to the Critical position, because he considered 
only particular judgements of reason which were unjusti- 
fied, and did not make the faculty of knowledge itself an 
object of systematic enquiry. In fact, he considered 
specially only the principle of causality and rightly held 
that we had no a priori insight into its validity; and 
thereupon he believed that the principle of causality, if 
it were to be valid, could be learnt from experience. 



DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON HYPOTHESES 217 

We have however learnt from the Transcendental Logic 
that we can know a priori the validity of the causal prin- 
ciple, not of course through an analysis of the concept of 
a happening and its cause, but only in reference to a third 
something, namely possibl eexperience. The causal princi- 
ple is valid as it makes knowledge of experience possible. 

Hume did not make a systematic study of such 
synthetic concepts as substance and attribute, cause and 
effect, etc., and the synthetic a priori principles arising 
from them. As he based his conclusions, not on any 
systematic consideration of principles, but on an examina- 
tion merely of particular and accidental facts, his own 
position of scepticism has itself remained open to doubt. 
He moreover did not see the difference between the well- 
grounded claims of the understanding, such as express 
themselves in the synthetic a priori principles (e. g. the 
principles of substantiality and causality), which are valid 
of experience, and the dialectical pretensions of reason 
(e.g. assertions about God and immortality), which can 
never be validated. 

Although scepticism itself is not a satisfactory posi- 
tion, we can see that it prepares the way for the true 
Critical position in philosophy. 

Sectoin III 

T/ie Discipline of Pure Reason in 
regard to Hypothesis 

We have learnt that without the help of experience, 

we cannot arrive at any knowledge merely through the 

speculation of pure reason. But although knowledge is 

confined to experience only, is there not left open, outside 

K. C.. .28 



218 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

experience, a wide field for hypothesis? Can we not 
frame hypotheses about things which we can never 
experience? Kant explains here certain conditions which 
a valid hypothesis must fulfil and which would therefore 
prevent reason from making all unwarrantable hypotheses. 

The first condition is that we must be antecedently 
certain as to the possibility of the object we are going to 
assume hypothetically for the explanation of any pheno- 
menon. It is only when we know for certain that an 
object is possible that we can entertain the opinon that it 
may be real and account for certain events or facts which 
we experience. In framing a hypothesis, we should not 
assume objects with altogether new qualities for which 
experience gives no evidence. It is thus not permissible to 
assume an understanding which intuits without the help 
of the senses or matter which is not impenetrable. If 
we do not obey this rule, we should be basing reason, not 
on any clear understanding, but on the empty figments 
of the brain. 

We know that the Ideas of reason representing 
objects like God and the soul are mere ideas and there 
can be no proof that God or the soul is a possible 
object. When we do not know that they are possible, we 
cannot assume them in any hypothesis to explain any facts 
of experience. Still, these ideas are not quite useless. 
They may be used, as we have seen, with great advan- 
tage as regulative ideas or heuristic notions, to aid our 
research and discovery. They are quite useless as expla- 
natory grounds. The actual explanation is to be sought 
always in terms of empirical objects. Therefore Kant 
says that even "the wildest hypotheses, if only they are 
physical, are here more tolerable than a hyperphysical 
hypotheses/' 



DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON HYPOTHESES 219 

The second condition that a hypothesis must fulfil is 
that it should be adequate to explain all the relevant 
facts. If one is compelled to resort to other auxiliary 
hypothesis to explain the facts, we become justly suspi- 
cious of the original hypothesis. We can indeed explain 
the purposiveness, order and vastness of the world by the 
hypothesis of an infinitely perfect divine cause. But the 
presence of various imperfections and evil in the world 
would call for other hypotheses and is thus an argument 
against the original hypothesis of a divine creator. 
Similarly, the hypothesis of the simple and imperishable 
nature of the soul cannot, without the help of other 
hypotheses, be reconciled with the appearance of growth 
and decay in our soul's life and is thereby rendered invalid. 

One may not assume God or the soul merely for the 
explanation of any facts of experience, but one may try to 
prove them a priori. But in that case the proof should 
be capable of yielding apodeictic certainty. In the 
transcendental sphere, where there is no question of 
experience, we know a priori either what is necessarily 
and absolutely true or nothing at all. Just as in geo- 
metry, which also follows an a priori procedure, a thing 
is either proved or not proved, but is never rendered 
merely probable, so there is no sense in a thing being 
rendered only probable by a priori arguments. 

Hypotheses are no doubt quite useless for establish- 
ing any metaphysical propositions. But they are very 
valuable as defensive weapons which we may well use 
against all destructive criticism of our metaphysical be- 
liefs. As moral beings, we are committed to certain 
metaphysical beliefs about God and immortality. We 
cannot of course make any use of these beliefs without 
sufficient reason in theoretical speculation. But we are 



220 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

within our rights to make use of them in the practical 
sphere. As the beliefs are already there in possession of 
the field, it is not for us to offer any reason why they 
should be entertained; but it is incumbent on our oppo- 
nent to show why they should be rejected. He may 
raise various objections to our beliefs and we are justi- 
fied in making use of hypotheses to turn the edge of his 
criticism. If, for instance, he says that our belief that 
the soul is immaterial and self-subsistent is inconsistant 
with the fact that our mental powers are subject to 
bodily conditions, we may, to meet his objection, resort 
to the hypothesis that the body is nothing but an appear- 
ance which only in our present state serves as a condi- 
tion of sensibility and thought. Thus regarded, the body 
would be a restrictive condition and so a hindrance to 
the pure and spiritual life, and not a cause of it. This 
hypothesis will greatly weaken the force of our oppo- 
nents' objection. Such hypotheses are not of course Ideas 
of reason, but only concepts devised for self-defence and 
designed to show ihat all the possibilities have not been 
taken into consideration. They are mere problematic 
judgements which can be neither proved nor disproved* 
They are however indispensable as weapons against 
doubts that are apt to occur, and are thus even necessary 
to our inner peace. 

Section IV 

The Discipline of Pure Reason in Regard 
to its Proofs 

If we are to go beyond the concept of an object and 
make any synthetic a priori judgement about it, we can 



DISCIPLINE OF PURE REASON PROOFS 221 

do so only with the help of some special guidence. This 
guidence is provided in mathematics by pure intuition, 
and in transcendental knowledge, so far as we are concern- 
ed with the concepts of the understanding, by the pos- 
sibility of experience. In the lattei case the proof of the 
validity of the concepts consists in showing that, without 
these synthetic concepts of the understanding, no expe- 
rience, and consequently no objects of experience, would 
be possible. Such proof is not possible in the case of the 
Ideas of reason. And mere ideas never suffice to give us 
the knowledge that there are real objects corresponding to 
them. From the simple representation /, we can never get 
the knowledge that there exists a simple soul -substance. 
This we have already seen in the discussion on Para- 
logisms. To avoid all such errors, Kant propounds some 
rules which should guide our transcendental proofs. 

The first rule is that we should not attempt any tran- 
scendental proof without making ourselves clear as to the 
principle on which the proof is based. We should know that 
with the help of the principles of understanding, such as 
the principle of causality, we can never prove the objects 
of the Ideas of reason as real, because these principles are 
valid only in respect of possible experience and cannot 
apply to objects beyond experience. We cannot in this 
regard appeal even to the principles of reason, because 
they have no objective significance and are only regula- 
tive in the sense that they merely help us to systematize 
and extend our empirical knowledge. 

The second point to be remembered in connexion with 
transcendental proofs is that for a transcendental propo- 
sition only one proof is possible. When in proving any- 
thing we get our guidance from an intuition, pure or em- 
pirical, we are presented with a manifold which admits 



222 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

of being connected in more ways than one, so that by 
diverse paths, we can arrive at the same conclusion. But 
in the case of a transcendental proposition, we have a 
single concept to go by, and if any proof is to be possible 
at all, the proof will be one and only one. So when a 
dogmatist gives various proofs for a metaphysical propo- 
sition, we know he must be wrong. 

The third rule is that a transcendental proof should 
be ostensive and not apogogical. In an ostensive 
proof we proceed directly from the ground to the conse- 
quence. Here we get an insight into the ground of a 
conclusion. In an apagogical proof we arrive at a con- 
clusion by showing the falsity of its opposite. Here we 
get certainty, but no insight into its ground, which is 
provided by the ostensive proof. 

The apagogical proof is allowed in sciences where 
there is no chance of confusing subjective conditions 
with objective grounds- Such confusion is not possible 
in mathematics and can be avoided in natural science by 
repeated observation. But in the transcendental sphere, 
where the subjective as a rule forces itself upon reason 
as being objective, the confusion is unavoidable, and so 
the apagogical proof is quite out of place here. When 
we assert here any proposition by refuting its opposite, 
(this being the procedure in apagogical proof), we cannot 
be sure whether the refutation or the impossibility of the 
opposite view does not merely mean its conflict with our 
subjective conditions of thought. If it be so, it would 
prove nothing as regards the thing itself. Both the asser- 
tion and the refutation might well be due to an impossi- 
ble concept of the object, produced by a transcendental 
illusion. 



ULTIMATE END OF PURE EMPLOYMENT OF REASON 223 
CHAPTER II 

THE CANON OF PURE REASON 

A canon embodies the a priori principles of the 
right employment of a certain faculty of knowledge. 
The Transcendental Analytic is thus a canon of the 
pure understanding, because it treats of the categories 
and the synthetic a priori principles derived from the 
understanding, and shows that their valid use consists 
in making experience possible. When there is no correct 
use of a faculty of knowledge, there is no canon for it. 
We have seen in the Dialectic that the theoretical use of 
pure reason is unjustified, and so we cannot have a canon 
of it in its theoretical employment. If there is to be a 
canon of pure reason, it must be concerned with its 
practical employment. We do not know by pure reason 
what is, but we may yet know by pure reason what ought 
to be. And if we do, this would be a practical use of pure 
reason. It is this practical use of pure reason that is 
now going to be considered. 

Section I 

The Ultimate End of the Pure Employment 
of our Reason 

The ultimate aim of speculative reason in its transc- 
endental employment is the solution of the questions 
concerning God, freedom and immortality. The solution 
of these questions has no bearing on our theoretical 
knowledge, which is concerned with the explanation of 
empirical facts, and that explanation in its detail will not 
in any way be furthered ii we know that God exists or 
that the soul is free or immortal. These propositions 
(God exists, etc.) do not represent, nor do they help, 



224 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

any theoretical knowledge, but they are of utmost import- 
ance for our practical life. The practical means for 
Kant what is possible through freedom, and comprises 
the whole field of our activity. "Here we want to know 
what we ought to do, if the will is free, if there is a God 
and a future world." So it appears that the ultimate end 
of our reason is concerned with our moral interests. 

The concept of freedom is used in the practical 
sense. That is, a will is considered free when it can be 
determined independently of sensuous impulses and 
through motives which are represented only by reason. 
Practical freedom in this sense is no problem for us. Our 
own experience shows that such freedom exists. 

Reason prescribes laws for our conduct without being 
determined by sensuous impulses, and is thus practically 
free. But we do not know whether reason is transcend- 
entally free and is not determined by any higher and 
remoter causes. That however is a speculative question 
and does not concern reason in its practical use. Thus in 
the canon of pure reason (in its practical use), we are 
concerned with the remaining two questions: "Is there a 
God?" and "Is there a future world?" 

Section II 

The Ideal of the Highest Good as a Determining 
Ground of the Ultimate End of Pure Reason 

What can we know? What ought we to do? 
What may we hope? These three questions express in 
a summary way all the interests of our reason, speculative 
as well as practical. We have already considered what 
we can know and what we cannot. We shall now try to 
find answers to the remaining two questions. 



IDEAL OF THE HIGHEST GOOD 225 

We are naturally inclined to strive after happiness, 
and from the pragmatic laws or rules of prudence, which 
are based on experience, we know how it can be attained 
on the fulfilment of certain natural conditions. Besides 
the practical law of prudence there is the moral law which 
says, not how happiness is to be attained, but how we 
should behave in order to be worthy of happiness. The 
moral law is not based on experience, but is delivered by 
pure reason. This law dees not make a hypothetical 
statement, but gives its command in an absolute manner. 

The moral law presuppos es the possibility of a moral 
world. When reason demands in its moral laws that 
certain actions should take place, we know that they 
must be possible. From this we get the conception of a 
moral world which is in accordance with the moral laws, 
that is, a world which is what it can be through the free- 
dom of rational beings, and what it ought to be in 
accordance with the necessary laws of morality. In this 
world the rational beings enjoy their freedom, and the 
freedom of each under moral laws is in harmony with the 
freedom of every one else. This world is of course different 
from the sensible world, and may be in contrast called 
the intelligible world. We can regard it only as a 
future world. 

The answer to the second question is that we should 
do that through which we should be worthy of happiness. 

Our reason or the moral law commands us categori- 
cally to do certain things and we must obey the com- 
mand without any ulterior motive. If we obey the law 
with the hope of enjoying happiness, our act will not be 
moral. But when we have so acted as to be worthy of 
being happy, it is demanded that in the ideal state or in 
the moral world, we should be accordingly happy. That 
K. C...32 



226 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

is, we should be happy in proportion to the moral 
excellence of our conduct. This demand can be fulfilled 
if the world be under the government of a supreme rea- 
son that is at the same time its cause. The idea of 
such an intelligence, in which the most perfect moral will 
united with supreme blessedness, is the cause of all right- 
eous happiness in the world, is what Kant understands 
by the ideal of supreme good. It is in this ideal of 
supreme original good that the moral world, the supreme 
derivative good, with its intimate connexion between 
virtue and happiness, is grounded. Our moral demand 
that virtue should be rewarded with happiness is thus 
the basis of the conviction that God exists a conviction 
which mere speculative theology is insufficient to produce* 

The answer to the third question then, is that we 
can hope to reap the reward of our virtuous conduct in 
a future world under the wise rule of an omniscient, 
omnipotent, eternal Being whom we call God. 

It is only when our moral consciousness is developed 
that we get a true idea of godhead. Even though we 
achieve great advance in theoretical knowledge, if our 
moral ideas are not adequately developed, our concepts 
of divinity are bound to remain crude and incoherent. 

Although we are led to the idea of God from a con- 
sideration of the moral laws, it is not to be assumed 
that the moral laws might as well be deduced from the 
idea of God, because we have no concept of God at all 
to start with, from which the moral laws might be 
derived : we first frame the concept only in accordance 
with those laws. Similarly we should not suppose that the 
moral law is binding on us because it is God's command. 
We should rather regard it as being the command of 
God, because we feel ourselves inwardly bound by it. 



OPINING, KNOWING AND BELIEVING 227 

Moral theology never suffices to give us any theo- 
retical knowledge of a transcendent reality like God. It 
is of immanent or practical use only. That is, moral 
theology helps us only to fulfil our moral vocation in the 
world, by showing us how we are to adapt ourselves to 
the ideal or moral world and its requirements. 

Section III 
Opining, Knowing and Believing 

If a judgement which we hold to be true is valid 
for every rational being, it is entitled conviction. Its 
ground must be objectively sufficient. When all people 
agree in a particular judgement, we may well think that 
the basis of their agreement is in the object, that the 
judgement is true, i. e. agrees with the object. If our 
holding a judgement to be true depends on mere subjec- 
tive conditions without any sufficient ground, the judge- 
ment is called persuasion. So long as a judgement is 
viewed as an appearance of the mind, one cannot dis- 
tinguish between persuasion and conviction* When we 
fail to make others agree with us, we have reason to 
suppose that our judgement is a persuasion, and we are 
certain that it is such when we can discover the subjec - 
tive causes which led us to make the judgement. 

A judgement may be entertained in three degrees of 
certitude. We may hold a judgement to be true without 
being subjectively certain about it, and without also 
knowing any objective ground for it. It is then called 
opinion. When we have subjective certainty, but do 
not know any objective ground, it is called belief. When 
there is subjective certitude as well as objective ground 
for a judgement, it is then called knowledge. 



228 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

Both opinion and knowledge are out of place in the 
transcendental use of reason. We make here a priori 
judgements which should be valid for all and so knowledge. 
There is no room for opinion here. But we have seen in 
the Dialectic that we cannot attain knowledge in the 
theoretical sense here. So our judgements here, as 
theoretically insufficient, may, from a practical point of 
view, be termed beliefs. 

A belief is only pragmatic when, on the basis of it, 
we are ready to act, although we know it may turn out 
to be false. When, e.g., a physician treats a patient for 
a certain disease of which he has found some symptoms 
in him, but no conclusive proof, we have a case of such 
belief. A belief is doctrinal when it helps us in our 
theoretical work. The belief that there is systematic 
unity in nature or that it is the work of an all-wise, all- 
powerful creator, is a belief of this sort, as it helps us in 
our scientific enquiry. But a mere doctrinal belief lacks 
stabilty. We often lose hold of it. It is not so with a 
moral belief. It is absolutely necessary that I should 
conform to the moral law. This presupposes the ultimate 
moral end, the sum mum bonnum, which can be 
guaranteed only if there is a God and a future life , 
These beliefs are inextricably bound up with our moral 
sentiment, and we can no more give up these beliefs than 
the moral sentiment itself. 

CHAPTER III 
THE ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 

By Architectonic Kant understands the art of 
constructing systems. As it is systematic unity that 



THE ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 229 

makes a body of knowledge into a science, architectonic 
may be taken to mean the doctrine of the scientific 
in our knowledge. 

By system is meant the unity of the manifold modes 
of knowledge under one idea. We have a science so far 
as our knowledge can be related and arranged under one 
idea. The idea requires a schema for its realization, and 
the schema a priori contains the outline as well as the 
division of the manifold whole into co-ordinated members 
in accordance with the idea. A science is thus always 
based on an idea, and without it so science is possible. 
But the idea at first is apt to remain quite vague. Even 
the founder of a science may not clearly realize the idea 
on which his science is based. But there is no doubt 
that it is always there in his mind inspiring and control- 
ling his scientific work. When our knowledge in the 
science has sufficiently advanced, we are able to discern 
the idea in a clear light and to envisage the whole in an 
architectonic scheme, more or less adequate to the idea. 

Kant now gives an outline of the architectonic of all 
knowledge derived from pure reason. All knowledge, 
viewed in abstraction from all content, is first derived 
into historical and rational Historical knowledge is 
cognitio ex datis, i. e. knowledge from the given. If 
what we learn is merely delivered from without and not 
developed from within, out of concepts and principles, 
our knowledge is only historical. Even when what we 
learn from onother is a philosophical system, we get 
only historical knowledge. 

Rational knowledge, on the contrary, is cognitio 
exprincipii, i.e. knowledge from concepts and principles. 
This knowledge is not gathered from an external source, 



230 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

but is produced out of one's own reason ; and on the 
basis of such knowledge we cannot only criticize but even 
reject what is merely learnt from another. Rational 
knowledge again is philosophical or mathematical, 
according as it is derived from concepts or from the 
construction of concepts. 

"Philosophy is the system of all philosophical know- 
ledge/* Philosophy does not yet exist in concrete. 
No system has yet been achieved of all philosophical 
knowledge. It is only an idea of a possible science. All our 
attempts in philosophizing are directed towards realizing 
this idea as far as possible. 

This is the scholastic notion of philosophy. Besides it 
we have the universal notion (conceptus cosmicus) 
of philosophy or the notion of philosophy in which not 
only academic people but men in general are interested. 
According to the latter view, ( 'Philosophy is the science 
of the relation of all knowledge to the essential ends of 
human reason." The philosopher would teach us how all 
our knowledge is related to our essential ends and ulti- 
mately to our moral destiny, which is the highest of all 
ends , The philosopher is the ideal teacher who would use 
the mathematician, the natural philosopher and the logi- 
cian as his instruments. These would be solving the tasks 
the philosopher would set them. He would be the law- 
giver of human reason. 

Philosophy, then, which is the legislation of human 
reason, has two objects, nature and freedom, and 
contains both the law of nature and the moral law. The 
philosophy of nature is concerned with what is and the 
philosophy of morals with what ought to be. 

Philosophy is again either pure (dealing with 



THE ARCHITECTONIC OF PURE REASON 231 

a priori knowledge of reason) or empirical (dealing 
with knowledge derived from empirical principles). Pure 
knowledge is either a propaedeutic which investigates 
the faculty of reason in respect of its pure a priori know- 
ledge and is called Criticism, or it is the system of 
pure reason which is called metaphysics. 

Metaphysics is either speculative or practical, 
i. e., either metaphysics of nature or metaphysics 
of morals. 

jBy metaphysics in a narrow sense we understand 
the metaphysics of nature or of all that is. It consists of 
transcendental philosophy (ontology) and physiology 
of pure reason. The former treats of the understanding 
and reason in a system of concepts and principles in 
relation to objects in general without taking into account 
objects that may be given. The latter treats of nature, 
that is, of the sum of given objects, whether given to the 
senses or to some other kind of intuition. 

The physiology of pure reason may be either 
immanent or transcendent. As immanent, it deals 
either with the objects of the outer senses, and so with 
their sum, corporeal nature, or with the object of inner 
sense, the soul, and thus it branches off into rational 
physics and rational psychology. 

As transcendent, the physiology of pure reason deals 
either with nature as a whole, giving us transcendental 
knowledge of the world, or with the relation of nature as 
a whole to a being above nature, giving us transcendental 
knowledge of God. It thus divides itself into rational 
cosmology and rational theology. The whole system 
of metaphysics then contains five main parts: (1) Onto- 
logy, (2) Rational Physics, (4) Rational Psychology, 
(4) Rational Cosmology, and (5) Rational Theology. 



232 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF METHOD 

CHAPTER IV 
THE HISTORY OF PURE REASON 

Kant seeks to characterize the most important direc- 
tions and changes in metaphysics under three heads. 

1. In respect of the object, we have two schools 
holding divergent views. The Sensualists, represented 
by Epicurus, hold that reality is to be found in the 
objects of the senses and nowhere else; and the Intel- 
lectuatists, represented by Plato, hold that the under- 
standing alone knows what is true and there is nothing 
but illusion in sense-experience. According to the former, 
the true objects are merely sensible; and according to the 
latter, the true objects are purely intelligible. 

2. As regards the origin of knowledge, the 
Empiricists, represented by Aristotle, hold that know- 
ledge is to be derived from experience, whereas the 
opposite party of the Noologists, represented by Plato, 
hold that knowledge has its origin independently of 
experience, in reason. 

3. In respect of method t we have to draw the 
distinction between the naturalistic and the scientific. 
The naturalist of pure reason believes that through our 
common sense only can we know things truly, without 
the help of any scientific method. This view is rather 
absurd. But if any one, for lack of better insight, is 
content to follow common sense, he does not merit 
censure. The scientific method has been either dogmatic 
as practised by Wolff, or sceptical, as we find it in 
Hume. If was left to Kant to introduce into Philosophy 
a new method, which is called Critical, 



INDEX 



Absolute (See Unconditioned) 
Actuality, 110 

Aesthetic, Transcendental, 20 ff. 
Affinity, in the manifold, 58 
Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflec- 
tion, 122 ff. 

Analogy, meaning of the term, 96; 
first, 97; second, 100; third, 10? 
Analytic, Transcendental, 40 ff. 

distinguished from Dialectic, 39 
Analytic and synthetic judgements, 

14-16 
the highest principle of a. 

judgements, 86 

Anticipations of Perception, Prin- 
ciple of, 92 ff. 

Antinomies of Pure Reason, 155 ff. 
general principle of their solu- 
tion, 169 ff. 

Appearances, and phenomena, 21 
and things in themselves, 32-4 
knowledge confined to, 32 
and illusion, 34 
Apperception, meaning of the 

term 55, 

transcendental unity of, 56 
ground of all experience, 60 
A priori, use of the term, 11 
and a posteriori 11-12 
science of the, required by 

philosophy, 12 
problem of synthetic a priori 

judgements, 17 
Aristotle, Logic of, 6 

Categories of, 46 

Architectonic of Pure Reason, 228ff 
Association of Ideas, rests on 

objective affinity, 58 
not an explanation of causality, 

58, 104-5 
Axioms, Principles of the A. 

of Intuition, 90 ff 
not possible in philosophy, 213 
Bacon, 7 
Belief, knowledge and opinion, 227rT 

K. C. 30 



Berkeley, his denial of the reality 

of outer things, 35 
his idealism, 111 ff. 
Body, relation to mind of, 144 ff, 

153 
Canon, distinguished from 

Organon, 39 t. n. 
of Pure Reason 223 ff. 
Categories, Kant's use of the 

term, 46 

Aristotle's use of the term, 46 
metaphysical deduction of, 41 ff. 
mathematical and dynamical, 35 
transcendental deduction of, in 

first edition, 51 ff. 
in second edition, 64 ff. 
valid only within experience, 

71-2 

make experience possible, 78-9 
Schematism of, 88 ff. 
proof of specific, 86 ff. ; 
Causality, Hume's view of, 58 
Kant's view of, 100 ff. 
proof of, 100-6 
free causality, 163 
and freedom, reconciliation of, 

178 ff. 
Certainty, claimed by Kant for 

his work, 4 
Change, conceivable only through 

time, 28 

implies permanence, 99 
implies causality, 100 
implies a changeless substance, 

106 
Community, category of, 107 f. n. 

proof of, 107 ff. 
Concepts, Kant's view of the, 

36 ff. 

and intuition, 36 
and judgements, 43 
doctrine of pure concepts, 44 
ot the Understanding and of 

Reason, 132 



234 



INDEX 



Constitutive and regulativepr in- 

ciples, 97, 173, 192, 199, 203 
Contingency, 193 
Continuity, principle, 94-5; 

transcendental principle of, 

201-2 
Contradiction, the Jaw of, the 

highest principle of ana- 
lytic judgements, 86 
Copernican revolution, 7 
Cosmos, an Idea of Reason, 135, 

205-6 
Cosmological argument, refuted, 

190-2 

Critique, Kant's use of the term, 1 
Criterion of truth, no universal 

criterion, 38 

Criticism, Kant's use ot the term, 3 
Critical philosophy, contrasted with 

dogmatic philosophy, 146 
Deduction, meaning of the 

term, 48 

of categories, (See Categories) 
of Ideas (See Ideas) 
Definition, Kant's use of the 

term, 212 
not possible in philosophy, 

212-13 
Demonstration, possible only in 

mathematics, 213 
Descartes, Dogmatic Idealism of, 

111-12; 
his theory of interactionism or 

of physical influence, 144 
Dialectic, Transcendental, 127 ff 
meaning of, 39-40 
aim of, 203 ff. 

Discipline of Pure Reason, 209 ff. 
Dogma, 213-14 
Dogmatism, distinguished from 

criticism, 2-3 
Dogmatic employment of reason, 

210 ff. 
Dynamical principles, 89-90; 

antinomies, 175-6 
Doctrine, Rational Psychology not 

a, but only a discipline, 152 



Ego (See Self) 

Empirical, and a priori (See Ex- 
perience) 

and transcendental, 25, 29 
Ens rea/issimum, God conceived 

as, 188-9 
Existece, category of, 110-11 

only in relation to possible ex- 
perience, 189 

necessary existence, 187-8; 
judgements of, always synthetic, 

189 
Experience, meaning of the term, 

10 f. n. 
not all knowledge arises out of 

experience, 11 
proof of categories by reference 

to, 57 
made possible by categories, 

78-9 
no knowledge beyond experience 

120-1 
Faith an knowledge, Kant's, 

view of, 9-10, 197-8 
Form and matter, 21 

forms of intuition,, 212 
Freedom of the will, problem of 

pure reason, 163, 176 
and causality, 163, 176 ff. 
not incompatible with natural 

mechanism, 178 ff. 
Galileo a discoverer of scientific 

method, 7 
Geometry, its judgements synthetic 

and a priori, 12 
made possible by apriority of 

space, 24-5 

God, beyond the scope of theore- 
tical reason, 8, 196-8 
His existence incompatible with 
the reality of space and 
time, 35 

an Idea of Reason, 135, 206 
idea of God, 184-5 
speculative proofs of the cxits- 

enccof, 186 ff. 

ontological proof, 187j cosmolo- 
gical proof, 190 



ItyDEX 



235 



physico-theological, or teleolo- 

gical proof, 194 
Ground and cause, 177 
Homogeneity, Principle of 201 
llumf, his view of causality, 

17, 58 

Kant's reply to, 58 
his philosophy a perfected ex- 
pression of the empirical 
and sceptical position, 
216-17 
Hypothesis, conditions of a, 217 ff. 

useless in philosophy, 219-220 
/ think, the original synthetic 
unity of apperception, 65 
only a thought, not knowledge, 

contains no empirical content, 
therefore does not repre- 
sent know ledge, 138 
Idealism, Critical, or Kant's Idea- 
lism, (See Transcendental 
Idealism) 

empirical idealism, 29, 143, 168 
dogmatic idealism, 111-12 
problematic idealism, 143, 151 
refutation of material idealism, 
lirst edition, 1423 
second edition, 11114 
Ideal or Reason, 182 ff. 
Ideality, transcendental, of space 

and time, 26, 30 
Ideas ol Reason, 132 ff. 
Kant's view of, .132 
and categories of relation, 134 
metaphysical deduction of, 

133-4 

transcendental deduction of, 203, 
mathematical and dynamical: 

175-6 
as regulative, not constitutive, 

173, 193 ff., 199, 203 
metaphysical and practical 

validity of, 179-180 
useful for unifying experience, 

203 ff. 

Identity of indiscernibles, Leibniz's 
principle of, 123 



Illusion and appearance, 127 
and probability, 127 
transcendental illusion, 127 
empirical illusion, 127 
logical illusion, 128 
Imagination, synthesis of, 54, 

73-4 ; 

and understanding, 61-2 
productive and reproductive, 

61,74 

Immanent and transcendent meta- 
physics (See Metaphysics) 
Immortality, criticism of Men- 
delssohn's argument for, 
150 ff. 

not theoretically provable, 152 
Infinity, problem of, stated in the 

antinomies, 1602 ; 
Kant's view of, 172 ff. 
distinction between in infini- 
tum and in indefmitum t \12 
Inner sense, 29, ff. 
Intuition, meaning of the term, 20 
non-sensuous or intellectual in- 
tuition, 35 

and conception, 36-7 
Judgement, 

a priori and empirical, 11-12 
analytic and synthetic, 14-15 
How are synthetic judgements 

a priori possible? 17 ff. 
Kant's definition of, 31 
judgement the fundamental 
activity of the understand - 

relation of forms of j. to catego- 
ries, 42 
as faculty, 80 

existential judgements, 189 
Knowing and thinking, 75, 120 
Knowledge, and faith, 8-9, 198 
limited to objects of possible 

experience, 8, 1201 
confined to appearance only, 

32, 120-1 ; 

theoretical and practical, 197 
and opinion, 227 
Leibniz, his view of space and 



236 



INDEX 



time, 31-2 
his distinction between 

appearance and reality, 32 
on sensibility and thought, 

32, 126 

on possibility, 110 ff, 
guilty of the fallacy of amphi- 
boly, 122 ff. 

on pre-established harmony, 145 
his statement of the cosmologi- 

cal argument, 190 
Locke, Kant's restatement of his 
views on primary and 
secondary qualities, 33 
referred to, 3, 126 
Logic, kinds of, 36, ff. 

and Aesthetic distinguished, 36 
general and transcendental, 

37-8 

formaU. and Kant's categories, 43 
Magnitude, extensive and inten- 
sive, 90-2 

Material Idealism, (See Idealism) 
Mathematics, a good example of 

science, 6 

judgements in, are synthetic, 15 
made possible by the apriority 

of space and time, 24, 28 
Mechanism, of nature, compatible 

with freedom, 178 ff. 
Mendelssohn, his proof of the 
permanence of the soul, 
refutation of, 150 ff. 
Metaphysics, use of the term, 

2, 231 

not making progress, 6 
as a natural disposition, 17 
rejection of, 119-121,136 
hypothesis not valid in, 219-220 
divisions of, 231 

immanent and transcendent, 231 
Method, Kant's critical, 232 
sceptical, 160, 232 
mathematical, 210 ff, 
dogmatic, 232 
Transcendental Doctrine of, 

209 ff. 
Modality of judgements, 43-4 



Morality, and immortality, 1545; 
and freedom, 154, 176, 180, 

225-6; 
as ground for belief in God, 

197, 226-7 
Motion, made conceivable by 

time, 28 

Nature, consists only of appear- 
ances, 76 

Necessary Being, 163-4 
Necessity, and universality, marks 

of apriority, 12 
meaning ot, 12, 114 
of a priori judgements, 12 
of causality, 114; 
unconditioned necessity, the 

idea of, 158-9 
Negation, derivative, based on 

affirmation, 184 
Newton his viev of space and 

time, 31-32 
Noumenon, 117 ff. 

positive and negative concep- 
tion of, 120 
the idea of a limit, or limiting 

concept, 120 

Number, the schema of quantity, 84 
Object, Kant's meaning of the 

ternij 67 
empirical, 122 
transcendental, 178 
Occasionalism, 144 
Ontology, not a science, 119 
On to logical argument, 187 ff. 
Opinion, Kant s use of the term, 

227 

and* knowledge, 227 
Organon, 39 f.n. 

and canon, 39 f,n. 
Outer sense, and inner sense, 29-30 
Paralogisms of Rational Psycho- 
logy, first edition, 137 ff. 
second edition, 147 ff. 
Perception, Kant's use of the 

term, 132 
Phenomenon and appearance, 21 

(See Appearance) 
and noumenon, 117 ff. 



INDEX 



237 



knowledge confined to pheno- 
mena only, 120-1 
Philosophy, needs a science of the 

a priori, 12 

general function of, 229 ff. 
divisions of, 230 

Physico-theological argument, 194 
Physics, a good example of 

science, 6 
method of 7 ; 
contains a priori synthetic 

judgements, 16 
How is pure p. possible? 17 
Physical influence, theory of, of 
the relation of body and 
soul, 144 
Plato, his use of the term 'Idea', 

132 
Polemic. Kant's use of the term, 

214 

polemical employment of Rea- 
son, 214 ff. 

Possibility, category of, 109 
Postulates of Empirical Thought, 

109 ff. 
Practical employment of reason, 

154, 180-1, 224 ff. 
Pre-established harmony, 145 
Preface, Kant's, to the Critique, 

first edition, 2 
second edition, 6 
Primary and secondary qualities, 

33 
Principle, distinguished from rules, 

128-9 
Psychology, rational, 137 ff. 

refutation of rational, 138 ff. 

147 ff. 
Pure, Kant's use of the term, 11 

and empirical knowledge, 11 
Quantity, extensive and intensive, 

90-5 
Realism, empirical, 269 ; 

distinguished from transcen- 
dental idealism, 26-9 
Reason, meaning of the term, 1 
an organic unity, 4 
and understanding, 128 



the faculty of principles, 128 
Ideas of, (See Ideas; 
Recognition, synthetic of, 54 ff. 
Regress us in infiniium and in inde- 

finitum distinguished, 172 
Regulative and constitutive, (See 

Constitutive) 

employment of reason, 199 ff. 
Representation, Kant's use of the 

term, 132 
and its object, 50 
Reproduction, synthesis of, 54 
Scepticism, result of dogmatism, 

3, 216 

Sceptical method of Kant, 160 
Schematism, of categories, 81 ff. 
Science, sure path of, 6 

revolution in the method of, 6-7 
Secondary qualities, 33 
Self, known only as an appearance, 

75, 141-2 

Self-consciousness, (See Appercep- 
tion) 

Sensation, manifold of, 52, 64 
required for determining actua- 
lity, 110 
Sensibility, meaning of the term, 

20 

and understanding, 36, 121 ; 
criticism of Leibniz's view of, 

32, 36 

inner and outer sense, 2530 
Smith N. K. t quoted, 20, 38, 

39 ff. n. 134 

Soul, an Idea of Reason, 135, 204-5; 
object of rational psychology, 

136 ff. 
and body, Kant's view of their 

relation, 144 ff., 153 
Space, an a priori intuition, 22 
not a concept, 23 
and spaces, 23 
subjective character of space, 

24-5 

and geometry, 24-5 
form of outer sense, 25 
empirically real, but transcen- 
den tally ideal, 26 



238 



INDEX 



empty space unperceivable, 94 
antinomies of, 160-2 
Specification, principle of, 201 
Subject, thinking, not substance, 

138 
Substance and attribute, category 

of, 97 ff. 
its proof, 97-100 
Leibnizian conception of, 

rejected, 124-5 
rejection of view that self is 

substance, 139 
Succession, apprehension always 

successive, 53, 101 
subjective and objective suc- 
cession, 101 ff, 
relation to substance of, 106 
Synthesis, nature of, 445 

necessary for all knowledge, 45 
as three-fold, 52 ff. 
figurative, 73 
Synthetic and analytic judgements, 

14-16 

how synthetic a priori judge- 
ments are possible, 17 ff.; 
highest principle of all synthe- 
tic judgements, 87-8; 
Teleological argument, (See God) 
Theology, rational, 182 ff. 

distinguished into natural and 

transcendental, 196 
criticism of, 196 ff. 
moral, 227 

Thing in itself, (See Noumenon) 
Thinking and knowing, 75, 120 
Time, not empirical but a priori, 

26-7 

not a concept but an intui- 
tion 27 

a form of inner sense, 29 
empirical reality and trans- 
cendental ideality of, 29-30 
cannot be experienced by itself, 

98, 103; 

does not itself change, 98 
only one time, 99, 
and causality, 100 ff. 



Torricelli, discoverer of scientific 

method, 7 

Totality of conditions, the uncon- 
ditioned, 156 

Transcendent, meaning of, 128 f.n,; 
and immanent metaphysics, 

(Set Metaphysics) 
Transcendental, meaning of the 

term, 18 
ideality of space and time, 

26, 30 

method of proof, 24-8 
unity of apperception, 55-6, 

65 ff. 
idealism, as key to the solution 

of antinomies, 168 
illusion, (See Illusion); 
object, 178 
principles , of reason (See Ideas 

of Reason) 

Transcendental deduction of cate- 
gories, 48 ff. 
first edition, 51 ff. 
second edition, 64 ff. 
Truth, meaning of, 38 
no general test of, 38 
logic defines the formal or ne- 
gative conditions of, 39 
Unconditioned, the idea of the,131 
i*s relation to the category of 

totality, 156 ff. 
an object of reason, 131, 134 
Understanding, defined, 36 
and sensibility, 32, 36, 40 
a unity, 40 

and imagination, 59-62 
intuitive, 68 

makes nature possible, 63, 76 
and judgement, 80 
and reason, 128 
Unity, of apperception, (See 

Apperception) 
of experience, 57 
of the world, 108 
Universality, as criterion of 
a priori judgements, 12 
Will, freedom of ,(See Freedom) 



ERRATA 

P. 7 L. 18 For the round read round 

18 3 For contradictions. Our read contradic- 
tions our 

82 ,,19 For by read be 

,, ,, ,, 22 For categorical read categorial 

,, 87 ,, 1 For hot read not 

,, 89 ,, 5 For with read without which 

,, ,, ,, 11 For nan read can 

,, ,, 22 For derived read are derived 

,, 91 ,, 12 For be must read must be 

,,116 8 For SYSTEMS read SYSTEM 

,, ,, ,, 17 For analytilical read analytical 

,,121 ,, 1 For supposed read suppose 

,, 149 ,, 18 For figuree read figarae 

,,156 ,, 28 For that read that all 

,,157 ,, 6 For series read series of 

,,160 ,, 13 For misunderstanding. It is 

read misunderstanding, is 

,,169 ,, 1 For impiiica! read empirical 

,, 182 ,, 24 For Idea read Ideal 

,, 218 ,, last For hypotheses read hypothesis 

,, 229 i, 22 For derived read divided 



