TEXT  CROSS 
WITHIN  THE 
BOOK  ONLY 


THE  BOOK  WAS 
DRENCHED 


60700  >m 


OSMAN1A  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

Call  No.       {  gb   ;  *  »  • '    (  Accession  No. 

Author 

Title  •  '    ' 

This  "book  should  be  returned  on  or  before  the  date  last  marked  below. 


MUIRHEAD  LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

As  may  be  seen  from  the  original  programme  printed  in 
Erdmann's  History  of  Philosophy  under  the  date  1890,  the 
Muirhead  Library  of  Philosophy  was  designed  as  a 
contribution  to  the  History  of  Modern  Philosophy  under 
the  heads:  first  of  different  Schools  of  Thought — 
Sensationalist,  Realist,  Idealist,  Intuitivist;  secondly  tff 
different  Subjects — Psychology,  Ethics,  ^Esthetics,  Political 
Philosophy,  Theology.  While  much  had  been  done  in 
England  in  tracing  the  course  of  evolution  in  nature, 
history,  economics,  morals,  and  religion,  little  had  been 
done  in  tracing  the  development  of  thought  on  these 
subjects.  Yet  "the  evolution  of  opinion  is  part  of  the 
whole  evolution/' 

By  the  co-operation  of  different  writers  in  carrying  out 
this  plan  it  was  hoped  that  a  thoroughness  and  complete- 
ness of  treatment,  otherwise  unattainable,  might  be  secured. 
It  was  believed  also  that  from  writers  mainly  British  and 
American  fuller  consideration  of  English  Philosophy  than 
it  had  hitherto  received  might  be  looked  for.  In  the  earlier 
series  of  books  containing,  among  others,  Bosanquet's 
History  of  ^Esthetics,  Pfleiderer's  Rational  Theology  since 
Kant,  Albee's  History  of  English  Utilitarianism,  Bonar's 
Philosophy  and  Political  Economy,  Brett's  History  of  Psy- 
chology, Ritchie's  Natural  Rights,  these  objects  were  to  a 
large  extent  effected. 

In  the  meantime  original  work  of  a  high  order  was 
being  produced  both  in  England  and  America  by  such 
writers  as  Bradley,  Stout,  Bertrand  Russell,  Baldwin, 
Urban,  Montague,  and  others,  and  a  new  interest  in  foreign 
works,  German,  French,  and  Italian,  which  had  either 


become  classical  or  were  attracting  public  attention,  had 
developed.  The  scope  of  the  Library  thus  became  extended 
into  something  more  international,  in  the  hope  that  it 
may  contribute  to  that  mutual  understanding  between 
countries  and  peoples  which  is  so  pressing  a  need  of 
the  present  time, 

GENERAL  EDITOR 


MUIRHEAD 
LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHY 

ANALYTIC  PSYCHOLOGY    By  Prof.  G.  F.  Stout.  Two  Vols.    6th  Impression. 
ATTENTION     By  Prof.  W.  B.  Pillsbury.     2nd  Impression. 
HISTORY  OF  AESTHETIC     By  B.  Bosanquet.     6th  Impression.     4th  Edition. 
HISTORY  OF  ENGLISH  UTILITARIANISM    By  Prof.  E.  Albee. 

HISTORY  OF  PHILOSOPHY     By  J.  E.  Erdmann. 

Vol.  I.     ANCIENT  AND  MEDIAEVAL.     6th  Impression 
Vol.  II.     MODERN.     6th  Impression. 
Vol.  III.     SINCE  HEGEL.     1th  Impression. 

HISTORY  OF  PSYCHOLOGY     By  Prof.  G.  S.  Brett. 
Vol.  I.     ANCIENT  AND  PATRISTIC. 
Vol.  II.     MEDIAEVAL  AND  EARLY  MODERN  PERIOD. 
Vol.  III.    MODERN  PSYCHOLOGY. 

MATTER  AND  MEMORY    By  Henri  Bergson.     Translated  by  N.  M.  Paul  and 
W.  S.  Palmer.     4th  Impression. 

NATURAL  RIGHTS     By  D.  G.  Ritchie.     3rd  Edition. 

PHILOSOPHY  AND  POLITICAL  ECONOMY    By  J.  Bonar.     4th  Impression. 

DEVELOPMENT  OF  THEOLOGY  SINCE  KANT    By  O.  Pfleiderer. 

THE  PHENOMENOLOGY  OF  MIND    By  G.  W.  F.  Hegel.    Translated  by  Prof. 
J.  B.  Baillie.     2nd  Edition. 

TIME  AND  FREE  WILL    By  Prof.  Henri  Bergson.     Translated  by  F.  G.  Pogson 
6th  Impression. 

VALUATION:  THE  THEORY  OF  VALUE     By  Prof.  W.  M.  Urban. 

THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  RELIGIOUS  LIFE    By  Prof.  G.  M.  Stratton.  •  2nd 
Edition. 

THE  GREAT  PROBLEMS    By  Bernardino  Varisco.     Translated  by  Prof.  R.  C. 
Lodge. 

KNOW  THYSELF    By  Bernardino  Varisco.    Translated  by  Dr.  Guglielmo  Salvadori. 

ELEMENTS  OF  FOLK  PSYCHOLOGY     By  W.  Wundt.     Translated  by  Prof. 
Edward  L.  Schaub.     3rd  Impression. 

ELEMENTS  OF  CONSTRUCTIVE  PHILOSOPHY    By  Prof.  J.  S.  Mackenzie, 
2nd  Impression. 

SOCIAL  PURPOSE     By  H.  J.  W.  Hetherington  and  Prof.  J,  H.  Muirhead.     2nd 
Impression. 

INTRODUCTION  TO  MATHEMATICAL  PHILOSOPHY    By  Bertrand  Russell, 
F.R.S.     1th  Impression, 


LIBRARY  OF  PHILOSOPHY— contd. 

GOD  AND  PERSONALITY  (GIFFORD  LECTURES)     By  Prof.  Clement  C.  J.  Webb. 

(Part  I.)     2nd  Impression. 

DIVINE  PERSONALITY  AND  HUMAN  LIFE  (GITTORD  LECTURES)     By  Prof. 
Clement  C.  J.  Webb.     (Part  II.)  2nd  Impression. 

MODERN  PHILOSOPHY    By  Guido  de  Ruggiero.     Translated  by  A.  Howard 
Hannay  and  R.  G.  Colling  wood. 

THE  ANALYSIS  OF  MIND    By  Bertrand  Russell,  F.R.S.     Mh  Impression. 

DIALOGUES    ON    METAPHYSICS    By    Nicolas    Malebranche.    Translated  by 

Morris  Ginsberg. 

INDIAN    PHILOSOPHY      By   Prof.    S.    Radhakrishnan.     2nd  Edition.      Two 

volumes.  . 

CONTEMPORARY  BRITISH  PHILOSOPHY    Edited  by  Prof.  J.  H.  Muirhead, 

Two  Vols. 

THE  WAYS  OF  KNOWING:  OR,  THE  METHODS  OF  PHILOSOPHY    By  Prof.  W.  P. 

Montague.     2nd  Impression. 

A  THEORY  OF  DIRECT  REALISM;  AND  THE  RELATION  OF  REALISM  TO  IDEALISM 
By  J.  E.  Turner. 

THE  GOODWILL:  A  STUDY  IN  THE  COHERENCE  THEORY  OF  GOOD- 
NESS.     By  Prof.  H.  J.  Paton. 

FUNDAMENTAL  PROBLEMS  OF  LIFE:  AN  ESSAY  ON  CITIZENSHIP  AS 
PURSUIT  OF  VALUES     By  Prof.  J.  S.  Mackenzie. 

THE    INTELLIGIBLE    WORLD:    METAPHYSICS    AND    VALUE    By  Prof. 
W.  M.  Urban. 

CONTEMPORARY   AMERICAN   PHILOSOPHY     Edited  by   Prof.   George  P. 
Adams  and  Prof.  Wm.  Pepperell  Montague.     Two  Vols. 

HEGEL'S  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC    Translated  by  W.  H.  Johnston  and  L.  G.  Struthers. 
Two  Vols.     2nd  Impression. 

IDENTITY  AND  REALITY    By  Emile  Meyerson.    Translated  by  Kate  Loewenberg. 

MORAL  SENSE    By  James  Bonar. 

COLERIDGE  AS  PHILOSOPHER     By  Prof.  J.  H.  Muirhead. 

IDEAS:   AN   INTRODUCTION   TO   PURE   PHENOMENOLOGY    By   Edmund  Husserl. 

Translated  by  W.  R.  Boyce  Gibson. 

THE  PLATONIC  TRADITION  IN  ANGLO-SAXON  PHILOSOPHY     By  Pro! 
J,  H.  Muirhead. 

ETHICS     By  Nicolai  Hartmann.      Translated  by  Stanton  Coit.    Three   Vols.    2nd 
Impression. 

ESSENTIALS  IN  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELIGION:  A  PHILOSOPHIC 
AND  PSYCHOLOGICAL  STUDY     By  J.  E.  Turner. 

KANT'S  METAPHYSIC  OF  EXPERIENCE    By  Prof.  H.  J.  Paton. 

CONTEMPORARY  INDIAN  PHILOSOPHY     Edited  by  Prof.  S.  Radhakrishnan 
and  Prof.  J.  H.  Muirltead. 

A  HUNDRED  YEARS  OF  BRITISH   PHILOSOPHY    By  Dr.  Rudolf  Metz. 
Translated  by  Prof.  J.  W.  Harvey,  Prof.  T.  E.  Jessopt  Henry  Sturt. 

LANGUAGE  AND  REALITY    By  Wilbur  Marshall  Urban. 

THE  NATURE  OF  THOUGHT    By  Brand  Blanshard,  B.Sc.,  Ph.D. 

HUMAN  KNOWLEDGE    By  Bertrand  Russell.     2nd  Impression. 


SCIENCE   OFJ.OGIC 


HEGEL'S 

SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

TRANSLATED     BY 

W.  H.  JOHNSTON,  B.A.,  AND 
L.  G.  STRUTHERS,  M.A. 


VOLUME  TWO 


LONDON:  GEORGE  ALLEN  &  UNWIN  LTD 
NEW  YORK:  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 


FJK5T    PUBLISHED    IW     ENGLISH    IN 
SECOND    IMPRESSION    195! 

This  book  is  copyright  under  the  Berne  Convention. 

No  portion  may  be  reproduced  by  any  process 

without  written  permission.    Inquiries  should 

be  addressed  to  the  publishers. 

First  published  in  German  1812-1816  under  the  title  "Wissenschaft  der  Logik." 

The  greater  part  of  this  translation  was  made  from  the  edition  published  in  1923 
by  Felix  Meiner,  Leipzig,  edited  by  Dr.  Georg  Lassont  of  Berlin. 


PRINTED     IN    GREAT    BRITAIN    BY 
VNWIN  BROTHERS,  LTD.,  WOKING 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 
VOLUME  I:    OBJECTIVE  LOGIC  (continued] 


BOOK   TWO 

•  FAOB 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE  .     .15 


SECTION  ONE 

ESSENCE  AS  REFLECTION  INTO  SELF    .  19 

CHAPTER 

I.  SHOW ao 

A — THE  ESSENTIAL  AND  THE  UNESSENTIAL 20 

B — SHOW ...  21 

C — REFLECTION * 25 

(a)  Positing  Reflection    ..........  26 

(b)  External  Reflection  ..........  29 

Observation •       •  30 

(c)  Determining  Reflection    .........  32 

II.  THE  ESSENTIALITIES  OR  DETERMINATIONS  OF  REFLEC- 
TION   35 

Observation:  Determinations  of  Reflection  in  the  Form  of 

Propositions .       .       •  35 

A — IDENTITY *      *  37 

Observation  t.  Abstract  Identity 38 

Observation  2.  First  Original  Law  of  Thought:  the  Law  of 

Identity    .               39 

B — DIFFERENCE 43 

(a)  Absolute  Difference.        .........  43 

(b)  Variety • 44 

Observation:  The  Law  of  Variety      ......  48 

(c)  Opposition •       •  50 

Observation:  Contrary  Magnitudes  of  Arithmetic           .       •  54 

G — CONTRADICTION •       •       .  58 

Observation  i.  Unity  of  Positive  and  Negative              .       .  63 

Observation  2.  The  Law  of  the  Excluded  Middle         .       .  65 

Observation  3.  The  Law  of  Contradiction       ....  66 


8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

III.  GROUND        c 7' 

Observation:  The  Law  of  Ground 73 

A — ABSOLUTE  GROUND 74 

(a)  Form  and  Essence 74 

(b)  Form  and  Matter 78 

(c)  Form  and  Content 82 

B — DETERMINED  GROUND       .                      84 

(a)  Formal  Ground :       .  84 

Observation:  Formal   Method  of  Explanation  from  Tauto- 
logical Grounds     .       .       .     * 85 

u(b)  Real  Ground 89 

Observation:  Formal  Method  of  Explanation  from  a  Ground 

Different  from  the  Grounded  Term        .       .       .       ?  91 

(c)   Complete  Ground 94 

C — CONDITION ."98 

(a)  The  Relatively  Unconditioned 98 

(b)  The  Absolutely  Unconditioned      .       .       .       ...       .100 

(c)  Transition  of  the  Fact  into  Existence    .       •       .       .       •       .  103 


SECTION  TWO 


APPEARANCE 


I.  EXISTENCE 109 

A — THE  THING  AND  ITS  PROPERTIES 112 

(a)  Thing-in-itself  and  Existence 112 

(b)  Property 115 

Observation:  The  Thing-in-itself  of  Transcendental  Idealism  1 1 7 

(c)  The  Reciprocal  Action  of  Things 118 

B — THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  THING  OUT  OF  MATTERS       .       .       .120 

C — THE  DISSOLUTION  OF  THE  THING 12^ 

Observation:  The  Porosity  of  Matters        .       .       .       .       .  124 

II.  APPEARANCE • 128 

A— THE  LAW  OF  APPEARANCE 130 

B— THE  WORLD  OF  APPEARANCE  AND  THE  WORLD  IN  ITSELF     .       -135 

C — THE  DISSOLUTION  OF  APPEARANCE 139 

III.  ESSENTIAL  RELATION 142 

A — THE  RELATION  OF  WHOLE  AND  PARTS 143 

Observation:  Infinite  Divisibility 147 


CONTENTS  9 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

B — THE  RELATION  OF  FORCE  AND  ITS  MANIFESTATION  .       •       •       -149 

(a)  The  Conditionedness  of  Force 149 

(b)  The  Solicitation  of  Force 151 

(c)  The  Infinity  of  Force 154 

C — THE  RELATION  OF  OUTER  AND  INNER 154 

Observation:  Immediate  Identity  of  Inner  and  Outer    •       •     157 


SECTION  THREE 
ACTUALITY 160 

I.  TkE  ABSOLUTE 161 

A — THE  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE 161 

B — THE  ABSOLUTE  ATTRIBUTE 164 

G — THE  MODUS  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE 166 

Observation:  Philosophy  of  Spinoza  and  of  Leibniz      •       .167 

II.  ACTUALITY 1 73 

A — CONTINGENCY,  OR  FORMAL  ACTUALITY,  POSSIBILITY,  AND  NECESSITY  1 74 
B — RELATIVE    NECESSITY,    OR    REAL    ACTUALITY,    POSSIBILITY,     AND 

NECESSITY 178 

C — ABSOLUTE  NECESSITY 183 

III.  THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION 187 

A — THE  RELATION  OF  SUBSTANTIALITY 188 

B — THE  RELATION  OF  CAUSALITY 191 

(a)  Formal  Causality 191 

(b)  The  Determinate  Relation  of  Causality 193 

(c)  Action  and  Reaction 200 

C — RECIPROCITY ••  203 


VOLUME  II:  SUBJECTIVE  LOGIC 
THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION 

ADVERTISEMENT aog 

ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL an 

DIVISION 330 


io  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

SECTION  ONE 

PAOS 

SUBJECTIVITY 233 

CHAPTER 

I.  THE  NOTION      *      .      v 234 

A — THE  UNIVERSAL  NOTION 235 

B— THE  PARTICULAR  NOTION 239 

Observation:  The  Common  Classes  of  Notions      .       ...  247 

C — THE  INDIVIDUAL 253 

• 

II.  THE  JUDGMENT 258 

A — THE  JUDGMENT  OF  INHERENCE 266 

(a)  The  Positive  Judgment %  266 

(b)  The  Negative  Judgment .       .271 

(c)  The  Infinite  Judgment 277 

B — THE  JUDGMENT  OF  SUBSUMPTION    , 279 

(a)  The  Singular  Judgment 280 

(b)  The  Particular  Judgment 281 

(c)  The  Universal  Judgment 283 

C — THE  JUDGMENT  OF  NECESSITY 286 

(a)  The  Categorical  Judgment 287 

(b)  The  Hypothetical  Judgment 288 

(c)  The  Disjunctive  Judgment 290 

D — THE  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  NOTION 29^ 

(a)  The  Assertoric  Judgment 295 

(b)  The  Problematic  Judgment 297 

(c)  The  Apodeictic  Judgment 298 

III.  THE  SYLLOGISM 301 

A — THE  QUALITATIVE  SYLLOGISM 303 

(a)  First  Figure  of  the  Syllogism 304 

(b)  The  Second  Figure:  P— /—  U 312 

(c)  The  Third  Figure:  7— £7— P 315 

(d)  The  Fourth  Figure:  U—U—U>  or  the  Mathematical  Syllogism  317 

Observation:  The  Common  View  of  the  Syllogism        .       .  319 

B— THE  SYLLOGISM  OF  REFLECTION 324 

(a)  The  Syllogism  of  Allness 325 

(6)  The  Syllogism  of  Induction  .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .327 

(c)  The  Syllogism  of  Analogy 330 

C-— THE  SYLLOGISM  OF  NECESSITY 333 

(a)  The  Categorical  Syllogism 334 

(b)  The  Hypothetical  Syllogism 337 

(c)  The  Disjunctive  Syllogism 335 


CONTENTS  n 

SECTION  1V/O 

PAOB 

OBJECTIVITY 343 

CHAPTER 

I.  MECHANISM 350 

A— THE  MECHANICAL  OBJECT 350 

B — THE  MECHANICAL  PROCESS 353 

(a)  The  Formal  Mechanical  Process  .......  355 

(b)  The  Real  Mechanical  Process 358 

(c)  The  Product  of  'the  Mechanical  Process                   •  360 
C — ABSOLUTE  MECHANISM            , 361 

(a)  The  Centre 361 

(b)  Law .  364 

(c)  Transition  of  Mechanism *  365 

II.  CHEMISM 367 

A — THE  CHEMICAL  OBJECT  ,                    367 

B— -THE  PROCESS 368 

C — TRANSITION  OF  CHEMISM 371 

III.  TELEOLOGY 374 

A — THE  SUBJECTIVE  END 381 

B— THE  MEANS 383 

C-  THE  REALIZED  END .  386 

SECTION  THREE 

THE  IDEA 395 

I.  LIFE 401 

A — THE  LIVING  INDIVIDUAL         •       •».•*,«•  404 

B — THE  LIFE-PROCESS     ...........  410 

C— THE  KIND ,*•••••  413 

II.  THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION ,  416 

A— THE  IDEA  OF  THE  TRUE *  425 

(a)  Analytic  Cognition *       .  428 

(b)  Synthetic  Cognition »       »  435 

1.  Definition •       •  436 

2.  Classification    ..........  442 

3.  The  Proposition *  448 

B — THE  IDEA  OF  THE  GOOD •      •  460 

HI.  THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA 466 


VOLUME    I 


OBJECTIVE    LOGIC 


BOOK   TWO 
THE  DOCTRINE   OF   ESSENCE 


THE   DOCTRINE    OF    ESSENCE 

THE  truth  of  Being  is  Essence. 

Being  is*  that  which  is  immediate.  Knowledge  seeks  to 
understand  that  truth  which  Being  is,  in  and  for  itself,  and 
therefore,  pressing  beyond  the  immediate  and  its  determina- 
tions, penetrates  further,  assuming  that  behind  this  Being  there 
is  something  other  than  Being  itself,  and  that  this  background 
constitutes  the  truth  of  Being.  This  cognition  is  mediated 
knowledge,  for  it  is  not  lodged  immediately  with  and  in  Essence, 
but  begins  at  an  Other,  Being,  and  has  to  make  a  preliminary 
passage,  the  passage  of  transition  beyond  Being,  or  rather  of 
entrance  into  it.  Only  when  knowledge,  coming  out  from  the 
sphere  of  immediate  Being,  internalizes  itself,  does  it  through 
this  mediation  discover  Essence. — Language  has  in  the  verb  Sein 
("to  be")  preserved  Wesen  ("Essence")  in  the  past  participle 
gewesen  ("been") ;  for  Essence  is  Being  which  has  passed  away, 
but  passed  away  non-temporally. 

When  this  movement  is  imagined  as  the  road  of  knowledge, 
the  beginning,  which  is  made  at  Being,  and  the  progress  which 
transcends  this  category  and  so  reaches  Essence  as  something 
mediated,  appear  to  be  an  activity  of  cognition,  external  to 
Being  and  irrelevant  to  its  proper  nature. 

However,  this  movement  is  the  movement  of  Being  itself. 
It  was  seen  in  Being  that  its  own  nature  causes  it  to  internalize 
itself,  and  that  thus  entering  into  itself  it  becomes  Essence. 

If  at  first,  then,  the  Absolute  was  determined  as  Being,  it 
is  as  Essence  that  it  is  now  determined.  Cognition  cannot  stand 
still  at  the  manifold  of  Determinate  Being,  nor  yet  at  Being — 
Pure  Being :  the  reflection  immediately  asserts  itself  that  this 
Pure  Being,  the  negation  of  everything  finite,  presupposes  an 
internalization  and  a  movement  which  have  purged  immediate 
Determinate  Being  into  Pure  Being.  Being  accordingly  is  deter- 
mined as  Essence,  that  is,  as  such  a  Being  as  suffers  complete 
negation  of  what  is  determinate  and  finite.  It  is  thus  indeter- 
minate and  simple  unity,  from  which  whatever  is  determinate 
has  in  an  external  manner  been  removed ;  what  is  determinate 


i6  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

was  itself  external  to  this  unity,  and  after  this  removal  has 
been  made  it  still  remains  opposed  to  it;  for  it  has  been 
transcended  not  in  itself  but  only  relatively  and  with  respect 
to  this  unity. — It  was  mentioned  above  that  if  pure  Essence 
is  defined  as  the  Sum-total  of  all  Realities,  then  these  realities 
themselves  are  subject  to  determinateness  and  abstracting 
reflection,  and  this  sum-total  reduces  itself  to  empty  simplicity. 
In  this  manner  Essence  is  only  a  product  or  construction.  That 
external  negation  which  is  abstraction  does  no  more  than  lift 
clear  from  that  which  remains  as  Essence  every  determinate- 
ness  of  Being ;  it  pushes  these,  so  to  speak,  from  place  to  place, 
while  they  retain  the  attribute  of  being.  But  in  this  manner 
Essence  is  neither  in  itself  nor  for  itself:  it  is  through  an  Other, 
namely  external  and  abstracting  reflection,  and  it  is  for  an 
Other,  namely  abstraction,  and,  generally,  for  that  existent 
which  still  stands  opposed  to  it.  In  its  determination,  therefore, 
it  is  a  dead  and  empty  absence  of  determination. 

But  Essence  as  it  is  now  is  what  it  is  not  by  virtue  of  a 
negativity  foreign  to  it,  but  by  virtue  of  its  own  movement, 
which  is  the  infinite  movement  of  Being.  It  is  Being-in-and- 
for-Self : — absolute  Being-in-Self,  since  it  is  indifferent  to  every 
determinateness  of  Being,  and  otherness  and  the  relatioh  to 
other  have  simply  been  transcended.  But  it  is  not  only  this 
Being-in-Self,  for  as  mere  Being-in-Self  it  would  be  only  the 
abstraction  of  pure  Essence :  equally  essentially  it  is  Being-for- 
Self ;  it  is  itself  that  negativity  which  is  the  self-transcendence 
of  otherness  and  determinateness. 

So  far  then  Essence,  as  the  complete  return  of  Being  upon 
itself,  is  Essence  indeterminate :  in  it  every  determinateness  of 
Being  is  transcended;  it  contains  these  in  itself,  but  not  as 
posited  in  it.  In  this  simple  existence  with  itself  absolute 
Essence  has  no  Determinate  Being.  Into  this,  however,  it  must 
pass ;  for  it  is  Being-in-and-for-Self,  that  is,  it  differentiates  the 
determinations  which  in  itself  it  contains.  It  is  self-repulsion 
or  self-indifference,  a  negative  self-relation,  and  thus  opposes 
itself  to  itself  and  is  infinite  Being-for-Self  only  in  so  far  as  it 
is  self-unity  in  this  its  self-differentiation. — This  determining 
is  then  of  a  nature  different  from  that  of  the  determining  which 
takes  place  in  the  sphere  of  Being,  and  a  determination  of 
Essence  differs  in  character  from  a  determinateness  of  Being. 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  ESSENCE  17 

Essence  is  the  absolute  unity  of  Being-in  and  Being-for-Self ; 
its  determining  power  therefore  remains  confined  within  this 
unity  and  is  no  Becoming  nor  transition,  while  the  deter- 
minations are  neither  Other  as  other  nor  relations  to  an  other ; 
they  are  independent,  but  for  this  very  reason  they  are  such 
entities  only  as  in  their  unity  are  with  each  other. — At  first 
Essence  is  simple  negativity;  now  it  must  posit  in  its  own 
sphere  the-  determinateness  which  it  contains  only  in  itself, 
in  order  to  give  itself  Determinate  Being  and,  next,  its  Being- 
for-Self. 

Essence  in  the  Whole  is  what  Quantity  was  in  the  sphere 
of  Being :  absolute  indifference  to  the  limit.  But  Quantity  is 
this  indifference  in  immediate  determination,  and  in  it  limit 
immediately  is  external  determinateness;  it  passes  over  into 
Quantum ;  external  limit  is  necessary  to  it  and  in  it  has  being. 
But  determinateness  has  not  being  in  Essence :  by  Essence  itself 
it  is  only  posited :  it  is  not  free,  but  exists  only  in  relation  to 
its  unity. — The  negativity  of  Essence  is  Reflection,  and  the 
determinations  are  reflected,  posited  by  Essence  itself  and 
remaining  in  it  as  transcended. 

Essence  is  midway  between  Being  and  Notion :  it  is  the  mean 
between  them,  and  its  movement  constitutes  the  transition 
frorii  Being  to  Notion.  Essence  is  Being-in-and-for-Self,  and 
that  in  the  determination  of  Being-in-Self;  for  its  general 
determination  is,  that  it  proceeds  out  of  Being  or  is  the  first 
negation  of  Being.  Its  movement  is  this,  that  it  posits  negation 
or  determination  in  Being,  and  thus  achieves  Determinate 
Being ;  it  becomes  as  infinite  Being-for-Self  what  it  is  in  itself. 
Thus  the  Determinate  Being  which  it  achieves  is  equal  to  its 
Being-in-Self ;  and  Essence  becomes  Notion.  For  the  Notion 
is  the  Absolute,  absolute  or  in  and  for  itself  as  it  is  in  its 
Determinate  Being.  But  that  Determinate  Being  which  Essence 
achieves  is  not  yet  Determinate  Being  as  it  is  in  and  for  itself, 
but  such  as  Essence  achieves  it  or  as  it  is  posited ;  so  far,  there- 
fore, it  is  different  from  the  Determinate  Being  of  the  Notion. 

Essence  first  shows  into  itself  or  is  Reflection;  next  it  appears, 
thirdly  it  manifests  itself.  In  its  movement  it  posits  itself  in  the 
following  determinations : — 

I.  as  simple  Essence  which  is  in  itself  in  its  determinations 
within  itself; 

VOL.  u.  B 


18  SCIENCE  OF   LOGIC 

II.  as  emerging  into  Determinate  Being,  or  according  to  its 
existence  and  Appearance ; 

III.  as  Essence  which  is  one  with  its  Appearance,  that  is, 
as  Actuality. 


SECTION  ONE 
ESSENCE   AS    REFLECTION    INTO    SELF 

ESSENCE  comes  out  of  Being ;  and  in  so  far,  it  is  not  immediate 
in  and  for  itself,  but  is  the  result  of  that  movement.  Or  if 
Essence  is  provisionally  taken  as  immediate,  it  is  a  determinate 
existence,  to  which  another  stands  opposed :  it  is  essential  only 
as  agayist  unessential  existence.  But  Essence  is  Being  tran- 
scended in  and  for  itself,  and  what  is  opposed  to  it  is  only  Show. 
Now  Show  is  the  self-positing  of  Essence. 

Essence  is,  first,  Reflection.  This  Reflection  determines  itself; 
its  determinations  are  a  positedness  which  also  is  Reflection 
into  Self. 

Secondly,  these  Reflection-determinations  or  Essentialities 
are  to  be  considered. 

Thirdly,  Essence,  as  the  Reflection  of  determining  into 
itself,  becomes  Ground,  and  passes  over  into  Existence  and 
Appearance. 


CHAPTER  I 
SHOW 

ESSENCE  comes  out  of  Being  and  appears  to  stand  'opposed  to 
it ;  here  this  immediate  Being  is  the  Unessential. 

But  secondly,  it  is  more  than  only  the  Unessential,  it  is 
Essenceless  Being,  it  is  Show. 

Thirdly,  this  Show  is  not  external  and  Other  to  Essence, 
but  is  its  own  Show.  The  showing  of  Essence  in  itself  is 
Reflection. 

A 

THE  ESSENTIAL  AND  THE  UNESSENTIAL 

Essence  is  Being  transcended.  It  is  simple  self-identity,  but 
only  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  general  negation  of  the  sphere  of 
Being.  Essence  is  thus  opposed  by  immediacy,  which  imme- 
diacy is  of  such  a  kind  that  it  caused  Essence  to  arise  out  of 
it,  conserving  and  maintaining  itself  in  this  transcendence. 
Essence  itself,  in  this  determination,  is  existent  immediate 
Essence,  and  Being  is  negative  only  in  relation  to  Essence 
and  not  in  and  for  itself;  Essence  is  hence  a  determinate 
negation.  Thus  Being  and  Essence  are  again  related  simply 
as  Other,  for  each  has  a  Being,  an  immediacy,  and  these  are 
indifferent  to  each  other,  and  according  to  this  Being  both  are 
of  equal  value. 

But  at  the  same  time  Being  in  opposition  to  Essence  is  the 
Unessential;  it  is  determined  with  regard  to  the  latter  a? 
already  transcended.  But  in  so  far  as  it  is  related  to  Essence 
merely  as  an  Other,  Essence  is  not  properly  Essence,  but  only 
an  existence  otherwise  determinate — the  Essential. 

The  distinction  between  Essential  and  Unessential  has 
allowed  Essence  to  fall  back  into  the  sphere  of  Determinate 
Being,  for  so  far  Essence  is  here  determined  as  an  immediate 
existent,  and  therefore  merely  as  Other  as  opposed  to  Being, 
Here  then  the  sphere  of  Determinate  Being  is  the  basis :  it  is 


SHOW  ai 

a  further  determination,  external  to  Determinate  Being,  that 
that  which  is  Being  in  this  Determinate  Being  is  Being-in-and- 
for-Self;  and  conversely,  while  Essence  is  Being-in-and-for- 
Self,  it  is  this  only  in  opposition  to  an  other — that  is,  in  a 
determinate  respect. — Hence,  in  so  far  as  an  Essential  and  an 
Unessential  are  distinguished  in  any  Determinate  Being,  this 
distinction's  an  external  positing,  a  severance  of  one  part  of 
a  Determinate  Being  from  another  part,  which,  however,  does 
not  touch  the  Determinate  Being  itself, — a  separation  which 
falls  within  a  third  element.  What  belongs  to  the  Essential 
and  what  to  the  Unessential  is  here  left  indeterminate.  What 
constitutes  it  is  some  external  consideration  or  point  of  view, 
and  the  same  content  must  therefore  be  regarded  at  one  time 
as  essential  and  at  another  as  unessential. 

More  closely  considered,  Essence  is  reduced  to  Essential  as 
opposed  to  Unessential  because  Essence  is  taken  only  as  tran- 
scended Being  or  Determinate  Being.  In  this  way  Essence 
is  only  first  negation,  or  that  negation  which  is  determinate- 
ness,  and  which  narrows  down  Being  to  Determinate  Being, 
and  Determinate  Being  to  Other.  But  Essence  is  the  absolute 
negativity  of  Being :  it  is  Being  itself,  Being  determined  not 
mesely,  however,  as  an  Other,  but  Being  which,  both  as 
immediate  Being  and  as  immediate  negation  (negation  which 
is  infected  with  Other-being),  has  transcended  itself.  Being  or 
Determinate  Being  has  here  not  preserved  itself  as  Other  than 
Essence ;  and  that  immediacy  which  is  still  distinguished  from 
Essence  is  not  merely  an  unessential  Determinate  Being,  but 
an  immediacy  which  is  null  in  and  for  itself;  it  is  mere 
Unessence,  or  Show. 

B 
SHOW 

i .  Being  is  Show.  The  Being  of  Show  consists  entirely  in  the 
fact  that  Being  is  transcended  and  is  null;  it  has  this  nullity 
in  Essence,  and  apart  from  its  nullity  and  from  Essence  it  is 
not.  It  is  the  Negative  posited  as  Negative. 

Show  is  all  the  rest  which  remains  over  from  the  sphere  of 
Being.  But  it  has  the  appearance  of  having  an  immediate  side 
independent  of  Essence,  and,  generally,  of  being  its  Other, 


22  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

The  Other  in  general  contains  the  two  moments  of  Existence 
and  Non-existence.  And  since  the  Unessential  has  no  Being, 
it  retains  nothing  of  its  Other-being  save  the  pure  moment 
of  Non-existence :  Show  is  this  immediate  Non-existence,  and 
it  is  this — in  the  determinateness  of  Being — in  such  a  manner 
that  it  has  existence  only  in  relation  to  another,  in  its  Non- 
existence:  it  is  that  instability  which  is  only  in  its  negation. 
There  remains  for  it  therefore  only  the  pure  determinateness 
of  immediacy ;  it  exists  as  reflected  immediacy,  that  is,  as  that 
immediacy  which  exists  only  through  the  mediation  of  its 
negation,  and  is  nothing  in  relation  to  its  mediation  but  the 
empty  determination  of  the  immediacy  of  Non-existenfce. 

Show  then  is  the  phenomenon  of  scepticism;  or  again  the 
appearance  of  idealism  is  such  an  immediacy,  which  is  neither 
Something  nor  Thing,  and,  generally,  is  not  an  indifferent 
Being  which  could  be  outside  its  determinateness  and  relation 
to  the  subject.  Scepticism  did  not  dare  to  affirm  "it  is"  ;  modern 
idealism  did  not  dare  to  regard  cognition  as  a  knowledge  of 
the  Thing-in-itself :  with  the  former,  Show  was  supposed  to 
have  no  basis  at  all  in  any  Being;  with  the  latter,  the  Thing- 
in-itself  was  supposed  incapable  of  entering  into  cognition. 
But  at  the  same  time  scepticism  admitted  manifold  deter- 
minations of  its  Show,  or  rather  its  Show  had  for  content  all 
the  manifold  riches  of  the  world.  In  the  same  manner  the 
"appearance53  of  idealism  comprehends  the  whole  range  of 
these  manifold  determinatenesses.  Thus  both  Show  and 
"appearance"  are  immediately  determined  as  manifold.  The 
content  may  then  have  no  basis  in  any  Being  nor  in  any  thing 
nor  thing-in-itself :  for  itself  it  remains  as  it  is :  it  has  only 
been  translated  from  being  into  Show;  thus  Show  contains 
these  manifold  determinatenesses,  which  relatively  to  one 
another  are  immediate,  existent,  and  other.  Show  itself  is,  then,' 
immediately  determinate.  Its  content  may  be  this  or  that ;  but 
whatever  content  it  has  is  not  posited  by  itself  but  belongs 
to  it  immediately.  The  idealism  of  Leibniz,  Kant  or  Fichte, 
or  any  other  form  of  idealism,  did  not  reach  beyond  Being 
as  determinateness,  beyond  this  immediacy;  and  scepticism 
also  failed.  Scepticism  allows  the  content  of  its  Show  to  be 
given  it :  for  it,  it  is  an  immediate  datum,  what  content  it  is 
to  have.  The  monad  of  Leibniz  develops  its  presentations  out 


SHOW  23 

of  itself;  but  it  is  no  creative  and  combining  force, — the  pre- 
sentations arise  in  it  like  bubbles;  they  are  indifferent  and 
immediate  relatively  to  one  another,  and  therefore  to  the 
monad  itself.  Similarly  Kant's  "phenomenon"  is  a  given  con- 
tent of  perception :  it  presupposes  affections,  determinations  of 
the  subject  which  are  immediate  to  one  another  and  to  the 
subject.  The  infinite  "resistance-principle"  of  Fichte's  idealism 
refuses,  perhaps,  to  be  based  on  any  thing-in-itself,  so  that  it 
becomes  purely  a  determjnateness  in  the  Ego.  But  this  deter- 
minateness  is  immediate  and  a  barrier  to  the  Ego,  which, 
transcending  its  externality,  incorporates  it  with  itself;  and 
though- the  Ego  can  pass  beyond  the  barrier,  the  latter  has  in 
it  an  aspect  of  indifference  by  virtue  of  which  it  contains  an 
immediate  Not-being  of  the  Ego,  though  itself  contained  in 
the  Ego. — 

2.  Show  thus  contains  an  immediate  presupposition,  an 
aspect  independent  of  Essence.  But  it  is  not  to  be  proved  of 
Show  that,  in  so  far  as  it  differs  from  Essence,  it  transcends 
itself  and  returns  to  Essence; — for  Being  has  returned  into 
Essence  in  its  totality,  but  Show  is  that  which  in  itself  is  null. 
All  that  is  to  be  proved  is,  that  the  determinations  which 
distinguish  it  from  Essence  are  also  determinations  of  Essence, 
and,  further,  that  that  determinateness  of  Essence  which  Show 
is,  is  transcended  in  Essence  itself. 

It  is  the  immediacy  of  Not-being  which  constitutes  Show; 
but  this  Not-being  is  nothing  else  than  the  negativity  of  Essence 
in  itself.  In  Essence,  Being  is  Not-being.  Its  nullity  in  itself  is 
the  negative  nature  of  Essence  itself.  But  the  immediacy  or  indif- 
ference which  this  Not-being  contains  is  the  proper  and 
absolute  Being-in-Self  of  Essence.  The  negativity  of  Essence  is 
its  self-identity,  or  its  simple  immediacy  and  indifference. 
Being  has  preserved  itself  in  Essence  in  so  far  as  the  latter 
has  this  self-identity  in  its  infinite  negativity;  and  by  virtue 
of  this,  Essence  itself  is  Being.  Hence  the  immediacy  which, 
in  Show,  belongs  to  determinateness  with  respect  to  Essence, 
is  nothing  else  than  the  immediacy  of  Essence  itself,  an  imme- 
diacy, however,  which  is  not,  but  is  just  mediated  or  reflected ; 
and  this  is  Show, — Being  not  as  Being,  but  only  as  the  deter- 
minateness of  Being  as  against  mediation :  Being  as  Moment. 

Two  moments  thus  constitute  Show:  Nullity,  which  how- 


24  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

ever  persists,  and  Being,  which  however  is  Moment ;  or  again 
negativity  which  is  in  itself,  and  reflected  immediacy.  Con- 
sequently these  moments  are  the  moments  of  Essence  itself: 
there  is  no  Show  of  Being  in  Essence,  nor  Show  of  Essence  in 
Being;  Show  in  Essence  is  not  the  Show  of  an  Other,  but 
Show  in  itself,  Show  of  Essence  itself. 

Show  is  Essence  itself  in  the  determinateness  of  Being. 
Essence  has  a  Show  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  it  is  determinate 
in  itself  and  thereby  distinguished  frpm  its  absolute  unity.  But 
this  determinateness  is  equally  transcended  in  it.  For  Essence 
is  stability;  that  is,  it  is  self-mediating  through  its  negation, 
and  this  it  is  itself.  It  is  thus  the  identical  unity  of  absolute 
negativity  and  of  immediacy. — This  negativity  is  negativity 
in  itself;  it  is  its  own  self-relation,  and  thus  immediacy  in 
itself;  but  it  is  negative  self-relation  and  repulsive  self- 
negation,  and  thus  this  immediacy  which  is  in  itself,  is 
negation  or  determinateness  with  regard  to  it.  But  this 
determinateness  is  itself  absolute  negativity,  and  is  this  deter- 
mining which  immediately  as  determination  is  self-tran- 
scendence and  return  upon  itself. 

Show  is  the  negative  which  has  a  being,  but  in  an  Other, 
in  its  negation:  Show  is  instability  which  in  itself  is  t^an- 
scended  and  is  null.  It  is  thus  the  negative  which  returns  into 
itself,  or  instability  as  that  which  in  itself  is  unstable.  This 
relation  to  itself  of  the  negative  or  of  instability  is  its  immediacy ; 
it  is  other  than  itself;  it  is  its  determinateness  as  against  itself, 
or  it  is  negation  as  against  the  negative.  But  negation  as  against 
the  negative  is  negativity  which  refers  itself  to  itself  only :  it 
is  absolute  transcendence  of  determinateness  itself. 

In  Essence  then  Show  is  a  determinateness  which  is  infinite : 
it  is  the  negative  which  coincides  only  with  itself:  it  is  thus 
determinateness  which  as  such  is  stability  and  is  not  deter- 
minate.— Conversely  stability  as  self-relating  immediacy  equally 
is,  absolutely,  determinateness  and  moment,  and  exists  only 
as  self-relating  negativity. — This  negativity  which  is  identical 
with  immediacy,  and  thus  this  immediacy  which  is  identical 
with  negativity,  is  Essence.  Thus  Show  is  Essence  itself,  but 
Essence  in  a  determinateness,  and  this  in  such  a  manner  that 
determinateness  is  only  its  moment:  Essence  is  the  showing 
of  itself  in  itself. 


SHOW  25 

In  the  sphere  of  Being,  Being,  as  immediate,  is  faced  by  Not- 
being,  which  also  is  immediate,  and  their  truth  is  Becoming. 
In  the  sphere  of  Essence,  first  Essence  and  the  Unessential, 
next  Essence  and  Show,  are  opposed  to  each  other;  and 
the  Unessential  and  Show  are  remnants  of  Being.  But  both 
(as  well  as  the  difference  of  Essence  from  them)  consist  in 
nothing  else  than  the  fact  that  Essence  first  is  taken  as  some- 
thing immediate,  not  as  it  is  in  itself  (not,  that  is,  as  immediacy 
which  is  such  as  pure  mediation  or  absolute  negativity).  Thus 
this  first  immediacy  is  only  the  determinateness  of  immediacy. 
And  this  determinateness  of  Essence  is  accordingly  transcended 
simply  -when  it  is  shown  that  the  Unessential  is  only  Show, 
and  that  Essence  rather  contains  Show  in  the  form  of  that 
infinite  internal  movement  which  determines  its  immediacy 
as  negativity  and  its  negativity  as  immediacy,  and  thus  is  its 
showing  within  itself.  In  this  its  self-movement  Essence  is 
Reflection. 

C 

REFLECTION 

SJiow  is  the  same  as  Reflection;  but  it  is  Reflection  as 
immediate :  for  Show  which  has  entered  into  itself  and  thereby 
is  emptied  of  its  immediacy,  we  have  the  term,  borrowed  from 
a  foreign  language,  of  Reflection. 

Essence  is  Reflection — the  movement  of  Becoming  and 
transition  which  remains  within  itself;  here  that  which  is  dis- 
tinguished is  determined  simply  as  that  which  is  negative  in 
itself,  as  Show. — In  the  Becoming  of  Being,  Being  is  the  basis 
of  Meterminateness,  which  is  relation  to  other.  The  reflecting 
movement  on  the  other  hand  is  the  Other  as  negation  in 
itself,  which  has  being  only  as  self-relating  negation.  Or  again, 
this  self-relation  being  this  very  negation  of  negation,  we  have 
here  negation  as  negation,  or  as  such  as  has  its  being  in  its 
negation,  that  is,  as  Show.  Thus  here  the  Other  is  not  Being 
plus  negation  or  limit,  but  negation  plus  negation.  But  the 
primary  entity  which  is  opposed  to  this  Other — immediacy  or 
Being — is  just  this  self-identity  of  negation, — negated  negation, 
or  absolute  negativity.  Hence  this  self-identity  or  immediacy 
is  not  a  primary  entity  which  forms  a  point  of  departure  and 


26  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

passes  over  into  its  negation,  nor  is  it  an  existent  substratum 
moving  through  Reflection;  rather  immediacy  is  this  move- 
ment itself  and  no  more. 

Becoming  in  Essence — its  reflective  movement — is  hence  the 
movement  from  Nothing,  to  Nothing  and  through  Nothing  back 
to  itself.  The  transition  or  Becoming  transcends  itself  in  its  tran- 
sition :  that  Other  which  arises  in  the  course  of  this  transition 
is  not  the  Not-being  of  a  Being  but  the  Nothing  of  a  Nothing ; 
and  it  is  this — the  fact  that  it  is  the  negation  of  a  Nothing — 
which  constitutes  Being. — Being  exists  only  as  the  movement  of 
Nothing  to  Nothing,  and  thus  is  Essence;  and  Essence  does 
not  contain  this  movement  in  itself  but  is  this  movement,  an 
absolute  Show  and  pure  negativity,  which  has  nothing  without 
it  that  could  negate  it,  but  negates  only  its  own  negativity, 
which  is  only  in  this  negation. 

This  pure  and  absolute  Reflection  which  is  the  movement 
from  Nothing  to  Nothing,  further  determines  itself. 

It  is,  first,  Positing  Reflection. 

Secondly,  it  begins  from  the  presupposed  immediacy  and 
thus  is  External  Reflection. 

Thirdly,  however,  it  transcends  this  presupposition,  and, 
since  in  this  act  of  transcendence  it  itself  presupposes,  it  is 
Determining  Reflection. 

(a)  POSITING  REFLECTION 

Show  is  that  which  is  null  or  essenceless;  but  this  null  or 
essenceless  has  not  its  Being  in  an  Other,  in  which  it  shows, 
but  its  Being  is  its  own  self-identity;  this  self-interchange  of 
the  negative  has  determined  itself  as  the  absolute  Reflection 
of  Essence. 

.  This  self-relating  negativity  is,  then,  its  own  negation.  In- 
the  same  measure,  therefore,  in  which  it  is  negativity,  it  is 
negativity  transcended.  Or  again,  it  is  itself  the  negative,  it 
is  simple  self-identity,  or  immediacy.  Its  substance  therefore  is 
that  it  is,  and  is  not,  itself;  and  this  in  one  unity. — 

Reflection  is,  first,  the  movement  of  Nothing  to  Nothing, 
it  is  negation  which  coincides  with  itself.  This  coincidence  with 
self  is  just  simple  self-identity,  or  immediacy.  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, the  case  that  this  collapse  is  the  transition  of  negation 


SHOW  27 

into  identity  with  self  as  into  its  otherness ;  but  Reflection  is 
transition  as  the  transcendence  of  transition,  for  it  is  immediate 
collapse  of  the  negative  with  itself.  This  coincidence  is,  then, 
first,  self-identity  or  immediacy ;  but,  secondly,  this  immediacy 
is  the  self-identity  of  the  negative,  or  self-negating  identity; 
it  is  that  immediacy  which  is  in  itself  the  negative,  the  negative 
of  its  own  $elf,  in  that  it  is  what  it  is  not. 

Thus  the  self-relation  of  the  negative  is  its  return  to 
itself;  it  is  immediacy  as  .the  transcendence  of  the  negative; 
but  it  is  immediacy  absolutely  only  as  this  relation,  or  as  return 
from  a  negative,  and  thus  it  is  self-transcending  immediacy. — 
This  is  'positedness,  immediacy  purely  as  determinateness  or 
as  self-reflecting.  This  immediacy,  which  exists  only  as  the 
return  of  the  negative  to  itself,  is  the  same  immediacy  which 
constitutes  the  determinateness  of  Show,  and  from  which  the 
reflecting  movement  appeared  above  to  begin.  But  it  cannot 
begin  from  this  immediacy,  which  in  fact  exists  only  as  return 
or  Reflection  itself  Reflection,  then,  is  the  movement  which 
is  return,  and  therefore  at  this  point  alone  is  that  which  begins 
or  returns. 

It  is  a  positing,  in  so  far  as  it  is  immediacy  as  a  return ;  for 
there  is  no  Other  there,  nor  anything  out  of  or  into  which  it 
could  return ;  it  exists  therefore  only  as  return,  or  as  the  negative 
of  itself.  But  further  this  immediacy  is  transcended  negation 
and  transcended  return  to  self.  As  the  transcendence  of  the 
negative,  Reflection  is  the  transcendence  of  its  Other,  namely, 
of  immediacy.  Reflection  is,  then,  immediacy  as  a  return,  as 
the  self-coincidence  of  the  negative,  and  thereby  it  is  also  the 
negation  of  the  negative  as  such :  Reflection  is  Presupposition. — 
Or  again,  immediacy  as  return  is  only  the  negative  of  itself, 
it  is  just  the  fact  that  it  is  not  immediacy ;  but  Reflection  is 
the  transcendence  of  the  negative  of  itself,  it  is  self-coincidence; 
thus  it  transcends  its  positing,  and  is  presupposition  because 
in  its  positing  it  is  the  transcendence  of  positing.  In  pre- 
supposition, Reflection  determines  the  return  to  itself  to  be 
its  own  negative,  or  that  the  transcendence  of  which  is  Essence. 
It  is  its  attitude  to  itself,  but  to  itself  as  its  own  negative ;  and 
thus  only  is  it  self-confined  and  self-relating  negativity.  And 
altogether  immediacy  is  manifested  only  as  return,  and  is  the 
same  kind  of  negative  as  is  that  Show  of  the  beginning  which 


28  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

is  negated  in  the  return.  The  return  of  Essence  is  thus  its  own 
self-repulsion.  Or,  intro-Reflection  is  essentially  the  presup- 
posing of  that  out  of  which  it  is  the  return. 

It  is  only  through  the  transcendence  of  its  self-identity  that 
Essence  is  self-identity.  It  presupposes  itself,  and  it  is  itself 
the  transcendence  of  this  presupposition ;  and  conversely  this 
transcendence  of  its  presupposition  is  the  presupposition  itself. 
— Reflection  thus  finds  itself  faced  with  something  immediate, 
beyond  which  it  passes,  and  out  of  which  it  is  the  return.  But 
this  return  is  only  the  presupposition  of  that  which  has  been 
found.  And  this  latter  arises  only  as  it  is  left  behind;  its 
immediacy  is  transcended  immediacy. — Conversely  tran'Scended 
immediacy  is  return  to  self,  the  arrival  of  Essence  at  itself,  Being 
simple  and  self-identical.  Thus  this  arrival  at  self  is  self- 
transcendence,  it  is  self-repellent  and  presupposing  Reflection ; 
and  its  self-repulsion  is  its  arrival  at  itself. 

From  these  considerations  it  results  that  the  reflecting 
movement  must  be  taken  as  absolute  recoil  into  itself.  For  the 
presupposition  of  return  into  self — that  from  which  Essence 
emerges  (and  except  as  this  return  it  cannot  be) — lies  only  in 
the  return  itself.  The  over-passing  beyond  the  immediate, 
whence  Reflection  begins,  arises  in  fact  only  from  this  over- 
passing; and  the  over-passing  beyond  the  immediate  is  the 
arrival  at  the  immediate.  The  movement  taken  as  a  progress 
immediately  reverses  within  itself,  and  thus  only  is  self-move- 
ment,— movement  which  arises  from  itself  in  so  far  as  positing 
Reflection  presupposes,  but  again,  as  presupposing  Reflection, 
just  posits. 

Reflection  thus  is  both  itself  and  its  not-being,  and  is  itself 
only  in  so  far  as  it  is  its  own  negative,  for  then  only  is  the 
transcendence  of  the  negative  also  a  coincidence  with  self. 

That  immediacy  which,  as  transcendence,  it  presupposes  fof 
itself,  exists  simply  only  as  positedness,  as  that  which  is  tran- 
scended in  itself,  which  is  not  distinguished  from  the  return  into 
itself,  and  itself  is  only  this  return.  But  it  is  also  determined 
as  negative,  as  being  immediately  opposed  to  one,  and,  there- 
fore, to  an  Other.  Thus  Reflection  is  determinate;  and,  since 
in  this  determinateness  it  has  a  presupposition  and  begins  from 
the  immediate  as  from  its  Other,  it  is  External  Reflection. 


SHOW  29 

(b)  EXTERNAL  REFLECTION 

Reflection  as  absolute  Reflection  is  Essence  showing  within 
itself,  and  presupposes  only  Show,  or  positedness:  as  pre- 
supposing Reflection  it  is  immediately  only  Positing  Reflection. 
But  External  or  real  Reflection  presupposes  itself  as  tran- 
scended, as  its  own  negative.  In  this  determination  it  is  twofold. 
It  is,  first, 'that  which  is  presupposed,  or  that  intro-Reflection 
which  is  the  imm-^diate;  and,  secondly,  it  is  Reflection 
which,  as  negative,  refers 'itself  to  itself;  it  refers  itself  to  itself 
as  to  that  other  which  is  its  not-being. 

External  Reflection,  then,  presupposes  a  Being,  but,  first, 
not  in  this  sense,  that  its  immediacy  is  only  positedness  or 
moment,  but  rather  that  this  immediacy  is  self-relation,  while 
the  determinateness  exists  only  as  moment.  Its  relation  to  its 
presupposition  is  this,  that  the  latter  is  the  negative  of  Reflection, 
but  this  in  such  a  manner  that  this  negative  as  such  is  tran- 
scended.— Reflection  in  its  positing  immediately  transcends  its 
positing,  and  thus  has  an  immediate  presupposition.  Thus  it 
meets  Positing  as  something  from  which  it  begins,  whence 
coming  it  is  return  to  self  and  negation  of  this  its  negative. 
That  this  presupposed  something  is  a  negative  or  posited  entity 
in  no  way,  however,  concerns  it;  this  determinateness  belongs 
only  to  Positing  Reflection,  while  in  presupposition  positedness 
exists  only  as  something  transcended.  Whatever  determinations 
external  Reflection  determines  and  posits  in  the  immediate, 
are  in  so  far  external  to  it. — In  the  sphere  of  Being  Reflection 
was  the  Infinite:  the  Finite  passes  for  the  first  term,  or  the 
Real,  and  is  supposed  to  be  and  to  remain  the  foundation 
from  which  a  beginning  is  made:  intro-Reflection — which 
remains  opposed  to  it — is  the  Infinite. 

This  External  Reflection  is  the  conclusion  in  which  the  two 
extremes  are  the  Immediate  and  intro-Reflection ;  the  relation 
of  the  two — the  determinate  immediate — is  the  mean,  so  that 
one  part  of  the  mean  (immediacy)  belongs  only  to  the  one 
extreme,  and  the  other  (determinateness  or  negation)  to  the 
other. 

But  if  the  activity  of  External  Reflection  is  more  closely 
considered,  then,  secondly,  it  is  a  positing  of  the  immediate, 
which  in  so  far  becomes  the  negative  or  determinate;  but, 


30  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

immediately,  it  is  also  the  transcendence  of  this  its  positing ; 
for  it  /^-supposes  the  immediate,  and  in  negation  it  is  the 
negation  of  this  its  negation.  But  thereby  it  immediately  is 
also  positing,  or  transcendence  of  its  negative  Immediate,  and 
this  latter,  which  seemed  alien  to  it  when  it  was  the  beginning 
whence  a  start  was  made,  exists  only  in  this  its  beginning. 
In  this  manner  the  immediate  is  not  only  in  itself  the  same  as 
Reflection  (which  would  mean  for  us,  or  in  External  Reflection), 
but  it  is  posited  that  it  is  the  same.  For  by  Reflection  it  is 
determined  as  being  its  negative  or'its  Other;  but  this  deter- 
mining is  negated  by  Reflection  in  itself  and  none  other. — 
Hereby  the  externality  of  Reflection,  as  against  the  immediate, 
is  transcended;  its  self-negating  positing  is  the  coincidence  of 
itself  with  its  negative  (the  immediate),  and  this  coincidence 
is  essential  immediacy  itself.  We  thus  discover  that  External 
Reflection  is  not  external  but  also  immanent  Reflection  of 
immediacy  itself,  or  that  that  which  exists  by  virtue  of  Positing 
Reflection  is  Essence  which  is  in  and  for  itself.  It  is  thus 
Determining  Reflection. 

Observation 

Commonly  Reflection  is  taken  in  the  subjective  meaning, 
of  the  movement  of  judgment  which  passes  beyond  a  given 
immediate  presentation,  seeking  universal  determinations  for 
it  or  comparing  them  with  it.  Kant  opposes  Reflecting  Judg- 
ment to  Determining  Judgment  (Critique  of  Judgment,  Intro- 
duction, p.  xxiii.  sq.).  Judgment  in  general  he  defines  as  the 
capacity  of  thinking  the  particular  as  contained  in  the  universal. 
Given  the  universal  (the  Rule,  Principle,  or  Law),  then  Judg- 
ment, which  subsumes  the  particular  under  it,  is  determinative. 
But  where  only  the  particular  is  given  and  the  relative  universal 
is  to  be  found,  then  Judgment  is  merely  reflective.  Here  too 
then  Reflection  is  the  over-passing  beyond  an  immediate  to 
the  universal.  The  immediate  is  determined  as  particular  in 
part  only  by  this  its  relation  to  its  universal :  for  itself  it  is 
only  an  isolated  unit  or  an  immediate  existent.  And  in  part 
that  to  which  it  is  related  (its  universal,  its  Rule,  Principle, 
or  Law)  is  that  which  is  intro-reflected  and  self-relating, — 
Essence  or  the  Essential. 


SHOW  31 

Here,  however,  neither  the  reflection  of  consciousness  nor 
the  more  determinate  reflection  of  understanding,  which  has 
the  particular  and  the  universal  for  its  determinations,  is  in 
question,  but  only  Reflection  in  general.  That  reflection  to 
which  Kant  ascribes  the  search  for  the  universal  appropriate 
to  any  given  particular  is  clearly  just  External  Reflection  which 
is  related  to  the  immediate  as  to  something  given. — But  it  also 
contains  thfe  concept  of  absolute  Reflection ;  for  the  universal, 
the  principle  or  rule  and  law,  to  which  it  proceeds  in  the  course 
of  its  determining,  is  counted  as  the  Essence  of  that  immediate 
from  which  a  beginning  is  made ;  the  latter  is  counted  as  null, 
and  only  the  return  thence  (the  determining  of  Reflection)  as 
the  positing  of  the  immediate  according  to  its  veritable  being ; 
and  so  the  operation  in  it  of  Reflection,  and  the  determinations 
thence  derived,  are  counted,  not  as  external  to  this  immediate, 
but  as  its  proper  being. 

For  some  time  it  was  fashionable  in  modern  philosophy  to 
tax  Reflection  in  general  with  every  possible  evil,  and  to  regard 
it  and  its  determining  as  the  antithesis  and  the  arch-enemy  of 
absolute  contemplation :  here  too  External  Reflection  was  meant. 
In  fact  thinking  Reflection  too,  in  so  far  as  its  attitude  is  external, 
simply  starts  from  an  immediate  which  is  given  and  is  alien 
to  it:  it  considers  itself  as  a  merely  formal  activity,  which 
receives  its  content  and  matter  from  without  and  for  itself  is 
only  the  movement  conditioned  by  these. — Further  (as  will 
soon  be  seen  in  more  detail  in  Determining  Reflection)  the 
reflected  determinations  are  of  a  kind  different  from  the  merely 
immediate  determinations  of  Being.  Of  the  latter  it  is  easily 
admitted  that  they  are  transitory  and  merely  relative,  related 
to  something  other,  while  the  reflected  determinations  have 
the  form  of  Being-in-and-for-Self;  they  accordingly  assert 
themselves  as  essential,  and  instead  of  passing  over  into  their 
opposites,  they  appear  rather  as  absolute,  free,  and  indifferent 
to  one  another.  They  therefore  stubbornly  resist  their  move- 
ment :  their  Being  is  their  self-identity  in  their  determinateness, 
according  to  which,  while  presupposing  one  another,  they  yet 
preserve  themselves  as  absolutely  separate  in  this  relation. 


32  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

(c)  DETERMINING  REFLECTION 

Determining  Reflection  in  general  is  the  unity  of  Positing 
Reflection  and  External  Reflection.  This  must  be  more  closely 
considered. — 

i.  External  Reflection  begins  from  immediate  Being,  Posit- 
ing Reflection  from  Nothing.  External  Reflection,  which 
becomes  determinative,  posits  an  Other — Essence — in  the 
place  of  transcended  Being;  Positing  does  not  posit  its 
determination  in  the  place  of  an  Other;  it  has  no  presup- 
position. But  this  does  not  suffice  to  make  it  into  complete 
Determining  Reflection,  and  accordingly  the  determination 
which  it  posits  is  only  something  posited :  it  is  immediate,  not 
because  it  is  self-identical  but  because  it  is  self-negating;  it 
has  an  absolute  relation  to  the  return  to  self;  it  is  only  in 
intro-Reflection,  and  is  not  this  Reflection  itself. 

That  which  is  posited  is  therefore  an  Other,  but  in  such 
a  manner  that  the  self-identity  of  Reflection  is  absolutely 
preserved ;  for  that  which  is  posited  exists  only  as  transcended, 
as  a  relation  to  the  return  to  self. — In  the  sphere  of  Being, 
Determinate  Being  was  that  kind  of  Being  which  contained 
negation,  while  Being  was  the  immediate  bottom  and  element 
of  this  negation,  which  therefore  was  itself  immediate.  In  the 
sphere  of  Essence,  Positedness  corresponds  to  Determinate 
Being.  It  too  is  a  Determinate  Being,  but  its  bottom  is  Being 
as  Essence  or  as  pure  negativity;  it  is  a  determinateness  or 
negation,  not  as  existent,  but  immediately  as  transcended. 
Determinate  Being  is  only  Positedness :  this  is  the  proposition  which 
Essence  makes  of  Determinate  Being.  Positedness  is  opposed 
first  to  Determinate  Being,  and  secondly  to  Essence,  and  is 
to  be  considered  as  the  mean  which  joins  Determinate  Being 
to  Essence  and  conversely  Essence  to  Determinate  Being. — If 
it  is  said  that  a  determination  is  only  a  Positedness,  this  can 
accordingly  have  a  double  meaning:  a  determination  is  this 
in  opposition  to  Determinate  Being  or  alternatively  to  Essence. 
In  the  former  meaning  Determinate  Being  is  taken  as  some- 
thing higher  than  Positedness,  and  the  latter  is  ascribed  to 
External  Reflection,  or  to  the  subjective  element.  But  in  fact 
Positedness  is  the  higher ;  for  as  Positedness  Determinate  Being, 
as  that  which  it  is  in  itself,  as  a  Negative,  is  simply  just  some- 


SHOW  33 

thing  which  is  related  to  the  return  to  self.  For  this  reason 
Positedness  is  only  a  positedness  with  respect  to  Essence,  as  the 
negation  of  the  state  of  having  returned  to  self. 

2.  Positedness  is  not  yet  Determination  of  Reflection :  it  is 
determinateness  only  as  negation  in  general.  But  now  Positing 
is  in  unity  with  External  Reflection;  in  this  unity  the  latter 
is  absolute  presupposing,  that  is,  the  self-repulsion  of  Reflection, 
or  the  positing  of  determinateness  as  itself.  As  such,  therefore, 
Positedness  is  negation;  but,  since  Positedness  is  presupposed, 
negation  is  intro-reflected.'And  thus  Positedness  is  Determina- 
tion of  Reflection. 

Determination  of  Reflection  is  different  from  the  deter- 
minateness of  Being,  which  is  Quality ;  the  latter  is  immediate 
relation  to  other  in  general;  and  though  Positedness  too  is 
relation  to  other,  it  is  relation  to  intro-reflectedness.  Negation 
as  Quality  is  negation  as  existent:  Being  constitutes  its  ground 
and  element.  But  Determination  of  Reflection  has  for  founda- 
tion intro-reflectedness.  Positedness  crystallizes  into  determina- 
tion just  because  Reflection  in  its  negatedness  is  self-identity ; 
and  therefore  its  negatedness  is  intro-Reflection.  Determination 
here  does  not  subsist  by  virtue  of  Being  but  of  self-identity. 
Being  (which  is  the  support  of  Quality)  is  that  which  is  not 
equal  to  negation,  and  for  this  reason  Quality  is  unequal  in 
itself,  and  is  therefore  a  transitory  moment  which  vanishes  in 
an  Other.  Determination  of  Reflection,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
Positedness  as  negation,  negation  which  has  negatedness  for 
foundation  and  thus  is  not  unequal  in  itself:  it  is  accordingly 
essential  and  not  transitory  determinateness.  It  is  the  self- 
identity  of  Reflection,  which  contains  the  negative  only  as 
negative  (or  as  something  transcended  or  posited),  that  gives 
to  it  persistence. 

By  virtue  of  this  intro-Reflection  the  Determinations  of 
Reflection  appear  as  free  Essentialities,  floating  in  the  void 
without  mutual  attraction  or  repulsion.  In  them  determinate- 
ness  has  confirmed  and  fixed  itself  as  infinite  through  self- 
relation.  It  is  the  determinate  entity  which  has  subjected  to 
itself  its  transition  and  mere  positedness,  and  has  converted 
its  Reflection  into  other  into  intro-Reflection.  By  virtue  of  this 
these  determinations  constitute  determinate  Show  as  it  is  found 
in  Essence,  or  Essential  Show.  For  this  reason  Determining 

VOL.  u.  c 


34  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Reflection  is  Reflection  which  has  passed  outside  itself;  the 
self-identity  of  Essence  is  lost  in  negation,  which  now  prevails. 

In  Determination  of  Reflection  there  are  then  two  sides, 
which  at  the  outset  are  distinguished.  First  it  is  Positedness, 
negation  as  such :  secondly  it  is  intro-Reflection.  As  Positedness, 
it  is  negation  as  negation,  which  thus  already  is  its  unity  with 
itself.  But  so  far  it  is  this  only  in  itself;  in  other  words,  it  is  the 
immediate  as  transcending  itself  in  it,  or  as  its  own  Other. — In 
so  far  Reflection  is  determining  which  remains  within  itself.  Here 
Essence  does  not  pass  outside  itself;  the  distinctions  are  simply 
posited  and  drawn  back  into  Essence.  But,  from  the  other  side, 
they  are  not  posited,  but  intro-reflected ;  negation  as  negation 
is  self-identical,  and  is  not  reflected  into  its  Other,  its  Not-being. 

3.  Determination  of  Reflection  is,  then,  reflected  relation  in 
itself,  and  it  is  also  Positedness ;  from  this  immediately  its  nature 
may  be  more  clearly  understood.  For  as  Positedness  it  is 
negation  as  such ;  it  is  a  Not-being  opposed  to  another  entity, 
namely,  absolute  intro-Reflection,  or  Essence.  But  as  self- 
relation  it  is  intro-reflected. — There  is  a  difference  between 
these  two  states — its  Reflection  and  its  Positedness;  the  latter 
is  more  truly  its  transcendedness,  but  its  intro-reflectedness  is 
its  subsistence.  In  so  far  then  as  it  is  Positedness  which  also 
is  intro-Reflection,  the  reflection-determinateness  is  the  relation 
to  its  other-being  in  itself. — It  is  not  a  determinateness  which 
is,  and  rests,  and  is  related  to  an  Other  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  related  term  and  its  relation  are  different  one  from 
the  other,  the  former  being  a  Being-in-Self,  a  Something  which 
excludes  its  Other  and  its  relation  to  this  Other  from  itself. 
On  the  contrary,  the  Reflection-Determination  is  in  itself  the 
determinate  side  and  the  relation  of  this  determinate  side  as 
determinate,  that  is,  relation  to  its  negation. — Quality  passes 
over  into  other  through  its  relation :  in  its  relation  its  change 
begins.  Determination  of  Reflection  on  the  other  hand  has 
re-absorbed  its  other-being.  It  is  Positedness,  or  negation,  which 
negation,  however,  bends  back  into  itself  relation  to  other, — 
negation  which  is  self-identical,  the  unity  of  itself  and  of  its 
Other,  so  that  for  this  reason  (and  this  reason  only)  it  is 
Essentiality.  Thus  it  is  Positedness — negation — but,  as  intro- 
Reflection,  it  is  also  the  accomplished  transcendence  of  this 
Positedness,  or  infinite  self-relation. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  ESSENTIALITIES  OR  DETERMINATIONS 
OF   REFLECTION 

REFLECTION  is  determinate  Reflection;  accordingly  Essence  is 
determinate  Essence,  or  Essentiality. 

Reflection  is  the  showing  of  Essence  into  itself.  Essence,  as 
infinite '  return  upon  itself,  is  not  immediate,  but  negative, 
simplicity :  it  is  a  movement  through  different  moments,  abso- 
lute self-mediation.  But  it  "shows"  into  these  its  moments ;  and 
therefore  they  are  themselves  intro-reflected  determinations. 

Essence  is,  first,  simple  self-relation,  pure  Identity.  This  is 
its  determination,  which  makes  it,  rather,  indeterminateness. 

Secondly,  the  proper  determination  is  Difference,  partly  as 
external  or  indifferent  Difference,  Variety  in  general,  and  partly 
as  opposed  Variety  or  Opposition. 

Thirdly,  as  Contradiction,  Opposition  reflects  itself  into  itself 
and*  returns  into  its  own  ground. 

Observation 

The  Determinations  of  Reflection  were  formerly  cast  into 
the  form  of  propositions,  in  which  it  was  said  of  them  that 
they  were  of  universal  application.  These  propositions  were 
counted  as  the  universal  Laws  of  Thought,  lying  at  the  root 
of  all  thought,  absolute  and  undemonstrable  in  themselves, 
but  recognized  as  true,  and  acknowledged,  immediately  and 
without  contradiction,  by  every  intelligence  which  seized  their 
meaning. 

Thus  the  essential  determination  of  Identity  is  enunciated 
in  the  proposition :  Everything  is  identical  with  itself ]  A  =  A:  or, 
negatively,  A  cannot  at  once  be  A  and  not  A. 

It  is  not  immediately  evident  why  only  these  simple  Deter- 
minations of  Reflection  are  to  be  cast  into  this  particular  form, 
and  not  also  the  other  categories,  such  as  every  determinateness 
of  the  sphere  of  Being.  We  would  then  have  such  propositions 


36  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

as  Everything  is,  Everything  has  Determinate  Being,  and  so  on; 
or,  Everything  has  Quality  or  Quantity,  and  so  forth.  For  Being, 
Determinate  Being,  and  the  rest,  are  logical  determinations, 
and  as  such  are  predicates  of  everything.  Category,  according 
to  its  etymology  and  its  Aristotelian  definition,  is  that  which 
is  predicated  or  asserted  of  the  existent. — But  a  determinateness 
of  Being  is  essentially  a  transition  into  the  opposite ;  the  negative 
of  any  determinateness  is  as  necessary  as  the  determinateness 
itself;  and  each  immediate  determinateness  is  immediately 
opposed  by  the  other.  When  therefore  these  categories  are 
embodied  in  such  propositions,  then  the  opposite  propositions 
equally  appear:  each  offers  itself  with  equal  necessity/ and  as 
an  immediate  assertion  has  at  least  an  equal  standing.  One 
therefore  would  demand  a  proof  as  against  the  other,  and 
hence  these  assertions  could  no  longer  have  the  character  of 
immediately  true  and  incontrovertible  propositions  of  thought. 

The  Determinations  of  Reflection  on  the  other  hand  are  not 
of  a  qualitative  kind.  They  are  self-relating  determinations, 
which  hence  are  also  free  from  determinateness  as  against  any 
other.  And  further,  since  each  such  determinateness  is  a 
relation  in  itself,  it  contains  the  propositional  form  in  itself 
already  to  that  extent.  For  the  main  distinction  between 
proposition  and  judgment  is  this,  that  in  the  former  the  content 
itself  constitutes  the  relation,  or  that  it  is  a  determinate  relation. 
Judgment  on  the  other  hand  removes  the  content  into  the 
predicate  as  a  universal  determinateness,  which  exists  for  itself 
and  is  distinguished  from  its  relation,  the  simple  copula.  When 
a  proposition  is  to  be  converted  into  a  judgment,  the  deter- 
minate content  is  changed — when,  for  instance,  it  is  a  verb — 
into  a  participle,  by  which  method  the  determination  itself  and 
its  relation  to  a  subject  are  separated.  The  propositional  form 
on  the  contrary  lies  ready  at  hand  for  the  Determinations  of 
Reflection,  for  they  are  an  intro-reflected  Positedness. — But, 
since  they  are  pronounced  as  universal  Laws  of  Thought,  they 
require  a  subject  for  their  relation,  and  this  subject  is  Everything, 
or  an  A,  which  equally  means  each  and  every  Being. 

This  propositional  form  on  the  one  hand  is  a  superfluity :  the 
Determinations  of  Reflection  are  to  be  considered  in  and  for 
themselves.  And  further  these  propositions  are  distorted  in  that 
they  have  for  subject  Being,  or  Every  Something.  For  hereby  they 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  37 

resuscitate  Being,  and  predicate  the  Determinations  of  Reflec- 
tion— Identity  and  so  forth — of  Something  as  a  Quality,  which 
belongs  to  the  latter,  not  in  the  speculative  meaning,  but  in 
this — that  Something  remains  as  subject  in  such  a  Quality 
because  it  is  existent,  and  not  that  it  has  passed  over  into 
Identity  and  so  on  as  into  its  truth  and  its  essence. 

And,  finally,  though  the  Determinations  of  Reflection  have 
the  form  of  being  self-identical,  unrelated  to  other,  and  without 
opposite,  yet  they  are  determinate  relatively  to  one  another — 
as  will  appear  when  they  are  more  closely  examined,  or  as  is 
immediately  clear  when  they  are  considered  as  Identity,  Variety, 
and  Opposition;  their  form  does  not  remove  them  from  the 
sphere  of  Reflection,  from  transition  and  contradiction.  Accord- 
ingly the  various  propositions  which  are  set  up  as  absolute 
Laws  of  Thought,  are,  more  closely  considered,  opposite  to 
one  another,  they  contradict  and  cancel  one  another. — If  every- 
thing is  self-identical  it  is  not  distinguished :  it  contains  no 
opposition  and  has  no  ground.  Or  when  it  is  assumed  that 
there  are  no  two  identical  things,  that  is,  each  thing  is  different 
from  every  other,  then  A  is  not  equal  to  A,  A  is  therefore  not 
opposite,  and  so  on.  If  either  of  these  propositions  is  assumed, 
the. assumption  of  the  other  is  barred. — A  thoughtless  con- 
sideration of  these  propositions  enumerates  them  one  after  the 
other,  so  that  they  appear  quite  unrelated;  it  thinks  only  of 
their  intro-reflectedness,  without  paying  attention  to  their  other 
moment,  Positedness  or  their  determinateness  as  such,  which 
drags  them  forward  to  transition  and  to  their  negation. 

A 

IDENTITY 

i.  Essence  is  simple  immediacy  as  transcended  immediacy. 
Its  negativity  is  its  Being:  it  is  self-identical  in  its  absolute 
negativity,  by  virtue  of  which  otherness  and  the  relation  to 
Other  has  simply  vanished  in  itself  into  pure  self-equality. 
Essence  is,  then,  simple  Self-identity. 

This  Self-identity  is  the  immediacy  of  Reflection.  It  is  not 
the  kind  of  Self-identity  which  is  Being  or  also  Nothing,  but 
that  kind  which  constructs  itself  into  unity, — not  a  recon- 
struction out  of  an  Other,  but  this  pure  construction  out  of 


38  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  in  self,  which  we  have  just  examined :  Essential  Identity. 
In  so  far  it  is  not  abstract  Identity,  and  not  the  producV  of 
a  relative  negation  taking  place  outside  it,  and  leaving  the 
distinguished  entity  separated  from  it  but  in  other  respects 
subsisting  external  to  it  as  before.  On  the  contrary  Being  and 
every  determinateness  of  Being  has  transcended  itself,  not 
relatively,  but  in  itself:  and  this  simple  negativity  of  Being  in 
itself  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  Identity.  In  so  far  Identity 
is  as  yet  the  same  as  Essence. 

Observation  i 

Such  thought  as  remains  within  the  sphere  of  External 
Reflection,  and  knows  no  other  kind  of  thought  than  this,  can 
never  succeed  in  recognizing  Identity  as  it  has  here  been  taken, 
or — what  is  the  same  thing — Essence.  Such  thought  concerns 
itself  only  with  abstract  Identity  and — beside  this  and  apart 
from  it — with  Difference.  This  thought  takes  Reason  to  be  no 
more  than  a  loom  on  which  it  combines  externally  and  inter- 
twines the  warp  (Identity)  and  then  the  woof  (Difference) ;  or 
again  it  imagines  that  by  analysis  it  separately  extracts  Identity, 
and  beside  it  also  preserves  Difference,  and  is  an  alternate 
positing  of  these  two, — a  positing  of  Identity  when  abstraction 
is  made  from  Difference,  and  a  positing  of  Difference  when 
abstraction  is  made  from  positing  Identity. — These  assurances 
and  opinions  about  the  operation  of  Reason  must  quite  be  left 
on  one  side,  for  in  a  sense  they  are  merely  historical;  and 
moreover,  the  contemplation  of  everything  that  is  shows,  in 
itself,  that  in  its  self-identity  it  is  self-contradictory  and  self- 
different,  and  in  its  variety  or  contradiction,  self-identical;  it 
is  in  itself  this  movement  of  transition  of  one  of  these  deter- 
minations into  the  other,  just  because  each  in  itself  is  its  own 
opposite.  The  concept  of  Identity  (that  it  is  simple  self-relating 
negativity)  is  not  a  product  of  external  reflection,  but  the 
result  which  appeared  from  Being  itself.  Now  this  Identity 
which  is  supposed  to  be  external  to  Difference,  and  this  Differ- 
ence which  is  supposed  to  be  external  to  Identity,  are,  on  the 
other  hand,  products  of  that  external  reflection  and  abstrac- 
tion which  arbitrarily  fixes  itself  at  this  point  of  indifferent 
variety. 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  39 

2.  This  Identity  at  this  point  is  Essence  itself,  and  not  yet 
any  determination  of  it ;  it  is  the  whole  Reflection,  and  not 
a  distinct  moment  of  it.  As  absolute  negation  it  is  that  negation 
which  immediately  negates  itself;  it  is  a  Not-being  and  Differ- 
ence which  vanishes  as  it  arises,  or  a  differentiation  which, 
differentiating  nothing,  immediately  collapses  into  itself. 
Differentiation  is  the  positing  of  Not-being  as  the  Not-being 
of  Other.  But  the  Not-being  of  Other  is  cancellation  of  Other, 
and  therefore  of  differentiation  itself.  Thus  then  differentiation 
is  here  found  to  be  a  self-relating  negativity,  a  Not-being  which 
is  its  own  Not-being,  having  its  Not-being  in  itself  and  not  in 
another.  So  that  we  have  here  self-relating  or  reflected  Differ- 
ence, or  pure  Absolute  Difference. 

Or  again  Identity  is  intro-Reflection,  which  is  Identity  only 
as  internal  repulsion;  and  it  is  this  repulsion  as  being  intro- 
Reflection,  repulsion  which  immediately  recalls  itself  into  itself. 
It  is  therefore  Identity  as  self-identical  Difference.  But  Differ- 
ence is  self-identical  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  Identity  but 
absolute  Non-identity.  But  Non-identity  is  absolute  in  so  faf 
as  it  contains  nothing  which  is  Other  to  it,  but  only  itself, 
that  is,  in  so  far  as  it  is  absolute  Self-identity. 

In  itself  then  Identity  is  absolute  Non-identity.  But  also  it 
is  the  determination  of  Identity  as  against  this.  For  as  intro- 
Reflection  it  posits  itself  as  its  own  Not-being ;  it  is  the  whole, 
but  as  Reflection  it  posits  itself  as  its  own  moment,  as  posited- 
ness;  and  it  is  the  return  from  this  to  itself.  Only  when  it  is 
thus  taken  as  moment  does  it  become  Identity  as  such,  as 
determination  of  simple  Self-identity,  as  opposed  to  Absolute 
Difference. 

Observation  2 

In  this  Observation  I  shall  more  closely  consider  Identity 
as  the  Law  of  Identity,  which  is  commonly  adduced  as  the 
first  Law  of  Thought. 

In  its  positive  expression  A  =  A  this  law  is  nothing  more 
than  empty  tautology.  It  has  therefore  rightly  been  observed 
that  this  Law  of  Thought  is  without  content  and  leads  no 
further.  Those  therefore  are  stranded  upon  empty  Identity  who 
take  it  to  be  a  truth  in  itself,  and  are  in  the  habit  of  repeating 
that  Identity  is  not  Variety,  but  that  Identity  and  Variety  art 


40  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

different.  They  do  not  see  that  they  are  themselves  here  saying 
that  Identity  is  different,  for  they  say  that  Identity  is  different 
from  Variety ;  and  since  this  must  at  the  same  time  be  admitted 
to  be  the  nature  of  Identity,  their  assertion  implies  that  Identity 
has  the  quality  of  being  different  not  externally  but  in  its  very 
nature. — But  further,  since  they  cling  to  this  rigid  Identity 
which  has  its  opposite  in  Variety,  they  do  not  se$  that  they 
are  thereby  making  it  into  a  one-sided  determinateness,  which 
as  such  has  no  truth.  It  is  admitted  that  the  Law  of  Identity 
expresses  only  a  one-sided  determinateness,  that  it  contains 
only  formal  truth,  which  is  abstract  and  incomplete. — But  this 
correct  judgment  immediately  implies  that  truth  is  complete 
only  in  the  union  of  Identity  with  Variety,  and  therefore 
consists  only  in  this  unity.  When  it  is  asserted  that  this  Identity 
is  imperfect,  the  mind  has  before  it  as  perfection  that  totality 
measured  against  which  the  Identity  is  imperfect;  but  when, 
on  the  other  hand,  Identity  is  held  fast  as  absolutely  separate 
from  Variety,  and  in  this  separation  is  taken  as  essential,  valid, 
true,  then  these  conflicting  assertions  are  nothing  more  than 
the  mistake  of  combining  the  two  ideas,  first  that  Identity  as 
abstract  is  essential,  and  secondly  that,  as  such,  it  is  also 
imperfect.  There  is  here  a  lack  of  understanding  of  the  negative 
movement,  which  Identity  itself  is  represented  to  be  in  these 
assertions. — Again,  when  the  expression  of  Identity  is  found 
in  the  saying  that  Identity  is  essential  Identity  as  the  separa- 
tion from  Variety,  or  in  the  separation  from  Variety,  then 
immediately  its  expressed  truth  just  consists  in  the  fact  that  it 
is  separation  as  such,  or  that  it  is  essentially  in  separation, 
that  is,  that  it  is  nothing  for  itself,  but  only  a  moment  of 
separation. 

With  regard  to  the  further  confirmation  of  the  absolute  truth 
of  the  Law  of  Identity,  this  is  based  on  experience,  in  so  faf 
as  every  consciousness  can  appeal  to  experience;  since  when 
the  proposition  A  is  A,  a  tree  is  a  tree,  is  rehearsed  to  it,  it 
immediately  admits  the  proposition,  and  rests  content  in  its 
immediate  -self-evidence,  which  needs  no  other  confirmation 
or  proof. 

This  appeal  to  experience,  which  states  that  every  conscious- 
ness acknowledges  the  proposition,  is  partly  a  mere  manner 
of  speaking.  It  is  not  meant  that  the  experiment  with  the 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  41 

abstract  proposition  A  =  A  has  been  made  upon  every  con- 
sciousness. So  that,  further,  the  appeal  to  an  experience  which 
has  actually  been  reached  is  not  serious ;  it  is  only  an  assurance 
that,  if  the  experience  were  to  be  reached,  the  result  would 
be  general  acknowledgment. — But  if  it  is  not  the  abstract 
proposition  as  such  which  is  meant,  but  the  proposition  in  its 
concrete  application  (from  which  the  former  is  to  be  developed), 
then  the  assertion  of  its  universality  and  immediacy  would 
consist  in  the  fact  that  every  consciousness  makes  it  the  basis 
of  its  every  manifestation,  or  that  it  lies  implicitly  in  every  one. 
But  the  concrete  and  the  application  are,  precisely,  the  relation 
of  the  Simple  identical  to  a  manifold  which  is  different  from 
it.  Expressed  as  a  proposition,  the  concrete  would  first  be  a 
synthetic  proposition.  It  is  true  that  abstraction  might  succeed 
in  extracting  by  analysis  the  Law  of  Identity  from  the  concrete 
itself  or  from  its  synthetic  proposition ;  but  then  it  would  not 
have  left  experience  as  it  is,  but  would  have  changed  it;  for 
experience  contained  Identity  in  unity  with  Variety,  and  is 
the  immediate  refutation  of  the  assertion  that  abstract  Identity 
as  such  is  true ;  for  the  exact  opposite — namely,  Identity  never 
separated  from  Variety — occurs  in  every  experience. 

On  the  other  side,  the  pure  Law  of  Identity  is  met  only  too 
frequently  in  experience,  where  it  is  seen  clearly  enough  what 
respect  is  paid  to  the  truth  which  it  contains.  When  the  question 
"What  is  a  plant?"  (for  example)  is  met  by  the  answer  "A 
plant  is — a  plant/5  the  truth  of  this  proposition  is  straightway 
admitted  by  the  entire  company  upon  which  it  is  tested ;  and 
it  will  be  said  with  equal  unanimity  that  this  answer  says 
nothing.  If  one  opens  his  mouth  and  promises  to  tell  what 
God  is,  namely,  that  God  is — God,  expectation  is  cheated,  for 
it  anticipated  a  different  determination ;  and  if  this  proposition 
i!s  absolute  truth,  such  absolute  verbiage  is  held  in  exceedingly 
small  esteem;  nothing  will  be  considered  more  boring  and 
tedious  than  a  conversation  which  still  chews  the  same  cud, 
or  such  speeches  which  yet  are  supposed  to  be  truth. 

If  we  consider  more  closely  this  tedious  effect  of  such  truths, 

we  find  that  the  beginning,  "A  plant  is ,"  sets  out  to  say 

something,  to  produce  a  further  determination.  But  only  a 
repetition  is  made,  and  the  opposite  has  happened — nothing 
has  been  produced.  Such  idiology  is  therefore  self-contradictory. 


42  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Identity  is  not  truth  and  absolute  truth  in  itself,  but  quite  the 
opposite ;  it  is  not  a  rigid  simplicity,  but  a  passing  beyond  self 
into  self-dissolution. 

The  form  of  the  proposition  which  expresses  Identity  contains 
more,  then,  than  Identity  simple  and  abstract :  it  contains  this 
pure  movement  of  Reflection,  in  which  the  Other  figures  only 
as  Show  and  as  immediate  disappearance.  A  is  is  3,  beginning 
which  imagines  a  different  term  that  is  to  be  reached;  but 
this  term  never  is  reached;  A  is— A;  the  difference  is  only 
a  disappearance,  and  the  movement  withdraws  into  itself. — 
The  prepositional  form  can  be  regarded  as  the  hidden  necessity 
of  adding  to  abstract  Identity  a  plus  in  the  shape 'of  that 
movement. — Similarly  an  A,  a  plant  or  some  other  substratum, 
is  added,  which  is  a  useless  content  and  as  such  of  no  sig- 
nificance; but  it  constitutes  Variety,  which  thus  appears  to 
come  into  the  association  accidentally.  If  Identity  itself — 
"Identity  is  Identity55 — is  taken  instead  of  the  A  and  of  any 
other  substratum,  then  it  is  also  admitted  that  any  other 
substratum  could  be  taken  in  place  of  it.  So  that  if  the  appeal 
is  made  to  what  appearance  shows  us,  then  what  it  shows  us 
is  this,  that  in  the  expression  of  Identity  Variety  too  imme- 
diately occurs, — or  rather,  more  definitely  (as  was  seen  above), 
that  this  Identity  is  Nothing,  negativity,  or  absolute  Self- 
Difference. 

The  alternative  expression  of  the  Law  of  Identity,  A  cannot 
be  both  A  and  not- A,  has  a  negative  form :  it  is  called  the  Law 
of  Contradiction.  The  negative  form  (by  which  this  Law  is 
distinguished  from  the  former),  and  its  occurrence  in  Identity, 
are  not  usually  explicitly  justified. — This  form  is  due  to  the 
fact  that  Identity,  as  the  pure  movement  of  Reflection,  is  simple 
negativity,  which  is  contained  in  a  more  developed  form  in 
the  second  expression  of  the  Law  just  quoted.  A  and  a  not- A 
(the  pure  Other  of  A)  are  pronounced ;  but  the  latter  shows 
itself  only  in  order  to  vanish.  Identity  is  thus  expressed  in  this 
proposition — as  negation  of  negation.  A  and  not- A  are  different, 
and  these  two  different  terms  are  related  to  one  and  the  same  A. 
Identity  therefore  is  here  represented  as  this  Difference  in  one 
relation,  or  as  the  simple  Difference  in  the  terms  themselves. 

From  this  it  is  clear  that  the  Law  of  Identity,  and  still  more 
the  Law  of  Contradiction,  is  not  merely  analytic,  but  synthetic. 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  43 

For  in  its  expression  the  latter  contains  not  only  empty,  simple 
self-identity,  but  also  the  Other  of  identity  in  general,  and, 
further,  absolute  non-identity  or  self-contradiction.  And  the 
Law  of  Identity  itself  contains  (as  was  shown  of  it)  the  move- 
ment of  Reflection — Identity  as  the  disappearance  of  otherness. 
The  result  then  of  this  consideration  is,  first,  that  the  Laws 
of  Identity  and  Contradiction,  when  they  are  intended  to 
express  as  the  truth  only  abstract  Identity  in  opposition  to 
Difference,  are  not  Laws  pf  Thought,  but  quite  the  opposite ; 
secondly,  that  these  Laws  contain  more  than  is  meant  by  them, 

namely  this  opposite — Absolute  Difference  itself. 

• 

B 
DIFFERENCE 

(a)  ABSOLUTE  DIFFERENCE 

Difference  is  negativity  which  contains  Reflection,  the 
Nothing  which  is  proclaimed  in  tautology,  the  essential  moment 
of  Identity  itself,  which  is  both  determined  as  being  its  own 
negativity  and  also  is  different  from  Difference. 

i.  This  Difference  is  Difference  in  and  for  itself,  Absolute 
Difference,  the  Difference  of  Essence. — It  is  Difference  in  and 
for  itself,  and  not  Difference  effected  by  an  external  entity: 
self-relating  and  therefore  simple  Difference. — It  is  essential 
that  Absolute  Difference  be  taken  as  simple.  In  the  Absolute 
Difference  between  A  and  Not-A,  it  is  the  simple  "not" 
which  as  such  constitutes  the  Difference.  Difference  itself  is 
a  simple  concept.  Two  things  are  different,  it  is  said,  "in  that" 
they  etc. — "In  that,"  that  is,  in  one  and  the  same  respect,  in 
the  same  basis  of  determination.  And  this  basis  is  the  Differ- 
ence of  Reflection,  and  not  the  otherness  of  Determinate  Being. 
One  Determinate  Being  and  another  are  posited  as  falling 
apart ;  each  of  these  existents,  which  are  determinate  as  against 
each  oth*r,  has  an  immediate  Being  for  itself.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Other  of  Essence  is  the  Other  in  and  for  itself,  and 
not  the  Other  of  another  Other  which  is  external  to  it,  simple 
determinateness  in  itself.  In  the  sphere  of  Determinate  Being, 
too,  otherness  and  determinateness  turned  out  to  be  of  this 
nature,  that  each  is  simple  determinateness  and  identical 


44  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

opposition ;  but  this  identity  showed  itself  to  be  only  the  tran- 
sition of  one  determinateness  into  the  other.  Here,  in  the  sphere 
of  Reflection,  Difference  emerges  as  a  reflected  Difference, 
which  is  posited  as  that  which  it  is  in  itself. 

2.  Difference  in  itself  is  self-relating  Difference:  it  is  thus 
its  own  negativity — Difference  not  from  an  Other,  but  from 
its  own  self:  it  is  not  itself,  but  its  Other.  But  that  which  is 
different  from  Difference  is  Identity.  Difference  is  therefore 
both  itself  and  Identity.  The  two  together  constitute  Difference : 
it  is   the   whole  and  its   moment. — It  may  equally  be  said 
that  Difference,  as   simple  Difference,  is   no  Difference,  and 
is  Difference  only  in  relation  to  Identity ;  but,  much  rather,  as 
Difference,  it  contains  both  Identity  and  this  relation  itself. — 
Difference  is  the  whole  and  its  own  moment,  just  as  Identity 
too  is  its  whole  and  its  moment. — This  may  be  considered  the 
essential  nature  of  Reflection  and  the  definite  fundamental 
basis  of  every  activity  and  self-motion. — Difference  and  also 
Identity  both  constitute  themselves  moment  or  positedness, 
because,  as  Reflection,  they  are  negative  self-relation. 

This  Difference,  which  is  the  unity  of  itself  and  Identity,  is 
Difference  determinate  in  itself.  It  is  not  transition  nor  relation 
to  an  external  Other;  its  Other — Identity — is  within  itself; 
and  similarly  Identity,  when  it  has  entered  into  the  deter- 
mination of  Difference,  has  not  lost  itself  in  it  as  in  its  Other, 
but  preserves  itself  in  it  and  is  its  intro-Reflection  and  moment. 

3.  Difference  has  the  two  moments  of  Identity  and  Differ- 
ence; thus  each  is  a  positedness  and  determinateness.  But  in 
this  positedness  each  is  relation  to  itself.  One — Identity — is, 
immediately,  the  moment  of  intro-Reflection ;  but  the  other 
equally  is  difference — Difference  in  itself,  reflected  Difference. 
Since  Difference  has  two  such  moments,  which  are  themselves 
intro-Reflections,  it  is  Variety. 

(b)  VARIETY 

i.  Identity  is  in  itself  cleft  into  Variety,  because  it  is  Absolute 
Difference  in  itself,  and  as  such  posits  itself  as  its  own  negative, 
and  because  further  these  its  moments — itself  and  its  negative 
(intro-Reflections) — are  identical  with  themselves;  or  again, 
because  it  itself  immediately  transcends  its  negation,  and  in 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  45 

its  determination  is  Intro-reflected.  The  distinct  parts  subsist 
as  different  from  and  indifferent  to  one  another,  for  each  part 
is  self-identical,  having  Identity  for  its  bottom  and  element; 
or  again,  what  is  different  is  what  it  is  only  in  its  opposite, 
namely  Identity. 

Difference  constitutes  the  other-being,  as  such,  of  Reflection. 
The  Other  of  Determinate  Being  has  immediate  Being  for 
ground:  therein  the  negative  consists.  In  Reflection,  on  the 
other  hand,  Self-identity  (reflected  immediacy)  constitutes  the 
subsistence  of  the  negative  and  its  indifference. 

The  moments  of  Difference  are  Identity  and  Difference  itself. 
They  are  different  because  they  are  intro-reflected  or  self- 
relating  :  thus  in  the  determination  of  Identity  they  are  self- 
relations  ;  Identity  is  not  related  to  Difference,  nor  is  Difference 
to  Identity;  each  moment  is  thus  related  only  to  itself,  and 
they  are  therefore  not  determinate  as  against  each  other. — 
Now  in  this  manner  they  are  not  different  in  themselves,  and 
therefore  Difference  is  external  to  them.  The  different  entities 
are  not  then  related  to  each  other  as  Identity  and  Difference, 
but  only  as  different  in  general,  indifferent  to  each  other  and 
to  their  determinateness. 

2.  In  Variety  as  the  indifference  of  Difference,  Reflection 
has  altogether  become  external  to  itself:  Difference  is  only  a 
positedness,  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  transcended,  but  also 
it  is  itself  the  whole  of  Reflection. — If  this  is  considered  more 
closely,  then  both  Identity  and  Difference,  as  they  have  just 
been  determined,  are  Reflections,  each  being  the  unity  of  itself 
and  its  Other — in  other  words,  the  whole.  But  now  the  deter- 
minateness, which  makes  them  only  Identity  or  only  Difference, 
has  become  transcended.  They  are  not  Qualities  for  the  reason 
that  their  determinateness,  by  virtue  of  intro-Reflection,  exists 
Only  as  negation.  We  have  therefore  a  twofold  fact — intro- 
Reflection  as  such  and  determinateness  as  negation,  or  posited- 
ness. Positedness  is  Reflection  which  is  external  to  itself;  it  is 
negation  as  negation,  and  accordingly  it  is,  in  itself,  self- 
relating  negation  and  intro-Reflection,  but  only  in  itself;  and 
it  is  related  to  it  as  to  an  external  term. 

Reflection  in  itself  and  External  Reflection  are  accordingly 
the  two  determinations  in  which  the  moments  of  Difference — 
Identity  and  Difference — posited  themselves.  They  are  these 


46  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

moments  themselves,  in  so  far  as  they  have  now  determined 
themselves. — Reflection  in  itself^  Identity;  but  it  is  determined 
as  indifferent  to  Difference,  not  as  quite  without  it  but  as 
maintaining  towards  it  an  attitude  of  self-identity :  it  is  Variety. 
It  is  Identity  which  has  reflected  itself  into  itself  in  such  a 
manner  that  it  is  really  the  One  Reflection  of  the  two  moments 
in  itself:  both  are  intro-Reflections.  Identity  is  this  one  Reflec- 
tion of  both,  which  contains  Difference  only  as  indifference, 
and  is  Variety  in  general. — External  Reflection,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  their  determinate  Difference,  not  as  absolute  intro- 
Reflection,  but  as  a  determination  to  which  self-existent 
Reflection  is  indifferent:  its  two  moments — Identity  and 
Difference  itself — are  thus  externally  posited  determinations 
which  are  not  in  and  for  themselves. 

Now  this  external  Identity  is  Likeness,  and  external  Differ- 
ence, Unlikeness. — Likeness  is  Identity,  but  only  as  a  posited- 
ness,  an  Identity  which  is  not  m  and  for  itself. — And  similarly 
Unlikeness  is  Difference,  but  only  as  external  Difference  which 
is  not  in  and  for  itself  the  Difference  of  the  unlike.  Whether 
something  is  or  is  not  like  another  something  concerns  neither 
term :  each  is  referred  only  to  itself,  and  is  what  it  is,  in  and 
for  itself.  Identity  or  Non-identity,  as  Likeness  and  Unlikeness, 
relates  only  to  their  aspect  from  a  third  view-point,  which  falls 
without  their  sphere. 

3.  External  Reflection  refers  the  different  to  Likeness  and 
Unlikeness.  This  process  of  referring,  this  comparison,  passes 
backwards  and  forwards  between  Likeness  and  Unlikeness. 
But  this  oscillating  process  of  relation  between  Likeness  and 
Unlikeness  is  quite  external  to  these  determinations;  and 
also  they  are  not  related  to  each  other,  but  each  is  related 
separately  to  a  third  term.  In  this  alternation  each  immediately 
manifests  itself  for  itself. — External  Reflection  as  such  is  external 
to  itself;  determinate  Difference  is  negated  Absolute  Difference, 
and  accordingly  it  is  not  simple  and  is  not  intro-Reflection ; 
the  latter  is  external  to  it.  Consequently  its  moments  fall  apart, 
and  are  related  to  intro-Reflection  (which  stands  over  against 
them)  as  external  to  each  other. 

Reflection  is  thus  estranged  from  itself,  and  Likeness  and 
Unlikeness  come  to  view  in  it  as  unrelated  to  each  other :  it 
separates  them  by  relating  them  to  one  and  the  same  term, 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  47 

by  means  of  "in  so  far,"  of  sides  and  respects.  The  different 
terms,  which  are  one  and  the  same  thing,  and  have  both 
Likeness  and  Unlikeness  related  to  them,  are  thus  like  each 
other  from  the  one  side,  but  unlike  from  the  other,  and  in 
so  far  as  they  are  like  they  are  not  unlike.  Likeness  is  related 
only  to  itself,  and  in  the  same  manner  Unlikeness  is  just 
Unlikeness. 

But  in  this  their  separation  they  only  cancel  each  other. 
It  was  intended  that  contradiction  and  dissolution  should  be 
kept  off  from  them  by  the  Tact  that  some  thing  is  like  another 
in  one  respect  but  unlike  in  another ;  but  precisely  this  sever- 
ance of  JLikeness  and  Unlikeness  is  their  destruction.  For  both 
are  determinations  of  Difference;  they  are  relations  to  each 
other  (one  is  what  the  other  is  not) ;  like  is  not  unlike,  and 
unlike  not  like;  and  both  have  this  relation  essentially,  and, 
apart  from  it,  no  significance.  As  determination  of  Difference 
each  is  what  it  is  as  being  different  from  its  other.  But,  by 
virtue  of  their  mutual  indifference,  Likeness  is  related  only 
to  itself,  and  similarly  Unlikeness  is  only  its  own  respect  and 
Reflection  for  itself.  Each  accordingly  is  like  itself,  and  Differ- 
ence, since  they  have  no  determinateness  one  against  the  other, 
has  vanished:  in  other  words,  each  now  is  Likeness  and  no 
more. 

This  indifferent  respect  or  external  Difference  thus  tran- 
scends itself  and  is  its  own  negativity  in  itself.  It  is  that 
negativity  which,  in  comparison,  belongs  to  the  comparing 
term.  This  term  passes  from  Likeness  to  Unlikeness  and  back ; 
it  thus  allows  one  to  vanish  in  the  other,  and  is  indeed  the 
negative  unity  of  both.  At  first  it  is  beyond  the  compared  term 
and'  also  beyond  the  moments  of  comparison,  being  a  subjective 
activity  which  falls  without  them.  But  in  fact  this  negative 
u^iity  is  the  nature  itself  of  Likeness  and  Unlikeness,  as  was 
seen.  It  is,  precisely,  independent  respect  (and  each  one  is 
independent  respect)  which  is  that  self-relation  which  tran- 
scends their  difference  and  therefore  themselves. 

In  this  aspect,  as  moments  of  External  Reflection,  and  as 
external  to  themselves,  Likeness  and  Unlikeness  vanish  together 
in  their  likeness.  But,  further,  this  their  negative  unity  is  also 
posited  in  them ;  for  Reflection  which  is  in  itself  is  external 
to  them,  or  they  are  the  Likeness  and  Unlikeness  of  a  third 


48  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

term  which  is  other  than  they.  What  is  Like  is  thus  not  like 
itself;  and  what  is  Unlike  is  unlike,  not  itself,  but  another 
(which  is  unlike  it),  and  it  is  therefore  itself  Like.  The  Like, 
and  the  Unlike,  is,  therefore,  its  own  Unlike.  Each  accordingly 
is  this  Reflection  which  makes  Likeness  to  be  both  itself  and 
Unlikeness,  and  Unlikeness  to  be  both  itself  and  Likeness. 

Likeness  and  Unlikeness  constituted  the  side  of  positedness 
as  against  the  compared  term  (the  Various),  which  had  deter- 
mined itself  against  them  as  self-existent  Reflection.  But  this 
term  has  hereby  likewise  lost  its  determinateness  as  against 
them.  Precisely  Likeness  and  Unlikeness,  the  determinations 
of  External  Reflection,  are  Reflection  which  is  only  in  itself: 
the  Various  as  such  was  to  have  been  this ;  they  are  its  merely 
indeterminate  Difference.  Self-existent  Reflection  is  self-rela- 
tion without  negation,  abstract  self-identity,  and  therefore 
positedness  itself. — The  merely  Various  passes  then  through 
positedness  into  negative  Reflection.  The  Various  is  merely 
posited  Difference,  Difference  therefore  which  is  not  Differ- 
ence, and  therefore  is  its  own  negation  in  itself.  Thus  Likeness 
and  Unlikeness  itself  (or  positedness)  passes  back  through 
indifference  or  self-existent  Reflection  into  negative  self-unity, 
into  Reflection  which  is  in  itself  the  Difference  between  Like- 
ness and  Unlikeness.  That  Variety,  whose  indifferent  sides  also 
are  just  moments,  since  they  constitute  one  negative  unity,  is 
Opposition. 

Observation 

Variety,  like  Identity,  is  formulated  in  its  own  Law.  And 
these  two  Laws  are  kept  in  a  relation  of  indifferent  Variety 
relatively  to  each  other,  so  that  each  is  valid  without  respect 
to  the  other. 

"All  things  are  different/'  or,  "There  are  no  two  things 
which  are  alike.55 — This  proposition  is  indeed  the  opposite  of 
the  Law  of  Identity,  for  it  states  that  A  has  Variety,  that  is, 
A  is  also  not  A ;  or  A  is  unlike  another,  and  then  it  is  not  A 
in  general,  (but  rather  a  determinate  A.  In  the  Law  of  Identity 
any  substratum  may  be  put  in  place  of  A ;  but  A  as  Unlike 
can  no  longer  be  interchanged  with  any  other.  It  is  not  indeed 
to  be  various  from  itself,  but  only  from  an  other;  but  this 
Variety  is  its  proper  determination.  As  self-identical  A  it  is 


ESSENTIALITIES   OF  REFLECTION  49 

the  indeterminate;  but  as  determinate,  it  is  the  opposite  of 
this;  it  has  no  longer  only  self-identity,  but  also  a  negation, 
that  is,  a  Variety  of  itself  from  itself. 

It  is  a  quite  superfluous  proposition  which  states  that  all  things 
are  different  from  one  another,  for  the  plural  of  things  imme- 
diately contains  multiplicity  and  quite  indeterminate  Variety. — 
But  the  proposition  "there  are  no  two  things  which  are  entirely 
alike' '  expresses  more,  namely,  determinate  Variety.  Two  things 
are  not  only  two — numerical  plurality  is  but  indifference — but 
they  are  made  various  by  a  determination.  Imagination  is 
struck  by  the  proposition  that  there  are  no  two  things  which 
are  alike, — as  in  that  courtly  anecdote  which  tells  how  Leibniz 
brought  it  up  among  the  ladies,  and  induced  them  to  look 
among  the  leaves  of  trees,  to  see  if  they  should  find  two  which 
were  alike. — Happy  times  for  metaphysics,  when  it  was  the 
occupation  of  courtiers,  and  no  greater  effort  was  needed  in 
testing  its  propositions  than  that  of  comparing  leaves  of  trees  ! — 
The  reason  why  this  proposition  is  striking  is  contained  in  what 
was  said,  namely,  that  duality  (or  numerical  plurality)  contains 
no  determinate  Variety,  and  that  Variety  as  such,  in  its 
abstraction,  so  far  is  indifferent  to  Likeness  and  Unlikeness. 
Imagination,  when  it  further  passes  over  to  determination, 
accepts  these  moments  themselves  as  indifferent  to  each  other, 
believing  that  either  the  one  or  the  other,  mere  Likeness  of 
things — without  Unlikeness — suffices  to  afford  determination; 
or  that  things  are  various  even  when  they  are  only  numerically 
many — that  is,  when  they  are  various  in  general — and  not 
unlike.  But  the  Law  of  Variety  expresses  this — that  things  are 
differentiated  by  Unlikeness,  and  that  the  determination  of 
Unlikeness  is  as  proper  to  them  as  that  of  Likeness ;  for  deter- 
minate Difference  is  constituted  only  by  the  two  together. 

Now  surely  this  proposition,  that  the  determination  of 
Unlikeness  belongs  to  all  things,  requires  proof:  it  cannot  be 
set  up  as  an  immediate  proposition,  for  the  common  method  of 
cognition  itself  demands  for  the  connection  of  different  deter- 
minations in  a  synthetic  proposition  a  proof,  or  the  production 
of  a  third  term  in  which  they  are  mediated.  This  proof  would 
have  to  demonstrate  the  transition  of  Identity  into  Variety, 
and  next  the  transition  of  Variety  into  determinate  Variety, 
or  Unlikeness.  This  is  not  usually  done;  but  it  results  from 

VOL.    II.  D 


50  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  fact  that  Variety  or  external  Difference  is  in  truth  intro- 
reflected  Difference  (or  Difference  in  itself),  and  that  hence 
the  indifferent  subsistence  of  the  Various  is  mere  positedness, 
and  therefore  not  external  and  indifferent  Difference,  but  one 
relation  of  the  two  moments. 

And  this  also  contains  the  dissolution  and  nullity  of  the  Law 
of  Variety.  No  two  things  are  perfectly  alike ;  if  so,  they  are 
like  and  also  unlike :  like,  in  that  they  are  things,  or,  generally, 
are  two, — for  each  is  a  thing  and  a  One  as  much  as  the  other, 
and  each  therefore  the  same  thing  as  the  other; — and  they 
are  unlike  ex  hypothesi.  We  have  then  this  determination,  that 
both  moments — Likeness  and  Unlikeness — are  different  in  one 
and  the  same  thing,  or  that  the  Difference  while  falling  apart 
is  one  and  the  same  relation.  It  has  thus  passed  over  into 
Opposition. 

It  is  true  that  the  coextensiveness  of  the  two  predicates  is 
kept  disjunct  by  the  "in-so-far,"  when  it  is  true  of  two  things 
that  "in  so  far  as"  they  are  alike,  "in  so  far"  they  are  not 
unlike;  or  that  in  one  side  or  respect  they  are  alike,  but  in 
the  other  side  or  respect  unlike.  This  removes  the  unity  of 
Likeness  and  Unlikeness  from  the  thing ;  and  that  which  would 
be  its  own  Reflection  and  the  Reflection  of  Likeness  and  Un- 
likeness in  itself,  is  held  fast  as  a  Reflection  external  to  the 
thing.  It  is  this  Reflection,  accordingly,  which  in  one  and  the 
same  activity  distinguishes  the  two  sides  of  Likeness  and 
Unlikeness ;  it  consequently  contains  both  in  one  activity,  and 
reflects  and  allows  the  one  to  show  in  the  other. — But  the 
customary  tenderness  for  things,  whose  only  care  is  that  they 
shall  not  contradict  one  another,  forgets  here  as  elsewhere  that 
this  is  no  solution  of  the  contradiction,  which  is  merely  planted 
elsewhere,  namely,  into  subjective  or  external  reflection;  and 
that  the  latter  does  in  fact  contain  the  two  moments — which 
this  removal  and  transplantation  proclaim  to  be  a  mere 
positedness — in  one  unity  as  transcended  and  related  to  each 
other. 

(c)  OPPOSITION 

In  Opposition,  determinate  Reflection,  or  Difference,  is 
perfected.  It  is  the  unity  of  Identity  and  Variety;  its  moments 
are  various  in  one  Identity,  and  thus  are  opposite. 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  51 

Identity  and  Difference  are  the  moments  of  Difference  as 
confined  within  the  latter ;  they  are  reflected  moments  of  its 
unity.  But  Likeness  and  Unlikeness  are  externalized  Reflection ; 
their  self-identity  is  not  only  the  indifference  of  each  to  that 
which  is  different  from  it,  but  also  to  Being-in-and-for-Self  as 
such;  it  is  self-identity  as  opposed  to  intro-reflected  Identity; 
and  therefore  it  is  immediacy  which  is  not  intro-reflected.  The 
positedncss  of  the  sides  of  External  Reflection  is  consequently 
a  Being,  and  their  not-po§itedness,  a  Not-being. 

If  the  moments  of  Opposition  are  more  closely  considered, 
they  are  seen  to  be  intro-reflected  positedness  or  determination 
in  general.  Positedness  is  Likeness  and  Unlikeness;  these  two, 
each  being  reflected  into  itself,  constitute  the  determinations 
of  Opposition.  Their  intro-Reflcction  consists  in  the  fact  that 
each  in  itself  is  the  unity  of  Likeness  and  Unlikeness.  Likeness 
is  only  in  Reflection  which  uses  Unlikeness  as  its  standard  of 
comparison  and  consequently  mediates  by  means  of  its  other 
and  indifferent  moment;  similarly  Unlikeness  is  only  in  the 
same  reflecting  relation  in  which  Likeness  is. — Each  then  of 
these  moments  is,  in  its  detcrminateness,  the  whole.  It  is  the 
whole  in  so  far  as  it  also  contains  its  other  moment;  but  this 
its  other  is,  and  is  indifferently ;  each  thus  contains  the  relation 
to  its  Not-being,  and  is  only  intro-Reflection,  or  the  whole 
which  essentially  relates  itself  to  its  Not-being. 

This  intro-reflected  Self-likeness  which  contains  in  itself  the 
relation  to  Unlikeness,  is  the  Positive :  Unlikeness,  which  con- 
tains the  relation  to  its  Not-being  (or  Likeness),  is  the  Negative. 
— Or  again  both  are  Positedness;  and  now,  in  so  far  as  the 
differentiated  determinateness  is  taken  as  differentiated  deter- 
minate self-relation  of  Positedness,  so  far  Opposition  is 
(a)  Positedness  reflected  into  its  Self-likeness,  and  (b)  the  same 
reflected  into  its  Unlikeness  to  self:  it  is  Positive  and  Negative. — 
The  Positive  is  Positedness  as  reflected  into  Self-likeness;  but 
that  which  is  reflected  is  Positedness,  that  is,  negation  as 
negation;  and  therefore  this  intro-Reflection  has  for  deter- 
mination relation  to  Other.  The  negative  is  Positedness  as 
reflected  into  Unlikeness;  but  Positedness  is  Unlikeness  itself; 
and  therefore  this  Reflection  is  the  self-identity  of  Unlikeness 
and  absolute  self-relation. — Thus  we  can  say  of  both  that 
Positedness  reflected  into  Self-likeness  has  Unlikeness  in  it, 


52  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  Positedness  reflected  into  Unlikeness  to  self  also  has 
Likeness. 

Thus  Positive  and  Negative  are  the  sides,  now  independent, 
of  Opposition.  They  are  independent  because  they  are  in 
themselves  the  intro-Reflfection  of  the  whole,  and  they  apper- 
tain to  Opposition  in  so  far  as  it  is  determinateness  which  is 
intro-reflected  as  a  whole.  Their  independence  allows  them 
to  constitute  Opposition  determinate  in  itself.  Each  is  itself  and 
its  Other ;  and  for  this  reason  each  has  its  determinateness  not 
in  an  Other  but  in  itself. — Each  is  self-related  only  as  relating 
itself  to  its  Other.  This  has  a  twofold  aspect :  each  is  relation 
to  its  Not-being  as  cancellation  of  this  otherness  in  itself;  its 
Not-being  is  only  a  moment  within  each  itself.  But  on  the 
other  hand  Positedness  has  here  become  a  Being,  an  indifferent 
persistence;  and  consequently,  while  each  contains  its  Other, 
this  latter  is  also  the  Not-being  of  that  in  which  it  is  supposed 
to  be  contained  only  as  moment.  Each  therefore  is  only 
in  so  far  as  its  Not-being  is,  and  is  only  in  an  identical 
relation. 

The  determinations  which  constitute  Positive  and  Negative 
consist  then  in  this,  that  Positive  and  Negative  are,  first, 
absolute  moments  of  Opposition :  their  subsistence  is,  insepar- 
ably, one  Reflection;  and  it  is  one  mediation  in  which  each 
is  by  virtue  of  the  Not-being  of  its  Other,  and  therefore  by 
virtue  of  its  Other  and  its  own  Not-being. — Thus  they  are 
opposed  one  to  the  other;  that  is,  each  stands  to  the  other  in 
this  relation  only;  it  is  not  true  that  one  is  positive  and  the 
other  negative,  but  both  are  negative  to  each  other.  Thus 
in  general  each  is,  first,  only  in  so  far  as  the  other  is;  it  is 
what  it  is  through  the  other,  or  through  its  own  Not-being; 
it  is  only  Positedness.  Secondly,  it  is  in  so  far  as  the  other  is 
not ;  it  is  what  it  is  through  the  Not-being  of  the  other ;  it  is 
intro-Reflection. — But  both  these  systems  together  are  only  one 
mediation  of  Opposition  in  general,  in  which  they  in  general 
are  only  posited  terms. 

But,  further,  this  mere  Positedness  is,  generally,  intro- 
reflected  ;  and  according  to  this  moment  of  External  Reflection, 
Positive  and  Negative  are  indifferent  to  that  first  Identity, 
in  which  they  are  only  moments;  in  other  words,  that  first 
Reflection  is  the  peculiar  intro-Reflection  of  Positive  and 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  53 

Negative,  and  each  is  its  own  Positedness  in  itself,  and  thus 
each  is  indifferent  to  this  its  Reflection  into  its  Not-being,  or 
indifferent  to  its  own  Positedness.  Here  the  two  sides  are 
merely  various;  and  in  so  far  as  their  determinateness,  which 
makes  them  positive  and  negative,  constitutes  their  Positedness 
as  against  each  other,  so  far  each  is  not  thus  determinate 
in  itself,  but  is  only  determinateness  in  general;  thus  to  each 
side  belongs  the  determinateness  either  of  Positive  or  Negative  ; 
but  they  are  interchangeable,  and  each  side  is  of  such  a  kind 
that  it  can  be  taken  equally  well  as  positive  or  as  negative. 

But,  thirdly,  Positive  and  Negative  are  not  only  a  posited 
term,  nor  yet  merely  indifferent;  but  their  Positedness  or  the 
relation  to  Other  in  a  unity  which  they  are  not  themselves, 
is  retracted  into  each.  Each  is  in  itself  positive  and  negative  ; 
Positive  and  Negative  are  the  Determination  of  Reflection  in 
and  for  itself;  and  it  is  positive  and  negative  only  in  this  intro- 
Reflection  of  the  Opposite.  The  Positive  has  in  itself  the  relation 
to  Other,  which  contains  its  determinateness;  similarly  the 
Negative  is  not  negative  as  against  an  Other,  but  also  contains 
the  determinateness  which  makes  it  negative. 

Thus  each  —  Positive  as  well  as  Negative  —  is  independent  and 
self-subsistent  self-unity.  It  is  true  that  the  Positive  is  a  Posited- 
ness, but  in  such  a  manner  that  for  it  Positedness  is  such  only 
as  transcended.  It  is  the  Not-opposite,  Opposition  transcended, 
but  as  side  of  Opposition  itself.  —  Something  may  be  determined 
as  being  positive  in  relation  to  an  other-being,  but  only  in 
such  a  manner  that  it  is  its  nature  not  to  be  something  posited  : 
it  is  intro-Reflection,  which  negates  other-being.  But  its  Other, 
the  Negative,  is  itself  no  longer  Positedness  nor  moment,  but 
an  independent  Being  ;  and  hence  negating  intro-Reflection  of 
the  Positive  is  determined  as  excluding  from  itself  this  its 


This  Negative  which  is  taken  as  absolute  Reflection  is  not 
the  immediate  Negative,  but  is  Negative  as  transcended  Posited- 
ness, the  Negative  in  and  for  itself  which  is  based  upon  itself 
positively.  As  intro-Reflection  it  negates  its  relation  to  Other; 
its  Other  is  the  Positive,  which  is  an  independent  Being  ;  —  and 
consequently  its  negative  relation  to  it  is,  to  exclude  it  from 
itself.  The  Negative  is  the  self-subsistent  Opposite,  as  against 
the  Positive,  which  is  the  determination  of  transcended 


54  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Opposition, — in   other   words,    the   self-based   and   complete 
Opposition,  which  is  opposed  to  self-identical  Positedness. 

Here  then  Positive  and  Negative  are  positive  and  negative 
not  only  in  themselves,  but  in  and  for  themselves.  They  are  these 
in  themselves  in  so  far  'as  abstraction  is  made  from  their 
exclusive  relation  to  Other  and  they  are  taken  only  according 
to  their  determination.  Something  is  positive  or  negative  in 
itself  when  it  is  supposed  to  be  so  determined  not  only  against 
other.  But  when  Positive  and  Negative  are  not  Positedness  and 
therefore  not  Opposite,  then  each  is  the  immediate,  Being  and 
Not-being.  But  Positive  and  Negative  are  the  moments  of 
Opposition,  and  their  Being-in-Self  constitutes  only  the  form 
of  their  intro-reflectedness.  Something  is  positive  in  itself,  apart 
from  relation  to  the  Negative;  and  something  is  negative  in 
itself,  apart  from  relation  to  the  Negative :  in  this  determination 
merely  the  abstract  moment  of  this  reflectedness  is  held  fast. 
The  self-existent  Positive  or  Negative,  on  the  other  hand,  means 
essentially  that  to  be  opposed  is  not  mere  moment  nor  belongs 
to  comparison,  but  is  the  peculiar  determination  of  the  sides 
of  Opposition.  So  that  they  are  not  positive  or  negative  in 
themselves  apart  from  the  relation  to  other,  but  this  relation 
(being  exclusive)  constitutes  their  determination  or  Being-in- 
Self;  here  then  they  are  this  also  in  and  for  themselves. 

Observation 

The  concept  of  Positive  and  Negative  as  used  in  arithmetic 
must  here  be  noticed.  It  is  there  assumed  to  be  known;  but 
since  it  is  not  taken  in  its  determinate  difference,  it  does  not 
escape  insoluble  difficulties  and  complications.  We  have  just 
reached  the  two  real  determinations  of  Positive  and  Negative — 
apart  from  the  simple  concept  of  their  opposition, — namely, 
first  that  a  merely  different  and  immediate  Determinate  Being 
is  the  base,  whose  simple  intro-Reflcction  is  distinguished  from 
its  Positedness,  which  is  Opposition  itself.  The  latter  therefore 
is  counted  conly  as  not  being  in  and  for  itself,  and  although  it 
belongs  to  the  Various,  so  that  each  in  general  is  a  term  of 
opposition,  yet  it  also  persists  indifferently  for  itself;  it  does 
not  matter  which  of  the  two  opposed  Varia  is  considered  as 
positive  or  as  negative.— But,  secondly,  the  Positive  is  that 


ESSENTIALITIES   OF  REFLECTION  55 

which  is  Positive  in  itself,  and  the  Negative  that  which  is 
Negative  in  itself,  so  that  the  Various  is  not  indifferent  to  it, 
but  has  here  its  determination  in  and  for  itself. — These  two 
forms  of  Positive  and  Negative  occur  in  the  very  first  deter- 
minations in  which  they  are  used  in  arithmetic. 

At  this  point  +  a  and  —  a  are  opposite  magnitudes  in 
general;  a, is  the  unit,  which  is  in  itself  and  is  their  common 
foundation,  indifferent  itself  to  opposition,  and  here  forming 
a  dead  base  without  further  concept.  —  a  is  designated  as 
negative  and  +  a  as  positive,  but  one  is  an  opposed  term  as 
much  as  the  other. 

Further,  a  is  not  only  simple  basic  unity,  but  as  -\-a  and  —a 
it  is  the  intro-Reflection  of  these  opposites;  there  are  two 
different  0's,  and  it  is  indifferent  which  of  the  two  is  to  be 
designated  as  positive  or  negative:  both  have  separate  per- 
sistence, and  are  positive. 

According  to  the  first  aspect  +  y  —y  =  o;  or,  in  —8  +  3, 
the  units  which  are  positive  in  3  are  negative  in  8.  Opposite 
units  cancel  each  other  when  combined.  An  hour's  journey 
to  the  east  followed  by  a  similar  journey  west  ends  in  the 
cancellation  of  the  first  journey ;  the  greater  the  liabilities,  by 
so  much  less  are  the  assets,  and  an  amount  of  assets  cancels 
a  similar  amount  of  liabilities.  At  the  same  time  the  hour's 
journey  east  is  not  the  positive  journey  in  itself,  nor  is  the 
journey  west  the  negative  journey :  these  directions  are  in- 
different to  this  determinateness  of  the  Opposition;  it  is  a 
third  respect,  which  falls  without  them,  that  makes  the  one 
positive  and  the  other  negative.  So  too  liabilities  are  not  in 
and  for  themselves  the  Negative;  they  are  so  only  in  relation 
to  the  debtor :  for  the  creditor  they  are  a  positive  asset,  a  sum 
of  money  or  anything  having  a  definite  value,  which  becomes 
liability  or  asset  according  to  an  external  respect. 

The  opposites  cancel  each  other  in  their  relation,  so  that 
the  result  is  zero;  however,  they  also  contain  their  identical 
relation,  which  is  indifferent  to  the  Opposition  itself;  and  now 
they  constitute  One.  It  has  just  been  said  that  die  sum  of 
money  is  one  sum,  and  the  a  only  one  a  in  +  a  and  —  a ;  and 
the  journey  is  one  journey  only  and  not  two,  one  eastwards 
and  the  other  westwards.  Similarly  an  ordinatejv  is  the  same  on 
whichever  side  of  the  axis  it  is  taken,  and  in  so  far  -\-y  —  y  =  y ; 


56  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  ordinate  is  only  the  ordinate,  and  has  only  one  determina- 
tion and  one  law. 

But,  further,  the  opposites  are  not  only  one  indifferent,  but 
two  indifferents.  For,  being  opposite,  they  are  also  intro- 
reflected,  and  thus  persist  as  various. 

Thus  —  8  +  3  contains  altogether  eleven  units ;  +  y  and  —  y 
are  ordinates  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  axis,  where  each  one 
is  a  Determinate  Being  indifferent  to  this  limit,  and  to  its 
opposite;  and  thus  +  y  —y=  2^.-^— Also  the  journey  made 
eastwards  and  westwards  is  the  sum  of  a  double  effort,  or  the 
sum  of  two  periods  of  time.  Similarly  in  economics  a  quantum 
of  money  or  of  wealth  is  not  only  this  one  quantum  as  a 
means  of  subsistence,  but  is  double :  it  is  a  means  of  sub- 
sistence for  the  creditor  as  well  as  for  the  debtor.  The  wealth 
of  a  nation  is  not  computed  as  merely  the  sum-total  of  ready 
money  and  of  the  value  of  property  movable  and  immovable 
which  it  contains;  still  less  is  it  the  difference  which  remains 
after  liabilities  have  been  deducted  from  assets.  Capital — even 
if  its  respective  determinations  of  asset  and  liability  nullify  each 
other — remains,  first,  positive  capital  (+  a  —  a  =  a) ;  and, 
secondly,  since  it  is  a  manifold  liability,  being  lent  and  re-lent, 
it  becomes  an  extremely  manifold  instrument. 

But  it  is  not  only  the  case  that  opposite  magnitudes  are, 
first,  merely  and  in  general  opposite,  and,  secondly,  real  or 
indifferent.  For,  further,  although  Quantum  itself  is  indiffer- 
ently limited  Being,  yet  that  which  is  Positive  in  itself  and 
that  which  is  Negative  in  itself  occurs  in  it  too.  For  instance, 
<2,  if  not  preceded  by  a  sign,  is  counted  as  being  meant  for 
positive  if  it  has  to  be  designated.  If  it  were  to  become  merely 
an  opposite  in  general,  it  might  equally  well  be  taken  as  —  a. 
But  the  positive  sign  is  given  it  immediately,  because  the 
Positive  for  itself  has  the  peculiar  meaning  of  immediate — the 
self-identical — in  contrast  with  Opposition. 

Further,  when  positive  and  negative  magnitudes  are  added 
or  subtracted,  they  are  counted  as  magnitudes  which  are 
positive  01  negative  in  themselves  and  do  not  become  positive 
and  negative  externally,  merely  through  the  relation  of  addition 
and  subtraction.  In  8  —  (  —  3)  the  first  minus  means  opposi- 
tion to  8,  but  the  second,  (—  3),  counts  as  a  term  opposite  in 
itself,  apart  from  this  relation. 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  57 

This  becomes  more  clearly  evident  in  multiplication  and 
division.  Here  the  Positive  must  essentially  be  taken  as  the 
not-opposite,  the  Negative  on  the  contrary  as  the  opposite,  and 
not  both  determinations  equally  as  opposite  terms  in  general. 
The  textbooks  do  not  pass  beyond  the  concept  of  opposite 
magnitudes  in  general  in  their  proofs  of  the  behaviour  of  the 
signs  in  these  two  species  of  calculation ;  these  proofs  are  there- 
fore incomplete  and  involved  in  contradictions. — In  fact  Plus 
and  Minus  in  multiplication  and  division  receive  the  more 
determinate  meaning  respectively  of  Positive  and  Negative  in 
itself,  because  the  relation  of  factors — they  are  as  Unit  and 
Amount  to  each  other — is  not  a  mere  relation  of  increase 
and  decrease  as  in  addition  and  subtraction,  but  is  qualitative ; 
whence  also  Plus  and  Minus  acquire  the  qualitative  meaning 
of  Positive  and  Negative. — Without  this  determination,  and 
merely  out  of  the  concept  of  opposed  magnitudes,  the  false 
conclusion  may  easily  be  drawn  that  if  —  a  x  +  a  =  —  a?y 
conversely  +  a  x  —  a  =  +  a2.  One  factor  denotes  Amount  and 
the  other  Unit,  and,  in  general,  the  first  factor  denotes  the 
former,  so  that  the  difference  between  the  two  expressions 
—  a  X  +  0  and  +  a  X  —  a  is  that  in  the  first  +  a  is  Unit  and  —  a 
is  Amount,  while  in  the  second  the  reverse  is  the  case.  Now 
in  the  first  case  it  is  commonly  said  that  if  I  am  to  take  +  a  —  a 
times,  I  take  +  a,  not  simply  a  times,  but  also,  in  the  opposite 
manner,  +  a  times  —  a ;  and  since  it  is  plus  I  have  to  take 
it  negatively,  and  the  product  is  —  a2. — But  if,  in  the  second 
case,  —  a  is  to  be  taken  +  #  times,  then  likewise  —  a  is  not  to 
be  taken  —  a  times,  but  in  the  opposite  determination,  that  is, 
+  a  times.  It  follows  from  the  reasoning  applied  in  the  first 
case  that  the  product  must  be  +  a2.  And  the  same  holds  good 
for  division. 

*  This  is  a  necessary  conclusion  so  long  as  Plus  and  Minus 
are  taken  only  as  opposite  magnitudes  in  general.  In  the  first 
case  the  Minus  is  credited  with  the  power  of  changing  the 
Plus;  but  in  the  second  case  Plus  was  not  supposed  to  have 
a  similar  power  over  Minus,  although  it  is  an  opposite  mag- 
nitudinal  determination  as  much  as  Minus.  But  in  fact  Plus 
has  not  this  power,  since  it  must  here  be  taken  in  its  qualitative 
determination  as  against  Minus,  the  factors  having  a  qualitative 
relation  to  each  other.  In  this  regard  then  the  Negative  here 


58  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

is  the  Opposite  in  itself  as  such,  and  the  Positive  is  the  indeter- 
minate and  indifferent  in  general ;  it  is  indeed  also  the  Negative, 
but  the  Negative  of  an  Other  and  not  in  itself.— Accordingly 
a  determination  as  negation  is  introduced  only  through  the 
Negative,  and  not  through  the  Positive. 

So  then  —  0  X  —  0  =  +  a2  because  the  negative  a  is  to  be 
taken  not  only  in  the  opposite  manner  (in  that  case  it  would 
have  to  be  taken  as  multiplied  by  —  a),  but  because  it  is  to 
be  taken  as  negative.  But  the  negation  of  negation  is  the 
Positive. 

G 
CONTRADICTION 

i.  Difference  in  general  contains  its  two  sides  as  moments; 
in  Variety  these  fall  apart  indifferent;  in  Opposition  as  such 
they  are  sides  of  Difference, — one  is  determined  only  by  the 
other  and  they  are  therefore  only  moments ;  but  also  they  are 
determinate  each  in  itself,  indifferent  to  each  other,  and 
mutually  exclusive:  independent  Determinations  of  Reflection. 

Of  these  one  is  the  Positive  and  the  other  the  Negative,  but 
the  former  as  that  which  is  positive  in  itself  and  the  latter  as 
that  which  is  negative  in  itself.  Each  has  indifferent  indepen- 
dence for  itself  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  it  contains  the  relation 
to  its  other  moment :  each  is  therefore  complete  and  self- 
contained  opposition. — As  this  Whole,  each  is  self-mediated  by 
its  Other  and  contains  it.  But  it  is  also  self-mediated  by  the 
Not-being  of  its  Other :  it  is  therefore  self-existent  unity  and 
excludes  the  Other. 

The  independent  Determination  of  Reflection  excludes 'the 
other  in  that  same  respect  in  which  it  includes  it,  wherein 
resides  its  independence:  being  independent  it  thus  excludes 
its  own  independence,  which  consists,  first,  in  the  fact  that  it 
contains  the  determination  which  is  other  to  it  and  for  this 
reason  only  is  not  a  relation  to  something  external,  but  also 
and  with  «qual  immediacy  in  the  fact  that  it  is  itself  and 
excludes  the  determination  which  is  negative  to  it.  Thus  it  is 
Contradiction. 

Already  Difference  in  general  is  Contradiction  in  itself;  for 
it  is  the  unity  of  terms  which  are  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  not 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  59 

one,  and  the  separation  of  terms  which  are  only  as  separated 
in  the  same  relation.  But  Positive  and  Negative  are  posited 
Contradiction,  because  they  are  negative  unities  which  posit 
themselves,  while  each  is  its  own  self-transcendence  and  the 
positing  of  its  opposite. — They  constitute  Determining  Reflec- 
tion in  its  excluding  aspect:  excluding  is  one  distinction,  and 
each  of  the  .distinguished  terms,  as  exclusive,  is  itself  the  whole 
exclusion ;  consequently  each  in  itself  excludes  itself. 

If  we  consider  the  two  independent  Determinations  of 
Reflection  for  themselves,  we  see  that  the  Positive  is  positedness 
as  reflected  into  self-equality ;  positedness  which  is  not  relation 
to  an  other,  and  thus  persistence  in  so  far  as  positedness  is 
transcended  and  excluded.  But  hereby  the  Positive  converts 
itself  into  the  relation  of  a  Not-being, — into  a  positedness. — It 
is  thus  Contradiction :  it  is  the  positing  of  self-identity,  and, 
by  excluding  the  Negative,  it  makes  itself  into  the  Negative 
of  something,  that  is,  into  that  Other  which  it  excludes  from 
itself.  This,  as  excluded,  is  posited  as  free  from  the  excluding 
term,  and  consequently  as  intro-reflected  and  itself  excluding. 
Thus  exclusive  Reflection  is  the  positing  of  the  Positive  as 
excluding  the  Other  in  such  a  manner  that  this  positing  is 
immediately  the  positing  of  its  Other,  which  excludes  it. 

This  is  the  absolute  Contradiction  of  the  Positive ;  but  it  is 
immediately  the  absolute  Contradiction  of  the  Negative :  the 
positing  of  both  is  one  single  Reflection. — The  Negative  con- 
sidered by  itself,  as  against  the  Positive,  is  positedness  as  reflected 
into  self-inequality,  the  Negative  as  Negative.  But  the  Negative 
itself  is  the  unequal  or  Not-being  of  an  Other :  accordingly  the 
Reflection  into  its  inequality  is  rather  its  self-relation. — Nega- 
tion* in  general  is  the  Negative  as  Quality,  or  immediate 
determinateness ;  but  the  Negative  as  such  is  the  Negative  as 
related  to  its  own  Negative  or  Other.  Now  if  this  Negative 
is  taken  simply  as  identical  with  the  first,  then  it — as  well 
as  the  first — is  merely  immediate ;  they  are  then  not  taken  as 
Other  to  each  other,  not,  therefore,  as  Negative :  the  Negative 
in  general  is  not  immediate. — But,  since  further  each  is  just 
as  much  that  which  the  other  is,  this  relation  of  unequal  terms 
is  just  as  much  their  identical  relation. 

This,  then,  is  that  same  Contradiction  which  the  Positive 
is,  namely  positedness  or  negation  as  self-relation.  But  the 


60  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

Positive  is  this  Contradiction  only  in  itself,  while  the  Negative 
is  posited  Contradiction ;  for  in  its  intro-Reflection,  which  makes 
it  to  be  Negative  in  and  for  itself  or  to  be  self-identical  as 
being  Negative,  it  has  the  determination  of  being  not-identical, 
the  exclusion  of  Identity.  The  Negative  is  and  means  to  be 
self-identical  as  opposed  to  Identity,  and  consequently,  by 
virtue  of  its  exclusive  Reflection,  to  exclude  itself  from  itself. 

The  Negative  then  is  the  totality  of  Opposition,  resting  upon 
itself  as  Opposition,  Absolute  Difference  not  relating  itself  to 
other;  as  Opposition  it  excludes  Identity  from  itself, — but  also 
thus  excludes  itself;  for  as  self -relation  it  determines  itself  to  be 
that  very  Identity  which  it  excludes. 

2.  Contradiction  resolves  itself. 

In  self-exclusive  Reflection,  which  has  just  been  under  con- 
sideration, Positive  and  Negative  each  in  its  independence 
transcends  itself;  each  is  simply  the  passing  over,  or  rather  the 
self-transference,  into  its  opposite.  This  restless  disappearance 
of  opposites  in  themselves  is  the  closest  unity  which  is  evolved 
from  Contradiction ;  it  is  the  Nought. 

But  Contradiction  contains  not  only  the  Negative  but  also 
the  Positive;  or,  self-exclusive  Reflection  is  also  Positing 
Reflection :  the  result  of  Contradiction  is  not  only  Nought. — 
The  Positive  and  Negative  constitute  the  positedness  of  in- 
dependence; their  self-negation  transcends  the  positedness 
of  independence.  It  is  this  which  in  truth  perishes  in 
Contradiction. 

Intro-Reflection,  through  which  the  sides  of  Opposition  make 
themselves  into  independent  self-relations,  is  at  this  point  their 
independence  as  distinguished  moments:  they  thus  are  this 
independence  only  in  themselves,  for  as  yet  they  are  still  opposites, 
and  the  fact  that  they  are  so  in  themselves  constitutes  their 
positedness.  But  their  exclusive  Reflection  transcends  this 
positedness  and  makes  them  into  independent  terms  which  are 
for  themselves,  which  are  independent  not  only  in  themselves 
but  also  through  the  negative  relation  of  each  to  its  Other ; 
in  this  manner  their  independence  is  also  posited.  But  further 
through  this  their  positing  they  make  themselves  into  a  posited- 
ness. They  destroy  themselves  in  determining  themselves  as  the 
self-identical,  but  therein  rather  as  the  Negative,  as  a  self- 
identical  something  which  is  relation  to  other. 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  61 

But,  more  closely  considered,  this  exclusive  Reflection  is  not 
only  this  formal  determination.  It  is  independence  which  is 
in  itself,  and  is  the  transcendence  of  this  positedness ;  only  by 
this  transcendence  is  it  unity  which  is  for  itself  and  is  in  truth 
independent.  By  the  transcendence  of  otherness  or  posited- 
ness it  is  true  that  positedness,  the  Negative  of  an  Other,  is 
reintroducqd.  But  in  fact  this  negation  is  not  only  first  and 
immediate  relation  to  other,  not  positedness  as  transcended 
immediacy,  but  also  it  exists  as  transcended  positedness.  Exclu- 
sive Reflection  of  independence,  since  it  is  exclusive,  becomes 
positedness,  but  is  equally  transcendence  of  its  positedness.  It 
is  transcending  self-relation :  first  it  here  transcends  the  Nega- 
tive, and  secondly  it  posits  itself  as  Negative,  and  this  is  just 
the  same  Negative  which  it  transcends :  in  transcending  the 
Negative  it  posits  the  Negative  and  simultaneously  transcends 
it.  In  this  manner  the  exclusive  determination  is  Other  to  itself 
and  is  the  negation  of  this  Other ;  and  consequently  the  tran- 
scendence of  this  positedness  does  not  again  become  positedness 
as  the  Negative  of  an  Other,  but  is  that  collapse  into  self  which 
is  positive  self-unity.  Thus  independence  is  unity  which  returns 
into  itself  through  its  own  negation,  since  it  returns  into  itself 
through  the  negation  of  its  own  positedness.  It  is  the  unity 
of  Essence,  which  makes  it  self-identical  through  the  negation 
not  of  an  Other  but  of  itself. 

3.  On  this  its  positive  side,  where  independence  in  Opposition 
as  exclusive  Reflection  makes  itself  into  positedness  and  equally 
transcends  the  point  where  it  is  positedness,  Opposition  not 
only  has  perished,  but  has  gone  back  into  its  Ground. — The 
exclusive  Reflection  of  independent  Opposition  makes  it  a 
negative  and  merely  posited  entity ;  and  thereby  it  reduces  its 
determinations,  Positive  and  Negative,  which  hitherto  have 
been  independent,  to  terms  which  are  only  determinations. 
Positedness  is  thus  made  into  positedness,  and  has  therefore 
returned  generally  into  its  self-unity :  it  is  simple  Essence,  but 
Essence  as  Ground.  By  the  transcendence  of  its  self-contra- 
dictory determinations  Essence  has  been  restored,*  with  this 
determination,  however,  that  it  is  exclusive  unity  of  Reflection, 
— simple  unity  which  determines  itself  as  Negative,  but  in  this 
positedness  is  immediately  self-equal  and  has  coincided  with 
itself. 


6a  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

First,  then,  independent  Opposition  passes  back  into  Ground 
through  its  Contradiction ;  Opposition  is  the  first  or  immediate 
term  from  which  a  beginning  is  made,  and  the  transcended 
Opposition  or  the  transcended  positedness  is  itself  a  positedness. 
Thus  Essence  as  Ground  is  a  positedness — something  which 
has  become.  But,  conversely,  the  only  positing  which  has  taken 
place  is  this,  that  Opposition  or  positedness  is  here  transcended 
only  as  positedness.  Therefore  Essence  as  Ground  is  exclusive 
Reflection  only  in  so  far  as  it  turns  itself  into  positedness,  or 
in  so  far  as  Opposition  (which  before  was  the  starting-point 
and  was  immediate)  is  the  merely  posited  and  determinate 
independence  of  Essence, — Opposition  being  merely  the  self- 
transcendent  in  itself,  but  Essence  that  which,  in  its  deter- 
minateness,  is  intro-reflected.  Essence  as  Ground  excludes 
itself  from  itself,  it  posits  itself;  its  positedness — which  is  the 
excluded  element — exists  only  as  positedness,  as  self-identity 
of  the  Negative.  This  independent  element  is  the  Negative 
posited  as  such;  and  it  is  self-contradictory,  and  therefore 
remains  immediately  in  Essence  as  in  its  Ground. 

Resolved  Contradiction  is,  then,  Ground,  that  is,  Essence 
as  unity  of  Positive  and  Negative.  In  Opposition,  the  deter- 
mination has  developed  into  independence;  but  Ground  is 
this  perfected  independence ;  in  it  the  Negative  is  independent 
Essence,  but  as  Negative ;  and  thus  it  is  Positive  just  as  much 
as  it  is  that  which  in  this  negativity  is  self-identical.  Opposition 
and  its  Contradiction  are  therefore  transcended  as  much  as 
preserved  in  Ground.  Ground  is  Essence  as  positive  self- 
identity,  which,  however,  simultaneously  relates  itself  to  itselt 
as  negativity ;  it  thus  determines  itself  and  becomes  excluded 
positedness ;  now  this  positedness  is  the  totality  of  independent 
Essence,  and  Essence  is  Ground,  since  in  this  its  negation  it 
is  self-identical  and  positive.  Self-contradictory  and  independent 
Opposition  was  then  already  itself  Ground;  now  only  the 
determination  of  self-unity  has  been  added;  and  the  latter 
emerges  when  the  independent  opposite  terms  transcend  each 
itself,  become  each  its  Other,  and  so  perish,  but  perishing 
merely  coincide  with  self;  so  that  while  perishing— that  is, 
in  its  positedness  or  negation — each  now  in  truth  becomes 
intro-reflected  and  self-identical  Essence. 


ESSENTIALITIES  OF  REFLECTION  63 

Observation  I 

Positive  and  Negative  are  the  same.  This  expression  belongs  to 
external  reflection  when  it  institutes  a  comparison  between 
these  two  determinations.  But  no  external  comparison  should 
be  made  between  these  any  more  than  between  any  other 
categories;  they  should  be  considered  in  themselves,  that  is, 
their  own  Reflection  should  be  considered.  But  here  it  appeared 
that  each  essentially  is  the  showing  of  itself  in  the  Other,  and 
is  the  positing  of  itself  as  of  the  Other. 

Imagination,  in  so  far  as  it  does  not  consider  Positive  and 
Negative  as  they  are  in  and  for  themselves,  may  indeed  be 
referred  to  comparison,  so  that  it  may  learn  how  baseless  are 
these  distinguished  terms  which  it  assumes  to  be  quite  rigidly 
opposed  to  each  other.  Even  a  slight  experience  in  reflective 
thought  will  perceive  that,  if  anything  has  just  been  determined 
as  Positive,  it  straightway  turns  into  Negative  if  any  progress 
is  made  from  that  base,  and  conversely  that  a  Negative  deter- 
mination turns  into  Positive ;  that  reflecting  thought  becomes 
confused  in  these  determinations  and  contradicts  itself.  In- 
sufficient acquaintance  with  the  nature  of  these  determinations 
thinks  that  this  confusion  is  a  fault  which  should  not  occur, 
and  attributes  it  to  a  subjective  error.  And  in  fact  this  tran- 
sition does  remain  mere  confusion  in  so  far  as  the  necessity 
for  this  metamorphosis  is  not  present  to  consciousness. — But  it 
is  a  simple  consideration,  even  for  external  reflection,  that, 
anyhow,  Positive  is  not  an  immediate  identity,  but  is  partly 
a  term  opposite  to  Negative,  having  significance  only  in  this 
relation  and  therefore  containing  the  Negative  in  its  concept, 
and  partly  that  in  itself  it  is  the  self-relating  negation  of  bare 
positedness  or  of  the  Negative,  and  therefore  is  absolute 
negation  in  itself. — Similarly  the  Negative,  which  is  opposed 
to  Positive,  has  meaning  only  with  reference  to  this  its  Other : 
it  therefore  contains  it  in  its  concept.  But  the  Negative  has 
its  own  persistence  also  apart  from  any  relation  to  the  Positive ; 
it  is  self-identical;  thus  it  is  that  which  the  Positive  was 
supposed  to  be. 

The  opposition  of  Positive  and  Negative  is  especially  taken 
in  the  meaning  that  the  former  (although  etymologically  it 
expresses  being  posited  or  positedness)  is  to  be  an  objective 


64  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

entity,  and  the  latter  a  subjective,  belonging  only  to  external 
reflection  and  in  no  way  concerned  with  the  objective  sphere, 
which  is  in  and  for  itself  and  quite  ignores  it.  And  indeed  if  the 
Negative  expresses  nothing  but  the  abstraction  of  subjective 
caprice  or  the  determination  of  an  external  comparison,  then 
of  course  it  is  not  present  for  the  objective  Positive,  that  is, 
the  latter  is  not  in  itself  related  to  any  such  empty  abstraction ; 
but  then  its  determination  as  Positive  is  also  only  external  to 
it. — To  quote  an  example  of  the  fixed  opposition  of  these 
Determinations  of  Reflection,  light  in  general  is  reckoned  as 
the  purely  Positive  and  darkness  as  the  purely  Negative.  But 
light,  in  its  infinite  expansion  and  in  the  force  of  its  maturing 
and  life-giving  activity,  has  essentially  the  nature  of  absolute 
negativity.  On  the  other  hand  darkness,  which  is  simple,  or 
the  not  self-differentiating  womb  of  generation,  is  simple 
self-identity — the  Positive.  Darkness  is  taken  as  the  merely 
Negative  in  this  meaning,  that  it  is  mere  absence  of  light  and 
therefore  just  is  not  present  for  it, — so  that  light,  when  relating 
itself  to  darkness,  is  supposed  to  relate  itself  not  to  an  Other 
but  purely  to  itself,  and  thus  darkness  must  simply  disappear 
before  it.  But  of  course  light  is  dimmed  into  grey  by  darkness ; 
and  apart  from  this  merely  quantitative  change,  it  also  under- 
goes the  qualitative  change  that  by  this  relation  it  is  determined 
as  a  colour. — And  so,  too,  virtue,  for  example,  does  not  exist 
without  struggle ;  it  is  indeed  the  highest  and  perfect  struggle, 
and  consequently  is  not  merely  the  Positive,  but  is  absolute 
negativity;  and  it  is  virtue  not  only  as  compared  with  vice, 
but  is  resistance  and  struggle  in  itself.  Or  again,  vice  is  not 
deficiency  of  virtue  (for  innocence,  too,  is  this  deficiency),  and 
it  differs  from  virtue  not  only  for  external  reflection,  but  is 
opposed  to  virtue  in  itself, — it  is  evil.  Evil  persists  in  being 
founded  in  itself  as  against  good :  it  is  positive  negativity.  But 
innocence,  which  is  lack  both  of  good  and  of  evil,  is  indifferent 
to  both  determinations,  and  is  neither  positive  nor  negative. 
But  this  lack,  too,  must  be  taken  as  determinateness :  it  must 
be  considered  on  the  one  hand  as  the  positive  nature  of  some- 
thing, and  on  the  other  as  relating  itself  to  an  opposite, — every 
nature  leaves  its  innocence,  its  indifferent  self-identity,  relating 
itself  through  itself  to  its  Other  and  thereby  destroying  itself 
or,  in  the  positive  sense,  passing  back  into  its  Ground. — And 


ESSENTIALITIES   OF  REFLECTION  65 

truth,  too,  is  the  Positive,  as  knowledge  corresponding  with 
its  object ;  but  it  is  this  self-equality  only  in  so  far  as  knowledge 
has  already  taken  up  a  negative  attitude  to  the  Other,  has 
penetrated  the  object,  and  transcended  that  negation  which 
the  object  is.  Error  is  a  Positive  as  an  opinion  affirming  that 
which  is  not  in  and  for  itself,  an  opinion  which  knows  itself 
and  asserts  itself.  But  ignorance  is  either  indifference  to  truth 
and  error,  and  thus  determined  neither  as  positive  nor  as 
negative, — and  if  it  is  determined  as  a  deficiency,  this  deter- 
mination belongs  to  external  reflection;  or  else,  objectively 
and  as  proper  determination  of  a  nature,  it  is  the  impulse 
which  is  directed  against  itself,  a  negative  which  contains  a 
positive  direction. — It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  recognize 
this  quality  of  the  Determinations  of  Reflection  which  have 
been  considered  here,  that  their  truth  consists  only  in  their 
relation  to  each  other,  and  therefore  in  the  fact  that  each 
contains  the  other  in  its  own  concept.  This  must  be  understood 
and  remembered,  for  without  this  understanding  not  a  step 
can  really  be  taken  in  philosophy. 

Observation  2 

The  determination  of  Opposition  too  has  been  made  into 
a  law,  the  so-called  Law  of  the  Excluded  Middle. 

Something  is  either  A  or  not- A:  there  is  no  third. 

This  law  implies  first  that  everything  is  a  term  of  an 
Opposition,  is  determined  either  as  positive  or  negative. — It 
is  an  important  proposition,  which  follows  from  the  fact  that 
Identity  passes  over  into  Variety  and  Variety  into  Opposition. 
But  it  is  not  generally  understood  in  this  meaning;  usually  it 
is  intended  to  signify  that,  of  all  predicates,  either  some  par- 
tiqular  predicate  itself,  or  its  not-being,  can  be  predicated  of 
a  thing.  The  opposite  here  means  only  deficiency,  or  rather 
indeterminateness ;  and  the  proposition  is  so  insignificant  that 
it  is  not  worth  enunciating.  If  the  determinations  of  sweet, 
green,  square,  are  taken — and  all  predicates  are  supposed  to 
be  taken — and  it  is  said  of  Spirit  that  it  is  either  sweet  or  not 
sweet,  green  or  not  green,  and  so  forth,  then  this  is  a  triviality 
which  leads  to  nothing.  The  determinateness  or  predicate  is 
referred  to  something;  the  law  states  that  the  something  is 

VOL.   II.  E 


66  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

determinate;  now  the  law  is  supposed  essentially  to  contain 
this,  that  the  determinateness  determines  itself  more  closely, 
becoming  determinateness  in  itself,  or  Opposition.  But  instead 
of  this  it  only  passes  in  this  trivial  sense  from  determinateness 
to  its  not-being  in  general,  that  is,  back  to  indeterminateness. 
The  law  of  the  excluded  middle  differs  also  from  the  laws 
of  identity  and  contradiction  which  were  considered  above : 
the  latter  of  these  states  that  there  is  nothing  which  is  at  once 
A  and  not-A.  It  implies  that  there  is  nothing  which  is 
neither  A  nor  not- A,  that  there  is  no  third  term  which  is  in- 
different to  this  opposition.  In  fact,  however,  this  third  term, 
which  is  indifferent  to  the  opposition,  is  contained  in  the 
law  itself— namely  A.  This  A  is  neither  +  A  nor  —  A,  and 
also  it  is  +  A  as  well  as  "~  ^4- — The  something  which  was 
to  be  either  +  A  or  not-A  is  here  related  both  to  +  A  and 
to  not-A ;  and  again,  since  it  is  related  to  A  it  is  supposed 
not  to  be  related  to  not-A,  and  also  not  to  A,  since  it  is 
related  to  not- A.  The  something  thus  is  itself  the  third  term 
which  was  supposed  to  be  excluded.  The  opposite  determina- 
tions are  posited  in  the  something  as  much  as  (in  this  positing) 
they  are  transcended,  and  therefore  the  third  (which  here  has 
the  form  of  a  dead  something),  taken  more  profoundly,  is  the 
unity  of  Reflection  into  which  Opposition  passes  back  as  into 
Ground. 

Observation  3 

The  primary  Determinations  of  Reflection — Identity,  Variety, 
and  Opposition — are  established  in  a  proposition ;  therefore  the 
determination  into  which  they  pass  over  as  into  their  truth 
(namely  Contradiction)  should  much  more  be  comprehended 
in  a  law ;  it  should  be  enunciated  that  all  things  are  contradictory 
in  themselves,  in  this  meaning,  that  this  proposition  as  opposed 
to  the  others  expresses  the  truth  and  essence  of  things. — Con- 
tradiction, which  emerges  in  Opposition,  is  no  more  than 
developed  Nothing ;  and  this  is  already  contained  in  Identity, 
and  occurred  in  the  expression  that  the  law  of  identity  states 
nothing.  This  negation  further  determines  itself  into  Variety 
and  into  Opposition,  which  now  is  posited  Contradiction. 

But  it  has  been  a  fundamental  prejudice  of  hitherto  existing 
logic  and  of  ordinary  imagination  that  Contradiction  is  a 


ESSENTIALITIES   OF  REFLECTION  67 

determination  having  less  essence  and  immanence  than 
Identity ;  but  indeed,  if  there  were  any  question  of  rank,  and 
the  two  determinations  had  to  be  fixed  as  separate,  Con- 
tradiction would  have  to  be  taken  as  the  profounder  and  more 
fully  essential.  For  as  opposed  to  it  Identity  is  only  the 
determination  of  the  simple  immediate,  or  of  dead  Being,  while 
Contradiction  is  the  root  of  all  movement  and  life,  and  it  is 
only  in  so  far  as  it  contains  a  Contradiction  that  anything 
moves  and  has  impulse  and  activity. 

Ordinarily  Contradiction  is  removed,  first  of  all  from  things, 
from  the  existent  and  the  true  in  general;  and  it  is  asserted 
that  there  is  nothing  contradictory.  Next  it  is  shifted  into  subjective 
reflection,  which  alone  is  said  to  posit  it  when  it  relates  and 
compares.  But  really — it  is  said — it  does  not  exist  even  in  this 
reflection,  for  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  or  to  think  anything 
contradictory.  Indeed,  Contradiction,  both  in  actuality  and 
in  thinking  reflection,  is  considered  an  accident,  a  kind  of  abnor- 
mality or  paroxysm  of  sickness  which  will  soon  pass  away. 

With  regard  to  the  assertion  that  Contradiction  does  not 
exist,  that  it  is  non-existent,  we  may  disregard  this  statement. 
In  every  experience  there  must  be  an  absolute  determination 
of  Essence — in  every  actuality  as  well  as  in  every  concept.  The 
same  remark  has  already  been  made  above,  under  Infinity, 
which  is  Contradiction  as  it  appears  in  the  sphere  of  Being. 
But  ordinary  experience  itself  declares  that  at  least  there  are 
a  number  of  contradictory  things  about,  contradictory  arrange- 
ments and  so  forth,  the  contradiction  being  present  in  them 
and  not  merely  in  an  external  reflection.  But  it  must  further 
not  be  taken  only  as  an  abnormality  which  occurs  just  here  and 
thefe:  it  is  the  Negative  in  its  essential  determination,  the 
principle  of  all  self-movement,  which  consists  of  nothing  else 
but  an  exhibition  of  Contradiction.  External,  sensible  motion 
is  itself  its  immediate  existence.  Something  moves,  not  because 
it  is  here  at  one  point  of  time  and  there  at  another,  but  because 
at  one  and  the  same  point  of  time  it  is  here  and  not  here,  and 
in  this  here  both  is  and  is  not.  We  must  grant  the  old  dialec- 
ticians the  contradictions  which  they  prove  in  motion;  but 
what  follows  is  not  that  there  is  no  motion,  but  rather  that 
motion  is  existent  Contradiction  itself. 

And   similarly  internal   or  self-movement,    or  impulse  in 


68  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

general  (the  appetitive  force  or  nisus  of  the  monad,  the 
entelechy  of  absolutely  simple  Essence),  is  nothing  else  than 
the  fact  that  something  is  itself  and  is  also  deficiency  or  the 
negative  of  itself,  in  one  and  the  same  respect.  Abstract  self- 
identity  has  no  life;  but  the  fact  that  Positive  in  itself  is 
negativity  causes  it  to  pass  outside  itself  and  to  change.  Some- 
thing therefore  has  life  only  in  so  far  as  it  contains  Con- 
tradiction, and  is  that  force  which  can  both  comprehend  and 
endure  Contradiction.  But  if  an  existent  something  cannot  in 
its  positive  determination  also  encroach  on  its  negative,  cannot 
hold  fast  the  one  in  the  other  and  contain  Contradiction  within 
itself,  then  it  is  not  living  unity,  or  Ground,  but  perishes  in 
Contradiction. — Speculative  thought  consists  only  in  this,  that 
thought  holds  fast  Contradiction,  and,  in  Contradiction,  itself, 
and  not  in  that  it  allows  itself  to  be  dominated  by  it — as 
happens  to  imagination — or  suffers  its  determinations  to  be 
resolved  into  others,  or  into  Nothing. 

In  movement,  impulse,  and  the  like,  the  simplicity  of  these 
determinations  hides  the  contradiction  from  imagination;  but 
this  contradiction  immediately  stands  revealed  in  the  deter- 
minations of  relations.  The  most  trivial  examples — above  and 
below,  right  and  left,  father  and  son,  and  so  on  without  end — 
all  contain  Contradiction  in  one  term.  That  is  above  which 
is  not  below;  "above"  is  determined  only  as  not  being  "below,55 
and  is  only  in  so  far  as  there  is  a  "below,55  and  conversely: 
one  determination  implies  its  opposite.  Father  is  the  Other  of 
son,  and  son  of  father,  and  each  exists  only  as  this  Other 
of  the  other;  and  also  the  one  determination  exists  only  in 
relation  to  the  other:  their  Being  is  one  persistence.  Father  is 
something  for  himself  apart  from  the  relation  to  son,  but  then 
he  is  not  father,  but  a  man  in  general;  and  similarly  above 
and  below,  right  and  left  are  intro-reflected  and  are  something 
apart  from  the  relation,  but  only  as  places  in  general. — Opposite 
terms  contain  Contradiction  in  so  far  as  they  are  negatively 
related  to  each  other  in  the  same  respect,  or  cancel  out  and 
remain  indifferent  to  each  other.  Imagination  passes  over 
to  the  moment  of  indifference  of  the  determinations,  and  so 
forgets  their  negative  unity,  remembering  them  only  as  merely 
different;  and  in  this  determination  right  is  no  longer  right, 
nor  left  left,  and  so  forth.  But  in  fact  imagination  still  keeps 


ESSENTIALITIES   OF  REFLECTION  69 

right  and  left  before  itself,  and  therefore  has  these  deter- 
minations before  itself  as  negating  each  other,  one  in  the 
other,  and  also  as  not  negating  each  other  in  this  unity  but 
existing  each  indifferently  for  itself. 

Thus  although  imagination  everywhere  has  Contradiction 
for  content,  it  never  becomes  aware  of  it ;  it  remains  an  external 
reflection,  which  passes  from  Likeness  to  Unlikeness,  or  from 
negative  relation  to  intro-reflectedness  of  the  different  terms. 
It  keeps  these  two  determinations  external  to  each  other,  and 
has  in  mind  only  these  and  not  their  transition,  which  is  the 
essential  matter  and  contains  the  Contradiction. — On  the  other 
hand  intelligent  reflection,  if  we  may  mention  this  here,  con- 
sists in  the  understanding  and  enunciating  of  Contradiction. 
It  does  not  express  the  concept  of  things  and  their  relations, 
and  has  only  determinations  of  imagination  for  material  and 
content;  but  still  it  relates  them,  and  the  relation  contains 
their  contradiction,  allowing  their  concept  to  show  through 
the  contradiction. — Thinking  Reason,  on  the  other  hand, 
sharpens  (so  to  speak)  the  blunt  difference  of  Variety,  the  mere 
manifold  of  imagination,  into  essential  difference,  that  is, 
Opposition.  The  manifold  entities  acquire  activity  and  live- 
liness in  relation  to  one  another  only  when  driven  on  the  sharp 
point  of  Contradiction;  thence  they  draw  negativity,  which 
is  the  inherent  pulsation  of  self-movement  and  liveliness. 

It  has  already  been  remarked  of  the  ontological  proof  of 
the  existence  of  God  that  the  fundamental  determination  there 
is  the  sum- total  of  all  realities.  It  is  usually  proved  of  this 
determination,  first,  that  it  is  possible  because  it  contains  no 
Contradiction,  since  reality  is  taken  only  as  reality  without 
barriers.  It  was  remarked  that  this  sum-total  thus  becomes 
simple  indeterminate  Being,  or,  if  the  realities  are  indeed  taken 
as  a  plurality  of  determinate  entities,  becomes  the  sum-total 
of  all  negations.  And  if  the  differentiation  of  Reality  is  taken 
more  closely,  it  changes  from  Variety  into  Opposition  and  so 
into  Contradiction;  and  the  sum-total  of  all  realities  ends  as 
absolute  self-contradiction.  This  conclusion  is  rejected  by  that 
common  abhorrence  which  Contradiction  rouses  in  imagina- 
tive (not  in  speculative)  thought,  as  the  vacuum  does  in  nature ; 
for  such  thought  does  not  pass  beyond  the  one-sided  con- 
sideration of  the  resolution  of  Contradiction  into  nothing,  and 


70  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

does  not  perceive  its  positive  side,  where  it  becomes  absolute 
activity  and  Absolute  Ground. 

Altogether  it  has  appeared  from  the  consideration  of  the 
nature  of  Contradiction  that  in  itself  it  is  not,  so  to  speak,  a 
blemish,  deficiency,  or  fz  ult  in  a  thing  if  a  contradiction  can  be 
shown  in  it.  On  the  contrary,  every  determination,  every  con- 
crete, every  concept  is  essentially  a  union  of  distinguished  and 
distinguishable  moments,  which  pass  over  through  determinate 
and  essential  difference  into  contradictory  moments.  It  is  true 
that  this  contradictory  concretion  resolves  itself  into  nothing — it 
passes  back  into  its  negative  unity.  Now  the  thing,  the  subject, 
or  the  concept  is  itself  just  this  negative  unity:  it  is  contra- 
dictory in  itself,  but  also  it  is  resolved  Contradiction ;  it  is  the 
Ground  which  contains  and  supports  its  determinations.  The 
thing,  subject,  or  concept,  as  intro-reflected  in  its  sphere,  is 
its  resolved  Contradiction;  but  its  whole  sphere  again  is 
determinate  and  various ;  it  is  therefore  finite,  and  this  means 
contradictory.  Itself  it  is  not  the  resolution  of  this  higher 
Contradiction;  but  it  has  a  higher  sphere  for  its  negative 
unity  or  Ground.  Accordingly,  finite  things  in  their  indifferent 
multiplicity  are  simply  this  fact,  that,  contradictory  in  them- 
selves, they  are  intro-refracted  and  pass  back  into  their  Ground. 
— The  nature  of  the  true  inference  of  an  absolutely  necessary 
Essence  from  a  finite  and  contingent  entity  will  be  considered 
below.  Such  an  essence  is  not  inferred  from  the  finite  and 
contingent  as  from  a  Being  which  both  is  and  remains  Ground, 
but,  as  is  also  implied  immediately  in  contingency,  this  absolute 
necessity  is  inferred  from  a  merely  collapsing  and  self-con- 
tradicting Being;  or  rather  it  is  demonstrated  that  contingent 
Being  passes  automatically  back  into  its  Ground,  where  it 
transcends  itself, — and,  further,  in  this  retrogression  it  posits 
Ground  in  such  a  manner  only  that  it  makes  itself  into  the 
posited  element.  In  an  ordinary  inference  the  Being  of  the 
finite  appears  as  the  Ground  of  the  absolute :  the  absolute  is 
because  the  finite  is.  The  truth,  however,  is  that  the  absolute 
is  just  because  the  finite  is  self-contradictory  opposition — just 
because  it  is  not.  In  the  former  meaning  an  inference  runs  thus : 
The  Being  of  the  finite  is  the  Being  of  the  absolute ; — but  in 
the  latter:  The  Not-being  of  the  finite  is  the  Being  of  the 
absolute. 


CHAPTER  III 
GROUND 

ESSENCE  determines  itself  as  Ground. 

In  the  beginning  Nothing  was  in  simple  immediate  unity 
with  Being ;  similarly  here  too  the  simple  identity  of  Essence 
is  in  immediate  unity  with  its  absolute  negativity.  Essence  is 
no  more  than  this  its  negativity,  which  is  pure  Reflection.  It 
is  this  pure  negativity  because  it  is  the  return  of  Being  into 
itself;  and  accordingly  it  is  determined  in  itself  or  for  us,  as 
Ground  in  which  Being  dissolves  itself.  But  this  determinate- 
ness  is  not  posited  through  Essence  itself;  in  other  words,  it 
is  not  Ground  except  in  so  far  as  it  has  itself  posited  this  its 
determinateness.  But  its  Reflection  consists  in  this,  that  it  posits 
and  determines  itself  as  that  which  it  is  in  itself- — as  Negative. 
Positive  and  Negative  constitute  the  essential  determination 
in  which,  as  in  its  negation,  it  lies  lost.  These  independent 
Determinations  of  Reflection  cancel  themselves,  and  the 
determination  which  has  perished  is  the  true  determination 
of  Essence. 

Consequently  Ground  is  itself  one  of  the  Determinations  of 
Reflection  of  Essence ;  but  it  is  the  last  of  these,  or  rather  it 
is  that  determination  which  determines  that  it  is  transcended 
determination.  As  it  perishes,  the  Determination  of  Reflection 
attains  its  true  significance — namely,  that  it  is  in  itself  its  own 
absolute  repulsion :  that  positedness  which  is  proper  to  Essence 
is  only  transcended  positedness,  and,  conversely,  only  self- 
transcending  positedness  is  the  positedness  of  Essence.  Essence 
in  determining  itself  as  Ground  determines  itself  as  the  non- 
determinate,  and  only  the  transcendence  of  its  determinateness 
is  its  determining. — In  this  determinateness,  which  is  here 
self-transcendent,  it  is  Essence  which  does  not  come  from 
elsewhere  but  in  its  negativity  is  self-identical. 

From  this  determination,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  first 
or  immediate  entity,  the  movement  goes  to  Ground  (through 
the  nature  of  the  determination  itself,  which  perishes  through 


72  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

itself) ;  and  thus  at  this  point  Ground  is  something  which  is 
determined  by  this  first  entity.  But  this  determining,  as  tran- 
scendence of  determining,  is  firstly  just  restored,  purified  or 
manifested  identity  of  Essence,  which  is  the  Determination  of 
Reflection  in  itself; — and  further  this  negating  movement,  as 
process  of  determination,  is  only  the  positing  of  that  deter- 
minateness  of  Reflection  which  appeared  as  immediate,  but 
which  in  fact  was  posited  by  the  self-exclusive  Reflection  of 
Ground,  and  here  is  posited  only*  as  posited  or  transcended 
entity. — Thus  Essence,  when  it  determines  itself  as  Ground, 
merely  arrives  from  out  of  itself.  As  Ground,  then,  it  posits 
itself  as  Essence,  and  its  determining  consists  in  the  fact  that 
it  posits  itself  as  Essence.  This  positing  is  the  Reflection  oi 
Essence,  and  this  Reflection  transcends  itself  in  its  determin- 
ing: in  its  former  aspect  it  is  positing,  and  in  its  latter  the 
positing  of  Essence, — and  consequently  it  is  both  in  one  single 
activity. 

Reflection  is  pure  mediation  in  general,  Ground  is  the  real 
self-mediation  of  Essence.  The  former — the  movement  of 
Nothing  through  nothing  back  to  itself— is  the  showing  of 
itself  in  an  Other;  but,  in  this  Reflection,  Opposition  as  yet 
has  no  independence,  and  therefore  it  is  neither  that  first, 
showing  entity — which  is  a  Positive,  nor  that  other  in  which 
it  shows — which  is  a  Negative.  Both  are  substrata,  and  really 
only  substrata  of  imaginative  force:  they  are  not  yet  self- 
relating  entities.  Pure  mediation  is  only  pure  relation  without 
related  terms.  It  is  true  that  Determining  Reflection  posits 
such  terms,  which  are  self-identical,  but  also  are  only 
determinate  relations.  On  the  other  hand,  Ground  is  real 
mediation  because  it  contains  Reflection  as  transcended 
Reflection :  it  is  Essence  which  returns  upon  itself  through  its 
Not-being,  and  posits  itself.  According  to  this  moment  'of 
transcended  Reflection,  that  which  is  posited  acquires  the 
determination  of  immediacy — an  entity  which,  apart  from  its 
relation  or  Show,  is  self-identical.  This  immediate  is  Being 
which  has  been  restored  through  Essence,  the  Not-being  of 
Reflection  through  which  Essence  mediates  itself.  Essence 
returns  into  itself  as  negating  Essence:  thus  it  gives  itself 
determinateness  in  its  return  to  itself;  and  this  determinate- 
ness  for  that  very  reason  is  the  self-identical  Negative,  tran- 


GROUND  73 

scended  positedness,  which  therefore  is  existent  just  as  much  as 
it  is  the  self-identity  of  Essence  as  Ground. 

Ground  is,  first,  Absolute  Ground,  in  which  here  Essence  is 
the  foundation  in  general  for  the  relation  of  Ground ;  but  more 
closely  it  determines  itself  as  Form  and  Matter  and  gives  itself 
a  Content. 

Secondly,  it  is  Determined  Ground  as  Ground  of  a  determinate 
Content;  and  since  the  Ground-relation  becomes  external  to 
itself  in  its  realization,  it  passes  over  into  Conditioning  Mediation. 

Thirdly,  Ground  presupposes  a  Condition ;  but  equally  the 
Condition  presupposes  Ground.  That  which  is  Unconditioned 
is  their  unity — the  Fact  in  itself,  which,  through  the  mediation 
of  the  conditioning  relation,  passes  over  into  Existence. 

Observation 

Ground,  like  the  other  Determinations  of  Reflection,  was 
expressed  in  a  proposition:  Everything  has  its  sufficient  Ground 
(reason). — Ordinarily  this  just  means  that  what  is  must  be 
considered  not  as  an  existent  immediate,  but  as  a  posited  entity. 
We  must  not  remain  at  immediate  Determinate  Being  or  at 
determinateness  in  general,  but  must  pass  back  to  its  Ground, 
in  which  Reflection  it  exists  as  transcended  and  in  its  Being- 
in-and-for-Self.  Thus  the  Law  of  Ground  asserts  the  essentiality 
of  intro-Reflection  as  against  bare  Being. — It  is  really  quite 
superfluous  to  add  that  the  Ground  is  sufficient,  because  it 
is  self-evident :  that  for  which  the  Ground  is  insufficient  would 
have  no  Ground ;  but  everything  is  supposed  to  have  a  Ground. 
But  Leibniz — who  was  especially  devoted  to  the  principle  of 
sufficient  reason  (or  Ground),  and  in  fact  made  it  the  foundation 
of  his  whole  philosophy — connected  with  it  a  profounder  mean- 
ing and  a  more  important  concept  than  is  generally  connected 
with  it  when  no  step  is  taken  beyond  the  immediate  expression ; 
although  the  law  must  be  regarded  as  important  even  in  this 
meaning,  where  Being  as  such  in  its  immediacy  is  declared  to 
be  invalid  and  essentially  to  be  something  posited,  and  Ground 
to  be  the  true  immediate.  But  Leibniz  especially  opposed  the 
sufficiency  of  Ground  to  causality  in  its  strict  meaning  of 
mechanical  efficacy.  The  latter  is  an  external  activity,  restricted 
in  content  to  one  determinateness,  and  consequently  the 


74  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

determinations  which  it  posits  become  connected  externally 
and  contingently;  partial  determinations  are  comprehended 
by  their  causes,  but  their  relation — and  this  it  is  which  con- 
stitutes the  essential  part  of  an  existence — is  not  contained 
among  the  causes  with  which  mechanism  operates.  This 
relation — the  whole  as  essential  unity — is  found  only  in  the 
Notion,  in  End.  Mechanical  causes  are  not  sufficient  for  this 
unity,  because  the  End  as  the  unity  of  the  determinations  is 
not  their  basis.  Accordingly  Leibniz  understood  by  "sufficient 
reason55  a  Ground  which  was  sufficient  for  this  unity  too,  and 
therefore  comprehended  not  only  causes,  but  final  causes.  But 
this  is  not  yet  the  place  for  this  determination  of  Ground ; 
Teleological  Ground  is  peculiar  to  the  Notion  and  to  that 
mediation  by  means  of  it  which  is  Reason. 


A 
ABSOLUTE  GROUND 

(a}  FORM  AND  ESSENCE 

Determination  of  Reflection,  in  so  far  as  it  passes  back  into 
Ground,  is  a  primary  and  immediate  Determinate  Being  in 
general,  from  which  a  beginning  is  made.  But  now  Determinate 
Being  has  the  significance  only  of  positedness,  and  essentially 
presupposes  a  Ground, — in  this  meaning,  that  it  really  does  not 
posit  it,  that  this  positing  is  a  self-transcendence,  and  the 
immediate  rather  is  what  is  posited  and  Ground  that  which 
is  not  posited.  It  was  seen  that  this  presupposing  is  positing 
which  recoils  upon  that  which  posits ;  Ground,  as  transcended 
determinateness,  is  not  the  indeterminate, — it  is  self-determined 
Essence,  but  determined  as  indeterminate  or  as  transcended 
positedness.  It  is  Essence  which,  in  its  negativity,  is  selP- 
identical. 

Here  then  the  determinateness  of  Essence  as  Ground  becomes 
twofold — it  is  determined  both  as  Ground  and  as  Grounded. 
It  is,  first,  Essence  as  Ground,  determined  as  Essence  (or  not- 
positedness)  against  positedness.  Secondly,  it  is  that  which  is 
Grounded — the  immediate  which,  however,  is  not  in  and  for 
itself,  or  positedness  as  such.  Consequently  this  too  is  self- 
identical  ;  but  it  is  the  self-identity  of  the  Negative.  The  self- 


GROUND  75 

identical  Negative  and  the  self-identical  Positive  are  now  one 
and  the  same  identity.  For  Ground  is  self-identity  of  Positive 
or  even  of  positedness,  while  that  which  is  Grounded  is 
positedness  as  positedness ;  now,  this  its  intro-Refiection  is  the 
identity  of  Ground. — Thus  this  simple  identity  is  not  itself 
Ground,  for  Ground  is  Essence  posited  as  the  not-posited  in 
opposition  to  positedness.  As  the  unity  of  this  determinate 
identity  (Ground)  and  of  negative  identity  (the  Grounded), 
it  is  Essence  in  general  as  .distinguished  from  its  mediation. 

If  this  mediation  is  compared  with  the  Reflections  which 
precede  it  and  are  its  origins,  it  is  found,  first,  not  to  be  Pure 
Reflection,  since  it  is  not  distinguished  from  Essence  and  does 
not  yet  contain  the  Negative,  which  alone  could  give  stability 
to  its  determinations ;  whereas  in  Ground,  which  is  Reflection 
transcended,  these  determinations  have  persistence. — Nor  is 
it  Determining  Reflection,  the  determinations  of  which  have 
essential  stability;  for  this  has  perished  in  Ground,  and  in  its 
unity  they  are  only  posited  entities. — This  mediation  of  Ground 
is,  consequently,  the  unity  of  Pure  and  of  Determining  Reflec- 
tion; its  determinations  (or,  the  posited)  have  persistence, 
and,  conversely,  their  persistence  is  something  posited.  And, 
because  this  their  persistence  is  itself  something  posited  or  has 
determinateness,  they  are  in  so  far  distinguished  from  their 
simple  identity,  and  constitute  Form  as  against  Essence. 

Essence  has  a  Form  and  determinations  of  this  Form.  It  has 
a  fixed  immediacy,  or  is  substratum,  only  as  Ground.  Essence 
as  such  is  one  with  its  Reflection,  and  the  movement  of  these 
two  itself  is  not  differentiated.  That  which  passes  through 
Reflection  therefore  is  not  Essence;  nor  is  Essence  that  first 
element  from  which  Reflection  begins.  This  circumstance  makes 
the  exposition  of  Reflection  in  general  more  difficult ;  for  really 
k  is  impossible  to  say  that  Essence  passes  back  into  itself,  or 
that  Essence  shows  in  itself,  because  it  is  neither  before  nor  in 
its  movement,  and  the  latter  has  no  basis  upon  which  it  takes 
its  course.  A  related  term  emerges  only  in  Ground  after  the 
moment  of  transcended  Reflection.  But  Essence -as  related 
substratum  is  determinate  Essence;  it  is  by  virtue  of  this 
positedness  that  Form  essentially  belongs  to  it. — The  deter- 
minations of  Form  on  the  other  hand  are  now  determinations 
as  applied  to  Essence:  Essence  is  their  foundation,  as  being 


76  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

that  indeterminate  which  in  its  determination  is  indifferent  to 
them;  and  in  it  they  have  their  intro-Reflection.  The  Deter- 
minations of  Reflection  were  supposed  to  contain  their  own 
persistence  and  to  be  independent;  but  their  independence  is 
their  dissolution,  and  therefore  they  have  their  independence 
in  an  Other ;  but  this  dissolution  itself  is  this  self-identity,  or 
the  Ground  of  persistence  which  they  give  to  themselves. 

Everything  determinate  belongs  to  Form,  and  is  a  deter- 
mination of  Form  in  so  far  as  it^  is  posited  and  therefore 
distinct  from  an  entity  of  which  it  is  the  Form ;  determinate- 
ness  as  Quality  is  one  with  its  substratum,  Being ;  Being  is  the 
immediately  determinate  which  is  not  yet  distinct  from  its 
determinateness,  or  is  not  yet  intro-reflected  in  the  latter ;  and 
the  determinateness  consequently  is  an  existent  but  not  yet 
a  posited  entity.  Further,  the  Form-determinations  of  Essence, 
as  determinatenesses  of  Reflection,  are,  according  to  their 
closer  determinateness,  the  moments  of  Reflection  considered 
above,  Identity  and  Difference, — the  latter  partly  as  Variety 
and  partly  as  Opposition.  But  further  the  Ground-relation 
belongs  to  Form,  in  so  far  as  it  is  transcended  Determination 
of  Reflection,  but  also  and  at  the  same  time  Essence  is  taken 
as  posited.  On  the  other  hand,  the  identity  which  Ground 
contains  does  not  belong  to  Form,  for  here  positedness  as 
transcended  and  positedness  as  such  (or  Ground  and  Grounded) 
are  one  Reflection  constituting  Essence  as  simple  foundation, 
which  is  the  persistence  of  Form.  But  this  persistence  is  posited 
in  Ground,  or  again  essentially  this  Essence  itself  exists  as 
determinate ;  and  now  it  has  once  more  become  the  moment 
of  Ground-relation  and  Form. — This  is  the  absolute  reciprocal 
relation  of  Form  and  Essence :  the  latter  is  simple  unity  of 
Ground  and  Grounded,  and  here  precisely  it  is  determinate,  or 
Negative,  and  is  distinct  from  Form  because  it  is  foundation.; 
but  at  the  same  time  it  thus  becomes  Ground  and  moment  of 
Form. 

Form  therefore  is  the  perfected  whole  of  Reflection ;  it  also 
contains  the  determination  of  Reflection  whereby  it  is  tran- 
scended ;  and  consequently  it  is  related  to  its  transcendedness, 
or  to  an  Other,  as  much  as  it  is  a  unity  of  its  determining. 
This  Other  is  not  itself  Form,  but  Form  is  applied  to  it.  As 
essential  self-relating  negativity  in  contrast  with  this  simple 


GROUND  77 

Negative,  it  is  the  positing  and  determining  element,  while 
simple  Essence  is  the  indeterminate  and  inactive  foundation 
on  which  the  determinations  of  Form  have  persistence  or 
intro-Reflection. — External  reflection  usually  does  not  pass 
beyond  this  distinction  between  Essence  and  Form;  the  dis- 
tinction is  necessary,  but  this  distinguishing  itself  is  their  unity, 
as  also  Essence,  self-repellent  and  making  itself  into  posited- 
ness,  is  this  fundamental  unity.  Form  is  absolute  negativity 
itself  or  negative  absolute  self-identity,  by  virtue  of  which 
precisely  Essence  is  not  Being  but  Essence.  This  identity,  taken 
abstractly,  is  Essence  as  against  Form ;  just  as  negativity,  taken 
abstractly  as  positedness,  is  the  individual  determination  of 
Form.  But  the  determination,  as  it  has  shown  itself,  is  in  its 
truth  total  and  self-relating  negativity,  which,  consequently, 
as  being  this  identity,  is,  in  itself,  simple  Essence.  Form  there- 
fore has  Essence  in  its  own  identity,  and  Essence  in  its  negative 
nature  has  absolute  Form.  The  question  cannot  therefore  be 
asked,  how  Form  is  added  to  Essence;  for  Form  is  only  the 
showing  of  Essence  in  itself— it  is  its  own  immanent  Reflection. 
Similarly  Form  in  itself  is  Reflection  returning  to  itself,  or 
identical  Essence;  in  its  determining  it  makes  determination 
to  be  positedness  as  such. — Form  then  does  not  determine 
Essence  as  though  it  were  in  truth  presupposed  and  separate 
from  Essence,  for  in  this  view  it  is  the  unessential  Determina- 
tion of  Reflection,  which  presses  to  destruction  without  stop ; 
rather  it  is  thus  itself  the  Ground  of  its  transcendence  or  the 
identical  relation  of  its  determinations.  The  assertion  that  Form 
determines  Essence  means,  then,  that  Form  in  its  distinguishing 
itself  transcends  this  distinguishing  and  is  self-identity,  which 
is  Essence  as  the  persistence  of  determination;  it  is  Con- 
tradiction in  that  in  its  positedness  it  is  transcended  and  in 
this  transcendedness  has  its  persistence;  accordingly  it  is 
Ground  as  Essence  which  is  self-identical  in  determinateness 
or  negatedness. 

These  different  terms,  Form  and  Essence,  are,  therefore,  only 
moments  of  the  simple  Form-relation  itself.  But  they  must  be 
more  closely  considered  and  fixed.  Determining  Form  relates 
itself  to  itself  as  transcended  positedness,  and  therefore  it  is 
related  to  its  identity  as  to  an  Other.  It  posits  itself  as  tran- 
scended, and  therefore  presupposes  its  identity ;  according  to 


78  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

this  moment  Essence  is  the  indeterminate  to  which  Form  is 
an  Other.  Thus  it  is  not  Essence — which  is  absolute  Reflection, 
in  itself— but  it  is  determined  as  formless  identity :  it  is  Matter. 

(b)  I»6RM  AND  MATTER 

Essence  becomes  Matter  when  its  Reflection  determines  itself 
to  be  related  to  Essence  as  to  the  formless  indeterminate. 
Matter  then  is  the  simple  undifferentiated  identity — which 
Essence  also  is — with  this  determination,  that  it  is  Other  to 
Form.  Consequently  it  is  the  real  foundation  or  substratum  of 
Form  because  it  constitutes  the  intro-Reflection  of  the  deter- 
minations of  Form,  or  that  stability  to  which  they  are  related 
as  to  their  positive  persistence. 

i.  If  abstraction  is  made  from  every  determination  and 
Form  of  a  Something,  indeterminate  Matter  remains.  Matter  is 
a  pure  abstract.  ( — Matter  cannot  be  seen  or  felt — what  is  seen 
or  felt  is  a  determinate  Matter,  that  is,  a  unity  of  Matter  and 
Form.)  But  this  abstraction,  out  of  which  Matter  proceeds,  is 
not  a  mere  external  subtraction  or  cancellation  of  Form ;  but 
Form  by  itself  reduces  itself,  as  was  seen,  to  this  simple 
identity. 

Further,  Form  presupposes  a  Matter  to  which  it  relates  itself. 
But  the  two  do  not  just  happen  to  be  face  to  face  externally 
and  contingently;  neither  Matter  nor  Form  has  arisen  out  of 
itself,  or — in  another  terminology — is  eternal.  Matter  is  that 
which  is  indifferent  to  Form,  but  this  indifference  is  the  deter- 
minateness  of  self-identity,  into  which,  as  into  its  foundation, 
Form  passes  back.  Form  presupposes  Matter  in  the  very  fact 
that  it  posits  itself  as  transcended  and  thereby  relates  itself  to 
this  its  identity  as  to  an  Other.  Conversely,  Matter  presupposes 
Form ;  for  the  former  is  not  simple  Essence  which  is  immediately 
itself  absolute  Reflection:  it  is  Essence  determined  as  the 
Positive — that  is,  as  that  which  is  only  as  transcended  negation. 
— But,  from  the  other  aspect,  Form  posits  itself  as  Matter  only 
in  so  far  a&  it  transcends  itself  and  therefore  presupposes  Matter ; 
hence  Matter  is  determined  also  as  groundless  persistence. 
Similarly  Matter  is  not  determined  as  Ground  of  Form ;  but, 
since  Matter  posits  itself  as  abstract  identity  of  the  transcended 
determination  of  Form,  it  is  not  identity  as  Ground ;  and  in 


GROUND  79 

so  far,  Form  is  groundless  as  against  it.  Form  and  Matter  are 
thus  determined,  the  one  as  much  as  the  other,  not  to  be 
mutually  posited  and  not  to  be  Ground  each  of  the  other. 
Rather,  Matter  is  the  identity  of  Ground  and  Grounded,  as 
foundation  which  stands  opposed  to  this  Form-relation.  This 
their  common  determination  of  indifference  is  the  determina- 
tion of  Matter  as  such,  and  also  constitutes  the  mutual  relation 
of  the  two.  And  similarly  the  determination  of  Form — to  be 
the  relation  of  the  two  as  distinct  terms — is  the  other  moment 
of  their  attitude  to  each'  other. — Matter  is  determined  as 
indifferent :  it  is  the  passive  as  against  Form  as  active.  Form  is 
the  self-relating  Negative ;  it  is  therefore  Contradiction  in  itself, 
self-resolvent,  self-repellent,  and  self-determining.  It  relates 
itself  to  Matter,  and  it  is  posited  as  relating  itself  to  this  its 
persistence  as  to  an  Other.  Matter  on  the  other  hand  is  posited 
as  relating  itself  only  to  itself  and  as  being  indifferent  to  Other; 
but  it  relates  itself  in  itself  to  Form ;  for  it  contains  transcended 
negativity,  and  is  Matter  only  by  virtue  of  this  determination. 
And  it  relates  itself  to  Form  as  to  an  Other  only  because  Form 
is  not  posited  in  it,  and  because  it  is  Form  only  in  itself.  It 
contains  Form  locked  in  itself,  and  is  absolute  susceptibility 
to  Form  only  because  it  absolutely  holds  it  and  because  this 
is  its  self-existent  determination.  Therefore,  Matter  must  be 
formed,  and  Form  must  materialize  itself — must  in  Matter  give 
itself  self-identity  or  persistence. 

2.  Hence  Form  determines  Matter,  and  Matter  is  determined 
by  Form. — Form  itself  is  absolute  self-identity,  and  thus  con- 
tains Matter:  Matter  in  its  pure  abstraction  or  absolute 
negativity  has  in  itself  Form :  and  thus  the  operation  of  Form 
upon  Matter  and  the  passive  determination  of  Matter  by 
Form,  are  really  only  the  cancellation  of  the  Show  of  their 
ipdifference  and  distinctness.  Thus  this  relation  of  determining 
is  the  mediation  of  each  with  itself  through  its  own  Not-being ; 
— but  these  two  mediations  are  one  movement  and  the  recon- 
struction of  their  original  identity — the  internalization  of  their 
externalixation. 

First,  Matter  and  Form  presuppose  one  the  other.  This 
means,  as  was  seen,  that  the  one  essential  unity  is  negative 
self-relation;  it  then  splits  asunder  into  essential  Identity, 
determined  as  indifferent  foundation,  and  essential  Difference 


8o  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

or  negativity,  as  determining  Form.  The  unity  of  Essence  and 
Form,  which  stand  opposed  as  Form  and  Matter,  is  Absolute 
Ground  which  determines  itself.  The  unity  becomes  a  Various,  and 
consequently  the  relation,  by  virtue  of  the  fundamental  identity 
of  the  Various  terms,  becomes  reciprocal  presupposition. 

Secondly,  Form,  as  independent,  is  in  any  case  self-tran- 
scending contradiction ;  but  it  is  also  posited  as  such,  for  it  is 
at  one  and  the  same  time  independent  and  essentially  related 
to  an  Other; — and  thus  it  transcends  itself.  It  is  itself  two-sided, 
and  therefore  this  transcendence  has  its  double  side :  first,  it  tran- 
scends its  independence  and  becomes  a  posited  entity,  something 
which  is  in  an  Other;  and  this  its  Other  is  Matter.  Secondly, 
it  transcends  its  determinateness  against  Matter,  its  relation  to 
it,  and  therewith  its  positedness,  and  thus  gives  itself  persistence. 
As  it  transcends  its  positedness,  this  its  Reflection  is  its  own 
identity,  into  which  it  passes;  but,  since  at  the  same  time  it 
casts  off  this  identity  and  opposes  it  to  itself  as  Matter,  this 
Reflection  of  positedness  in  itself  exists  as  union  with  a  Matter 
in  which  it  achieves  persistence.  Accordingly,  in  the  union  it 
coalesces  with  Matter  as  with  an  Other — according  to  that  first 
aspect  in  which  it  makes  itself  into  something  posited — and 
also  with  its  own  identity. 

The  activity  of  Form,  then,  by  which  Matter  is  determined, 
consists  in  a  negative  attitude  of  Form  towards  itself.  But 
conversely  it  thereby  is  in  a  negative  attitude  to  Matter  too. 
However,  this  process  of  determination  of  Matter  is  also  the 
proper  movement  of  Form  itself  Form  is  free  from  Matter, 
but  it  transcends  this  its  independence;  but  its  independence 
is  Matter  itself,  for  in  this  it  has  i^s  essential  identity.  When 
in  this  manner  Form  makes  itself  a  posited  entity,  this«  is 
identical  with  the  fact  that  it  makes  Matter  determinate. — 
But,  considered  from  the  other  side,  the  proper  identity  of 
Form  is  also  externalized,  and  Matter  is  its  Other;  and  in  so 
far  Matter  is  not  determined,  since  Form  transcends  its  own 
independence.  But  Matter  is  independent  only  as  against  Form : 
the  Positive  transcends  itself  in  the  same  measure  as  the 
Negative.  Thus,  as  Form  transcends  itself,  the  determinateness 
of  Matter,  which  it  has  as  against  Form,  vanishes ;  and  this 
determinateness  was  indeterminate  persistence. 

Now  this,  which  appears  as  the  activity  of  Form,  is  equally 


GROUND  81 

the  proper  movement  of  Matter  itself.  The  self-existent  deter- 
mination of  Matter,  or  its  Ought,  is  its  absolute  negativity. 
By  virtue  of  this,  Matter  relates  itself  absolutely  not  only  to 
Form  as  to  an  Other,  but  this  external  something  is  that  Form 
which  it  contains  locked  within  itself.  Matter  is  that  same 
inner  contradiction  which  Form  contains,  and  this  contra- 
diction, like  its  solution,  is  one  only.  But  Matter  is  contra- 
dictory in  itself,  for  as  indeterminate  self-identity  it  is  also 
absolute  negativity ;  it  therefore  transcends  itself  in  itself,  and 
its  identity  disintegrates  in  its  negativity;  the  latter  achieves 
its  persistence  in  the  former.  Thus,  when  Matter  is  determined 
by  Form  as  by  something  external,  it  reaches  its  determination ; 
and  externality  of  attitude  both  for  Form  and  for  Matter 
consists  in  this,  that  each  unity,  or  rather  their  original  unity, 
in  its  positing  also  presupposes ;  and  hereby  self-relation  becomes 
relation  to  self  as  transcended,  or  relation  to  Other. 

Thirdly,  their  original  unity  is  on  the  one  side  restored  by 
this  movement  of  Form  and  Matter,  and  on  the  other  it  has 
now  become  posited.  Matter  determines  itself,  and  equally 
this  determining  is,  for  it,  only  an  external  activity  of  Form. 
Conversely  Form  determines  only  itself,  or  has  in  itself  that 
Matter  which  it  determines,  just  as  much  as  it  is  related  to 
an  Other  in  its  determining ;  and  both — the  activity  of  Form 
and  the  movement  of  Matter — are  the  same ;  only  the  former 
is  an  activity,  that  is,  negativity  as  posited  determination,  and 
the  latter  is  movement  or  becoming,  negativity  as  self-existent 
determination.  Consequently  the  result  is  the  unity  of  Being- 
in-Self  and  of  positedness.  Matter  is  determined  as  such  or 
necessarily  has  a  Form;  and  Form  is  simply  material,  or 
persistent,  Form. 

Form,  in  so  far  as  it  presupposes  a  Matter  as  its  Other,  is 
finite.  It  is  not  Ground,  but  only  the  active  principle.  Similarly 
Matter,  in  so  far  as  it  presupposes  Form  as  its  Not-being,  is 
finite  Matter ;  nor  is  it  the  Ground  of  its  unity  with  Form,  but 
only  the  foundation  for  Form.  But  this  finite  Matter  as  well 
as  this  finite  Form  has  no  truth ;  each  relates  itself  to,  the  other, 
or  only  their  unity  is  their  truth.  These  two  determinations 
pass  back  into  this  unity  and  there  transcend  their  indepen- 
dence :  the  unity  thus  proves  itself  their  Ground.  Consequently 
Matter  is  Ground  of  its  determination  of  Form  only  in  so  far 

VOL.    II.  F 


82  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

as  it  is  not  Matter  as  Matter,  but  the  absolute  unity  of  Essence 
and  Form ;  and  similarly  Form  is  Ground  of  the  persistence 
of  its  determinations  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  such  a  unity.  But 
this  one  unity  as  absolute  negativity,  or,  more  closely  deter- 
mined, as  exclusive  un:ty,  is  in  its  Reflection  a  presupposing 
principle;  in  other  words,  it  is  one  activity,  in  positing  to 
preserve  itself  in  unity  as  posited,  and  also  to  repel  itself  from 
itself, — to  relate  itself  to  itself  as  itself  and  also  to  itself  as  to 
an  Other.  Or  again,  the  process  of  determination  of  Matter 
by  Form  is  the  mediation  of  Essence  as  Ground  with  itself  in 
a  unity,  through  itself  and  through  the  negation  of  itself. 

Formed  Matter,  or  persisting  Form,  is  now  not  only  this 
absolute  self-unity  of  Ground,  but  is  also  posited  unity.  It  is 
that  movement  which  has  been  considered,  in  which  Absolute 
Ground  has  exhibited  its  moments  simultaneously  as  self- 
transcending  and  hence  as  posited.  Or  again,  restored  unity 
in  its  coincidence  with  itself  has  equally  repelled  itself  from 
itself  and  determined  itself;  for  its  unity,  since  negation  created 
it,  is  also  negative  unity.  It  is  therefore  the  unity  of  Form  and 
Matter  as  their  foundation,  which  however  is  determinate; 
and  this  is  Formed  Matter,  which  nevertheless  is  indifferent 
to  both  Form  and  Matter,  since  they  are  transcended  and 
unessential.  It  is  Content. 


(c)  FORM  AND  CONTENT 

Form  at  first  stands  opposed  to  Essence,  and  is  then  Ground- 
relation  in  general;  its  determinations  are  Ground  and 
Grounded.  It  further  stands  opposed  to  Matter,  and  then  is 
Determining  Reflection;  and  its  determinations  are  Deter- 
mination of  Reflection  itself  and  its  persistence.  Finally  it 
stands  opposed  to  Content,  where  its  determinations  again  are 
itself  and  Matter.  What  before  was  the  self-identical — first 
Ground,  then  persistence  in  general,  and  lastly  Matter — passes 
beneath  the  domination  of  Form,  and  is  once  more  one  of 
its  determinations. 

Content,  first,  has  one  Form  and  one  Matter  which  belong 
to  it  and  are  essential  to  it;  it  is  their  unity.  But  this  unity 
also  is  determinate  or  posited  unity,  and  thus  it  stands  opposed 
to  Form ;  Form  constitutes  positedness,  and,  as  against  Content, 


GROUND  83 

is  the  unessential.  Content  is  therefore  indifferent  to  it; 
Form  includes  both  Form  as  such  and  Matter;  and  thus 
Content  has  a  Form  and  a  Matter  of  which  it  constitutes  the 
foundation,  while  they  are  to  it  mere  positedness. 

Secondly,  Content  is  that  which  is  identical  in  Form  and 
Matter,  which  would  make  these  into  merely  indifferent  ex- 
ternal determinations.  They  are  positedness  in  general,  which 
however  in  Content  has  passed  back  into  its  unity  or  Ground. 
Thus  the  self-identity  of  Content  is,  in  the  one  instance,  that 
identity  which  is  indifferent  to  Form;  but  in  the  other  it  is 
the  identity  of  Ground.  At  first  Ground  has  vanished  in  Content ; 
but  at  the  same  time  Content  is  the  negative  intro-Reflection 
of  the  determinations  of  Form ;  its  unity — which  so  far  is  that 
unity  only  which  is  indifferent  to  Form — hence  is  also  formal 
unity  or  the  Ground-relation  as  such.  Content  therefore  has  this 
for  essential  Form,  and  conversely  Ground  has  a  Content. 

The  Content  of  Ground  then  is  Ground  which  has  returned 
into  its  unity  with  itself;  Ground  first  is  Essence,  which  is 
self-identical  in  its  positedness;  in  so  far  as  it  is  various  and 
indifferent  to  its  positedness,  it  is  indeterminate  Matter;  but 
being  Content  it  is  also  Formed  identity,  and  this  Form 
becomes  Ground-relation  because  the  determinations  of  its 
opposite  are  posited  as  also  negated  in  Content. — Further, 
Content  is  determinate  in  itself;  not  only — as  is  Matter — as 
the  indifferent  in  general,  but  as  Formed  Matter,  so  that  the 
determinations  of  Form  have  a  material  and  indifferent  per- 
sistence. Content  is  on  the  one  hand  the  essential  self-identity 
of  Ground  in  its  positedness ;  on  the  other  it  is  posited  identity 
as  against  the  Ground-relation.  This  positedness,  which  is  in 
this*  identity  in  the  shape  of  determination  of  Form,  is  opposed 
to  free  positedness,  that  is,  to  Form  as  complete  relation  of 
Ground  and  Grounded;  this  Form  is  total  positedness,  which 
returns  into  itself,  and  therefore  the  former  is  only  positedness 
as  immediate,  or  determinateness  as  such. 

Hereby  Ground  has  constituted  itself  Determined  Ground, 
and  the  determinateness  it  has  here  is  twofold :  determinateness 
first  of  Form  and  secondly  of  Content.  The  former  is  that 
determinateness  whereby  it  is  altogether  external  to  Content, 
which  is  indifferent  to  this  relation.  The  latter  is  the 
minateness  of  the  Content  which  is  Content  of  Ground. 


84  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 


DETERMINED  GROUND 

(a)  FORMAL  GROUND 

Ground  has  a  determinate  Content.  It  appeared  that  the 
determinateness  of  Content  was  the  foundation  of  Form,  the 
simple  immediate  as  against  the  mediation  of  Form.  Ground 
is  identity  which  is  negatively  related  to  itself,  and  thus  con- 
stitutes itself  as  positedness.  It  is  negatively  related  to  itself  in 
that  it  is  self-identical  in  this  its  negativity;  this  identity  is 
foundation  or  Content,  which  in  this  manner  constitutes  the 
indifferent  or  positive  unity  of  the  Ground-relation  and  is  its 
mediator. 

At  this  point  the  determinateness  of  Ground  and  Grounded 
against  each  other  is  not  present  in  this  Content.  But,  further, 
mediation  is  negative  unity.  In  this  indifferent  foundation  the 
Negative  is  its  immediate  determinateness,  by  virtue  of  which 
Ground  has  a  determinate  Content.  But  also  the  Negative  is 
the  negative  self-relation  of  Form.  On  the  one  hand  what  is 
posited  cancels  itself  and  passes  back  into  its  Ground;  but 
Ground — which  is  essential  independence — relates  itself  nega- 
tively to  itself  and  makes  itself  a  posited  entity.  This  negative 
mediation  of  Ground  and  Grounded  is  the  peculiar  mediation 
of  Form  as  such,  or  formal  mediation.  Now  the  two  sides  of 
Form,  since  one  passes  over  into  the  other,  jointly  posit  them- 
selves in  one  identity  as  transcended,  and  this  identity  therefore 
they  also  presuppose.  It  is  determinate  Content,  and  formal 
mediation  relates  itself  thus  to  it  as  to  the  positive  mediator, 
and  through  itself.  Content  is  the  element  of  identity  in  both ; 
they  are  distinct,  but  each  in  its  distinctness  is  the  relation 
to  the  other,  and  so  Content  is  their  persistence,  and  the 
persistence  of  each  as  of  the  whole  itself. 

From  this  it  results  that  Determined  Ground  contains  what 
follows.  First,  a  determinate  Content  is  considered  from  two 
sides,  in  so  far  as  it  is  posited  (a)  as  Ground  or  (b)  as  Grounded. 
Content  itself  is  indifferent  to  this  Form :  in  both  it  is  one 
determination  only.  Secondly,  Ground  itself  is  moment  of 
Form  quite  as  much  as  is  that  which  it  posits:  this  is  their 


GROUND  85 

formal  identity.  It  is  indifferent  which  of  the  two  determinations 
is  given  priority;  whether  the  transition  is  made  from  Posited 
to  Other  (as  to  Ground)  or  from  Ground  to  Other  (as  to 
Posited).  Grounded,  considered  by  itself,  is  its  own  transcen- 
dence, and  thereby  it  makes  itself  on  the  one  hand  Posited 
and  also  is  positing  of  Ground.  Ground  as  such  is  the  same 
movement :  it  makes  itself  Posited,  and  thus  becomes  Ground 
of  something,  and  so  is  present  in  this  something  both  as 
Posited  and  also  only  as  Ground.  Posited  is  the  ground  why 
there  is  Ground,  and  conversely  Ground  hence  is  Posited. 
Mediation  begins  interchangeably  with  either  term ;  each  side 
is  Ground  as  much  as  Posited,  and  each  is  the  whole  mediation 
or  the  whole  Form. — This  whole  Form  further  is  self-identical, 
and  thus  is  itself  the  foundation  of  the  determinations  which 
are  these  two  sides  of  Ground  and  Grounded ;  and  so  Form 
and  Content  are  one  and  the  same  identity. 

This  identity  of  Ground  and  Grounded,  with  respect  to  both 
Content  and  Form,  makes  Ground  sufficient  (sufficiency  being 
restricted  to  this  relation) :  there  is  nothing  in  Ground  which 
is  not  in  Grounded,  and  nothing  in  Grounded  which  is  not 
in  Ground.  If  a  Ground  is  asked  for,  it  is  desired  to  see  in 
duplicate  the  same  determination  (namely  Content),  first  in 
the  form  of  Posited,  and  next  in  the  form  of  intro-reflected 
Determinate  Being,  or  Essentiality. 

Now  in  Determined  Ground,  Ground  and  Grounded  are  the 
whole  Form,  and  their  Content,  though  determinate,  is  one 
and  the  same ;  and,  in  so  far,  Ground  is  not  determined  really 
in  its  two  sides:  as  yet,  the  Content  of  each  is  the  same. 
Determinateness  here  is  simple,  and  has  not  yet  passed  into 
the  sides ;  and  Determined  Ground  is  here  present  only  in  its 
pure  Form  as  Formal  Ground. — Content  is  only  this  simple 
dpterminateness,  which  does  not  contain  in  itself  the  Form  of 
Ground-relation;  the  latter  therefore  is  self-identical  Content, 
and  indifferent  to  Form  as  Form  is  external  to  it.  It  is  Other 
than  Form. 

Observation 

If  in  reflecting  upon  definite  grounds  no  departure  is  made 
from  that  form  of  Ground  which  has  here  appeared,  then  the 
indication  of  a  ground  remains  mere  formalism  and  empty 


86  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

tautology,  which  expresses  in  the  form  of  intro-Reflection  or 
Essentiality  the  same  content  that  is  present  already  in  the 
form  of  immediate  Determinate  Being  considered  as  posited. 
Hence  such  a  statement  of  grounds  is  attended  with  the  same 
emptiness  as  speech  in  the  terms  of  the  Law  of  Identity.  Every 
science,  and  especially  physical  science,  is  full  of  tautologies 
of  this  kind,  which  in  a  manner  constitute  a  prerogative  of 
science. — For  instance,   the   ground   of  the   planets'   motion 
round  the  sun  is  sometimes  declare^  to  be  the  attractive  force 
between  earth  and  sun.  Nothing  is  here  stated  with  regard  to 
Content  except  what  the  phenomenon  contains,  namely  the 
relation  of  these  bodies  to  one  another  in  their  movement; 
only  it  is  expressed  in  the  form  of  intro-reflected  determination, 
or  force.  If  it  is  asked  what  kind  of  force  attractive  force  is, 
then  it  is  replied  that  it  is  the  force  which  causes  the  earth  to 
revolve  around  the  sun;  that  is,  it  has  precisely  the  same 
Content  as  that  Determinate  Being  of  which  it  is  supposed  to 
be  the  Ground ;  the  relation  of  earth  and  sun  with  respect  to 
movement  is  the  identical  foundation  of  Ground  and  Grounded. 
— If  a  certain  form  of  crystallization  is  explained  as  having 
its  ground  in  the  particular  arrangement  with  regard  to  one 
another  into  which  the  molecules   enter,   then  the  existing 
crystallization  is  this  arrangement  itself  which  is  given  as  the 
ground.    In   ordinary   life   these    aetiologies,    which    are   the 
privilege  of  the  sciences,  are  reckoned  to  be  what  they  are — 
empty  and  tautological  talk.  If  the  question  why  somebody 
goes  to  town  is  answered  by  the  ground  that  there  is  an 
attractive  force  in  the  town  which  draws  him  there,  this  style 
of  answer,  sanctioned  in  the  sciences,  is  counted  absurd. — 
Leibniz  charged  Newton's  attractive  force  with  being  just  such 
a  hidden  quality  as  was  used  by  the  schoolmen  for  purposes 
of  explanation.  But  it  ought  rather  to  be  charged  with  the 
opposite,  namely  that  it  is  a  quality  known  too  well;  for  it 
has  no  other  content  than  the  phenomenon  itself. — This  manner 
of  explaining  is  favoured  because  it  is  easy  to  see  and  under- 
stand; nothing  is  easier  to  see  and  understand,  for  instance, 
than  that  a  plant  has  its  ground  in  vegetative — that  is,  in  plant- 
productive— force.— It  could  be  called  an  occult  quality  only 
in  this  meaning,  that  the  ground  is  supposed  to  have  a  content 
different  from  that  which  is  to  be  explained;  but  no  such 


GROUND  87 

content  is  given.  In  so  far  as  a  ground,  such  as  is  demanded, 
is  not  given,  this  force  which  is  usea  in  the  explanation  is 
indeed  an  occult  ground.  But  this  formalism  serves  to  furnish 
an  explanation  no  more  than  the  nature  of  a  plant  is  under- 
stood when  I  say  that  it  is  a  plant  or  that  it  has  its  ground  in 
a  plant-productive  force;  and,  clear  as  this  proposition  is,  it 
may  yet  for  this  reason  be  called  an  exceedingly  occult  manner 
of  explanation. 

Secondly,  and  formally,  this  mode  of  explanation  contains 
the  two  opposite  directions  of  the  Ground-relation,  but  their 
determinate  relation  is  not  understood.  Ground  on  the  one 
hand  is  Ground  as  being  the  intro-reflected  Content-deter- 
mination of  the  existence  which  it  grounds ;  on  the  other  hand 
it  is  that  which  is  posited.  It  is  meant  to  make  this  existence 
intelligible ;  but  conversely  it  is  deduced  from  the  existence  and 
understood  by  its  help.  For  the  main  business  of  this  reflection 
is,  beginning  from  the  existent,  to  discover  grounds;  that  is, 
to  transform  immediate  existence  into  the  form  of  reflectedness ; 
and  Ground,  instead  of  being  in  and  for  itself  and  independent, 
thus  becomes  posited  and  derivative.  This  procedure  fits  it  to 
the  phenomenon  and  its  determinations  rest  upon  the  latter, 
so  that  this  naturally  flows  from  its  ground  smoothly  and  with 
a  fair  wind.  But  knowledge  has  not  been  advanced;  it  drifts 
in  a  distinction  of  form  which  this  very  procedure  reverses  and 
cancels.  One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  in  becoming  familiar 
with  the  sciences  in  which  this  method  prevails  is  due,  there- 
fore, to  this  perversion  of  premising  as  ground  what  is  in  fact 
derived,  of  passing  to  the  consequences  and  calling  them  in 
fact  only  the  ground  of  those  other  so-called  grounds.  The 
exposition  begins  with  grounds,  and  they  are  suspended  in 
mid-air  as  principles  and  primary  concepts;  they  are  simple 
determinations,  having  no  necessary  existence  in  and  for  them- 
selves ;  and  what  follows  is  supposed  to  be  grounded  on  them. 
Who  would  therefore  penetrate  into  this  sort  of  science  must 
begin  by  acquiring  these  grounds, — a  grievous  task  for  Reason, 
which  is  asked  to  count  what  is  groundless  as  ground-work. 
Those  fare  best  who,  without  much  thought,  accept  these 
principles  as  given,  and  thenceforward  use  them  as  fundamental 
rules  of  their  understanding.  Without  this  method  the  point 
of  departure  cannot  be  reached,  nor  can  any  progress  be  made 


88  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

without  it.  But  this  progress  soon  checks  itself;  for  the  obstruc- 
tion in  the  method  becomes  apparent  when  in  its  course  it 
attempts  to  exhibit  the  derivative,  which  in  fact  contains  the 
grounds  of  the  primary  assumptions.  It  is  seen  that  the  deduc- 
tions are  that  existence  from  which  the  ground  was  derived; 
and  therefore  this  relation  in  which  the  phenomenon  is  repre- 
sented leads  to  suspicions  of  the  manner  of  its  exposition ;  for 
it  does  not  show  itself  as  expressed  in  its  immediacy,  but  as 
a  voucher  for  the  ground.  But  the  ground  is  again  derived 
from  it,  and  therefore  one  requires  to  see  it  in  its  immediacy, 
in  order  that  it  may  be  made  the  standard  for  judging  the 
ground.  Hence,  in  such  an  exposition,  where  what  really  is 
fundamental  appears  as  derivative,  one  cannot  tell  how  to  take 
either  ground  or  phenomenon.  This  uncertainty  is  increased — 
especially  if  the  exposition  is  not  rigorously  consistent,  but 
rather  honest — by  the  fact  that  traces  and  emanations  of  the 
phenomenon  everywhere  betray  themselves,  suggesting  that 
the  phenomenon  contains  more  and  quite  other  things  than 
the  principles  do.  Confusion  becomes  still  greater  when  reflected 
and  merely  hypothetical  determinations  are  mingled  with 
immediate  determinations  of  the  phenomenon  itself,  and  the 
former  are  enunciated  as  though  they  belonged  to  immediate 
experience.  Many  who  approach  these  sciences  with  honest 
credulity  may  believe  that  molecules,  void  interstices,  cen- 
trifugal force,  aether,  the  single  ray  of  light,  electrical  and 
magnetic  matter,  and  many  other  such  things,  are  things  or 
relations  which  in  fact  are  present  in  perception  in  the  manner 
in  which  they  are  spoken  of— as  immediate  determinations  of 
existence.  They  serve  as  first  grounds  for  other  matter,  they 
are  pronounced  as  actualities  and  are  applied  with  all  con- 
fidence ;  and  they  are  allowed  to  count  as  such  on  trust  before 
it  is  realized  that  in  truth  they  are  determinations  deduced 
from  that  of  which  they  are  meant  to  be  the  grounds — 
hypotheses  and  figments  derived  by  an  uncritical  reflection. 
And  indeed  we  are  here  in  a  kind  of  witches'  circle,  where 
determinations  of  existence  and  of  reflection,  Ground  and 
Grounded,  phenomena  and  phantoms,  form  a  pullulating  and 
indiscriminate  mass  and  enjoy  equality  of  rank. 

In  the  course  of  this  formal  business  of  explaining  from 
grounds,  we  also  hear  it  repeated  (in  spite  of  all  explanations 


GROUND  89 

based  on  well-known  forces  and  classes  of  matter)  that  we  do 
not  know  the  inner  nature  itself  of  these  agents.  Clearly  this 
is  no  more  than  a  confession  that  this  process  of  finding  grounds 
is  in  itself  quite  inadequate,  and  that  something  quite  different 
from  such  grounds  is  required.  But  then  it  does  not  appear 
why  all  this  explanatory  trouble  has  been  taken,  and  why  this 
different  something  has  not  been  sought  for;  or  why  at  least 
such  explanations  were  not  left  on  one  side  and  no  more 
departures  made  from  the.  simple  facts. 

(b)  REAL  GROUND 

It  appeared  that  the  determinateness  of  Ground  is  (a)  deter- 
minateness  of  foundation  or  Content-determination,  and 
(b)  otherness  in  the  Ground-relation  itself — namely,  the  dis- 
tinctness between  its  Content  and  Form ;  the  relation  between 
Ground  and  Grounded  exhausts  itself  as  an  external  Form 
upon  Content,  which  is  indifferent  to  these  determinations. — 
But  in  fact  these  two  are  not  external  to  each  other;  for 
Content  is  this,  to  be  the  self-identity  of  Ground  in  Grounded 
and  of  Grounded  in  Ground.  The  side  of  Ground  has  turned 
out  to  be  itself  posited,  and  the  side  of  Grounded,  to  be  Ground : 
each  in  itself  is  this  identity  which  is  the  whole.  But  they  also 
belong  to  Form,  and  constitute  its  determinate  distinctness; 
and  therefore  each  in  its  determinateness  is  the  self-identity 
of  the  whole.  Thus  each  has  a  Content  different  as  against 
the  other. — Or,  considered  from  the  side  of  Content,  and 
because  Content  is  self-identity  as  of  the  Ground-relation,  it 
essentially  has  this  difference  of  Form  in  itself,  and  is  different 
as  Ground  from  what  it  is  as  Grounded. 

Ground  and  Grounded  have  a  different  Content :  and  herein 
the  Ground-relation  has  ceased  to  be  formal ;  the  regress  into 
Ground,  and  the  progress  out  of  Ground  to  the  Posited,  are 
no  longer  tautology:  Ground  is  realized.  Accordingly,  when 
a  ground  is  asked  for,  some  other  determination  of  Content 
is  really  required  for  Ground  than  that  the  ground  of  which 
is  demanded. 

This  relation  now  determines  itself  further.  For  in  so  far  as 
its  two  sides  are  different  Content,  they  are  indifferent  to  each 
other;  each  is  an  immediate  and  self-identical  determination. 


go  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Further,  when  they  are  related  to  each  other  as  Ground  and 
Grounded,  Ground  is  that  which  is  reflected  into  itself  in  the 
Other  as  in  its  positedness ;  that  Content,  accordingly,  which 
belongs  to  the  side  of  Ground,  is  also  in  Grounded ;  and  this, 
as  Posited,  has  its  self-identity  and  persistence  only  in  Ground. 
But  apart  from  this  Content  of  Ground,  Grounded  now  also 
has  its  peculiar  Content,  and  is  therefore  the  unity  of  a  twofold 
Content,  This  unity,  being  a  unity  of  distincts,  is  their  negative 
unity ;  but  these  are  determinations  of  Content  indifferent  to 
each  other,  and  therefore  it  is  an  empty  relation  lacking 
Content  in  itself,  and  not  their  mediation, — a  One  or  Some- 
thing which  is  their  external  link. 

The  Real  Ground-relation,  then,  has  this  double  implication. 
(a)  The  determination  of  Content,  which  is  Ground,  is  con- 
tinued with  itself  in  positedness,  so  that  it  constitutes  the  simple 
identical  element  in  Ground  and  Grounded;  Grounded  thus 
contains  Ground  completely  in  itself;  their  relation  is  un- 
diflferentiated  and  essential  solidity.  Hence  what  in  Grounded 
is  added  to  this  simple  Essence  is  only  an  unessential  Form  or 
external  determinations  of  Content;  and  these,  as  such,  are 
free  from  Ground  and  are  an  immediate  manifold.  Therefore 
the  former  Essential  is  not  the  Ground  of  this  latter  Unessential, 
nor  is  it  Ground  of  the  relation  of  the  two  in  Grounded.  It 
is  a  positively  identical  entity  which  is  immanent  in  Grounded, 
but  does  not  there  posit  itself  in  the  shape  of  formal  difference ; 
but,  as  self-relating  Content,  it  is  indifferent  positive  founda- 
tion, (b)  That  which  is  connected  with  this  foundation  in 
the  Something  is  an  indifferent  Content;  but  it  is  so  as  the 
unessential  side.  The  main  matter  is  the  relation  between 
foundation  and  unessential  manifold.  But  this  relation  to6  is 
not  Ground,  since  the  related  determinations  are  indifferent 
Content ;  one  of  these  is,  indeed,  determined  as  essential,  and 
the  other  only  as  unessential  or  posited  Content;  but  as  self- 
relating  Content  this  Form  is  external  to  both.  The  One  of  the 
Something,  which  constitutes  their  relation,  is  therefore  not 
Form-relation,  but  only  an  external  nexus  which  does  not 
contain  unessential  manifold  Content  as  posited;  it  too  con- 
sequently is  only  foundation. 

Ground  now,  determining  itself,  as  it  does,  as  Real  Ground, 
falls  apart  into  external  determinations  by  reason  of  the  variety 


GROUND  91 

of  Content  which  constitutes  its  reality.  The  two  relations, 
(a)  essential  Content  as  the  simple  immediate  identity  of 
Ground  and  Grounded,  and  (b)  the  Something  as  the  relation 
of  differentiated  Content,  are  two  different  foundations ;  the 
self-identical  form  of  Ground,  which  makes  the  same  entity 
first  essential  and  then  posited,  has  vanished:  the  Ground- 
relation  has  thus  become  external  to  itself. 

It  is  therefore  now  an  external  Ground  which  connects 

differentiated  Content  and  determines  what  is  Ground  and 

• 

what  that  which  is  posited  by  it:  this  determination  is  not 
included  in  the  Content  itself  of  either  term.  Real  Ground 
consequently  is  relation  to  other, — (a)  of  Content  to  other 
Content,  and  (b)  of  the  Ground-relation  itself  (Form)  to  other, 
namely  to  an  immediate  entity  not  posited  by  it. 

Observation 

The  formal  Ground-relation  contains  only  one  Content  for 
Ground  and  Grounded ;  in  this  identity  consists  its  necessity,  but 
also  its  tautology.  Real  Ground  contains  a  differentiated  Con- 
tent ;  but  here  the  contingent  and  external  nature  of  the  Ground- 
relation  enters  in.  On  the  one  hand,  that  which  is  considered 
as  essential,  and  hence  as  Ground-determination,  is  not  Ground 
of  the  other  determinations  which  are  connected  with  it.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  also  undetermined  which  of  several 
Content-determinations  of  a  concrete  thing  is  to  be  taken  as 
essential  and  as  Ground;  hence  the  choice  between  them  is 
free.  In  the  first  respect,  for  instance,  the  ground  of  a  house 
is  its  foundation ;  and  this  is  ground  by  reason  of  the  weight 
inherent  in  sensible  matter ;  and  this  weight  is  simply  identical 
in  the  ground  and  in  the  grounded  house.  Now  it  is  quite 
indifferent  to  the  heavy  itself  that  there  is  such  a  distinction 
in  heavy  matter  as  that  between  a  foundation  and  a  modi- 
fication which  is  to  be  distinguished  from  it  and  makes  it  into 
a  dwelling;  its  relation  to  the  other  content-determinations — 
purpose,  furnishing  of  house,  and  so  on — is  external  to  it ;  thus 
although  it  is  foundation,  it  is  not  ground  of  these.  Weight  is 
the  ground  for  a  house  standing  and  also  the  ground  for  a 
stone  falling ;  the  stone  has  in  itself  this  ground — weight ;  but 
it  is  external  to  weight  that  the  stone  has  a  further  content- 


92  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

determination,  which  makes  it  stone  and  not  merely  heavy. 
And  further  it  is  posited  through  something  Other  that  the  stone 
has  first  been  removed  from  the  body  upon  which  it  falls; 
and  time  and  space  and  their  relation,  movement,  are  also 
a  content  different  from  weight,  and  can  be  imagined  (as  the 
saying  is)  without  it,  whence  it  follows  that  they  are  not 
essentially  posited  by  it. — Weight  is  equally  the  ground  which 
makes  a  projectile  describe  the  trajectory  opposite  to  falling. — 
This  variety  of  determinations  of  which  it  is  the  ground  makes 
it  clear  that  an  Other  is  also  demanded  which  shall  make  it 
ground  of  this  or  of  some  other  determination. — 

If  it  is  said  of  Nature  that  it  is  the  ground  of  the  world, 
then  what  is  called  Nature  is,  first,  identical  with  the  world, 
and  the  world  is  nothing  but  Nature  itself.  But  secondly  they 
are  distinct,  so  that  Nature  is  rather  the  indeterminate,  or  at 
least  is  determinate  only  in  those  general  distinctions  which 
are  laws,  or  is  the  self-identical  essence  of  the  world ;  and  if 
Nature  is  to  be  the  world,  a  manifold  of  determinations 
is  added  externally.  But  these  are  not  grounded  in  Nature 
as  such;  Nature  indeed  is  indifferent  to  them,  for  they  are 
contingent. — The  same  relation  subsists  when  God  is  deter- 
mined as  the  ground  of  Nature.  As  ground  he  is  its  essence ; 
Nature  contains  this  essence  and  is  identical  with  it;  but  it 
has  a  further  manifold,  which  is  distinct  from  the  ground 
itself,  and  is  that  third  term  in  which  these  two  distinct  terms 
are  connected;  while  the  ground  is  ground  neither  of  the 
manifold  which  is  distinct  from  it,  nor  of  its  connexion  with 
this  manifold.  Nature  is  therefore  not  understood  through  God 
as  ground,  for  then  God  would  be  only  its  general  essence, 
which  does  not  contain  it  as  it  is,  as  determinate  essence  and 
Nature. 

Thus  it  is  a  formalism,  as  much  as  is  Formal  Ground  itself 
to  assign  Real  Grounds :  this  is  due  to  the  difference  of  content 
in  Ground  (or  properly  foundation)  and  in  that  which  is 
connected  with  it  in  Grounded.  In  Formal  Ground  the  self- 
identical  Cpntent  is  indifferent  to  Form;  and  this  is  also  the 
case  in  Real  Ground.  It  results  from  this  that  it  does  not 
contain  in  itself  which  of  the  manifold  determinations  is  to  be 
taken  as  essential.  A  Something  is  a  concretion  of  such  a 
manifold  of  determinations,  each  of  which  manifests  itself  in 


GROUND  93 

it  in  equal  permanence  and  persistence.  Each,  therefore,  as 
much  as  any  other,  can  be  determined  as  Ground,  that  is, 
as  essential,  the  other  consequently  in  comparison  with  it  being 
merely  posited.  Connected  with  this  is  what  was  mentioned 
before,  that  if  there  is  a  determination  which  in  one  case  is 
regarded  as  Ground  of  another,  it  does  not  follow  that  this 
other  will  also  be  posited  with  it  in  another  case  or  at  all. — 
Punishment  for  example  has  manifold  determinations — it  is 
retributive,  a  deterrent  example,  a  threat  used  by  the  law  as 
a  deterrent,  and  also  it  brings  the  criminal  to  himself  and  to 
a  better  frame  of  mind.  Each  of  these  different  determinations 
has  been  considered  the  Ground  of  punishment,  because  each 
is  an  essential  determination,  and  consequently  the  others  in 
distinction  from  it  are  determined  as  merely  contingent  in 
contrast  with  it.  But  that  determination  which  is  taken  as 
Ground  is  not  yet  the  whole  of  punishment ;  for  this  concretion 
also  contains  those  others,  which  are  only  attached  to  it  here, 
but  do  not  find  their  Ground  in  it. — Again,  an  official  has 
a  certain  aptitude  for  his  office,  has  certain  relationships  as 
an  individual,  has  such  and  such  acquaintances,  and  a  par- 
ticular character;  he  could  show  himself  in  such  and  such 
circumstances  and  occasions,  and  so  on.  Each  of  these 
characteristics  may  be,  or  be  regarded  as,  the  Ground  of  his 
holding  his  office  ;  they  are  a  various  Content  connected  in 
a  third  term ;  the  Form  (namely  the  fact  that  they  are  deter- 
mined as  essential  and  as  posited  relatively  to  one  another) 
is  external  to  it.  Each  of  these  characteristics  is  essential  to  the 
official  because  he  is  the  determinate  individual  that  he  is, 
by  virtue  of  them ;  in  so  far  as  the  office  can  be  considered 
as  an  external  and  posited  determination,  each  may  be  deter- 
mined as  Ground  against  it ;  but  also  and  conversely  they  may 
be  regarded  as  posited,  and  the  office  as  their  Ground.  Their 
actual  relation — that  is,  their  relation  in  the  individual  in- 
stance— is  a  determination  external  to  the  Ground-relation  and 
to  the  Content  itself;  that  which  imparts  to  them  the  form  of 
Ground  and  Grounded  is  a  third  factor. 

And  indeed  any  Determinate  Being  may  have  a  variety  of 
Grounds;  each  of  its  content-determinations  penetrates  the 
concrete  whole  in  its  self-identity  and  therefore  allows  itself 
to  be  considered  as  essential;  and  there  are  infinite  oppor- 


94  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

tunities  for  admitting  the  many  respects — that  is,  determinations 
which  lie  outside  the  matter  itself— in  the  contingent  nature 
of  the  connexion. — For  this  reason  it  is  also  contingent  whether 
a  Ground  has  this  or  that  consequence.  Moral  motives,  for 
example,  are  essential  determinations  of  the  ethical  being ;  but 
that  which  follows  fro.n  them  is  also  an  externality  foreign 
to  them,  which  both  follows  and  does  not  follow  from  them; 
it  is  added  to  them  only  through  a  third  term.  More  exactly 
this  must  be  taken  in  the  following  manner :  it  is  not  contingent 
to  the  moral  determination,  if  it  is  Ground,  that  it  has  a 
consequence  (or  Grounded) ;  but  it  is  contingent  whether  it 
is  made  Ground  or  not.  But  again  the  content  which  is  its 
consequence,  if  it  has  been  made  Ground,  is  of  external  nature, 
and  consequently  it  can  be  cancelled  immediately  by  some 
other  externality.  Hence  an  action  may,  or  may  not,  proceed 
from  a  moral  motive.  Conversely  an  action  may  have  more 
Grounds  than  one ;  as  a  concrete,  it  contains  manifold  essential 
determinations,  each  of  which  for  this  reason  may  be  called 
Ground.  Accordingly  argumentation — which  chiefly  consists 
in  the  search  for  and  indication  of  Grounds — is  an  endless 
meandering,  which  contains  no  ultimate  determination.  For 
any  and  every  thing  one  and  more  good  Grounds  can  be  given, 
and  they  can  also  be  given  for  its  opposite ;  and  there  may  be 
present  any  number  of  Grounds  from  which  nothing  follows. 
What  Sokrates  and  Plato  call  sophistry  is  just  argumentation 
from  Grounds,  to  which  Plato  opposes  the  contemplation  of 
the  Idea,  that  is,  the  Thing  in  and  for  itself  or  in  its  Notion. 
Grounds  are  taken  only  of  essential  content-determinations, 
relations,  and  respects,  and  of  these  each  thing,  as  well  as  its 
opposite,  contains  several ;  and  in  their  form  of  essentiality  'one 
is  as  valid  as  another;  it  does  not  contain  the  whole  volume 
of  the  thing,  and  therefore  is  a  one-sided  Ground,  and  each 
of  the  other  particular  sides  has  again  its  group  of  Grounds ; 
but  not  one  exhausts  the  thing  itself,  which  constitutes  their 
connexion  and  contains  them  all.  Not  one  is  sufficient  Ground, 
that  is,  the.  Notion. 

(c)  COMPLETE  GROUND 

i.  In  Real  Ground,   Ground  as  content  and  Ground  as 
relation  are  only  foundations,  The  former  is  only  posited  as 


GROUND  95 

essential  and  as  Ground;  the  relation  is  the  Something  of 
Grounded  as  the  indeterminate  substratum  of  a  varied  content, 
a  connexion  of  it  which  is  not  its  own  Reflection  but  a 
Reflection  external  and  therefore  only  posited.  Hence  the  Real 
Ground-relation  is  rather  Ground  as  transcended;  conse- 
quently this  relation  constitutes  rather  the  side  of  Grounded 
or  of  positedness.  But  as  positedness  Ground  itself  has  now 
passed  back  into  its  Ground;  it  is  now  a  Grounded,  and  has 
another  Ground.  Hereby  the  latter  determines  itself  in  such  a 
manner  that,  first,  it  is  that  which  is  identical  with  Real  Ground 
as  its  Grounded ;  in  this  determination  both  sides  have  one  and 
the  same  content;  and  the  two  content-determinations  and 
their  connexion  in  the  Something  are  also  within  the  new 
Ground.  But,  secondly,  the  new  Ground  into  which  that  merely 
posited  external  connexion  has  transcended  itself  is,  as  its 
intro-Reflection,  the  absolute  relation  of  the  two  content- 
determinations. 

Real  Ground  itself  has  passed  back  into  its  Ground ;  hence 
in  it  the  identity  of  Ground  and  Grounded,  or  Formal  Ground, 
is  restored.  The  resulting  Ground-relation  is  therefore  complete \ 
containing  both  Formal  and  Real  Ground,  and  mediating  the 
content-determinations,  which  in  the  latter  were  immediate  to 
each  other. 

2.  The  Ground-relation  has  now  determined  itself  more 
closely,  in  the  following  manner.  First,  something  has  a 
Ground;  it  contains  the  content-determination  (which  is 
Ground)  and  a  second  content-determination  which  is  posited 
by  Ground.  But  each  is  an  indifferent  content,  and  therefore 
the  one  is  not  in  itself  Ground,  nor  is  the  other  grounded  by 
the  first:  this  relation  exists  as  transcended  or  posited  in  the 
immediacy  of  content,  and  as  such  it  has  its  Ground  in  an 
other.  This  second  relation  is  distinct  only  formally  and  has 
the  same  content  as  the  first  (namely,  the  two  determinations 
of  content),  but  it  is  their  immediate  connexion.  But  the  con- 
nected terms  are  various  content  in  general,  and  therefore 
determinations  indifferent  to  each  other;  the  relation  there- 
fore is  not  their  truly  absolute  relation,  where  one  of  the 
determinations  would  be  that  which  is  self-identical  in  its 
positedness,  and  the  other  the  positedness  of  this  same  identity. 
In  fact,  however,  they  are  supported  by  a  Something  which 


96  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

constitutes  their  merely  immediate  (and  not  reflected)  relation ; 
hence  this  relation  is  only  relative  Ground  as  against  the 
connexion  in  the  other  Something.  The  two  Somethings  are, 
accordingly,  the  two  distinct  relations  of  content  which  have 
resulted.  They  stand  in  the  identical  Ground-relation  of  Form ; 
they  are  one  and  the  same  whole  Content,  namely,  the  two 
content-determinations  and  their  relation;  they  are  distin- 
guished only  by  the  manner  of  this  relation,  which  is  immediate 
in  the  one  and  posited  in  the  other,  so  that  one  is  distinguished 
from  the  other  only  formally,  as  Ground  and  Grounded. — 
Secondly,  this  Ground-relation  is  not  only  formal,  but  also  real. 
It  was  seen  above  that  Formal  Ground  passes  over  into  Real 
Ground ;  the  moments  of  Form  reflect  themselves  into  them- 
selves; they  are  an  independent  Content,  and  the  Ground- 
relation  also  contains  one  peculiar  Content  as  Ground  and 
one  as  Grounded.  The  Content  first  constitutes  the  immediate 
identity  of  the  two  sides  of  Formal  Ground :  they  thus  have 
one  and  the  same  Content.  But  it  also  has  Form  in  itself,  and 
is  thus  a  twofold  Content,  having  terms  in  the  relation  of 
Ground  and  Grounded.  Consequently  one  of  the  two  content- 
determinations  of  the  two  Somethings  is  determined  to  be 
not  only  common  to  them  in  an  external  comparison,  but  also 
to  be  their  identical  substratum  and  the  foundation  of  their 
relation.  As  against  the  other  content-determination  this  one 
is  the  essential  one,  and  is  its  Ground  while  the  other  is  posited 
— namely  in  the  Something  of  which  the  grounded  content- 
determination  is  the  relation.  In  the  first  Something,  which  is 
the  Ground-relation,  this  second  content-determination  too 
exists  immediately,  and  is  connected  in  itself  with  the  first.  The 
other  Something  on  the  other  hand  contains  only  the  one  in 
itself  as  that  in  which  it  is  immediately  identical  with  the  first 
Something;  and  it  contains  the  other  content-determination 
as  posited  in  it.  The  former  content-determination  is  its  Ground 
by  virtue  of  the  fact  that,  originally,  it  is  connected  with  the 
other  content-determination  in  the  first  Something. 

The  Ground-relation  of  the  content-determinations  in  the 
second  Something  is  thus  mediated  by  the  self-existent  relation 
of  the  first  Something.  The  argument  is  this  :  in  one  Something 
determination  B  is  in  itself  connected  with  determination  A ; 
therefore  in  the  second  Something,  to  which  immediately  only 


GROUND  97 

the  determination  A  belongs,  B  too  is  connected  with  A.  In 
the  second  Something  it  is  not  only  the  case  that  this  second 
determination  is  mediate,  but  also  that  its  immediate  deter- 
mination is  Ground;  the  mediation  takes  place  through  its 
original  relation  to  B  in  the  first  Something.  This  relation 
accordingly  is  the  Ground  of  Ground  Ay  and  the  whole  Ground- 
relation  in  the  second  Something  is  posited,  or  Grounded. 

3.  Real  Ground  appears  as  the  self-external  Reflection  of 
Ground ;  and  the  complete  mediation  of  the  latter  is  the 
restoration  of  its  self-identity.  But  hereby  this  has  also  acquired 
the  externality  of  Real  Ground,  and  the  formal  Ground-relation 
in  this  unity  of  itself  and  of  Real  Ground  is  self-positing  as 
much  as  it  is  self-transcending  Ground;  the  Ground-relation 
mediates  itself  with  itself  through  its  negation.  First,  Ground, 
as  the  original  relation,  is  a  relation  of  immediate  content- 
determinations.  As  essential  Form  the  Ground-relation  has 
for  sides  such  entities  as  are  transcended  or  are  moments. 
Consequently,  as  Form  of  immediate  determinations,  it  is 
self-identical  relation,  and  also  relation  of  its  negation;  accord- 
ingly it  is  Ground,  not  in  and  for  itself,  but  as  relation 
to  transcended  Ground-relation. — Secondly,  the  transcended 
relation  or  the  immediate,  which  in  the  original  and  posited 
relation  is  the  identical  foundation,  is  Real  Ground,  but  also 
not  in  and  for  itself;  but  it  is  posited  by  that  original  connexion, 
that  it  is  Ground. — 

The  Ground-relation  in  its  totality  is  thus  essentially  presup- 
posing Reflection ;  Formal  Ground  presupposes  the  immediate 
content-determination,  and  this,  as  Real  Ground,  presupposes 
Form.  Ground  is  then  Form  as  immediate  connexion;  but 
in  such  a  manner  that  it  repels  itself  from  itself  and  rather 
presupposes  immediacy,  and  therein  relates  itself  to  itself  as 
tp  an  Other.  This  immediate  is  the  content-determination, 
or  simple  Ground ;  but  as  sucji — as  Ground — it  too  is  repelled 
from  itself,  and  also  relates  itself  to  itself  as  to  an  Other. — 
Thus  the  total  Ground-relation  has  determined  itself  to  be 
conditioning  mediation. 


yS  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

G 

CONDITION 

(a)  THE  RELATIVELY  UNCONDITIONED 

I.  Ground  is  the  immediate  and  Grounded  the  mediate. 
But  Ground  is  Positing  Reflection ;  as  such  it  turns  itself  into 
positedness,  and  is  Presupposing  Reflection;  it  thus  relates 
itself  to  itself  as  to  a  transcended  term,  to  an  immediate 
through  which  it  is  mediated  itself.  This  mediation,  as  the 
progress  from  the  immediate  to  Ground,  is  not  an  External 
Reflection,  but,  as  was  seen,  the  immanent  activity  of  Ground, 
or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  Ground-relation  as  Reflec- 
tion into  self-identity  is  equally  essentially  self-externalizing 
Reflection.  The  immediate  to  which  Ground  relates  itself  as  to 
its  essential  presupposition  is  Condition;  Real  Ground  is  there- 
fore essentially  conditioned.  The  determinateness  which  it 
contains  is  the  other-being  of  itself. 

Condition  then,  is,  first,  an  immediate  and  manifold  Deter- 
minate Being.  Secondly,  this  Determinate  Being  is  related  to 
another,  to  something  which  is  Ground,  not  of  this  Being,  but 
in  another  respect ;  for  the  Determinate  Being  itself  is  imme- 
diate and  without  Ground.  According  to  the  former  relation 
it  is  a  posited  term;  the  immediate  Determinate  Being  is  to 
be  as  Condition  not  for  itself,  but  for  something  else.  But  at 
the  same  time  this  fact,  that  it  is  thus  for  an  other,  is  only 
a  positedness;  the  fact  that  it  is  posited  is  transcended  in  its 
immediacy,  and  a  Determinate  Being  is  indifferent  to  the  fact 
that  it  is  Condition.  Thirdly,  the  Condition  is  an  immediate 
in  such  a  manner  that  it  constitutes  the  presupposition  of 
Ground.  In  this  determination  it  is  the  Form-relation  of 
Ground,  which  has  passed  back  into  self-identity,  and  hence 
it  is  its  Content.  But  Content  as  such  is  but  the  indifferent 
unity  of  Ground  as  its  Form ;  without  Form  there  is  no  Content. 
And  it  further  sets  itself  free  from  Form  when  in  Complete 
Ground  the  Ground-relation  becomes  a  relation  external  to 
its  identity,  whereby  Content  acquires  immediacy.  Accordingly, 
in  so  far  as  Condition  is  that  in  which  the  Ground-relation  has 
its  self-identity,  it  constitutes  the  Content  of  Ground;  but 


GROUND  99 

Content  is  that  which  is  indifferent  to  this  Form,  and  therefore 
it  is  its  Content  only  in  itself,  or  such  an  entity  as,  so  far,  ought 
only  to  become  Content,  and  accordingly  constitutes  material 
for  Ground.  Posited  as  Condition,  Determinate  Being  has  the 
determination  (according  to  the  second  moment)  of  losing  its 
indifferent  immediacy  and  becoming  the  moment  of  an  Other. 
It  is  indifferent  to  this  relation  by  virtue  of  its  immediacy ; 
but,  in  so  far  as  it  enters  into  the  relation,  it  constitutes  the 
Being-in-Self  of  Ground,  and  is  for  it  the  Unconditioned.  In 
order  to  be  Condition,  it  has  its  presupposition  in  Ground  and 
is  itself  conditioned ;  but  this  determination  is  external  to  it. 

2.  Something  does  not  exist  by  virtue  of  its  Condition;  its 
Condition  is  not  its  Ground.   Condition  is  the  moment  of 
unconditioned  immediacy  for  Ground,  but  it  is  not  itself  that 
movement  and  positing  which  relates  itself  negatively  to  itself 
and  turns  itself  into  positedness.  Condition  therefore  is  opposed 
by  the  Ground-relation.  Apart  from  its  Condition,  Something 
also  has  a  Ground. — Ground  is  the  empty  movement  of  Reflec- 
tion because  the  presupposition   of  Reflection  is  immediacy, 
which  is,  accordingly,  external  to  it.  But  Reflection  is  the  whole 
Form  and  is  independent  mediation;  for  Condition  is  not  its 
Ground.  This  mediation,  in  so  far  as  it  is  positing,  is  self- 
related,  and  from  this  side  therefore  it  too  is  an  immediate 
and  an  Unconditioned:  it  presupposes  itself,  but  only  as  an 
externalized  or  transcended  positing,  while  it  is  in  and  for 
itself  what  it  is  according  to  its  determination. — Thus  the 
Ground-relation  has  a  peculiar  Content  as  against  the  Content 
of  Condition  in  so  far  as  it  is  independent  self-relation  and 
has  the  identity  of  Reflection  in  itself.  The  former  Content 
is  Content  of  Ground,  and  therefore  essentially  has  Form ;  but 
the  latter  is  only  immediate  material,  and  its  relation  to  Ground 
fe  also  external  to  it,  while  at  the  same  time  it  constitutes 
Ground's  Being-in-Self.  It  is,  therefore,  a  mixture  of  indepen- 
dent Content,  which  has  no  relation  to  the  Content  of  the 
Ground-determination,  and  of  such  content  as  is  absorbed  in  the 
latter  and,  as  its  material,  is  designed  to  become  its  moment. 

3.  The  two  sides  of  the  whole — Condition  and  Ground — are, 
then,  indifferent  and  unconditioned  one  against  the  other ;  the 
one  since  it  is  the  unrelated  term  to  which  the  relation  in 
which  it  is  Condition  is  external,  and  the  other  as  the  relation 


too  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

or  Form  for  which  the  determinate  existence  of  Condition  is 
only  a  kind  of  material  or  passive  substratum,  whose  Form 
(which  it  has  in  it  for  itself)  is  an  unessential  one.  And  further, 
both  are  mediate.  Condition  is  the  Being-in-Self  of  Ground ; 
it  is  so  much  essential  moment  of  the  Ground-relation  that 
it  is  the  simple  identity  of  this  with  itself.  But  this  is  also 
transcended;  this  Being-in-Self  is  only  posited;  immediate 
Determinate  Being  is  indifferent  to  the  fact  that  it  is  Condition. 
Thus  the  fact  that  Condition  is ,  Being-in-Self  for  Ground 
constitutes  that  side  of  it  which  makes  it  mediate.  And  in  the 
same  manner  the  Ground-relation  in  its  independence  has  a 
presupposition,  and  its  Being-in-Self  is  external  to  it. — Thus 
each  of  the  two  sides  is  the  contradiction  of  indifferent  imme- 
diacy and  of  essential  mediation,  both  in  one  relation, — or 
the  contradiction  of  independent  persistence  and  the  determi- 
nation of  being  only  moment. 

(b)  THE  ABSOLUTELY  UNCONDITIONED 

The  two  Relatively  Unconditioned  terms  at  first  show  each 
into  the  other;  the  Condition,  as  immediate,  into  the  Form- 
relation  of  Ground,  and  the  Form-relation  into  immediate 
Determinate  Being  as  its  positedness ;  but  while  its  Other  shows 
in  each,  each  is  also  independent  and  has  its  peculiar  content. 

Condition  at  first  is  immediate  Determinate  Being ;  its  Form 
has  two  moments, — positedness,  where  as  Condition  it  is  the 
material  and  moment  of  Ground,  and  Being-in-Self,  where 
it  constitutes  the  essentiality  of  Ground  or  its  simple  intro- 
Reflection.  Both  sides  of  Form  are  external  to  immediate 
Determinate  Being,  since  that  is  transcended  Ground-relation. 
— But,  first,  Determinate  Being  in  itself  is  no  more  than  the 
fact  that  it  transcends  itself  in  its  immediacy  and  perishes1. 
And  indeed  Being  is  only  the  Becoming  of  Essence ;  it  is  its 
essential  nature  to  become  Posited  and  Identity,  which  latter 
becomes  immediate  by  negation  of  itself.  Accordingly  the 
Form-determinations  of  Positedness  and  of  self-identical  Being- 
in-Self — the  Form  by  virtue  of  which  immediate  Determinate 
Being  is  Condition — are  therefore  not  external  to  it :  it  is  this 
Reflection  itself.  Secondly,  as  Condition,  Being  is  now  posited 
as  that  which  it  is  essentially,  that  is,  as  moment,  and  necessarily 


GROUND  101 

as  moment  of  an  Other,  and  also  as  the  Being-in-Self  likewise 
of  an  Other ;  but  in  itself  it  exists  only  by  virtue  of  its  own 
negation,  that  is,  of  Ground  and  of  its  self-transcendent  and 
consequently  self-presupposing  Reflection ;  the  Being-in-Self  of 
Being  is,  accordingly,  only  posited.  This  Being-in-Self  of  Con- 
dition has  two  sides :  it  is,  first,  its  essentiality,  as  essentiality 
of  Ground,  and,  secondly,  the  immediacy  of  its  Determinate 
Being.  Or,  rather,  both  are  the  same.  Determinate  Being  is 
an  immediate,  but  the  immediacy  is  essentially  what  is  mediated 
— mediated  by  self-transcending  Ground.  It  is  immediacy 
mediated  by  self-transcending  mediation;  but,  as  such,  it  is 
also  the  Being-in-Self  of  Ground  and  its  Unconditioned ;  while 
this  Being-in-Self  in  turn  is  equally  only  moment  or  positedness, 
for  it  is  mediated. — Condition  therefore  is  the  whole  Form  of 
the  Ground-relation;  it  is  its  presupposed  Being-in-Self,  but 
for  this  reason  it  is  itself  a  positedness ;  and  its  immediacy  is 
this,  that  it  becomes  positedness,  and  so  repels  itself  from  itself 
in  such  a  manner  that  it  perishes  but  is  also  Ground,  which 
Ground  becomes  positedness  and  hence  also  Grounded;  these 
two  are  one  and  the  same. 

Similarly,  in  Conditioned  Ground,  Being-in-Self  is  not  only 
the  showing  in  it  of  an  Other.  This  Ground  is  the  independent, 
that  is,  the  self-relating.  Reflection  of  positing,  and  accordingly 
it  is  self-identical ;  in  other  words  it  is  in  itself  its  Being-in-Self 
and  its  Content.  But  also  it  is  presupposing  Reflection:  it 
relates  itself  negatively  to  itself,  and  opposes  its  Being-in-Self 
to  itself  as  Other  to  it ;  and  Condition,  according  to  its  moment 
of  Being-in-Self  and  also  according  to  its  moment  of  immediate 
Determinate  Being,  is  the  proper  moment  of  the  Ground- 
relation;  immediate  Determinate  Being  exists  essentially  only 
by  virtue  of  its  Ground,  and  is  its  own  moment  in  so  far  as  it 
*£  presupposition.  Ground  therefore  is  equally  the  whole. 

Accordingly  there  is  here  only  one  whole  of  Form,  and, 
equally,  only  one  whole  of  Content.  For  the  peculiar  Content 
of  Condition  is  essential  Content  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  the 
self-identity  of  Reflection  in  Form,  or  in  so  far  as  it0is  Ground- 
relation  as  being  this  immediate  Determinate  Being  in  itself. 
This  latter  further  is  Condition  only  by  virtue  of  the  pre- 
supposing Reflection  of  Ground;  it  is  the  self-identity  of 
Ground,  or  it  is  its  Content,  to  which  it  opposes  itself.  Hence 


102  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Determinate  Being  is  not  merely  formless  material  for  the 
Ground-relation :  it  has  this  Form  in  itself,  and  therefore  it  is 
Formed  Matter;  and  also,  since  in  its  identity  with  it  it  is 
indifferent  to  it,  it  is  Content.  Finally,  it  is  the  same  Content 
which  Ground  has;  for,  precisely,  it  is  Content,  and  Content 
is  that  which  is  self-identical  in  the  Form-relation. 

The  two  sides  of  the  whole,  Condition  and  Ground,  are, 
then,  one  essential  unity,  equally  as  Content  and  as  Form. 
Each  passes  into  the  other  through  itself,  or,  being  a  Reflection, 
each  posits  itself  as  transcended,  relates  itself  to  this  its  negation, 
and  thus  presupposes  the  other.  But  at  the  same  time  this  is 
only  one  Reflection  of  both,  and  therefore  their  presupposing 
also  is  only  one ;  and  the  reciprocity  of  this  rather  passes  over 
into  that  state  where  they  presuppose  their  one  identity  as 
their  persistence  and  their  foundation.  It  is  this  identity — their 
common  Content  and  unity  of  Form — which  is  the  truly 
Unconditioned;  it  is  the  Fact  in  itself. — Condition,  as  resulted 
above,  is  only  the  Relatively  Unconditioned.  Generally,  there- 
fore, it  is  itself  looked  upon  as  a  Conditioned ;  a  new  condition 
is  asked  for,  and  thus  the  familiar  infinite  progress  from  con- 
dition to  condition  is  initiated.  The  question  now  is  why  a 
new  condition  to  any  one  condition  is  asked  for,  that  is,  why 
this  condition  is  taken  as  conditioned.  The  answer  is,  because 
it  is  indifferently  any  finite  Determinate  Being.  But  this  is  a 
further  determination  of  Condition,  which  is  not  contained 
in  its  concept.  Condition  as  such  is  a  Conditioned  because 
it  is  posited  Being-in-Self ;  it  is  therefore  transcended  in  the 
Absolutely  Unconditioned. 

Now  this  contains  in  itself  the  two  sides — Condition  and 
Ground — as  its  moments ;  it  is  the  unity  into  which  these  have 
returned.  They  together  constitute  its  Form  or  positedness. 
The  Unconditioned  Fact  is  Condition  of  both ;  but  it  is  Absolute 
Condition,  that  is,  Condition  which  is  itself  Ground. — Now  as 
Ground  it  is  that  negative  identity  which  has  repelled  itself 
into  these  two  moments ; — first,  into  the  shape  of  transcended 
Ground-relation,  an  immediate,  self-external  multiplicity  which 
is  without  unity,  which  relates  itself  to  Ground  as  an  Other 
to  it  and  at  the  same  time  constitutes  its  Being-in-Self;  and 
secondly  into  the  shape  of  an  internal  and  simple  Form,  which 
is  Ground,  but  relates  itself  to  the  self-identical  immediate  as 


GROUND  103 

to  an  Other  and  determines  it  as  Condition, — that  is,  it  deter- 
mines this  its  In-itself  as  its  own  moment. — These  two  sides 
presuppose  the  totality  in  such  a  manner  that  the  totality  is 
that  which  posits  them.  Conversely,  because  they  presuppose 
the  totality,  the  totality  in  turn  appears  to  be  conditioned  by 
them;  and  the  Fact  appears  to  arise  from  its  Condition  and 
from  its  Ground.  But  these  two  sides  have  shown  themselves 
to  be  identity,  and  therefore  the  relation  between  Condition 
and  Ground  has  vanished ^they  have  been  reduced  to  a  Show; 
the  Absolutely  Unconditioned  in  its  movement  of  positing  and 
presupposing  is  only  that  movement  in  which  this  Show  cancels 
itself.  The  activity  of  the  Fact  is,  to  condition  itself  and  to 
oppose  itself  as  Ground  to  its  Conditions ;  but  its  relation  as 
relation  between  Conditions  and  Ground  is  a  Showing  within 
itself,  and  its  attitude  to  them  is  its  collapse  into  itself. 

(c)  TRANSITION  OF  THE  FACT  INTO  EXISTENCE 

The  Absolutely  Unconditioned  is  Absolute  Ground  which 
is  identical  with  its  Condition :  the  immediate  Fact,  as  being 
of  truly  essential  nature.  As  Ground  it  is  in  a  negative  relation 
to  itself;  it  makes  itself  positedness,  but  a  positedness  which 
is  Reflection  perfected  in  its  sides  and  Form-relation  self- 
identical  in  them;  for  such  is  the  concept  of  it  which  was 
reached.  Accordingly  this  positedness  is,  first,  transcended 
Ground,  or  the  Fact  as  the  reflectionless  immediate;  this  is 
the  side  of  Conditions.  This  side  is  the  totality  of  the  deter- 
minations of  the  Fact — or  the  Fact  itself,  but  cast  out  into  the 
externality  of  Being ;  it  is  the  re-established  sphere  of  Being. 
In  Condition,  Essence  dismisses  the  unity  of  its  intro-Reflection 
as  an  immediacy,  which  immediacy  now,  however,  has  the 
determination  that  it  is  conditioning  presupposition  and  essen- 
tially constitutes  one  only  of  the  sides  of  Essence.  The  Con- 
ditions are  the  whole  content  of  the  Fact  because  they  are 
the  Unconditioned  in  the  form  of  formless  Being.  But  by 
reason  of  this  form  they  have  another  shape  besides  that  of 
determinations  of  the  content  as  it  is  in  the  Fact  as  such.  They 
appear  as  a  manifold  lacking  unity  and  mixed  with  non- 
essentials  and  other  elements  which  do  not  belong  to  the 
sphere  of  Determinate  Being  in  so  far  as  thJs  constitutes  the 


104  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Conditions  of  this  particular  Fact. — The  sphere  of  Being  itself 
is  Condition  for  the  absolute  and  unrestricted  Fact.  Ground, 
which  passes  back  into  itself,  posits  it  as  the  first  immediacy, 
and  relates  itself  to  it  as  to  its  Unconditioned.  This  immediacy, 
as  transcended  Reflection,  is  Reflection  within  the  element  of 
Being,  which  thus,  as  such,  develops  into  a  whole;  Form 
continues  to  grow  rank  as  determinateness  of  Being,  and  thus 
appears  as  a  Content  which  is  manifold  and  both  distinct  from 
and  indifferent  to  the  Determination  of  Reflection.  The 
Unessential,  which  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  Being,  and  is  cast 
off  by  it  in  so  far  as  it  is  Condition,  is  the  determinateness  of 
immediacy,  in  which  the  unity  of  Form  is  submerged.  This 
unity  of  Form  as  the  relation  of  Being  is,  in  Being,  first, 
Becoming — the  transition  of  one  determinateness  of  Being  into 
another.  But  further  the  Becoming  of  Being  is  its  Becoming 
of  Essence  and  the  regress  into  Ground.  In  truth,  therefore, 
that  Determinate  Being  which  constitutes  the  Conditions  is 
not  determined  to  be  Condition  by  an  Other,  nor  used  as 
material  by  an  Other ;  but  by  itself  it  makes  itself  the  moment 
of  an  Other. — Further,  in  its  Becoming  it  does  not  begin  with 
itself  as  the  true  first  term  and  immediate :  its  immediacy  is 
only  that  which  is  presupposed,  and  the  movement  of  its 
Becoming  is  the  activity  of  Reflection  itself.  Consequently  the 
truth  of  Determinate  Being  is  that  it  is  Condition ;  its  imme- 
diacy is  due  only  to  the  Reflection  of  the  Ground-relation, 
which  posits  itself  as  transcended.  Like  immediacy,  therefore, 
Becoming  is  only  the  Show  of  the  Unconditioned,  when  this 
latter  presupposes  itself  and  therein  has  its  Form;  and  con- 
sequently the  immediacy  of  Being  essentially  is  only  moment 
of  Form. 

The  Ground-relation  as  such  is  the  other  side  of  this  Showing 
of  the  Unconditioned;  this  relation  is  determined  as  Form 
against  the  immediacy  of  the  Conditions  and  of  Content.  But 
it  is  the  Form  of  the  absolute  Fact,  which  has  in  itself  the  self- 
unity  of  its  Form  (or,  its  Content),  and,  determining  it  as 
Condition,  .transcends  its  variety  in  this  positing  and  makes 
it  a  moment;  and,  conversely,  as  essenceless  Form  it  achieves 
the  immediacy  of  persistence  in  this  self-identity.  The  Reflection 
of  Ground  transcends  the  immediacy  of  the  Conditions  and 
relates  them  so  that  they  become  moments  in  the  unity  of  the 


GROUND  105 

Fact.  But  the  Conditions  themselves  are  presupposed  by  the 
unconditioned  Fact,  which  thus  transcends  its  own  positing; 
in  other  words,  its  own  positing  equally  and  immediately 
constitutes  itself  Becoming. — The  two  are  therefore  one  unity; 
the  proper  movement  of  the  Conditions  is  Becoming,  regress 
into  Ground  to  the  positing  of  Ground ;  but  Ground  as  posited 
— that  is,  as  transcended — is  the  immediate.  Ground  relates 
itself  negatively  to  itself,  constitutes  itself  positedness,  and 
grounds  the  Conditions.  It  jls  thus  that  immediate  Determinate 
Being  is  determined  as  a  posited,  and  in  this  very  fact  Ground 
transcends  it  and  only  now  constitutes  itself  Ground. — This 
Reflection  then  is  the  mediation  with  itself  of  the  unconditioned 
Fact  through  its  negation.  Or  rather,  the  Reflection  of  the 
Unconditioned  at  first  is  presupposition  (but  this  self-transcen- 
dence is  an  immediately  determining  positing) ;  secondly  it  is 
here  immediately  transcendence  of  what  is  presupposed,  and 
is  determination  out  of  itself;  and  thus  this  determining  has 
again  become  transcendence  of  positing  and  is  in  itself  Becoming. 
Here  mediation — the  return  to  self  through  negation — has 
vanished ;  it  is  simple  Reflection  showing  in  itself,  and  ground- 
less absolute  Becoming.  The  movement  of  the  Fact,  when  it 
is  posited  (a)  by  its  Conditions  and  (b)  by  its  Ground,  is 
nothing  more  than  the  disappearance  of  the  show  of  mediation. 
Accordingly,  when  the  Fact  is  posited,  this  process  is  an 
emergence,  the  simple  entry  into  Existence,  pure  movement 
of  the  Fact  to  itself. 

When  all  the  Conditions  of  a  Fact  are  present,  it  enters  into 
Existence.  The  Fact  is  before  it  exists:  it  is,  first,  as  Essence 
or  as  Unconditioned;  secondly,  it  has  Determinate  Being,  or 
is  determinate  in  the  twofold  manner  already  considered — in 
its  Conditions  and  in  its  Ground  respectively.  In  the  former 
it  gave  itself  the  form  of  external  and  groundless  Being,  since, 
being  absolute  Reflection,  it  is  negative  relation  to  itself  and 
makes  itself  its  own  presupposition.  This  presupposed  Uncon- 
ditioned is,  therefore,  the  groundless  immediate,  whose  Being 
is  nothing  except  the  mere  fact  of  its  existence  as  groundless. 
When  all  the  Conditions  of  the  Fact  are  present,  then,  that 
is,  when  the  totality  of  the  Fact  is  posited  as  the  groundless 
immediate,  this  scattered  manifold  internalizes  itself  in  itself. — 
The  whole  Fact  must  be  there  in  its  Conditions ;  or,  all  Con- 


io6  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

ditions  belong  to  its  Existence,  for  all  constitute  its  Reflection ; 
in  other  words.  Determinate  Being,  since  it  is  Condition,  is 
determined  by  Form;  its  determinations  are  consequently 
determinations  of  Reflection,  and  the  positing  of  one  essentially 
involves  the  positing  of  the  others. — The  internalization  of  the 
Conditions  is,  so  far,  the  destruction  of  immediate  Determinate 
Being,  and  the  Becoming  of  Ground.  But  thus  Ground  becomes 
posited  Ground, — that  is,  by  as  much  as  it  is  Ground,  by  so 
much  it  is  transcended  as  GrouncJ  and  is  immediate  Being, 
Therefore,  when  all  the  Conditions  of  the  Fact  are  present, 
they  transcend  themselves  as  immediate  Determinate  Being 
and  presupposition;  and  equally  Ground  transcends  itself. 
Ground  manifests  itself  merely  as  a  Show  which  immediately 
vanishes ;  accordingly  this  emergence  is  the  tautological  move- 
ment of  the  Fact  towards  itself,  and  its  mediation  by  the 
Conditions  and  by  Ground  is  the  disappearance  of  both.  The 
emergence  into  Existence  is  therefore  immediate,  but  im- 
mediate in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  mediated  only  by  the 
disappearance  of  mediation. 

The  Fact  emerges  out  of  Ground.  It  is  not  grounded  in  or 
posited  by  Ground  in  such  a  manner  that  Ground  remains  as 
substratum:  the  process  of  positing  is  the  egress  of  Ground 
towards  itself  and  its  simple  disappearance.  The  union  with 
the  Conditions  gives  to  Ground  external  immediacy  and  the 
moment  of  Being.  But  Ground  does  not  obtain  these  as  some- 
thing external,  nor  by  means  of  an  external  relation :  but  as 
Ground  it  turns  itself  into  positedness ;  in  positedness  its  simple 
essentiality  coincides  with  itself,  and  in  this  self-transcendence 
is  the  disappearance  of  its  difference  from  its  positedness ;  that 
is,  it  is  simple  essential  immediacy.  Ground  therefore  does  not 
remain  over  as  different  from  Grounded,  but  the  truth  of 
Grounding  is  that  Ground  there  unites  itself  with  itself  and 
that  therefore  its  Reflection  into  other  is  its  intro-Reflection. 
Hence  the  Fact,  as  it  is  the  Unconditioned,  so  also  is  the  Ground- 
less, and  emerges  from  Ground  only  in  so  far  as  Ground  has 
perished  and  is  no  Ground:  it  emerges  from  the  Groundless, 
that  is,  from  its  proper  essential  negativity  or  pure  Form. 

This  immediacy  mediated  by  Ground  and  Condition,  and 
self-identical  by  the  transcendence  of  mediation,  is  Existence. 


SECTION    TWO 
APPEARANCE 

ESSENCE  must  appear. 

Being  is  absolute  abstraction ;  and  this  negativity  is  not  external 
to  it:  it  is  Being  and  nothing  but  Being  only  as  being  this 
absolute  negativity.  It  is  this  which  causes  Being  to  be  only 
as  self-transcending  Being,  so  that  it  is  Essence.  Conversely, 
however.  Essence,  as  simple  self-identity,  is  also  Being.  The 
Doctrine  of  Being  contains  the  primary  proposition  that  Being 
is  Essence.  The  second  proposition — Essence  is  Being — constitutes 
the  content  of  the  first  section  of  the  Doctrine  of  Essence.  Now 
this  Being,  which  Essence  constitutes  itself  to  be,  is  Essential 
Being,  or  Existence;  it  is  a  perfected  egress  from  negativity 
and  internality. 

Thus  Essence  appears.  Reflection  is  the  showing  of  Essence 
into  self.  The  Determinations  of  Reflection  are  included  in  unity 
simply  as  posited  or  transcended;  in  other  words,  Reflection 
is  Essence  immediately  self-identical  in  its  positedness.  But  this 
Essence  is  Ground,  and  as  such  really  determines  itself  through 
its  self-transcending  or  self-reverting  Reflection.  Further,  this 
determination,  or  the  otherness  of  the  Ground-relation,  tran- 
scends itself  in  the  Reflection  of  Ground  and  becomes  Existence ; 
and  herein  the  determinations  of  Form  obtain  an  element  of 
independent  persistence.  Their  Show  perfects  itself  so  as  to  be 
Appearance. 

Essentiality  which  has  progressed  to  immediacy  is,  so  far, 
Existence,  and  existing  entity  or  Thing, — as  undistinguished  unity 
of  Essence  with  its  immediacy.  The  Thing  contains  Reflection, 
but  at  this  point  the  negativity  of  Reflection  has  become 
extinguished  in  the  immediacy  of  the  Thing;  however,  the 
Ground  of  the  Thing  essentially  is  Reflection,  and  therefore  its 
immediacy  transcends  itself:  the  Thing  becomes  a  positedness. 

Thus  the  Thing,  secondly,  is  Appearance.  Appearance  is  what 
the  Thing  is  in  itself,  or  its  truth.  But  this  Existence,  which 
is  merely  posited  and  reflected  into  otherness,  is  equally  a 


io8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

passing  beyond  itself  in  its  infinity:  the  intro-reflected  self- 
existent  world  stands  opposed  to  the  world  of  Appearance. 

Apparent  and  Essential  Being  are,  however,  absolutely 
related  to  each  other.  Thus,  thirdly,  Existence  is  essential 
relation:  the  Apparent  demonstrates  the  Essential,  and  this 
latter  is  in  its  Appearance. — The  relation  is  the  union — imper- 
fect as  yet — of  Reflection  into  otherness  and  intro-Reflection : 
their  perfect  interpenetration  is  Actuality. 


CHAPTER  I 
EXISTENCE 

THE  proposition  of  Ground  states  that  whatever  is  has  a 
Ground,  or  is  posited  or  mediated ;  similarly  a  proposition  of 
Existence  should  be  formulated  and  expressed  in  these  terms : 
Whatever  is,  exists.  The  truth  of  Being  is,  not  that  it  is  a  primary 
immediate,  but  that  it  is  Essence  which  has  emerged  into 
immediacy. 

It  was  further  said,  Whatever  exists  has  a  Ground  and  is  con- 
ditioned; but  it  must  also  be  added  that  it  has  no  Ground  and  is 
unconditioned.  For  Existence  is  that  immediacy  which  emerged 
from  the  transcendence  of  the  mediation  whose  relating 
activity  operates  by  means  of  Ground  and  Condition,  and  in 
emerging  it  transcends  this  emergence. 

In  so  far  as  this  is  the  proper  place  to  mention  the  proofs 
of  the  existence  of  God,  it  must  first  be  recalled  that  besides 
(a)  immediate  Being  and  (b)  Existence  (Being  which  emerges 
from  Essence)  there  is  a  third  Being  which  emerges  from  the 
Notion — Objectivity. — Demonstration  in  general  is  mediated 
cognition.  The  various  kinds  of  Being  demand  or  contain  each 
its  own  kind  of  mediation ;  consequently  the  nature  of  demon- 
stration too  is  different  for  each.  The  ontological  proof  attempts 
to  begin  from  the  concept;  its  basis  is  the  sum-total  of  all 
realities,  and  it  proceeds  to  subsume  existence  under  reality. 
It  is  therefore  that  kind  of  mediation  which  is  Syllogism :  this 
as  yet  need  not  here  be  considered.  Kant's  objections  to  this 
have  already  been  considered  above,  and  it  was  remarked  that 
by  Existence  Kant  understands  determinate  existence,  whereby 
something  enters  into  the  fabric  of  the  totality  of  experience, 
that  is,  into  the  determination  of  an  otherness  and  into  the 
relation  to  other.  As  existing,  something  is  mediated  through 
an  other ;  and  existence  in  general  is  the  side  of  its  mediation. 
Now  what  Kant  calls  concept — namely  something  taken  as 
related  simply  to  itself,  or  image  as  such — does  not  contain 
its  mediation;  in  abstract  self-identity  opposition  is  omitted. 


i  io  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

It  would  be  the  business  of  the  ontological  proof  to  demonstrate 
that  the  absolute  concept — namely  the  concept  of  God — reaches 
determinate  existence,  or  mediation,  or  how  simple  Essence 
mediates  itself  with  mediation.  This  is  effected,  as  was  pointed 
out,  by  the  subsumption  of  existence  under  its  universal, 
namely  reality,  which  is  taken  as  the  mean  between  (a)  God 
in  his  concept  and  (b)  existence. — This  kind  of  mediation,  in 
so  far  as  it  is  cast  in  the  form  of  a  syllogism,  is  not  here  in 
question,  as  was  stated.  And  our  exposition  up  to  this  point 
has  shown  what  is  the  true  nature  of  this  mediation  of  Essence 
with  Existence.  The  nature  of  demonstration  itself  is  to  be 
considered  under  the  doctrine  of  Cognition.  Here  we  have  only 
to  indicate  what  is  relevant  to  the  nature  of  mediation  in 
general. 

The  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God  indicate  a  ground  for  this 
existence.  This  ground  is  not  supposed  to  be  an  objective 
ground  of  the  existence  of  God;  for  this  existence  is  in  and 
for  itself.  It  is  therefore  a  ground  merely  for  cognition.  It  thus 
announces  itself  as  an  entity  which  vanishes  in  the  object  which 
prima  facie  appears  as  grounded  by  it.  Now  the  Ground  which 
is  derived  from  the  contingent  nature  of  the  world  contains 
the  regress  of  the  world  into  absolute  Essence ;  for  the  con- 
tingent is  that  which  is  groundless  in  itself  and  transcends  itself. 
In  this  manner  then  it  is  true  that  absolute  Essence  emerges 
from  the  groundless:  Ground  transcends  itself,  and  imme- 
diately the  illusion  vanishes  of  the  relation  which  was  attri- 
buted to  God,  of  being  something  grounded  in  an  Other.  It  is 
thus  seen  that  this  mediation  is  true  mediation.  But  this  nature 
of  its  mediation  is  not  known  to  this  kind  of  demonstrative 
reflection:  on  the  one  hand  it  takes  itself  as  being  merely 
subjective,  and  thus  removes  its  mediation  from  God  himself, 
but  on  the  other  it  for  that  reason  does  not  recognize  thb 
mediating  movement,  nor  that  it  is  in  Essence  and  how  it  is 
in  Essence  itself.  Its  true  relation  consists  in  this,  that  it  is 
both  in  one ;  it  is  mediation  as  such,  but  it  is  also  of  course 
a  mediation  which  is  subjective  and  external — external  to 
itself— and  which  in  itself  again  transcends  itself.  But  in  the 
proof  just  discussed  Existence  is  in  the  false  relation  of  appearing 
only  as  mediated  or  posited. 

Thus  on  the  other  side  Existence  cannot  be  considered  as 


EXISTENCE  in 

merely  immediate.  Taken  in  the  determination  of  an  imme- 
diacy, the  comprehension  of  the  existence  of  God  has  been 
expressed  as  something  undemonstrable,  and  the  knowledge 
of  it  as  a  merely  immediate  consciousness,  as  an  act  of  faith. 
Knowledge  is  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  knows  nothing, 
that  is,  that  it  again  renounces  its  mediating  movement  and 
the  determinations  which  occur  in  it.  This  has  already  appeared 
above;  but  it  must  be  added  that  reflection,  when  it  thus 
ends  with  its  own  cancellation,  does  not  have  Nothing  for 
result ;  (if  this  were  true,  positive  knowledge  about  Essence, 
being  an  immediate  relation  to  it,  would  be  severed  from  this 
result  and  would  be  an  independent  emergence,  an  act 
beginning  with  itself;)  on  the  contrary,  this  end  itself,  this 
perishing  of  mediation,  is  at  the  same  time  the  Ground  out 
of  which  the  immediate  emerges.  Language,  as  was  observed 
above,  combines  the  signification  of  this  perishing  and  of 
Ground ;  the  essence  of  God,  it  is  said,  is  the  abyss  (der  Abgrund) 
for  finite  reason.  And  this  it  is  indeed,  in  so  far  as  reason  here 
surrenders  its  finitude  and  sinks  its  mediating  movement;  but 
this  abyss,  or  negative  Ground,  is  also  the  positive  Ground 
of  the  emergence  of  the  Existent,  of  Essence  immediate  in 
itself;  mediation  is  essential  moment.  Mediation  by  means  of 
Ground  transcends  itself,  but  does  not  make  of  Ground  a 
substratum,  in  which  case  that  which  emerges  from  Ground 
would  be  something  posited,  having  its  Essence  elsewhere, 
namely  in  Ground;  but  in  fact  this  Ground,  as  abyss,  is 
vanished  mediation.  Conversely  only  vanished  mediation  is 
also  Ground,  and  is  the  self-identical  and  immediate  only  by 
virtue  of  this  negation. 

Existence  here  then  must  not  be  taken  as  a  predicate  or  as 
determination  of  Essence,  so  that  a  proposition  about  Essence 
would  be:  Essence  exists,  or  has  existence. — On  the  contrary, 
Essence  has  passed  over  into  Existence ;  Existence  is  its  abso- 
lute externalization,  nor  has  it  remained  on  the  further  side 
of  it.  The  proposition  would  be :  Essence  is  existence ;  it  is  not 
distinct  from  its  existence. — Essence  has  passed  over  into  Existence 
in  so  far  as  Essence,  as  Ground,  is  no  longer  distinct  from  itself 
as  Grounded,  or  in  so  far  as  this  Ground  has  transcended  itself. 
But  this  negation  is  equally  its  position,  or  absolute  positive 
self-continuity;  Existence  is  the  intro-Reflection  of  Ground, 


ii2  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

its  self-identity  which  came  into  being  in  its  negation;  it  is 
thus  mediation  which  has  posited  itself  as  self-identical  and 
thereby  is  immediacy. 

Now  Existence  essentially  is  self-identical  mediation,  and 
therefore  the  determinations  of  mediation  belong  to  it ;  but 
they  belong  to  it  in  such  a  manner  that  at  the  same  time  they 
are  intro-reflected  entities  and  have  essential  and  immediate 
persistence.  Existence,  as  immediacy  which  posits  itself  through 
transcendence,  is  negative  unity  and  Being-in-Self ;  it  therefore 
immediately  determines  itself  as  an  Existent  and  as  Thing. 


A 
THE  THING  AND  ITS  PROPERTIES 

Existence  as  existing  entity  is  posited  in  the  form  of  nega- 
tive unity,  and  it  is  this  essentially.  But  as  yet  this  negative 
unity  is  only  immediate  determination — it  is  the  One  of  the 
Something  in  general.  But  the  existing  Something  is  different 
from  the  Something  which  is.  The  former  is  essentially  that 
kind  of  immediacy  which  arose  through  the  Reflection  of 
mediation  in  itself.  Thus  the  existing  Something  is  a  Thing. 

The  Thing  is  distinct  from  its  Existence  as  the  Something 
can  be  distinguished  from  its  Being.  Immediately,  the  Thing 
and  the  Existent  are  one  and  the  same.  But  Existence  is  not 
the  first  immediacy  of  Being ;  the  moment  of  mediation  is  part 
of  it ;  and  therefore  its  determination  as  Thing,  and  the  dis- 
tinction of  the  two,  is  not  a  transition  but,  properly,  an  analysis ; 
and  Existence  as  such  contains  this  distinction  itself  in  the 
moment  of  its  mediation:  the  distinction,  then,  is  between 
Thing-in-itself  and  External  Existence. 

(a)  THING-IN-ITSELF  AND  EXISTENCE 

i.  The  Thing-in-itself  is  the  existing  entity  as  the  essential 
immediate  .which  is  given  as  the  result  of  the  transcendence 
of  mediation.  To  the  Thing-in-itself  here  mediation  is  equally 
essential ;  but  this  distinction,  in  this  first  or  immediate  Exist- 
ence, falls  apart  into  indifferent  determinations.  One  side, 
namely  the  mediation  of  the  Thing,  is  its  non-reflected 


EXISTENCE  113 

immediacy,  and  so  its  Being  in  general ;  and  this — since  it  is 
also  determined  as  mediation — is  a  Determinate  Being  which 
is  other  to  itself  and  in  itself  manifold  and  external.  But  it  is 
not  only  Determinate  Being;  it  stands  in  relation  to  tran- 
scended mediation  and  essential  immediacy ;  and  consequently 
it  is  Determinate  Being  as  unessential,  or  as  positedness. — (If 
the  Thing  is  distinguished  from  its  Existence,  then  it  is  the 
possible,  the  Thing  of  imagination  or  thought,  which  as  such 
is  supposed  not  to  exist  at  the  same  time.  But  the  determination 
of  Possibility  and  the  opposition  of  the  Thing  and  its  Existence 
come  later.) — But  the  Thing-in-itself  and  its  mediated  Being 
are  both  contained  in  Existence,  and  each  is  an  Existence; 
the  Thing-in-itself  exists  and  is  the  essential  Existence  of  the 
Thing,  while  mediated  Being  is  its  unessential  Existence. 

The  Thing-in-itself,  as  the  simple  reflectedness  of  Existence 
in  itself,  is  not  the  Ground  of  unessential  Determinate  Being ; 
it  is  motionless,  indeterminate  unity,  because  it  has  precisely 
this  determination,  that  it  is  transcended  mediation,  and  there- 
fore it  is  only  foundation  of  Determinate  Being.  And  for  this 
reason  too,  Reflection,  as  Determinate  Being  which  mediates 
itself  through  other,  falls  outside  the  Thing-in-itself.  The  latter 
is  not  supposed  to  contain  in  itself  any  determinate  multiplicity, 
and  consequently  obtains  this  only  when  brought  under  external 
reflection,  but  remains  indifferent  to  it.  ( — The  Thing-in-itself 
has  colour  only  in  relation  to  the  eye,  smell  in  relation  to 
the  nose,  and  so  forth.)  Its  variety  is  a  collection  of  respects 
taken  by  an  Other,  certain  relations  to  the  Thing-in-itself 
in  which  this  Other  places  itself;  and  these  are  not  its  own 
determinations. 

2.  Now  this  Other  is  Reflection,  which,  determined  as 
external,  is,  first,  external  to  itself,  and  is  determinate  variety. 
N,pxt  it  is  external  to  the  essentially  existing,  and  relates  itself 
to  it  as  to  its  absolute  presupposition.  But  these  two  moments 
of  External  Reflection — its  own  multiplicity  and  its  relation  to 
the  Thing-in-itself  which  is  other  to  it — are  one  and  the  same. 
For  this  Existence  is  external  only  in  so  far  as  it  relates  itself 
to  essential  identity  as  to  an  Other.  Multiplicity  therefore  has 
not  its  own  independent  persistence  beyond  the  Thing-in-itself, 
but  exists  only  as  Show  in  opposition  to  it,  in  its  necessary 
relation  to  it  of  reflex  refracting  itself  against  it.  We  have,  then, 

VOL.  n.  H 


ii4  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

variety  as  the  relation  of  an  Other  to  the  Thing-in-itself ;  but 
this  Other  is  nothing  persisting  for  itself,  but  is  only  as  relation 
to  the  Thing-in-itself;  but  also  it  is  only  as  the  repulsion  from 
this ;  thus  it  is  the  unsupported  recoil  of  itself  on  itself. 

Now  the  Thing-in-itself  is  essential  identity  of  Existence, 
and  so  this  unessential  Reflection  does  not  apply  to  it,  but 
remains  external  to  it  and  collapses  into  itself.  It  perishes,  and 
thus  itself  becomes  essential  identity  or  Thing-in-itself. — This 
may  also  be  considered  in  the  following  manner:  unessential 
Existence  has  its  intro-Reflection  in  the  Thing-in-itself;  it  is 
primarily  related  to  it  as  to  its  Other;  but  as  being  Other  to 
that  which  is  in  itself,  it  is  nothing  but  its  own  transcendence 
and  the  becoming  of  Being-in-self.  Thus  the  Thing-in-itself  is 
identical  with  External  Existence. 

In  the  Thing-in-itself  this  appears  in  the  following  manner. 
The  Thing-in-itself  is  self-relating  essential  Existence;  it  is 
self-identity  only  in  so  far  as  it  contains  the  negativity  of 
intro-Reflection ;  therefore,  that  which  appeared  as  Existence 
external  to  it  is  a  moment  which  it  contains.  For  this  reason 
too  it  is  self-repellent  Thing-in-itself,  which  stands  in  the 
attitude  of  an  Other  to  itself.  There  is  thus  now  a  plurality 
of  Things-in-themselves,  which  stand  in  the  relation  of  External 
Reflection  to  one  another.  This  unessential  Existence  is  their 
relation  to  one  another  as  to  other ;  but,  further,  it  is  essential 
to  them,— in  other  words,  this  unessential  Existence,  collapsing 
into  itself,  is  Thing-in-itself,  but  another  Thing-in-itself  than 
the  first ;  for  this  first  is  immediate  essentiality,  while  the  latter 
is  that  which  emerges  from  unessential  Existence.  But  this  other 
Thing-in-itself  is  only  an  other  in  general ;  for,  being  a  self- 
identical  Thing,  it  has  no  further  determinateness  as  against 
the  first ;  and  like  the  first  it  is  the  intro-Reflection  of  unessential 
Existence.  Hence  the  determinateness  of  the  various  Things- 
in-themselves  against  one  another  falls  within  External 
Reflection. 

3.  At  this  point  this  External  Reflection  is  an  attitude  of 
the  Things-in-themselves  to  one  another:  as  Others,  they 
mediate  one  another.  The  Things-in-themselves  are  thus  the 
extreme  terms  of  a  syllogism,  the  middle  term  of  which  is 
constituted  by  their  external  Existence — that  Existence  through 
which  they  are  Others  to  one  another  and  distinct  entities. 


EXISTENCE  115 

This  their  distinctness  falls  only  within  their  relation:  they 
depute,  as  it  were,  determinations  into  the  relation  from  their 
surface  only,  themselves  remaining  indifferent  to  it,  since  they 
are  absolutely  intro-reflected. — Now  this  relation  constitutes 
the  totality  of  Existence.  The  Thing-in-itself  stands  in  relation 
to  a  Reflection  which  is  external  to  it ;  in  this  Reflection  it  has 
manifold  determinations.  This  is  its  self-repulsion  into  another 
Thing-in-itself, — a  repulsion  which  is  the  recoil  of  itself  on  itself, 
each  being  an  Other  only.because  it  shows  over  against  itself 
out  of  the  Other ;  it  has  its  positedness  not  in  itself  but  in  the 
Other,  and  is  determinate  only  through  the  determinateness  of 
the  Other ;  and  equally  this  Other  is  determinate  only  through 
the  determinateness  of  the  first.  Accordingly  the  two  Things-in- 
themselves  do  not  contain  variety  in  themselves;  each  has  it 
only  in  the  other ;  they  are  therefore  not  distinct  entities.  The 
Thing-in-itself  is  supposed  to  be  related  to  the  other  extreme 
as  to  another  Thing-in-itself;  but  in  fact  it  is  related  to  it  as 
to  something  not  distinct  from  it,  and  External  Reflection, 
which  was  supposed  to  constitute  the  mediating  relation 
between  extremes,  is  an  attitude  of  the  Thing-in-itself  only  to 
itself:  it  is  essentially  its  intro-Reflection.  It  is  thus  self-existent 
determinateness,  or  the  determinateness  of  the  Thing-in-itself 
Accordingly  the  Thing-in-itself  has  determinateness  not  in  a 
reciprocated  relation,  external  to  it,  to  another  Thing-in-itself; 
determinateness  is  not  merely  a  surface  of  the  Thing-in-itself, 
but  is  its  essential  self-mediation  with  itself  as  with  an  Other. — 
The  two  Things-in-themselves,  which  are  supposed  to  con- 
stitute the  extremes  of  the  relation  because  they  are  supposed 
to  have  in  themselves  no  determinateness  against  each  other, 
coincide,  in  fact,  and  are  one:  it  is  only  one  Thing-in-itself 
which  in  External  Reflection  has  an  attitude  to  itself,  and  it 
is*  its  own  relation  to  itself  as  to  an  other  which  constitutes  its 
determinateness. 

This  determinateness  of  the  Thing-in-itsclf  is  the  Property 

of  the  Thing. 

• 
(b]  PROPERTY 

Quality  is  the  immediate  determinateness  of  the  Something — 
that  very  negative  by  virtue  of  which  Being  is  Something. 
Similarly  the  Property  of  the  Thing  is  the  negativity  of 


n6  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Reflection,  whereby  Existence  succeeds  in  becoming  existing 
entity  and — as  simple  self-identity — Thing-in-itself.  But  the 
negativity  of  Reflection,  or  transcended  mediation,  is  itself 
essentially  mediation  and  relation,  not  to  an  Other  in  general 
(as  is  Quality,  since  it  is  non-reflected  determinateness),  but 
to  itself  as  to  an  Other,  or  mediation  which  immediately  is 
equally  self-identity.  The  abstract  Thing-in-itself  is  itself  this 
attitude  which  returns  out  of  other  to  itself;  hence  it  is  deter- 
minate in  itself.  But  its  determinateness  is  Modification,  which, 
as  such,  is  itself  determination,  and,  as  attitude  to  Other,  does 
not  pass  over  into  otherness  and  is  removed  beyond  change. 

A  Thing  has  Properties.  These  are,  first,  its  determinate 
relations  to  Other ;  Property  is  given  only  as  a  mode  of  attitude 
of  one  towards  an  Other ;  it  is  therefore  External  Reflection 
and  the  side  of  positedness  of  the  Thing.  But,  secondly,  in  this 
positedness  the  Thing  is  in  itself;  it  preserves  itself  in  relation 
to  Other.  Thus  it  is  admittedly  only  a  surface,  and  now 
Existence  exposes  itself  to  the  becoming  of  Being  and  to  change ; 
but  Property  is  not  lost  in  it.  A  Thing  has  the  Property  of 
effecting  this  or  that  in  an  Other,  and  of  disclosing  itself  in 
a  peculiar  manner  in  its  relation.  It  manifests  this  Property 
only  under  one  condition, — the  other  Thing  must  have  a 
corresponding  nature ;  but  also  it  is  peculiar  to  the  first  Thing 
and  is  its  own  self-identical  foundation; — for  this  reason  this 
reflected  quality  is  called  Property.  The  Thing  here  passes  over 
into  an  externality,  but  the  Property  preserves  itself.  Through 
its  Properties  the  Thing  becomes  cause ;  and  cause  is  this,  that 
it  preserves  itself  as  effect.  At  this  point,  however,  the  Thing 
is  only  the  stable  Thing  of  many  Properties,  and  it  is  not  yet 
determined  as  actual  cause ;  it  is  Reflection  of  its  determinations, 
but  Reflection  which  is  in  itself,  and  is  not  yet  Positing 
Reflection. 

It  has  resulted,  then,  that  the  Thing-in-itself  is  essentially 
not  only  Thing-in-itself  in  such  a  manner  that  its  Properties 
are  the  positedness  of  an  External  Reflection :  they  are  its  own 
determinations,  which  give  it  a  particular  attitude.  It  is  not 
an  indeterminate  foundation  lying  beyond  its  external  Exist- 
ence, but  is  found  in  its  Properties  as  Ground;  that  is,  it  is 
self-identity  in  its  positedness.  But  it  is  also  found  as  Conditioned 
Ground,  that  is,  its  positedness  is  equally  self-external  Reflec- 


EXISTENCE  117 

tion ;  it  is  intro-reflected,  and  is  in  itself,  only  in  so  far  as  it 
is  external. — The  Thing-in-itself  enters  into  external  relations 
through  Existence,  and  Existence  consists  in  this  externality; 
it  is  the  immediacy  of  Being,  and  through  it  the  Thing  is 
subjected  to  change ;  but  it  is  also  the  reflected  immediacy  of 
Ground,  and  the  Thing  is  thus  in  itself  in  its  change. — But 
this  mention  of  the  Ground-relation  must  not  be  taken  as 
meaning  that  the  Thing  is  in  general  determined  as  Ground 
of  its  Properties ;  its  Thinghood  itself  is  as  such  the  Ground- 
determination,  and  Property  is  not  distinct  from  its  Ground, 
nor  does  it  merely  constitute  positedness :  it  is  Ground  which 
has  passed  over  into  its  externality  and  has  thus  become 
veritably  intro-reflected  Ground;  the  Property  itself  as  such 
is  Ground,  self-existent  positedness,  in  other  words  Ground 
constitutes  the  Form  of  its  self-identity ;  its  determinateness  is 
the  self-external  Reflection  of  Ground;  and  the  whole  is 
Ground  which,  in  its  repulsion  and  determination  and  its 
external  immediacy,  relates  itself  to  itself. — The  Thing-in-itself 
thus  exists  essentially,  and  the  fact  that  it  exists  means,  con- 
versely, that  Existence,  as  external  immediacy,  is  also  Being- 
in-Self. 

Observation 

Mention  has  already  been  made  above  (Vol.  I,  p.  133)  (under 
the  moment  of  Determinate  Being,  Being-in-Self )  of  the  Thing- 
in-itself,  and  it  was  observed  that  the  Thing-in-itself  as  such 
is  no  more  than  the  empty  abstraction  from  all  determinate- 
ness,  of  which  it  is  admitted  that  nothing  can  be  known  just 
because  it  is  meant  to  be  the  abstraction  from  all  determination. 
— The  Thing-in-itself  being  thus  presupposed  as  the  indeter- 
minate, all  determination  falls  outside  it  into  a  Reflection 
which  is  foreign  to  it,  while  it  is  indifferent  to  the  Reflection. 
In  transcendental  idealism  this  External  Reflection  is  con- 
sciousness. This  philosophical  system  places  all  determinate- 
ness  of  things  (both  with  regard  to  form  and  to  content)  in 
consciousness ;  and  accordingly,  from  this  point  of  view,  it  falls 
within  me,  the  subject,  that  I  see  the  leaves  of  a  tree  not  as 
black  but  as  green,  the  sun  as  round  and  not  as  square,  and 
taste  sugar  as  sweet  and  not  as  bitter;  that  I  determine  the 
first  and  second  strokes  of  a  clock  as  successive  and  not  as 


Ii8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

simultaneous,  and  determine  the  first  to  be  neither  the  cause 
nor  the  effect  of  the  second,  and  so  forth. — This  crude  pre- 
sentation of  subjective  idealism  is  in  immediate  contradiction 
to  the  consciousness  of  freedom,  according  to  which  the  ego 
knows  itself  to  be  the  universal  and  indeterminate,  and  casts 
off  these  manifold  and  necessary  determinations,  recognizing 
them  to  be  external  to  itself  and  applicable  only  to  things. — 
In  this  consciousness  of  its  freedom  the  ego  is  that  true  and 
intro-reflected  identity  which  the  Thing-in-itself  was  supposed 
to  be. — I  have  shown  elsewhere  that  this  transcendental 
idealism  does  not  emancipate  itself  from  the  limitation  of 
the  ego  by  the  object,  or,  generally,  from  the  finite  world ;  it 
only  changes  the  form  of  the  barrier  (which  remains  absolute 
for  it),  translating  it  from  the  objective  to  the  subjective  shape, 
and  making  into  determinatenesses  of  the  ego  and  into  a  wild 
change  raging  within  it  (the  ego  being  treated  as  a  Thing) 
that  which  ordinary  consciousness  knows  as  a  multiplicity  and 
change  belonging  to  Things  which  are  merely  external  to  it. — 
At  the  point  here  reached  only  the  Thing-in-itself  and  Reflec- 
tion (which  is  as  yet  external  to  it)  are  opposed  to  each  other ; 
the  latter  has  not  yet  determined  itself  as  consciousness,  nor 
the  former  as  ego.  It  has  resulted  from  the  nature  of  the  Thing- 
in-itself  and  from  External  Reflection  that  this  very  externality 
determines  itself  as  Thing-in-itself,  or,  conversely,  becomes  the 
peculiar  determination  of  that  primary  Thing-in-itself.  The 
essential  inadequacy  of  the  standpoint  at  which  this  philosophy 
halts  consists  in  this,  that  it  clings  to  the  abstract  Thing-in- 
itself  as  to  an  ultimate  determination ;  it  opposes  Reflection, 
or  the  determinateness  and  multiplicity  of  the  Properties,  to 
the  Thing-in-itself;  while  in  fact  the  Thing-in-itself  essentially 
has  this  External  Reflection  in  itself,  and  determines  itself  as 
an  entity  endowed  with  its  proper  determinations,  or  Proper- 
ties ;  whence  it  is  seen  that  the  abstraction  of  the  Thing,  which 
makes  it  pure  Thing-in-itself,  is  an  untrue  determination. 

(c)  THE  RECIPROCAL  ACTION  OF  THINGS 

rx  7 

The  Thing-in-itself  exists  essentially ;  external  immediacy  and 
determinateness  belong  to  its  Being-in-Self  or  intro-Reflection. 
Hence  the  Thing-in-itself  is  a  Thing  which  has  Properties; 
hence  there  are  several  Things,  which  are  distinguished  from 


EXISTENCE  119 

one  another  not  through  some  foreign  respect  but  through 
themselves.  These  many  different  Things  are  in  essential 
Reciprocal  Action  by  virtue  of  their  Properties;  Property  is 
this  very  reciprocal  relation,  and  apart  from  it  the  Thing  is 
nothing ;  the  mutual  determination,  the  middle  term  of  the 
Things-in-themselves,  which,  as  extremes,  were  supposed  to 
remain  indifferent  as  against  this  their  relation,  is  itself  that 
self-identical  Reflection  and  Thing-in-itself  which  these  ex- 
tremes were  supposed  to  be.  Thinghood  is  thus  degraded  to 
the  form  of  indeterminate  self-identity  which  has  its  essentiality 
only  in  its  Property.  If  therefore  a  Thing,  or  Things  in  general, 
be  spoken  of  without  determinate  Property,  then  their  dis- 
tinction is  merely  indifferent  and  quantitative.  What  is  con- 
sidered as  one  Thing  can  equally  be  made  into  or  considered 
as  several  Things :  separation  or  union  is  here  external. — A 
book  is  a  Thing,  and  each  of  its  pages  is  also  a  Thing,  and  so 
is  each  particle  of  its  pages,  and  so  to  infinity.  The  deter- 
minateness  by  virtue  of  which  one  Thing  is  this  Thing  only, 
lies  in  its  Properties  alone.  By  means  of  them  it  distinguishes 
itself  from  other  Things,  because  Property  is  negative  Reflection 
and  the  very  act  of  distinguishing ;  the  Thing  therefore  contains 
its  distinction  from  others  only  in  its  Property.  Property  is 
intro-reflected  distinction  by  virtue  of  which  the  Thing  in  its 
positedness — that  is,  in  its  relation  to  other  entities — becomes 
indifferent  both  to  Other  and  to  its  relation.  Consequently 
without  its  Properties  the  Thing  retains  nothing  but  abstract 
Being-in-Self,  an  unessential  capacity  and  external  holding- 
together.  Veritable  Being-in-Self  is  Being-in-Self  in  its  posited- 
ness :  and  this  is  Property.  Thus  Thinghood  has  now  passed 
over  into  Property. 

The  Thing  was  to  have  occupied  the  position  of  self-existent 
extreme  as  against  Property,  and  Property  was  to  have  con- 
stituted the  middle  term  between  the  related  Things.  But  it 
is  in  this  relation  that  the  Things  meet  each  other  as  self- 
repellent  Reflection,  and  here  they  are  distinguished  and 
related.  This  their  distinction  and  relation  is  one*  Reflection 
and  one  continuity  of  them.  Accordingly  the  Things  them- 
selves fall  only  within  this  continuity,  which  is  Property ;  and, 
considered  as  persistent  extremes  having  existence  apart  from 
this  Property,  they  vanish. 


120  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Consequently  Property,  which  was  meant  to  constitute  the 
relation  of  independent  extremes,  is  the  Independent  itself. 
Against  it  the  Things  are  the  unessential.  They  are  an  essential 
only  as  that  Reflection  which  distinguishes  itself  and  thus 
relates  itself  to  itself;  but  this  is  Property.  Property  therefore 
is  not  that  which  is  transcended  in  the  Thing,  nor  is  it  a  mere 
moment  in  it:  in  truth  the  Thing  is  only  that  unessential 
capacity,  which  is  negative  unity,  but  resembles  only  the  One 
of  the  Something,  that  is,  an  immediate  One.  The  Thing  was 
determined  above  as  unessential  capacity  in  so  far  as  it  was 
made  such  by  an  external  abstraction  which  detaches  Property 
from  it :  now  this  abstraction  has  taken  place  by  means  of  the 
transition  of  the  Thing-in-itself  into  Property  itself.  But  in  this 
process  the  values  have  been  inverted;  in  the  first  abstraction 
the  abstract  Thing  without  its  Property  was  imagined  as  the 
essential,  and  Property  as  an  external  determination :  here  the 
Thing  as  such  determines  itself  through  itself  as  an  indifferent 
external  form  of  Property. — Property  is  now  freed  from  the 
indeterminate  and  brittle  connexion  which  is  the  One  of  the 
Thing :  it  is  Property  which  constitutes  the  consistence  of  the 
Thing,  an  independent  Matter. — This  is  simple  self-continuity, 
and  therefore  contains  form  only  as  variety;  there  are  con- 
sequently many  independent  Matters  of  this  kind,  and  the 
Thing  consists  of  them. 

B 
THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  THING  OUT  OF  MATTERS 

The  transition  of  Property  into  a  Matter  or  independent 
material  is  the  well-known  transition  which  chemistry  operates 
upon  sensible  matter  when  it  attempts  to  represent  the  proper- 
ties of  colour,  smell,  taste,  and  so  forth,  as  material  of  light, 
of  colour,  of  smell,  sour  or  bitter  material,  and  so  forth,  while 
it  simply  postulates  others  like  that  of  heat,  or  electrical  and 
magnetic  matter,  under  the  conviction  that  now  it  is  handling 
Properties  4n  their  very  truth. — The  expression  that  Things 
consist  of  various  Matters  or  materials  has  equal  currency.  Good 
care  is  taken  not  to  call  these  Matters  or  materials  Things, 
though  it  would  probably  be  admitted  that  a  pigment,  for 
instance,  is  a  Thing ;  but  I  do  not  know  whether,  for  example, 


EXISTENCE  121 

the  materials  of  light,  heat,  electricity,  and  so  on,  are  called 
Things.  Things  and  their  constituents  are  distinguished,  but 
it  is  not  stated  exactly  whether  and  to  what  degree  the  latter 
are  also  Things,  or  perhaps  only  half-things ;  but  certainly  they 
are  at  least  Existents. 

The  necessity  of  passing  from  Properties  to  Matters,  or  the 
fact  that  Properties  in  truth  are  Matters,  resulted  from  the 
truth  that  they  are  the  essential  and  therefore  the  veritably 
independent  element  of  Things. — But  at  the  same  time  the 
intro-Reflection  of  Property  constitutes  only  one  side  of  the 
whole  Reflection,  namely  the  transcendence  of  distinction  and 
the  self-continuity  of  Property,  which  was  meant  to  be  an 
existence  for  other.  Hereby  Thinghood,  as  negative  intro- 
Reflection  and  as  act  of  distinguishing  which  repels  itself  from 
other,  is  degraded  to  an  unessential  moment ;  but  at  the  same 
time  it  has  further  determined  itself  in  the  degradation.  First, 
this  negative  moment  has  preserved  itself;  for  Property  has 
become  self-continuous,  and  independent  Matter,  only  in  so 
far  as  the  distinction  of  Things  has  transcended  itself;  accord- 
ingly the  continuity  of  Property  into  otherness  contains  itself 
the  moment  of  the  negative,  and  at  the  same  time  its  inde- 
pendence, as  being  this  negative  unity,  is  the  re-established 
Something  of  Thinghood :  negative  independence  as  against 
the  positive  independence  of  material.  Secondly,  the  Thing 
has  now  advanced  from  its  indeterminateness  into  perfect 
determinateness.  As  Thing-in-itself  it  is  abstract  identity,  simply 
negative  Existence,  or  Existence  determined  as  the  indeter- 
minate. Next  it  is  determined  by  its  Properties,  by  means  of 
which  it  is  supposed  to  distinguish  itself  from  others.  But  in 
fact  it  is  by  means  of  Property  continuous  with  others,  and 
thus  this  incomplete  distinction  transcends  itself;  through  it 
the  Thing  has  passed  back  into  itself  and  is  now  determined  as 
determinate.  It  is  determinate  in  itself:  it  is  this  Thing. — 

But,  thirdly,  although  this  return  upon  self  is  self-relating 
determination,  it  is  also  unessential;  self-continuous  consis- 
tence constitutes  independent  Matter,  in  which  tho  distinction 
of  Things — their  determinateness  which  is  in  and  for  itself— 
is  transcended  and  has  become  external.  The  Thing  as  "this8' 
is  thus  perfect  determinateness,  but  this  determinateness  is 
determinateness  in  the  element  of  unessentiality. 


122  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

This  results  in  the  following  manner,  if  considered  from  the 
side  of  the  movement  of  Property.  Property  is  not  only  external 
determination  but  also  self-being  Existence.  This  unity  of 
externality  and  essentiality  contains  intro-Reflection  and 
Reflection  into  other,  and  therefore  repels  itself  from  itself; 
it  is  determination  as  a  simple,  identically  self-related  inde- 
pendent, in  which  negative  unity  (the  One  of  the  Thing) 
has  been  transcended,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  this 
determination  as  against  Other;  .and  here  too  it  is  intro- 
reflected  and  self-determined  One.  We  have,  then,  Matters, 
and  "this"  Thing.  These  are  the  two  moments  of  self-identical 
externality  or  intro-reflected  Property. — Property  was  that  by 
means  of  which  Things  were  to  be  distinct  from  one  another ; 
now  Property  has  rid  itself  of  this  its  negative  side  (namely 
inherence  in  an  Other),  and  simultaneously  the  Thing  too  has 
been  freed  from  its  determination  by  other  Things,  and  has 
passed  back  from  relation  to  other  upon  itself.  But  at  the  same 
time  it  is  only  Thing-in-itself  which  has  become  Other  to  itself, 
since  the  manifold  Properties  for  their  part  have  become 
independent,  and  thereby  their  negative  relation  has  become 
a  merely  transcended  relation  in  the  One  of  the  Thing.  For 
this  reason  the  Thing  is  self-identical  negation  only  as  against 
the  positive  continuity  of  the  material. 

The  "this"  therefore  constitutes  the  perfected  determinateness 
of  the  Thing :  the  determinateness  is  now  also  external.  The 
Thing  consists  of  independent  Matters  which  are  indifferent 
to  their  relation  in  the  Thing.  Hence  this  relation  is  only  an 
unessential  collocation  of  these,  and  the  distinction  of  one  Thing 
from  another  depends  upon  the  selection  of  the  particular 
Matters,  and  their  individual  quantities,  which  it  contains. 
These  pass  beyond  "this"  Thing  and  continue  themselves  into 
other  Things;  the  fact  that  they  belong  to  "this"  Thing  is  not 
a  barrier  for  them.  And  equally  they  are  no  barrier  to  one 
another,  since  their  negative  relation  is  no  more  than  the 
impotent  "this."  When  therefore  they  are  connected  in  this  latter 
they  do  npt  cancel  one  another;  they  are  independent  and, 
as  such,  impenetrable  to  one  another;  each  in  its  deter- 
minateness relates  itself  only  to  itself,  and  is  a  member  of 
a  multiplicity  of  consistence  indifferent  to  the  other  members; 
they  admit  only  quantitative  limitation. — The  Thing  as  "this" 


EXISTENCE  123 

is  this  their  merely  quantitative  relation ;  it  is  a  mere  collection, 
their  "also."  It  consists  of  any  quantum  of  a  material,  and  also 
of  any  quantum  of  another,  and  also  of  others ;  the  Thing  alone 
constitutes  this  connexion  of  having  no  connexion. 

G 

THE  DISSOLUTION  OF  THE  THING 

"This"  Thing  has  determined  itself  as  the  merely  quantitative 
coherence  of  free  materials,  and  as  such  is  the  absolutely 
variable  Thing.  Its  variation  consists  in  this,  that  one  or  more 
Matters  are  withdrawn  from  the  collection  or  else  are  added 
to  this  "also,"  or  that  their  quantitative  ratio  is  changed.  The 
arising  and  passing  away  of  "this"  Thing  is  the  external  dissolu- 
tion of  this  kind  of  external  connexion,  or  the  connexion  of 
such  terms  as  are  indifferent  to  connexion.  Materials  circulate 
into  and  out  of  "this"  Thing  without  hindrance ;  the  Thing  is 
absolute  porosity  having  no  measure  nor  form  of  its  own. 

The  Thing  then  in  its  absolute  determinateness,  whereby  it 
is  "this,"  is  the  absolutely  soluble  Thing.  This  dissolution,  as  well 
as  its  Being,  is  an  external  becoming-determinate;  but  the 
dissolution  of  the  Thing  and  the  externality  of  its  Being  is 
what  is  essential  in  this  Being ;  it  is  "also"  and  no  more,  and 
consists  only  in  this  externality.  But  also  it  consists  of  its 
Matters ;  and  not  only  the  abstract  "this"  as  such,  but  the  whole 
"this"  Thing  is  its  own  dissolution.  For  the  Thing  is  determined 
as  an  external  collection  of  independent  Matters ;  these  Matters 
are  not  Things,  and  have  no  negative  independence:  they 
are  Properties  as  the  independent,  namely  as  determinateness 
which  is  intro-reflected  as  such.  Accordingly  the  Matters  are 
simple  and  relate  only  to  themselves;  but  their  content  is  a 
determinateness ;  intro-Reflection  is  only  the  form  of  this  con- 
tent, which  is  not  intro-reflected  as  such,  but  relates  itself  to 
Other  according  to  its  determinateness.  The  Thing  is  therefore 
not  only  the  "also"  of  the  Matters  (which  is  the  relation  of  these 
as  indifferent  to  one  another),  but  is  equally  thejr  negative 
relation ;  and  the  Matters,  by  virtue  of  their  determinateness, 
are  themselves  this  their  negative  Reflection,  which  is  the 
puncticity  of  the  Thing.  One  Matter  is  not  what  another  is, 
according  to  their  determinateness  of  content  as  against  one 


124  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

another ;  and  one  is  not  in  so  far  as  another  is,  according  to 
their  independence. 

The  Thing  therefore  is  the  mutual  relation  of  Matters  out 
of  which  it  is  constituted  in  such  a  manner  that  in  it  one  Matter 
and  another  "also"  have  persistence  while  at  the  same  time  one 
does  not  persist  in  it  in  so  far  as  another  does.  Hence  one  Matter 
is  cancelled  in  a  Thing  in  the  same  measure  in  which  another 
is  in  it;  but  simultaneously  the  Thing  is  the  "also"  or  the  per- 
sistence of  that  other.  Hence  in  the  persistence  of  one  Matter 
the  other  does  not  persist,  and  equally  it  also  does  persist 
in  the  former;  and  so  with  all  these  different  Matters  reci- 
procally. In  the  same  respect,  then,  in  which  one  persists  the 
others  also  persist,  and  this  unified  persistence  is  the  puncticity 
or  negative  unity  of  the  Thing ;  and  in  this  regard  they  simply 
interpenetrate  one  another.  Again,  the  Thing  at  the  same  time 
is  only  their  "also,"  and  the  Matters  are  reflected  into  their 
determinateness ;  and  in  this  regard  they  are  indifferent  to  one 
another  and  while  interpenetrating  one  another  are  not  in 
contact.  The  Matters  therefore  are  essentially  porous,  so  that 
one  persists  in  the  pores  (or  non-persistence)  of  the  others ; 
but  those  others  are  porous  themselves ;  in  their  pores,  or  non- 
persistence,  the  first  and  all  the  others  persist ;  their  persistence 
is  also  their  cancellation  and  the  persistence  of  others ;  and 
equally  this  persistence  of  others  is  their  own  cancellation 
and  the  persistence  of  the  first,  and  similarly  of  all  the  rest. 
Consequently  the  Thing  is  the  self-contradictory  mediation 
of  independent  persistence  with  itself  through  its  opposite 
(namely,  through  its  negation),  or  of  one  independent  Matter 
through  the  persistence  and  non-persistence  of  another. — In 
"this"  Thing  Existence  has  reached  its  completion;  that  is,  in 
one  entity  it  is  self-being  Being  or  independent  persistence,  and 
unessential  Existence ;  hence  the  truth  of  Existence  is  that  it 
has  its  Being-in-Self  in  unessentiality  or  its  persistence  in  an 
Other  (and  indeed  in  the  absolutely  Other),  or  that  it  has  its 
own  nullity  for  foundation.  It  is  therefore  Appearance. 

Observation 

It  is  one  of  the  commonest  determinations  of  imagination 
that  a  Thing  consists  of  many  independent  Matters.  The  Thing 
on  the  one  hand  is  considered  as  having  Properties,  the  Thing 


EXISTENCE  125 

being  their  persistence.  But  on  the  other  hand  these  different 
determinations  are  taken  as  Matters  the  persistence  of  which 
is  not  the  Thing :  the  Thing,  conversely,  consists  of  them,  and 
is  itself  no  more  than  their  external  connexion  and  quantita- 
tive limit.  Both  Properties  and  Matters  are  the  same  content- 
determinations ;  but  the  former  are  moments,  that  is,  entities 
reflected  into  their  negative  unity  as  into  a  foundation  distinct 
from  themselves  (namely  Thinghood) ;  the  latter  are  indepen- 
dent distinct  entities  each. of  which  is  reflected  into  its  own 
self-unity.  These  Matters  now  further  determine  themselves 
as  independent  persistence;  also,  however,  they  are  gathered 
together  in  one  Thing.  This  Thing  has  the  two  determinations  of 
being  first  "this'5  and  secondly  "also."  The  "also"  is  that  which 
occurs  in  external  intuition  as  spatial  extension ;  while  "this,"  or 
negative  unity,  is  the  puncticity  of  the  Thing.  The  Matters  are 
collected  in  the  puncticity,  and  their  "also,"  or  extension,  is 
every  where  this  puncticity ;  for  the  "  also"  as  Thinghood  is  essen- 
tially also  determined  as  negative  unity.  Therefore,  where  one 
of  these  Matters  is,  there,  at  one  and  the  same  point,  is  every 
other;  the  Thing  has  not  its  colour  at  one  place,  its  material 
of  heat  at  another  and  of  smell  at  a  third,  and  so  on,  but,  at 
the  point  where  it  is  warm,  it  is  also  coloured,  acid,  electric, 
and  so  on.  Now  these  materials  are  not  external  to  one  another, 
but  are  in  one  single  "this"  ;  and  therefore  they  are  assumed  to 
be  porous,  so  that  one  Matter  exists  in  the  interstices  between 
the  others.  But  that  Matter  which  is  in  the  interstices  between 
the  others  is  porous  itself;  conversely,  therefore,  in  its  pores 
exists  the  other  Matter;  and  not  it  alone,  but  also  the  third, 
the  tenth,  and  so  forth.  They  all  are  porous,  and  all  the  others 
arc  in  the  interstices  of  each,  just  as  each,  with  all  the  rest, 
is  in  the  pores  of  every  other.  Accordingly  they  form  a  mass 
which  reciprocally  interpenetrates  itself  in  such  a  manner  that 
the  penetrating  elements  are  equally  penetrated  by  the  others, 
whence  each  penetrates  again  its  own  penetratedness.  Each 
is  posited  as  its  own  negation,  and  this  negation  is  the  per- 
sistence of  another ;  but  this  persistence  is  equally  the  negation 
of  this  other  and  the  persistence  of  the  first. 

The  contradiction  of  the  independent  persistence  of  several 
Matters  in  one  whole,  or  of  their  indifference  to  one  another 
in  their  interpenetration,  is,  as  a  rule,  warded  off  by  imagination 


T26  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

by  means  of  an  excuse  based  on  the  smallness  of  the  parts  and 
of  the  pores.  Here  distinction  in  itself,  contradiction,  and  the 
negation  of  negation  come  into  play,  and,  in  general,  a  notion 
is  required  to  be  formed ;  and  here  imagination  allows  itself  to 
relapse  into  external  or  quantitative  distinction;  in  respect  of 
arising  and  passing  away  it   has   recourse  to  graduality,  and 
in  respect  of  Being,  to  smallness,  where  the  vanishing  term  is 
degraded  to  the  imperceptible,  and  contradiction  to  a  con- 
fusion, and  the  true  relation  is  shifted  into  a  vague  sensuous 
representation  which  saves  the  self-transcendent  by  its  obscurity. 
But  if  further  light  is  thrown  upon  this  obscurity  it  reveals 
itself  as  contradiction,  partly  subjective  and  springing  from 
sensuous  representation,   and  partly  objective  and  springing 
from  the  object ;  sensuous  representation  itself  completely  con- 
tains its  elements.  For  the  action  of  this  latter  is,  first,  the 
contradiction  of  clinging  to  perception  (wherein  it  has  before 
it  things  of  existence),  and  yet  of  ascribing  sensuous  existence 
to  the  imperceptible,  which  is  determined  only  by  reflection. 
The  minute  parts,  and  pores,  are  at  the  same  time  said  to  be 
a  sensuous  existence,  and  their  positedness  is  spoken  of  in  the 
same  manner  as  is  that  mode  of  reality  which  belongs  to 
colour,  heat,  and  so  forth.  If,  further,  imagination  were  to 
consider  this  objectival  mist  (the  pores  and  minute  parts)  more 
closely,   it   would   there   recognize   one   Matter   and   also   its 
negation,  since  Matter  would  be  found  at  one  point,  and  by 
its  side  its  negation,  the  pore,  and  by  its  side  again  Matter, 
and  so  forth ;  and  besides  this  it  would  further  perceive  that  in 
"this"  Thing  it  has  (i)  independent  Matter,  and  (2)  its  negation 
(or  porosity)  and  the  other  independent  Matter,  at  one  and 
the  same  point,  and  that  this  porosity  and  the  independent 
persistence  of  Matters  in  one  another  as  in  one  entity  are  a 
reciprocal  negation  and  penetration  of  penetration. — In  physics, 
modern  expositions  of  the  expansion  of  steam  in  atmospheric 
air,    and   of  various   gases   in   one   another,   elaborate   more 
exactly  one  side  of  the  concept  of  the  nature  of  the  Thing 
which  has* here  resulted.  For  they  show  that  a  certain  volume, 
for  instance,  has  a  capacity  for  the  same  amount  of  steam 
whether  it  is  empty  or  full  of  atmospheric  air ;  and  also  that 
the  various  gases  spread  themselves  in  one  another  in  such 
a  manner  that  each  is  as  good  as  a  vacuum  for  the  other,  or 


EXISTENCE  127 

at  least  that  they  are  in  no  kind  of  chemical  combination 
with  one  another,  each  remaining  uninterrupted  by  the  other 
and  self-continuous,  and  preserving  itself  indifferent  to,  while 
penetrating,  the  others. — But  in  the  concept  of  the  Thing  the 
further  moment  is  this,  that  here  one  Matter  is  at  the  same 
point  where  the  other  is  also;  that  at  this  point  one  Matter 
both  penetrates  and  is  penetrated,  or  that  the  independent 
immediately  is  also  the  independence  of  an  Other.  This  is 
self-contradictory;  but  the  Thing  is  this  very  contradiction, 
and  for  this  reason  it  is  Appearance. 

In  the  sphere  of  spirit  the  idea  of  forces  or  faculties  of  the 
soul  is  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  these  Matters.  Spirit  is  "this" 
in  a  far  deeper  sense — the  negative  unity  in  which  its  deter- 
minations interpenetrate  one  another.  But  when  imagined 
as  soul  it  is  frequently  taken  as  a  Thing.  Man  in  general 
is  allowed  to  consist  of  soul  and  body,  and  each  of  these  is 
counted  as  independent  by  itself;  and  similarly  the  soul  is 
allowed  to  consist  of  so-called  soul-forces,  each  of  which  has 
an  independence  persisting  by  itself,  or  is  an  immediate  activity 
operating  for  itself  according  to  its  determinateness.  It  is 
imagined  that  at  one  point  understanding  and  at  another 
fantasy  is  operating  by  itself,  and  that  understanding,  memory, 
and  so  on,  are  cultivated  each  by  itself,  while  the  other  forces 
are  left  inactive  on  one  side  until  their  turn  comes  or  does  not 
come.  The  faculties  are  transposed  into  the  materially-simple 
soul-thing  (supposed  to  be  immaterial  because  simple),  and, 
though  in  this  process  they  are  not  imagined  as  separate 
Matters,  yet,  as  forces,  they  are  assumed  to  be  as  indifferent 
to  one  another  as  these  Matters.  But  spirit  is  not  that  con- 
tradiction which  the  Thing  is,  which  dissolves  and  passes  over 
into  Appearance:  it  is  already  in  itself  contradiction  which 
has  passed  back  into  its  absolute  unity — namely,  the  Notion, 
where  distinctions  must  now  be  thought  of  no  longer  as 
independent,  but  only  as  separate  moments  in  the  subject, 
which  is  simple  individuality. 


CHAPTER  II 
APPEARANCE 

EXISTENCE  is  the  immediacy  of  Being  as  which  Essence  has 
reconstituted  itself.  This  immediacy  is  in  itself  the  intro- 
Reflection  of  Essence.  Essence  as  Existence  emerged  out  of  its 
Ground,  and  the  Ground  itself  has  passed  over  into  it.  Exist- 
ence is  this  reflected  immediacy  in  so  far  as  it  is  in  itself 
absolute  negativity.  And  now  it  is  also  posited  as  this,  since 
it  has  determined  itself  as  Appearance. 

Consequently  Appearance  at  this  point  is  Essence  in  its 
Existence;  Essence  is  present  therein  immediately.  The  fact 
that  it  is  not  immediate  but  reflected  Existence  constitutes  the 
moment  of  Essence  in  it ;  in  other  words,  Existence  as  essential 
Existence  is  Appearance. 

Something  is  only  Appearance  in  this  meaning,  that  Existence 
as  such  is  only  a  posited  entity  and  not  one  which  is  in  and 
for  itself.  This  constitutes  its  essentiality,  which  causes  it  to 
have  in  itself  the  negativity  of  Reflection,  which  is  the  nature 
of  Essence.  This  Reflection  is  not  foreign  or  external,  with 
Essence  belonging  to  it,  nor  does  it  declare  Existence  to 
be  Appearance  after  comparison  made  between  Essence 
and  Existence;  but  (as  was  seen)  this  essentiality  of  Exist- 
ence, which  makes  it  Appearance,  is  the  proper  truth  of 
Existence.  The  Reflection,  by  virtue  of  which  it  is  this,  is 
its  own. 

But  if  it  is  said  that  something  is  only  Appearance,  as  though 
immediate  Existence  on  the  contrary  were  the  truth,  then, 
in  fact,  Appearance  is  the  higher  truth;  for  Appearance  is 
Existence  as  essential  Appearance,  whereas  immediate  Exist- 
ence is  Appearance  which  as  yet  is  essenceless  because  it  has 
one  moment  only  of  Appearance,  namely  Existence  as  imme- 
diate, and  has  not  yet  its  negative  Reflection.  If  Appearance 
is  called  essenceless,  then  the  moment  of  its  negativity  is 
thought  of  as  though  the  immediate,  as  opposed  to  it,  were 
the  positive  and  true ;  but  in  fact  this  immediate  does  not  yet 


APPEARANCE  129 

contain  essential  truth.  Indeed,  Existence  ceases  to  be  essence- 
less  by  the  fact  that  it  passes  over  into  Appearance. 

Essence  at  first  shows  in  itself,  in  its  simple  identity;  it  is 
thus  abstract  Reflection,  or  the  pure  movement  from  nothing 
through  nothing  back  to  itself.  Essence  appears,  and  now  is 
real  Show,  where  the  moments  of  Show  have  Existence.  It  has 
already  resulted  that  Appearance  is  the  negative  self-mediation 
of  the  Thing;  the  distinctions  that  the  Thing  contains  are 
independent  Matters,  which  are  this  contradiction,  that  they 
are  an  immediate  persistence  and  also  have  their  persistence 
only  in  a  foreign  independence,  that  is,  in  the  negation  of  their 
own,  and,  again,  for  this  very  reason  have  their  persistence 
only  in  the  negation  of  this  foreign  independence,  or  in  the 
negation  of  their  own  negation.  Show  is  this  same  media- 
tion; but  its  unstable  moments  take  in  Appearance  the 
shape  of  immediate  independence.  On  the  other  hand  the 
immediate  independence  which  belongs  to  Existence  is,  for  its 
part,  reduced  to  the  rank  of  moment.  Appearance  consequently 
is  the  unity  of  Show  and  Existence. 

Appearance  now  determines  itself  more  closely.  It  is  essential 
Existence ;  the  essentiality  of  the  latter  distinguishes  itself  from 
Appearance  in  so  far  as  this  is  unessential,  and  these  two  sides 
enter  into  relation  with  each  other. — At  first  therefore  Appear- 
ance is  simple  self-identity,  containing  at  the  same  time  various 
content-determinations ;  and  it  itself  as  well  as  their  relation 
is  that  which  remains  constant  to  itself  in  the  changes  of 
Appearance ;  this  is  the  Law  of  Appearance. 

Now  secondly  Law,  which  is  simple  in  its  variety,  passes 
over  into  the  opposite;  the  essential  part  of  Appearance  is 
opposed  to  Appearance,  and  the  World  which  is-in-itself  takes 
its  stand  against  the  World  of  Appearance. 

Thirdly  this  opposition  passes  back  into  its  Ground;  that 
which  is-in-itself  is  in  Appearance,  and  conversely  that  which 
appears  is  determined  as  absorbed  into  its  Being-in-Self; 
Appearance  becomes  Relation. 


130  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

A 

THE  LAW  OF  APPEARANCE 

i.  Appearance  is  the  Existent  mediated  through  its  negation, 
which  constitutes  its  persistence.  Though  this  its  negation  is 
another  independent  entity,  it  is  equally  essentially  a  tran- 
scended entity.  Consequently  the  Existent  is  the  return  of  itself 
into  itself  through  its  negation  and  through  the  negation  of 
this  its  negation;  it  has  therefore  essential  independence,  as 
also  it  is  likewise  immediately  just  positedness,  which  has  a 
Ground  and  an  Other  for  its  consistence. — First,  then,  Appear- 
ance is  Existence  together  with  its  essentiality,  positedness  with 
its  Ground ;  but  this  Ground  is  negation,  and  the  other  inde- 
pendent entity  which  is  the  Ground  of  the  first  is  also  no  more 
than  a  positedness.  Or  again,  the  Existent,  as  Appearing,  is 
reflected  into  an  Other  and  has  this  for  Ground,  and  this 
means  only  this,  that  it  is  reflected  into  an  Other.  The  essential 
independence  which  belongs  to  it  because  it  is  return  into  self 
is  the  return  of  Nothing  through  Nothing  to  itself,  on  account 
of  the  negativity  of  the  moments ;  hence  the  independence  of 
the  Existent  is  only  essential  Show.  For  this  reason  the  coher- 
ence of  the  Existent  which  reciprocally  grounds  itself  consists 
in  this  reciprocal  negation,  namely,  that  the  persistence  of  the 
one  is  not  the  persistence  of  the  other  but  its  positedness,  which 
relation  of  positedness  alone  constitutes  its  persistence.  Ground 
is  here  as  it  is  in  its  truth:  it  is  a  first  term  which  is  only  a 
presupposition. 

This  then  constitutes  the  negative  side  of  Appearance.  But 
in  this  negative  mediation  is  contained  immediately  the  positive 
self-identity  of  the  Existent.  For  it  is  not  positedness  as  against 
an  essential  Ground,  or,  again,  it  is  not  Show  as  in  an  inde- 
pendent entity ;  but  it  is  positedness  which  refers  itself  to  a 
positedness,  or  it  is  Show  only  in  a  Show.  In  this  its  negation 
or  in  its  Other  (which  is  itself  transcended)  it  relates  itself  to 
itself,  and -accordingly  is  self-identical  or  positive  essentiality. — 
This  identity  is  not  immediacy,  which  belongs  to  Existence 
as  such,  and  is  only  that  unessential  part  of  it  by  which  it 
has  its  persistence  in  an  Other.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the 
essential  content  of  Appearance,  which  has  two  sides :  first 


APPEARANCE  131 

it  is  in  the  form  of  positedness  or  external  immediacy,  and 
secondly  it  is  positedness  as  self-identity.  According  to  the  first 
side  the  content  is  as  a  Determinate  Being,  which  however  is 
contingent  and  unessential,  subject  in  its  immediacy  to  transi- 
tion, arising,  and  passing  away.  According  to  the  other  side  the 
content  is  simple  content-determination  exempt  from  this 
change ;  it  is  the  enduring  part  of  it. 

This  content  in  general  is  the  simple  element  of  perishable- 
ness  ;  but  apart  from  this  it  is  also  determinate  content  various 
within  itself.  It  is  the  intro-Reflection  of  Appearance,  of 
negative  Determinate  Being,  and  thus  essentially  contains 
determinateness.  But  Appearance  is  existent  multiple  variety 
which  disports  itself  in  unessential  multifariousness ;  while  its 
reflected  content  is  its  multifariousness  reduced  to  simple 
difference.  For  (considered  more  precisely)  determinate 
essential  content  is  not  only  determinate  in  general,  but,  as 
the  essential  part  of  Appearance,  it  is  complete  determinate- 
ness  :  One  and  its  Other.  In  Appearance  each  of  these  has  its 
persistence  in  the  other  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  also  only 
in  the  other's  non-persistence.  This  contradiction  cancels  itself, 
and  its  intro-Reflection  is  the  identity  of  the  persistence  of 
each :  the  positedness  of  the  one  is  the  positedness  of  the  other 
also.  They  constitute  one  persistence,  and  at  the  same  time  are 
a  various  and  mutually  indifferent  content.Thus  in  the  essential 
side  of  Appearance  the  negative  part  of  the  unessential  content 
(self-transcendence)  has  passed  back  into  identity;  it  is  an 
indifferent  persistence,  which  is  not  transcendedness  but  rather 
the  persistence  of  the  Other. 

This  unity  is  the  Law  of  Appearance. 

2.  Law  therefore  is  the  positive  element  in  the  mediation 
of  the  Apparent.  Appearance  at  this  stage  is  Existence  as 
negative  self-mediation,  so  that  the  Existent  is  mediated  with 
itself  through  its  own  non-persistence,  through  an  Other,  and 
again  through  the  non-persistence  of  this  Other.  Herein  is 
contained  firstly  the  mere  showing  and  vanishing  of  both 
(unessential  Appearance),  and  secondly  also  endurance  or 
Law ;  for  each  of  the  two  exists  in  the  transcendence  of  the 
other,  and  their  positedness  as  their  negativity  is  also  the 
identical,  positive  positedness  of  both. 

This  enduring  persistence  which  belongs  to  Appearance  in 


132  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Law  is  accordingly,  as  it  has  determined  itself,  opposed  firstly 
to  the  immediacy  of  Being  which  belongs  to  Existence.  In 
itself  this  immediacy  is  reflected  immediacy,  that  is,  Ground 
which  has  passed  back  into  itself;  but  now,  in  Appearance, 
this  simple  immediacy  is  distinct  from  reflected  immediacy, 
whereas  in  the  Thing  their  separation  was  but  commencing. 
In  its  dissolution  the  existing  Thing  has  become  this  opposition ; 
the  positive  element  of  its  dissolution  is  the  self-identity  of  the 
Apparent,  as  positedness,  in  its  other  positedness. — Secondly 
this  reflected  immediacy  is  itself  determined  as  positedness  as 
against  the  immediacy,  which  has  being,  of  Existence.  This 
positedness  (Gesetztsein)  is  now  the  essential  and  truly  positive. 
The  German  expression  Gesetz  (Law)  contains  this  deter- 
mination likewise.  In  this  positedness  lies  the  essential  relation 
of  the  two  sides  of  the  distinction  which  is  contained  in  Law ; 
they  are  a  various  and  mutually  immediate  content,  and  they 
are  this  as  the  Reflection  of  the  vanishing  content  which  belongs 
to  Appearance.  As  essential  variety  the  various  terms  are  simple 
self-relating  content-determinations.  But  equally  none  of  them 
is  immediate  for  itself,  but  each  essentially  is  positedness,  or 
is  only  in  so  far  as  the  other  is. 

Thirdly,  Appearance  and  Law  have  one  and  the  same  con- 
tent. Law  is  the  Reflection  of  Appearance  into  identity  with 
itself;  thus  Appearance  stands  opposed  as  void  immediacy  to 
the  intro-reflected,  and,  according  to  this  form,  they  are  dis- 
tinct. But  the  Reflection  of  Appearance  by  virtue  of  which 
this  distinction  has  being  is  also  the  essential  identity  of 
Appearance  itself  and  of  its  Reflection,  and  indeed  this  is  the 
nature  of  Reflection :  it  is  that  which  in  positedness  is  self- 
identical  and  indifferent  to  that  distinction  which  is  form  or 
positedness;  it  is  a  content  which  continues  itself  out  of 
Appearance  into  Law:  the  content  of  Law  and  of  Appearance. 

This  content  accordingly  constitutes  the  foundation  of 
Appearance;  Law  is  this  foundation  itself,  and  Appearance 
is  the  same  content,  but  it  contains  more  too,  namely  the 
unessential  content  of  its  immediate  being.  For  the  form-deter- 
mination also,  by  virtue  of  which  Appearance  as  such  is 
distinct  from  Law,  is  a  content,  and  is  likewise  distinct  from 
the  content  of  Law.  For  Existence,  too,  as  immediacy  in 
general,  is  a  self-identity  of  matter  and  form  which  is  indifferent 


APPEARANCE  133 

to  its  form-determinations  and  therefore  is  content :  it  is  Thing- 
hood  with  its  Properties  and  Matters.  But  it  is  that  content 
whose  independent  immediacy  also  has  being  only  as  a  non- 
persistence.  But  its  self-identity  in  this  its  non-persistence  is 
the  other  or  essential  content.  This  identity,  the  foundation  of 
Appearance,  which  constitutes  Law,  is  the  peculiar  moment 
of  Appearance ;  it  is  the  positive  side  of  essentiality,  by  virtue 
of  which  Existence  is  Appearance. 

Consequently  Law  is  not  beyond  Appearance,  but  is  imme- 
diately present  in  it:  the  realm  of  Laws  is  the  quiescent 
counterfeit  of  the  existing  or  appearing  world.  Or  rather  both 
are  one  totality,  and  the  existing  world  is  itself  the  realm  of 
Laws,  which,  as  the  simple  identical,  is  at  the  same  time 
identical  with  itself  in  positedness  or  in  the  self-dissolving 
independence  of  Existence.  Existence  passes  back  into  Law  as 
into  its  Ground;  Appearance  contains  them  both — simple 
Ground  and  the  dissolving  movement  of  the  appearing  uni- 
verse, of  which  movement  Ground  is  the  essentiality. 

3.  Law,  then,  is  essential  Appearance;  it  is  the  intro- 
Reflection  of  Appearance  in  its  positedness,  the  identical 
content  of  itself  and  of  unessential  Existence.  Now  first  this 
identity  of  Law  with  its  Existence  is  just  immediate  and  simple 
identity,  and  Law  is  indifferent  to  its  Existence :  Appearance 
has  a  further  content  as  against  the  content  of  Law.  The 
former,  indeed,  is  unessential  and  is  the  regress  into  the  latter 
content ;  but  for  Law  it  is  a  prius  which  is  not  posited  by  it ; 
as  content  therefore  it  is  externally  connected  with  Law.  Appear- 
ance is  a  multitude  of  closer  determinations  which  belong 
to  the  "this"  or  the  concrete,  and  are  not  contained  in  Law, 
but  are  determined  by  something  else. — Secondly,  that  which 
Appearance  contains  apart  from  Law  determined  itself  as 
positive  or  as  another  content;  but  essentially  it  is  negative; 
it  is  Form  and  its  movement  as  such,  which  belongs  to  Appear- 
ance. The  realm  of  Laws  is  the  quiescent  content  of  Appear- 
ance ;  Appearance  is  this  same  content,  but  presents  itself  in 
unquiet  change  and  as  Reflection  into  other.  It  Jis  Law  as 
negative  and  just  changing  Existence,  the  movement  of  transi- 
tion into  opposite,  of  self-transcendence  and  regress  into  unity. 
Law  does  not  contain  this  side  of  unquiet  Form,  or  of  negativity; 
Appearance,  therefore,  as  against  Law  is  the  totality,  for  it 


I34  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

contains  Law  but  also  more,  namely  the  moment  of  self- 
moving  Form. — Thirdly,  this  deficiency  is  found  in  Law  in 
this  shape,  that  its  content  is  as  yet  merely  various  and  there- 
fore indifferent  to  itself,  so  that  the  identity  of  its  sides  with 
each  other  is  just  immediate  and  so  internal,  or  not,  as  yet, 
necessary.  In  Law  two  content-determinations  are  connected 
as  essential  (for  instance,  in  the  Law  of  Gravitation,  spatial 
and  temporal  magnitude:  spaces  passed  through  vary  as  the 
squares  of  the  times  elapsed) ;  they^  are,  in  a  connected  state ; 
as  yet  this  relation  is  merely  immediate.  Consequently  the 
relation  itself  is  merely  posited,  and  indeed  in  Appearance  the 
immediate  in  general  has  obtained  the  significance  of  posited- 
ness.  The  essential  unity  of  the  two  sides  of  Law  would  be 
their  negativity — the  one,  that  is,  containing  the  other  in  itself; 
but  this  essential  unity  has  not  yet  emerged  in  Law.  ( — It  is 
not  contained  in  the  concept  of  the  space  which  is  passed 
through  when  a  body  falls  that  time  is  to  correspond  to  it  as 
a  square.  A  fall  is  a  sensible  movement,  and  therefore  it  is  the 
relation  between  time  and  space;  but,  first,  it  is  not  implied 
in  the  determination  of  time  itself— -that  is,  time  as  taken  by 
imagination — that  it  is  related  to  space,  and  conversely.  It  is 
said  that  time  can  quite  well  be  imagined  without  space,  and 
space  without  time;  one  is  therefore  added  to  the  other 
externally,  and  this  external  relation  is  movement.  Secondly, 
the  further  determination — namely,  what  are  the  magnitudes 
in  accordance  with  which  time  and  space  are  related  in  move- 
ment— is  indifferent.  The  law  governing  this  is  known  empiri- 
cally, and  in  so  far  it  is  merely  immediate ;  and  a  proof  is 
still  required,  that  is,  a  mediation  for  cognition,  that  the  law 
not  only  operates  but  is  necessary.  The  law  as  such  does  not 
contain  this  proof  and  its  objective  necessity. — )  Consequently 
Law  is  only  the  positive  and  not  the  negative  essentiality  of 
Appearance.  In  the  latter  the  content-determinations  are 
moments  of  Form,  as  such  pass  over  into  their  Other,  and  in 
themselves  are  just  as  much  not  themselves  but  their  Other. 
In  Law  then  the  positedness  of  one  side  is  the  positedness  of 
the  other;  but  yet  their  content  is  indifferent  to  this  relation 
and,  in  itself,  does  not  contain  this  positedness.  Consequently, 
although  Law  is  essential  Form,  it  is  not  yet  Real  Form, 
reflected  into  its  sides  as  Content. 


APPEARANCE  135 

B 
THE  WORLD  OF  APPEARANCE  AND  THE  WORLD  IN  ITSELF 

i .  The  existing  world  rises  peacefully  into  a  realm  of  Laws ; 
the  void  content  of  its  manifold  Determinate  Being  has  its 
persistence  in  an  Other;  and  accordingly  its  persistence  is  its 
dissolution.  But  in  this  Other  the  Apparent  also  coincides  with 
itself;  thus  Appearance  in  its  mutation  is  also  an  enduring,  and 
its  positedness  is  Law.  Law  is  this  simple  self-identity  of  Appear- 
ance, and  therefore  is  its  foundation  and  not  its  Ground;  for 
it  is  not  the  negative  unity  of  Appearance,  but,  as  its  simple 
identity,  it  is  immediate  because  abstract  unity;  consequently 
its  other  content  also  has  its  place  beside  it.  The  content  is 
"this55 ;  it  coheres  in  itself,  or  has  its  negative  Reflection  within 
itself.  It  is  reflected  into  an  Other;  this  Other  is  itself  an 
Existence  of  Appearance ;  appearing  things  have  their  Grounds 
and  conditions  in  other  appearing  things. 

But  in  truth  Law  is  also  the  Other  of  Appearance  as  such, 
and  is  its  negative  Reflection  as  into  its  Other.  The  content 
of  Appearance,  which  is  different  from  the  content  of  Law,  is 
the  Existent,  which  has  its  negativity  for  its  Ground,  or  is 
reflected  into  its  not-being.  But  this  Other,  which  is  also  an 
Existent,  is  likewise  an  entity  reflected  in  this  manner  into  its 
not-being;  it  is  therefore  the  same,  and  the  Apparent  in  it  is 
in  fact  not  reflected  into  an  Other  but  into  itself:  and  precisely 
this  intro-Reflection  of  positedness  is  Law.  But,  as  Apparent, 
it  is  essentially  reflected  into  its  not-being;  or,  its  identity  is 
itself,  essentially,  also  its  negativity  and  its  Other.  The  intro- 
Reflection  of  Appearance,  that  is,  Law,  is,  then,  not  only  its 
identical  foundation,  but  Appearance  also  has  its  opposite  in 
Law,  and  Law  is  its  negative  unity. 

The  determination  of  Law  has  thus  changed  in  Law  itself. 
At  first  Law  is  only  a  differentiated  content  and  the  formal 
intro-Reflection  of  positedness,  so  that  the  positedness  of  one 
of  its  sides  is  the  positedness  of  the  other.  But  Law  is  also 
negative  intro-Reflection,  and  therefore  its  sides  are  related 
not  merely  as  different  but  as  negative  to  each  other. — Or, 
if  Law  is  considered  merely  for  itself,  then  the  sides  of  its 
content  are  indifferent  to  each  other;  but  equally  they  are 


136  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

transcended  in  virtue  of  their  identity ;  the  positedness  of  the 
one  is  the  positedness  of  the  other ;  and  accordingly  the  per- 
sistence of  one  is  also  its  own  non-persistence.  This  positedness 
of  the  one  in  the  other  is  their  negative  unity,  and  each  is  not 
only  the  positedness  of  itself  but  also  of  the  other ;  in  other 
words,  each  is  itself  this  negative  unity.  The  positive  identity 
which  they  have  in  Law  as  such  is  only  their  internal  unity, 
which  requires  demonstration  and  mediation,  since  this  nega- 
tive unity  is  not  yet  posited  in  them.  But  the  different  sides 
of  Law  are  now  determined  as  being  different  in  their  negative 
unity,  or  as  being  such  terms  as  contain  each  its  Other  in 
itself  and  at  the  same  time,  being  independent,  repel  each  this 
its  otherness  from  itself;  and  therefore  the  identity  of  Law  now 
is  a  posited  and  a  real  identity. 

So  now  Law  has  likewise  attained  the  moment  of  negative 
form  of  its  sides,  hitherto  lacking, — the  moment  which  before 
still  belonged  to  Appearance;  Existence  now  has  returned 
completely  into  itself,  and  has  reflected  itself  into  its  absolute 
otherness  which  is  in  and  for  itself.  That  which  formerly  was 
Law  is  in  consequence  no  longer  only  one  side  of  that  whole 
whose  other  side  was  Appearance  as  such;  it  is  the  whole 
itself.  It  is  the  essential  totality  of  Appearance,  so  that  Appear- 
ance now  contains  also  the  moment  of  unessentiality,  which 
formerly  belonged  to  the  latter ;  but  it  contains  it  as  reflected, 
self-existent  unessentiality,  that  is,  as  essential  negativity. — As 
immediate  content  Law  is  determinate  in  general,  and  is 
distinct  from  other  laws,  of  which  there  is  an  indeterminable 
number.  But  it  now  has  in  itself  essential  negativity,  and  for 
this  reason  it  no  longer  contains  such  a  merely  indifferent  and 
contingent  content-determination;  its  content  is  the  sum  of 
determinateness  in  an  essential  relation  which  constitutes  itself 
as  totality.  Thus  intro-reflected  Appearance  now  is  a  World, 
which  reveals  itself  as  a  World  that  is  in  and  for  itself  above 
the  World  of  Appearance. 

The  realm  of  Laws  contains  only  the  simple,  immutable, 
but  various  content  of  the  Existing  World.  But  this  realm  is 
the  total  Reflection  of  the  latter,  and  therefore  also  contains 
the  moment  of  its  essenceless  multiplicity.  This  moment  of 
variability  and  variation,  as  intro-reflected  and  essential,  is 
absolute  negativity  or  Form  in  general  as  such ;  but  the  moments 


APPEARANCE  137 

of  this  Form  have  the  reality  proper  to  independent  but  reflected 
Existence  in  the  World  which  is  in  and  for  itself.  Conversely, 
this  reflected  independence  now  also  has  Form,  and  its  content 
therefore  is  not  merely  manifold,  but  essentially  self-coherent. 

— This  World  which  is  in  and  for  itself  is  also  called  the 
supersensuous  World,  in  so  far  as  the  Existing  World  is  deter- 
mined as  sensuous,  that  is,  as  of  a  kind  that  is  for  intuition, 
for  the  immediate  attitude  of  consciousness. — The  supersen- 
suous World,  too,  has  immediacy,  or  Existence,  but  reflected, 
essential  Existence.  Essence  as  yet  has  no  Determinate  Being; 
but  it  is,  and  is  in  a  profounder  sense  than  Being ;  the  Thing 
is  the  beginning  of  reflected  Existence,  it  is  an  immediacy 
which  is  not  yet  posited  as  essential  or  reflected ;  but  in  truth 
it  is  not  an  immediate  which  is.  Only  Things — as  Things  of 
an  other,  supersensuous  World — are  posited,  first  as  veritable 
existences  and  secondly  as  the  truth  as  opposed  to  that  which 
has  being; — in  them  it  is  recognized  that  there  is  a  Being 
different  from  immediate  Being,  and  that  this  is  veritable 
Existence.  In  this  determination  the  sensuous  imagination  has 
been  overcome  which  ascribes  Existence  only  to  the  immediate 
Being  of  sensation  and  of  intuition;  but  also  the  unconscious 
reflection  is  overcome,  which  has  the  imagination  of  Things, 
Forces,  Interiority,  and  so  forth,  but  does  not  know  that  such 
determinations  are  not  sensuous  or  being  immediacies,  but 
reflected  Existences. 

2.  The  World  which  is  in  and  for  itself  is  the  totality  of 
Existence ;  outside  it  there  is  nothing.  But  since  in  itself  it  is 
absolute  negativity  or  Form,  its  intro-Reflection  is  negative 
self-relation.  It  contains  opposition,  and  repels  itself  into  itself 
as  the  Essential  World  and  into  itself  as  the  World  of  Other- 
ness or  the  World  of  Appearance.  Therefore,  because  it  is  the 
totality,  it  is  also  as  one  side  thereof  only,  and  in  this  deter- 
mination constitutes  a  different  independence  over  against  the 
World  of  Appearance.  The  Appearing  World  has  its  negative 
unity  in  the  Essential  World ;  it  perishes  in  it,  and  passes  back 
into  it  as  into  its  Ground.  Further,  the  Essential  Wbrld  is  also 
the  positing  Ground  of  the  Appearing  World ;  for  it  contains 
absolute  Form  in  its  essentiality,  and  hence  its  self-identity 
transcends  itself,  constitutes  itself  positedness,  and,  as  this 
posited  immediacy,  is  the  Appearing  World. 


138  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Further,  it  is  not  only  Ground  in  general  of  the  Appearing 
World,  but  its  determinate  Ground.  Already  as  the  realm  of 
Laws  it  is  manifold  content — the  essential  content  of  the 
Appearing  World;  and  as  Ground  having  content,  it  is  the 
determinate  Ground  of  the  other  World,  but  only  according 
to  this  content;  for  the  Appearing  World  had  manifold  other 
content  beside  this  realm,  since  the  negative  moment  was  its 
peculiar  characteristic.  But  now  the  realm  of  Laws,  too,  has 
in  itself  this  moment,  and  consequently  it  is  the  totality  of  the 
content  of  the  Appearing  World,  and  the  Ground  of  all  its 
multifariousness.  At  the  same  time,  however,  that  World  is 
also  the  negative  of  this  latter,  and  therefore  is  the  World 
which  is  opposed  to  it. — For  in  the  identity  of  the  two  Worlds 
one  is  formally  determined  as  essential,  and  the  other  as  the 
same,  but  as  posited  and  unessential;  and  thus  the  Ground- 
relation  has  restored  itself,  but  is  now  at  the  same  time  the 
Ground-relation  of  Appearance ;  it  is  the  relation  not  of  an 
identical  content,  nor  of  one  which  is  merely  different  (as  is 
Law),  but  is  total  relation  or  negative  identity  and  essential 
relation  of  content  as  opposed. — The  realm  of  Laws  is  not  only 
this,  that  the  positedness  of  one  content  is  the  positedness  of 
an  other,  but  this  identity  is  essentially — as  was  established — 
negative  unity  too ;  each  of  the  two  sides  of  Law  is,  in  negative 
unity,  in  itself  its  other  content ;  the  Other  therefore  is  not 
an  indeterminate  Other  in  general ;  it  is  its  Other,  that  is,  it 
too  draws  its  content-determination  from  the  first;  thus  the 
two  sides  are  opposites.  The  realm  of  Laws  now  has  in  itself 
this  negative  moment  and  opposition;  it  is  totality,  and 
accordingly  repels  itself  from  itself  into  a  World  which  is  in 
and  for  itself  and  an  Appearing  World ;  and  thus  the  identity 
of  the  two  is  essential  relation  of  opposition. — The  Ground- 
relation  as  such  is  opposition  which  has  perished  in  its  con- 
tradiction, and  Existence  is  Ground  which  coincides  with  itself. 
But  Existence  becomes  Appearance;  Ground  is  transcended 
in  Existence;  it  restores  itself  as  return  of  Appearance  into 
itself;  but  at  the  same  time  it  does  so  as  transcended  Ground, 
namely  as  Ground-relation  of  opposite  determinations.  But  the 
identity  of  such  terms  is  essentially  becoming  and  transition, 
no  longer  Ground-relation  as  such. 

Accordingly  the  World  which  is  in  and  for  itself  is  itself  a 


APPEARANCE  139 

World  differentiated  in  itself,  in  the  totality  of  manifold  con- 
tent ;  it  is  identical  with  the  Appearing  or  Posited  World,  and, 
in  so  far,  it  is  the  Ground  thereof;  but  its  identical  coherence 
is  also  determined  as  opposition,  because  the  Form  of  the 
Appearing  World  is  the  Reflection  into  its  otherness,  so  that 
it  has  truly  passed  back  into  itself  in  the  World  which  is  in 
and  for  itself  in  so  far  as  this  is  its  opposite.  Having  been 
determined,  therefore,  the  relation  is  this,  that  the  World  which 
is  in  and  for  itself  is  the  inversion  of  the  Appearing  World. 


G 

DISSOLUTION  OF  APPEARANCE 

The  World  which  is  in  and  for  itself  is  the  determinate 
Ground  of  the  Appearing  World,  and  it  is  this  only  in  so  far 
as  it  is  in  itself  the  negative  moment  and  hence  the  totality 
of  content-determinations  and  their  changes,  corresponding  to 
the  Appearing  World  but  at  the  same  time  constituting  that 
side  of  it  which  is  absolutely  opposite.  The  relation  of  the  two 
Worlds  to  each  other  is,  then,  such  that  what  is  positive  in 
the  Appearing  World  is  negative  in  the  World  which  is  in  and 
for  itself  and  conversely  what  is  negative  in  that  is  positive 
in  this.  The  North  Pole  of  the  Appearing  World  is  in  and  for 
itself  the  South  Pole,  and  conversely;  positive  electricity  in 
itself  is  negative,  and  so  forth.  What  in  Apparent  Determinate 
Being  is  evil,  misfortune,  and  30  on,  is  in  and  for  itself  good  or 
happiness. 

Indeed  in  this  very  opposition  of  the  two  Worlds  their 
difference  has  vanished,  and  what  was  to  have  been  World 
which  is  in  and  for  itself,  is  itself  Appearing  World,  while  this 
conversely  is  in  itself  Essential  World. — The  Appearing  World 
at  first  is  determined  as  the  Reflection  into  otherness,  so  that 
its  determinations  and  Existences  have  their  Ground  and  per- 
sistence in  an  Other;  but  this  Other  is  likewise  reflected  mco 
an  Other,  and  therefore  in  being  related  to  it  they  are  related 
merely  to  a  self-transcending  Other,  and  hence  to  themselves ; 
the  Appearing  World  thus  is,  in  itself,  self-equal  Law. — Con- 
versely the  World  which  is  in  and  for  itself  is  at  first  self- 
identical  content,  removed  from  otherness  and  change;  but 


140  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

thi$  content,  as  complete  intro- Reflection  of  the  Appearing 
World,  or  because  its  variety  is  intro-reflected  and  absolute 
difference,  contains  the  negative  moment  and  the  relation  to 
self  as  to  otherness.  This  makes  it  self-opposed,  self-inverting, 
cssenceless  content.  Further  this  content  of  the  World  which 
is  in  and  for  itself  has  now  obtained  thereby  the  form  of  imme- 
diate Existence.  For  at  the  outset  this  World  is  Ground  of  the 
Appearing  World ;  but,  since  it  contains  opposition,  it  is  equally 
transcended  Ground  and  immediate  Existence. 

Thus  both  the  Appearing  and  the  Essential  World  are  each 
in  itself  the  totality  of  self-identical  Reflection  and  of  Reflection 
into  Other,  or  of  Being-in-and-for-Self  and  of  Appearing.  Each 
is  the  independent  whole  of  Existence.  One  was  to  have  been 
only  reflected  Existence,  and  the  other  only  immediate  Exist- 
ence ;  but  each  continues  itself  in  its  other,  and  consequently 
in  itself  is  the  identity  of  these  two  moments.  We  have,  there- 
fore, this  totality  which  repels  itself  from  itself  into  two  totalities 
— one  reflected,  and  the  other  immediate,  totality.  Both  in  the 
first  instance  are  independent,  but  they  are  independent  only 
as  totalities,  and  they  are  this  in  so  far  as  each  essentially  has 
in  itself  the  moment  of  the  other.  The  distinct  independence 
of  each — of  that  which  is  determined  as  immediate,  and  that 
which  is  reflected — is  consequently  now  posited  in  this  manner, 
that  each  is  only  as  essential  relation  to  the  other  and  has  its 
independence  in  this  unity  of  both. 

The  beginning  was  made  from  the  Law  of  Appearance ;  this 
is  the  identity  of  a  differentiated  content  with  another  content 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  positcdness  of  the  one  is  the  positcd- 
ncss  of  the  other.  In  Law  this  difference  is  still  present,  that 
the  identity  of  its  sides  is  no  more  than  an  internal  identity : 
the  sides  have  not  yet  identity  in  themselves.  Thus  (a)  this 
identity  is  not  realized ;  the  content  of  Law  is  not  as  identical, 
but  an  indifferent,  various  content; — and  (b)  the  content  is 
determined  only  in  itself  in  such  a  manner  that  the  positedness 
of  the  one  is  the  positedness  of  the  other ;  this  is  not  yet  manifest 
in  Law.  B.ut  now  Law  is  realized ;  its  inner  identity  also  has 
determinate  being,  and  conversely  the  content  of  Law  is  raised 
into  ideality ;  for  it  is  a  content  in  itself  transcended  and  intro- 
reflected,  each  side  having  its  other  in  itself,  and  therefore  being 
veritably  identical  with  it  and  with  itself. 


APPEARANCE  141 

Thus  Law  is  Essential  Relation.  The  truth  of  the  unessential 
World  is,  at  first,  an  other  World,  which  is  in  and  for  itself; 
but  this  World  is  the  totality,  for  it  is  both  itself  and  also  that 
first  World.  Both  thus  are  immediate  Existences  and  hence 
Reflections  into  their  otherness ;  and  also,  for  this  reason,  they 
arc  truly  intro-reflected.  Indeed,  the  term  world  expresses  the 
formless  totality  of  multifariousness :  this  World,  both  as 
Essential  and  as  Appearing,  has  perished,  since  multifarious- 
ness  has  ceased  to  be  merely  various ;  it  still  is  totality  or 
universe,  but  it  is  so  as  Essential  Relation.  Two  totalities  of 
content  arose  in  Appearance.  They  are  at  first  determined  as 
mutually  indifferent  independent  entities :  they  have  Form, 
each  in  itself,  but  they  have  not  Form  each  as  against  the  other. 
But  Form  has  also  shown  itself  to  be  their  relation,  and  Essential 
Relation  is  the  completion  of  their  formal  unity. 


CHAPTER  III 
ESSENTIAL   RELATION 

THE  truth  of  Appearance  is  Essential  Relation.  Its  content  has 
immediate  independence:  immediacy  which  is,  and  reflected 
immediacy  or  self-identical  Reflection.  At  the  same  time  the 
content  in  this  independence  is  a  relative  content,  which  is 
only  as  Reflection  into  its  Other  or  as  unity  of  the  relation 
to  its  Other.  In  this  unity  the  independent  content  is  some- 
thing posited,  transcended ;  but  this  very  unity  constitutes  its 
essentiality  and  independence:  this  Reflection  into  other  is 
intro-Reflection.  The  Relation  has  sides  because  it  is  Reflection 
into  other;  it  thus  contains  self-difference,  and  the  sides  are 
independent  persistence,  since  in  their  indifferent  variety 
as  against  each  other  they  are  inwardly  refracted,  so  that 
equally  the  persistence  of  each  has  its  significance  only  in  the 
relation  to  the  other  or  in  their  negative  unity. 

Essential  Relation  therefore  is  not  the  true  third  term  for 
Essence  and  Existence ;  but  it  does  already  contain  the  definite 
union  of  the  two.  Essence  in  it  is  realized  in  such  a  manner 
that  it  has  for  its  persistence  entities  having  independent 
Existence ;  and  these  have  passed  back  out  of  their  indifference 
into  their  essential  unity,  so  that  they  have  only  this  for  their 
consistence.  The  Reflection-determinations  of  positive  and 
negative  likewise  are  intro-reflected  only  as  reflected  each  into 
its  opposite ;  but  they  have  no  other  determination  except  this 
their  negative  unity,  whereas  Essential  Relation  has  for  its  sides 
terms  that  are  posited  as  independent  totalities.  It  is  the  same 
opposition  as  that  of  positive  and  negative,  but  at  the  same 
time  as  an  inverted  World.  The  side  of  Essential  Relation  is 
a  totality,  which  however  essentially  has  an  opposite  or  Beyond ; 
it  is  only  'Appearance ;  its  own  Existence  is  rather  that  not  of 
itself  but  of  its  Other.  It  is  therefore  inwardly  refracted ;  but 
this  its  transcendedness  consists  in  this,  that  it  is  the  unity  of 
itself  and  of  its  Other,  that  is,  a  Whole ;  and  for  this  very  reason 
it  has  independent  Existence  and  is  essential  intro-Reflection. 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  143 

This  is  the  concept  of  the  Relation.  But  at  this  stage  the 
identity  which  it  contains  is  not  yet  complete;  as  yet  the 
totality,  which  everything  relative  is  in  itself,  is  only  internal ; 
and  the  side  of  the  Relation  is  posited  in  one  of  the  determina- 
tions of  the  negative  unity :  the  proper  independence  of  each  of 
the  two  sides  is  that  which  constitutes  the  form  of  the  Relation. 
Its  identity  therefore  is  only  a  relation,  and  its  independence 
falls  outside  this  relation,  namely  in  the  sides;  the  reflected 
unity  of  this  identity  and. of  the  independent  Existences  has 
not  yet  arisen :  there  is  not  yet  Substance. — Thus  the  concept 
of  Relation  has  resulted,  in  the  shape  of  unity  of  reflected  and 
immediate  independence.  But,  at  first,  this  concept  itself  is  still 
immediate ;  its  moments  consequently  are  immediate  as  against 
each  other,  and  unity  is  their  essential  relation — a  unity  which 
then  only  is  true,  and  corresponds  to  the  concept,  when  and 
in  so  far  as  it  realizes  itself,  that  is,  has  posited  itself  as  this 
unity  through  its  movement. 

Essential  Relation  is,  therefore,  immediately  the  Relation  of 
Whole  and  Parts, — the  relation  of  reflected  and  of  immediate 
independence,  where  the  two  terms  coexist  only  as  reciprocally 
conditioning  and  presupposing. 

In  this  Relation  as  yet  neither  of  the  sides  is  posited  as 
moment  of  the  other,  and  therefore  their  identity  itself  is  one 
side ;  in  other  words,  their  identity  is  not  their  negative  unity. 
Secondly,  therefore,  the  Relation  passes  over  into  the  state 
where  one  is  moment  of  the  other  and  is  in  it  as  in  its  Ground 
— the  truly  independent  of  the  two  terms : — the  Relation  of 
Force  and  its  Manifestation. 

There  still  remains  an  asymmetry  in  this  relation.  This, 
thirdly,  transcends  itself;  and  the  last  Relation  is  that  of  Inner 
and  Outer. — This  distinction  has  become  wholly  formal,  and 
in  it  Relation  itself  perishes,  and  Substance  or  the  Actual  emerges, 
as  the  absolute  unity  of  immediate  and  of  reflected  Existence. 

A 
THE  RELATION  OF  WHOLE  AND  PARTS 

i.  Essential  Relation  contains,  first,  the  intro-reflected  inde- 
pendence of  Existence ;  it  is  thus  simple  From,  whose  deter- 
minations are  also  Existences,  but  at  the  same  time  are  posited 


144  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

— moments  preserved  in  unity.  This  intro-reflected  indepen- 
dence is  also  Reflection  into  its  opposite,  namely  immediate 
independence,  and  its  persistence  is  essentially  its  own  inde- 
pendence no  more  than  it  is  this  identity  with  its  opposite. — 
But  precisely  hereby — secondly — the  other  side  too  is  imme- 
diately posited:  immediate  ir dependence  which,  determined 
as  the  Other,  is  a  multiple  manifold  within  itself,  but  in  such 
a  manner  that  this  manifold  essentially  also  contains  the 
relation  to  the  other  side,  the  unity  ^of  reflected  independence. 
That  one  side — the  Whole — is  the  independence  which  con- 
stituted the  World  which  is  in  and  for  itself;  the  other  side — 
the  Parts — is  that  immediate  Existence  which  was  the  Appearing 
World.  In  the  Relation  of  Whole  and  Parts  the  two  sides  are 
these  independences,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  in  each  the 
other  shows  and  each  also  is  only  as  this  identity  of  the  two. 
Essential  Relation  is  only  first  and  immediate,  and  therefore 
negative  unity  and  positive  independence  are  connected  by  the 
"also" ;  although  both  sides  are  posited  as  moments,  they  are 
equally  posited  as  existing  independences. — The  fact  that  both 
are  posited  as  moments  has  hence  the  following  components : 
first,  the  Whole,  or  reflected  independence,  is  as  Existent,  and 
the  other  or  immediate  independence  is  in  it  as  moment; — 
here  the  Whole  constitutes  the  unity  of  the  two  sides  or  their 
foundation,  and  immediate  Existence  is  as  positedness. — Con- 
versely on  the  other  side — the  side  of  the  Parts — immediate 
Existence  which  is  manifold  in  itself  is  the  independent  founda- 
tion; while  the  reflected  unity,  or  the  Whole,  is  only  external 
relation. 

2.  Accordingly  this  relation  contains  the  independence  of  the 
sides  and  equally  their  transcendedness,  and  it  contains  both 
in  one  relation.  The  Whole  is  the  independent,  and  the  Parts 
are  only  moments  of  this  unity ;  but  equally  they  too  are  the 
independent,  and  their  reflected  unity  is  only  a  moment ;  and 
each  in  its  independence  is  just  something  relative  to  an  Other. 
Thus  this  Relation  is  in  itself  immediate  contradiction  and 
cancels  itself. 

If  this  is  more  closely  considered,  the  Whole  is  the  reflected 
unity  which  has  independent  persistence  for  itself;  but  this  its 
persistence  is  equally  repelled  from  it;  as  negative  unity,  the 
Whole  is  negative  relation  to  itself.  It  has  thus  externalized 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  145 

itself;  it  has  its  consistence  in  its  opposite — manifold  immediacy, 
or  the  Parts.  Hence  the  Whole  consists  of  the  Parts,  so  that 
it  is  not  something  without  them.  Thus  it  is  the  whole  Relation 
and  the  independent  totality ;  but  for  this  very  reason  it  is  only 
a  relative  term,  for  that  which  makes  it  a  totality  is  precisely 
its  Other,  the  Parts ;  and  it  has  its  consistence  not  in  itself  but 
in  its  Other. 

Thus  the  Parts  are  also  the  whole  Relation.  They  are  imme- 
diate, as  against  reflected,  independence,  and  they  do  not 
consist  in  the  Whole,  but  are  for  themselves.  Further,  they 
have  this  Whole  in  themselves  as  their  moment:  it  con- 
stitutes their  relation,  there  being  no  Parts  without  a  Whole. 
But,  since  they  are  the  independent  element,  this  relation  is 
only  an  external  moment,  and  against  it  they,  in  and  for 
themselves,  are  indifferent.  But  at  the  same  time  the  Parts  as 
manifold  Existence  collapse  into  themselves,  for  such  Existence 
is  Reflection-less  Being ;  they  have  their  independence  only  in 
reflected  unity,  which  is  this  unity  and  also  is  existent  mul- 
tiplicity; that  is,  they  have  independence  only  in  the  Whole, 
but  the  Whole  is  at  the  same  time  an  other  independence  to  the 
Parts. 

The  Whole  and  the  Parts  therefore  condition  each  other; 
but  the  Relation  here  considered  is  at  the  same  time  higher 
than  the  relation  between  Condition  and  Conditioned  as  it 
had  determined  itself  above.  This  relation  here  is  realized; 
that  is,  it  is  posited  that  the  Condition  is  the  essential  indepen- 
dence of  the  Conditioned  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  pre- 
supposed by  the  latter.  Condition  as  such  is  only  the  immediate, 
and  is  presupposed  only  in  itself;  whereas  the  Whole  is  the 
Condition  of  the  Parts,  but  also  itself  immediately  contains 
this,  that  it  too  is  only  in  so  far  as  it  has  the  parts  for  pre- 
supposition. Thus  the  two  sides  of  the  Relation  are  posited 
as  conditioning  each  other,  and  each  therefore  is  an  immediate 
independence  in  itself;  but  equally  its  independence  is  mediated 
or  posited  by  the  other.  By  virtue  of  this  reciprocity  the  whole 
Relation  is  the  return  of  Conditioning  into  itself:  it  is  the 
non-relative,  the  Unconditioned. 

Each  side  of  the  Relation  now  has  its  independence  not  in 
itself  but  in  the  other,  and  thus  there  is  only  one  identity  of 
both,  in  which  both  are  only  moments ;  but  each  is  independent 

VOL.    II.  K 


146  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

in  itself,  and  thus  they  are  two  independent  Existences  which 
are  indifferent  to  each  other. 

According  to  the  first  respect — that  of  the  essential  identity 
of  these  sides— the  Whole  is  equal  to  the  Parts  and  the  Parts 
to  the  Whole.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Whole  which  is  not  in 
the  Parts,  and  nothing  in  the,  Parts  which  is  not  in  the  Whole. 
The  Whole  is  not  abstract  unity,  but  the  unity  as  of  a  various 
multiplicity ;  this  unity,  however,  as  that  in  which  the  manifold 
relates  itself  internally  to  itself,  is  the  determinateness  of  the 
latter,  by  virtue  of  which  it  is  Part.  The  Relation  therefore 
has  an  inseparable  identity  and  one  independence  only. 

But  further,  although  the  Whole  is  equal  to  the  Parts,  it  is 
not  equal  to  them  as  Parts;  the  Whole  is  reflected  unity,  but 
the  Parts  constitute  the  determinate  moment  or  otherness  of 
the  unity,  and  are  the  various  manifold.  The  Whole  is  equal 
to  them  not  as  this  independent  various,  but  to  them  jointly. 
But  this  "jointly"  is  just  their  unity,  or  the  Whole  as  such.  The 
Whole  therefore  is  equal  only  to  itself  in  the  Parts,  and  the 
equality  of  itself  and  the  Parts  expresses  only  the  tautology 
that  the  Whole  as  Whole  is  equal  not  to  the  Parts  but  to  the 
Whole. 

Conversely  the  Parts  are  equal  to  the  Whole.  But,  since  they 
are  the  moment  of  otherness  in  themselves,  they  are  not  equal 
to  it  as  the  unity,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  one  of  its  manifold 
determinations  is  appropriated  to  the  Part,  or  that  they  are 
equal  to  it  as  being  a  manifold;  that  is,  they  are  equal  to  it 
as  a  partitioned  Whole,  that  is,  as  the  Parts.  Thus  we  have  here 
the  same  tautology:  the  Parts  as  Parts  are  equal  not  to  the 
Whole  as  such,  but,  in  it,  to  themselves,  the  Parts. 

In  this  manner  the  Whole  and  the  Parts  fall  apart  indifferent ; 
each  of  these  sides  relates  itself  only  to  itself.  But  being  thus 
held  apart  they  destroy  themselves.  The  whole  which  is  in- 
different to  the  Parts  is  abstract  undifferentiated  identity;  the 
identity  in  question  here  is  a  Whole  only  as  differentiated  in 
itself,  and  differentiated  in  such  a  manner  that  these  manifold 
determinations  are  reflected  into  themselves  and  have  imme- 
diate independence.  And  the  identity  of  Reflection  has  shown 
in  its  movement  that  it  has  for  its  truth  this  Reflection  into 
its  Other. — In  the  same  manner  the  Parts,  as  indifferent  to 
the  unity  of  the  Whole,  are  only  the  unrelated  manifold,  or 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  147 

that  which  is  Other  in  itself,  which,  as  such,  is  its  own  Other, 
cancelling  itself  and  no  more. — This  self-relation  of  each  of  the 
two  sides  is  their  independence ;  but  this  their  independence, 
which  each  has  for  itself,  is  rather  self-negation.  Accordingly 
each  has  its  independence  not  in  itself  but  in  the  other ;  this 
other,  which  constitutes  the  consistence,  is  its  presupposed  im- 
mediate, which  is  supposed  to  be  First  and  its  beginning ;  but 
this  First  of  each  is  itself  only  such  an  entity  as  is  not  a  First 
but  has  its  beginning  in  tfye  Other. 

The  truth  of  the  Relation  consists,  then,  in  mediation ;  its 
Essence  is  negative  unity,  in  which  both  reflected  and  being 
immediacy  are  transcended.  The  Relation  is  contradiction 
which  passes  back  into  its  Ground,  into  unity  which,  as  return- 
ing, is  reflected  unity ;  but,  since  this  latter  has  equally  posited 
itself  as  transcended,  it  is  in  a  negative  relation  to  itself, 
transcends  itself,  and  constitutes  itself  being  immediacy.  But 
this  its  negative  relation,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  First  and  an  imme- 
diate, is  mediated  only  through  its  Other,  and  is  equally 
posited.  And  equally  this  Other — being  immediacy — is  only  as 
transcended;  its  independence  is  a  First,  but  forthwith  it 
vanishes,  and  has  a  Determinate  Being  which  is  posited  and 
mediated. 

In  this  determination  the  Relation  is  no  longer  one  of  Whole 
and  Parts;  the  immediacy  which  belonged  to  its  sides  has 
passed  over  into  positedness  and  mediation.  Each  is  posited, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  immediate,  as  transcending  itself  and  passing 
over  into  the  other,  and  also,  in  so  far  as  it  is  itself  negative 
relation,  as  being  conditioned  by  the  other  as  by  its  positive 
term ;  and  indeed  its  immediate  transition  equally  is  mediated, 
for  it  is  a  transcendence  which  is  posited  by  the  other. — Thus 
the  Relation  of  Whole  and  Parts  has  passed  over  into  the 
Relation  of  Force  and  its  Manifestation. 

Observation 

The  antinomy  of  the  infinite  divisibility  of  matter  was 
considered  above  (Vol.  I,  pp.  204  sqq.),  under  the  concept  of 
Quantity.  Quantity  is  the  unity  of  continuity  and  discreteness ; 
in  the  independent  One  it  contains  the  completed  fact  of  its 
amalgamation  with  others,  and,  in  this  uninterruptedly  con- 


148  SCIENCE   OF   LOGIC 

tinuous  self-identity,  it  also  contains  its  negation.  The  imme- 
diate relation  of  these  moments  of  Quantity  is  expressed  as  the 
Essential  Relation  of  Whole  and  Parts  (the  One  of  Quantity 
being  Part,  and  its  continuity,  Whole,  which  is  composed  of 
Parts),  and  the  antinomy  then  consists  in  the  contradiction 
which  has  been  presented  and  resolved  in  the  Relation  of  Whole 
and  Parts. — For  Whole  and  Parts  are  indifferent  to  each  other 
and  have  independent  persistence,  but  also  they  are  essentially 
related  and  constitute  only  one  identity.  The  Relation  there- 
fore is  the  antinomy  that  the  one  moment,  in  freeing  itself  from 
the  other,  immediately  introduces  the  other. 

The  Existent,  then,  being  determined  as  Whole,  has  Parts, 
and  the  Parts  constitute  its  consistence ;  the  unity  of  the  Whole 
is  only  a  posited  relation,  an  external  composition  which  does 
not  concern  the  independent  Existent.  Now  in  so  far  as  this 
Existent  is  Part,  it  is  not  Whole,  nor  composite,  but  simple. 
But  the  relation  to  a  Whole  is  external  to  it,  and  therefore  does 
not  concern  it;  thus  the  independent  entity  is  not  Part  even 
in  itself,  for  it  is  Part  only  through  this  relation.  But  now, 
since  it  is  not  Part,  it  is  Whole;  for  the  only  relation  which 
is  given  is  this  Relation  of  Whole  and  Parts,  and  the  indepen- 
dent entity  is  one  of  the  two.  But  when  it  is  Whole  it  is  again 
composite;  it  again  consists  of  Parts,  and  so  to  infinity. — This 
infinity  consists  just  in  the  perpetual  alternation  of  the  two 
determinations  of  the  Relation,  in  each  of  which  the  other 
immediately  arises,  so  that  the  positedness  of  each  is  its  own 
disappearance.  Matter  determined  as  Whole  consists  of  Parts, 
and  in  these  the  Whole  becomes  an  unessential  relation  and 
vanishes.  But  the  Part  too,  thus  isolated,  is  also  not  Part,  but 
the  Whole. — The  antinomy  of  this  conclusion  being  closely 
compressed  is  properly  this :  the  Whole  is  not  the  independent 
entity,  and  therefore  the  Part  is ;  but  since  the  Part  is  indepen- 
dent only  without  the  Whole,  it  is  independent  not  as  Part  but 
rather  as  Whole.  The  infinity  of  the  progress  which  results  is 
the  impossibility  of  combining  the  two  ideas  which  the  media- 
tion contains,  namely,  that  each  of  the  two  determinations 
passes  over  through  its  independence  and  separation  from  the 
other  into  dependence  and  into  the  other. 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  149 

B 
THE  RELATION  OF  FORCE  AND  ITS  MANIFESTATION 

Force  is  the  negative  unity  into  which  the  contradiction  of 
Whole  and  Parts  has  resolved  itself;  it  is  the  truth  of  that  first 
Relation.  The  Whole  and  Parts  is  the  first  Relation  to  which 
imagination  has  recourse,  and  it  is  without  meaning  for  thought ; 
objectively  it  is  a  dead  and  mechanical  aggregation  having 
form-determinations  by  which  the  multiplicity  of  its  indepen- 
dent matter  is  related  in  one  unity ;  but  this  unity  is  external 
to  such  matter. — But  the  Relation  of  Force  is  the  higher  return 
upon  self,  where  the  unity  of  the  Whole,  which  constituted  the 
relation  of  independent  otherness,  ceases  to  be  external  and 
indifferent  to  this  multiplicity. 

Essential  Relation  has  now  determined  itself  to  be  such  that 
immediate  and  reflected  independence  arc  posited  in  it  as 
transcended,  or  as  moments — whereas  in  the  preceding  Rela- 
tion they  were  sides  persisting  for  themselves,  or  extremes.  In 
this  there  is  contained,  first,  that  reflected  unity  and  its  im- 
mediate Determinate  Being,  in  so  far  as  both  arc  first  and 
immediate,  transcend  themselves  and  pass  over  each  into  its 
Other :  the  former — Force — passes  over  into  its  Manifestation, 
and  the  Manifest  is  something  which  disappears,  and  passes 
back  into  Force  as  into  its  Ground:  it  is  only  as  supported 
and  posited  by  Force.  Secondly,  this  transition  is  not  only  a 
Becoming  and  disappearance,  but  also  negative  self-relation; 
or,  that  which  changes  its  determination  is  here  also  intro- 
reflected  and  preserves  itself:  the  movement  of  Force  is  not 
so  much  a  transition  as  a  self-transposition,  where  it  remains 
what  it  is  in  this  change  which  it  posited  itself. — Thirdly,  this 
reflected  and  self-relating  unity  is  itself  also  transcended  and 
is  moment;  it  is  mediated  by  its  Other  and  has  it  for  Con- 
dition ;  its  negative  self-relation,  which  is  First  and  begins  the 
movement  of  its  transition  out  of  itself,  has  equally  a  pre- 
supposition by  which  it  is  solicited,  and  an  Other  from  which 
it  begins. 

(a)  THE  CONDITIONEDNESS  OF  FORCE 

Considered  in  its  closer  determinations  Force  is  seen,  first, 
to  contain  the  moment  of  existent  immediacy;  it  itself  on 


150  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  other  hand  is  determined  as  negative  unity.  But  this 
unity  in  the  determination  of  immediate  Being  is  an  existing 
Something.  This  Something  is  negative  unity  as  immediate 
entity,  and  therefore  appears  as  First ;  Force  on  the  other  hand, 
because  it  is  reflected,  appears  as  positedness,  and,  in  this 
respect,  as  belonging  to  the  existing  Thing  or  to  a  Matter. 
This  does  not  mean  that  Force  is  the  Form  of  this  Thing,  or 
that  the  Thing  is  determined  by  Force;  the  Thing  as  imme- 
diate is,  rather,  indifferent  to  it. — Jn  this  determination  the 
Thing  contains  no  Ground  for  possessing  a  Force;  but  Force, 
as  the  side  of  positedness,  essentially  has  the  Thing  for  its 
presupposition.  When  therefore  it  is  asked  how  the  Thing  or 
Matter  comes  to  have  a  Force,  then  the  Force  appears  as 
connected  with  it  externally,  and  impressed  on  the  Thing  by 
an  alien  power. 

As  this  immediate  persistence  Force  is  a  quiescent  deter- 
minateness  of  the  Thing  in  general ;  it  is  not  self-manifesting, 
but  is  immediately  manifest.  Thus  Force  is  also  designated  as 
Matter,  and,  instead  of  magnetic,  electrical,  and  other  Forces, 
magnetic,  electrical,  and  other  Matters  are  assumed,  or,  instead 
of  the  famous  attractive  Force,  a  subtle  aether  which  holds 
together  all  things. — These  are  the  Matters  into  which  the 
inactive,  forceless,  and  negative  unity  of  the  Thing  resolves 
itself,  and  which  were  considered  above. 

But  Force  contains  immediate  Existence  for  moment — as 
moment  which,  though  it  is  Condition,  passes  over  and  tran- 
scends itself,  and  not  therefore  as  an  existing  Thing.  It  is 
not,  further,  negation  as  determinateness,  but  negative  intro- 
reflective  unity.  The  Thing  in  which  Force  was  supposed  to 
reside  has  therefore  no  significance  here;  rather,  Force  itself 
is  the  positing  of  the  Manifestation  which  appears  as  Existence. 
It  is  therefore  not  merely  a  determinate  Matter :  such  indepen- 
dence long  ago  passed  over  into  positedness  and  Appearance. 

Secondly,  Force  is  the  unity  of  reflected  and  immediate 
persistence ;  or,  of  formal  unity  and  external  independence. 
It  is  both  ui  one ;  it  is  the  contact  of  terms  of  which  one  is 
in  so  far  as  the  other  is  not — self-identical  positive,  and 
negated,  Reflection.  Thus  Force  is  self-repellent  contradiction ; 
it  is  active,  or  it  is  self-relating  negative  unity,  in  which 
reflected  immediacy  or  essential  Being-in-Self  is  posited  as  being 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  151 

only  as  transcended  or  as  moment,  that  is,  in  so  far  as  it 
distinguishes  itself  from  immediate  Existence,  as  passing  over 
into  this.  Force,  then,  as  the  determination  of  the  reflected 
unity  of  the  Whole,  is  posited  as  becoming  existent  external 
multiplicity  from  out  of  itself. 

But,  thirdly,  Force  is  as  yet  only  self-existent  and  immediate 
activity;  it  is  reflected  unity  and,  equally  essentially,  it  is  its 
negation;  in  so  far  as  it  is  different  from  this,  and  is  only  as 
the  identity  of  itself  and  of  its  negation,  it  is  essentially  related 
to  the  latter  as  to  an  immediacy  external  to  it,  and  has  it  for 
presupposition  and  Condition. 

Now  this  presupposition  is  not  a  Thing  which  stands  over 
against  it ;  this  indifferent  independence  is  transcended  in  Force ; 
as  a  Condition  of  Force  the  Thing  is  an  independent  entity 
which  is  other  to  it.  Here,  however,  it  is  not  Thing,  but  inde- 
pendent immediacy  has  here  also  determined  itself  as  self- 
relating  negative  unity ;  and  thus  it  too  is  Force, — The  activity 
of  Force  is  conditioned  through  itself  as  through  that  which  is 
Other  to  itself,  through  a  Force. 

In  this  manner  Force  is  Relation  in  which  each  side  is  that 
which  the  other  is.  There  are  Forces  which  stand  in  Relation 
and  are,  in  fact,  essentially  related  to  each  other. — Further, 
they  are,  at  first,  merely  different  in  general ;  the  unity  of  their 
Relation  is  at  this  stage  only  inner,  self-existent  unity.  Thus 
Conditionedness  by  another  Force  is,  in  itself,  the  action  of 
Force  itself;  or,  Force  is  in  this  regard  only  presupposing, 
merely  negatively  self-relating,  action ;  this  other  Force  as  yet 
lies  beyond  its  positing  activity,  namely  Reflection  which,  as 
it  determines,  immediately  returns  to  itself. 

(V)  THE  SOLICITATION  OF  FORGE 

Force  is  Conditioned  because  it  contains  a  moment  of 
immediate  Existence  which  is  only  as  something  posited,  but — 
since  it  is  also  immediate — is  something  presupposed,  in  which 
Force  negates  itself.  Therefore  the  externality  which  is  given 
in  Force  is  its  own  presupposing  activity,  which,  at  first,  is 
posited  as  another  Force. 

Further,  this  act  of  presupposing  is  reciprocal.  Each  of  the 
two  Forces  contains  intro-reflected  unity  as  transcended,  and 


152  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

therefore  it  presupposes ;  it  posits  itself  as  external ;  this  moment 
of  externality  is  its  own.  But  equally  it  is  intro-reflected  unity, 
and  therefore  it  posits  this  its  externality  not  in  itself  but  as 
another  Force. 

But  the  external  as  such  is  the  self-transcending.  Further, 
the  self-intro-reflective  activity  is  essentially  related  to  this 
external  as  to  its  Other,  but  equally  as  to  that  which  in  itself 
is  null  and  identical  with  it.  Presupposing  activity  is  equally 
intro-Reflection,  and  hence  it  is  the  transcendence  of  this  its 
negation ;  it  posits  the  latter  as  its  own  self  or  as  that  which 
is  external  to  it.  Thus  Force,  as  conditioning,  is,  reciprocally, 
an  Impulse  for  the  other  Force,  against  which  it  is  active.  Its 
attitude  is  not  the  passivity  of  being  determined,  which  would 
introduce  something  foreign  into  it;  the  Impulse  only  solicits 
it.  It  is  in  itself  its  own  negativity :  its  self-repulse  is  its  self- 
positing.  Its  activity  then  consists  in  the  transcendence  of  the 
external  nature  of  this  Impulse ;  it  makes  it  into  a  mere  Impulse, 
and  posits  it  as  its  own  self-repulse,  as  its  own  Manifestation. 

Force  which  manifests  itself  is,  therefore,  that  same  entity 
which  before  was  only  presupposing  activity, — that  is,  it 
externalizes  itself;  but  Force,  as  manifesting  itself,  is,  at  the 
same  time,  an  activity  which  negates  externality  and  posits 
it  as  its  own.  Now  in  so  far  as  in  this  consideration  a  beginning 
is  made  from  Force  as  negative  unity  of  itself,  and,  conse- 
quently, as  presupposing  Reflection,  in  so  far  this  is  the  same 
as  when  a  beginning  is  made,  in  the  Manifestation  of  Force, 
from  the  soliciting  Impulse.  Thus  in  its  concept  Force  is,  first, 
determined  as  self-transcending  identity;  and,  in  its  reality, 
one  of  the  Forces  is  determined  as  soliciting  and  the  other  as 
being  solicited.  But  the  concept  of  Force  in  general  is  the 
identity  of  positing  and  presupposing  Reflection,  or  of  reflected 
and  immediate  unity ;  and  each  of  these  determinations  is  just 
a  moment,  in  unity,  and  therefore  is  mediated  through  the 
other.  But  also  there  is  nothing  in  either  of  the  two  recipro- 
cally related  Forces  to  determine  which  is  to  be  soliciting  and 
which  solicited ;  or  rather  both  form-determinations  belong  in 
the  same  manner  to  each.  But  this  identity  is  not  only  an 
external  identity  of  comparison,  but  is  an  essential  unity  of 
the  two. 

For  one  Force  is  here  determined  as  soliciting  and  the  other 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  153 

as  being  solicited;  in  this  manner  these  form-determinations 
appear  as  immediate  distinctions,  given  in  themselves,  between 
the  two  Forces.  But  they  are  essentially  mediated.  One  of  the 
Forces  is  solicited;  this  Impulse  is  a  determination  which  is 
inserted  into  it  from  without.  But  Force  itself  is  that  which 
presupposes ;  essentially  it  reflects  itself  into  itself  and  tran- 
scends the  fact  that  the  Impulse  is  external.  Hence  the  fact 
that  it  is  solicited  is  its  own  doing,  or,  it  is  determined  through 
itself  that  the  other  Force  .is  other  and  is  the  soliciting  Force. 
The  soliciting  Force  is  negatively  related  to  its  other,  and  thus 
transcends  its  externality,  and  in  this  respect  it  posits ;  but  it 
does  so  only  by  virtue  of  the  presupposition  that  it  has  another 
Force  opposite  to  it ;  that  is,  it  itself  solicits  only  in  so  far  as 
it  has  in  it  an  externality,  and  hence  in  so  far  as  it  is  solicited. 
In  other  words,  it  solicits  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  solicited  to 
solicit.  Thus  conversely  the  first  Force  is  solicited  only  in  so 
far  as  it  itself  solicits  the  other  to  solicit  it  (the  first  Force).  Each 
of  the  two  thus  obtains  its  Impulse  from  the  other ;  but  the 
Impulse  which  it  gives  as  active  Force  consists  in  receiving 
an  Impulse  from  the  other,  while  the  Impulse  which  it  receives 
was  solicited  by  itself.  Both  the  Impulse  given  and  that  received 
(or  active  manifestation  and  passive  externality)  are  conse- 
quently not  immediate,  but  mediated ;  and  each  of  the  two 
Forces  is  the  determinateness  which  the  other  Force  has  as 
against  it ;  it  is  mediated  through  the  other ;  and  this  mediating 
other  is,  again,  its  own  determinative  positing. 

When  therefore  an  Impulse  is  exerted  upon  Force  by 
another  Force,  and,  in  so  far,  Force  is  passive,  but  once  more 
passes  over  from  this  passivity  into  activity, — then  this  is  the 
regress  of  Force  into  itself.  It  manifests  itself.  The  Manifestation 
is  reaction  in  the  sense  that  it  posits  externality  as  its  own 
moment  and  thus  transcends  the  fact  that  it  was  supposed  to 
be  solicited  by  another  Force.  Both  therefore  are  one — the 
Manifestation  of  Force,  by  means  of  which  it  gives  itself  a 
Determinate  Being-for-Other  through  its  negative  activity 
exerted  upon  itself, — and  the  infinite  return  upon  self  in  this 
externality,  so  that  in  it  it  only  relates  itself  to  itself.  Pre- 
supposing Reflection,  to  which  belong  both  Conditionedness 
and  Impulse,  is  therefore  immediately  also  self-returning 
Reflection,  and  the  activity  is  essentially  reactive,  directed 


i54  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

against  itself.  The  positing  of  the  Impulse  or  of  the  external 
is  itself  the  transcendence  of  this,  and  conversely  the  tran- 
scendence of  the  Impulse  is  the  positing  of  externality. 

(c)  THE  INFINITY  OF  FORCE 

Force  is  finite  in  so  far  as  its  moments  still  retain  the  form 
of  immediacy ;  its  presupposing  and  its  self-relating  Reflection 
are  distinct  in  this  determination;  the  former  appears  as  a 
self-persisting  external  Force,  and  the  other,  in  its  relation  to 
it,  as  passive.  Force  thus  is  conditioned  with  regard  to  form, 
and  likewise  restricted  with  regard  to  content;  for  a  formal 
determinateness  also  contains  a  restrictedness  of  content.  But 
the  activity  of  Force  consists  in  this,  that  it  manifests  itself; 
that  is — as  was  seen — that  it  transcends  externality  and  deter- 
mines it  as  that  in  which  it  is  identical  with  itself.  Thus  what 
Force  in  truth  manifests  is  this,  that  its  relation  to  other  is  its 
self-relation,  and  that  its  passivity  consists  in  its  own  activity. 
The  Impulse  by  which  it  is  solicited  into  activity  is  its  own 
soliciting,  and  the  externality  which  affects  it  is  not  immediate, 
but  mediated  by  it.  Similarly  its  own  essential  self-identity  is 
not  immediate,  but  mediated  by  its  negation ;  in  other  words, 
Force  manifests  the  identity  of  its  externality  with  its  internality. 

C 

THE  RELATION  OF  OUTER  AND  INNER 

i.  The  Relation  of  Whole  and  Parts  is  an  immediate  relation ; 
consequently  both  reflected  and  existent  immediacy  have  in  it 
each  its  own  independence;  but,  since  they  are  in  Essential 
Relation,  their  independence  is  no  more  than  their  negative 
unity.  Now  this  is  posited  in  the  Manifestation  of  Force; 
reflected  unity  is,  essentially,  other-becoming  as  translation  of 
itself  into  externality ;  but  the  latter  equally  is  immediately 
withdrawn  into  the  former ;  the  distinction  between  the  inde- 
pendent Forces  cancels  itself;  the  Manifestation  of  Force  is 
only  a  self-mediation  of  reflected  unity.  All  that  is  given  is 
an  empty  and  transparent  distinction — Show — ,  but  this  Show 
is  the  mediation  which  is  independent  persistence  itself.  Not 
only  are  these  opposite  determinations,  which  together  cancel 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  155 

each  other,  and  not  only  is  their  movement  a  transition ;  but 
partly  the  immediacy  from  which  the  beginning  was  made  and 
the  transition  took  place  into  otherness  is  itself  only  as  posited, 
and  partly  for  this  reason  each  of  the  determinations  in  its 
immediacy  is  already  the  unity  with  its  other,  whence  the 
transition  is  equally  just  self-positing  return  to  self. 

Inner,  as  the  Form  of  reflected  immediacy  or  of  Essence,  is 
determined,  in  opposition  to  Outer,  as  the  Form  of  Being; 
but  both  are  but  one  identity. — This  identity  is,  first,  the  solid 
unity  of  both ;  it  is  a  foundation  full  of  content ;  or  it  is  the 
absolute  Fact,  wherein  both  determinations  are  indifferent  and 
external  moments.  In  this  respect  it  is  content  and  that  totality 
which  is  the  Inner  that  equally  becomes  external,  but  in  spite 
of  this  remains  self-equal  and  has  completed  no  process  either 
of  Becoming  or  of  transition.  According  to  this  determination 
Outer  is  not  only  equal  to  Inner  in  content,  but  both  are  but 
one  Fact. — But  this  Fact  as  simple  self-identity  is  distinct  from 
its  form-determinations:  these  are  external  to  it;  and  in  so 
far  it  is  itself  an  Inner  which  is  distinct  from  their  externality. 
Now  this  externality  consists  in  this,  that  it  is  constituted  out 
of  the  two  determinations  themselves  of  Inner  and  Outer.  But 
the  Fact  is  itself  nothing  but  the  unity  of  these  two.  Thus  the 
two  sides  are  again  the  same  with  respect  to  content.  In  the 
Fact  however  they  are  as  interpenetrating  identity,  or  founda- 
tion full  of  content.  But  in  externality,  as  Forms  of  the  Fact, 
they  are  indifferent  to  this  identity  and  therefore  to  each 
other. 

2.  In  this  manner  they  are  the  different  form-determinations 
which  have  an  identical  foundation  not  in  themselves  but  in 
an  Other, — Reflection-determinations  which  are  for  themselves, 
Inner  as  the  form  of  intro-Reflection  or  essentiality,  and  Outer 
as  the  form  of  immediacy  reflected  into  other,  or  unessentiality. 
But  the  nature  of  the  Relation  has  shown  that  these  determina- 
tions simply  constitute  one  identity.  Force  in  its  Manifestation 
is  this,  that  the  acts  of  presupposing  and  of  self-returning 
determining  are  one  and  the  same.  In  so  far  therefore  as  Inner 
and  Outer  are  considered  as  form-determinations,  they  are, 
first,  only  simple  Form  itself;  and,  secondly,  (since  here  they 
are  also  determined  as  opposites)  their  unity  is  pure  abstract 
mediation,  in  which  one  is,  immediately,  the  other,  and  is  this 


156  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

because  it  is  itself.  Thus  Inner  is  immediately  only  Outer,  and 
it  is  the  determinateness  of  externality  because  it  is  Inner; 
conversely  Outer  is  only  Inner  because  it  is  only  Outer. — For 
this  unity  of  form  contains  the  determinations  of  both  as 
opposite,  and  therefore  their  identity  is  no  more  than  this 
transition,  and  in  this  act  r  only  the  Other  of  both  and  not 
their  identity  full  of  content.  Or,  this  retention  of  form  is,  in 
general,  the  side  of  determinateness.  According  to  this  it  is  not 
the  real  totality  of  the  whole  whichr  is  posited ;  what  is  posited 
is  the  totality  or  the  Fact  itself  only  in  the  determinateness 
of  form ;  form  is  the  unity  of  the  two  opposite  determinations 
as  a  mere  bundle ;  consequently  when  one  of  these  is  taken 
first — and  it  is  indifferent  which  is  taken — we  may  say  of  the 
foundation  or  Fact  that  it  is  essentially  in  the  other  deter- 
minateness, but  also  only  in  it,  for  this  very  reason,  just  as  it 
was  said  before  that  it  is  only  in  the  first. — 

Thus  something  which  is  only  Inner  as  yet,  is  for  this  reason 
only  Outer.  Or,  conversely,  what  is  only  Outer  is  therefore  only 
Inner.  Or  again,  if  Inner  is  determined  as  Essence  and  Outer 
as  Being,  then  a  Fact,  in  so  far  as  it  is  only  in  its  Essence,  is 
for  this  very  reason  only  an  immediate  Being ;  or,  a  Fact  which 
only  is  is  for  that  reason  still  only  in  the  stage  of  Essence. — 
Outer  and  Inner  are  determinateness  posited  in  such  a  manner 
that  each  of  these  two  determinations  not  only  presupposes 
the  other  and  passes  over  into  it  as  into  its  truth,  but  also 
remains  posited  as  determinateness  (in  so  far  as  it  is  this  truth 
of  the  other),  and  points  towards  the  totality  of  both. — Inner 
then  is  the  formal  completion  of  Essence.  Essence — that  is,  in 
so  far  as  it  is  determined  as  Inner — implies  its  own  defective- 
ness  and  the  fact  that  it  is  only  as  relation  to  its  Other,  namely, 
Outer;  and  similarly  Outer  is  not  only  Being,  nor  even 
Existence,  but  is  only  as  related  to  Essence  or  Inner.  But  there 
is  not  only  given  the  relation  of  the  two  to  each  other,  but  also 
(i)  this  determinate  relation  of  absolute  form,  in  which  each 
is,  immediately,  its  own  opposite,  and  (2)  their  common 
relation  to  a  third  term,  or,  rather,  to  their  unity.  But  as  yet 
their  mediation  lacks  this  identical  foundation  which  contains 
both ;  hence  their  relation  is  the  immediate  conversion  of  one 
into  the  other,  and  this  negative  unity  which  connects  them 
is  the  simple  and  empty  Point. 


ESSENTIAL  RELATION  157 

Observation 

The  general  movement  of  Essence  is  a  Becoming  towards 
the  Notion.  In  the  Relation  of  Inner  and  Outer  its  essential 
moment  emerges — namely,  that  its  determinations  are  posited 
as  being  in  negative  unity  in  such  a  manner  that  each  imme- 
diately is  not  only  its  other  but  also  the  totality  of  the  whole. 
But  in  the  Notion  as  such  this  totality  is  the  universal, — a 
foundation  which  is  not  yet  present  in  the  Relation  of  Inner 
and  Outer. — In  the  negative  identity  of  Inner  and  Outer,  which 
is  the  immediate  conversion  of  one  of  these  determinations  into 
the  other,  that  foundation,  too,  is  lacking  which  above  was 
called  the  Fact. — 

The  unmediated  identity  of  form,  posited  as  it  here  is  without 
the  movement — full  of  content — of  the  Fact  itself,  should  be 
very  carefully  noticed.  It  occurs  in  the  Fact  as  this  is  in  its 
beginning.  Thus  Pure  Being  immediately  is  Nothing.  And, 
generally,  all  that  is  real  is,  in  its  beginning,  such  a  merely 
immediate  identity;  for  in  its  beginning  its  moments  are  not 
yet  developed  nor  in  opposition ;  it  has  not  yet  internalized  itself 
out  of  externality,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  has  it  externalized 
and  elicited  itself  by  means  of  its  activity  out  of  internality. 
Consequently  it  is  Inner  only  as  determinateness  against  Outer, 
and  Outer  only  as  determinateness  against  Inner,  Thus  partly 
it  is  only  an  immediate  Being;  partly  (in  so  far  as  it  equally 
is  negativity,  which  is  to  become  the  activity  of  development) 
it  is,  as  such,  essentially  only  Inner. — This  is  apparent  in  every 
natural,  scientific,  and,  generally,  intellectual  development; 
and  it  is  essential  to  understand  that  the  First,  when  as  yet 
Something  is  internal,  or  in  its  concept,  is,  for  this  reason,  only 
its  immediate  and  passive  existence.  Thus — to  take  the  nearest 
example — the  Essential  Relation  here  considered  is  only  Rela- 
tion in  itself— it  is  its  concept,  or  is  internal — before  it  has 
moved  through  mediation,  the  Relation  of  Force,  and  has 
realized  itself.  Hence  it  is  only  external  and  immediate  Relation, 
the  Relation  of  Whole  and  Parts,  in  which  the  sid£s  have  an 
indifferent  persistence  against  each  other.  Their  identity  is 
not  yet  in  themselves;  as  yet  it  is  only  internal,  and  hence 
they  fall  apart  and  have  an  immediate,  external  persistence. — 
Similarly  the  sphere  of  Being  in  general  is  only  simple  Inner, 


158  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  hence  it  is  the  sphere  of  existent  immediacy,  or  externality. 
— Essence  ( Weseri)  is  no  more  than  Inner,  and  is  therefore  taken 
as  a  wholly  external  common  element  without  system ;  we  speak 
of  Schulwesen  and  %eitungswesen>  and  mean  something  common 
which  is  produced  when  existing  objects  are  grouped  together 
externally  and  in  so  far  as  they  are  without  essential  connexion 
or  organization. — Or,  in  concrete  objects,  the  germ  of  a  plant 
is  inner  plant,  and  a  child,  internal  man.  But  for  this  reason  plant 
or  man  as  germ  is  an  immediate,  an  Outer  which  has  not  yet 
given  itself  negative  self-relation,  but  is  passive  and  lies  exposed 
to  otherness. — Similarly  God  in  his  immediate  concept  is  not 
Spirit:  Spirit  is  not  the  immediate  entity,  the  opposite  of 
mediation,  but  rather  Essence  which  eternally  posits  its  imme- 
diacy, whence  it  eternally  returns  to  itself.  Immediately  therefore 
God  is  only  Nature.  In  other  words,  Nature  is  only  the  inner 
God  who  is  not  actual  as  Spirit  and  consequently  not  verit- 
able God. — Or  again  in  thought — in  first  thought — God  is 
only  Pure  Being,  or  else  Essence  or  the  abstract  Absolute, 
but  not  God  as  Absolute  Spirit,  which  alone  is  the  veritable 
nature  of  God. 

3.  The  first  of  the  identities  of  Inner  and  Outer  which  we 
considered  is  the  foundation,  indifferent  to  the  distinction  of 
these  determinations  as  to  a  form  external  to  it, — the  identity 
as  Content.  The  second  is  the  unmediated  identity  of  their 
distinction,  the  immediate  conversion  of  each  into  its  opposite, 
— the  identity  as  pure  Form.  But  these  two  identities  are  only 
the  sides  of  one  totality ;  or,  the  totality  itself  is  but  the  con- 
version of  one  into  the  other.  The  totality,  as  foundation  and 
content,  is  this  intro-reflected  immediacy  only  by  virtue  of  the 
presupposing  Reflection  of  form  which  transcends  their  dis- 
tinction and  posits  itself,  as  against  it,  as  indifferent  identity 
or  reflected  unity.  Or,  content  is  form  itself  in  so  far  as  the 
latter  determines  itself  as  variety  and  constitutes  itself  one  cf 
its  sides  as  externality,  but  constitutes  itself  the  other  (Inner) 
as  intro-reflected  immediacy. 

Conversely,  the  distinctions  of  form,  Inner  and  Outer,  are 
hereby  posited  each  in  itself  as  the  totality  of  itself  and  its 
Other.  Inner,  as  simple  intro-reflected  identity,  is  the  imme- 
diate, and  consequently  is  as  much  Being  and  externality  as 


ESSENTIAL   RELATION  159 

Essence;  and  Outer,  as  manifold  and  determinate  Being,  is 
only  Outer,  that  is,  it  is  posited  as  unessential  and  as  having 
passed  back  into  its  Ground, — in  other  words,  as  Inner.  This 
transition  of  each  into  the  other  is  their  immediate  identity 
as  foundation ;  but  also  it  is  their  mediated  identity ;  for  each 
is  through  its  Other  what  it  is  in  itself,  the  totality  of  the 
Relation.  Or  conversely  the  determinateness  of  each  side  is 
mediated  with  the  other  determinateness  through  the  fact  that 
in  itself  it  is  the  totality ;  thus  the  totality  mediates  itself  with 
itself  through  form  or  determinateness,  and  the  determinateness 
mediates  itself  through  its  simple  self-identity. 

That,  therefore,  which  Something  is,  it  is  wholly  in  its 
externality ;  its  externality  is  its  totality — it  is  equally  its  intro- 
reflected  unity.  Its  Appearance  is  not  only  Reflection  into 
other,  but  into  self,  and  consequently  its  externality  is  the 
manifestation  of  that  which  it  is  in  itself.  Thus  its  content  and 
its  form  are  utterly  identical,  and  therefore  in  and  for  itself 
it  is  just  the  fact  of  its  self-manifestation.  It  is  the  revelation 
of  its  Essence  in  such  a  manner  that  this  Essence  simply  consists 
in  this,  that  it  is  that  which  reveals  itself. 

Essential  Relation,  in  this  identity  of  Appearance  with  Inner 
or  Essence,  has  determined  itself  as  Actuality. 


SECTION    THREE 
ACTUALITY 

ACTUALITY  is  the  unity  of  Essence  and  Existence ;  shapeless  Essence 
and  unstable  Appearance,  or  indeterminate  persistence  and 
non-persistent  multiplicity,  in  it  have  their  truth.  Although 
Existence  is  immediacy  which  has  emerged  out  of  Ground,  form 
is  not  yet  posited  in  it.  It  determines  and  forms  itself,  and  in 
this  process  is  Appearance]  this  persistence  is  determined  only 
as  Reflection-into-other,  and,  as  it  develops  itself  into  intro- 
Reflection  it  becomes  two  worlds,  two  totalities  of  content,  one 
of  which  is  determined  as  reflected  into  itself,  and  the  other  as 
reflected  into  other.  Essential  Relation  represents  their  form- 
relation,  the  perfection  of  which  is  the  Relation  of  Inner  and 
Outer,  where  the  content  of  both  is  one  identical  foundation 
and  equally  one  identity  of  form. — The  form-determination  of 
their  distinctness  is  transcended  because  this  identity  with 
respect  to  form  has  resulted ;  and  it  is  posited  that  they  are  one 
absolute  totality. 

This  unity  of  Inner  and  Outer  is  Absolute  Actuality.  At  this 
point  this  Actuality  is  the  Absolute  as  such — in  so  far  as  it  is 
posited  as  unity  in  which  form  is  transcended  and  has  become 
the  empty  or  external  distinction  of  an  Outer  and  an  Inner. 
Reflection  is  related  to  this  Absolute  as  external,  for  it  rather 
contemplates  the  Absolute  than  is  its  proper  movement.  But 
since  it  is  this  essentially,  it  exists  as  the  negative  return  into 
itself  of  the  Absolute. 

Secondly,  we  have  Actuality  proper.  Actuality ,  Possibility,  and 
Necessity  constitute  the  formal  moments  of  the  Absolute,  or  its 
Reflection. 

Thirdly,  the  unity  of  the  Absolute  and  its  Reflection  is  the 
Absolute  Relation,  or,  rather,  the  Absolute  as  relation  to  itself, — 
Substance. 


CHAPTER   I 
THE   ABSOLUTE 

THE  simple  and  solid  identity  of  the  Absolute  is  indeterminate ; 
or  rather,  in  it  all  determinateness  of  Essence  and  Existence, 
or  of  Being  in  general  as  well  as  of  Reflection,  has  dissolved 
itself.  To  this  extent  the  process  of  determining  what  the  Abso- 
lute is  becomes  negative — the  Absolute  appears  only  as  the 
negation  of  all  predicates,  and  as  the  void.  But  equally  it  must 
be  declared  to  be  the  positing  of  all  predicates,  and  therefore 
it  appears  as  a  contradiction  of  the  most  formal  nature.  In  so 
far  as  these  two — the  negating  and  the  positing — belong  to 
external  reflection,  this  is  a  formal  and  unsystematic  dialectic, 
which  has  no  difficulty  in  picking  up  here  and  there  deter- 
minations of  many  kinds,  or  in  demonstrating  with  equal  ease, 
on  the  one  hand,  their  finitude  and  mere  relativity,  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  asserts  the  immanence  of  all  determina- 
tions in  it — for  it  imagines  it  vaguely  as  the  totality;  but  it 
does  not  succeed  in  raising  these  positings  and  negations  to  a 
veritable  unity. — But  the  problem  is,  to  demonstrate  what  is 
the  Absolute ;  but  this  demonstration  cannot  be  a  determining 
or  an  external  reflection,  which  would  make  only  determina- 
tions of  the  Absolute :  it  is  the  Exposition  and  indeed  the  self- 
Exposition  of  the  Absolute,  and  only  points  out  what  it  is. 

A 
THE  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE 

The  Absolute  is  not  only  Being,  nor  yet  Essence.  The 
former  is  first  unreflected  immediacy,  the  latter  reflected  imme- 
diacy. Further,  each  in  itself  is  totality,  but  a  determinate 
totality.  In  Essence,  Being  emerges  as  Existence;  and* the  rela- 
tion of  Being  and  Essence  has  developed  to  the  Relation  of 
Inner  and  Outer.  Inner  is  Essence — Essence  as  that  totality 
which  essentially  has  the  determination  to  be  related  to  Being 
and  immediately  to  be  Being.  Outer  is  Being,  with  this  essential 

VOL.    II.  L 


i62  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

determination,  that  it  is  related  to  Reflection  and  is,  imme- 
diately, equally  relationless  identity  with  Essence.  The  Absolute 
itself  is  the  absolute  unity  of  both ;  it  is  that  which  constitutes 
the  Ground  of  Essential  Relation, — which,  as  relation,  merely 
has  not  yet  passed  back  into  this  its  identity,  and  whose  Ground 
is  not  yet  posited. 

From  this  it  results  that  the  determination  of  the  Absolute 
is,  to  be  Absolute  Form,  but,  at  the  same  time,  not  as  that 
identity  of  which  each  moment  is.  a  simple  determinateness, 
but  as  that  whose  moments  are  each  in  itself  the  totality  and 
therefore  (as  indifferent  to  form)  the  complete  content  of  the 
whole.  But  conversely  the  Absolute  is  Absolute  Content  in  such 
a  manner  that  the  content,  which,  as  such,  is  indifferent 
multiplicity,  possesses  negative  form-relation,  by  virtue  of  which 
its  multiplicity  is  only  one  solid  identity. 

Accordingly  the  identity  of  the  Absolute  is  absolute  by  virtue 
of  this,  that  each  of  its  parts  is  itself  the  whole,  or  that  each 
determinateness  is  the  totality,  that  is,  that  determinateness 
in  general  has  become  an  utterly  transparent  Show,  a  distinc- 
tion which  has  vanished  in  its  positedness.  Essence,  Existence, 
World  which  is  in  itself,  Whole,  Parts,  Force, — these  reflected 
determinations  appear  to  imagination  as  true  Being  valid 
in  and  for  itself;  while  the  Absolute  as  against  them  is  the 
Ground  in  which  they  have  been  swallowed  up. — Now,  in 
the  Absolute,  form  is  just  simple  self-identity,  and  hence  the 
Absolute  does  not  determine  itself;  for  determination  is  a  form- 
distinction  which,  at  first,  counts  as  such.  But  at  the  same  time 
the  Absolute  contains  every  distinction  and  form-determination 
whatever,  or  is  itself  Absolute  Form  and  Reflection,  and  there- 
fore variety  of  content  too  must  emerge  in  it.  But  the  Absolute 
itself  is  Absolute  Identity ;  this  is  its  determination,  since  all 
multiplicity  of  the  World  in  Itself  and  the  World  of  Appearance 
— or  of  internal  and  external  totality — is  transcended  in  it. — 
There  is  no  Becoming  in  it,  for  it  is  not  Being;  nor  is  it  self- 
reflecting  determining,  for  it  is  not  Essence  determining  itself 
only  in  itSelf ;  nor  yet  is  it  a  self-manifestation,  for  it  is  as  the 
identity  of  Inner  and  Outer. — But  now  the  movement  of 
Reflection  stands  opposed  to  its  absolute  identity.  This  move- 
ment is  cancelled  in  the  identity,  and  thus  is  only  the  Inner 
thereof;  but  hereby  the  movement  is  external  to  the  identity. — 


THE  ABSOLUTE  163 

At  first  therefore  the  movement  only  consists  in  this,  that  it 
cancels  its  activity  in  the  Absolute.  It  is  the  Beyond  of  the 
manifold  distinctions  and  determinations  and  of  their  move- 
ment, a  Beyond  which  lies  at  the  back  of  the  Absolute ;  and 
accordingly,  although  it  is  the  acceptance  of  these,  it  is  also 
their  perishing;  it  is  thus  the  negative  Exposition  of  the  Abso- 
lute, which  was  mentioned  before. — In  its  veritable  presen- 
tation this  Exposition  is  the  whole  of  the  logical  movement  of 
the  sphere  of  Being  and  of  Essence  which  has  been  traced 
up  to  this  point ;  the  content  of  this  sphere  is  not  given  from 
without  and  picked  up  contingently,  nor  plunged  into  the  abyss 
of  the  Absolute  by  means  of  a  reflection  external  to  it3  but 
has  determined  itself  in  it  through  its  own  necessity,  and,  as 
the  peculiar  Becoming  of  Being  and  as  Reflection  of  Essence,  has 
passed  back  into  the  Absolute  as  into  its  Ground. 

But  at  the  same  time  this  Exposition  has  also  a  positive  side, 
namely,  in  that  the  finite  when  it  perishes  exhibits  this  fixed 
characteristic  of  being  related  to  the  Absolute,  or  of  itself  con- 
taining the  Absolute.  But  this  side  is  not  so  much  the  positive 
Exposition  of  the  Absolute  itself  as  the  exposition  of  the  deter- 
minations, showing  that  they  have  the  Absolute  for  Abyss 
(Abgrund]  but  also  for  Ground,  or  that  that  which  gives  to  them 
(that  is,  to  Show)  a  persistence,  is  the  Absolute  itself. — The 
Show  is  not  Nothing,  but  Reflection,  or  relation  to  the  Absolute ; 
it  is  Show,  in  so  far  as  the  Absolute  shows  in  it.  Thus  this 
positive  Exposition  arrests  the  finite  before  it  vanishes,  and  looks 
upon  it  as  an  expression  and  copy  of  the  Absolute.  But  the 
transparency  of  the  finite,  which  is  opaque  to  all  but  the 
Absolute,  ends  in  total  disappearance ;  for  there  is  nothing  in 
the  finite  which  could  preserve  for  it  a  distinction  against  the 
Absolute;  it  is  a  medium  which  is  absorbed  by  that  which 
shows  through  it. 

Consequently  this  positive  Exposition  of  the  Absolute  is  itself 
only  a  showing;  for  the  truly  positive  which  it  and  the  ex- 
pounded content  contain  is  the  Absolute  itself.  Such  further 
determinations  as  occur,  or  the  form  in  which  the?  Absolute 
shows,  is  a  thing  of  no  account ;  they  are  taken  up  by  the  Ex- 
position from  without,  and  it  makes  them  the  starting-point  of 
its  activity.  Such  a  determination  has  in  the  Absolute  not  its 
beginning  but  only  its  end.  The  process  of  expounding  is  therefore; 


164  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

absolute  activity  by  its  relation  to  the  Absolute  (into  which  it 
passes  back],  but  not  as  regards  its  starting-point,  which  is  a 
determination  external  to  the  Absolute. 

But  in  fact  the  expounding  of  the  Absolute  is  its  own  activity, 
which  begins  with  itself  as  it  arrives  at  itself.  The  Absolute 
as  mere  absolute  identity  is  determinate — it  is  determined  as 
identical ;  it  is  posited  as  such  by  Reflection  as  against  opposi- 
tion and  multiplicity ;  or,  it  is  only  the  negative  of  Reflection 
and  of  determining  in  general. — Hence  not  only  this  expound- 
ing of  the  Absolute  is  incomplete,  but  so  is  this  Absolute  itself, 
which  is  merely  a  point  reached.  In  other  words,  that  Absolute 
which  is  only  as  absolute  identity  is  only  the  Absolute  of  an 
external  reflection.  It  is  therefore  not  the  absolute-Absolute, 
but  the  Absolute  in  a  determinateness ;  that  is,  it  is  Attribute. 

But  the  Absolute  is  not  only  Attribute,  because  it  is  object 
of  an  external  reflection,  and  therefore  is  an  entity  deter- 
mined by  the  latter. — Or,  reflection  is  not  only  external  to 
it;  but  immediately,  because  it  is  external  to  it,  it  is  internal. 
The  Absolute  is  the  Absolute  only  because  it  is  not  abstract 
identity,  but  the  identity  of  Being  and  Essence,  or  of  Inner  and 
Outer.  It  is  thus  itself  that  Absolute  Form  which  causes  it  to 
show  in  itself  and  determines  it  as  Attribute, 

B 
THE  ABSOLUTE  ATTRIBUTE 

The  expression  of  absolute-Absolute  which  was  employed 
denotes  the  Absolute  which  in  its  form  has  returned  to  itself, 
or  that  whose  form  is  equal  to  its  content.  The  Attribute  is  the 
merely  relative  Absolute,  which  nexus  just  means  the  Absolute 
in  a  form-determination.  For  at  first,  and  before  its  completed 
Exposition,  form  is  only  internal  as  yet,  or — which  is  the  same 
thing — only  external ;  it  is  here  determinate  form,  or  negation  in 
general.  But  it  is  also  as  form  of  the  Absolute,  and  consequently 
the  Attribute  is  the  whole  content  of  the  Absolute ;  it  is  that 
totality  which  before  appeared  as  a  World,  or  as  one  of  the 
sides  of  the  Essential  Relation,  each  of  which  is  itself  the  whole. 
But  the  two  Worlds — that  which  appears  and  that  which  is  in 
and  for  itself— were  supposed  to  be  opposed  to  each  other 
in  their  Essence.  One  side  indeed  of  the  Essential  Relation 


THE  ABSOLUTE  165 

was  equal  to  the  other — the  Whole  was  equal  to  the 
Parts,  Manifestation  of  Force  the  same  content  as  Force,  and 
Outer  in  general  the  same  as  Inner  j  but  still,  each  of  these 
sides  was  also  supposed  to  have  its  own  immediate  persist- 
ence— one  as  existent,  and  the  other  as  reflected,  immediacy. 
In  the  Absolute  on  the  other  hand  these  distinct  imme- 
diacies are  reduced  to  Show,  and  the  totality,  which  is  the 
Attribute,  is  posited  as  its  true  and  only  persistence ;  and  the 
determination  in  which  it  is,  as  the  unessential. 

The  Absolute  is  Attribute  because  as  simple  absolute  identity 
it  is  in  the  determination  of  identity.  Other  determinations 
may  be  attached  to  determination  in  general, — among  them 
this,  that  there  are  more  attributes  than  one.  But  absolute 
identity  means  this  only — not  merely  that  all  determinations 
have  been  transcended,  but  that  it  is  itself  Reflection  which 
has  transcended  itself,  and  consequently  all  determinations  are 
posited  in  it  as  transcended.  Or  again,  totality  is  posited  as 
absolute,  or  the  Attribute  has  the  Absolute  for  content  and  for 
persistence ;  and  accordingly  its  form-determination,  whereby 
it  is  Attribute,  is  also  posited,  immediately  as  mere  Show, — 
the  negative  as  negative.  The  positive  Show  which  the  Expo- 
sition acquires  by  means  of  the  Attribute,  when  it  does  not 
take  the  finite  in  its  barrier  as  being  in  and  for  itself,  but 
dissolves  its  persistence  into  the  Absolute  and  extends  it  until 
it  becomes  Attribute,  transcends  the  fact  that  it  is  Attribute; 
it  submerges  both  it  and  its  distinguishing  activity  in  the  simple 
Absolute. 

Thus  Reflection,  while  it  distinguishes,  only  returns  there- 
from to  the  identity  of  the  Absolute,  and  for  this  reason  it  has 
not  left  externality  nor  arrived  at  the  veritable  Absolute.  It 
has  reached  only  determinate  and  abstract  identity,  that  is, 
that  identity  which  is  in  the  determinateness  of  identity. — In  other 
words,  when  Reflection,  as  inner  form,  determines  the  Absolute 
as  Attribute,  this  determining  remains  distinct  from  externality ; 
the  inner  determination  does  not  penetrate  the  Absolute;  its 
manifestation  is,  to  vanish  in  the  Absolute  as  merely  posited. 

Therefore  the  form,  whether  taken  as  outer  or  inner,  by 
means  of  which  the  Absolute  might  be  Attribute,  is  at  the  same 
time  posited  as  null  in  itself,  as  an  external  Show,  or  mere  way 
and  manner. 


i66  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

G 

THE  MODUS  OF  THE  ABSOLUTE 

The  Attribute  is,  first,  the  Absolute  as  in  simple  self-identity. 
Secondly,  it  is  negation,  ar.d  this  as  negation  is  formal  intro- 
Reflection.  These  two  sides  constitute,  to  begin  with,  the  two 
extremes  of  the  Attribute,  of  which  itself  is  the  mean,  since  it 
is  as  well  Absolute  as  determinateaess. — The  second  of  these 
extremes  is  the  negative  as  negative,  or  Reflection  external  to 
the  Absolute. — Or,  in  so  far  as  it  is  taken  as  Inner  of  the 
Absolute,  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  its  proper  determination  to 
posit  itself  as  Modus,  so  far  Modus  is  the  self-externality  of  the 
Absolute  where  it  loses  itself  in  the  instability  and  contingency 
of  Being,  or  its  accomplished  transition  into  the  opposite  with- 
out return  to  self;  it  is  the  multiplicity  of  form  and  content- 
determinations  subsumed  under  no  totality. — But  the  Modus — 
the  externality  of  the  Absolute — is  not  this  only;  it  is  also 
externality  posited  as  externality,  a  mere  way  and  manner,  and 
hence  Show  as  Show  or  the  intro-Reflection  of  form, — hence 
that  self-identity  which  is  the  Absolute.  Thus  in  fact  the  Abso- 
lute is  posited  as  absolute  identity  only  in  the  Modus;  it  is 
what  it  is — namely  self-identity — only  as  self-relating  nega- 
tivity, as  Showing  which  is  posited  as  Showing. 

In  so  far,  then,  as  the  Exposition  of  the  Absolute  begins 
with  its  absolute  identity  and  thence  passes  over  to  the  Attri- 
bute and  from  that  to  the  Modus,  it  has  now  passed  completely 
through  its  moments.  But  herein,  first,  it  is  not  a  merely 
negative  attitude  to  these  determinations ;  this  its  activity  is  the 
reflecting  movement  itself,  and  it  is  only  as  this  that  the 
Absolute  is  veritably  absolute  identity. — Secondly,  it  is  here 
not  merely  engaged  upon  the  external,  and  the  Modus  is  not 
only  extremest  externality;  but,  because  it  is  Show  as  Show, 
it  is  return  to  self,  self-dissolving  Reflection,  as  being  which  the 
Absolute  is  absolute  Being. — Thirdly,  expounding  Reflection 
appears  to  begin  from  its  own  determinations  and  from  exter- 
nality, and  to  take  up  the  Modi,  and  also  the  determinations 
of  the  Attribute,  as  found  contingently  outside  the  Absolute ; 
and  its  activity  seems  to  consist  in  merely  reducing  them  into 
indifferent  identity.  But  in  fact  it  has  in  the  Absolute  itself  that 


THE  ABSOLUTE  167 

determinateness  from  which  it  begins.  For  the  Absolute,  as 
first  indifferent  identity,  is  itself  only  determinate  Absolute  or 
Attribute,  because  it  is  the  Absolute  unmoved  and  as  yet  un- 
reflected.  This  determinateness,  because  it  is  determinateness, 
belongs  to  the  reflecting  movement ;  the  Absolute  is  determined 
as  first  identical  entity  only  by  it,  and  likewise  by  it  alone  has 
absolute  form  and  is,  not  that  which  u,  but  that  which  posits 
itself  equal  to  itself. 

Consequently  the  true  rjieaning  of  the  Modus  is  that  it  is 
the  proper  reflecting  movement  of  the  Absolute, — a  determin- 
ing, though  not  one  by  which  it  would  become  an  Other,  but 
a  determining  only  of  that  which  it  already  is, — transparent 
externality  which  is  a  self-display,  a  movement  from  out  of 
itself  in  such  a  manner  that  this  outward-Being  is  equally 
internality  itself,  and  therefore  is  equally  a  positing  which  is 
not  merely  positedness  but  absolute  Being. 

When  therefore  the  content  of  the  Exposition  is  asked  for  (what 
is  it  that  the  Absolute  expounds?),  the  answer  is  that  the 
distinction  between  form  and  content  is  anyhow  dissolved  in 
the  Absolute.  In  other  words,  it  is  precisely  the  content  of  the 
Absolute  to  manifest  itself.  The  Absolute  is  absolute  form  which 
as  its  own  dichotomy  is  utterly  self-identical — the  negative,  as 
negative  or  as  coinciding  with  itself;  it  is  absolute  self-identity 
only  in  this  manner,  and  the  self-identity  is  also  indifferent  to 
its  differentiations,  or  is  absolute  content;  consequently  the 
content  is  only  this  Exposition  itself. 

As  this  self-supporting  movement  of  Exposition,  as  a  way 
and  manner  which  is  its  absolute  self-identity,  the  Absolute  is 
not  manifestation  of  an  Inner,  nor  against  an  Other ;  it  is  only 
as  absolute  self-manifestation  for  itself.  It  is  thus  Actuality. 

Observation 

The  concept  of  Substance  in  Spinoza  corresponds  to  the 
concept  of  the  Absolute  and  the  relation  of  reflection  to  it,  as 
it  has  here  exhibited  itself.  Spinoza's  philosophy  has  this  fault, 
that  in  it  reflection  and  its  manifold  determining  activity  are 
an  external  thinking. — The  Substance  of  this  system  is  One 
Substance,  one  inseparable  totality;  there  is  no  determinate- 
uess  which  is  not  contained  and  dissolved  in  this  Absolute; 


i68  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  it  is  of  sufficient  importance  that  everything  which  to 
natural  imagination  or  determining  understanding  appears, 
distinctly  or  vaguely,  as  independent,  is  wholly  reduced  in  this 
necessary  concept  to  a  mere  positedness. — Determinateness  is 
negation — this  is  the  absolute  principle  of  Spinoza's  philosophy, 
and  this  true  and  simple  insight  is  the  foundation  of  the  absolute 
unity  of  Substance.  But  Spinoza  does  not  pass  on  beyond 
negation  as  determinateness  or  quality  to  a  recognition  of  it 
as  absolute,  that  is,  self-negating,  .negation.  Accordingly  his 
Substance  does  not  itself  contain  absolute  form,  and  when  it 
is  cognized,  this  is  no  immanent  cognition.  Certainly  Substance 
is  absolute  unity  of  Thought  and  of  Being  (or  Extension) ;  it 
therefore  contains  Thought  itself,  but  only  in  its  unity  with 
Extension,  that  is,  as  not  separating  itself  from  Extension: 
it  is  hence  in  general  not  determining  and  forming  activity, 
nor  movement  which  returns  and  begins  out  of  itself.  There- 
fore, (a)  Substance  lacks  the  principle  of  personality — a 
defect  which  more  than  any  other  has  aroused  revolt  against 
Spinoza's  system ;  and  (b]  cognition  is  external  reflection,  which 
does  not  comprehend  and  deduce  from  Substance  that  which 
appears  as  finite — the  determinateness  of  the  Attribute,  and  the 
Mode,  and  indeed  itself:  it  is  active  as  an  external  understand- 
ing, and  takes  up  the  determinations  as  given,  reducing  them 
into  the  Absolute,  and  not  beginning  from  it. 

The  concepts  of  Substance  which  Spinoza  offers  are  concepts 
of  an  entity  which  is  its  own  cause :  it  is  that  whose  essence 
includes  existence ;  the  concept  of  the  Absolute  for  him  does 
not  require  the  concept  of  an  Other  as  a  necessary  factor  in 
its  formation.  These  concepts  are  profound  and  correct,  but 
they  are  definitions  which  are  assumed  immediately  at  the 
opening  of  the  system.  Mathematics  and  other  subordinate 
sciences  must  begin  with  something  presupposed  which  con- 
stitutes their  element  and  positive  foundation.  But  the  Absolute 
cannot  be  a  first  or  immediate  entity :  the  Absolute  essentially 
is  the  result  of  such  an  entity. 

After  thfc  definition  of  the  Absolute,  the  definition  of  Attribute 
next  emerges  with  Spinoza;  it  is  determined  as  a  manner  in 
which  understanding  comprehends  the  essence  of  the  Absolute. 
Understanding  is  taken  to  be  posterior  in  its  nature  to  Attribute, 
for  Spinoza  determines  it  as  Mode;  but  at  the  same  time 


THE  ABSOLUTE  169 

Attribute — determination  as  determination  of  the  Absolute 
— is  made  dependent  upon  an  Other,  namely  understand- 
ing, which  emerges  externally  and  immediately  over  against 
Substance. 

Spinoza  further  determines  the  Attributes  as  infinite,  and 
this  in  the  sense  of  an  infinite  plurality.  In  the  sequel,  however, 
only  two  occur — Thought  and  Extension,  and  it  is  not  shown 
by  what  necessity  the  infinite  plurality  reduces  itself  to  an 
opposition,  namely  this  cfcfinite  opposition  of  Thought  and 
Extension. — These  two  Attributes  are,  then,  accepted  empiri- 
cally. Thought  and  Being  represent  the  Absolute  in  a  deter- 
minate aspect;  the  Absolute  itself  is  their  absolute  unity,  so 
that  they  are  only  unessential  forms ;  the  order  of  things  is  the 
same  as  that  of  ideas  or  thoughts ;  and  the  one  Absolute  is 
contemplated  only  by  external  reflection  (which  is  a  Mode) 
under  these  two  determinations,  (a)  as  a  totality  of  ideas  and 
(b]  as  a  totality  of  things  and  their  mutations.  It  is  this  external 
reflection  which  both  makes  this  distinction,  and  brings  it  back 
to  absolute  identity  and  there  submerges  it.  But  this  whole 
movement  takes  place  outside  the  Absolute.  Certainly  the 
Absolute  itself  too  is  Thought,  and,  so  far,  this  movement  is 
only  in  the  Absolute ;  but,  as  was  observed,  it  is  in  the  Absolute 
only  as  unity  with  Extension,  and  hence  not  as  this  movement, 
which  is  essentially  also  the  moment  of  opposition. — Spinoza 
makes  the  sublime  demand  of  thought  that  it  is  to  consider 
everything  under  the  form  of  eternity,  sub  specie  aeterni,  that  is, 
as  it  is  in  the  Absolute.  But  in  this  Absolute,  which  is  only 
unmoved  identity,  both  Attribute  and  Mode  exist  only  as 
vanishing  and  not  as  becoming,  so  that  this  vanishing  too  now 
takes  its  positive  beginning  only  from  without. 

The  third  term — the  Mode — is  with  Spinoza  an  affection  of 
Substance,  determinate  determinateness,  or  that  which  is  in 
an  Other  and  is  apprehended  through  this  Other.  Really  the 
Attributes  have  only  indeterminate  variety  for  their  determina- 
tion :  each  is  supposed  to  express  the  totality  of  Substance,  and 
to  be  understood  out  of  itself ;  but,  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  Absolute 
as  determinate,  it  contains  otherness  and  therefore  cannot  be 
understood  only  out  of  itself.  Consequently  the  determination 
of  the  Attribute  is  really  posited  only  in  the  Mode.  Further, 
this  third  term  remains  mere  Mode:  on  the  one  hand  it  is 


170  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

immediately  given,  on  the  other  its  nullity  is  not  recognized 
as  intro-Reflection. — Consequently  Spinoza's  exposition  of  the 
Absolute  is  complete  in  so  far  as  it  begins  with  the  Absolute, 
follows  up  with  the  Attribute,  and  ends  with  the  Mode;  but 
these  three  are  only  enumerated  one  after  the  other  without 
any  inner  sequence  of  development,  and  the  third  term  is  not 
negation  as  negation,  not  negatively  self-relating  negation, — if 
it  were,  it  would  of  itself  be  return  to  the  first  identity,  and 
this  identity  would  be  veritable  identity.  Hence  the  necessity 
of  the  progress  of  the  Absolute  to  unessentiality  is  lacking,  as 
well  as  its  dissolution  in  and  for  itself  into  identity;  or, 
the  becoming  both  of  identity  and  of  its  determinations  is 
wanting. 

In  a  similar  manner  in  the  Oriental  idea  of  emanation  the 
Absolute  is  self-illuminating  light.  But  it  does  not  only  illumine 
itself:  it  also  emanates.  Its  emanations  are  distances  from  its 
unclouded  purity ;  and  the  subsequent  products  are  less  perfect 
than  the  preceding  ones  out  of  which  they  arise.  Emanation 
is  taken  only  as  a  happening,  and  becoming  only  as  a  pro- 
gressive loss.  Thus  Being  increasingly  obscures  itself,  and  night, 
the  negative,  is  the  last  term  of  the  line  and  does  not  return 
to  the  primal  light. 

The  lack  of  intro-Reflection  which  is  common  to  Spinoza's 
exposition  of  the  Absolute  and  to  the  theory  of  emanation  is 
made  good  in  the  concept  of  the  monad  in  Leibniz. — The  one- 
sidedness  of  one  philosophic  principle  is  generally  faced  by  its 
opposite  one-sidedness,  and,  as  everywhere,  totality  at  least  is 
found  as  a  sundered  completeness. — The  monad  is  only  One, 
an  intro-reflected  negative ;  it  is  the  totality  of  the  content  of 
the  world;  in  it  the  various  manifold  has  not  only  vanished, 
but  is  in  a  negative  manner  stowed  away.  (Spinoza's  Substance 
is  the  unity  of  all  content ;  but  this  manifold  content  of  the 
world  is  not  in  it  as  such,  but  in  reflection  which  is  external 
to  it.)  Essentially  therefore  the  monad  exists  as  ideating;  but 
although  it  is  finite  it  has  no  passivity :  mutations  and  deter- 
minations within  it  are  manifestations  of  itself  in  itself.  It  is 
an  entelechy,  and  revelation  is  its  proper  activity. — At  the  same 
time  the  monad  is  also  determinate,  it  is  distinct  from  others ; 
and  the  determinateness  belongs  to  the  particular  content  and 
the  way  and  manner  of  the  manifestation.  Consequently  the 


THE  ABSOLUTE  171 

monad  is  in  itself  (or  according  to  its  substance)  the  totality,— 
not  in  its  manifestation.  This  restriction  of  the  monad  necessarily 
is  not  part  of  the  self-positing  or  ideating  monad,  but  of  its 
Being-in-Self;  in  other  words  it  is  absolute  limit,  a  predestina- 
tion which  is  posited  by  some  other  essence  than  itself.  Further, 
limited  entities  exist  only  as  related  to  other  limited  entities, 
but  the  monad  is  at  the  same  time  a  self-contained  absolute 
entity ;  and  consequently  the  harmony  of  these  limitations — 
that  is,  the  relation  of  thejnonads  to  one  another — falls  outside 
them,  and  is  likewise  pre-established  by  some  other  essence  or 
in  itself. 

Clearly,  by  means  of  the  principle  of  intro-Reflection,  which 
constitutes  the  fundamental  determination  of  the  monad,  other- 
ness and  external  influence  in  general  are  certainly  removed, 
and  the  changes  of  the  monad  are  its  own  positing ; — but,  on 
the  other  hand,  passive  subjection  to  other  has  been  transformed 
into  an  absolute  barrier,  into  a  barrier  of  Being-in-Self.  Leibniz 
ascribes  to  the  monads  a  certain  self-completeness,  a  kind  of 
independence;  they  are  created  essences. — If  their  barrier  is 
considered  more  closely,  it  is  seen  from  this  presentation  of  the 
case  that  the  self-manifestation  which  is  theirs  is  the  totality  of 
form.  It  is  an  extremely  important  concept  that  the  changes 
of  the  monad  are  imagined  as  actions  having  no  passivity,  or  as 
self-manifestations,  and  that  the  principle  of  intro-Reflection 
or  individuation  clearly  emerges  as  essential.  Further  it  is  necessary 
to  allow  finitude  to  consist  in  this,  that  content  or  Substance  is 
distinct  from  form,  and  that,  further,  the  former  is  restricted 
but  the  latter  infinite.  But  now  the  task  would  be  to  find  in 
the  concept  of  the  absolute  monad  not  only  this  absolute  unity 
of  form  and  content,  but  also  the  nature  of  Reflection  as  self- 
relating  negativity  which  is  self-repulsion,  by  means  of  which 
it  exists  as  positing  and  creating.  It  is  true  that  in  Leibniz's 
system  the  further  feature  is  present  that  God  is  the  source  of 
the  existence  and  of  the  essence  of  the  monads,  that  is,  that 
those  absolute  barriers  in  the  Being-in-Self  of  the  monads  are 
not  existent  in  and  for  themselves,  but  vanish  in  the  Absolute. 
But  in  these  determinations  only  those  vulgar  ideas  appear 
which  are  left  without  philosophic  development  and  are  not 
raised  to  the  rank  of  speculative  concepts.  Thus  the  principle 
of  individuation  does  not  receive  its  profounder  elaboration ; 


1 72  SCIENCE  OF   LOGIC 

the  concepts  which  concern  the  distinctions  of  the  various  finite 
monads  and  their  relation  to  their  Absolute  do  not  originate 
in  this  essence  itself  nor  in  an  absolute  manner,  but  belong  to 
argumentative  and  dogmatic  reflection  and  have  therefore 
achieved  no  inner  coherence. 


CHAPTER   II 
ACTUALITY 

THE  Absolute  is  the  unity  of  Inner  and  Outer  as  first  unity, 
which  is  in  itself.  The.  Exposition  appeared  as  external 
Reflection  which  has  the  immediate  on  its  side  as  something 
found  contingently,  but  at  the  same  time  is  the  movement  of 
this  towards,  and  its  relation  to,  the  Absolute,  and  as  such 
leads  it  back  to  the  Absolute  and  determines  it  as  a  mere  way 
and  manner.  This  way  and  manner,  however,  is  the  deter- 
mination of  the  Absolute  itself,  namely  its  first  identity  or  its 
unity  which  merely  is  in  itself.  And  this  Reflection  not  only 
posits  that  first  Being-in-Self  as  essenceless  determination,  but, 
since  it  is  negative  self-relation,  this  Modus  arises  through  it 
alone.  This  Reflection,  as  cancelling  itself  in  its  determinations, 
and,  generally,  as  self-returning  movement,  is  alone  veritably 
absolute  identity ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  the  determining 
of  the  Absolute  or  its  modality.  Consequently  the  Modus  is  the 
externality  of  the  Absolute,  but  is  this  only  as  its  intro-Reflec- 
tion; — or  it  is  the  Absolute's  own  manifestation,  so  that  this 
manifesting  is  its  intro-Reflection  and  therefore  its  Being-in- 
and-for-Self. 

The  Absolute  taken  as  manifestation  in  this  manner,  in 
which  it  is  nothing  else  and  has  no  content  except  that  of  being 
self-manifestation,  is  Absolute  Form.  Actuality  must  be  taken 
as  this  reflected  absoluteness.  Being  is  not  yet  actual :  it  is  the 
first  immediacy;  consequently  its  Reflection  is  Becoming  and 
transition  into  other ;  in  other  words  its  immediacy  is  not  Being- 
in-and-for-Self.  Actuality  also  stands  higher  than  Existence. 
Existence  is,  indeed,  immediacy  which  has  arisen  out  of  Ground 
and  Conditions,  or  out  of  Essence  and  its  Reflection.  It  there- 
fore is  in  itself  what  Actuality  is,  namely  real  Reflection ;  but 
it  is  not  yet  the  posited  unity  of  Reflection  and  immediacy. 
Hence  Existence  passes  over  into  Appearance,  since  it  develops 
the  Reflection  which  it  contains.  It  is  Ground  which  has 
perished ;  its  determination  is  the  restoration  of  this  Ground ; 


174  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

it  thus  becomes  Essential  Relation,  and  its  last  Reflection  is 
this,  that  its  immediacy  is  posited  as  intro-Reflection,  and  con- 
versely. Now  this  unity,  where  Existence  or  immediacy,  and 
Being-in-Self,  Ground,  or  the  reflected  entity,  are  simply 
moments,  is  Actuality.  For  this  reason  the  Actual  is  Manifes- 
tation ;  its  externality  does  not  draw  it  into  the  sphere  of  change ; 
it  is  not  its  own  Showing  in  an  Other,  but  it  manifests  itself; 
that  is,  in  its  externality  it  is  itself,  and  is  itself  in  that  alone,  or 
only  as  self-distinguishing  and  determining  movement. 

Now  Actuality  is  this  absolute  form,  and  in  it,  as  such,  the 
moments  are  only  as  transcended  or  formal  and  not  yet  realized ; 
thus  here  its  variety  belongs  to  external  Reflection  and  is  not 
yet  determined  as  content. 

Actuality,  as  being,  itself,  immediate  formal  unity  of  Inner 
and  Outer,  is  thus  in  the  determination  of  immediacy  as  against 
the  determination  of  intro-Reflection ;  or,  it  is  an  Actuality  as 
against  a  Possibility.  Their  relation  to  each  other  is  the  third 
term — the  Actual  determined  equally  as  intro-reflected  Being 
and  this  at  the  same  time  as  immediately  existing.  This  third 
term  is  Necessity. 

But  at  this  point,  Actual  and  Possible  being  formal  distinc- 
tions, their  relation  too  is  only  formal,  and  consists  in  this  only, 
that  the  one  as  well  as  the  other  is  a  positedness, — that  is,  in 
Contingency. 

Since,  in  Contingency,  Actual  as  well  as  Possible  is  posited- 
ness, they  have  hereby  obtained  determination  in  themselves ; 
thus,  secondly,  through  this  Real  Actuality  arises,  and  with  it 
also  emerge  Real  Possibility  and  Relative  Necessity. 

Thirdly,  the  intro-Reflection  of  Relative  Necessity  produces 
Absolute  Necessity,  which  is  Absolute  Possibility  and  Actuality. 


CONTINGENCY,    OR   FORMAL   ACTUALITY,    POSSIBILITY, 

AND   NECESSITY 

• 

i.  Actuality  is  formal  in  so  far  as,  being  first  Actuality,  it  is 
only  immediate,  unreflected  Actuality,  and  hence  is  only  in 
this  form-determination,  but  not  as  totality  of  form.  Thus  it  is 
no  more  than  a  Being,  or  Existence  in  general.  But  essentially 


ACTUALITY  175 

it  is  not  mere  immediate  existence;  it  is  as  formal  unity  of 
Being-in-Self  or  internality  and  of  externality,  and  therefore  it 
immediately  contains  Being-in-Self  or  Possibility.  What  is  actual, 
is  possible. 

2.  This  Possibility  is  intro-reflected  Actuality.  But  this  very 
first  reflectedness  is  likewise  formality,  and  therefore,  generally, 
only  the  determination  of  self-identity  or  of  Being-in-Self  in 
general. 

But  the  determination  here  is  totality  of  form,  and  conse- 
quently this  Being-in-Self  is  determined  as  transcended  or  as 
essentially  only  in  relation  to  Actuality,  that  is,  as  the  negative 
of  Actuality,  it  is  posited  as  negative.  Possibility  therefore  contains 
two  moments.  The  first  is  the  positive  moment,  that  it  is  an 
intro-reflectedness.  But  in  Absolute  Form  it  is  reduced  to  a 
moment,  and  thus  intro-reflectedness  no  longer  counts  as 
Essence,  but,  secondly,  has  the  negative  meaning  that  Possibility 
is  incomplete,  refers  on  to  an  Other  (namely  Actuality),  and 
perfects  itself  in  it. 

According  to  the  first  or  merely  positive  side,  then,  Possi- 
bility is  the  mere  form-determination  of  self-identity,  or  the 
form  of  essentiality.  It  is  thus  the  relation-less  and  indeterminate 
container  for  everything  in  general. — In  this  sense  of  Formal 
Possibility,  everything  is  possible  which  is  not  self-contradictory ; 
hence  the  realm  of  Possibility  is  limitless  multiplicity.  But  every 
manifold  is  determinate  in  itself  and  as  against  other,  and 
contains  negation;  and,  generally,  indifferent  variety  passes 
over  into  opposition;  but  opposition  is  contradiction.  Every- 
thing therefore  equally  is  contradictory  and  therefore  impossible. 

— This  merely  formal  predication  of  something — that  it  is 
possible — is  as  flat  and  empty  as  the  law  of  contradiction  and 
every  content  which  is  taken  up  into  it.  A  is  possible  has  as 
much  significance  as  A  is  A.  In  so  far  as  no  steps  are  taken  to 
develop  the  content,  this  content  has  the  form  of  simplicity ; 
difference  arises  in  it  only  through  the  resolution  of  the  con- 
tent into  its  determinations.  So  long  as  this  simple  form  is 
retained,  the  content  remains  self-identical  and  therefore 
possible.  But  this  statement  states  nothing — just  as  in  the  formal 
law  of  identity. 

The  Possible,  however,  contains  more  than  does  the  bare  law 
of  identity.  The  Possible  is  reflected  intro-reflectedness,  or  the 


176  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

identical  simply  as  moment  of  totality,  and  thus  is  also  deter- 
mined as  not  being  in  itself;  it  has  therefore  the  second  deter- 
mination of  being  only  a  Possible — the  Ought  of  the  totality 
of  form.  Possibility  without  this  Ought  is  essentiality  as  such ; 
but  Absolute  Form  contains  this,  that  Essence  itself  is  only 
moment  and  has  no  truth  \vithout  Being.  Possibility  is  this  bare 
essentiality,  posited  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  only  moment, 
and  is  not  adequate  to  Absolute  Form.  It  is  Being-in-Self, 
determined  as  only  posited,  or,  equally,  as  not  being  in  itself. — 
Consequently  Possibility  in  itself  is  also  Contradiction  or 
Impossibility. 

This  next  expresses  itself  in  this  manner,  that  Possibility — as 
form-determination  posited  as  transcended — possesses  a  content 
in  general.  As  possible,  this  is  a  Being-in-Self,  which  at  the 
same  time  is  transcended  or  is  an  otherness.  And  because  it  thus 
is  merely  possible,  an  other,  and  its  contrary,  is  equally  poss- 
ible. A  is  A ;  and,  equally,  —  A  is  —  A.  Each  of  these  propo- 
sitions expresses  the  possibility  of  its  content-determination. 
But  as  these  two  statements  of  identity  they  are  indifferent  to 
each  other;  it  is  not  posited  in  the  one  that  the  other  shall 
be  added.  Possibility  is  the  comparing  relation  of  both;  in  its 
determination  as  a  Reflection  of  the  totality  it  contains  this, 
that  the  contrary  too  is  possible.  It  is  therefore  the  relating 
Ground  of  the  connexion  that,  because  A  =  A,  therefore 
—  A  =  —A.  The  possible  A  contains  also  the  possible  not-^4 ; 
and  it  is  this  very  relation  which  determines  both  as  possible. 

But  the  relation,  as  being  one  where  in  the  one  Possible  its 
Other  is  contained,  is  a  contradiction  which  cancels  itself. 
According  to  its  determination  it  is  the  Reflected,  and,  as  was 
seen,  the  self-cancelling  Reflected;  and  thus  it  is  also  the 
immediate,  and  becomes  Actuality. 

3.  This  Actuality  is  not  first  Actuality,  but  is  reflected:  it 
is  posited  as  unity  of  itself  and  Possibility.  The  Actual  as  such 
is  possible,  and  is  in  immediate  positive  identity  with  Possi- 
bility ;  but  the  latter  has  determined  itself  as  only  Possibility ; 
and  accordingly  the  Actual  too  is  determined  as  only  a  Possible. 
And  immediately  because  Possibility  is  immediately  contained 
in  Actuality,  it  is  contained  in  Actuality  as  transcended,  as 
only  Possibility.  Conversely  Actuality  which  is  in  unity  with 
Possibility  is  only  transcended  immediacy ; — or,  because  Formal 


ACTUALITY  177 

Actuality  is  only  immediate  and  first  Actuality,  it  is  only 
moment,  only  transcended  Actuality,  or  only  Possibility. 

Here  at  the  same  time  there  is  a  closer  expression  of  the 
determination,  how  far  Possibility  is  Actuality.  For  Possibility 
is  not  yet  all  Actuality, — no  question  has  yet  arisen  of  real 
and  absolute  Actuality; — it  is  only  that  Possibility  which 
first  occurred — Formal  Possibility,  which  determined  itself  to 
be  only  Possibility;  and  thus  it  is  Formal  Actuality,  which  is 
only  Being  or  Existence  in,  general.  Whatever  is  possible  there- 
fore has  a  Being  or  an  Existence. 

This  unity  of  Possibility  and  Actuality  is  Contingency. — The 
Contingent  is  an  Actual  which  at  the  same  time  is  determined 
only  as  possible — whose  Other  or  opposite  equally  is.  This 
Actuality  therefore  is  mere  Being  or  Existence,  but  is  posited 
in  its  truth,  as  being  equivalent  to  a  positedness  or  to  Possibility. 
Conversely  Possibility  as  intro-Reflection  or  Being-in-Self  is 
posited  as  positedness;  in  this  sense  of  Actuality,  what  is 
possible  is  an  Actual;  it  is  worth  only  as  much  as  contingent 
Actuality :  it  is  itself  a  Contingent. 

The  Contingent  therefore  offers  two  sides.  First,  in  so  far  as 
it  immediately  contains  Possibility,  or  (which  is  the  same  thing) 
in  so  far  as  Possibility  is  in  a  transcended  state  in  it,  it  is  neither 
positedness  nor  is  it  mediated,  but  is  immediate  Actuality; 
it  has  no  Ground. — This  immediate  Actuality  belongs  to  the 
Possible  too,  and  therefore  it  is  determined  equally  as  the 
Actual  and  as  contingent,  and  thus  is  groundless  as  well. 

But,  secondly,  the  Contingent  is  the  Actual  as  a  merely 
Possible  or  as  a  positedness;  and  similarly  the  Possible  as 
formal  Being-in-Self  is  merely  positedness.  Thus  neither  is  in 
and  for  itself,  but  each  has  its  veritable  intro-Reflection  in  an 
Other :  or,  it  has  a  Ground. 

The  Contingent,  then,  has  no  Ground  because  it  is  contin- 
gent ;  and,  equally,  because  it  is  contingent  it  has  a  Ground. 

It  is  the  posited  and  unmediated  conversion  of  Inner  and 
Outer,  or  of  intro-reflectedness  and  Being,  into  each  other, — 
posited,  because  Possibility  and  Actuality  each  has  this  deter- 
mination in  itself,  since  both  are  moments  of  Absolute  Form. — 
Thus  Actuality  in  its  immediate  unity  with  Possibility  is  only 
Existence,  and  is  determined  as  groundless  and  as  being  only 
posited  and  only  possible ; — or,  as  reflected  and  determinate  as 

TT_  M 


i78  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

against  Possibility,  it  is  severed  from  Possibility,  from  intro- 
reflectedness,  and  thus  equally  and  immediately  is  only  a 
Possible.— Similarly  Possibility,  as  simple  Being-in-Self,  is  an 
immediate  having  merely  bare  Being  in  general ; — or,  in  opposi- 
tion to  Actuality,  it  is  equally  a  non-actual  Being-in-Self,  it  is 
only  a  Possible,  and  for  this  very  reason  is  again  only  a  non- 
intro-reflected  Existence  in  general. 

This  absolute  unrest  of  the  Becoming  of  these  two  deter- 
minations is  Contingency.  But,  since  each  immediately  con- 
verts itself  into  its  opposite,  it  simply  coincides  with  itself  in 
this  its  opposite ;  and  this  identity  of  both — of  each  with  the 
other — is  Necessity. 

The  Necessary  is  an  Actual ;  it  thus  exists  as  immediate  or 
groundless ;  but  equally  it  has  its  Actuality  through  an  Other, 
or  in  its  Ground,  but  is  at  the  same  time  the  positedness  of 
this  Ground,  and  its  intro-Reflection ;  the  Possibility  of  the 
Necessary  is  a  transcended  Possibility.  The  Contingent  there- 
fore is  necessary  because  the  Actual  is  determined  as  Possible, 
whereby  its  immediacy  is  transcended  and  cast  off  into  Ground 
(or  Being-in-Self)  and  Grounded,  and  also  because  this  its 
Possibility — the  Ground-relation — is  simply  transcended  and 
posited  as  Being.  The  Necessary  is,  and  this  existent  is  itself 
the  Necessary.  It  is  also  in  itself;  this  intro-Reflection  is  an 
Other  than  that  immediacy  of  Being,  and  the  Necessity  of  the 
existent  is  an  Other.  Thus  the  existent  itself  is  not  the  Necessary ; 
but  this  Being-in-Self  is  itself  only  positedness ;  it  is  transcended 
and  itself  immediate.  Thus  Actuality  in  the  term  which  is 
distinct  from  it,  namely  Possibility,  is  self-identical.  As  this 
identity  it  is  Necessity. 

B 

RELATIVE  NECESSITY,  OR  REAL  ACTUALITY,  POSSIBILITY, 

AND  NECESSITY 

i.  The  Necessity  which  has  been  reached  is  formal  because 
its  moments  are  formal ;  they  are  simple  determinations  which 
are  a  totality  only  as  immediate  unity  or  as  immediate  con- 
version of  one  into  the  other,  and  thus  are  without  the  form 
of  independence. — Hence,  in  this  Formal  Necessity,  the  unity 
at  first  is  simple  and  indifferent  to  its  distinctions.  As  immediate 


ACTUALITY  179 

unity  of  the  form-determinations  this  Necessity  is  Actuality; 
but  its  unity  now  is  determined  as  indifferent  to  the  distinction 
between  the  form-determinations,  that  is,  between  itself  and 
Possibility ;  and  so  this  Actuality  is  one  which  has  a  content. 
This  content,  as  indifferent  identity,  contains  form  too  as 
indifferent,  that  is,  as  merely  a  variety  of  determinations,  and 
is  manifold  content  in  general.  This  Actuality  is  Real  Actuality. 

At  this  point  Real  Actuality  as  such  is  the  Thing  of  many 
properties,  the  existing  world ;  but  it  is  not  the  Existence  which 
resolves  itself  into  Appearance,  but,  as  Actuality,  it  is  also 
Being-in-Self  and  intro-Reflection;  it  preserves  itself  in  the 
multiplicity  of  bare  Existence;  its  externality  is  an  internal 
attitude  to  itself  alone.  What  is  actual  can  act ;  and  something 
manifests  its  actuality  through  that  which  it  produces.  Its 
attitude  to  other  is  the  manifestation  of  itself;  it  is  neither  a 
transition — where  the  existent  Something  relates  itself  to  other, 
— nor  an  appearing — where  the  Thing  stands  merely  in  a 
relation  to  others  and,  though  independent,  has  its  intro- 
Reflection  and  determinate  essentiality  in  another  independent 
entity. 

Real  Actuality  likewise  now  immediately  possesses  Possibility. 
It  contains  the  moment  of  Being-in-Self;  but  since  as  yet  it  is 
only  immediate  unity,  it  is  in  one  of  the  determinations  of  form, 
and  consequently  is  distinct,  as  the  existent,  from  Being-in-Self 
or  Possibility. 

2.  This  Possibility,  as  the  Being-in-Self  of  Real  Actuality,  is 
itself  Real  Possibility ;  and,  at  first,  it  is  Being-in-Self  which 
is  full  of  content. — Formal  Possibility  is  intro-Reflection  only  as 
the  abstract  identity  in  which  a  Something  is  not  self-con- 
tradictory. But  in  so  far  as  the  determinations,  circumstances, 
and  conditions  of  a  case  are  explored  in  order  to  deduce  its 
possibility,  Formal  Possibility  is  left  behind,  and  what  is  now 
under  consideration  is  its  Real  Possibility. 

This  Real  Possibility  is  itself  immediate  Existence,  but  no  longer 
because  Possibility  as  such,  as  formal  moment,  is  immediately 
its  opposite  and  a  non-reflected  Actuality;  but,  b'ecause  it  is 
Real  Possibility,  this  determination  forthwith  belongs  to  it. 
Consequently  the  Real  Possibility  of  a  case  is  the  existing 
multiplicity  of  circumstances  which  are  related  to  it. 

This   multiplicity   of  existence   then   is,   indeed,   as   much 


i8o  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Possibility  as  Actuality,  but  as  yet  their  identity  is  only  the 
content,  which  is  indifferent  to  these  form-determinations; 
they  therefore  constitute  form,  determined  as  against  their 
identity. — Or,  immediate  Real  Actuality,  because  it  is  imme- 
diate, is  determined  as  against  its  Possibility;  and,  as  this 
determinate  and  therefore  reflected  Possibility,  it  is  Real 
Possibility.  Now  this  Possibility  is  the  posited  whole  of  form, 
but  of  form  in  its  determinateness, — namely  Actuality  as  formal 
or  immediate  Actuality  and  also  Possibility  as  abstract  Being- 
in-Self.  Consequently  this  Actuality  which  constitutes  the 
Possibility  of  a  case  is  not  its  own  Possibility,  but  the  Being- 
in-Self  of  some  other  Actual;  it  in  itself  is  that  Actuality  which 
is  to  be  transcended,  or  Possibility  as  Possibility  only. — Thus 
Real  Possibility  constitutes  the  totality  of  conditions  \  an  Actuality 
which  is  not  intro-reflected  or  scattered,  but  is  determined 
to  be  Being-in-Self— the  Being-in-Self  of  some  Other,  which 
ought  to  pass  back  into  itself. 

That  therefore  which  is  really  possible  is  in  its  Being-in-Self 
a  formal  identity  which  in  its  simple  content-determination  is 
not  self-contradictory;  but,  as  self-identical,  it  must  also  not 
be  contradictory  in  all  its  developed  and  distinct  circumstances 
and  in  everything  with  which  it  is  connected.  But  secondly, 
because  it  is  manifold  in  itself  and  has  manifold  connexions 
with  other,  and  because,  further,  variety  of  itself  passes  over 
into  opposition,  it  is  contradictory.  If  any  possibility  is  under 
discussion  and  it  is  desired  to  demonstrate  its  contradiction, 
it  is  only  necessary  to  concentrate  upon  the  multiplicity  which 
it  contains  as  content  or  as  its  conditioned  existence,  and  thence 
its  contradiction  is  easily  discovered. — But  this  is  not  a  con- 
tradiction of  comparison :  manifold  existence  in  itself  is  its  own 
self-transcendence  and  destruction,  and  for  this  reason  essen- 
tially implies  within  itself  the  determination  of  being  merely 
possible. — When  all  the  conditions  of  a  fact  are  completely 
assembled,  it  enters  into  Actuality ; — the  completeness  of  the 
conditions  is  the  totality  as  of  content,  and  the  fact  itself  is  this 
content,  determined  to  be  both  actual  and  possible.  In  the 
sphere  of  Conditioned  Ground  the  conditions  have  form — 
namely,  Ground  or  Reflection  which  is  for  itself — outside  them- 
selves ;  and  this  Ground  or  Reflection  relates  them  for  moments 
of  the  fact,  and  evokes  existence  in  them.  Here,  on  the  other 


ACTUALITY  181 

hand,  immediate  Actuality  is  not  determined  by  a  presupposing 
Reflection  as  being  condition:  it  is  posited  that  it  itself  is 
Possibility. 

Now  self-transcending  Real  Possibility  contains  a  duality, 
which  is  transcended ;  for  Possibility  is  itself  a  duality,  since 
it  is  Actuality  and  Possibility,  i.  The  Actuality  is  formal — 
an  Existence  which  appeared  as  independent  and  immediate 
and  by  its  transcendence  becomes  reflected  Being  or  moment 
of  an  Other,  and  thus  receives  Being-in-Self,  2.  This  Existence 
was  also  determined  as  Possibility,  or  as  the  Being-in-Self,  but 
of  an  Other.  As  it  transcends  itself,  this  Being-in-Self  also  is 
transcended  and  passes  over  into  Actuality. — Thus  this  move- 
ment of  self-transcending  Real  Possibility  produces  the  same 
moments  which  are  already  there,  but  now  each  grows  out  of 
the  other;  consequently  in  this  negation  it  is  also  not  a  tran- 
scendence but  a  coincidence  with  itself. — In  Formal  Possibility, 
if  and  because  something  was  possible,  then  also  not  itself  but 
its  Other  was  possible.  Real  Possibility  is  no  longer  faced  with 
such  an  Other,  for  it  is  real  in  so  far  as  it  itself  is  also  Actuality. 
Its  immediate  existence,  then  (that  is,  the  ring  of  conditions), 
transcends  itself,  and  it  thus  constitutes  itself  that  Being-in-Self 
which  it  already  is,  namely  as  the  Being-in-Self  of  an  Other. 
Since  conversely  its  moment  of  Being-in-Self  at  the  same  time 
hereby  transcends  itself,  it  becomes  Actuality — that  is,  that 
moment  which  also  it  already  is. — What  vanishes  thus  is  this, 
that  Actuality  was  determined  as  the  Possibility  or  Being-in- 
Self  of  an  Other,  and  conversely  Possibility  as  an  Actuality 
which  is  not  that  of  which  it  is  the  Possibility. 

3.  Thus  the  negation  of  Real  Possibility  is  its  self-identity; 
in  this  its  transcendence  it  is  the  recoil  of  this  transcendence 
into  itself,  and  thus  is  Real  Necessity. 

What  is  necessary  cannot  be  otherwise :  what  is  possible  in 
general,  can ;  for  Possibility  is  that  Being-in-Self  which  is  only 
positedness  and  therefore  essentially  otherness.  Formal  Possi- 
bility is  this  identity  as  transition  into  the  utterly  other :  Real 
Possibility,  since  it  possesses  the  other  moment,  Actuality,  is 
already  itself  Necessity.  What  therefore  is  really  possible  can 
no  longer  be  otherwise:  under  such  and  such  conditions  and 
circumstances  something  else  cannot  result.  Real  Possibility 
and  Necessity  are  therefore  only  apparently  different;  this  is  an 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

identity  which  does  not  become  but  is  already  presupposed  and 
forms  a  basis.  Consequently  Real  Necessity  is  a  relation  which 
is  full  of  content ;  for  the  content  is  that  self-existent  identity 
which  is  indifferent  to  distinctions  of  form. 

But  this  Necessity  at  the  same  time  is  relative. — For  it  has 
a  presupposition  from  which  it  begins;  it  has  its  point  of 
departure  in  the  contingent.  For  the  Real  Actual  as  such  is  the 
determinate  Actual,  and,  at  first,  has  its  determinateness  as 
immediate  Being  in  the  fact  that  it  is  a  multiplicity  of  existing 
circumstances.  But,  as  this  immediate  Being  as  determinate- 
ness,  it  is  also  its  own  negative,  it  is  Being-in-Self  or  Possibility ; 
and  thus  it  is  Real  Possibility.  As  this  unity  of  the  two  moments 
it  is  the  totality  of  form — a  totality,  however,  which  as  yet  is 
external  to  itself;  it  is  unity  of  Possibility  and  Actuality  in  such 
a  manner  that  ( i )  manifold  Existence  is  Possibility  immediately 
or  positively — a  Possible  which  is  self-identical  in  general 
because  it  is  an  Actual;  and  (2)  in  so  far  as  this  Possibility 
of  Existence  is  posited,  it  is  determined  as  Possibility  only^  as 
immediate  conversion  of  Actuality  into  its  opposite, — or  as 
Contingency.  Hence  this  Possibility  which  immediate  Actuality 
possesses  in  so  far  as  it  is  condition,  is  only  Being-in-Self  as 
Possibility  of  an  Other.  It  has  been  shown  that  this  otherness 
transcends  itself  and  that  this  positedness  is  itself  posited,  and 
hereby  Real  Possibility  indeed  becomes  Necessity;  but  still, 
the  latter  thus  begins  from  the  former  unity — which  is  not  yet 
intro-reflected — of  Possible  and  Actual; — as  yet  this  presup- 
posing and  the  self-returning  movement  are  separate; — or, 
Necessity  has  not  yet  determined  itself  as  Contingency  out 
of  itself. 

In  the  content,  the  relativity  of  Real  Necessity  exhibits  itself 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  content  so  far  is  only  identity 
indifferent  to  form;  it  is  therefore  distinct  from  it  and  is  a 
determinate  content  in  general.  The  really  Necessary  is  con- 
sequently any  restricted  Actuality,  which  for  the  sake  of  this 
restrictedness  is  also  merely  contingent  in  some  other  respect. 

Thus  in  fact  Real  Necessity  in  itself  is  also  Contingency. — 
This  now  appears  in  the  following  manner :  the  really  Necessary 
is  necessary  indeed  in  form,  but  in  content  is  restricted  and 
has  its  Contingency  through  that.  But  Contingency  is  contained 
also  in  the  form  of  Real  Necessity;  for,  as  was  seen,  Real 


ACTUALITY  183 

Possibility  is  only  in  itself  the  Necessary,  while  it  is  posited  as 
the  otherness  of  Actuality  and  Possibility  to  each  other.  Real 
Necessity  therefore  contains  Contingency;  it  is  the  return  to 
self  out  of  that  restless  otherness  of  Actuality  and  Possibility  to 
each  other,  but  not  out  of  itself  to  itself. 

In  itself,  then,  the  unity  of  Necessity  and  Contingency  is 
found  here;  this  unity  must  be  called  Absolute  Actuality. 


C 

ABSOLUTE  NECESSITY 

Real  Necessity  is  determinate  Necessity:  Formal  Necessity 
has  not  yet  either  content  or  determinateness.  The  deter- 
minateness  of  Necessity  consists  in  this,  that  it  possesses  in  itself 
its  own  negation,  namely  Contingency.  This  is  the  result  about 
it  which  has  been  reached. 

But  this  determinateness  in  its  first  simplicity  is  Actuality; 
consequently  determinate  Necessity  is,  immediately,  actual 
Necessity.  This  Actuality,  which  itself  is  necessary  as  such  (in 
that  it  contains  Necessity  as  its  Being-in-Self),  is  Absolute 
Actuality ;— Actuality  which  no  longer  can  be  otherwise,  for 
its  Being-in-Self  is  not  Possibility  but  Necessity  itself. 

But  now  this  Actuality,  because  it  is  posited  as  absolute,  that 
is,  as  being  itself  the  unity  of  itself  and  Possibility,  is  only  an 
empty  determination,  or,  it  is  Contingency. — This  emptiness 
of  its  determination  makes  it  a  mere  Possibility,  something  which 
might  equally  well  be  otherwise  and  may  be  determined  as 
Possible.  But  this  Possibility  itself  is  Absolute  Possibility ;  for 
it  is  just  this  Possibility,  of  being  determined  equally  as  Possi- 
bility or  as  Actuality.  Since  it  is  this  indifference  to  itself,  it  is 
posited  as  empty  or  contingent  determination. 

Thus  Real  Necessity  not  only  in  itself  contains  Contingency ; 
Contingency  also  becomes  in  it;  but  this  Becoming,  as  exter- 
nality, is  itself  only  the  Being-in-Self  of  such  Necessity,  since 
this  Becoming  is  only  an  immediate  determinedness.  But  it  is 
not  only  this,  but  also  the  very  Becoming  of  Necessity, — or,  the 
presupposition  which  the  latter  had  is  its  own  positing.  For, 
as  Real  Necessity,  it  is  the  suspension  of  Actuality  in  Possibility, 
and  conversely; — it  is  the  simple  conversion  of  one  of  these 


184  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

moments  into  the  other,  and  thus  it  is  also  their  simple  positive 
unity,  each — as  was  seen — coinciding  in  the  other  only  with 
itself.  But  thus  it  is  Actuality ;  of  such  a  kind,  however,  that  it 
is  only  as  this  simple  self-coincidence  of  form.  Hence  its  negative 
positing  of  these  moments  is  itself  the  presupposing  or  positing 
of  itself  as  transcended,  or  of  immediacy. 

But  at  this  very  point  this  Actuality  is  determined  as  some- 
thing negative ;  it  is  a  self-coincidence  out  of  Actuality,  which 
was  Real  Possibility;  thus  this  new  Actuality  arises  only  out 
of  its  Being-in-Self,  out  of  its  own  negation. — Hereby  it  is 
also  immediately  determined  as  Possibility,  or  as  something 
mediated  through  its  negation.  But  thus  this  Possibility  is  now 
immediately  nothing  but  this  mediating,  in  which  Being-in- 
Self,  or  Possibility  and  immediacy,  both  in  the  same  manner 
are  positedness. — Thus  it  is  Necessity  which  is  equally  tran- 
scending of  this  positedness  or  positing  of  immediacy  and  of 
Being-in-Self,  and  also  by  that  very  fact  determining  of  this 
transcending  as  positedness.  It  therefore  itself  determines  itself 
as  Contingency, — repels  itself  from  itself  in  its  Being,  in  this 
repulsion  has  but  returned  to  itself,  and  in  this  return  (as  its 
Being)  has  but  repelled  itself  from  itself. 

Thus  Form  in  its  realization  has  penetrated  all  its  dis- 
tinctions; it  has  made  itself  transparent,  and,  as  Absolute 
Necessity,  is  only  this  simple  self-identity  of  Being  in  its  negation, 
or  in  Essence. — The  distinction  between  content  and  form  itself 
has  vanished  equally ;  for  this  unity  of  Possibility  in  Actuality, 
and  conversely,  is  form  which  is  indifferent  to  itself  in  its 
determinateness,  or  in  positedness;  it  is  the  fact  filled  with 
content,  against  which  the  form  of  Necessity  broke  and  re- 
mained external.  But  in  this  manner  it  is  this  reflected  identity 
of  the  two  determinations  as  indifferent  to  them,  and  thus  it 
is  the  form-determination  of  Being-in-Self  as  opposed  to  posited- 
ness ;  and  this  Possibility  constitutes  the  restrictedness  of  the 
content  which  belonged  to  Real  Necessity.  But  the  dissolution 
of  this  distinction  is  Absolute  Necessity,  the  content  of  which 
is  this  distinction  which  in  it  penetrates  itself. 

Absolute  Necessity  then  is  the  truth  into  which  Actuality 
and  Possibility  in  general  pass  back,  as  well  as  Formal  and 
Real  Necessity. — The  truth  was  reached  that  Absolute  Necessity 
is  Being  which  in  its  negation — in  Essence — relates  itself  to 


ACTUALITY  185 

itself  and  is  Being.  It  is  simple  immediacy  or  pure  Being  as 
much  as  simple  intro-Reflection  or  pure  Essence :  it  is  the  fact 
of  the  identity  of  these  two. — The  absolutely  Necessary  is  only 
because  it  is,  and  has  otherwise  neither  condition  nor  Ground. 
— But  equally  it  is  pure  Essence;  its  Being  is  simple  intro- 
Reflection  ;  it  is,  because  it  is.  As  Reflection  it  has  Ground  and 
condition,  but  it  has  for  Ground  and  condition  only  itself. 
It  is  Being-in-Self,  but  its  Being-in-Self  is  its  immediacy; 
its  Possibility  is  its  Actuality. — It  is,  then,  because  it  is;  as 
coincidence  of  Being  with  itself  it  is  Essence;  but  since  this 
simpleness  is  also  immediate  simplicity,  it  is  Being. 

In  this  manner  Absolute  Necessity  is  the  Reflection  or  Form 
of  the  Absolute;  unity  of  Being  and  Essence,  simple  immediacy, 
which  is  absolute  negativity.  Consequently  on  the  one  hand 
its  distinctions  do  not  exist  as  Determinations  of  Reflection, 
but  as  existing  multiplicity  or  differentiated  Actuality,  which 
has  the  shape  of  Others  independent  against  one  another.  On 
the  other  hand,  since  its  relation  is  absolute  identity,  it  is  the 
absolute  conversion  of  its  Actuality  into  its  Possibility  and  of 
its  Possibility  into  Actuality. — Absolute  Necessity  is  therefore 
blind.  On  the  one  hand,  the  distinct  terms  which  are  determined 
as  Actuality  and  Possibility  have  the  shape  of  intro-Reflection 
as  of  Being ;  they  therefore  both  exist  as  free  Actualities,  of 
which  neither  shows  in  the  other  nor  will  allow  any  trace 
of  its  relation  to  the  other  to  appear  in  itself;  being  founded 
on  itself  each  is  the  Necessary  in  itself.  Necessity  as  Essence  is 
locked  up  in  this  Being,  and  consequently  the  mutual  contact 
of  these  Actualities  appears  as  an  empty  externality;  the 
Actuality  of  one  in  the  other  is  bare  Possibility  or  Contingency. 
For  Being  is  posited  as  absolutely  necessary,  as  self-mediation 
which  is  absolute  negation  of  mediation  by  other,  or  as  Being 
which  is  identical  only  with  Being;  consequently  an  Other 
having  Actuality  in  Being  is  just  determined  as  a  bare  Possible, 
as  empty  positedness. 

But  this  Contingency  is  rather  Absolute  Necessity ;  it  is  the 
Essence  of  these  free  Actualities  which  are  necessary  in  them- 
selves. This  Essence  is  that  which  shuns  the  light,  because  in 
these  Actualities  there  is  no  Showing  nor  reflex,  because  they 
are  founded  purely  on  themselves,  are  fashioned  only  for  them- 
selves, and  manifest  only  themselves, — because  they  are  only 


i86  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Being. — Their  Essence  however  will  burst  out  in  them,  and 
reveal  both  what  it  is  and  what  they  are.  The  simplicity  of 
their  Being  and  repose  upon  themselves  is  absolute  negativity ; 
it  is  the  freedom  of  their  show-less  immediacy.  This  negative 
element  breaks  out  in  them  because  Being  through  this  its 
Essence  is  self-contradiction ;  it  is  this  contradiction  as  against 
this  Being  in  the  form  of  Being,  as  the  negation  therefore  of 
those  Actualities,  which  is  absolutely  different  from  their  Being, 
or  as  their  Nothing,  which  is  an  otherness  over  against  them 
as  free  as  is  their  Being. — Yet  its  existence  in  them  could  not 
but  be  recognized.  In  their  self-based  fashioning  they  are 
indifferent  to  form ;  they  are  a  content  and,  therefore,  distinct 
Actualities  and  a  determinate  content ;  and  this  content  is  the 
mark  which  Necessity  impressed  upon  them  when  it,  which  in 
its  determination  is  absolute  return  upon  itself,  let  them  go 
free  as  absolutely  actual.  To  this  mark  Necessity  appeals  as 
to  the  witness  of  its  cause,  and,  touched  by  it,  the  Actualities 
now  perish.  This  manifestation  of  that  which  determinateness 
is  in  truth — namely  negative  self-relation — is  blind  submersion 
in  otherness;  the  Showing  or  Reflection  which  breaks  out  is, 
in  the  existent  entities,  as  Becoming  or  transition  of  Being  into 
Nothing.  But  conversely  Being  is  equally  Essence,  and  Becoming 
is  Reflection  or  Showing.  Thus  externality  is  their  internality ; 
their  relation  is  absolute  identity ;  and  the  transition  of  Actual 
into  Possible,  of  Being  into  Nothing,  is  a  self-coincidence; 
Contingency  is  Absolute  Necessity,  and  itself  is  the  presup- 
posing of  that  first  Absolute  Actuality. 

This  self-identity  of  Being  in  its  negation  is  Substance.  Sub- 
stance is  this  unity  as  in  its  negation,  or  as  in  Contingency: 
it  is  thus  Substance  as  self-relation.  The  blind  transition  of 
Necessity  is  rather  the  proper  Exposition  of  the  Absolute,  its 
movement  in  itself  which,  in  its  alienation,  rather  exhibits  itself. 


CHAPTER   III 
THE    ABSOLUTE    RELATION 

ABSOLUTE  Necessity  is  not  the  Necessary,  and  still  less  a  Necessary : 
it  is  Necessity — Being  simply  as  Reflection.  It  is  Relation 
because  it  is  distinguishing,  the  moments  of  which  process  are 
themselves  its  whole  totality ;  these  therefore  absolutely  persist, 
but  there  is  only  one  persistence, — distinction  is  only  the  Show 
of  Exposition,  and  Show  is  the  Absolute  itself. — Essence  as  such 
is  Reflection  or  showing;  but  Essence  as  Absolute  Relation  is 
Show  posited  as  Show,  which,  as  this  self-relating,  is  Absolute 
Actuality. — The  Absolute,  first  expounded  by  external  reflec- 
tion, now,  as  Absolute  Form  or  as  Necessity,  expounds  itself; 
this  self-expounding  is  its  self-positing,  and  it  is  only  this  self- 
positing. — Natural  light  is  not  Something,  nor  Thing,  but  its 
being  is  just  its  showing ;  and  similarly  manifestation  is  self-equal 
Absolute  Actuality. 

Consequently  the  sides  of  the  Absolute  Relation  are  not 
Attributes.  In  the  Attribute,  the  Absolute  shows  only  in  one 
of  its  moments,  which  is  taken  as  presupposed  and  picked  up 
by  external  reflection.  That,  however,  which  expounds  the 
Absolute  is  Absolute  Necessity  which  is  self-identical  as  being 
self-determining.  Since  this  is  showing  which  is  posited  as  Show, 
the  sides  of  this  Relation  are  totalities  because  they  are  as  Show ; 
for,  as  Show,  the  distinctions  are  each  itself  and  its  opposite, 
or  they  are  each  the  whole; — and  conversely  they  are  Show 
in  this  manner  because  they  are  totalities.  Thus  this  distin- 
guishing or  showing  of  the  Absolute  is  only  the  identical 
positing  of  itself. 

This  Relation  in  its  immediate  concept  is  the  Relation  of 
Substance  and  Accidents,  the  immediate  vanishing  and  becom- 
ing in  itself  of  Absolute  Show.  Substance  determines  itself  as 
Being-for-Self  as  against  an  Other ;  or,  the  Absolute  Relation 
determines  itself  as  real ;  and  thus  the  relation  is  the  Relation 
of  Causality.  This  as  self-relating  finally  passes  over  into 
Reciprocity,  and  thus  the  Absolute  Relation  hereby  is  also 


i88  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

posited  according  to  the  determinations  which  it  contains ;  and 
next  this  posited  unity  of  itself  in  its  determinations  (which  are 
themselves  posited  as  the  Whole  and  therefore  equally  as 
determinations)  is  the  Notion. 


A 
THE  RELATION  OF  SUBSTANTIALITY 

Absolute  Necessity  is  Absolute  Relation  because  it  is  not 
Being  as  such,  but  Being  which  is  because  it  is — Being  as  absolute 
self-mediation.  This  Being  is  Substance;  as  ultimate  unity  of 
Essence  and  Being  it  is  the  Being  in  all  Being;  it  is  not  the 
unreflected  immediate  nor  an  abstract  something  which  stands 
behind  existence  and  appearance — it  is  immediate  Actuality 
itself,  and  this  as  absolute  intro-reflectedness,  as  a  persistence 
which  is  in  and  for  itself. — Substance,  as  this  unity  of  Being 
and  Reflection,  is  essentially  the  showing  and  positedness  of 
these.  Showing  is  self-related  showing,  and  thus  it  is ;  this  Being 
is  Substance  as  such.  Conversely  this  Being  is  only  self-identical 
positedness :  it  is  thus  showing  totality,  or  Accidentality. 

This  showing  is  identity  as  formal  identity — the  unity  of 
Possibility  and  Actuality.  It  is,  first,  Becoming,  contingency 
as  the  sphere  of  arising  and  passing  away ;  for,  according  to  the 
determination  of  immediacy,  the  relation  of  Possibility  and 
Actuality  is  immediate  conversion  of  one  into  the  other  (as 
existents),  or  of  each  into  that  which  is  only  Other  to  it. — But 
Being  is  Show,  and  therefore  their  mutual  relation  is  one  of 
identical  or  showing  terms ;  it  is  Reflection.  Consequently  the 
movement  of  Accidentality  represents  in  each  of  its  moments 
the  showing  of  the  categories  of  Being  and  the  Reflection- 
determinations  of  Essence  into  one  another. — The  immediate 
Something  has  a  content;  its  immediacy  at  the  same  time  is 
reflected  indifference  to  form.  This  content  is  determinate ;  and, 
since  this  is  determinateness  of  Being,  the  Something  passes 
over  into*  an  Other.  But  Quality  is  also  determinateness  of 
Reflection ;  it  is  thus  indifferent  Variety.  This  however  animates 
itself  into  opposition  and  passes  back  into  Ground,  which  is 
Nothing  and  also  intro-Reflection.  The  latter  transcends  itself; 
but  it  is  itself  reflected  Being-in-Self ;  it  is  thus  Possibility,  and 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  189 

this  Being-in-Self  in  its  transition   (which  is  equally  intro- 
Reflection)  is  the  necessary  Actual. 

This  movement  of  Accidentality  is  the  Actuosity  of  Substance 
as  quiet  emergence  of  itself.  It  is  not  active  against  Something, 
but  only  against  itself  as  simple  unresisting  element.  The 
transcendence  of  a  presupposed  term  is  vanishing  Show ;  and 
only  in  the  process  which  transcends  the  immediate  does  this 
immediate  itself  become,  or  that  showing  achieve  being ;  the 
beginning  from  self  is  only  the  positing  of  that  self  from  which 
the  beginning  takes  place. 

Substance  as  this  identity  of  showing  is  the  totality  of  the 
whole  and  comprehends  Accidentality;  and  Accidentality  is 
the  whole  of  Substance.  Its  distinction  into  simple  identity  of 
Being  and  the  alternation  of  Accidents  in  it  is  a  form  of  its 
Show.  The  former  is  the  formless  Substance  of  imagination 
for  which  Show  has  not  determined  itself  as  Show ;  it  clings 
to  such  an  indeterminate  identity  as  though  it  were  an  Abso- 
lute, although  this  identity  has  no  truth;  it  is  only  the 
determinateness  of  immediate  Actuality  or,  equally,  of 
Being-in-Self  or  Possibility — form-determinations  which  fall 
within  Accidentality. — 

The  other  determination,  the  alternation  of  Accidents,  is 
the  absolute  formal  unity  of  Accidentality,  Substance  as 
absolute  power. — When  the  Accident  passes  away,  this  is  the 
retrogression  of  itself  as  Actuality  into  itself  as  into  its  Being- 
in-Self  or  into  its  Possibility ;  but  this  its  Being-in-Self  is  itself 
only  a  positedness,  and  is  therefore  also  Actuality;  and,  since 
these  form-determinations  are,  equally,  content-determinations, 
this  possible  is  an  actual  (otherwise  determined)  even  according 
to  content.  Through  Actuality  with  its  content  (into  which  it 
translates  the  possible)  Substance  manifests  itself  as  creative, 
and  through  Possibility  (into  which  it  leads  back  the  actual) 
as  destructive,  power.  But  both  are  identical :  creation  is  de- 
structive and  destruction  creative ;  for  negative  and  positive — 
that  is,  Possibility  and  Actuality — are  absolutely  united  in 
substantial  Necessity. 

The  Accidents  as  such — and  there  are  more  than  one,  since 
plurality  is  one  of  the  determinations  of  Being — have  no  power 
over  one  another.  They  are  the  Something  which  is  or  is  for 
itself,  existing  things  with  manifold  properties,  or  wholes  which 


i  go  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

consist  of  parts;  independent  parts,  forces  which  require 
solicitation  by  one  another  and  have  one  another  for  condition. 
In  so  far  as  such  an  Accidental  seems  to  exercise  power  over 
an  Other,  it  is  the  power  of  Substance  which  comprehends 
both  within  itself:  as  negativity  it  posits  an  unequal  value, 
determining  the  one  as  passing  away  and  the  other  (with  a 
different  content)  as  arising,  or  the  former  as  passing  over  into 
its  Possibility  and  the  latter  as  passing  over  therein  into 
Actuality, — ever  sundering  itself  into  the  distinctions  of  form 
and  content  and  ever  purifying  itself  of  this  one-sidedness, 
though  in  this  purification  itself  it  has  fallen  back  into  deter- 
mination and  division. — Thus  one  Accident  only  extrudes 
another  because  its  own  subsisting  is  itself  this  totality  of  form 
and  content,  in  which  it  perishes  as  much  as  its  other. 

Because  of  this  immediate  identity  and  this  presence  of 
Substance  in  the  Accidents  no  real  distinction  yet  exists.  In  this 
first  determination  Substance  is  not  yet  manifested  according 
to  its  full  concept.  When  Substance  as  self-identical  Being-in- 
and-for-Self  is  distinguished  from  itself  as  totality  of  Accidents, 
then,  as  power,  it  is  the  mediator.  This  is  Necessity — its  positive 
endurance  in  the  negativity  of  the  Accidents  and  its  mere 
positedness  in  their  persistence :  accordingly  this  mean  is  unity 
of  Substantiality  and  Accidentality  itself,  and  its  extremes  have 
no  peculiar  persistence.  Substantiality  therefore  is  only  the 
Relation  as  immediately  vanishing;  it  is  not  related  to  itself 
as  negative,  and,  as  immediate  self-unity  of  power,  is  only  in 
the  form  of  its  identity  and  not  of  its  negative  Essence :  one 
moment  only,  namely  the  negative,  or  distinction,  is  that  which 
utterly  vanishes,  but  not  the  other,  the  identical.— This  can 
also  be  considered  in  the  following  manner.  Show  or  Acciden- 
tality in  itself  is ,  indeed,  Substance  through  power,  but  it  is 
not  thus  posited  as  this  self-identical  Show ;  and  thus  Substance 
has  only  Accidentality  for  its  shape  or  positedness,  and  not 
itself;  it  is  not  Substance  as  Substance.  Here  then  it  is  the 
Relation  of  Substantiality  only  in  this,  that  it  discloses  itself 
as  formal  power  the  distinctions  of  which  are  not  substantial : 
in  fact  it  exists  only  as  Inner  of  the  Accidents,  and  these  are 
only  in  Substance.  In  other  words,  this  Relation  is  only  Showing 
Totality  as  Becoming;  but  equally  it  is  Reflection.  Acciden- 
tality, which  in  itself  is  Substance,  is  for  this  very  reason  also 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  191 

posited  as  such ;  it  is  thus  determined  as  self-relating  negativity 
as  against  itself;  it  is  determined  as  self-relating  simple  self- 
identity,  and  thus  is  Substance  which  is  for  itself  and  has  power. 
Thus  the  Relation  of  Substantiality  passes  over  into  the  Relation 
of  Causality. 

B 
THE  RELATION  OF  CAUSALITY 

Substance  is  power — power  which  is  intro-reflected  and  not 
merely  transitory,  but  posits  determinations  and  distinguishes 
them  from  itself.  In  its  determining  it  relates  itself  to  itself, 
and  therefore  is  itself  that  which  it  posits  as  a  negative,  or 
makes  into  positedness.  Hence  this  in  general  is  transcended 
Substantiality,  the  merely  posited  entity,  or  Effect,  while  Sub- 
stance which  is  for  itself  is  Cause. 

Here  this  Relation  of  Causality  is  only  this  relation  of  Cause 
and  Effect ;  it  is  thus  Formal  Relation  of  Causality. 

(a)  FORMAL  CAUSALITY 

i.  Cause  stands  against  Effect  as  the  original. — Substance, 
as  power,  is  Showing,  or  has  Accidentality.  But  as  power  it  is 
equally  intro-Reflection  in  its  Show;  it  thus  expounds  its 
transition,  and  this  Showing  is  determined  as  Show,  or  the 
Accident  is  posited  as  just  this — that  it  is  only  something 
posited. — But,  while  it  determines,  Substance  does  not  proceed 
from  Accidentality  as  though  Accidentality  were  previously 
an  Other  and  were  now  first  posited  as  determinateness ;  on 
the  contrary  both  are  one  Actuosity.  Substance  as  power 
determines  itself;  but  this  determining  is  itself  immediately  the 
transcendence  of  determining  and  is  the  return.  It  determines 
itself, — and  it,  the  determinant,  is  thus  the  immediate  and  the 
already  determinate; — and  since  it  determines  itself,  it  posits 
this  already  determinate  entity  as  determinate:  it  has  thus 
transcended  positedness  and  has  returned  to  itself. — Conversely 
this  return,  because  it  is  the  negative  self-relation  of  Substance, 
is  itself  a  determining  or  self-repulse ;  by  virtue  of  this  return 
the  determinate  entity,  from  which  Substance  seems  to  begin 
and  seems  now  to  posit  it  simply  as  a  determinate  already 


192  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

given,  becomes. — Thus  absolute  Actuosity  is  Cause, — the  power 
of  Substance  in  its  truth  as  manifestation,  which  immediately 
also  expounds  in  its  Becoming  that  which  is  in  itself,  the 
Accident  (which  is  positedness),  and  posits  it  as  positedness, 
or  Effect. — Effect,  then,  first  is  that  which  the  Accidentality 
of  the  Relation  of  Substantiality  is,  namely  Substance  as 
positedness;  but  secondly  the  Accident  exists  as  such  sub- 
stantially only  through  its  disappearance,  as  transitory.  As 
Effect,  however,  it  is  positedness  as  self-identical;  Cause  is 
manifested  in  Effect  as  whole  Substance,  namely  as  reflected 
into  itself  in  positedness  itself  as  such. 

2.  This  intro-reflected  positedness  (the  determinate  as  deter- 
minate) stands  opposed  by  Substance  as  non-posited  Original. 
As  absolute  power  Substance  is  return  to  itself,  but  this  return 
is  itself  a  determining ;  hence  it  is  no  longer  merely  the  in-itself 
of  its  Accident,  but  is  also  posited  as  this  Being-in-Self.  Con- 
sequently Substance  attains  Actuality  only  when  it  has  become 
Cause.  But  this  Actuality,  in  that  its  Being-in-Self  (its  deter- 
minateness  in  the  Relation  of  Substantiality)  is  now  posited 
as  determinateness,  is  Effect ;  hence  Substance  has  the  Actuality 
which  it  has  as  Cause  only  in  its  Effect. — This  is  the  Necessity 
which  is  Cause. — It  is  actual  Substance  because  Substance  as 
power  determines  itself,  but  it  is  also  Cause  because  it  expounds 
this  determinateness  or  posits  it  as  positedness:  thus  it  posits 
its  actuality  as  positedness,  or  as  Effect.  This  is  the  Other  of 
Cause — positedness  as  against  Original  and  mediated  by  it. 
But  Cause  as  Necessity  equally  cancels  this  its  mediation,  and 
in  the  process  of  determining  itself  it  is — as  the  originally  self- 
relating  as  against  the  mediated — the  return  to  self;  for  posited- 
ness is  determined  as  positedness  and  is  therefore  self-identical ; 
consequently  Cause  is  veritably  actual  and  self-identical  only 
in  its  Effect. — Effect  therefore  is  necessary  just  because  it  is 
manifestation  of  Cause,  or  because  it  is  that  Necessity  which 
is  Cause. — Cause  is  self-moving  only  as  this  Necessity  and  only 
as  this  begins  from  itself  without  solicitation  from  an  Other, 
and  is  independent  source  of  production  out  of  itself; — it  must 
act ;  its  originality  is  this,  that  its  intro-Reflection  is  determinant 
positing,  and  that  conversely  both  are  one  unity. 

Hence  Effect  contains  nothing  whatever  which  Cause  does 
not  contain.  Conversely  Cause  contains  nothing  which  is  not 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  193 

in  its  Effect.  Cause  is  Cause  only  in  so  far  as  it  brings  about 
an  Effect;  and  Cause  is  nothing  but  this  determination,  that 
it  has  an  Effect,  while  Effect  is  nothing  but  that  it  has  a  Cause. 
Cause  as  such  implies  its  Effect,  and  Effect  Cause;  in  so  far 
as  Cause  does  not  yet  act  or  has  ceased  to  act,  it  is  not  Cause, — 
and  Effect,  in  so  far  as  its  Cause  has  vanished,  is  no  longer 
Effect,  but  an  indifferent  actuality. — 

3.  In  this  identity  of  Cause  and  Effect,  the  form  in  which 
they  are  distinguished  as  the  self-existent  and  as  positedness 
is  transcended.  Cause  is  extinguished  in  its  Effect ;  and  simul- 
taneously Effect  has  been  extinguished,  for  it  is  no  more  than 
the  determinateness  of  Cause.  This  Causality  which  has  been 
extinguished  in  Effect  is  thus  an  immediacy  which  is  indifferent 
to  the  relation  of  Cause  and  Effect  and  is  connected  to  it 
externally. 

(b)  THE  DETERMINATE  RELATION  OF  CAUSALITY 

i .  The  self-identity  of  Cause  in  its  Effect  is  the  transcendence 
of  its  power  and  negativity ;  consequently  it  is  unity  which 
is  indifferent  to  form-distinctions,  or  content. — It  is  therefore 
related  to  form  (that  is,  here,  Causality)  only  in  itself.  They  are 
thus  posited  as  various,  and  form  itself  is,  as  against  content, 
a  Causality  which  is  only  immediately  actual,  or  a  contingent 
Causality. 

Further,  content  thus  determinate  is  a  content  various  in 
itself;  and  Cause  is  determined  according  to  its  content,  and 
so  therefore  equally  is  Effect. — Content  (since  reflectedness 
here  is  also  immediate  Actuality)  is  to  this  extent  actual  but 
also  finite  Substance. 

This  now  is  the  Relation  of  Causality  in  its  reality  andjinitude. 
As  formal,  it  is  the  infinite  relation  of  absolute  power,  whose 
content  is  pure  manifestation  or  Necessity.  As  finite  Causality 
on  the  contrary  it  has  a  given  content,  and  exhausts  itself  as 
an  external  distinction  upon  that  identity  which  in  its  deter- 
minations is  one  and  the  same  Substance. 

By  virtue  of  this  identity  of  content  this  Causality  is  an 
analytic  proposition.  It  is  the  same  fact  which  displays  itself 
first  as  Cause  and  then  as  Effect, — here  as  peculiar  persistence 
and  there  as  positedness  or  determination  in  an  Other.  These 

VOL.  H.  N 


194  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

determinations  of  form  are  an  external  reflection,  and  con- 
sequently it  is  in  the  circumstances  a  tautological  consideration, 
made  by  a  subjective  understanding,  when  a  phenomenon  is 
determined  as  effect  and  the  ascent  is  thence  made  to  its  cause, 
in  order  that  the  fact  may  be  understood  and  explained :  one 
and  the  same  content  is  repeated,  and  the  cause  is  no  richer 
than  the  effect. — For  example,  rain  is  the  cause  of  dampness, 
and  dampness  is  its  effect.  "Rain  moistens" ;  this  is  an  analytic 
proposition:  the  same  water  which  is  rain  is  dampness;  only 
as  rain  this  water  has  the  form  of  a  fact  by  itself,  while  as 
wateriness  or  dampness  it  is  adjectival,  something  posited, 
which  is  no  longer  supposed  to  have  its  persistence  in  itself; 
and  both  determinations  are  equally  external  to  it. — Similarly 
the  cause  of  a  given  colour  is  a  colouring  agent,  a  pigment 
which  is  one  and  the  same  actuality  (i)  in  the  form  (which  is 
external  to  it)  of  an  active  principle — that  is,  as  externally 
connected  with  an  agent  which  is  different  from  it — and  (2)  in 
the  determination  of  effect,  which  is  equally  external  to  it. — 
The  cause  of  a  deed  is  the  inner  disposition  of  an  active  subject, 
and  this  remains  the  same  content  and  value  in  the  shape  of 
the  external  existence  which  it  acquires  through  performance. 
If  the  movement  of  a  body  is  considered  as  effect,  then  a 
propulsive  force  is  its  cause ;  but  the  same  quantum  of  move- 
ment is  there  before  and  after  the  impulse — the  same  existence 
which  the  propelling  body  contained  and  communicated  to  the 
impelled  body ;  and  itself  it  loses  as  much  as  it  communicates. 
It  is  true  that  the  cause — the  painter  or  the  propelling  body, 
for  example — has  a  further  content,  besides  the  colours  and 
their  form  which  combines  them  into  a  picture  (in  the  case 
of  the  former),  and  besides  a  movement  of  definite  strength 
and  direction  (in  the  case  of  the  latter) .  But  this  further  content 
is  a  contingent  accessory  which  does  not  concern  the  cause : 
the  qualities  of  the  painter,  apart  from  this  quality  that  he  is 
the  painter  of  the  given  picture,  are  irrelevant  to  the  picture ; 
only  those  of  his  properties  which  are  displayed  in  the  effect 
are  present  in  him  as  cause ;  he  is  not  cause  in  his  remaining 
properties.  Similarly,  whether  the  propelling  body  is  of  stone 
or  wood,  is  green  or  yellow,  and  so  on,  is  irrelevant  to  the 
impulse  which  it  communicates;  and  to  this  extent  it  is  not 
cause. 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  195 

With  respect  to  this  tautology  of  the  Relation  of  Causality, 
the  observation  must  be  made  that  it  does  not  seem  to  contain 
the  tautology  if  the  remote  and  not  the  proximate  cause  of  an 
effect  is  adduced.  The  change  of  form  which  the  fundamental 
fact  undergoes  in  this  passage  through  a  series  of  intermediate 
members  disguises  the  identity  which  it  therein  retains.  At  the 
same  time,  in  this  multiplication  of  causes  which  have  entered 
between  it  and  the  ultimate  effect,  it  connects  itself  with  other 
things  and  circumstances,  so  that  the  complete  effect  is  con- 
tained not  in  that  first  term  which  is  pronounced  to  be  the 
cause,  but  only  in  this  plurality  of  causes  together. — If,  for 
example,  a  man  came  into  circumstances  where  his  talent 
developed  because  he  lost  his  father  who  was  hit  by  a  bullet 
in  battle,  then  this  shot  (or,  further  back,  the  war,  or  a  cause 
of  the  war,  and  so  on  to  infinity)  might  be  assigned  as  the  cause 
of  the  man's  skill.  But  it  is  clear  that  the  shot  (for  example) 
is  not  by  itself  the  cause,  but  only  the  connexion  of  the  shot 
with  other  effective  determinations.  Or  rather,  it  is  not  cause 
at  all,  but  only  an  individual  moment  which  belonged  to  the 
circumstances  of  the  possibility. 

Further,  and  above  all,  we  must  consider  the  inadmissible 
application  of  the  Relation  of  Causality  to  relations  of  physico- 
organic  and  of  spiritual  life.  Here  that  which  is  called  cause 
does,  indeed,  show  itself  as  having  a  different  content  from  the 
effect ;  but  the  reason  is  that  that  which  acts  upon  living  matter 
is  independently  determined,  changed,  and  transmuted  by 
such  matter,  because  whatever  has  life  does  not  allow  the 
cause  to  reach  its  effect,  that  is,  cancels  it  as  cause.  Thus  it  is 
inadmissible  to  say  that  food  is  the  cause  of  blood,  or  certain 
dishes  or  cold  or  damp  the  cause  of  fever,  and  so  on ;  and  it 
is  equally  inadmissible  to  find  in  the  Ionic  climate  the  cause 
of  the  works  of  Homer,  or  in  the  ambition  of  Caesar  the  cause 
of  the  downfall  of  the  republican  constitution  of  Rome.  In 
history  in  general  intellectual  quanta,  and  individuals,  are  in 
play  and  in  reciprocal  determination  with  one  another;  but 
it  is  the  nature  of  spirit,  in  a  sense  far  higher  than  it  is  the 
character  of  living  matter  in  general,  not  to  absorb  another 
original  entity,  or  not  to  allow  a  cause  to  continue  into  itself, 
but  to  break  it  off  and  to  transmute  it. — These  relations  how- 
ever belong  to  the  Idea,  and  are  not  to  be  considered  till  that 


ig6  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

has  been  reached. — But  we  may  here  and  now  observe  that, 
in  so  far  as  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  admitted  (although 
in  an  improper  sense),  effect  cannot  be  greater  than  cause; 
for  effect  is  nothing  further  than  the  manifestation  of  cause. 
It  has  become  a  popular  jest  in  history  to  allow  great  effects 
to  spring  from  small  causes,  and  to  quote  for  first  cause  of 
a  comprehensive  and  profound  event  an  anecdote.  Such  a 
so-called  cause  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  nothing  more  than  an 
occasion  or  external  stimulus;  the  inner  spirit  of  the  event 
would  not  have  required  it,  or  might  have  used  an  in- 
definite number  of  other  such  in  order  to  begin  from  them 
in  appearance,  to  unfold  and  to  manifest  itself.  Much  rather 
such  an  essentially  petty  and  contingent  matter  is,  conversely, 
only  determined  by  the  event  itself  as  its  occasion.  Consequently 
these  arabesques  of  history,  where  a  huge  shape  is  depicted  as 
growing  from  a  slender  stalk,  are  a  sprightly  but  a  most  super- 
ficial treatment.  In  this  growth  of  great  out  of  small,  the  con- 
version certainly  is  present  which  spirit  applies  to  the  external ; 
but  for  this  very  reason  the  small  is  not  cause  in  itself,  or  this 
conversion  itself  transcends  the  relation  of  causality. 

2.  But  this  determinateness  of  the  Relation  of  Causality 
which  makes  content  and  form  various  and  indifferent,  extends 
further.  Form-determination  is  also  content-determination: 
cause  and  effect  (the  two  sides  of  the  relation)  are  also,  there- 
fore, another  content.  Or,  the  content,  because  it  is  only  as 
content  of  a  form,  has  the  latter' s  difference  in  itself  and  is 
essentially  various.  But,  since  this  its  form  is  the  Relation  of 
Causality,  which  is  a  content  identical  in  cause  and  effect, 
therefore  the  various  content  is  connected  externally  with  the 
cause  on  the  one  hand  and  with  the  effect  on  the  other  hand ; 
it  does  not  therefore  itself  enter  into  the  activity  and  into  the 
relation. 

This  external  content,  then,  is  without  relation, — an  imme- 
diate existence; — or,  because  as  content  it  is  also  the  self- 
existent  identity  of  cause  and  effect,  it  is  also  immediate, 
existent  identity.  Consequently  this  is  any  thing  which  has 
manifold  determinations  of  its  existence,  and,  among  others, 
this,  that  it  is  cause  or  else  effect  in  some  respect  or  another. 
In  it  the  form-determinations  of  cause  and  effect  have  their 
substratum,  that  is,  their  essential  persistence,  and  each  has 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  197 

a  separate  persistence, — for  their  identity  is  their  persistence ; — 
but  at  the  same  time  it  is  their  immediate  persistence,  and  not 
their  persistence  as  form-unity  or  as  relation. 

But  this  thing  is  not  only  substratum  but  also  substance,  for 
it  is  identical  persistence  only  as  persistence  of  the  relation. 
It  is,  further,  finite  substance,  for  it  is  determined  as  immediate 
as  against  its  causal  nature.  But  at  the  same  time  it  has 
causality,  since  it  equally  is  identical  only  as  the  identical 
element  of  this  relation. — Now  as  cause  this  substratum  is 
negative  self-relation.  But  it  itself,  to  which  it  relates  itself,  is, 
first,  a  positedness,  because  it  is  determined  as  immediately 
actual;  this  positedness  as  content  is  any  determination  in 
general. — Secondly,  causality  is  external  to  it:  causality  itself 
thus  constitutes  its  positedness.  Now  since  it  is  causal  substance, 
its  causality  consists  in  this — that  it  relates  itself  negatively  to 
itself,  that  is,  to  its  positedness  and  external  causality.  Conse- 
quently the  activity  of  this  substance  begins  from  an  external 
term,  and  frees  itself  from  this  external  determination ;  and  its 
return  to  itself  is  the  preservation  of  its  immediate  existence 
and  the  transcendence  of  its  posited  causality,  and  therefore 
of  its  causality  in  general. 

Thus  a  stone  in  motion  is  cause;  its  movement  is  a  deter- 
mination which  it  has,  while  besides  this  it  contains  many  other 
determinations  of  colour,  shape,  and  so  on,  which  do  not  enter 
into  its  causal  nature.  Its  immediate  existence  is  apart  from 
its  form-relation  (causality),  and  therefore  this  is  external;  the 
movement  of  the  stone  and  the  causality  which  belongs  to  it 
in  movement  are  only  positedness  in  it. — But  the  causality  is 
also  peculiar  to  it ;  this  is  given  in  the  fact  that  its  substantial 
persistence  is  its  identical  self-relation;  the  latter  however  is 
now  determined  as  positedness;  it  is  therefore  also  negative 
self-relation. — Consequently  its  causality,  which  directs  itself 
upon  itself  as  upon  positedness  or  as  something  external,  con- 
sists in  transcending  it  and,  by  its  removal,  returning  to  itself: 
therefore  to  this  extent  it  is  not  self-identical  in  its  positedness, 
but  only  reconstructs  its  abstract  originality. — Or  again,  rain 
is  the  cause  of  dampness,  which  is  the  same  water  as  the  rain. 
This  water  has  the  determination  of  being  rain  and  cause  by 
virtue  of  the  fact  that  the  latter  is  posited  in  it  by  an  Other ; — 
some  other  force  (or  whatever  else  it  may  be)  has  raised  it  in 


ig8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  air  and  collected  it  into  a  mass,  the  gravity  of  which  causes 
it  to  fall.  Its  distance  from  the  earth  is  a  determination  foreign 
to  its  original  self-identity  (or,  gravity) ;  its  causal  nature 
consists  in  removing  this  determination  and  in  reconstructing 
this  identity;  but  in  doing  so  it  also  cancels  its  causality. 

The  second  determinateness  of  Causality  which  we  have  just 
considered  concerns  form ;  this  relation  is  Causality  as  external 
to  itself,  as  that  originality  which  is  equally  in  itself  positedness 
or  effect.  This  union  of  the  opposite  determinations  as  in  the 
existent  substratum  constitutes  the  infinite  regress  from  causes 
to  causes.— We  begin  from  the  effect ;  as  such  it  has  a  cause, 
which  has  a  cause  in  turn,  and  so  forth.  Why  has  the  cause 
a  cause  in  turn?  that  is,  why  is  the  side  which  before  was 
determined  as  cause  now  determined  as  effect,  which  involves 
the  search  for  a  new  cause? — The  reason  is  that  cause  is  finite 
and  determinate  in  general,  determined  as  one  moment  of 
form  as  against  effect ;  thus  it  has  its  determinateness  or  nega- 
tion outside  it ;  but  for  that  very  reason  it  is  itself  finite,  has 
its  determinateness  in  itself,  and  is  thus  positedness  or  effect. 
This  its  identity  is  also  posited,  but  it  is  a  third  term,  the 
immediate  substratum ;  causality  is  therefore  external  to  itself, 
since  here  its  originality  is  an  immediacy.  The  form-distinction 
is  consequently  first  determinateness,  it  is  not  yet  determinate- 
ness  posited  as  determinateness ;  it  is  existent  otherness.  On  the 
one  hand  finite  reflection  halts  at  this  immediate,  removes  the 
form-unity  from  it,  and  allows  it  to  be  cause  in  one  respect 
and  effect  in  another ;  on  the  other  hand  it  transfers  the  form- 
unity  to  the  infinite,  and  by  never-ending  progress  expresses 
its  impotence  to  catch  and  to  hold  it. 

With  Effect  the  case  is  immediately  the  same ;  or  rather,  the 
infinite  progress  from  effect  to  effect  is  entirely  the  same  as  the 
regress  from  cause  to  cause.  In  the  latter,  cause  became  effect, 
which  in  turn  has  another  cause;  similarly  effect  conversely 
becomes  cause,  which  in  turn  has  another  effect. — The  deter- 
minate cause  which  has  been  considered  begins  from  an  exter- 
nality, and*  in  its  effect  does  not  return  as  cause  into  itself,  but 
rather  loses  causality  in  the  effect.  But  conversely  effect  comes 
into  contact  with  a  substratum,  which  is  substance  or  originally 
self-relating  persistence ;  consequently  this  positedness  becomes 
positedness  in  it;  that  is,  this  substance,  when  an  effect  is 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  199 

posited  in  it,  behaves  as  cause.  But  that  first  effect — positedness, 
which  comes  to  it  externally,  is  other  than  the  second,  which 
is  produced  by  it;  for  this  second  is  determined  as  its  intro- 
Reflcction,  but  the  former  as  an  externality  in  it. — But  here 
Causality  is  self-external  causativeness,  and,  therefore,  equally 
it  does  not  return  to  itself  in  its  effect,  and  does  become  external 
to  itself  in  the  effect :  its  effect  in  turn  becomes  positedness 
in  a  substratum — in  another  substance,  which,  however,  equally 
makes  it  a  positedness  or  manifests  itself  as  cause,  again  repels 
its  effect  from  itself,  and  so  on  into  bad  infinity. 

3.  It  remains  to  see  what  has  arisen  through  the  movement 
of  the  Determinate  Relation  of  Causality. — Formal  Causality 
is  extinguished  in  the  effect ;  and  hereby  the  identical  element 
of  these  two  moments  has  become,  but  at  the  same  time  has 
become  only  as  in  itself  the  unity  of  cause  and  effect,  in  which 
the  form-relation  is  external. — By  virtue  of  this,  the  identical 
term  is  also  immediate,  according  to  the  two  determinations  of 
immediacy,  first  as  Being-in-Self,  a  content  at  which  causality 
expires  externally,  and  secondly  as  an  existing  substratum  in 
which  cause  and  effect  inhere  as  distinct  form-determinations. 
In  it  the  latter  are,  in  themselves,  one ;  but  each  by  reason  of  this 
Being-in-Self  or  externality  of  form  is  external  to  itself,  and 
hence  in  its  unity  with  the  other  is  also  determined  as  other 
against  it.  Consequently,  although  cause  has,  and  also  is  itself, 
an  effect,  and  effect  not  only  has  but  also  itself  is  a  cause,  yet 
the  effect  which  the  cause  has  and  that  which  it  is  arc  different ; 
— and  so  with  the  cause  which  the  effect  has,  and  the  cause 
which  it  is. 

But  the  movement  of  the  Determinate  Relation  of  Causality 
has  now  resulted  in  this,  that  the  cause  is  not  merely  extin- 
guished in  the  effect — and  with  it  the  effect  too  (as  happens  in 
Formal  Causality),  but  the  cause  in  its  extinction,  in  the  effect, 
becomes  again;  that  effect  vanishes  into  cause,  but  equally 
becomes  again  in  it.  Each  of  these  determinations  cancels  itself 
in  its  positing  and  posits  itself  in  its  cancellation :  what  takes 
place  is  not  an  external  transition  of  causality  from  one  sub- 
stratum to  another,  but  this  its  becoming  other  is  at  the  same 
time  its  own  positing.  Causality,  then,  presupposes  or  conditions 
itself.  The  identity  which  before  was  only  in  itself  (the  sub- 
stratum) is  hence  now  determined  as  presupposition  or  as 


200  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

posited  against  effective  causality;  and  the  reflection  which 
before  was  only  external  to  the  identical  now  stands  in  a 
relation  to  it. 

(c)  ACTION  AND  REACTION 

Causality  is  a  presupposing  activity.  The  cause  is  conditioned ; 
it  is  negative  self-relation  as  being  presupposed,  as  an  external 
Other  which  in  itself  (but  only  in  itself)  is  causality  itself.  It  is 
(as  has  already  resulted)  substantial  identity  into  which  Formal 
Causality  passes  over;  and  now  it  has  determined  itself  as 
against  the  latter  as  its  negative.  Or  it  is  the  same  as  the 
Substance  of  the  Relation  of  Causality,  only  the  power  of 
Accidentality  stands  opposed  to  it  as  being  itself  a  substantial 
activity. — It  is  passive  substance. — That  which  is  immediate, 
or  in-itself,  and  is  not  also  for-itself,  is  passive, — pure  Being 
or  Essence  which  is  only  in  this  determinateness  of  abstract 
self-identity. — Active  substance,  as  negatively  self-relating,  stands 
opposed  to  passive  substance.  It  is  cause  in  so  far  as  it  has 
reconstructed  itself  in  Determinate  Causality  through  the 
negation  of  itself  and  out  of  effect ;  a  reflected  entity  which 
in  its  otherness  or  as  immediate  essentially  has  a  positing 
attitude  and  mediates  itself  with  itself  through  its  negation. 
For  this  reason  Causality  here  no  longer  has  a  substratum  in 
which  it  might  inhere;  and  as  against  this  identity  it  is  not 
form-determination,  but  is  itself  substance ;  or,  that  which  is 
original  is  only  Causality. — The  substratum  is  passive  sub- 
stance which  has  presupposed  itself. 

This  cause  now  acts,  for  it  is  negative  power  exerted  upon 
itself.  At  the  same  time  it  is  its  own  presupposition ;  it  thus  acts 
upon  itself  as  upon  an  Other— upon  passive  substance.— 
Accordingly,  it  transcends,  first,  the  otherness  of  the  latter, 
and  in  it  returns  to  itself;  secondly  it  determines  it,  positing 
this  transcendence  of  its  otherness  (or  the  return  to  itself)  as 
a  determinateness.  This  positedness  is  at  the  same  time  its 
return  to  itself,  and  therefore  is,  at  this  point,  its  effect;  but 
conversely,,  because,  as  presupposing,  it  determines  itself  as  its 
Other,  it  posits  effect  in  the  other  (or  passive)  substance. — In 
other  words,  passive  substance  itself  is  twofold  (it  is  an  indepen- 
dent Other,  and  also  it  is  presupposed  and  in  itself  already 
identical  with  the  active  cause),  and  therefore  the  activity  of 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  201 

substance  is  twofold.  Two  are  here  in  one ;  the  transcendence 
of  its  determinateness  (that  is,  of  its  condition,  or  the  transcen- 
dence of  the  independence  of  passive  substance) — and  the 
transcending  of  its  identity  with  it,  so  that  it  presupposes  itself 
or  posits  itself  as  Other. — Passive  substance  is  preserved  by  the 
latter  moment :  its  first  transcendence  appears,  in  reference  to 
this,  in  this  manner,  that  only  some  out  of  more  determinations 
are  transcended  in  it,  and  it  becomes  identical  with  the  first 
substance  in  the  effect,  and  in  an  external  manner. 

To  this  extent  it  is  subjected  to  force. — Force  is  the  appear- 
ance of  power,  or  power  as  something  external.  But  power  is 
external  only  in  so  far  as  the  causal  substance  in  its  activity 
(that  is,  in  positing  itself)  at  the  same  time  presupposes  itself, 
that  is,  posits  itself  as  transcended.  Conversely  therefore  the 
activity  of  force  is  an  activity  of  power.  The  forceful  cause  acts 
only  upon  an  Other  presupposed  by  itself;  its  effect  upon  it 
is  negative  self-relation  or  the  manifestation  of  itself.  The 
passive  is  the  independent  which  is  only  a  posited  entity,  it 
is  intro-refracted, — an  actuality  which  is  condition,  and  more- 
over condition  in  its  truth:  an  actuality  which  is  only  a 
possibility,  or,  conversely,  a  Being-in-Self  which  is  only  the 
determinateness  of  Being-in-Self,  or  merely  passive.  Conse- 
quently that  upon  which  force  is  exerted  is  not  only  capable 
of  suffering  force,  but  force  must  be  applied  to  it ;  that  which 
has  force  over  the  Other  has  it  only  because  it  is  the  latter's 
power  which  therein  manifests  both  itself  and  the  Other. 
Passive  substance  is  only  posited  by  force  as  that  which  in  truth 
it  is :  because  it  is  the  simple  positive  or  immediate  substance, 
for  that  very  reason  it  is  only  something  posited ;  as  condition 
it  is  a  prius  which  is  the  show  of  immediacy,  and  of  this  show 
active  causality  strips  it. 

Thus  the  influence  of  another  force  upon  passive  substance 
is  no  more  than  its  due.  What  it  loses  is  that  immediacy,  or 
substantiality  which  is  foreign  to  it.  And  what  comes  to  it  as 
foreign — namely,  to  be  determined  as  a  positedness — is  its 
proper  determination. — But  when  now  it  is  posited,  in  its  own 
positedness  or  in  its  proper  determination,  it  is  not  transcended 
thereby,  but  merely  coincides  with  itself,  and  thus,  when  sub- 
ject to  determination,  is  originality. — Thus  passive  substance 
on  the  one  hand  is  preserved  or  posited  by  active  substance, 


202  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

in  so  far,  namely,  as  the  latter  constitutes  itself  transcended 
substance; — on  the  other  hand  it  is  the  very  activity  of  the 
passive  to  coincide  with  itself,  and  thereby  to  make  itself 
original  and  cause.  For  it,  to  be  posited  by  an  Other,  and  to 
become,  are  one  and  the  same  thing. 

Passive  substance  has  now  been  converted  into  cause,  and 
hereby,  first,  effect  is  transcended  in  it:  in  this  consists  its 
Reaction  in  general.  In  itself  it  is  positedness,  as  passive  sub- 
stance; and  also  positedness  has  been  posited  in  it  through 
the  other  substance — that  is,  in  so  far  as  it  received  in  itself 
the  effect  of  the  latter.  Consequently  its  Reaction  also  contains 
this  twofold  fact,  namely,  first,  that  that  which  it  is  in  itself  is 
posited,  and  secondly  that  that  as  which  it  is  posited  presents 
itself  as  its  Btiug-in-Self.  In  itself  it  is  positedness ;  and  therefore 
it  achieves  for  itself  an  effect  through  the  other :  but  conversely 
this  positedness  is  its  own  Being-in-Self ;  this  is  thus  its  own 
effect,  and  it  itself  presents  itself  as  cause. 

Secondly,  Reaction  is  directed  against  the  first  acting  cause. 
For  that  effect  which  substance  (which  before  was  passive) 
transcends  within  itself  is  precisely  the  effect  of  the  first.  But 
cause  has  its  substantial  actuality  only  in  its  effect,  which  being 
transcended,  its  causal  substantiality  is  transcended.  This 
happens,  first,  in  itself  through  itself  when  it  constitutes  itself 
as  effect;  in  this  identity  its  negative  determination  vanishes 
and  it  becomes  passive:  secondly,  this  happens  through  sub- 
stance which  before  was  passive  and  now  reacts  and  transcends 
its  effect. — In  Determinate  Causality,  too,  the  substance  upon 
which  action  is  exercised  becomes  cause  again,  and  thus  reacts 
to  the  fact  that  an  effect  was  posited  in  it.  But  it  did  not  react 
upon  the  cause,  but  in  turn  placed  its  effect  in  another  sub- 
stance,— which  produced  the  infinite  progress  of  effects ;  for 
here  cause  in  its  effect  is  only  in  itself  self-identical,  and,  there- 
fore, (i)  vanishes  in  an  immediate  identity  in  its  state  of  rest, 
and  (2)  resuscitates  itself  in  another  substance. — In  conditioned 
causality,  on  the  other  hand,  cause  relates  itself  to  itself  in  the 
effect,  for.it  is  its  Other  as  condition  (or  presupposed  term), 
so  that  its  activity  is  becoming  as  much  as  positing  and  transcen- 
dence of  the  Other. 

Further,  it  is  thus  in  the  attitude  of  passive  substance ;  but 
(as  already  resulted)  this  arises  through  the  activity  which  has 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  203 

been  exercised  upon  it  as  causal  substance.  That  first  cause, 
which  acts  first  and  receives  back  into  itself  its  Action  in  the 
shape  of  Reaction,  thus  reappears  as  cause ;  and  hereby  the 
activity,  which  in  finite  causality  runs  into  a  progress  that  is 
infinite  in  the  bad  sense,  is  bent  round  and  becomes  an  activity 
which  returns  upon  itself,  an  infinite  Reciprocity. 


C 

RECIPROCITY 

In  finite  causality  substances  stand  in  a  relation  of  activity 
to  one  another.  The  mechanism  consists  in  this  externality  of 
causality,  where  the  intro-Reflection  of  cause  in  its  effect  is, 
at  the  same  time,  a  repellent  Being,  or  where,  in  the  self- 
identity  which  the  causal  substance  has  in  its  effect,  it  remains 
equally  immediately  external  to  itself,  and  effect  has  passed 
over  into  another  substance.  Now  in  Reciprocity  this  mechanism 
is  transcended ;  for  it  contains,  firstly,  the  disappearance  of  that 
original  survival  of  immediate  substantiality,  and  secondly  the 
arising  of  cause,  and  thus  also  originality,  as  mediating  itself 
with  itself  through  its  negation. 

At  this  point  Reciprocity  presents  itself  as  a  reciprocal 
causality  of  presupposed  and  self-conditioning  substances ;  each 
is,  in  relation  to  the  other,  at  once  active  and  passive  substance. 
Both  being  thus  as  well  passive  as  active,  every  distinction 
between  them  is  already  transcended :  it  is  a  perfectly  trans- 
parent Show:  they  are  substances  only  inasmuch  as  they  are 
the  identity  of  active  and  passive.  Consequently  Reciprocity 
itself  is  still  only  an  empty  way  and  manner  ^  and  all  that  is  yet 
required  is  an  external  comprehension  of  what  already  is  as 
much  in  itself  as  posited.  First,  it  is  no  longer  substrata  that  are 
here  in  relation,  but  substances ;  in  the  movement  of  conditioned 
Causality,  presupposed  immediacy  (which  still  remained)  has 
transcended  itself,  and  the  conditioning  element  of  causal 
activity  is  now  only  influence  or  proper  passivity.  Bat,  further, 
this  influence  is  not  derived  from  some  other  original  substance, 
but  from  some  causal  nature  which  is  conditioned  by  influence, 
or  is  a  mediated  entity.  Consequently  this  entity,  which  is  as 
yet  external,  but  belongs  to  cause  and  constitutes  the  side  of 


204  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

its  passivity,  is  mediated  through  cause  itself;  it  is  produced 
by  its  own  activity,  and  is  thus  passivity  posited  through  its 
own  activity. — Causality  conditions  and  is  conditioned;  that 
which  conditions  is  passive,  but  what  is  conditioned  is  passive 
equally.  This  conditioning  (or  passivity)  is  the  self-negation 
of  cause,  when  it  essentially  constitutes  itself  effect  and  for  that 
very  reason  is  cause.  Thus  Reciprocity  is  only  Causality  itself: 
cause  not  only  has  an  effect,  but  in  the  effect  stands  related, 
as  cause,  to  itself. 

Hereby  Causality  has  returned  to  its  absolute  notion,  and 
at  the  same  time  has  reached  the  Notion  itself.  At  first  it  is 
Real  Necessity,  absolute  self-identity,  so  that  the  differentiation 
of  Necessity,  and  the  determinations  which  in  it  are  related 
to  each  other,  are  substances  or  free  actualities  as  against  each 
other.  In  this  manner  Necessity  is  inner  identity;  Causality 
is  its  manifestation,  where  its  show  of  substantial  otherness  has 
transcended  itself  and  Necessity  is  raised  to  the  rank  of  Free- 
dom.— In  Reciprocity,  original  Causality  presents  itself  as  an 
arising  out  of  its  negation  (or  passivity)  and  as  a  passing  away 
into  it — as  a  Becoming,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  this  Becoming 
is  equally  only  a  showing;  the  transition  into  other  is  intro- 
Reflection;  negation,  which  is  the  ground  of  cause,  is  its 
positive  self-coincidence. 

Necessity  and  Causality  have,  then,  vanished  in  it;  they 
contain  both  the  immediate  identity  (as  connexion  and  rela- 
tion) and  the  absolute  substantiality  of  distincts,  and  therefore 
their  absolute  contingency, — the  original  unity  of  substantial 
variety,  in  other  words  absolute  contradiction.  Necessity  is 
Being,  because  it  is, — the  self-unity  of  Being,  which  has  itself  for 
ground;  but,  conversely,  because  it  has  a  ground,  it  is  not 
Being,  it  is  nothing  whatever  but  Show,  relation  or  mediation. 
Causality  is  this  posited  transition  of  original  Being,  or  cause, 
into  Show  or  mere  positedness,  and  conversely  of  positedness 
into  originality ;  but  the  identity  itself  of  Being  and  Show  is, 
still,  inner  Necessity.  This  internality  (or  Being-in-Self)  tran- 
scends ther  movement  of  Causality ;  and,  concurrently,  the 
substantiality  of  the  sides  which  are  in  relation  is  lost — Necessity 
unveils  itself.  Necessity  does  not  become  Freedom  because  it 
vanishes,  but  only  because  its  identity  (as  yet  an  inner  identity) 
is  manifested, — a  manifestation  which  is  the  identical  move- 


THE  ABSOLUTE  RELATION  205 

merit  into  themselves  of  the  distincts,  the  intro-Reflection  of 
Show  as  Show. — Conversely  Contingency  at  the  same  time 
becomes  Freedom,  in  that  the  sides  of  Necessity,  which  have 
the  shape  of  actualities  that  are  free  for  themselves  and  do  not 
show  in  each  other,  are  now  posited  as  identity ;  so  that  these 
totalities  of  intro-Reflection  in  their  distinction  now  also  show  as 
identical,  or  are  posited  as  only  one  and  the  same  Reflection. 

Absolute  Substance  distinguishes  itself  from  itself  as  Absolute 
Form ;  but  in  doing  so  it  no  longer  repels  itself  as  Necessity 
from  itself,  nor  falls  apart  as  Contingency  into  indifferent 
substances  external  to  one  another:  it  distinguishes  itself 
(i)  into  the  totality — passive  substance  above — which  is  some- 
thing original  as  intro-Reflection  out  of  determinateness,  as 
simple  whole  containing  its  own  positcdness  in  itself  and  posited 
in  it  as  self-identical, — the  Universal ;  and  (2)  into  totality — 
causal  substance  above — as  into  intro-Reflection  equally  out 
of  determinateness  to  negative  determinateness,  which  thus 
as  self-identical  determinateness  is  likewise  the  whole,  but  is 
posited  as  self-identical  negativity :  the  Individual.  But,  imme- 
diately, the  Universal  is  self-identical  only  because  it  contains 
determinateness  as  transcended ;  it  is  the  negative  as  negative ; 
and  therefore  it  is  that  same  negativity  which  Individuality 
is; — and  Individuality  is  similarly  the  determinate  Deter- 
minate, the  negative  as  negative,  and  therefore  is,  immediately, 
that  same  identity  which  Universality  is.  This  their  simple 
identity  is  Particularity,  which  receives  from  the  Individual 
the  moment  of  determinateness,  and  from  the  Universal  the 
moment  of  intro-Reflection,  in  immediate  unity.  These  three 
totalities  are  consequently  one  and  the  same  Reflection,  which 
as  negative  self-relation  distinguishes  itself  into  these  two ;  but 
the  distinction  is  a  completely  transparent  one,  for  it  is  only 
a  distinction  into  determinate  simplicity  and  simple  deter- 
minateness, which  are  just  one  and  the  same  identity. — This 
is  the  Notion,  the  realm  of  Subjectivity  or  of  Freedom. 


VOLUME  II 


SUBJECTIVE    LOGIC 

OR 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  NOTION 


ADVERTISEMENT 

THIS  part  of  the  Logic,  which  contains  the  Doctrine  of  the 
Notion  and  constitutes  the  third  division  of  the  whole,  is 
published  also  under  the  separate  title  of  System  of  Subjective 
Logic  for  the  convenience  of  those  friends  of  this  science  who 
generally  are  more  interested  in  the  matters  here  treated,  and 
comprised  in  logic  commonly  so-called,  than  in  the  further 
logical  subjects  which  were  dealt  with  in  the  first  two  divisions. 
— For  those  earlier  divisions  I  could  claim  the  indulgence  of 
a  fair  judge  on  the  score  of  the  scanty  work  done  in  this  field 
which  could  have  afforded  me  either  starting-point,  matter, 
or  line  of  direction.  Here  I  may  appeal  to  such  indulgence  from 
the  opposite  ground ;  for  the  Logic  of  the  Notion  finds  ready 
a  perfectly  finished  and  compact  or,  so  to  say,  ossified  material, 
and  the  task  is  to  render  it  fluid  and  to  rekindle  the  life-spark 
of  the  Notion  in  such  dead  matter.  It  is  difficult  to  build  a  new 
city  in  a  waste  land :  on  the  other  part,  there  is  material  enough 
at  hand,  but  there  are  also  all  the  more  obstacles  of  another 
kind,  when  it  is  desired  to  give  a  new  plan  to  an  old  city, 
firmly  built  and  never  without  owners  and  inhabitants.  It  is 
necessary  to  make  this  resolve  among  others — that  no  use  at 
all  shall  be  made  of  a  great  deal  of  the  stock  which  elsewhere 
is  held  in  value. — 

But  chiefly  the  greatness  of  the  subject  itself  may  be  urged 
as  an  excuse  for  the  imperfect  execution.  For  what  subject  is 
more  sublime  for  cognition  than  truth  itself? — And  the  doubt 
whether  perhaps  it  is  not  this  subject  itself  which  requires 
excuse  is  not  impertinent  if  it  is  remembered  in  what  sense 
Pilate  put  his  question  "What  is  truth?" : — as  the  poet  says, 
"with  the  air  of  the  courtier,  which,  short-sighted  and  smiling, 
damns  the  cause  of  gravity."1  This  question  implies  the  mean- 
ing (which  may  be  regarded  as  a  component  parjt  of  court- 
liness), and  a  reminder  thereof,  that  the  goal — to  know  the 
truth — has  of  course  long  been  abandoned  and  dropped,  and 
that  the  unattainable  nature  of  truth  is  recognized  even  among 

1  Klopstock,  Der  Messias>  7th  canto. 

VOL.  n.  o 


210  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

professional  philosophers  and  logicians. — And  if  the  enquiry 
of  religion  about  the  value  of  things,  sentiments,  and  acts — an 
enquiry  which  has  substantially  the  same  meaning — lays  claim 
to  its  rights  more  and  more  in  our  days,  then  philosophy  too 
may  hope  that  it  may  no  longer  be  held  surprising  if  once  more 
it  asserts  its  real  aim  (in  its  immediate  field  at  first),  and,  having 
sunk  to  the  methods  of  other  sciences  and  to  their  renunciation 
of  truth,  now  once  more  endeavours  to  rise  to  its  goal.  It  cannot 
really  be  permitted  to  advance  any  excuse  for  this  attempt ;  but, 
with  regard  to  its  execution,  I  may  plead  this  for  myself,  that 
the  conditions  of  my  office  and  other  personal  circumstances 
allowed  me  only  a  distracted  labour  upon  this  science,  which 
demands,  and  is  worthy  of,  an  effort  undistracted  and  un- 
divided. 

NtJRNBERG, 

2  ist  July  1816. 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL 

THE  nature  of  the  Notion  can  no  more  be  indicated  imme- 
diately than  the  notion  of  any  other  object  can  be  established 
immediately.  It  might  seem  that,  in  order  to  indicate  the  notion 
of  an  object,  the  logical  element  were  presupposed,  and  that 
this  in  turn  could  have  nothing  for  antecedent,  and  could  not 
be  derived ;  as  in  geometry  logical  propositions  (as  they  appear 
in  application  to  magnitude  and  are  used  in  that  science)  are 
premised  in  the  form  of  axioms,  underived  and  underivable 
determinations  of  cognition.  Now  the  Notion  must  be  looked 
upon  not  merely  as  a  subjective  presupposition,  but  as  absolute 
foundation ;  but  still  it  cannot  be,  except  in  so  far  as  it  has  made 
itself,  foundation.  It  is  true  that  the  abstract  immediate  is  a 
prius ;  but  as  abstract  it  is,  rather,  mediated,  so  that  its  founda- 
tion must  first  be  sought  if  it  is  to  be  seized  in  its  truth.  Con- 
sequently the  foundation  must  be  immediate,  but  in  such  a 
manner  that  it  has  made  itself  immediate,  mediation  having 
been  transcended. 

From  this  side,  and  in  general,  the  Notion  must  be  looked 
upon  as  the  third  term  (where  Being  and  Essence,  or  the 
Immediate  and  Reflection,  are  the  other  two).  In  this  regard, 
Being  and  Essence  are  the  moments  of  its  becoming ;  but  the 
Notion  is  their  foundation  and  truth,  as  that  identity  in  which 
they  have  been  submerged  and  are  contained.  They  are  con- 
tained in  it  because  it  is  their  result,  but  no  longer  as  Being 
and  as  Essence :  they  have  this  latter  determination  only  in  so 
far  as  they  have  not  yet  passed  back  into  this  their  unity. 

Accordingly  Objective  Logic,  which  considers  Being  and 
Essence,  really  constitutes  the  genetic  exposition  of  the  Notion. 
And  (to  come  to  details)  Substance  already  is  real  Essence,  or 
Essence  in  so  far  as  it  is  united  to  Being  and  has  entered  into 
actuality.  Consequently  the  Notion  has  Substance  *for  imme- 
diate presupposition;  Substance  is  that  in  itself  which  the 
Notion  is  as  manifested  entity.  Hence  the  dialectic  movement 
of  Substance  through  Causality  and  Reciprocity  is  the  imme- 
diate genesis  of  the  Notion,  and  represents  its  becoming.  But 


212  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

its  becoming  (like  Becoming  everywhere)  has  the  meaning  that 
it  is  the  Reflection  into  its  Ground  of  that  which  passes  over, 
and  that  which  first  appears  as  Other  into  which  the  former 
has  passed  over,  constitutes  its  truth.  Thus  the  Notion  is  the 
truth  of  Substance ;  and,  since  Necessity  is  the  specific  mode 
of  relation  of  Substance,  Freedom  shows  itself  to  be  the  truth 
of  Necessity  and  the  specific  relation  of  the  Notion. 

The  peculiar  and  necessary  process  of  determination  of  Sub- 
stance is  the  positing  of  that  which  is  in  and  for  itself;  the 
Notion  is  this  absolute  unity  of  Being  and  Reflection, — that 
Being-in-and-for-Self  is  only  because  it  is  also  Reflection  or 
positedness,  and  that  positedness  is  Being-in-and-for-Self. — 
This  abstract  result  explains  itself  through  the  presentation  of 
its  concrete  genesis:  this  latter  contains  the  nature  of  the 
Notion,  but  must  precede  its  treatment.  The  chief  moments 
of  this  exposition  (which  has  been  treated  in  detail  in 
Book  Two  of  Objective  Logic)  can  therefore  here  be  briefly 
summarized. 

Substance  is  the  Absolute,  the  Actual  which  is  in  and  for 
itself: — in  itself,  as  simple  identity  of  Possibility  and  Actuality, 
absolute  Essence  which  contains  in  itself  all  Actuality  and 
Possibility;  and  for  itself  as  being  this  identity  as  absolute  power 
or  simply  self-relating  negativity. — The  movement  of  Substan- 
tiality which  is  posited  through  these  moments  has  the  following 
structure. 

i.  Substance  as  absolute  power  or  self-relating  negativity 
divides  itself  and  becomes  a  relation  wherein  those  moments, 
which  at  first  are  only  simple,  exist  as  substances  and  as  original 
presuppositions. — The  definite  relation  between  them  is  that 
between  a  passive  and  an  active  substance;  between  the 
originality  of  simple  Being-in-Self  which  is  powerless,  does  not, 
therefore,  posit  itself,  and  is  only  original  positedness, — and 
self-relating  negativity,  which  as  such  has  posited  itself  as 
Other  and  relates  itself  to  this  Other.  This  Other  is  passive 
substance,  which  the  active,  in  the  originality  of  its  power,  has 
presupposed  for  itself  as  condition. — This  presupposing  must  be 
conceived  in  this  manner,  that  the  movement  of  Substance 
is  at  first  under  the  form  of  one  moment  of  its  notion,  of 
Being-in-Self;  that  the  determinateness  of  one  of  the  related 
substances  is  also  the  determinateness  of  this  relation  itself. 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL  213 

2.  The  other  moment  is  Being-for-Self,  where  power  posits 
itself  as  self-relating  negativity,  whereby  it  cancels  again  the 
term  which  had  been  presupposed. — Active  substance  is  Cause ; 
it  acts;  that  is,  it  now  posits  what  it  presupposed  before, 
namely  that  (a)  power  has  now  also  the  show  of  power,  and 
positedness  the  show  of  positedness.  What  in  presupposition 
was  original  becomes  in  causality,  through  relation  to  Other, 
what  it  is  in  itself.  Cause  produces  an  effect,  and  produces  it  in 
another  substance ;  it  is  now  power  in  relation  to  Other,  and 
thus  appears  as  cause,  but  is  this  only  by  virtue  of  this  appear- 
ance.— (b)  Effect  is  achieved  on  passive  substance,  and  thus 
it  now  appears  also  as  positedness,  but  is  passive  substance 
only  in  this  appearance. 

3.  But  there  is  more  here  than  only  this  appearance,  (a)  Cause 
acts  upon  passive  substance  and  changes  its  determination. 
But  Substance  is  positedness,  apart  from  which  there  is  nothing 
in  it  susceptible  of  change,  while  the  other  determination  which 
it  receives  is  causal  nature;  passive  substance  thus  becomes 
cause,  power,  and  activity,  (b]  Effect  is  posited  in  it  by  cause ; 
but  that  which  cause  posits  is  cause  itself  which,  in  action,  is 
self-identical;  it  is  cause  which  substitutes  itself  for  passive 
substance. — In  regard  to  active  substance  similarly  (a)  action 
is  the  translation  of  cause  into  effect  (its  Other),  or  positedness ; 
and  (b)  in  effect  cause  shows  itself  for  what  it  is :  effect  is 
identical  with  cause  and  is  not  an  Other ;  cause  in  action  thus 
shows  positedness  as  that  which  essentially  it  is. — Each  thus 
becomes  its  own  opposite,  and  that  from  both  sides,  from  the 
identical  as  well  as  the  negative  relating  of  the  other  to  it ;  but 
each  side  becomes  this  opposite  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
other  (and  therefore  also  each)  remains  identical  with  itself. — 
But  both — negative  and  positive  relating — are  one  and  the 
same  thing ;  Substance  is  self-identical  only  in  its  opposite,  and 
this  constitutes  the  absolute  identity  of  the  substances  which 
are  posited  as  being  two.  Active  substance  is  manifested  in 
action  as  cause  or  original  substantiality ;  and  action  means  that 
it  posits  itself  as  its  own  opposite,  which  is  also  the  transcendence 
of  its  presupposed  otherness,  of  passive  substance.  Conversely, 
through  this  operation  positedness  is  manifested  as  positedness, 
the  negative  as  negative,  and  consequently  passive  substance 
as  self-relating  negativity ;  and  cause,  in  this  its  absolute  Other, 


214  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

simply  coincides  with  itself.  Through  this  positing,  then,  pre- 
supposed or  self-existent  originality  becomes  for  itself ';  but  this 
Being-in-and-for-Self  is  only  because  this  positing  is  equally 
a  transcendence  of  that  which  is  presupposed,  or,  because 
absolute  Substance  has  returned  to  itself  only  from  and  in  its 
positedness,  and  thereby  is  absolute.  This  Reciprocity  is  thus 
the  self-transcending  appearance,  the  revelation  of  the  show 
of  causality,  where  cause  is  as  cause  of  show  being  show.  This 
infinite  intro-Reflection  where  Being-in-and-for-Self  is  only 
because  it  is  positedness,  is  the  consummation  of  Substance. 
But  this  consummation  is  no  longer  Substance  itself,  but  some- 
thing higher — the  Notion,  the  Subject.  The  transition  of  the 
Relation  of  Substantiality  takes  place  by  virtue  of  its  own 
immanent  necessity,  and  is  no  more  than  the  manifestation 
of  this  itself, — of  the  fact  that  the  Notion  is  its  truth,  and 
Freedom  the  truth  of  Necessity. 

It  has  been  mentioned  already  in  Book  Two  of  Objec- 
tive Logic  (p.  167,  Observation)  that  the  philosophy  which 
takes  up  the  standpoint  of  Substance,  and  there  halts,  is  the 
system  of  Spinoza.  At  that  place  the  deficiency  of  this  system 
both  in  form  and  matter  was  demonstrated.  But  to  refute  it 
is  another  matter.  With  respect  to  the  refutation  of  a  philosophic 
system,  the  general  observation  was  made  in  another  place  that 
it  must  be  purged  of  the  erroneous  idea  that  the  system  is  to 
be  presented  as  false  throughout,  and  that  the  true  system  is 
just  opposed  to  the  false.  The  connexion  in  which  Spinoza's 
system  here  occurs  shows  of  itself  its  true  standpoint,  and  that 
of  the  question  whether  it  is  true  or  false.  The  Relation  of 
Substantiality  evolved  itself  out  of  the  nature  of  Essence; 
therefore  this  relation,  and  its  representation  extended  into  the 
comprehensiveness  of  a  system,  is  a  necessary  standpoint  which 
the  Absolute  occupies.  Such  a  standpoint  must  not  then  be 
regarded  as  an  opinion,  a  subjective  and  arbitrary  manner  of 
imagining  or  thinking  peculiar  to  an  individual,  nor  as  an 
aberration  of  speculation;  rather,  speculation  in  its  course 
necessarily,  is  promoted  to  this  point,  and  in  so  far  the  system 
is  perfectly  true. — But  it  is  not  the  highest  standpoint.  The 
system,  however,  cannot  for  this  reason  be  regarded  as  false, 
as  needing  and  capable  of  refutation :  only  its  claim  to  be  the 
highest  standpoint  is  to  be  considered  as  false  in  it.  And  hence 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL  215 

the  true  system  cannot  have  the  relation  to  it  of  being  merely 
its  opposite ;  for  then  this  opposite  would  itself  be  one-sided. 
Much  rather,  being  superior,  it  must  contain  the  subordinate. 
Further,  the  refutation  must  not  come  from  outside ;  that  is, 
it  must  not  proceed  from  assumptions  which  lie  beyond  that 
system  and  do  not  correspond  with  it.  It  only  requires  not  to 
acknowledge  those  assumptions ;  a  flaw  is  a  flaw  only  for  those 
who  proceed  from  requirements  and  needs  which  are  based  upon 
it.  In  this  sense  it  has  been  said  that  no  refutation  of  Spinoza's 
system  can  be  made  for  those  who  do  not  presuppose  for  them- 
selves as  decided  the  freedom  and  independence  of  the  self- 
conscious  subject.  In  any  case,  a  standpoint  so  high  and  already 
in  itself  so  rich  as  is  the  Relation  of  Substantiality  does  not 
ignore  those  assumptions,  but  also  contains  them :  Thought  is  one 
of  the  attributes  of  Spinoza's  Substance.  This  standpoint  rather 
succeeds  in  resolving  and  absorbing  the  determinations  in 
which  those  assumptions  conflict  with  it,  so  that  (but  with  the 
modifications  appropriate  to  it)  they  appear  in  this  standpoint. 
The  sinew  of  external  refutation  is  this  alone — firmly  and 
rigidly  on  their  side  to  uphold  the  opposite  forms  of  the  given 
assumptions, — for  example,  the  absolute  self-persistence  of  the 
thinking  individual  as  against  the  form  of  Thought  as  the  latter 
is  posited  in  absolute  Substance — namely,  as  identical  with 
Extension.  True  refutation  must  engage  the  force  of  the  oppo- 
nent and  must  place  itself  within  the  compass  of  his  strength ; 
the  task  is  not  advanced  if  he  is  attacked  outside  himself  and 
the  case  is  carried  in  his  absence.  Hence  the  refutation  of 
Spinoza's  system  can  consist  solely  in  this,  that  his  standpoint 
be  first  recognized  as  essential  and  as  necessary,  but  that 
secondly  this  standpoint  be  raised  out  of  itself  to  a  higher.  The 
Relation  of  Substantiality,  considered  solely  in  and  for  itself, 
leads  over  to  its  opposite,  the  Notion.  Consequently  the  ex- 
position of  Substance  contained  in  the  last  book,  which  leads 
over  to  the  Notion,  is  the  only  and  veritable  refutation  of 
Spinoza's  system.  It  is  the  revelation  of  Substance,  and  the  latter 
is  the  genesis  of  the  Notion,  of  which  the  chief  moments  were 
summarized  above. — The  oneness  of  Substance  is  its  relation 
of  Necessity ;  but  thus  it  is  only  inner  Necessity ;  and,  positing 
itself  through  the  moment  of  absolute  negativity,  it  becomes 
manifested  or  posited  identity  and  consequently  Freedom, 


216  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

which  is  the  identity  of  the  Notion.  The  Notion  is  the  totality 
which  results  from  Reciprocity,  and  is  the  unity  of  the  two 
substances  of  Reciprocity,  but  is  so  in  such  a  manner  that  now 
they  belong  to  Freedom;  for  the  identity  which  they  have  is 
no  longer  blind  nor  inner,  and  their  essential  determination  is 
that  they  are  Show  or  moments  of  Reflection,  where  each  has 
immediately  coincided  with  its  Other  or  its  positedness,  and 
each  contains  its  positedness  in  itself  and  thus  is  simply  posited 
as  self-identical  in  its  Other. 

In  the  Notion,  accordingly,  the  realm  of  Freedom  has  opened. 
The  Notion  is  the  free  because  it  is  the  identity  which  is  in 
and  for  itself  and  which  constitutes  the  necessity  of  Substance ; 
simultaneously  it  exists  as  transcended  or  as  positedness,  and 
this  positedness,  as  self-relating,  is  precisely  that  identity.  The 
darkness  in  which  each  of  the  substances  which  are  in  the 
Relation  of  Causality  stands  to  the  other,  has  vanished,  for 
the  originality  of  their  individual  persistence  has  passed  over 
into  positedness,  and  has  thereby  become  self-transparent 
clarity.  The  original  fact  is  this  in  being  only  its  own  cause,  and 
this  is  Substance  which,  having  achieved  Freedom,  has  become 
Notion. 

From  this  the  following  and  closer  determination  for  the 
Notion  immediately  results.  Being-in-and-for-Self  is  immedi- 
ately as  positedness,  and  therefore  the  Notion  in  its  simple 
self-relation  is  absolute  determinateness ;  which,  however, 
equally  as  merely  self-relating  is  immediately  simple  identity. 
But  this  self-relation  of  determinateness,  as  its  own  self-coinci- 
dence, is  equally  the  negation  of  determinateness,  and  as  this 
self-equality  the  Notion  is  the  Universal.  But  this  identity  has 
just  as  much  the  determination  of  negativity ;  it  is  negation  or 
determinateness  which  relates  itself  to  itself:  and  thus  the 
Notion  is  Individual.  Each  of  the  two  is  the  totality,  and  each 
contains  the  determination  of  the  other ;  and  for  this  reason 
these  totalities  are  one,  as  much  as  this  unity  is  its  own  schism 
into  the  free  Show  of  this  duality,— a  duality  which  in  the 
distinction,  between  individual  and  universal  appears  as  com- 
plete opposition,  but  is  Show  so  much  that  as  soon  as  one  is 
conceived  and  enunciated  the  other  is  therein  immediately 
conceived  and  enunciated. 
What  has  just  been  submitted  should  be  considered  as  the 


ON  THE  NOTION   IN  GENERAL  217 

notion  of  the  Notion.  If  this  notion  seems  to  deviate  from  what 
is  asserted  to  be  the  common  view  of  Notion,  it  might  be  asked 
that  a  demonstration  be  furnished  how  that  which  here  has 
yielded  itself  as  the  Notion  is  contained  in  any  other  concep- 
tions or  explanations.  But  on  the  one  hand  there  can  be  no 
question  here  of  a  confirmation  founded  upon  the  authority 
of  ordinary  understanding :  in  the  science  of  the  Notion  its 
content  and  determination  can  be  vouched  for  only  by  the 
immanent  deduction  which  is  contained  in  its  genesis,  and 
which  we  have  already  left  behind.  On  the  other  hand  surely 
the  Notion  which  has  here  been  deduced  must  be  recognizable 
in  what  is  elsewhere  offered  as  the  notion  of  Notion.  But  it  is 
not  so  easy  to  discover  what  others  have  said  about  the  nature 
of  the  Notion.  For,  generally,  they  do  not  concern  themselves 
at  all  with  this  quest,  and  presuppose  that  everyone  understands 
automatically  when  the  Notion  is  discussed.  Recently  men 
might  have  considered  themselves  superior  to  all  trouble  about 
the  Notion, — the  more  so  because  it  was  the  fashion  for  some 
time  to  speak  ill  in  every  way  of  imagination  and  also  of 
memory;  and  because  for  long  it  has  been  and  still  is  in  part 
a  practice  in  philosophy  to  heap  every  calumny  upon  the 
Notion,  to  ridicule  that  which  is  the  summit  of  thought,  and 
to  regard  as  the  highest  peak  both  in  the  scientific  and  in  the 
moral  sphere  the  renunciation  of  Notion  both  as  objective  and 
as  method. 

I  here  restrict  myself  to  an  observation  which  may  serve  to 
render  intelligible  the  concepts  here  developed  and  to  make 
them  more  easily  acceptable.  The  Notion,  in  so  far  as  it  has 
advanced  into  such  an  existence  as  is  free  itself,  is  just  the  Ego, 
or  pure  self-consciousness.  It  is  true  that  I  have  notions — that  is, 
determinate  notions ;  but  Ego  is  the  pure  Notion  itself,  which 
as  Notion  has  reached  Existence.  If  therefore  the  fundamental 
determinations  which  constitute  the  nature  of  the  Ego  are 
recalled,  it  may  be  assumed  that  mention  is  being  made  of 
something  which  is  known,  that  is,  which  is  familiar  to  imagi- 
nation. Now  Ego  is  this  unity  which,  first,  is  pure  and  self- 
relating,  and  is  so  not  immediately,  but  abstracting  from  every 
determinateness  and  content  and  passing  back  into  the  freedom 
of  boundless  self-equality.  It  is  thus  universality:  unity  which 
is  self-unity  only  by  virtue  of  this  negative  attitude  which 


2i8  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

appears  as  abstraction,  and  therefore  contains  dissolved  within 
itself  all  determinateness.  Secondly,  and  equally  immediately, 
Ego  as  self-relating  negativity  is  individuality ,  or  absolute  deter- 
minedness  which  opposes  itself  to  and  excludes  Other :  it  is 
individual  personality.  That  absolute  universality  which  equally 
immediately  is  absolute  individualization,  and  a  Being-in-and- 
for-Self  which  is  simply  positedness  and  is  this  Being-in-and- 
for-Self  only  by  virtue  of  the  unity  with  positedness,  constitutes 
equally  the  nature  of  Ego  and  of  the  Notion ;  no  notion  can 
be  formed  about  either  unless  the  two  moments  mentioned 
are  taken  at  once  in  their  abstraction  and  at  once  in  their 
complete  unity. 

If  the  understanding,  which  I  have,  is  spoken  of  in  the 
ordinary  manner,  a  capacity  or  property  is  understood  thereby 
which  is  related  to  the  Ego  as  the  property  of  the  thing  to  the 
thing  itself — to  an  indeterminate  substratum  which  is  not  the 
true  ground  and  determining  element  of  its  property.  Accord- 
ing to  this  idea  I  have  notions  and  the  Notion  as  I  have  a  coat, 
colour,  and  other  external  properties. — Kant  has  passed  beyond 
this  external  relation  of  the  understanding  (taken  as  the 
capacity  of  notions  and  of  the  Notion  itself)  to  the  Ego.  Among 
the  profoundest  and  most  correct  discoveries  of  the  Critique 
of  Reason  is  this,  that  the  unity  which  constitutes  the  essence 
of  the  Notion  is  recognized  to  be  the  original  and  synthetic 
unity  of  apperception,  as  unity  of  the  "I  think53  or  of  self- 
consciousness. — This  proposition  constitutes  the  so-called  tran- 
scendental deduction  of  the  category ;  but  it  has  always  been 
counted  for  one  of  the  hardest  parts  of  Kant's  philosophy — 
probably  for  no  other  reason  than  because  it  demands  that 
the  bare  image  of  the  relation  in  which  the  Ego  and  the 
understanding  (or  the  notions)  stand  to  a  thing  with  its 
properties  and  accidents,  must  be  superseded  by  thought 
proper.  The  object,  says  Kant  (Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  137, 
2nd  edition),  is  that  in  whose  notion  the  manifold  of  a  given 
intuition  is  unified.  But  every  unification  of  ideas  requires  unity 
of  consciousness  in  their  synthesis.  Consequently  this  unity  of 
consciousness  alone  is  that  which  constitutes  the  relation  of  the 
ideas  to  an  object,  that  is,  their  objective  validity :  upon  it  alone 
even  the  possibility  of  understanding  rests.  Kant  distinguishes 
from  this  the  subjective  unity  of  consciousness,  the  unity  of 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN   GENERAL  219 

ideation :  I  may  be  conscious  of  a  manifold  as  simultaneous 
or  as  a  sequence,  and  this  is  stated  to  depend  upon  empirical 
conditions.  On  the  contrary,  the  principles  of  the  objective 
determination  of  ideas  must  be  derived  wholly  from  the  law 
of  the  transcendental  unity  of  apperception.  The  categories 
(which  are  these  objective  determinations)  so  determine  the 
manifold  of  given  ideas  that  it  is  reduced  to  the  unity  of  con- 
sciousness.— According  to  this  representation,  the  unity  of  the 
Notion  is  that  by  virtue  of  which  something  is  object  and  not 
merely  determination  of  sensation,  intuition,  or  mere  idea; 
and  this  objective  unity  is  the  self-unity  of  the  Ego. — And 
indeed  to  form  a  notion  of  an  object  consists  just  in  this,  that 
the  Ego  appropriates  it,  penetrates  it,  and  reduces  it  into  its 
own  form,  that  is,  universality  which  is  immediately  deter- 
minateness,  or  determinateness  which  is  immediately  univer- 
sality. In  intuition  and  also  in  ideation  the  object  still  is  external 
and  foreign.  When  a  notion  is  formed  of  it,  the  Being-in-and- 
for-Self  which  it  has  in  intuition  and  ideation  is  changed  into 
a  positedness:  Ego  penetrates  it  in  and  by  thinking.  But  the 
object  is  truly  in  and  for  itself  only  as  it  is  in  thought;  as  it  is 
in  intuition  or  ideation  it  is  appearance;  thought  transcends  its 
immediacy,  with  which  at  first  it  meets  us,  and  thus  makes  it 
a  positedness;  but  this  its  positedness  is  its  Being-in-and-for- 
Self  or  its  objectivity.  Hence  the  object  has  this  objectivity  in 
the  Notion,  and  the  Notion  is  the  unity  of  self-consciousness 
into  which  the  object  has  been  taken  up.  Consequently  its 
objectivity  (or  the  Notion)  is  nothing  else  than  the  nature  of 
self-consciousness,  and  has  no  other  moments  or  determinations 
than  the  Ego  itself. 

Thus  a  capital  proposition  of  Kant's  philosophy  furnishes 
the  justification  of  the  method,  when  the  nature  of  the  Ego  is 
recalled  in  order  that  the  Notion  may  be  understood.  But 
conversely  it  is  necessary  for  this  that  the  notion  of  the  Ego  (as 
cited  above)  shall  have  been  grasped.  If  a  halt  is  made  at  the 
mere  idea  [Vorstellung]  of  the  Ego  as  it  is  present  to  our 
ordinary  consciousness,  then  Ego  is  only  that  simple»//tfVzg,  which 
is  also  called  soul,  in  which  the  notion  inheres  as  a  possession 
or  property.  This  idea,  which  does  not  attempt  to  form  a 
notion  of  either  Ego  or  the  Notion,  cannot  serve  to  make  it 
an  easier  or  readier  matter  to  form  a  notion  of  the  Notion. 


220  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Kant's  account  of  this  matter,  which  has  been  quoted,  con- 
tains two  further  sides  which  concern  the  Notion  and  necessi- 
tate some  further  observations.  First,  the  stages  of  sensation 
and  intuition  are  made  to  precede  the  stage  of  understanding, 
and  it  is  an  essential  proposition  of  Kant's  transcendental 
philosophy  that  notions  without  intuition  are  empty,  and  have 
validity  only  as  relations  of  the  manifold  which  is  given  by 
intuition.  Secondly,  the  Notion  has  been  indicated  as  the 
objective  element  of  cognition,  and  consequently  as  the  truth. 
But  on  the  other  side  it  is  taken  as  something  merely  subjective, 
out  of  which  reality  (by  which  objectivity  must  be  understood, 
since  it  is  contrasted  with  subjectivity)  cannot  be  extracted; 
and,  in  general,  both  the  Notion  and  the  logical  element  are 
declared  to  be  something  merely  formal  which  abstracts  from 
content  and  therefore  does  not  contain  truth. 

Now,  first,  with  regard  to  this  relation  of  the  understanding 
or  the  Notion  to  the  stages  which  are  supposed  to  precede  it, 
it  is  of  importance  what  science  it  is  that  is  being  treated,  in 
order  to  determine  the  form  of  these  stages.  In  our  science, 
since  it  is  pure  logic,  these  stages  are  Being  and  Essence.  In 
psychology,  sensation  and  intuition  and  also  ideation  [Vor- 
stellung]  in  general  precede  understanding.  In  the  Phenom- 
enology of  Spirit,  since  it  is  the  doctrine  of  consciousness,  the 
ascent  was  made  through  the  stages  of  sensuous  consciousness 
and,  next,  perception,  to  understanding.  Kant  places  only 
sensation  and  intuition  before  this :  and  he  himself  allows  us 
to  recognize  how  incomplete  this  scale  is  by  adding  as  appendix 
to  the  Transcendental  Logic  (or  doctrine  of  the  understanding) 
a  treatise  on  the  Notions  of  Reflection — a  sphere  which  lies 
between  intuition  and  understanding,  or  between  Being  and 
the  Notion. 

Concerning  this  matter  itself,  we  may  first  observe  that  these 
forms  of  intuition,  ideation,  and  the  like  belong  to  self-con- 
scious spirit,  which  is  not  considered  as  such  in  the  science 
of  logic.  It  is  true  that  the  pure  determinations  of  Being, 
Essence,  and  Notion  also  constitute  the  foundation  and  the 
inner  simple  framework  of  the  forms  of  spirit :  spirit  as  intuitive 
and  also  as  sensuous  consciousness  is  in  the  determinateness 
of  immediate  Being ;  while  spirit  as  ideating  as  well  as  per- 
ceiving consciousness  has  risen  from  Being  to  the  stage  of 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL  221 

Essence  or  of  Reflection.  But  these  concrete  shapes  concern 
the  science  of  logic  no  more  than  the  concrete  forms  which 
the  logical  determinations  assume  in  nature,  which  forms  would 
be  space  and  time,  and,  further,  filled  space  and  time  (as 
inorganic  nature),  and  finally  organic  nature.  And  further  the 
Notion  must  not  here  be  considered  as  an  act  of  self-conscious 
understanding,  or  as  subjective  understanding:  what  we  have 
to  do  with  is  the  Notion  in  and  for  itself,  which  constitutes 
a  stage  as  well  of  Nature  as  of  Spirit.  Life,  or  organic  nature, 
is  that  stage  of  nature  at  which  the  Notion  emerges,  but  as 
blind,  not  self-comprehending,  and  therefore  not  thinking, 
Notion:  as  thinking  it  belongs  only  to  Spirit.  But  the  logical 
form  of  the  Notion  does  not  depend  upon  either  its  non-spiritual 
or  its  spiritual  shape,  and  what  was  necessary  has  already 
been  premised  about  this  in  the  Introduction.  This  is  a  sig- 
nificance which  cannot  be  justified  within  the  body  of  logic : 
there  must  be  no  doubt  about  it  before  logic  is  attempted. 

But,  secondly,  whatever  shape  the  forms  which  precede  the 
Notion  may  be  given,  the  relation  is  of  importance  in  which 
the  Notion  is  thought  of  as  standing  to  them.  Both  in  the 
common  psychological  representation  and  in  Kant's  transcen- 
dental philosophy  this  relation  is  assumed  to  be  such  that  the 
empirical  material,  the  manifold  of  intuition  and  of  ideation, 
first  exists  for  itself,  and  that  next  understanding  addresses  it, 
unifies  it,  and  by  abstraction  raises  it  into  the  form  of  univer- 
sality. Here  understanding  is  an  empty  form,  which  partly 
achieves  reality  only  by  this  content  which  is  given  it  and 
partly  abstracts  from  it,  leaving  it  aside  as  useless,  but  useless 
only  for  the  Notion.  In  both  of  these  activities  the  Notion  is 
not  the  independent,  is  not  the  essential  and  true  part  of  the 
preceding  material,  but  this  latter  rather  is  reality  in  and  for 
itself,  which  cannot  be  extracted  out  of  the  Notion. 

It  must  indeed  be  admitted  that  the  Notion  as  such  is  not 
yet  complete,  but  must  rise  into  the  Idea,  which  is  the  unity 
of  Notion  and  Reality ;  this  must  result  of  itself  below,  out  of 
the  nature  of  the  Notion.  For  the  reality  which  it  gives  itself 
must  not  be  taken  up  as  external:  science  demands  that  it 
should  be  derived  from  the  Notion  itself.  Certainly  it  is  not 
the  material  given  by  intuition  and  ideation  that  may  be 
claimed  as  real  in  opposition  to  the  Notion.  "It  is  only  a 


222  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

notion5'  is  ;i  thing  commonly  said;  and  not  only  the  Idea,  but 
sensuous,  spatial,  and  temporal  palpable  existence  is  opposed 
to  the  Notion,  as  something  which  is  more  excellent  than  it. 
And  the  abstract  is  counted  of  less  worth  than  the  concrete, 
because  from  the  former  so  much  of  that  kind  of  material  has 
been  omitted.  To  those  who  hold  this,  the  process  of  abstraction 
means  that  for  our  subjective  needs  one  or  another  charac- 
teristic is  taken  out  of  the  concrete  in  such  a  manner  that, 
while  so  many  other  properties  and  modifications  of  the  object 
are  omitted,  these  lose  nothing  in  value  or  dignity.  They  are 
the  real  and  are  reckoned  as  counting  in  full,  only  they  are 
left  on  the  other  side ;  and  it  is  only  the  incapacity  of  under- 
standing to  absorb  such  riches  that  forces  it  to  rest  content 
with  meagre  abstraction.  But  if  the  given  material  of  intuition 
and  the  manifold  of  ideation  are  taken  as  the  real  in  opposition 
to  that  which  is  thought  and  to  the  Notion,  then  this  is  a  view 
the  renunciation  of  which  is  not  only  a  condition  of  philosophy, 
but  is  assumed  even  by  religion ;  for  how  can  these  be  needed 
and  have  significance  if  the  fugitive  and  superficial  appearance 
of  the  sensuous  and  the  individual  are  taken  for  the  truth?  But 
philosophy  furnishes  an  insight,  in  terms  of  the  Notion,  into 
the  value  of  this  reality  of  sensuous  Being,  and  prefaces  under- 
standing with  those  stages  of  sensation  and  intuition,  sensuous 
consciousness  and  so  forth,  so  far  as  they  are  the  conditions 
of  its  becoming :  this  they  are  only  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
Notion  emerges  out  of  their  dialectic  and  nothingness  as  their 
Ground,  but  is  in  no  way  conditioned  by  their  reality.  Con- 
sequently abstracting  thought  must  not  be  considered  as  a 
mere  setting-aside  of  the  sensuous  material,  whose  reality  is 
said  not  to  be  lowered  thereby ;  but  it  is  its  transcendence,  and 
the  reduction  of  it  (as  from  mere  appearance)  to  the  essential, 
which  manifests  itself  in  the  Notion  only.  Of  course,  if  what 
is  to  be  taken  up  out  of  concrete  appearance  into  the  Notion  is 
to  serve  only  as  a  mark  or  symbol,  then  indeed  it  may  be  any 
merely  sensuous  and  individual  determination  of  the  object, 
which  is  selected  from  the  others  for  the  sake  of  some  external 
interest  and  is  of  the  same  kind  and  nature  as  the  rest. 

The  principal  misapprehension  here  is,  that  the  natural 
principle  or  the  beginning  which  is  the  starting-point  in  the 
natural  development  or  in  the  history  of  the  individual  in  its 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL  223 

formation,  is  taken  as  the  true  and  as  that  which  is  first  also 
in  the  Notion.  It  is  true  that  in  nature  intuition  or  Being  is 
prius  or  condition  for  the  Notion,  but  neither  is  for  that  reason 
in  and  for  itself  unconditioned :  indeed,  in  the  Notion  their 
reality  is  transcended,  and  with  it  the  show  which  they  had  as 
conditioning  realities.  If,  instead  of  the  search  for  truth,  the 
aim  is  to  narrate  what  happens  in  ideation  and  appearing 
thought,  then  a  halt  may  be  made  at  the  point  where  the  story 
is  told  that  we  begin  with  sensations  and  intuitions,  and  that 
understanding  extracts  from  their  manifold  a  universality  or 
an  abstract,  and,  naturally,  requires  that  foundation  to  remain 
present  before  imagination  in  this  process  of  abstraction  with 
all  the  reality  in  which  it  first  showed  itself.  But  philosophy 
is  not  meant  to  be  a  narrative  of  what  happens,  but  a  cognition 
of  what  is  true  in  happenings,  and,  further,  it  has  to  form  a 
Notion  out  of  the  body  of  truth  about  that  which  in  the 
narrative  appears  as  mere  happening. 

In  the  superficial  idea  about  the  nature  of  the  Notion,  all 
multiplicity  stands  outside  it,  and  it  has  only  the  form  of 
abstract  universality  or  of  empty  identity  of  Reflection ;  but 
it  may  be  recalled  that  elsewhere  too,  where  a  notion  or  a  defi- 
nition is  given,  a  specific  determinateness  is  explicitly  required 
in  addition  to  the  species,  which  is  itself  not  really  purely 
abstract  universality.  If  only  some  thoughtful  consideration 
were  applied  to  the  meaning  of  this,  it  would  be  plain  that 
distinction  is  implicitly  regarded  as  an  equally  essential  moment 
of  the  Notion.  Kant  led  up  to  this  idea  by  the  extremely 
important  reflection  that  there  are  synthetic  judgments  a  priori. 
This  original  synthesis  of  apperception  is  one  of  the  profoundest 
principles  for  speculative  development ;  it  contains  the  begin- 
ning of  a  correct  understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  Notion, 
and  is  absolutely  opposed  to  that  empty  identity  or  abstract 
universality  which  is  no  synthesis  in  itself. — But  the  further 
development  little  fulfils  the  promise  of  this  beginning.  The  very 
term  "synthesis"  again  leads  easily  to  the  image  of  an  external 
unity  and  mere  connexion  of  elements  which  in  and  for  them- 
selves are  separate.  Next,  Kant's  philosophy  made  a  halt  at 
the  psychological  reflex  of  the  Notion,  and  returned  again  to 
the  assertion  of  the  permanent  conditionedness  of  the  Notion 
by  a  manifold  of  intuition.  It  pronounced  the  discoveries  of 


224  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

understanding,  and  experience,  to  be  an  appearing  content 
not  because  the  categories  themselves  are  only  finite  but  by 
reason  of  a  psychological  idealism,  because  they  are  only  deter- 
minations which  are  derived  from  self-consciousness.  It  also 
belongs  to  this  place  that  the  Notion,  without  the  manifold  of 
intuition,  is  again  supposed  to  be  void  of  content  and  empty,  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  a  priori  it  is  supposed  to  be  a  synthesis ; 
which  if  it  is,  it  has  determinateness  and  distinction  within 
itself.  The  synthesis  is  the  determinateness  of  the  Notion, 
and,  therefore,  absolute  determinateness  or  individuality,  and 
consequently  the  Notion  is  ground  and  source  of  all  finite 
determinateness  and  multiplicity. 

The  formal  position  which  the  Notion  retains  as  under- 
standing is  completed  in  Kant's  presentation  of  the  nature  of 
Reason.  It  might  be  expected  that  in  Reason,  which  is  the 
highest  stage  of  thought,  the  Notion  would  lose  that  con- 
ditionedness  in  which  it  appears  at  the  stage  of  understanding, 
and  would  reach  perfected  truth.  But  this  expectation  is 
cheated.  Kant  determines  the  attitude  of  Reason  to  the  cate- 
gories as  being  merely  dialectic,  and  takes  the  result  of  this 
dialectic  as  being  just  infinite  Nothing ;  and  thereby  the  infinite 
unity  of  Reason  loses  even  the  synthesis,  and,  with  it,  the 
beginning  of  a  speculative  and  truly  infinite  Notion :  it  becomes 
the  well-known,  quite  formal,  merely  regulative  unity  of  the 
systematic  practice  of  understanding.  It  is  declared  to  be  an 
abuse  if  logic,  which  ought  to  be  merely  a  canon  of  judgment, 
is  regarded  as  an  organ  for  the  production  of  objective  dis- 
coveries. The  notions  of  Reason,  in  which  a  higher  force  and 
a  deeper  content  were  of  necessity  divined,  are  less  constitutive 
than  even  the  categories ;  they  are  mere  ideas.  Their  use  may 
certainly  be  permissible,  but  these  intelligible  essences,  which 
should  wholly  unlock  the  truth,  are  to  signify  no  more  than 
hypotheses ;  and  it  would  be  completely  arbitrary  and  reckless 
to  ascribe  any  truth  to  them  in  and  for  themselves,  since  they 
can  occur  in  no  kind  of  experience. — Could  it  ever  have  been  thought 
that  philosophy  would  gainsay  the  validity  of  the  intelligible 
essences  because  they  are  without  the  spatial  and  temporal 
material  of  sensuousness? 

With  this  the  point  of  view  is  immediately  connected  with 
respect  to  which  the  Notion  and  the  determination  of  logic  in 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL  225 

general  must  be  considered :  this  in  Kant's  philosophy  is  taken 
in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  taken  commonly.  This  point  of  view 
is  the  relation  of  the  Notion  and  its  science  to  truth  itself. 
We  quoted    above  from   Kant's  deduction  of  the  categories 
that,  according  to  it,  the  object,  in  which  the  manifold   of 
intuition  is  united,  is   this  unity  only  by  virtue  of  the  unity 
of  self-consciousness.  Thus  the  objectivity  of  thought  is  here 
definitely  asserted — an  identity  of  the  Notion  and  the  thing, 
which  is  the  truth.  In  a  like  manner  it  is  generally  admitted 
that  when  thought  appropriates  a  given  object,  this  undergoes 
a  change,  and  having  been  an  object  of  sense  becomes  an  object 
of  thought;  but  that  this  change  not  only  does  not  alter  its 
essentiality,  but  that  it  is  in  its  truth  only  in  its  Notion,  while 
in  the  immediacy  in  which  it  is  given  it  is  only  appearance 
and  contingency;  and  that  cognition  of  the  object  which  forms 
a  Notion  of  it  is  a  cognition  of  it  as  it  is  in  and  for  itself,  and 
the  Notion  is  its  very  objectivity.  But,  on  the  other  side,  the 
assertion  is  made  again  that  we  surely  cannot  know  things  as 
they  are  in  and  for  themselves,  and  that  truth  does  not  allow 
cognizing  reason  to  approach  it ;  that  truth  which  consists  in 
the  unity  of  object  and  Notion  is  after  all  only  appearance, 
and  the  reason  now  is  that  its  content  is  only  the  manifold  of 
intuition.  Of  this  argument  it  has  already  been  remarked  that 
this  manifoldness,  in  so  far  as  it  belongs  to  intuition  as  opposed 
to  the  Notion,  is  transcended  precisely  in  the  Notion,  and  that 
the  object  is  led  back  by  the  Notion  into  its  non-contingent 
essentiality;  the  latter  enters  into  appearance,  and  for  this 
very  reason  the  appearance  is  not  merely  non-essential,  but 
manifestation  of  Essence.  But  that  manifestation  of  it  which 
has  become  entirely  free  is  the  Notion. — The  propositions  which 
are  here  mentioned  are  not  dogmatic  assertions,  for  they  are 
results  produced  through  themselves  in  the  course  of  the  entire 
development  of  Essence.  The  standpoint  to  which  this  develop- 
ment has  led  is,  now,  that  that  form  of  the  Absolute  which  is 
higher  than  Being  and  Essence  is  the  Notion.  From  this  side 
it  has  subordinated  to  itself  Being  and  Essence  (which,  with 
other  starting-points,  include  sensation,  intuition,  and  ideation) : 
these  appeared  as  its  precedent  conditions,  and  it  has  now 
proved  itself  their  unconditioned  Ground.  There  now  remains 
therefore  the  second  side  (to  the  treatment  of  which  this  third 
VOL.  n.  p 


226  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

book  of  the  Logic  is  devoted) — which  shows  how  the  Notion 
forms  in  and  out  of  itself  that  Reality  which  has  vanished  in  it. 
It  has  here  been  admitted  that  cognition  which  has  halted  at 
the  Notion  purely  as  such,  is  incomplete  as  yet  and  has  reached 
only  abstract  truth.  But  its  incompleteness  lies  not  in  any  lack 
of  the  "reality55  which  sensation  and  intuition  are  supposed  to 
give,  but  in  the  fact  that  the  Notion  has  not  yet  given  itself 
its  own  self-generated  Reality.  The  absoluteness  of  the  Notion, 
which  is  proved  upon  and  in  empirical  matter  (and,  more 
exactly,  in  its  categories  and  determinations  of  reflection),  con- 
sists in  this,  that  the  latter  has  truth  not  as  it  appears  apart 
from  and  before  the  Notion,  but  only  in  its  ideality,  or  in  its 
identity  with  the  Notion.  The  derivation  (if  that  is  to  be  its 
name)  of  the  real  from  it  here  consists  essentially  in  this,  that 
the  Notion  in  its  formal  abstraction  shows  itself  to  be  incom- 
plete, and  passes  over  to  reality  by  the  dialectic  which  is 
founded  upon  itself;  it  does  this  by  generating  reality  from 
within  itself,  and  not  by  falling  back  again  into  a  reality  which 
it  finds  standing  ready  over  against  it,  nor  by  taking  refuge 
with  something  which  had  manifested  itself  as  the  unessential 
of  appearance  because,  having  looked  for  something  better,  it 
has  failed  to  find  it. — It  will  always  remain  a  matter  for  aston- 
ishment how  the  Kantian  philosophy  knew  that  relation  of 
thought  to  sensuous  existence,  where  it  halted,  for  a  merely 
relative  relation  of  bare  appearance,  and  fully  'acknowledged 
and  asserted  a  higher  unity  of  the  two  in  the  Idea  in  general, 
and,  particularly,  in  the  idea  of  an  intuitive  understanding ; 
but  yet  stopped  dead  at  this  relative  relation  and  at  the  asser- 
tion that  the  Notion  is  and  remains  utterly  separated  from 
reality ; — so  that  it  affirmed  as  true  what  it  pronounced  to  be 
finite  knowledge,  and  declared  to  be  superfluous  and  improper 
figments  of  thought  that  which  it  recognized  as  truth,  and  of 
which  it  established  the  definite  notion. 

Since  it  is  logic,  and  not  science  in  general,  whose  relation 
to  the  truth  is  here  under  discussion,  it  must  further  be  admitted 
that  the  fcrmer,  as  formal  science,  cannot  and  ought  not  to 
contain  that  reality  too  which  is  the  content  of  further  parts 
of  philosophy — the  Sciences  of  Nature  and  of  Spirit.  These 
concrete  sciences  do  indeed  emerge  into  a  more  real  form  of 
the  Idea  than  does  logic, — but  not  in  such  a  manner  as  to  turn 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL  227 

back  to  that  reality  which  consciousness  has  given  up  when 
rising  beyond  its  appearance  into  science,  or  to  revert  to  the 
use  of  forms  (such  as  the  categories  or  determinations  of  reflec- 
tion) whose  finitude  and  invalidity  have  proved  themselves  in 
the  logic.  Logic  rather  shows  the  elevation  of  the  Idea  to  that 
stage  from  which  it  becomes  the  creator  of  Nature  and  passes 
over  to  the  form  of  a  concrete  immediacy,  the  Notion  of  which, 
however,  breaks  this  mould  too  when,  as  concrete  Spirit,  it 
becomes  itself.  These  are  concrete  sciences ;  the  logical  element, 
or  the  Notion,  is  and  remains  that  which  moulded  and  still 
moulds  them;  and,  as  opposed  to  these,  logic  itself  is  the  formal 
science:  but  it  is  the  science  of  absolute  form,  which  is  totality 
in  itself,  and  contains  the  pure  idea  of  truth  itself.  This  absolute 
form  has  its  content,  or  reality,  in  itself:  the  Notion  is  not 
trivial  empty  identity,  and  thus,  in  the  moment  of  its  negativity 
or  of  absolute  determining,  it  has  a  variety  of  determinations : 
the  content  is  indeed  nothing  else  than  such  determinations 
of  absolute  form — the  content  posited  by  it  and  therefore 
adequate  to  it. — And  hence  this  form  is  quite  different  in 
nature  from  that  which  normally  is  taken  as  logical  form.  It 
is  truth  already  for  itself,  since  this  content  is  adequate  to  its 
form,  or  this  reality  to  its  Notion ;  and  it  is  pure  truth,  because 
the  determinations  of  content  have  not  yet  the  form  of  an 
absolute  otherness  or  of  absolute  immediacy. — When  Kant 
(in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason,  p.  83)  comes  to  speak  of  the  old 
and  famous  question  "what  is  truth?53  in  connexion  with  logic, 
he  begins  by  granting  (as  something  trivial)  the  description 
of  truth  as  the  correspondence  of  knowledge  with  its  object — 
a  definition  which  is  of  great  and  even  of  the  highest  value. 
If  this  is  recalled  in  connexion  with  the  fundamental  assertion 
of  transcendental  idealism,  namely,  that  cognition  by  means 
of  reason  is  not  capable  of  apprehending  the  things-in-them- 
selves,  and  that  reality  lies  utterly  outside  the  Notion,  then  it 
is  clear  immediately  that  such  a  reason,  which  cannot  estab- 
lish a  correspondence  between  itself  and  its  object  (the  things- 
in- themselves),  is  an  untrue  idea ;  and  equally  untrue  are  things- 
in-themselves  which  do  not  correspond  with  the  Notion  of 
reason,  a  Notion  which  does  not  correspond  with  reality,  and 
a  reality  which  does  not  correspond  with  the  Notion.  If  Kant 
had  kept  the  idea  of  an  intuitive  understanding  close  to  this 


228  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

definition  of  truth,  then  he  would  not  have  treated  this  idea, 
which  expresses  the  required  correspondence,  as  a  figment  of 
thought,  but  as  truth. 

"What  it  is  required  to  know/5  Kant  proceeds,  "is  a  universal 
and  safe  criterion  of  the  truth  of  every  cognition ;  this  would 
be  a  criterion  valid  of  every  cognition  without  distinction  of 
object;  but,  since  here  abstraction  is  made  from  every  content 
of  cognition  (namely,  relation  to  its  object),  and  truth  concerns 
itself  precisely  with  this  content,  it  would  be  quite  impossible 
and  absurd  to  ask  for  a  token  of  the  truth  of  this  content  of 
cognitions.5' — Here  the  common  view  of  the  formal  function 
of  logic  is  very  definitely  expressed,  and  the  argument  quoted 
appears  very  convincing.  But  it  must  first  be  observed  that 
such  a  formal  argument  generally  comes  to  forget,  in  the  course 
of  its  utterance,  the  matter  which  it  has  made  its  foundation 
and  is  now  discussing.  It  would  be  absurd,  we  are  told,  to  ask 
for  a  criterion  of  the  truth  of  the  content  of  cognition ; — but, 
according  to  the  definition,  it  is  not  the  content  which  con- 
stitutes truth,  but  its  correspondence  with  the  Notion.  A 
content  such  as  is  spoken  of  here,  that  is,  without  Notion,  is 
notionless  and  therefore  essenceless ;  of  course  it  is  impossible 
to  ask  for  the  criterion  of  the  truth  of  such  an  entity,  but  for 
the  opposite  reason,  namely  because,  lacking  notion,  it  is  not 
the  requisite  correspondence  and  cannot  be  anything  but  what 
belongs  to  truthless  opinion. — If  we  omit  mention  of  the  content, 
which  here  causes  the  confusion  (in  which  formalism  is  involved 
every  time,  being  caused  to  say  the  opposite  of  what  it  would 
submit  whenever  it  attempts  an  explanation), — if  we  make  a 
halt  at  the  abstract  view  that  the  logical  is  merely  formal  and 
abstracts  from  all  content, — we  then  obtain  a  one-sided  cogni- 
tion which  is  to  contain  no  object,  a  form  empty  and  without 
determination,  which  consequently  is  neither  correspondence 
(since  correspondence  essentially  demands  two)  nor  truth. — In 
the  synthesis  a  priori  of  the  Notion  Kant  had  a  higher  principle, 
where  duality  could  be  cognized  in  unity,  which  was  what  was 
demanded 'for  truth;  but  the  sense-material,  the  manifold  of 
intuition,  was  too  powerful  to  allow  him  to  leave  it  for  a 
consideration  of  the  Notion  and  of  the  categories  in  and  for 
themselves,  or  for  a  speculative  method  of  philosophy. 

Since  logic   is    the    science  of   absolute  form,  this  formal 


ON  THE  NOTION  IN  GENERAL  229 

element,  in  order  to  be  true,  must  in  itself  have  a  content 
which  must  be  adequate  to  its  form;  and  this  the  more 
because  the  formal  element  of  logic  is  pure  form,  so  that 
logical  truth  must  be  pure  truth.  This  formal  element 
must  therefore  be  thought  of  as  being  in  itself  much  richer  in 
determinations  and  content,  and  as  having  infinitely  more 
influence  upon  the  concrete,  than  it  is  generally  held  to  do. 
The  laws  of  logic  in  themselves  (aside  from  applied  logic  and 
the  other  psychological  and  anthropological  material,  which  is 
in  any  case  of  a  different  kind)  are  generally  restricted,  apart 
from  the  law  of  contradiction,  to  some  few  poor  propositions 
regarding  the  conversion  of  judgments  and  the  forms  of  syllo- 
gisms. The  forms  themselves  which  here  occur  and  their  further 
determinations  are  taken  up  in  a  historical  manner,  so  to  say, 
and  are  not  subjected  to  criticism  to  test  their  truth.  Thus,  for 
example,  the  form  of  positive  judgment  is  counted  as  perfectly 
correct  in  itself,  the  truth  of  such  a  judgment  depending  entirely 
upon  its  content.  And  no  thought  is  given  to  the  investigation 
whether  this  form  in  and  for  itself  is  a  form  of  truth,  and 
whether  the  proposition  which  it  enunciates  ("the  individual 
is  a  universal35)  is  not  dialectic  in  itself.  It  is  simply  held  that 
this  judgment  in  itself  is  capable  of  containing  truth,  and  that 
the  proposition  which  every  positive  judgment  enunciates  is 
valid,  although  it  is  immediately  clear  that  what  the  definition 
of  truth  demands  is  lacking  in  it — namely,  the  correspondence 
of  the  notion  and  its  object;  if  the  predicate  (which  is  here  the 
universal)  is  taken  as  the  notion,  and  the  subject  (which  is  the 
individual)  is  taken  as  the  object,  then  the  one  does  not  corre- 
spond with  the  other.  But  if  the  abstract  universal  which  the 
predicate  is  does  not  by  itself  constitute  a  notion,  which  certainly 
requires  much  more  beside, — just  as  such  a  subject  also  is  not 
yet  much  more  than  a  grammatical  subject, — then  how  can  the 
judgment  contain  truth,  when  its  notion  and  object  do  not 
correspond,  and  perhaps  the  notion,  or  even  the  object,  is 
lacking? — Hence  this  procedure  is  rather  the  impossibility  and 
absurdity  of  attempting  to  frame  the  truth  in  such  forms  as 
positive  judgment  or  judgment  in  general.  Kant's  philosophy 
did  not  consider  the  categories  for  their  own  sake,  but  only 
for  the  mistaken  reason  that  they  were  thought  to  be  subjective 
forms  of  self-consciousness,  and  therefore  it  declared  them  to 


ago  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

be  finite  determinations  incapable  of  containing  the  truth ;  and, 
again,  it  has  even  less  submitted  to  criticism  the  forms  of  the 
Notion  which  are  the  content  of  ordinary  logic ;  rather,  it  has 
taken  up  part  of  them  (namely  the  functions  of  judgments  in 
determining  a  category),  ard  has  allowed  them  to  count  as 
valid  presuppositions.  But,  even  if  the  logical  forms  are  to  be 
regarded  as  nothing  more  than  formal  functions  of  thought, 
yet  this  character  would  make  them  worthy  of  an  investigation 
as  to  how  far  they  correspond  to  the  truth  in  themselves.  A 
system  of  logic  which  neglects  this  can  claim  at  most  to  have 
the  value  of  a  naturalistic  description  of  the  empirical  pheno- 
mena of  thought.  It  is  of  infinite  merit  in  Aristotle,  and  must 
fill  us  with  the  highest  admiration  of  his  genius,  that  he  first 
undertook  this  description.  But  it  is  necessary  to  go  further, 
and  to  understand  both  the  systematic  connexion  and  the  value 
of  the  forms. 


DIVISION 

As  considered  above,  the  Notion  shows  itself  to  be  the  unity 
of  Being  and  Essence.  Essence  is  the  first  negation  of  Being, 
and  has  turned  it  into  Show ;  the  Notion  is  the  second,  or  the 
negation  of  this  negation,  that  is,  it  is  reconstructed  Being,  but 
is  this  as  its  infinite  mediation  and  negativity  in  itself. — Con- 
sequently in  the  Notion  Being  and  Essence  no  longer  have  the 
determination  in  which  they  are  as  Being  and  Essence;  nor 
are  they  in  such  a  unity  that  each  only  shows  in  the  other. 
Hence  the  Notion  does  not  diversify  itself  into  these  deter- 
minations. It  is  the  truth  of  the  Relation  of  Substantiality,  in 
which  Being  and  Essence  reach  their  perfected  independence 
and  determination  one  through  the  other.  Substantial  identity 
proved  itself  to  be  the  truth  of  Substantiality,  and  this  equally, 
and  only,  exists  as  positedness.  Positedness  is  Determinate  Being 
and  Distinction ;  consequently  Being-in-and-for-Self  has  reached 
a  self-adequate  and  true  Determinate  Being  in  the  Notion ;  for 
that  positedness  is  Being-in-and-for-Self  itself.  This  positedness 
constitutes  the  internal  distinction  of  the  Notion :  its  distinctions 
are  themselves  the  whole  of  the  Notion  because  it  is  immediately 
Being-in-and-for-Self:  they  are  universal  in  their  determinate- 
ness  and  identical  with  their  negation. 


ON  THE   NOTION   IN  GENERAL  431 

This  is  the  very  Notion  of  the  Notion.  But,  so  far,  it  is  only 
its  Notion; — or,  it  is  only  Notion  itself.  It  is  Being-in-and-for- 
Self  in  so  far  as  that  is  positedness ;  or  it  is  absolute  Substance 
in  so  far  as  that  reveals  the  necessity  of  distinct  substances  as 
identity ;  and  therefore  this  identity  must  itself  posit  that  which 
it  is.  The  moments  of  the  movement  of  the  Relation  of  Sub- 
stantiality, out  of  which  the  Notion  became,  and  the  reality 
which  they  represent,  are  only  in  a  state  of  transition  to  the 
Notion ;  reality  is  not  yet  its  peculiar  determination  which  has 
emerged  from  it,  but  fell  within  the  sphere  of  Necessity ;  the 
determination  of  the  Notion  must  be  a  free  determination,  an 
existence  in  which  it  is  as  identical  with  itself,  having  for 
moments  Notions  which  have  been  posited  by  itself. 

First,  then,  the  Notion  is  truth  only  in  itself  \  because  it  is 
only  inner,  it  is,  equally,  only  outer.  It  is  first  an  immediate 
in  general,  and  in  this  shape  its  moments  have  the  form  of 
immediate  and  fixed  determinations.  It  appears  as  the  deter- 
minate Notion,  as  the  sphere  of  mere  understanding. — This 
form  of  immediacy  is  an  existence  which  is  not  yet  adequate 
to  its  nature,  since  the  Notion  is  that  free  entity  which  relates 
itself  to  itself  alone ;  and  therefore  it  is  an  external  form,  in 
which  the  Notion  cannot  count  as  Being-in-and-for-Self,  but 
as  only  posited,  or  subjective, — The  shape  of  the  immediate 
Notion  constitutes  that  standpoint  from  which  the  Notion  is 
a  subjective  process  of  thought,  a  reflection  external  to  the 
object.  This  stage  accordingly  constitutes  Subjectivity  or  the 
Formal  Notion.  Its  externality  appears  in  the  fixed  being  of 
its  determinations,  by  virtue  of  which  each  comes  forward  as 
isolated  and  qualitative  for  itself,  existing  only  in  external 
relation  to  its  Other.  But  the  identity  of  the  Notion,  which  is 
their  inner  or  subjective  essence,  sets  them  in  dialectic  move- 
ment, by  means  of  which  their  isolation,  and  consequently  the 
separation  of  the  Notion  from  the  object,  transcends  itself: 
totality  emerges  as  their  truth,  and  this  is  the  Objective  Notion. 

Secondly,  the  Notion  in  its  Objectivity  is  the  object  which  is 
in  and  for  itself.  The  Formal  Notion,  in  the  necessary  process 
of  its  determination,  itself  becomes  the  object,  and  therefore 
loses  the  relationship  of  subjectivity  and  externality  to  the  object. 
Or,  conversely,  Objectivity  is  the  Real  Notion  which  has 
emerged  from  its  internality  and  has  passed  over  into  existence. 


232  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

— In  this  identity  with  the  object  it  thus  has  peculiar  and  free 
existence.  But  this  is  an  immediate  and  not  yet  a  negative 
freedom.  Being  at  one  with  the  object,  it  is  immersed  in  it;  its 
distinctions  are  objective  existences  in  which,  in  turn,  it  itself 
is  again  Inner.  It  is  the  soul  of  objective  existence,  and  must 
therefore  give  itself  that  form  of  Subjectivity  which,  as  Formal 
Notion,  it  possessed  immediately.  Thus  in  the  form  of  the  free 
(which,  in  Objectivity,  it  did  not  yet  possess)  it  opposes  the 
object,  and  now  makes  the  identity  with  it,  which  as  Objective 
Notion  it  has  in  and  for  itself,  a  posited  identity. 

In  this  perfection,  where,  in  its  Objectivity,  it  also  has  the 
form  of  freedom,  the  adequate  Notion  is  the  Idea.  Reason,  which 
is  the  sphere  of  the  Idea,  is  truth  which  is  unveiled  from  itself, 
wherein  the  Notion  has  the  realization  which  is  entirely  proper 
to  it,  and  is  free  in  so  far  as  it  recognizes  this  its  objective  world 
in  its  subjectivity,  and  its  subjectivity  in  its  objective  world. 


SECTION    ONE 
SUBJECTIVITY 

AT  first,  the  Notion  is  formal  Notion — the  Notion  at  the 
beginning,  or  Notion  which  is  as  immediate. — In  immediate 
unity  its  distinctness  or  positedness  is  at  first  itself  just  simple 
and  is  only  a  show,  so  that  the  moments  of  the  distinctness  are 
immediately  the  totality  of  the  Notion  and  are  only  the  Notion 
as  such. 

But  secondly  it  is  absolute  negativity;  it  therefore  divides 
and  posits  itself  as  the  negative  (or  Other)  of  itself.  Now  at 
this  point  the  Notion  is  immediate  as  yet,  and  therefore  this 
process  of  positing  or  distinguishing  has  the  determination  that 
the  moments  are  indifferent  to  each  other  and  that  each  is 
for  itself;  in  this  division  its  unity  is  no  more  than  external 
relation.  As  this  relation  of  its  moments,  which  are  posited  as 
independent  and  indifferent,  it  is  the  Judgment. 

Thirdly,  although  the  Judgment  contains  the  unity  of  the 
Notion  which  had  vanished  into  its  independent  moments,  this 
unity  is  not  posited.  It  becomes  posited  by  means  of  the 
dialectic  movement  of  the  Judgment  (which  hereby  has  become 
the  Syllogism)  to  the  completely  posited  Notion,  since  in  the 
Syllogism  not  only  are  its  moments  posited  as  independent 
extremes,  but  also  their  mediating  unity  is  posited. 

But  this  unity  itself  as  uniting  mean,  and  the  moments 
as  independent  extremes,  are  immediately  opposed  to  one 
another;  and  this  contradictory  relation  which  occurs  in  the 
formal  Syllogism  transcends  itself,  and  the  consummation  of 
the  Notion  passes  over  into  the  unity  of  totality, — and  the 
Subjectivity  of  the  Notion  into  its  Objectivity. 


CHAPTER   I 
THE    NOTION 

THE  capacity  of  forming  Notions  in  general  is  usually  expressed 
as  Understanding;  and  in  this  respect  Understanding  is  dis- 
tinguished from  the  power  of  Judgment  and  the  capacity  of 
Syllogisms,  which  is  formal  Reason.  But  chiefly  it  is  contrasted 
with  Reason;  but  in  so  far  it  does  not  mean  the  capacity  of 
the  Notion  in  general,  but  of  determinate  Notions :  it  is  here 
imagined  that  the  Notion  is  only  a  determinate  entity.  If  Under- 
standing in  this  meaning  is  distinguished  from  formal  power 
of  Judgment  and  formal  Reason,  then  it  must  be  taken  as  the 
capacity  of  the  individual  determinate  Notion.  For  Judgment 
and  Syllogism  (or  Reason  itself)  are,  even  as  formal,  only  of 
understanding  nature,  because  they  stand  under  the  form  of 
abstract  Notion-determinateness.  But  here  the  Notion  is  not 
counted  as  merely  abstractly  determinate  entity ;  consequently 
Understanding  must  be  distinguished  from  Reason  only  by  the 
definition  that  the  former  is  only  the  capacity  of  the  Notion 
in  general. 

Now  this  general  Notion  which  is  here  to  be  considered 
contains  the  three  moments  of  Universality,  Particularity,  and 
Individuality.  The  distinction,  and  the  determinations  which 
result  in  the  process  of  distinguishing,  constitute  the  side  which 
before  was  called  positedness.  This  is  in  the  Notion  identical 
with  Being-in-and-for-Self,  and  therefore  each  of  these  moments 
is  whole  Notion  as  much  as  determinate  Notion  or  as  one 
determination  of  the  Notion. 

At  first  it  is  pure  Notion  or  the  determination  of  Universality. 
But  the  pure  or  Universal  Notion  is  also  only  a  determinate 
or  Particular  Notion,  which  places  itself  alongside  of  the  others. 
The  Notion  is  the  totality,  and  thus  in  its  universality  or  pure 
identical  self-relation  is  essentially  the  fact  of  determining  and 
distinguishing ;  and  therefore  it  contains  in  itself  the  standard 
by  means  of  which  this  form  of  its  self-identity,  penetrating 
and  comprehending  all  the  moments,  equally  immediately 


THE  NOTION  235 

determines  itself  to  be  only  the  Universal  as  against  the  dis- 
tinctness of  the  moments. 

Secondly,  the  Notion  is  hereby  as  this  Particular  Notion,  or 
as  the  determinate  Notion  which  is  posited  as  distinct  from 
others. 

Thirdly,  Individuality  is  the  Notion  which  reflects  itself  out 
of  distinction  into  absolute  negativity.  This  at  the  same  time 
is  the  moment  in  which  it  has  passed  out  of  its  identity  into 
its  otherness,  and  becomes  the  Judgment. 


A 
THE  UNIVERSAL  NOTION 

The  pure  Notion  is  the  absolutely  infinite,  unconditioned, 
and  free.  At  this  point,  where  the  treatment  which  has  the 
Notion  for  content  begins,  its  genesis  must  once  more  be 
reviewed.  Essence  grew  out  of  Being,  and  the  Notion  out  of 
Essence  and,  in  consequence,  out  of  Being  too.  But  this  process 
of  becoming  is  equivalent  to  the  recoil  of  itself,  so  that  what 
has  become  is  now  rather  unconditioned  and  original.  Being 
in  its  transition  to  Essence  has  become  a  show  or  positedness, 
and  Becoming  (or  the  transition  to  other)  has  become  a 
positing ;  and  conversely  positing,  or  the  Reflection  of  Essence, 
has  transcended  itself  and  has  reconstructed  itself  to  be  a  non- 
posited  and  original  Being.  The  Notion  is  the  interpenetration 
of  these  moments : — the  Qualitative  which  has  original  being 
is  only  as  a  positing  and  return  upon  itself,  and  this  pure 
intro-Reflection  is  simply  other-becoming,  or  determinateness 
which  consequently  is  equally  infinite  and  self-relating  deter- 
minateness. 

The  Notion  then  is,  first,  absolute  self-identity,  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  identity  is  self-identity  only  as  negation  of 
negation,  or  as  the  infinite  self-unity  of  negativity.  This  pure 
self-relation  of  the  Notion,  which  thus  this  relation  is  as  positing 
itself  through  negativity,  is  the  Universality  of  the  Notion. 

Universality  is  the  most  simple  determination,  and  therefore 
seems  incapable  of  explanation :  for  an  explanation  must  enter 
upon  determinations  and  distinctions  and  must  predicate  about 
its  object ;  but  what  is  simple  is  changed  rather  than  explained 


236  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

by  such  a  process.  But  it  is  precisely  the  nature  of  the  universal 
to  be  such  a  simple  entity  as  contains  in  itself  the  highest  degree 
of  distinctness  and  determinateness  by  virtue  of  absolute 
negativity.  Being  is  simple  because  it  is  immediate ;  consequently 
it  is  only  intended,  and  it  is  impossible  to  say  of  it  what  it  is ; 
it  is  therefore  immediately  one  with  its  Other,  Not-being.  Just 
this  is  its  Notion,  to  be  such  a  simple  entity  as  vanishes  imme- 
diately into  its  opposite ;  this  Notion  is  Becoming.  The  universal 
on  the  other  hand  is  that  simple  entity  which  also  is  richest 
within  itself,  because  it  is  the  Notion. 

For  this  reason  it  is,  first,  simple  self-relation :  it  is  in  itself 
only.  But,  secondly,  this  identity  is  in  itself  absolute  mediation, 
though  it  is  not  a  mediated  entity.  That  universal  which  is 
a  mediated  universal,  because  abstract  and  opposed  to  the 
particular  and  the  individual,  will  not  be  discussed  until  the 
Determinate  Notion  is  reached. — But  the  abstract  already  con- 
tains this,  that,  in  order  that  it  may  be  preserved,  it  is  required 
that  other  determinations  of  the  concrete  be  omitted.  These 
determinations,  as  determinations,  are  negations ;  and,  further, 
their  omission  also  is  a  negating.  Thus  in  the  abstract  too  the 
negation  of  negation  occurs.  But  this  double  negation  is 
imagined  as  external  to  it,  and  as  though  the  further  properties 
of  the  concrete,  which  are  omitted,  were  different  from  that 
which  is  retained  (which  is  the  content  of  the  abstract) ;  and 
it  is  also  imagined  that  this  operation  of  omission  of  the 
remaining  properties  and  retention  of  the  one  takes  place 
externally  to  the  latter.  The  universal  has  not  yet  determined 
itself  to  such  an  externality  as  against  this  movement :  as  yet, 
it  is  still  in  itself  that  absolute  mediation  which  is  precisely 
negation  of  negation,  or  absolute  negativity. 

According  to  this  original  unity  the  first  negative,  or  deter- 
mination, is,  first,  no  barrier  for  the  universal,  which  preserves 
itself  within  it  and  is  positively  self-identical.  The  categories 
of  Being  as  Notions  were  essentially  these  self-identities  of 
determinations  in  their  barrier  or  their  otherness:  but  this 
identity  was  Notion  only  in  itself ";  it  was  not  yet  manifested. 
Hence  the  qualitative  determination  as  such  perished  in  its 
other,  and  had  for  its  truth  a  determination  different  from  it. 
The  universal,  on  the  other  hand,  even  if  it  posits  itself  into 
a  determination,  remains  in  it  what  it  is.  It  is  the  soul  of  the 


THE  NOTION  237 

concrete  in  which  it  dwells,  unimpeded  and  self-equal  in  the 
latter's  multiplicity  and  variety.  It  is  not  dragged  into  Becom- 
ing, but  continues  through  it  undisturbed,  and  has  the  force  of 
unchangeable  and  immortal  self-preservation. 

But  equally  it  does  not  only  show  into  its  Other,  as  does  the 
Reflection-determination.  The  latter,  as  relative,  relates  itself 
not  only  to  itself,  but  also  is  an  attitude.  In  its  Other  it  manifests 
itself,  but  only  shows  in  it;  and,  because  of  their  indepen- 
dence, the  showing  of  each  in  the  other  (or  their  mutual  deter- 
mining) has  the  form  of  an  external  activity. — On  the  other 
hand  the  universal  is  posited  as  the  Essence  of  its  determination, 
as  its  peculiar  positive  nature.  For  the  determination  which 
constitutes  its  negative  element  is  in  the  Notion  simply  as  a 
positedness,  or,  essentially,  only  as  the  negative  of  the  negative ; 
and  it  is  only  as  this  self-identity  of  the  negative,  which  the 
universal  is.  The  latter  to  this  extent  too  is  the  substance  of  its 
determinations,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  what  for  Substance 
as  such  was  contingent  is  the  proper  self-mediation  of  the 
Notion,  its  peculiar  immanent  Reflection.  But  this  mediation 
which  here  raises  the  contingent  to  necessity,  is  the  manifested 
relation ;  the  Notion  is  not  the  abyss  of  formless  Substance,  or 
necessity  as  the  inner  identity  of  things  and  circumstances  which 
are  distinct  from  one  another  and  self-restrictive:  as  absolute 
negativity  it  forms  and  creates ;  and,  because  the  determination 
is  not  a  barrier,  but  is  transcended  as  much  as  it  is  positedness, 
therefore  the  show  is  appearance  as  appearance  of  the  identical. 

The  universal  consequently  is  free  power.  It  is  itself  and  it 
encroaches  upon  its  Other,  but  not  by  force:  in  its  Other  it 
is  quiescent  and  at  home.  It  has  been  called  free  power,  but 
it  might  also  have  been  called  free  love  or  unbounded  bliss, 
for  it  is  an  attitude  of  itself  to  what  is  distinct  as  though  it  were 
itself;  in  this  it  has  returned  to  itself. 

Mention  has  been  made  of  determinateness,  although  the 
Notion,  being  universal  as  yet  and  only  self-identical,  has  not 
yet  advanced  to  it.  But  mention  of  the  universal  involves 
mention  of  determinateness,  which  more  closely  considered  is 
Particularity  and  Individuality;  for,  in  its  absolute  nega- 
tivity, it  contains  these  in  and  for  itself;  therefore  if  deter- 
minateness is  mentioned  with  the  universal,  it  is  not  imported 
from  without.  The  universal,  as  negativity  in  general  (or 


238  6U1ENCE   OF   LOGIC 

according  to  first  and  immediate  negation),  has  determinateness 
in  general  in  the  shape  of  Particularity ;  in  its  second  quality, 
and  as  negation  of  negation,  it  is  absolute  determinateness,  or 
Individuality  and  concretion. — Thus  the  universal  is  the  totality 
of  the  Notion ;  it  is  concrete,  not  empty,  but  rather,  by  virtue 
of  its  Notion,  has  content — a  content  in  which  it  not  merely 
preserves  itself,  but  which  is  peculiar  and  immanent  to  it. 
Abstraction  can  indeed  be  made  from  the  content;  but  the 
result  is  not  the  Universal  of  the  Notion,  but  the  Abstract, 
which  is  an  isolated  and  incomplete  moment  of  the  Notion  and 
has  no  truth. 

This,  in  detail,  is  how  the  universal  turns  out  to  be  this 
totality.  In  so  far  as  it  contains  determinateness,  it  is  not  only 
first  negation  but  also  its  intro-Reflection.  Taken  by  itself  with 
this  first  negation,  it  is  particular  (and,  as  such,  it  will  be 
discussed  forthwith) ;  but  in  this  determinateness  it  is  still 
essentially  universal;  and  this  side  still  remains  to  be  appre- 
ciated here. — For,  since  this  determinateness  is  in  the  Notion, 
it  is  total  Reflection,  double  Show,  namely  (i)  Show  outwards 
or  Reflection  into  other,  and  (2)  Show  inwards  or  intro- 
Reflection.  The  external  showing  constitutes  a  distinction 
against  Other;  and  accordingly  the  universal  has  a  Particu- 
larity which  has  its  solution  in  a  higher  universal.  It  is  now 
only  relatively  universal,  but  in  so  far  it  does  not  lose  its 
character  of  universal;  it  preserves  itself  in  its  determinateness, 
— and  not  only  in  such  a  manner  as  it  would  if  remaining 
indifferent  to  while  connected  with  it  (for  then  it  would  only 
be  composite  with  it),  but  it  is  that  which  has  just  been  called 
showing  inwards.  Determinateness  as  determinate  Notion  has 
been  bent  back  into  itself  out  of  externality ;  it  is  peculiar  and 
immanent  character,  which  is  essential  because  it  has  been  taken 
up  into  universality  and  penetrated  by  it,  and  thus  has  a  like 
scope,  is  identical  with  it,  and  equally  penetrates  it;  it  is  the 
character  which  belongs  to  the  genus  as  a  determinateness  not 
severed  from  the  universal.  It  is  in  so  far  not  a  barrier  acting 
outwards,  but  is  positive,  since  this  character  by  virtue  of 
universality  stands  in  a  free  relation  to  itself.  And  thus  the 
determinate  Notion  too  remains  in  itself  infinitely  free  Notion. 

But  in  regard  to  the  other  side,  in  which  the  genus  is  limited 
by  its  definitive  character,  it  has  been  observed  that,  as  lower 


THE  NOTION  239 

genus,  it  has  its  solution  in  a  higher  universal.  This  can  in  turn 
be  taken  as  genus,  but  as  a  more  abstract  genus ;  but  it  always 
belongs  to  that  side  only  of  the,  determinate  Notion  which  goes 
outwards.  The  truly  higher  universal  is  that  in  which  this  side 
which  goes  outwards  is  taken  back  inwards, — the  second 
negation,  in  which  determinateness  is  simply  only  as  posited 
or  as  Show.  Life,  Ego,  Spirit,  and  Absolute  Notion  are  univer- 
sals  not  only  as  higher  genera :  they  are  concrete  entities  whose 
determinatenesses  are  not  only  genera  or  inferior  species,  but, 
in  their  reality,  they  are  altogether  only  in  themselves  and 
filled  by  themselves.  In  so  far  as  Life,  Ego,  and  finite  Spirit 
must  be  admitted  to  be  only  determinate  Notions,  their  absolute 
solution  is  found  in  that  universal  which  must  be  taken  as 
veritably  Absolute  Notion,  as  Idea  of  infinite  Spirit,  whose 
positedness  is  infinite  and  transparent  Reality,  in  which  it 
contemplates  its  creation  and,  in  it,  itself. 

And  now  the  veritable  infinite  universal,  which,  immediately, 
is  in  itself  Particularity  as  much  as  Individuality,  must  be 
considered  more  closely  as  Particularity.  It  determines  itself 
freely :  when  it  becomes  finite,  this  is  not  a  transition,  which 
takes  place  only  within  the  sphere  of  Being :  it  is  creative  power 
as  absolute  negativity  which  relates  itself  to  itself.  As  such  it 
is  a  process  of  internal  distinguishing,  and  this  is  a  determining 
because  distinguishing  is  at  one  with  Universality.  It  is  thus 
a  positing  of  the  distinctions  themselves  as  universal  and  self- 
relating  distinctions.  Hereby  they  become  fixed  and  isolated 
distinctions.  The  isolated  persistence  of  the  finite,  which,  before, 
determined  itself  as  its  Being-for-Self  (or  as  Thinghood,  or 
Substance),  is,  in  its  truth,  the  Universality  with  which  form 
the  infinite  Notion  clothes  its  distinctions — a  form  which,  pre- 
cisely, is  one  of  its  own  distinctions.  Herein  consists  the  creative 
activity  of  the  Notion,  which  can  be  conceived  only  in  this 
innermost  core  of  itself. 

B 
THE  PARTICULAR  NOTION 

Determinateness  as  such  belongs  to  Being  and  to  the  Quali- 
tative ;  as  determinateness  of  the  Notion  it  is  Particularity.  It 
is  not  a  limit :  it  is  not  related  to  any  Other  as  its  beyond ;  but, 


240  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

as  has  just  been  seen,  it  is  the  peculiar  immanent  moment  of 
the  universal,  which  latter,  therefore,  in  Particularity  is  not 
with  an  Other  but  just  with  itself. 

The  particular  contains  Universality,  which  constitutes  its 
substance;  the  genus  is  unchanged  in  its  species;  and  the 
species  are  not  different  from  the  universal,  but  only  one  from 
another.  The  particular  has  one  and  the  same  universality 
with  the  other  particulars,  with  which  it  is  related.  At  the  same 
time  their  difference,  because  of  their  identity  with  the  universal, 
is,  as  such,  universal;  it  is  totality. — Thus  the  particular  not 
only  contains  the  universal,  but  also  exhibits  it  through  its 
determinateness ;  and,  in  so  far,  the  universal  constitutes  a 
sphere  which  the  particular  must  exhaust.  In  so  far  as  the 
determinateness  of  the  particular  is  taken  as  mere  variety,  this 
totality  appears  as  completeness.  In  this  respect  the  species  are 
complete,  since  there  just  are  no  more  of  them.  For  these  there 
is  no  inner  standard  nor  principle,  because  Variety  is,  precisely, 
Difference  lacking  unity,  where  Universality,  which  for  itself 
is  absolute  unity,  is  merely  external  reflex  and  an  unrestricted 
and  contingent  completeness.  But  Variety  passes  over  into 
Opposition — into  an  immanent  relation  of  the  various  entities. 
But  Particularity  is  such  immanent  relation  as  Universality  in 
and  for  itself,  and  not  by  transition ;  it  is  totality  in  itself  and 
simple  determinateness :  essentially  it  is  principle.  It  has  no  other 
determinateness  than  such  as  is  posited  by  the  universal  itself 
and  results  from  it  in  the  following  manner. 

The  particular  is  the  universal  itself,  but  it  is  its  difference 
or  relation  to  an  Other,  its  showing  outwards ;  but  there  is  no 
Other  from  which  the  particular  could  be  different,  except 
the  universal  itself. — The  universal  determines  itself,  and  so  it 
is  itself  the  particular :  the  determinateness  is  its  own  difference, 
and  it  is  different  only  from  itself.  Its  species  therefore  are  only 
(a)  the  universal  itself  and  (b]  the  particular.  The  universal 
as  the  Notion  is  both  itself  and  its  opposite,  which  again  is 
itself  as  its  posited  determinateness ;  it  thus  extends  beyond  the 
latter  and  in  it  is  with  itself.  It  is  thus  the  totality  and  principle 
of  its  variety,  which  is  determined  quite  by  itself  alone. 

There  is  therefore  no  other  valid  classification  but  this,  that 
the  Notion  itself  stands  aside  as  immediate  and  indeterminate 
Universality;  and  this  very  indetermination  makes  its  deter- 


THE  NOTION  241 

minateness,  or  makes  it  a  particular.  Both  together  are  the 
particular  and  are  therefore  coordinated.  Also  both,  as  the 
particular,  are  the  determinate  as  against  the  universal;  and 
in  so  far  the  former  ranks  as  subordinate  to  the  latter.  But  this 
universal  against  which  the  particular  is  determined  is  itself 
thereby  one  only  of  the  two  opposed  terms.  And  if  we  speak 
of  two  opposed  terms,  we  must  then  also  say  again  that  they 
constitute  the  particular ;  and  not  only  together  (in  which  case 
they  would  be  equal  only  for  external  reflection  in  the  fact  of 
their  particularity),  but  their  determinateness  as  against  each 
other  is  essentially  also  one  determinateness,  or  negativity 
which,  in  the  universal,  is  simple. 

Difference,  as  it  shows  itself  here,  is  in  its  Notion  and  there- 
fore in  its  truth.  All  former  difference  has  this  unity  in  the 
Notion.  As  immediate  difference  in  Being,  it  is  as  the  limit 
of  an  Other ;  in  Reflection,  it  is  relative  and  posited  as  essen- 
tially relating  itself  to  its  Other;  here  accordingly  the  unity 
of  the  Notion  begins  to  be  posited,  but,  at  first,  it  is  only  Show 
in  an  Other. — The  transition  and  solution  of  these  determina- 
tions has  only  this  true  meaning,  that  they  reach  their  Notion, 
their  truth ;  Being,  Determinate  Being,  Something,  Whole  and 
Parts,  and  so  on,  Substance  and  Accidents,  Cause  and  Effect, 
are  for  themselves  intellectual  determinations :  they  are  taken 
as  determinate  Notions  in  so  far  as  each  is  recognized  in  unity 
with  its  Other  or  opposite. — Thus  for  example  Whole  and  Parts, 
Cause  and  Effect,  and  the  rest,  are  not  yet  various  terms  deter- 
mined (as  against  each  other)  as  particular ;  for  although  they 
constitute  one  Notion  in  themselves,  their  unity  has  not  yet 
reached  the  form  of  universality ;  and  similarly  the  difference 
which  is  in  these  relations  has  not  yet  the  form  of  being  one 
determinateness.  For  example,  Cause  and  Effect  are  not  two 
different  Notions  but  only  one  determinate  Notion,  and 
Causality,  like  every  Notion,  is  simple. 

With  regard  to  completeness,  the  result  has  been  reached 
that  the  element  of  determinateness  in  Particularity  lies  com- 
pletely in  the  difference  between  universal  and  particular,  and 
that  these  two  alone  constitute  the  particular  species.  In  Nature 
indeed  a  genus  has  more  than  two  species,  and  also  these  many 
species  cannot  be  related  to  one  another  in  the  manner  demon- 
strated. This  is  the  impotence  of  Nature  to  hold  fast  and  to 

VOL.  n.  Q, 


242  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

represent  the  austerity  of  the  Notion,  so  that  it  wastes  away 
into  this  notionless  and  blind  multiplicity.  In  the  multiplicity 
of  its  genera  and  species  and  in  the  infinite  variety  of  its 
formations  we  may  admire  Nature,  for  admiration  is  without 
Notion  and  its  object  is  the  irrational.  Nature  is  the  self- 
externality  of  the  Notion,  and  therefore  it  is  free  to  disport 
itself  in  this  variety,  like  Spirit  which,  although  it  has  the 
Notion  in  the  shape  of  the  Notion,  enters  upon  sensuous  repre- 
sentation and  runs  wild  in  the  infinite  multiplicity  thereof.  The 
various  natural  genera  or  species  must  rank  as  nothing  higher 
than  the  arbitrary  conceits  of  Spirit  in  its  ideations.  Both 
indeed  show  traces  and  premonitions  everywhere  of  the  Notion, 
but  they  do  not  represent  it  in  its  true  image,  because  they  are 
the  side  of  its  free  self-externality;  it  is  absolute  power  just 
because  it  can  freely  discharge  its  distinction  into  the  shape 
of  independent  variety,  external  necessity,  contingency,  caprice, 
or  opinion ;  but  these  must  not  be  taken  for  anything  more  than 
the  abstract  side  of  nullity. 

The  determinateness  of  the  particular  is  simple  as  principle 
(as  was  seen) ;  but  it  is  simple  also  as  moment  of  totality — as 
determinateness  against  the  other  determinateness.  The  Notion, 
in  so  far  as  it  determines  or  distinguishes  itself,  points  negatively 
at  its  unity  and  takes  the  form  of  one  of  its  moments  (which 
is  of  ideal  nature)  of  Being :  as  determinate  Notion  it  has  a 
Determinate  Being  in  general.  But  this  Being  no  longer  sig- 
nifies bare  immediacy  but  Universality — immediacy  which 
through  absolute  mediation  is  equal  to  itself  and  equally  con- 
tains the  other  moment,  Essence  or  intro-Reflection.  This 
Universality  which  clothes  the  determinate  is  abstract  Univer- 
sality. The  particular  contains  Universality  as  its  Essence ;  but, 
in  so  far  as  the  determinateness  of  the  difference  is  posited,  and 
thereby  has  Being,  this  Universality  is  related  to  the  difference 
as  form,  and  the  determinateness  as  such  is  content.  Univer- 
sality becomes  form  in  so  far  as  the  difference  exists  as  the 
essential;  whereas  in  the  purely  universal  it  exists  only  as 
absolute  negativity,  and  not  as  difference  which  is  posited 
as  such. 

Now  although  determinateness  is  the  abstract  as  against  the 
other  determinateness,  yet  the  other  is  only  Universality  itself. 
In  so  far  this  latter  is  also  abstract,  and  the  determinateness 


THE  NOTION  243 

of  the  Notion  (that  is,  Particularity)  is  again  no  more  than 
determinate  Universality.  In  it  the  Notion  is  outside  itself;  and 
in  so  far  as  it  is  the  Notion  which  here  is  outside  itself,  the 
abstract-universal  contains  all  the  moments  of  the  Notion :  it 
is  (a)  universality,  (jS)  determinateness,  and  (y)  simple  iden- 
tity of  the  two;  but  this  unity  is  immediate,  and  for  this 
reason  Particularity  is  not  as  totality.  In  itself  it  is  this  totality, 
and  is  mediation ;  it  is,  essentially,  exclusive  relation  to  other 
or  transcendence  of  negation,  that  is,  of  the  other  determinate- 
ness, — which  other  however  merely  hovers  before  the  imagina- 
tion, for  it  vanishes  immediately  and  shows  itself  as  that  which 
its  other  was  to  be.  What  therefore  makes  this  Universality 
abstract  is  the  fact  that  mediation  is  only  condition,  or  is  not 
posited  of  it  itself.  And  because  it  is  not  posited,  the  unity  of 
the  abstract  has  the  form  of  immediacy,  and  the  content  has 
the  form  of  indifference  to  its  Universality,  because  it  is  not 
as  that  totality  which  is  the  Universality  of  absolute  negativity. 
Thus,  although  the  abstractly  universal  is  the  Notion,  it  is 
Notion  only  as  notionless,  as  Notion  which  is  not  posited 
as  such. 

If  mention  is  made  of  the  Determinate  Notion,  what  is  meant 
is  generally  only  such  a  purely  abstractly  universal  entity.  And 
by  "the  Notion55  in  general  only  this  notionless  Notion  as  a  rule 
is  understood;  and  "Understanding"  denotes  the  capacity  of 
such  Notions.  Demonstration  belongs  to  this  understanding  in 
so  far  as  it  is  said  to  proceed  along  a  chain  of  Notions,  that  is, 
along  mere  determinations.  Such  a  process  therefore  does  not 
pass  beyond  finitude  and  necessity ;  and  its  highest  point  is  the 
negative  infinite,  the  abstraction  of  the  highest  essence,  which 
itself  is  the  determinateness  of  indeterminateness.  Absolute 
Substance  too  is,  it  is  true,  not  this  empty  abstraction :  accord- 
ing to  its  content  it  is,  indeed,  totality,  but  it  is  abstract  because 
it  is  without  absolute  form ;  the  Notion  does  not  constitute  its 
innermost  truth ;  and  although  it  is  the  identity  of  Universality 
and  Particularity  (or  of  thought  and  mutual  externality),  yet 
this  identity  is  not  the  determinateness  of  the  Notion ;  outside 
it  there  is  an  understanding  (which,  precisely  because  it  is 
outside  it,  is  contingent)  in  and  for  which  it  exists  in  various 
Attributes  and  Modes. 

For  the  rest,  abstraction  is  not  rightly  called  empty,  as  is 


244  SCIENCE   OF   LOGIC 

commonly  done :  it  is  the  Determinate  Notion,  and  has  some 
determinateness  for  content ;  and  even  the  highest  essence  (pure 
abstraction)  has,  as  was  mentioned,  the  determinateness  of 
indeterminateness ;  but  a  determinateness  is  indeterminateness, 
because  it  is  supposed  to  s*and  opposite  to  the  determinate. 
But,  even  while  that  which  it  is  is  being  pronounced,  this,  which 
it  is  supposed  to  be,  cancels  itself;  it  is  pronounced  to  be  one 
with  determinateness,  and  in  this  manner  the  Notion  and  the 
truth  of  indeterminateness  are  constructed  out  of  abstraction. — 
But  every  determinate  Notion  is  of  course  empty  in  so  far  as 
it  does  not  contain  the  totality  but  only  a  one-sided  deter- 
minateness. Even  though  it  otherwise  has  a  concrete  content, 
like  mariy  state,  animal,  and  so  forth,  yet  it  remains  an  empty 
Notion  in  so  far  as  its  determinateness  is  not  the  principle  of 
its  distinctions:  the  principle  contains  the  beginning  and  the 
essence  of  its  development  and  realization,  and  any  other 
determinateness  of  the  Notion  is  barren.  If  therefore  the  Notion 
is  ever  denounced  as  empty,  that  absolute  determinateness  of 
it  is  misunderstood  which  is  the  differentia  of  the  Notion  and 
the  sole  true  content  in  its  element. 

This  is  the  proper  place  also  to  mention  the  circumstance 
which  has  caused  Understanding  latterly  to  be  held  in  such 
small  esteem  and  to  be  ranked  after  Reason, — namely  the  fixity 
which  it  imparts  to  the  determinatenesses,  and  hence  to  the 
finitudes.  This  fixity  consists  in  the  form  of  abstract  Universality 
which  has  just  been  considered :  by  virtue  of  it  they  become 
immutable.  For  qualitative  determinateness,  and  Determination 
of  Reflection,  exist  essentially  as  limited,  and,  in  their  barrier, 
have  a  relation  to  their  Other ;  they  thus  contain  the  necessity 
of  transition  and  passing  away.  But  Universality  (which  they 
have  in  Understanding)  gives  them  the  form  of  intro-Reflection, 
which  withdraws  them  from  the  relation  to  other  and  renders 
them  imperishable.  Now  in  the  pure  Notion  this  eternity  belongs 
to  its  own  nature,  and  so  its  abstract  determinations  would  be 
eternal  essentialities  only  according  to  their  form;  but  their 
content  is  *iot  adequate  to  this  form,  and  consequently  they 
are  not  truth  and  imperishability.  Their  content  is  not  ade- 
quate to  the  form,  because  it  is  not  determinateness  itself  as 
universal ;  that  is,  it  is  not  as  totality  of  the  differentia  of  the 
Notion,  or  not  itself  the  whole  form ;  now  the  form  of  Under- 


THE  NOTION  245 

standing  which  is  subject  to  a  barrier  is  itself  incomplete  (that 
is,  abstract)  Universality. — But  further,  it  must  be  counted  as 
the  infinite  force  of  Understanding  to  divide  the  concrete  into 
abstract  determinatenesses,  and  to  comprehend  the  depth  of 
the  distinction  which  at  the  same  time  is  the  power  that  effects 
its  transition.  The  concrete  of  intuition  is  totality,  but  sensuous 
totality — an  indifferent  juxtaposition  of  real  matters  in  space 
and  time.  Now  surely  this  lack  of  unity  in  the  manifold,  in 
which  it  is  the  content  of  intuition,  should  not  be  counted  to 
it  for  merit  and  for  an  advantage  over  the  understandable.  That 
mutability  which  it  shows  in  intuition  already  points  to  the 
universal ;  that  part  of  it  which  comes  into  intuition  is  only 
another  and  equally  mutable  entity — that  is,  the  self-same 
thing ;  it  is  not  the  case  that  the  universal  takes  its  place  and 
appears.  But  least  of  all  should  the  intuitive  element  in  a  science 
(such  as  geometry  or  arithmetic),  which  its  material  brings  with 
it,  be  counted  as  a  merit,  or  its  propositions  be  imagined  as 
being  thereby  substantiated.  On  the  contrary,  the  material  of 
these  sciences  is  for  that  very  reason  of  a  lower  nature:  to 
intuit  figures  or  numbers  does  not  lead  to  knowledge  of  them, 
which  is  only  produced  by  thought  on  these  matters. — But,  in 
so  far  as  objective  totality  is  meant  by  intuition,  and  not  only 
the  merely  sensuous,  this  intuition  is  intellectual,  that  is,  it  has 
for  object  Determinate  Being  not  in  its  external  existence,  but 
that  which  in  it  is  imperishable  reality  and  truth ; — reality  only 
in  so  far  as  it  is  essentially  in  the  Notion  and  is  determined  by 
it ;  the  Idea,  whose  further  nature  must  be  reached  at  a  later 
point.  What  is  supposed  to  exalt  intuition  as  such  above  the 
Notion  is  external  reality — that  notionless  something  which  has 
value  only  through  the  Notion. 

Understanding  then  represents  the  infinite  force  which  deter- 
mines the  universal,  or  conversely  imparts  fixed  persistence 
through  the  form  of  Universality  to  what  in  determinateness 
has  in  and  for  itself  no  stability ;  and  it  is  not  the  fault  of  under- 
standing if  no  further  progress  is  made.  It  is  a  subjective 
impotence  of  reason  which  allows  these  determirmtenesses  to 
count  in  this  manner,  and  is  unable  to  lead  them  back  to  unity 
through  the  dialectic  force  which  is  opposed  to  this  abstract 
Universality,  that  is,  through  the  peculiar  nature  (in  other 
words,  the  Notion)  of  these  determinatenesses.  It  is  true  that 


246  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

through  the  form  of  abstract  Universality  understanding  gives 
them  what  may  be  called  such  a  hardness  of  Being  as  they  do 
not  possess  in  the  spheres  of  Quality  and  of  Reflection ;  but  by 
this  simplification  understanding  also  spiritualizes  them  and  so 
sharpens  them  that  they  receive  only  at  this  extreme  point  the 
capacity  of  dissolving  and  passing  over  into  their  opposite.  The 
highest  maturity  or  stage  which  any  Something  can  reach  is 
that  in  which  it  begins  to  perish.  That  fixed  element  of  deter- 
minateness  upon  which  understanding  seems  to  wreck  itself 
(namely  the  form  of  the  imperishable)  is  the  form  of  self- 
relating  Universality.  But  this  is  the  peculiar  property  of  the 
Notion;  and  consequently  the  dissolution  of  the  finite  lies 
expressed  in  it  itself,  and  in  infinite  proximity.  This  Univer- 
sality immediately  argues  the  determinateness  of  the  finite  and 
expresses  its  inadequacy  to  itself. — Or  rather,  the  adequacy  of 
the  finite  is  already  given ;  the  abstract  determinate  is  posited 
as  being  one  with  Universality,  and  as  not  for  itself  alone,  for 
then  it  would  be  only  determinate,  but  only  as  unity  of  itself 
and  of  the  universal, — that  is,  as  Notion. 

The  ordinary  practice  of  separating  understanding  and  reason 
must  therefore  be  condemned  in  every  respect.  If  the  Notion 
is  considered  as  reasonless,  this  should  rather  be  considered  as 
an  incapacity  of  reason  to  recognize  itself  in  the  Notion.  The 
determinate  and  abstract  Notion  is  the  condition,  or  rather 
essential  moment,  of  reason ;  it  is  the  spiritualized  form  in  which 
the  finite,  by  virtue  of  the  Universality  in  which  it  relates  itself 
to  itself,  kindles  itself  in  itself,  is  posited  as  dialectic,  and  thus 
is  the  beginning  itself  of  the  appearance  of  reason. 

So  far  the  Determinate  Notion  has  been  represented  in  its 
truth,  and  it  only  remains  to  indicate  what  has  been  implied 
about  it  in  this  positing. — Difference  is  an  essential  moment 
of  the  Notion,  but  is  not  yet  posited  as  such  in  the  purely 
universal;  in  the  Determinate  Notion  it  comes  into  its  own. 
Determinateness  in  the  form  of  Universality  is  compounded 
with  it,  and  a  simplicity  results ;  this  determinate  universal  is 
self-relating'  determinateness ;  determinate  determinateness,  or 
absolute  negativity  posited  for  itself.  But  self-relating  deter- 
minateness is  Individuality.  Universality  is  immediately  and 
in  and  for  itself  Particularity ;  but  Particularity  is  also,  equally 
immediately,  and  in  and  for  itself,  Individuality, — which  now 


THE  NOTION  247 

must  be  considered  as  third  moment  of  the  Notion  in  so  far 
as  it  is  retained  as  against  the  first  two,  but  also  as  the  absolute 
return  of  the  Notion  to  itself  and,  at  the  same  time,  as  the 
posited  loss  of  itself. 

Observation 

It  follows  from  what  has  gone  before  that  Universality, 
Particularity,  and  Individuality  are  the  three  determinate 
Notions, — if  indeed  it  is  desired  to  count  them.  It  has  already 
been  shown  that  number  is  not  a  form  fit  to  hold  notional 
determinations,  and  is  least  of  all  fit  to  hold  determinations  of 
the  Notion  itself;  for  number,  having  One  for  principle,  makes 
the  numbered  entities  wholly  separate  and  wholly  indifferent 
to  one  another.  It  has  already  resulted  from  our  survey  that 
the  various  determinate  Notions  are  in  fact  simply  one  and  the 
same  Notion,  rather  than  that  they  fall  apart  into  number. 

In  other  ordinary  treatises  about  logic  many  divisions  and 
species  of  Notions  occur.  Here  one  is  immediately  struck  by 
the  inconsistency  with  which  the  species  are  introduced,  when 
it  is  said  that  "according  to  Quantity,  or  Quality,  and  so  on, 
there  are  the  following  Notions."  ' There  is55  expresses  no  other 
kind  of  justification  except  that  such  species  are  found  and  that 
they  show  themselves  in  experience.  In  this  manner  an  empirical 
logic  is  obtained ; — a  peculiar  science,  an  irrational  knowledge 
of  the  Rational.  Herein  logic  affords  a  very  poor  example  of 
how  it  follows  its  own  precepts :  for  its  own  benefit  it  allows 
itself  to  do  the  opposite  of  what  it  prescribes  as  rule,  namely, 
that  Notions  must  be  derived  and  that  scientific  propositions 
must  be  demonstrated  (and  among  them  the  proposition  which 
says  that  there  are  so-and-so  many  kinds  of  Notion). — In  this 
matter  Kant's  philosophy  commits  a  further  inconsistency :  for 
Transcendental  Logic  it  borrows  the  categories,  as  so-called 
root-notions,  from  Subjective  Logic,  into  which  they  were 
admitted  empirically.  Since  it  confesses  this  last  step,  it  is  not 
clear  why  Transcendental  Logic  troubles  to  borrow  from  such 
a  science,  and  does  not  immediately  help  itself  empirically. 

Some  parts  of  this  process  may  here  be  detailed.  The  Notions 
are  chiefly  classified  according  to  their  clarity,  into  clear  and 
obscure,  definite  and  indefinite,  and  adequate  and  inadequate. 
Complete  and  superfluous  Notions  and  other  irrelevancies  may 


248  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

also  be  mentioned  in  this  place. — With  regard  to  this  classifi- 
cation according  to  clarity,  it  soon  appears  that  this  point  of 
view  and  the  distinctions  which  are  related  to  it  are  derived 
from  psychological  and  not  from  logical  determinations.  The  so- 
called  clear  Notion  is  supposed  to  suffice  to  distinguish  one  object 
from  another :  but  this  cannot  yet  be  called  a  Notion ;  it  is 
nothing  more  than  subjective  mental  representation.  What  an 
obscure  Notion  is  must  remain  its  own  secret,  otherwise  it  would 
be  a  definite  and  not  an  obscure  Notion. — The  definite  Notion 
is  supposed  to  be  a  Notion  of  which  the  criteria  can  be  stated. 
Thus  it  is  really  the  Determinate  Notion.  The  criterion  (that 
is,  if  that  which  is  correct  in  it  is  taken  up)  is  just  the  deter- 
minateness  or  simple  content  of  the  Notion  in  so  far  as  it  is 
distinguished  from  the  form  of  Universality.  But  in  the  first 
instance  the  criterion  has  not  this  more  precise  significance ;  it 
is  merely  any  determination  which  serves  for  the  observer  to 
note  an  object,  or  the  Notion ;  it  may  therefore  be  some  quite 
accidental  circumstance.  And  altogether  it  does  not  express  the 
immanence  and  essentiality  of  the  determination  so  much  as 
its  relation  to  an  external  understanding.  If  this  is  really  an 
understanding,  then  it  has  the  Notion  before  itself  and  notes 
this  Notion  solely  by  virtue  of  its  content.  But  if  the  criterion 
is  distinct  from  it,  then  it  is  a  token  or  some  other  determination 
which  belongs  to  the  image  of  the  thing  and  not  to  its  Notion. — 
As  to  the  meaning  of  the  indefinite  Notion,  this  may  be  passed 
over  as  superfluous. 

But  the  adequate  Notion  is  a  higher  concept;  the  correspon- 
dence of  the  Notion  with  reality  is  really  here  before  the  mind, 
and  this  is  not  the  Notion  as  such  but  the  Idea. 

If  the  criterion  of  the  definite  Notion  really  is  the  deter- 
mination itself  of  the  Notion,  then  logic  would  be  in  difficulties 
with  the  simple  Notions,  which  according  to  another  classifica- 
tion are  opposed  to  compound  Notions.  For  if  a  true,  that  is,  an 
immanent,  criterion  were  to  be  given  of  the  simple  Notion, 
then  it  would  become  undesirable  to  look  upon  it  as  simple; 
and  in  so  far  as  no  criterion  were  given,  it  would  not  be  a 
definite  Notion.  Here  only  the  clear  Notion  avails.  Unity, 
reality,  and  similar  determinations  are  supposed  to  be  simple 
Notions,  presumably  because  logicians  did  not  succeed  in 
finding  their  determination,  and  consequently  were  content 


THE   NOTION  249 

to  have  merely  a  clear  Notion  of  them — that  is,  none  at  all. 
A  definition,  that  is,  a  statement  of  the  Notion,  is  commonly 
held  to  demand  that  the  genus  and  the  specific  difference  be 
indicated.  Definition  therefore  gives  the  Notion,  not  as  some- 
thing simple,  but  in  two  distinct  parts,  of  which  it  consists. 
But  surely  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  for  this  reason  such 
a  Notion  must  be  looked  upon  as  a  compound. — In  the  simple 
Notion,  abstract  simplicity  seems  to  be  present  before  the 
imagination, — a  unity  which  does  not  contain  distinction  and 
determinateness  and  therefore  is  not  that  unity  which  is  proper 
to  the  Notion.  In  so  far  as  an  object  exists  in  imagination,  and 
especially  in  memory,  or  in  so  far  as  it  is  abstract  thought- 
determination,  it  may  be  perfectly  simple.  Even  objects  which 
in  themselves  are  of  richest  content,  like  Spirit,  Nature,  World, 
or  God — if  they  are  comprehended  without  any  Notion  in  the 
simple  image  of  the  equally  simple  expressions  Spirit,  Nature, 
World,  God — are  something  simple  where  consciousness  can  halt 
without  elaborating  the  peculiar  determination,  or  a  criterion. 
But  it  is  improper  that  the  objects  of  consciousness  should  thus 
remain  simple  and  be  images  or  abstract  thought-determina- 
tions :  Notions  ought  to  be  formed  about  them,  that  is,  their 
simplicity  ought  to  be  determined  from  their  inner  distinction. — 
As  for  the  compound  Notion,  it  would  appear  to  be  no  better 
than  wooden  iron.  It  is  possible  to  have  a  Notion  about  a  com- 
pound ;  but  a  compound  Notion  would  be  somethingworse  than 
that  materialism  which  assumes  only  the  substance  of  the  soul  to 
be  a  compound,  but  nevertheless  takes  thought  to  be  simple. 
Uncultivated  reflection  first  has  recourse  to  composition,  as  a 
wholly  external  relation,  which  is  the  worst  form  under  which 
things  can  be  considered ;  even  the  lowest  natures  must  be  an 
inner  unity.  But  if,  to  crown  all,  the  form  of  the  untruest 
existence  is  applied  to  Ego,  to  the  Notion,  this  is  more  than 
was  to  be  expected:  it  must  be  considered  as  unseemly  and 
barbarous. 

Notions  are  further  divided  into  contrary  and  contradictory. — 
If,  in  treating  the  Notion,  it  were  necessary  to  state  what  kinds 
of  determinate  Notions  there  are,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
enumerate  every  possible  determination  (for  all  determinations 
are  Notions  and  consequently  determinate  Notions) ;  and  all 
the  categories  of  Being  and  determinations  of  Essence  would 


250  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

have  to  be  enumerated  under  the  kinds  of  Notions.  Indeed, 
treatises  of  logic  rehearse,  in  greater  or  less  detail,  that  there 
are  affirmative,  negative,  identical,  conditioned,  necessary,  and 
other  Notions.  Such  determinations  have  already  been  sur- 
passed by  the  nature  of  the  Notion  itself,  and  therefore,  if  they 
are  recited  here,  they  do  not  occur  in  their  due  place;  they 
therefore  admit  only  of  superficial  verbal  explanations,  and 
appear  to  be  quite  without  interest  here. — Contrary  and  con- 
tradictory Notions — a  distinction  which  chiefly  is  noted  here — 
are  based  upon  the  Reflection-determinations  of  Variety  and 
Opposition.  They  are  looked  upon  as  two  separate  species,  that 
is,  as  each  fixed  for  itself  and  indifferent  to  the  other,  without 
any  consideration  of  the  dialectic  and  of  the  inner  nullity  of 
these  distinctions, — as  though  that  which  is  contrary  must  not 
equally  be  determined  as  contradictory.  The  nature  and  the 
essential  transition  of  the  forms  of  Reflection  which  they  express, 
have  been  considered  in  their  own  place.  In  the  Notion, 
Identity  has  been  developed  into  Universality,  Difference  into 
Particularity,  and  Opposition  (which  passes  back  into  Ground) 
into  Individuality.  In  these  forms  the  above-mentioned  Deter- 
minations of  Reflection  exist  as  they  are  in  their  Notion.  The 
universal  turned  out  to  be  not  only  the  identical,  but  also  the 
different  or  contrary  as  against  the  particular  and  individual, 
and,  further,  to  be  opposed  to  them  or  contradictory ;  but  in  this 
opposition  it  is  identical  with  them  and  is  their  true  Ground, 
in  which  they  are  transcended.  And  the  same  holds  of  Par- 
ticularity and  Individuality,  which  also  are  the  totality  of  the 
Determinations  of  Reflection. 

Again,  Notions  are  divided  into  subordinate  and  coordinate, — 
a  distinction  which  more  closely  concerns  the  determination 
of  the  Notion,  namely  the  relation  between  Universality  and 
Particularity,  where  in  fact  these  expressions  have  been  cur- 
sorily mentioned.  Only,  they  too  are  usually  considered  as 
firmly  fixed  relations,  and  numerous  barren  propositions  are 
put  forward  about  them.  The  lengthiest  treatment  in  this 
connexion  again  refers  to  the  relation  of  contrariety  and  con- 
tradictoriness  to  subordination  and  coordination.  Judgment  is 
the  relation  of  determinate  Notions,  and  accordingly  the  true 
relationship  can  result  only  at  that  point.  The  fashion  of  com- 
paring these  determinations  without  any  thought  of  their 


THE  NOTION  251 

dialectic  and  of  the  progressive  change  of  their  determination, 
or,  rather,  of  the  connexion  of  opposite  determinations  which 
is  present  in  them,  renders  barren  and  unsubstantial  the  whole 
consideration  about  their  harmony  and  disharmony ;  as  though 
such  harmony  or  disharmony  were  something  separate  and 
enduring. — The  great  Euler,  who  was  infinitely  fruitful  and 
ingenious  in  seizing  and  combining  the  profounder  relations 
of  algebraical  magnitudes ;  more  especially  the  dry  intelligence 
of  Lambert ;  and  others,  too,  have  attempted  a  notation  by 
means  of  lines,  figures,  and  the  like  for  this  kind  of  relation 
between  the  determinations  of  Notions :  the  general  purpose 
was  to  raise  the  logical  types  of  relation  to  a  calculus, — or, 
rather,  to  reduce  them  to  one.  Even  the  attempt  at  notation 
immediately  manifests  its  own  nullity  if  the  nature  of  the 
symbol  is  compared  with  that  which  it  is  to  symbolize.  The 
determinations  of  the  Notion,  Universality,  Particularity,  and 
Individuality,  are  indeed  distinct,  like  lines,  or  the  letters  of 
algebra; — further  they  are  opposite,  and  in  so  far  would  also 
admit  the  signs  of  plus  and  minus.  But  they  themselves,  and  their 
relations  much  more  (even  if  no  progress  is  made  beyond  sub- 
sumption  and  inherence),  are  of  an  essential  nature  which  is 
wholly  different  from  letters  and  lines  and  their  relations,  like 
equality  or  difference  of  magnitude,  plus  and  minus,  or  the 
position  of  lines  over  one  another,  their  connexion  to  form 
angles,  and  the  dispositions  of  spaces  which  they  enclose.  Such 
objects  have  the  peculiar  distinction,  as  against  them,  that  they 
are  external  to  one  another  and  have  a  fixed  determination. 
Now  if  Notions  are  taken  in  this  manner,  so  that  they  corre- 
spond to  such  symbols,  then  they  cease  to  be  Notions.  Their 
determinations  are  not  such  dead  matter  as  numbers  and  lines, 
in  which  their  relation  is  not  immanent ;  they  are  living  move- 
ments ;  the  different  determinateness  of  one  side  is  also  imme- 
diately internal  to  the  other;  and  what  would  be  a  complete 
contradiction  with  numbers  and  lines  is  essential  to  the  nature 
of  the  Notion. — Higher  mathematics,  which  also  goes  on  to  the 
infinite  and  permits  itself  contradictions,  can  no  longer  employ 
its  former  signs  for  the  representation  of  such  determinations. 
To  denote  the  image  (which  is  very  far  removed  from  the 
Notion)  of  the  infinite  approximation  of  two  ordinates,  it  does 
no  more  than  draw  two  straight  lines  outside  of  each  other; 


252  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

or  when  it  identifies  a  curve  with  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely 
small  straight  lines,  it  does  no  more  than  draw  straight  lines 
into  a  curve  but  different  from  it.  For  the  infinite,  which  is  the 
real  matter  here,  it  refers  to  imagination. 

It  is  chiefly  the  quantitative  relation,  in  which  Universality, 
Particularity,  and  Individuality  are  supposed  to  stand  to  one 
another,  that  has  led  to  this  attempt;  universal  means  wider 
than  particular  and  individual,  and  particular  wider  than 
individual.  The  Notion  is  the  concrete  and  richest  entity 
because  it  is  the  ground  and  the  totality  of  the  earlier  deter- 
minations— of  the  categories  of  Being  and  the  Determinations 
of  Reflection ;  the  latter  therefore  may  also  chance  to  emerge  in 
it.  But  the  nature  of  the  Notion  is  wholly  misunderstood  if 
these  are  retained  in  it  in  that  abstraction,  and  if  the  further 
volume  of  the  universal  is  taken  as  though  it  were  something 
more,  or  a  bigger  quantum,  than  the  particular  and  the  individual. 
The  Notion,  as  absolute  Ground,  is  the  possibility  of  quantity, 
but  also  of  quality,  that  is,  its  determinations  are  also  dis- 
tinguished qualitatively;  they  are  therefore  considered  in  a 
manner  which  does  not  agree  with  their  truth  if  they  are  posited 
under  the  form  of  quantity  alone.  And  further  the  Determina- 
tion of  Reflection  is  something  relative  in  which  its  opposite 
shows;  unlike  a  quantum,  it  is  not  in  the  external  relation. 
But  the  Notion  is  more  than  all  this:  its  determinations  are 
determinate  Notions,  and  are  essentially  the  totality  itself  of  all 
determinations.  It  is  therefore  quite  unfitting  to  attempt  to 
apply  numerical  and  spatial  relations  in  order  to  apprehend 
such  an  intimate  totality ;  in  such  relations  all  determinations 
fall  apart,  and  they  are  indeed  the  last  and  worst  medium  that 
could  be  used.  Natural  relations  like  magnetism  or  colour- 
relations  would  be  infinitely  higher  and  truer  symbols.  Man 
has  language  as  the  means  of  designation  peculiar  to  reason, 
and  therefore  it  is  an  idle  caprice  to  engage  in  a  weary  search 
for  a  less  perfect  manner  of  description.  The  Notion  as  such 
can  essentially  be  apprehended  only  by  Spirit,  of  which  it  is 
not  only  the*  peculiar  property,  but  the  pure  self.  It  is  in  vain 
that  an  attempt  is  made  to  fix  it  by  means  of  spatial  figures 
and  algebraical  symbols  for  the  purposes  of  the  external  eye 
and  of  a  notionless  mechanical  treatment  or  calculus.  And  any- 
thing else  which  should  serve  for  symbol  (like  symbols  of  the 


THE  NOTION  253 

nature  of  God;  can  at  best  excite  only  presentiments  and  echoes 
of  the  Notion ;  but  if  it  were  a  serious  attempt  to  express  and 
understand  the  Notion  by  their  aid,  then  we  must  declare  that 
the  external  nature  of  all  symbols  is  inadequate :  the  relation 
is  the  opposite,  and  what  in  the  symbols  is  echo  of  a  higher 
determination  is  understood  only  through  the  Notion,  and 
can  be  approximated  to  it  only  by  the  elimination  of  every 
sensuous  accretion  which  was  meant  to  express  it. 


C 

THE  INDIVIDUAL 

Individuality,  as  was  seen,  is  posited  already  by  Particularity, 
which  is  determinate  Universality,  that  is,  self-relating  deter- 
minateness  or  the  determinate  determinate. 

i.  At  first  therefore  Individuality  appears  as  the  intro- 
Reflection  of  the  Notion  out  of  its  determinateness.  It  is  the 
self-mediation  of  the  Notion  in  so  far  as  its  otherness  has  made 
itself  into  an  Other,  whence  the  Notion  has  been  restored  as 
self-equal,  but  is  in  the  determination  of  absolute  negativity. — 
The  negative  in  the  universal  whereby  this  is  a  particular,  was 
determined  above  as  a  double  Show.  In  so  far  as  it  is  a  showing 
inwards,  the  particular  remains  a  universal ;  by  virtue  of  show- 
ing outwards,  it  is  a  determinate ;  and  the  return  of  this  side 
into  the  universal  is  of  double  kind, — either  by  means  of 
abstraction,  which  omits  the  particular  and  ascends  to  higher 
and  highest  genus, — or  by  means  of  Individuality,  to  which  the 
universal  itself  descends  in  determinateness. — At  this  point 
the  divagation  occurs  by  which  abstraction  leaves  the  road  of 
the  Notion  and  deserts  the  truth.  Its  higher  and  highest  uni- 
versal to  which  it  rises  is  but  the  surface  which  has  less  and  less 
content;  the  Individuality  which  it  scorns  is  that  profundity 
in  which  the  Notion  comprehends  itself  and  is  posited  as 
Notion. 

Universality  and  Particularity  on  the  one  hand  appeared  as 
the  moments  of  the  becoming  of  Individuality.  But  it  has  already 
been  shown  that  they  are  the  total  Notion  in  themselves,  and 
therefore  in  Individuality  do  not  pass  over  into  an  Other,  but 
that  only  that  is  posited  in  Individuality  which  they  are  in  and 


254  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

for  themselves.  The  universal  is  for  itself  because  in  itself  it  is 
absolute  mediation,  self-relation  only  as  absolute  negativity. 
It  is  abstract  universal  in  so  far  as  this  transcendence  is  an 
external  act  and  therefore  an  omission  of  determinateness. 
Thus  although  this  negativity  is  in  the  abstract,  yet  it  remains 
external  to  and  a  mere  condition  of  it :  it  is  abstraction  itself, 
which  retains  its  universal  over  against  itself,  so  that  the  latter 
has  not  in  itself  Individuality  and  remains  notionless. — Life, 
Spirit,  God,  and  also  the  pure  Notion  cannot  therefore  be 
apprehended  by  abstraction,  because  it  keeps  off  from  its 
products  Individuality,  the  principle  of  singularity  and  per- 
sonality, and  thus  reaches  nothing  but  universalities  lacking 
both  life  and  spirit,  colour  and  content. 

But  the  unity  of  the  Notion  is  so  inseparable  that  even  these 
products  of  abstraction,  while  they  are  supposed  to  omit 
Individuality,  are  individuals  themselves.  It  raises  the  concrete 
into  Universality,  and  takes  the  universal  only  as  determinate 
Universality:  but  then  this  is  just  Individuality  which  has 
resulted  in  the  shape  of  self-relating  determinateness.  Conse- 
quently abstraction  is  a  separation  of  the  concrete  and  an 
isolation  of  its  determinations :  it  seizes  only  individual  proper- 
ties and  moments,  for  its  product  must  contain  that  which  it  is 
itself.  The  distinction  between  this  individuality  of  its  products 
and  the  Individuality  of  the  Notion  is  that,  in  the  former,  the 
individual  as  content  and  the  universal  as  form  are  distinct 
from  each  other, — -just  because  the  former  does  not  exist  as 
absolute  form,  or  as  the  Notion  itself,  nor  the  latter  as  the 
totality  of  form. — But  this  closer  consideration  shows  the 
abstract  itself  as  unity  of  the  individual  content  and  abstract 
Universality,  that  is,  as  concrete, — which  is  the  opposite  of  what 
it  is  supposed  to  be. 

For  the  same  reason  (because  it  is  only  the  determinate 
universal)  the  particular  too  is  individual;  and,  conversely, 
because  the  individual  is  the  determinate  universal,  it  is  equally 
a  particular.  If  this  abstract  determinateness  is  retained,  the 
Notion  has 'three  separate  determinations — universal,  particu- 
lar, and  individual;  whereas  before  universal  and  particular 
alone  were  enumerated  as  species  of  the  particular.  Indivi- 
duality is  the  return  of  the  Notion,  as  negative,  to  itself;  and 
thus  this  return  from  abstraction,  which  really  is  transcended 


THE  NOTION  255 

in  it,  may  be  placed  and  counted  as  an  indifferent  moment  by 
the  side  of  the  others. 

Individuality  has  been  mentioned  as  one  of  the  particular 
determinations  of  the  Notion :  Particularity  is  the  totality  which 
comprehends  them  all ;  and,  as  this  totality,  it  is  their  concrete, 
or  Individuality  itself.  But  it  is  concrete  also  from  the  side 
(noticed  before)  of  determinate  Universality ;  and  thus  it  is 
immediate  unity,  in  which  no  one  of  these  moments  is  posited 
as  distinct  or  as  determining;  and  in  this  form  it  will  con- 
stitute the  middle  of  the  formal  Syllogism. 

It  is  obvious  that  every  determination  which  so  far  has  been 
made  in  the  exposition  of  the  Notion  has  dissolved  immediately 
and  lost  itself  in  its  other.  Every  distinction  confounds  itself 
under  the  scrutiny  which  is  meant  to  isolate  and  fix  it.  Only 
bare  imagination,  for  which  it  has  isolated  the  process  of 
abstraction,  can  steadfastly  keep  apart  universal,  particular, 
and  individual:  thus  they  can  be  counted,  and,  for  further 
distinction,  imagination  has  recourse  to  perfectly  external  Being, 
to  Quantity,  whose  place  is  nowhere  less  than  here. — In 
Individuality  the  inseparability  of  the  determinations  of  the 
Notion — their  true  relation — is  posited;  for,  as  negation  of 
negation,  it  contains  both  their  opposition  and  also  the  Notion 
in  ifc>  Ground  or  unity :  the  completed  coincidence  of  each  one 
with  its  other.  This  Reflection  contains  Universality  in  and  for 
itself:  it  is  therefore  essentially  the  negativity  of  the  deter- 
minations of  the  Notion, — and  this  not  only  as  though  it  were 
only  a  third  and  different  term  as  against  them,  but  it  is  posited 
that  positedness  is  Being-in-and-for-Self ;  that  is,  that  the  deter- 
minations which  belong  to  the  distinction  are  each  the  totality. 
The  return  to  itself  of  the  Determinate  Notion  is  this,  that  it 
has  the  determination  of  being,  in  its  determinateness,  the 
whole  Notion. 

2.  But  Individuality  is  not  only  the  return  of  the  Notion 
into  itself;  it  is  also  immediately  its  loss.  In  Individuality  it  is 
in  itself;  and,  because  of  the  manner  in  which  it  is  in  itself,  it 
becomes  external  to  itself  and  enters  into  actuality.:,  Abstraction 
is  the  soul  of  Individuality,  and,  as  such,  is  the  relation  of 
negative  to  negative ;  and  it,  as  has  been  seen,  is  not  external 
to  the  universal  and  the  particular  but  immanent;  and  they 
through  it  are  concrete,  content,  and  individual.  And  Indi- 


256  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

viduality  as  this  negativity  is  determinate  determinateness, 
is  distinguishing  as  such ;  through  this  introReflection  of  dis- 
tinction it  becomes  fixed ;  the  determining  of  the  particular 
takes  place  only  through  Individuality,  for  it  is  that  abstraction 
which  now,  as  Individuality,  is  posited  abstraction. 

The  individual,  then,  as  self-relating  negativity,  is  immediate 
self-identity  of  the  negative;  it  is-for-self.  In  other  words,  it  is 
abstraction  which  determines  the  Notion,  according  to  its 
moment  (which  is  of  ideal  nature)  of  Being,  as  immediate. — Thus 
the  individual  is  a  qualitative  One  or  This.  According  to  this 
quality  it  is,  first,  self-repulsion,  by  which  process  the  many 
other  Ones  are  presupposed;  and  secondly  it  is  negative 
relation  against  these  presupposed  others ;  and,  in  so  far,  the 
individual  is  exclusive.  If  Universality  is  related  to  these 
individuals  as  indifferent  Ones  (and  it  must  be  so  related 
because  it  is  a  moment  of  the  notion  of  Individuality),  then 
it  is  merely  their  common  element.  If  by  the  universal  is  meant 
that  which  is  common  to  more  than  one  individual,  then  the 
beginning  is  being  made  from  their  indifferent  persistence,  and 
the  immediacy  of  Being  is  mixed  with  the  determination  of  the 
Notion.  The  lowest  possible  image  of  the  universal  in  its  relation 
to  the  individual  is  this  external  relation  of  it  as  a  mere  common 
element. 

The  individual,  which  in  the  sphere  of  Reflection  belonging 
to  Existence  is  as  This,  has  not  the  exclusive  relation  to  other 
Ones  which  belongs  to  qualitative  Being-for-Self.  "This/*  as 
intro-reflected  One,  is,  for  itself,  without  repulsion ;  or,  repul- 
sion in  this  Reflection  is  one  with  abstraction,  and  is  reflecting 
mediation  which  appertains  to  This  in  such  a  manner  that 
it  is  a  posited  immediacy,  demonstrated  by  an  external  element. 
"This"  is ;  it  is  immediate;  but  it  is  This  only  in  so  far  as  it  is 
pointed  at.  And  pointing  is  that  reflecting  movement  which 
collects  itself  within  itself  and  posits  immediacy  as  something 
external  to  itself. — Now  the  individual  is  This,  since  it  is  an 
immediate  constructed  out  of  mediation ;  but  mediation  is  not 
external  to  it :  it  is  self-repelling  separation,  posited  abstraction, 
but  in  its  separation  it  is  itself  positive  relation. 

This  abstracting  of  the  individual  is,  first,  as  the  intro- 
Reflection of  distinction,  a  positing  as  independent  and  intro- 
reflected  of  the  distinct  terms.  They  are  immediate ;  but,  further, 


THE  NOTION  357 

this  separating  is  Reflection  in  general,  the  showing  of  one  in 
another;  they  are  thus  in  essential  relation.  But  further  they 
are  not  merely  existent  individuals  as  against  one  another; 
such  manyness  belongs  to  Being;  Individuality  which  posits 
itself  as  determinate  posits  itself  not  in  an  external  but  in  a 
notional  distinction ;  thus  it  excludes  the  universal  from  itself, 
but,  since  this  is  a  moment  of  itself,  the  latter  also  essentially 
relates  itself  to  it. 

The  Notion  as  this  relation  between  its  independent  deter- 
minations has  vanished ;  for  now  it  is  no  longer  their  posited 
unity,  and  they  are  no  longer  its  moments  or  Show,  but  persist 
in  and  for  themselves. — As  Individuality  the  Notion  returns 
to  itself  in  determinateness ;  and  thus  the  determinate  has 
become  totality  itself.  Its  return  to  itself  is  therefore  the  absolute 
and  original  division  of  itself;  or,  as  Individuality,  it  is  posited 
as  Judgment. 


CHAPTER   II 
THE  JUDGMENT 

THE  Judgment  is  the  determinateness  of  the  Notion  posited  in 
the  Notion  itself.  The  determinations  of  the  Notion  (or,  which 
is  the  same  thing,  as  we  saw,  the  determinate  Notions)  have 
already  been  considered  by  themselves ;  but  this  consideration 
was  rather  a  subjective  reflection  or  subjective  abstraction. 
But  the  Notion  is  itself  this  process  of  abstraction :  the  opposing 
of  its  determinations  is  its  own  determining.  The  Judgment  is 
this  positing  of  determinate  Notions  through  the  Notion  itself. 

Judgment  is  a  different  function  from  the  forming  of  Notions 
(or  rather,  it  is  the  other  function  of  the  Notion),  in  so  far  as 
it  is  the  self-determination  of  the  Notion;  and  the  further 
progress  of  the  Judgment  into  the  variety  of  Judgments  is  this 
progressive  determination  of  the  Notion.  What  determinate 
Notions  there  are,  and  how  these  its  determinations  yield  them- 
selves necessarily,  will  have  to  be  shown  in  the  Judgment. 

Consequently  the  Judgment  may  be  called  the  next  realiza- 
tion of  the  Notion,  in  so  far  as  reality  designates  as  determinate 
Being  in  general  an  entry  into  existence.  More  precisely  the 
nature  of  this  realization  has  appeared  to  be  this,  that,  first, 
the  moments  of  the  Notion,  by  virtue  of  its  intro-Reflection  or 
its  Individuality,  are  independent  totalities,  while,  secondly, 
the  unity  of  the  Notion  exists  as  their  relation.  The  intro- 
reflected  determinations  are  determinate  totalities  as  essentially 
in  their  indifferent  and  unrelated  persistence,  as  in  reciprocal 
mediation.  The  act  of  determining,  itself,  is  totality  only  in  so 
far  as  it  contains  these  totalities  and  their  relation.  This  totality 
is  the  Judgment. — First,  then,  it  contains  the  two  independent 
terms  which  are  called  subject  and  predicate.  It  is  not  yet  properly 
possible  to  gay  what  each  is:  they  are  as  yet  indeterminate, 
for  they  are  to  be  determined  only  by  the  Judgment.  In  so  far 
as  the  Judgment  is  the  Notion  as  determinate  Notion,  only 
this  general  mutual  distinction  is  present,  that  the  Judgment 
contains  the  determinate  Notion  as  against  that  which  still 


THE  JUDGMENT  259 

remains  indeterminate.  At  this  point,  then,  subject  may  be 
taken  against  predicate  as  individual  against  universal,  or  again 
as  particular,  in  so  far  as  they  are  opposed  to  each  other  at 
all  as  more  determinate  and  more  universal. 

It  is  consequently  fit  and  necessary  to  have  these  names  of 
subject  and  predicate  for  the  determinations  of  the  Judgment ; 
as  names  they  are  something  indeterminate  which  still  awaits 
its  determination;  consequently  they  are  not  more  than  names. 
Determinations  of  the  Notion  themselves  could  not  be  used  for 
the  two  sides  of  the  Judgment,  partly  for  this  reason,  and  partly 
(and  more  particularly)  because  the  nature  of  the  determina- 
tion of  the  Notion  reveals  itself  as  being  not  abstract  and  fixed, 
but  as  containing,  and  positing  in  itself,  its  opposites.  The  sides 
of  the  Judgment  are  themselves  Notions  (that  is,  the  totality 
of  its  determinations) ;  they  must  thus  pass  through  the  whole 
scale  of  the  latter  and  show  them  in  themselves,  whether  in 
abstract  or  concrete  form.  Now,  in  order  to  fix  in  a  general 
manner  the  sides  of  the  Judgment  during  this  change  of  their 
determination,  names,  which  remain  unchanged,  will  serve 
best. — But  the  name  stands  opposed  to  the  fact  or  Notion ;  this 
distinction  occurs  in  the  Judgment  as  such.  The  subject  in 
general  expresses  the  determinate  and  therefore  rather  that 
which  is  immediately;  the  predicate  expresses  the  universal 
(namely  the  essence  or  the  Notion) ;  and  thus  the  subject  as 
such  is  at  first  only  a  kind  of  name ;  for  it  is  only  the  predicate 
(which  contains  Being  within  the  meaning  of  the  Notion)  that 
expresses  what  it  is.  When  it  is  asked  what  this  w,  or  what  kind 
of  a  plant  this  is,  and  so  on,  the  name  alone  often  is  meant, 
and  no  other  kind  of  Being,  and  when  the  enquirer  has  learnt 
this  he  is  satisfied  and  knows  what  the  thing  is.  This  is  Being 
within  the  meaning  of  the  subject.  But  only  the  predicate 
furnishes  the  Notion,  or  at  least  the  essence  and  the  universal 
in  general,  and  it  is  this  that  is  asked  for  within  the  meaning 
of  the  Judgment. — As  subject  of  a  Judgment,  therefore,  God, 
Spirit,  Nature,  or  whatever  else  it  may  be,  is  only  the  name : 
what  such  a  subject  is  according  to  the  Notion  i^  given  only 
in  the  predicate.  If  the  predicate  proper  to  such  a  subject  is 
looked  for,  then  a  Notion  must  already  be  implied  to  furnish 
a  ground  for  judgment;  but  it  is  only  the  predicate  that 
expresses  this  Notion.  Really  therefore  the  mere  image  con- 


2tk>  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

stitutes  the  presupposed  significance  of  the  subject  and  leads 
to  a  declaration  of  name ;  and  what  is  or  is  not  understood  by  a 
name  is  a  historical  fact,  and  contingent.  Many  controversies 
whether  a  predicate  is  proper  or  not  to  a  certain  subject  are 
therefore  no  more  than  verbal  disputes,  because  they  begin 
from  this  form;  that  which  lies  at  the  bottom  (subiectumy 
VTTOKtlntvov)  is  as  yet  no  more  than  the  name. 

Secondly,  it  remains  to  consider  more  closely  how  the  relation 
of  subject  and  predicate  in  the  Judgment  is  determined,  and 
how  they  themselves  are,  in  the  first  instance,  determined  by 
it.  The  Judgment  has  for  its  sides  totalities,  which  here  exist 
as  essentially  independent.  The  unity  of  the  Notion  is  conse- 
quently only  a  relation  of  independent  terms ;  it  is  not  yet  the 
concrete  or  completed  unity,  which  has  returned  to  itself  out 
of  this  reality,  but  a  unity  outside  of  which  they  persist  as 
extremes  which  are  not  transcended  in  it. — Now  the  con- 
sideration of  the  Judgment  may  begin  from  the  original  unity 
of  the  Notion  or  from  the  independence  of  the  extremes.  The 
Judgment  is  the  self-diremption  of  the  Notion :  consequently 
this  unity  is  the  foundation  from  which  it  is  considered  in  its 
true  objectivity.  In  so  far  the  Judgment  is  the  original  division 
(urspriingliche  Teilung)  of  the  original  One:  the  word  ' Judg- 
ment55 (Urteil)  thus  refers  to  what  it  is  in  and  for  itself.  That 
side  of  externality,  on  the  other  hand,  by  which  the  Notion 
is  in  the  Judgment  in  the  shape  of  appearance  (since  its 
moments  have  therein  attained  independence)  is  favoured 
rather  by  imagination. 

In  this  subjective  consideration,  then,  subject  and  predicate 
are  each  considered  as  complete  by  itself  apart  from  the  other : 
the  subject  as  an  object  which  would  exist  even  if  it  had  not 
this  predicate;  and  the  predicate  as  a  general  determination 
which  would  exist  even  if  it  did  not  belong  to  this  subject. 
Accordingly  judging  is  associated  with  the  reflection  whether 
this  or  that  predicate,  which  is  in  the  mind,  can  and  ought 
to  be  attached  to  the  subject,  which  exists  externally  by  itself; 
and  judging  itself  consists  in  this,  that  only  by  this  process  a 
predicate  is  connected  with  the  subject  in  such  a  manner  that, 
if  this  connexion  did  not  take  place,  each  for  itself  would  still 
remain  what  it  is — the  one  an  existing  subject  and  the  other 
an  image  in  the  mind. — But  the  predicate  which  is  attached 


THE  JUDGMENT  261 

to  the  subject  ought  also  to  be  proper  to  it,  that  is,  to  be 
identical  with  it  in  and  for  itself.  Through  this  meaning  of 
attachment,  the  subjective  significance  of  judging  and  the 
indifferent  external  persistence  of  subject  and  predicate  are 
transcended  again.  "This  action  is  good" :  the  copula  denotes 
that  the  predicate  belongs  to  the  Being  of  the  subject,  and  is 
not  connected  with  it  merely  externally.  In  the  grammatical 
sense  this  subjective  relation,  in  which  a  beginning  is  made 
from  the  indifferent  externality  of  subject  and  predicate,  has 
complete  validity;  for  the  terms  which  here  are  externally 
connected  are  words. — It  may  be  mentioned  in  this  context 
that  a  sentence  has  a  subject  and  predicate  in  the  grammatical 
sense,  but  is  not  necessarily  a  Judgment  for  that  reason.  A 
Judgment  requires  that  predicate  should  be  related  to  subject 
as  the  determinations  of  the  Notion  are  related,  that  is,  as 
universal  to  particular  or  individual.  If  that  which  is  predicated 
of  the  individual  subject  itself  only  expresses  an  individual  fact, 
then  this  is  a  mere  sentence.  Thus  it  is  a  sentence,  and  not 
a  Judgment,  that  Aristotle  died  in  his  seventy-third  year  and 
in  the  fourth  year  of  the  H5th  Olympiad.  The  sentence  would 
contain  an  element  of  Judgment  only  if  one  of  the  circumstances 
—the  time  of  death  or  the  age  of  this  philosopher — had  been 
questioned,  and  the  numbers  stated  were  nevertheless  for  some 
reason  upheld.  For  in  this  case  they  would  be  taken  as  some- 
thing universal,  as  time  having  some  other  filling  and  persisting 
apart  from  that  determinate  content,  the  death  of  Aristotle, 
or  even  as  empty  time.  Thus  the  news  "My  friend  N.  has  died" 
is  a  sentence,  and  would  be  a  Judgment  only  if  the  question 
were  whether  he  is  really  dead  or  only  appears  to  be. 

Judgment  is  usually  explained  as  being  the  connexion  of  two 
Notions,  and  for  the  external  copula  the  indefinite  expression 
of  connexion  may  be  allowed ;  and  it  may  also  be  allowed  that 
the  connected  terms  are  at  least  supposed  to  be  Notions.  But 
otherwise  this  explanation  is  most  superficial :  for  instance  in  the 
Disjunctive  Judgment  more  than  two  so-called  Notions  are 
connected ;  and,  quite  apart  from  this,  the  explanartion  is  much 
better  than  the  fact;  for  not  Notions  are  meant  here,  hardly 
even  determinations  of  the  Notion,  but  properly  only  deter- 
minations of  imagination.  It  was  observed  under  Notion  in 
general  and  under  Determinate  Notion  that  what  commonly 


262  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

is  designated  as  such  in  no  way  deserves  the  name  of  Notion ; 
whence  then  could  Notions  be  derived  in  the  Judgment? — In 
that  explanation,  above  all,  the  essential  part  of  the  Judgment, 
namely  the  distinction  of  its  determinations,  is  passed  over; 
and  the  relation  of  the  Judgment  to  the  Notion  is  even  less 
regarded. 

With  regard  to  the  further  determination  of  subject  and 
predicate,  it  has  been  mentioned  that  they  have  really  to 
receive  their  determination  only  in  the  Judgment.  In  so  far  as 
the  Judgment  is  the  posited  determinateness  of  the  Notion, 
it  contains  the  distinctions  stated,  immediately  and  abstractly, 
as  Individuality  and  Universality. — But,  in  so  far  as  it  is  the 
Determinate  Being  or  otherness  of  the  Notion  (which  has  not 
yet  reconstituted  itself  into  that  unity  in  which  it  is  as  Notion), 
in  so  far  notionless  determinateness  emerges — the  opposition 
between  Being  and  Reflection  or  Being-in-Self.  But  the  Notion 
constitutes  the  essential  ground  of  Judgment,  and  therefore 
these  determinations  are  indifferent  at  least  in  this  way,  that, 
while  one  belongs  to  the  subject  and  the  other  to  the  predicate, 
this  relation  also  holds  in  a  converse  manner.  The  subject  as 
the  individual  appears  at  first  as  that  which  is  or  is-for-self 
according  to  the  determinate  determinateness  of  the  individual 
— as  an  actual  object  even  although  it  is  object  only  of  imagina- 
tion,— for  instance,  as  courage,  law,  harmony,  and  so  forth — 
about  which  a  judgment  is  made.  The  predicate,  on  the  other 
hand,  as  the  universal,  appears  as  this  reflection  about  the 
object,  or  rather  as  its  intro-Reflection,  which  passes  beyond 
that  immediacy  and  transcends  the  determinatenesses  as  merely 
being:  it  appears  as  the  object's  Being-in-Self. — In  so  far  a 
beginning  is  made  from  the  individual  as  first  and  immediate, 
and  it  is  raised  into  universality  by  the  Judgment;  while 
conversely  the  universal  which  is  merely  in-itself  descends  into 
Determinate  Being  in  the  individual,  or  becomes  something 
which  is-for-self. 

This  significance  of  the  Judgment  must  be  taken  as  its 
objective  meaning  and  also  as  the  true  one  among  the  earlier 
forms  of  transition.  What  has  Being  becomes  and  changes; 
Finite  is  submerged  in  Infinite ;  the  Existent  emerges  out  of  its 
Ground  into  Appearance  and  perishes ;  Accident  manifests  the 
riches  of  Substance  and  its  power ;  in  Being  there  is  transition 


THE  JUDGMENT  263 

into  other  and  in  Essence  showing  in  an  other,  wherein  the 
necessary  relation  reveals  itself.  This  transition  and  showing  have 
now  passed  over  into  the  original  dividing  of  the  Notion,  which, 
leading  back  the  Individual  into  the  Being-in-Self  of  its  Univer- 
sality, equally  determines  the  Universal  as  actual.  That  Indi- 
viduality is  posited  in  its  intro-Reflection,  and  the  Universal 
as  determinate — these  two  processes  are  one  and  the  same. 

But  this  must  be  added  to  this  objective  significance,  that 
the  distinctions  which  have  been  mentioned,  when  they  re- 
emerge  in  the  determinateness  of  the  Notion,  are  at  the  same 
time  posited  as  only  appearing,  that  is,  as  not  fixed,  but  as 
applying  to  one  determination  of  Notion  as  well  as  to  the 
other.  Consequently  the  subject  may  equally  well  be  taken  as 
Being-in-Self,  and  the  predicate  as  Determinate  Being.  Thus 
the  subject  without  predicate  is  like  the  Thing  without  Proper- 
ties, the  Thing-in-itself,  in  Appearance, — it  is  an  empty  and 
indeterminate  Ground;  thus  it  is  the  Notion  in  itself,  which 
receives  a  distinction  and  determinateness  only  in  the  predi- 
cate ;  the  latter  then  constitutes  the  side  of  Determinate  Being 
in  the  subject.  By  virtue  of  this  determinate  universality  the 
subject  stands  in  relation  to  the  outside,  is  open  to  the  influence 
of  other  things,  and  thus  enters  into  activity  as  against  them. 
That  which  exists  passes  out  of  its  Being-in-Self  into  the  uni- 
versal element  of  connexion  and  relations,  into  the  negative 
relations  and  reciprocal  play  of  actuality ;  this  is  a  continuation 
of  the  Individual  into  others,  that  is,  Universality. 

The  identity  which  has  just  been  demonstrated — namely, 
that  the  determination  of  the  subject  also  applies  to  the  pre- 
dicate, and  conversely — does  not  belong  to  this  consideration 
alone ;  it  is  not  only  in  itself,  but  is  also  posited  in  the  Judgment ; 
for  the  Judgment  is  the  relation  of  the  two,  and  the  copula 
expresses  that  the  subject  is  the  predicate.  The  subject  is  deter- 
minate determinateness,  and  the  predicate  is  this  its  posited 
determinateness ;  the  subject  is  determinate  only  in  its  predi- 
cate, or,  it  is  subject  in  it  alone ;  it  has  returned  to  itself  in 
the  predicate,  and  is  in  it  the  universal. — But  in  -so  far  as  the 
subject  is  the  independent,  this  identity  has  the  relation  that 
the  predicate  has  no  independent  persistence  for  itself,  but  only 
in  the  subject,  in  which  it  inheres.  In  so  far  as  now  the  pre- 
dicate is  distinguished  from  the  subject,  it  is  only  an  isolated 


2t>4  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

determinateness  of  the  latter,  only  one  among  its  properties ; 
while  the  subject  itself  is  the  concrete,  the  totality  of  those 
manifold  determinatenesses,  of  which  the  predicate  contains 
one ;  it  is  the  universal. — But  on  the  other  hand  the  predicate 
too  is  independent  universality,  and  the  subject  conversely  is 
only  one  of  its  determinations.  To  this  extent  the  predicate 
subsumes  the  subject:  neither  individuality  nor  particularity 
is  for  itself,  but  each  has  its  essence  and  its  substance  in  the 
universal.  The  predicate  expresses  the  subject  in  its  Notion; 
individual  and  particular  are  contingent  determinations  of  it, 
and  it  is  their  absolute  possibility.  When  in  subsumption  an 
external  relation  of  subject  and  predicate  is  present  before  the 
mind,  and  the  subject  is  imagined  as  independent,  then  the 
subsumption  refers  to  the  above-mentioned  subjective  judging 
in  which  the  beginning  is  made  from  the  independence  of  both. 
Thus  subsumption  is  no  more  than  the  application  of  the 
universal  to  a  particular  or  individual,  which,  according  to 
an  indeterminate  imagination,  is  posited  under  it,  as  being  of 
inferior  quality. 

The  identity  of  subject  and  predicate  has  been  considered 
in  such  a  way  that  (a)  one  determination  of  the  Notion  belongs 
to  the  former  and  the  other  to  the  latter,  and  (b)  the  converse 
happens, — thus  the  identity  still  is  one  which  is  in  itself;  and 
because  of  the  independent  distinctness  of  the  two  sides  of  the 
Judgment,  their  posited  relation  also  has  these  two  sides,  which 
at  this  point  are  different.  But  really  distinctionless  identity 
constitutes  the  true  relation  of  subject  to  predicate.  The  deter- 
mination of  the  Notion  is  essentially  itself  relation,  for  it  is  a 
universal ;  hence  their  relation  itself  has  the  same  determina- 
tions that  subject  and  predicate  have.  The  relation  is  universal, 
for  it  is  the  positive  identity  of  these  two,  subject  and  predicate ; 
but  it  is  also  determinate,  for  the  determinateness  of  the  pre- 
dicate is  that  of  the  subject;  and  further  it  is  also  individual, 
since  in  it  the  independent  extremes  (as  being  in  their  negative 
unity)  are  transcended. — But  in  the  Judgment  this  identity  has 
not  yet  beeli  posited;  the  copula  exists  as  the  relation  (as  yet 
indeterminate)  of  Being  in  general :  A  is  B ;  for  the  indepen- 
dence of  the  determinatenesses  of  the  Notion,  or  of  the  extremes, 
is,  in  the  Judgment,  the  reality  which  the  Notion  has  at  this 
point.  If  the  "is"  of  the  copula  were  already  posited  as  this 


THE  JUDGMENT  265 

determinate  and  completed  unity  of  subject  and  predicate,  or 
as  their  Notion,  then  it  would  already  be  Syllogism. 

It  is  the  aim  of  the  movement  of  the  Judgment  to  recon- 
stitute this  identity  of  the  Notion,  or,  rather,  to  posit  it.  What 
is  already  given  in  the  Judgment  is  partly  the  independence 
but  also  the  determinateness  of  subject  and  predicate  as  against 
each  other,  and  partly  also  their  relation,  which,  however, 
is  abstract.  The  Judgment  at  first  affirms  that  the  subject  is 
the  predicate;  but,  since  the  predicate  is  held  not  to  be  what 
the  subject  is,  there  is  a  contradiction  which  must  be  resolved, 
or  pass  over  into  some  result.  But,  since  in  and  for  themselves 
subject  and  predicate  are  the  totality  of  the  Notion  and  the 
Judgment  is  the  reality  of  the  Notion,  its  progress  is  only 
development.  It  already  contains  what  emerges  in  it,  and  in 
so  far  the  demonstration  is  only  a  monstration,  a  Reflection 
as  a  positing  of  that  which  is  already  given  in  the  extremes 
of  the  Judgment.  But  this  positing  too  is  already  given :  it  is 
the  relation  of  the  extremes. 

The  Judgment  in  its  immediacy  is,  first,  the  Judgment  of 
Inherence ;  its  subject  is,  immediately,  an  abstract,  existent 
individual,  and  the  predicate  is  an  immediate  determinateness 
or  property  of  it — an  abstract  universal. 

This  qualitative  element  in  subject  and  predicate  transcends 
itself,  and  the  determination  of  one  shows  in  the  other:  the 
Judgment  now  is,  secondly,  the  Judgment  of  Subsumption. 

But  this  somewhat  external  coincidence  passes  over  into  the 
essential  identity  of  a  substantial  and  necessary  connexion ;  thus, 
thirdly,  it  is  the  Judgment  of  Necessity. 

Fourthly,  in  this  essential  identity  the  distinction  between 
subject  and  predicate  has  become  a  form,  and  so  the  Judgment 
becomes  subjective;  it  contains  the  opposition  between  the 
Notion  and  its  reality,  and  the  comparison  of  both :  it  is  the 
Judgment  of  the  Notion. 

This  emergence  of  the  Notion  is  the  foundation  of  the 
transition  of  the  Judgment  into  the  Syllogism. 


266  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

A 
THE  JUDGMENT  OF  INHERENCE 

In  the  subjective  Judgment  the  attempt  is  made  to  see  one 
and  the  same  object  twofold, — first  in  its  individual  actuality, 
secondly  in  its  essential  identity,  or  in  its  Notion :  the  individual 
raised  to  its  universality,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  uni- 
versal individualized  into  its  actuality.  In  this  manner  the 
Judgment  is  truth ;  for  it  is  the  agreement  of  Notion  and  reality. 
At  first,  however,  this  is  not  the  nature  of  the  Judgment ;  for  at 
first  it  is  immediate,  since  as  yet  no  Reflection  and  movement 
of  determinations  have  come  to  light  in  it.  This  immediacy 
makes  the  first  Judgment  to  be  a  Judgment  of  Determinate 
Being,  which  may  also  be  called  qualitative,  but  only  in  so  far 
as  Quality  not  only  belongs  to  the  determinateness  of  Being 
but  also  includes  abstract  universality,  which,  because  of  its 
simplicity,  has  also  the  form  of  immediacy. 

The  Judgment  of  Determinate  Being  is  also  the  Judgment 
of  Inherence ;  immediacy  is  its  determination,  and,  in  the  dis- 
tinction between  subject  and  predicate,  the  former  is  the  imme- 
diate element  and  therefore  is  the  essential  and  logically  first 
part  in  this  Judgment ;  hence  the  predicate  is  formally  a  depen- 
dent element  which  has  its  foundation  in  the  subject. 

(a)  THE  POSITIVE  JUDGMENT 

i .  As  has  already  been  mentioned,  subject  and  predicate  are 
at  first  names  whose  real  determination  is  reached  only  in  the 
course  of  the  Judgment.  But,  as  sides  of  the  Judgment  (which 
is  posited  determinate  Notion),  they  have  the  determination 
of  being  its  moments ;  but,  because  of  their  immediacy,  they 
are  as  yet  quite  simple, — partly  as  they  have  not  been  enriched 
by  mediation,  and  partly  because  they  are  abstractly  opposed 
as  abstract  individuality  and  universality. — The  predicate  (to 
discuss  this^first)  is  the  abstract  universal ;  but  the  abstract  is 
conditioned  through  the  mediation  of  the  transcendence  of  the 
individual  or  particular,  and  therefore,  in  so  far,  this  mediation 
is  only  a  presupposition.  In  the  sphere  of  the  Notion  there 
can  be  no  other  immed^y  than  one  which  contains  mediation 


THE  JUDGMENT  267 

in  and  for  itself  and  has  arisen  only  out  of  the  transcendence 
thereof— a  universal  immediacy.  Thus  also  qualitative  Being 
itself  is  in  its  Notion  a  universal ;  but,  as  Being,  universality 
has  not  yet  been  posited  in  this  manner :  only  as  universality 
does  it  become  that  determination  of  the  Notion  in  which  it  is 
posited  that  negativity  essentially  belongs  to  it.  This  relation 
is  present  in  the  Judgment,  where  it  is  the  predicate  of  a 
subject. — In  the  same  manner  the  subject  is  an  entity  which 
is  abstractly  individual,  or,  the  immediate  which  is  supposed 
to  be  as  such :  it  must  therefore  be  the  individual  as  a  Some- 
thing in  general.  In  so  far  the  subject  constitutes  the  abstract 
side  in  the  Judgment,  according  to  which  the  Notion  in  it  has 
passed  over  into  externality. — In  the  same  manner  that  the 
two  determinations  of  Notion  are  determined,  their  relation, 
the  "is,"  or  copula,  is  determined :  it  too  can  have  the  meaning 
only  of  an  immediate  and  abstract  Being.  This  Judgment  is 
called  the  Positive  from  the  relation,  which  as  yet  contains  no 
mediation  nor  negation. 

2.  Hence  the  next  pure  expression  of  the  Positive  Judgment 
is  this  proposition:  "The  individual  is  universal." 

This  expression  must  not  be  understood  as  Ais  B\  for  A  and  B 
are  perfectly  formless  and  therefore  meaningless  names ;  while 
Judgment  in  general  (and,  consequently,  even  the  Judgment 
of  Inherence)  has  determinations  of  Notion  for  its  extremes. 
A  is  B  can  represent  any  mere  proposition  as  well  as  a  Judg- 
ment. But  in  every  Judgment  (even  in  that  which  by  its  form 
is  determined  as  a  richer  one)  the  proposition  of  this  deter- 
minate content  is  asserted:  "the  individual  is  universal" — that 
is,  in  so  far  as  every  Judgment  is  also  abstract  Judgment  in 
general.  Negative  Judgment,  and  the  question  how  far  it  also 
must  fall  under  this  expression,  will  be  discussed  presently. — It 
is  usually  forgotten  that  in  every  Judgment  (or  at  least  in  every 
Positive  Judgment)  the  assertion  is  made  that  the  individual 
is  a  universal ;  and  this  happens,  partly  because  the  determinate 
form  through  which  subject  and  predicate  are  distinguished  is 
overlooked  (since  the  Judgment  is  thought  to  be  nothing  more 
than  the  relation  of  two  Notions) ;  and  partly  perhaps  because 
the  further  content  of  such  a  Judgment  as  "Gaius  is  learned" 
or  "the  rose  is  red"  is  vaguely  present  before  consciousness, 
which,  busy  with  the  image  of  Gaius  or  the  rose,  does  not 


268  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

reflect  upon  the  form ;  although  such  a  content  at  least  as  the 
Gaius  of  logic  (who  usually  must  furnish  the  example)  is  an 
exceedingly  uninteresting  content,  and  indeed  is  selected  to  be 
uninteresting  in  order  not  to  distract  attention  from  the  form 
to  itself. 

In  its  objective  significance  the  proposition  that  the  individual 
is  universal  denotes  (as  was  mentioned  above  in  passing)  partly 
the  perishable  nature  of  individual  things  and  partly  their 
positive  persistence  in  the  Notion  in  general.  The  Notion  itself 
is  immortal,  but  that  which  in  its  separation  emerges  from  it 
is  subject  to  change  and  to  the  regress  into  its  universal  nature. 
But,  conversely,  the  universal  achieves  a  Determinate  Being. 
Essence  passes  out  into  Show  in  its  determinations,  Ground 
into  the  Appearance  of  Existence,  and  Substance  into  Mani- 
festation and  into  its  Accidents;  and  similarly  the  universal 
unfolds  itself  into  the  individual :  Judgment  is  this  its  unlocking, 
the  development  of  that  negativity  which  in  itself  it  is  already. 
—This  latter  fact  is  expressed  in  the  converse  proposition  that 
the  universal  is  individual,  which  is  equally  asserted  in  the  Positive 
Judgment.  The  subject,  being,  at  first,  that  which  is  immediately 
individual,  is  related  in  the  Judgment  itself  to  its  Other,  namely 
the  universal ;  it  is  thus  posited  as  the  Concrete :  as  Being  it 
is  posited  as  a  Something  of  many  qualities,  or,  as  the  concrete 
of  Reflection,  as  a  Thing  of  manifold  Properties,  an  Actual  of 
manifold  Possibilities,  or  a  Substance  of  manifold  Accidents. 
These  manifolds  here  belong  to  the  subject  of  the  Judgment ; 
hence  the  Something  or  Thing  or  whatever  it  may  be  is  intro- 
reflected  in  its  qualities,  properties,  or  accidents,  or  continues 
itself  through  them,  preserving  itself  in  them  and  equally  them 
in  it.  Positedness  or  determinateness  belongs  to  Being-in-and- 
for-Self.  Consequently  the  subject  is  the  universal  in  itself. — 
The  predicate  on  the  other  hand,  as  abstract,  and  not  real  or 
concrete,  universality,  is  determinateness  as  against  the  subject, 
and  contains  only  one  moment  of  the  totality  of  the  subject 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  others.  Because  of  this  negativity,  which, 
at  the  same*  time,  as  extreme  of  the  Judgment,  refers  itself  to 
itself,  the  predicate  is  abstractly  individual. — Thus  in  the 
proposition  "the  rose  is  fragrant55  it  expresses  one  only  of  the 
many  properties  of  the  rose ;  it  isolates  the  property  which,  in 
the  subject,  is  commingled  with  the  others,  just  as,  in  the  dis- 


THE  JUDGMENT  269 

solution  of  the  thing,  the  manifold  properties  which  inhere  in 
it  become  matters,  grow  independent,  and  are  thus  isolated. 
According  to  this  side  therefore  the  proposition  of  the  Judgment 
runs :  the  universal  is  individual. 

In  the  Judgment  this  reciprocal  determination  of  subject  and 
predicate  is  gathered  in  one  point,  with  this  twofold  result. 
First,  the  subject  exists  immediately  as  that  which  z>,  as  the 
individual,  and  the  predicate  as  the  universal.  But  the  Judg- 
ment is  the  relation  of  the  two,  and  the  subject  is  determined 
as  universal  by  the  predicate,  and  therefore  the  subject  is  the 
universal.  Secondly,  the  predicate  is  determined  in  the  subject ; 
for  it  is  not  any  determination  in  general,  but  a  determination 
of  the  subject.  "The  rose  is  fragrant" ;  and  this  fragrance  is  not 
any  indeterminate  fragrance,  but  that  of  the  rose.  Thus  the 
predicate  is  an  individual. — Now  subject  and  predicate  stand 
in  the  relation  of  Judgment,  and  therefore  they  ought  to  remain 
opposed,  according  to  the  determinations  of  the  Notion ;  as  in 
the  reciprocal  action  of  Causality,  before  they  have  reached 
their  truth,  the  two  sides  ought  to  remain  independent  and 
opposite,  against  the  equality  of  their  determination.  Conse- 
quently, if  the  subject  is  determined  as  universal,  its  deter- 
mination of  universality  must  not  also  be  taken  up  by  the 
predicate  (else  no  Judgment  could  arise),  but  only  its  deter- 
mination of  individuality;  while  in  so  far  as  the  subject  is 
determined  as  individual,  the  predicate  must  be  taken  as 
universal. — If  this  mere  identity  is  considered,  two  propositions 
of  identity  appear: — 

The  individual  is  individual; 

The  universal  is  universal. 

Here  the  determinations  of  the  Judgment  would  have  fallen 
quite  apart,  only  their  self-relation  would  be  expressed ;  while 
their  reciprocal  relation  would  be  dissolved,  and  the  Judgment 
thus  cancelled. — Of  these  two  propositions  one  (the  universal  is 
individual}  expresses  the  Judgment  according  to  its  content, 
which  in  the  predicate  is  an  isolated  determination,  but  in  the 
subject  is  its  totality;  the  other  (the  individual  is  universal}  ex- 
presses the  form,  which  is  given  immediately  in  the  proposition 
itself. — In  the  immediate  Positive  Judgment  the  extremes  are 
still  simple;  consequently  form  and  content  are  still  at  one. 
Or,  the  Judgment  does  not  consist  of  two  propositions :  the 


C70  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

double  relation,  which  arose  in  it,  immediately  constitutes  the 
one  Positive  Judgment.  For  its  extremes  are  (a)  the  independent, 
abstract  determinations  of  the  Judgment ;  and  (b)  each  side  is 
determined  by  the  other  through  the  copula  which  relates 
them.  But  in  itself,  for  this  reason,  the  distinction  of  form  and 
content  is  present  in  the  Judgment,  as  it  has  resulted ;  and  the 
content  of  the  first  proposition  (the  individual  is  universal)  belongs 
to  form,  because  it  expresses  the  immediate  determinate- 
ness  of  the  Judgment.  But  the  relation  which  is  expressed  by 
the  other  proposition  (the  universal  is  individual), — that  is,  that 
the  subject  is  determined  as  universal  and  the  predicate 
as  particular  or  individual, — affects  content  because  its  deter- 
minations arise  only  through  intro-Reflection,  whereby  the 
immediate  determinatenesses  are  cancelled,  and  thus  the  form 
constitutes  itself  an  identity  which  has  coincided  with  itself; 
it  persists  against  the  distinction  of  form,  and  is  content. 

3.  There  are  two  propositions,  one  of  form  and  one  of 
content : — 

(Subject)  (Predicate) 

The  individual  is  universal; 

The  universal  is  individual. 

If  now  these  two  propositions,  because  they  are  contained  in 
one  Positive  Judgment,  were  united,  so  that  both,  subject  as 
well  as  predicate,  were  determined  as  unity  of  individuality  and 
universality,  then  both  would  be  the  particular,  and  this  in 
itself  must  be  recognized  as  their  inner  determination.  But  then, 
partly,  this  connexion  would  only  have  been  effected  by  an 
external  reflection,  and  partly  the  resulting  proposition  the 
particular  is  the  particular  would  no  longer  be  a  Judgment,  but 
an  empty  proposition  of  identity,  like  the  propositions  which 
were  already  discovered,  the  individual  is  individual  and  the 
universal  is  universal. — Individuality  and  universality  cannot  yet 
be  united  into  particularity,  because  in  the  Positive  Judgment 
they  are  still  posited  as  immediate. — Or,  the  Judgment  must 
still  be  distinguished  according  to  its  form  and  to  its  content, 
just  because  subject  and  predicate  are  still  distinguished  as 
immediacy  and  mediated  respectively,  or  because  the  Judg- 
ment according  to  its  relation  is  both  independence  of  the 
related  terms,  and  their  reciprocal  determination  or  mediation* 


THE  JUDGMENT  271 

First,  then,  the  Judgment,  considered  according  to  its  form, 
runs : — 

The  individual  is  universal.  But  such  an  immediate  individual 
is  not  universal ;  its  predicate  is  more  comprehensive  and  thus 
does  not  correspond  to  it.  The  subject  is  an  entity  which  is 
immediately  for  itself,  and  consequently  is  the  opposite  of  that 
abstraction  (namely,  universality  posited  by  mediation)  which 
was  to  be  predicated  of  it. 

Secondly,  if  the  Judgment  is  considered  according  to  its  con- 
tent (or  as  the  proposition  the  universal  is  individual),  the  subject 
is  a  universal  of  qualities,  a  concrete,  which  is  determined  as 
infinite ;  its  determinatenesses  are  only  qualities,  properties,  or 
accidents,  and  therefore  its  totality  is  their  infinite  number  in 
the  bad  sense.  Such  a  subject  therefore  is  not  such  an  individual 
property  as  its  predicate  affirms  it  to  be.  Both  propositions 
must  therefore  be  negated ;  and  the  Positive  Judgment  must 
be  posited  as  Negative. 

(b]  NEGATIVE  JUDGMENT 

i.  We  have  already  mentioned  the  common  idea  that  the 
truth  or  untruth  of  a  Judgment  depends  only  upon  its  content, 
logical  truth  relating  to  nothing  but  the  form  and  demanding 
only  that  the  content  shall  not  be  self-contradictory.  The  form 
of  the  Judgment  is  held  to  be  made  up  only  of  the  relation  of 
two  Notions.  But  it  was  seen  that  these  two  Notions  have  not 
only  the  relationless  determination  of  an  Amount,  but  that 
they  are  related  as  individual  and  universal.  These  deter- 
minations constitute  the  truly  logical  content,  which  in  this 
abstraction  is  the  content  of  the  Positive  Judgment;  what 
further  content  may  occur  in  a  Judgment  ("the  sun  is  round," 
"Cicero  was  a  great  orator  of  Rome,53  "it  is  now  day,"  and 
so  forth)  is  irrelevant  to  the  Judgment  as  such ;  it  merely  asserts 
this,  that  the  subject  is  predicate,  or  (since  these  are  only 
names)  in  a  more  closely  determinate  manner,  that  the  indi- 
vidual is  universal,  and  conversely. — The  Positive  Judgment  is 
untrue  because  of  this  purely  logical  content,  and  has  its  truth 
in  the  Negative  Judgment. — It  is  only  demanded  that  the  content 
of  the  Judgment  must  not  be  self-contradictory ;  but  in  the 
Positive  Judgment  it  was  seen  that  it  is  self-contradictory. — 


272  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Nevertheless  it  is  quite  indifferent  if  this  logical  content  is  also 
called  form,  and  only  further  empirical  filling  is  reckoned  as 
content :  form  then  does  not  contain  only  empty  identity,  with 
the  determination  of  content  lying  outside  of  it.  In  that  case 
the  Positive  Judgment  is  devoid  of  truth  through  its  form  as 
Positive  Judgment ;  and  if  correctness  of  intuition  or  percep- 
tion, or  correspondence  of  image  with  object,  were  to  be  called 
truth,  no  expression  would  be  left  over  for  that  which  is  the 
object  and  purpose  of  philosophy.  At  least,  the  latter  would 
have  to  be  called  truth  of  Reason ;  and  it  will  be  admitted  that 
such  Judgments  as  these,  that  Cicero  was  a  great  orator,  that 
it  is  now  day,  and  so  forth,  are  no  truths  of  Reason.  But  they 
are  not  truths  of  Reason,  not  because  they  have  an  empirical 
content  in  a  contingent  kind  of  way,  but  because  they  are 
only  Positive  Judgments  which  can  and  ought  to  have  no 
other  content  than  an  immediate  individual  and  an  abstract 
determination. 

The  Positive  Judgment  has,  at  first,  its  truth  in  the  Negative 
Judgment,  the  individual  is  not  abstractly  universal; — but  the  pre- 
dicate of  the  individual  (because  it  is  such  a  predicate  or 
because,  considered  for  itself  without  relation  to  the  subject, 
it  is  abstractly  universal)  is  itself  determinate ;  so  far,  then, 
the  individual  is  a  particular.  Further,  according  to  the  other 
proposition  which  is  contained  in  the  Positive  Judgment,  the 
Negative  Judgment  runs  thus:  the  universal  is  not  abstractly 
individual ;  but  this  predicate,  because  it  is  predicate,  or  because 
it  stands  in  a  relation  to  a  universal  subject,  is  some  thing  further 
than  a  mere  individuality,  and  consequently  the  universal  too  is, 
so  far,  a  particular. — Now  this  universal,  as  subject,  is  itself  in 
the  Judgment-determination  of  individuality,  and  thus  the  two 
propositions  are  reduced  to  the  one :  the  individual  is  a  particular. 

What  follows  may  here  be  observed :  (a)  Particularity,  which 
has  already  been  mentioned,  here  shows  itself  to  be  the  pre- 
dicate; but  here  it  is  not  posited  by  external  reflection,  but 
has  originated  through  the  negative  relation  which  was  demon- 
strated in  Judgment,  (b)  This  determination  here  results  only 
for  the  predicate.  In  the  immediate  Judgment,  the  Judgment 
of  Inherence,  the  subject  is  the  foundation,  and  consequently 
the  determination  seems  to  exhaust  itself  upon  the  predicate. 
But  in  fact  this  first  negation  cannot  yet  be  a  determination, 


THE  JUDGMENT  273 

or,  more  properly,  cannot  be  a  positing  of  the  individual,  since 
that  is  only  second  negation,  or  the  negative  of  the  negative. 

The  proposition  the  individual  is  a  particular  is  the  positive 
expression  of  the  Negative  Judgment.  This  expression  is  not 
Positive  Judgment  itself,  in  so  far  as,  because  of  its  immediacy, 
the  latter  has  only  the  abstract  for  its  extremes;  whereas  the 
particular  results  precisely  through  the  positing  of  the  relation 
of  Judgment  as  the  first  mediated  determination. — But  this 
determination  must  not  be  taken  only  as  moment  of  the  extreme, 
but  also  as  determination  of  the  relation  (which,  in  fact,  so  far, 
it  is) ;  or,  this  Judgment  must  also  be  considered  as  Negative. 

This  transition  is  founded  upon  the  relation  between  the 
extremes  and  upon  that  of  their  general  connexion  in  the 
Judgment.  The  Positive  Judgment  is  the  relation  of  the  imme- 
diately individual  and  the  universal,  of  terms,  that  is,  of  which 
one  at  the  same  time  is  not  what  the  other  is.  Consequently  the 
relation  equally  essentially  is  separation,  or  is  negative :  for  this 
reason  the  Positive  Judgment  had  to  be  posited  as  Negative. 
Hence  logicians  need  not  have  protested  so  violently  because 
the  not  of  Negative  Judgment  had  been  attached  to  the  copula. 
What  in  the  Judgment  is  determination  of  the  extreme  is, 
equally,  determinate  relation.  The  determination  of  the  Judg- 
ment, or  the  extreme,  is  not  purely  qualitative,  like  immediate 
Being,  which  is  meant  to  stand  opposed  merely  to  some  Other 
outside  it.  Nor  is  it  determination  of  Reflection,  which,  accord- 
ing to  its  general  form,  takes  up  the  attitude  of  positive  and 
negative,  each  of  which  terms  is  posited  as  exclusive  and  is 
identical  with  the  other  only  in  itself.  The  determination  of 
Judgment  (as  determination  of  Notion)  is  in  itself  a  universal, 
posited  as  continuing  itself  into  its  other.  Conversely,  the  rela- 
tion of  Judgment  is  the  same  determination  as  that  which  the 
extremes  possess,  for  it  is  just  this  universality  and  continuation 
of  one  into  the  other :  in  so  far  as  these  are  distinct  it  also 
contains  negativity. 

The  above-mentioned  transition  from  the  form  of  relation 
to  the  form  of  determination  constitutes  the  immediate  result 
that  the  not  of  the  copula  must  equally  be  added  to  the  pre- 
dicate, whence  the  latter  must  be  determined  as  the  non- 
universal.  But  the  non-universal,  by  an  equally  immediate 
consequence,  is  the  particular. — If  the  negative  is  kept  fast 

VOL.  n.  s 


274  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

according  to  the  wholly  abstract  determination  of  immediate 
Not-being,  then  the  predicate  is  just  the  quite  indeterminate 
non-universal.  This  determination  is  otherwise  dealt  with  in 
logic  under  the  contradictory  Notions,  and  it  is  emphasized  as 
being  important  that  in  the  negative  of  a  Notion  only  the 
negative  must  be  held  fast:  it  must  be  taken  as  the  merely 
indeterminate  extent  of  the  Other  of  the  positive  Notion.  Thus 
the  merely  not-white  would  be  red,  yellow,  blue,  and  so  on, 
as  much  as  black.  But  white  as  such  is  the  notionless  deter- 
mination of  intuition ;  the  not  of  white  is,  then,  equally  notion- 
less  Not-being,  which  abstraction  was  considered  at  the  very 
beginning  of  the  Logic,  when  its  next  truth  was  recognized  to 
be  Becoming.  If,  in  the  consideration  of  the  determinations  of 
Judgment,  such  notionless  content,  coming  from  intuition  and 
imagination,  is  used  as  example,  and  the  determinations  of 
Being  and  of  Reflection  are  taken  for  determinations  of  Judg- 
ment, then  this  is  that  same  uncritical  procedure  as  when,  in 
imitation  of  Kant,  the  notions  of  understanding  are  applied  to 
the  infinite  idea  of  reason  or  the  so-called  Thing-in-itself.  The 
Notion  (which  includes  the  Judgment  issuing  from  it)  is  the 
true  Thing-in-itself  or  reasonable  entity ;  while  these  determina- 
tions belong  to  Being  or  Essence,  and  are  not  forms  developed 
to  that  state  in  which  they  are  in  their  truth,  in  the  Notion. — 
If  no  progress  is  made  beyond  white  or  red  as  sensuous  images, 
then  (as  happens  so  often)  something  is  called  notion  which 
in  fact  is  only  determination  of  imagination ;  and  then  it  is  true 
that  not-white  and  not-red  are  not  positive,  while  further  the 
not-triangular  is  something  quite  indeterminate,  since  that 
determination  which  rests  upon  number  and  quantum  in 
general  is  essentially  indifferent  and  notionless.  But  a  notion 
ought  to  be  formed  both  about  Not-being  and  about  every 
such  sensuous  content:  it  ought  to  lose  that  indifference  and 
abstract  immediacy  which  it  has  in  blind  and  motionless 
imagination.  Already  in  Determinate  Being  the  thoughtless 
Nothing  becomes  a  Limit  by  which  Something  does  after  all 
relate  itself  Jto  an  Other  which  is  outside  it.  But  in  Reflection 
it  is  the  Negative  which  essentially  relates  itself  to  a  Positive, 
and  is  thus  determinate.  Already  a  Negative  is  no  longer  that 
indeterminate  Not-being;  it  is  posited  as  being  only  in  so  far 
as  the  Positive  stands  opposite  to  it;  the  third  term  is  their 


THE  JUDGMENT  275 

Ground ;  and  thus  the  Negative  is  held  in  an  enclosed  sphere 
where  that  which  the  one  is  not  is  something  determinate. — Still 
more  this  not  is  immediately  a  Positive  in  the  absolutely  fluid 
continuity  of  the  Notion  and  its  determinations ;  and  negation 
is  not  only  determinateness,  but  is  taken  up  into  universality, 
and  thus  identified  with  it.  Consequently  the  non-universal  is 
forthwith  the  particular. 

2.  Since  negation  concerns  the  relation  of  Judgment,  and 
Negative  Judgment  is  still  being  considered  as  such,  it  is  still 
a  Judgment;  thus  the  relation  of  subject  and  predicate  or  of 
individuality  and  universality  is  present  here,  as  well  as  their 
connexion,  the  form  of  the  Judgment.  The  subject,  as  the 
fundamental  immediate,  remains  untouched  by  negation ;  thus 
it  retains  its  determination  of  having  a  predicate,  or  its  relation 
to  universality.  What  therefore  is  negated  is  not  universality  in 
general  in  the  predicate,  but  its  abstraction,  or  determinate- 
ness,  which  appeared  as  content  as  against  that  universality. — 
The  Negative  Judgment  then  is  not  total  negation ;  the  universal 
sphere,  which  the  predicate  contains,  still  remains ;  the  relation 
of  subject  to  predicate  is  therefore  still  essentially  positive,  and 
the  surviving  determination  of  the  predicate  is  equally  rela- 
tion.— If  for  example  it  is  said  that  the  rose  is  not  red,  this 
negates  only  the  determinateness  of  the  predicate,  which  is 
distinguished  from  the  universality  which  also  belongs  to  the 
predicate.  The  universal  sphere,  colour,  is  retained ;  if  the  rose 
is  not  red,  it  is  assumed  that  it  has  a  colour — some  other  colour ; 
and,  according  to  this  universal  sphere,  the  Judgment  still  is 
positive. 

This  is  expressed  immediately  in  the  positive  form  of  the 
Negative  Judgment — the  individual  is  a  particular ;  the  particular 
contains  universality.  This  proposition  moreover  expresses  that 
the  predicate  is  not  only  a  universal,  but  also  a  determinate. 
The  negative  form  contains  the  same ;  for  although,  for  example, 
the  rose  is  not  red,  still  it  is  not  only  to  retain  for  predicate 
the  universal  sphere  of  colour,  but  it  is  also  to  have  some  other 
determinate  colour;  thus  only  the  individual  detorminateness 
of  red  is  cancelled,  and  not  only  is  the  universal  sphere  left, 
but  determinateness  too  is  preserved,  although  it  has  been 
turned  into  indeterminate  or  universal  determinateness,  that 
is,  into  particularity. 


276  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

3.  Particularity,  which  has  yielded  itself  as  the  positive  deter- 
mination of  the  Negative  Judgment,  is  the  mediating  term 
between  individuality  and  universality;  hence  now  Negative 
Judgment  in  general,  at  the  third  step,  is  the  mediating  term 
of  the  intro-Reflection  of  the  Judgment  of  Inherence.  In  its 
objective  significance  it  is  only  the  moment  of  the  change  of 
accidents, — or,  in  Determinate  Being,  of  the  individual  proper- 
ties of  the  Concrete.  By  virtue  of  this  change  the  complete 
determinateness  of  the  predicate,  or  the  Concrete,  emerges  as 
posited. 

The  individual  is  particular,  according  to  the  positive  expression 
of  the  Negative  Judgment.  But  also  the  individual  is  not  par- 
ticular, for  particularity  is  of  wider  compass  than  individuality; 
it  is  thus  a  predicate  which  does  not  correspond  with  its 
subject ;  in  which,  therefore,  it  has  not  yet  its  truth.  The  individual 
is  only  individual,  it  is  negativity  relating  itself  not  to  Other, 
either  positively  or  negatively,  but  only  to  itself. — The  rose  is 
not  any  coloured  something,  but  it  has  only  that  determinate 
colour  which  is  rose-colour.  The  individual  is  not  an  indeter- 
minate determinate,  but  the  determinate  determinate. 

If  the  start  is  made  from  this  positive  form  of  the  Negative 
Judgment,  this  its  negation  appears  again  as  only  a  first  nega- 
tion. But  it  is  not  this  in  fact.  Rather  the  Negative  Judgment 
in  and  for  itself  is  already  second  negation  or  negation  of 
negation;  it  remains  to  posit  what  it  is  in  and  for  itself.  It 
negates,  then,  the  determinateness  of  the  predicate  of  the  Positive 
Judgment,  its  abstract  universality,  or,  considered  as  content, 
the  individual  quality  which  it  receives  from  the  subject.  But 
already  negation  of  determinateness  is  second  negation,  that 
is,  the  infinite  return  upon  itself  of  individuality.  Thus  the 
construction  of  the  concrete  totality  of  the  subject  has  been 
effected,  or  rather  it  has  only  now  been  posited  as  individual, 
since  it  has  been  mediated  with  itself  through  negation  and 
its  transcendence.  The  predicate  for  its  part  has  herewith  passed 
over  from  first  universality  to  absolute  determinateness,  and 
has  equated* itself  with  the  subject.  In  so  far  the  Judgment  runs : 
the  individual  is  individual. — From  the  other  side,  since  the  subject 
equally  was  to  be  taken  as  universal,  and  in  so  far  as  in  Negative 
Judgment  the  predicate  (which  is  the  individual  as  against  this 
determination  of  the  subject)  became  extended  into  particu- 


THE  JUDGMENT  277 

larity,  and  since  further  the  negation  of  this  determinateness 
is  equally  the  purification  of  the  universality  which  it  contains, 
now  therefore  this  Judgment  also  runs:  the  universal  is  the 
universal. 

In  these  two  Judgments,  which  before  had  been  reached 
through  external  reflection,  the  predicate  is  already  expressed 
in  its  positivity.  But  here  the  negation  of  the  Negative  Judg- 
ment must  itself  appear  in  the  form  of  a  Negative  Judgment. 
It  was  seen  that  a  positive  relation  of  subject  to  predicate,  and 
the  universal  sphere  of  the  latter,  remained  in  this  Judgment. 
From  this  side  therefore  it  contained  a  universality  more  clear 
of  restrictedness  than  did  the  Positive  Judgment,  and  con- 
sequently it  must  be  negated  all  the  more  of  the  subject  as 
individual.  In  this  manner  the  whole  volume  of  the  predicate 
has  been  negated,  and  no  positive  relation  remains  between  it 
and  the  subject.  This  is  Infinite  Judgment. 

(c)  INFINITE  JUDGMENT 

The  Negative  Judgment  is  no  more  a  true  Judgment  than  is 
the  Positive  Judgment.  But  the  Infinite  Judgment,  which  is  to  be 
its  truth,  is  negatively  expressed  and  therefore  is  Negatively- 
infinite  Judgment — a  Judgment  in  which  the  form  of  Judgment 
too  is  transcended. — But  this  is  an  absurd  Judgment.  It  is  sup- 
posed to  be  a  Judgment,  and  thus  to  contain  a  relation  of  sub- 
ject and  predicate ;  but  at  the  same  time  such  a  relation  is  not 
to  be  contained  in  it. — The  name  of  Infinite  Judgment  is  gener- 
ally mentioned  in  ordinary  systems  of  logic ;  but  it  is  not  made 
very  clear  what  it  really  is. — Examples  of  Negatively-infinite 
Judgments  are  easily  obtained :  determinations  are  negatively 
connected  as  subject  and  predicate,  and  one  of  these  not  only 
does  not  contain  the  determinateness  of  the  other,  but  also 
does  not  contain  its  universal  sphere :  Spirit  (for  example)  is 
not  red,  yellow,  and  so  forth,  nor  acid  nor  alkaline;  the  rose 
is  not  an  elephant ;  understanding  is  not  a  table ;  and  the  like. — 
These  Judgments  are  correct  or  true,  as  the  expression  goes, 
but  in  spite  of  such  truth  they  are  absurd  and  trivial. — Or, 
rather,  they  are  not  Judgments  at  all. — An  evil  deed  is  a  more 
valid  example  of  Infinite  Judgment.  In  a  civil  case  Something 
is  negated  only  as  the  property  of  one  party,  while  it  is  admitted 


278  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

that  it  should  belong  to  that  party  if  it  had  a  good  claim ;  it 
is  claimed  only  in  the  name  of  law :  thus  the  universal  sphere, 
namely  law,  is  recognized  and  preserved  in  this  Negative 
Judgment.  But  the  misdeed  is  that  Infinite  Judgment  which 
negates  not  only  the  particular  application  of  law  but  also  the 
universal  sphere,  or  law  as  law.  It  has  of  course  "correctness" 
because  it  is  an  actual  deed,  but  it  is  absurd  because  it  is 
related  in  a  wholly  negative  manner  to  morality,  which  con- 
stitutes its  universal  sphere. 

The  positive  element  of  the  Infinite  Judgment,  or  of  the 
negation  of  negation,  is  the  intro-Reflection  of  individuality : 
it  is  only  through  this  that  it  is  posited  as  determinate  deter- 
minateness.  According  to  this  reflection  its  expression  was  this : 
the  individual  is  individual.  In  the  Judgment  of  Inherence  the 
subject  exists  as  immediate  individual,  and  to  that  extent  is  only 
as  Something  in  general.  It  is  posited  as  individual  only  through 
the  mediation  of  Negative  and  Infinite  Judgment. 

Hereby  the  individual  is  posited  as  continuing  itself  into  its 
predicate,  which  is  identical  with  it;  and  thus  now  equally 
universality  exists  no  longer  as  immediate,  but  as  a  compre- 
hension of  distincts.  The  Positively-infinite  Judgment  also  runs : 
the  universal  is  universal ;  and  thus  it  is  also  posited  as  return  into 
itself. 

Judgment  has  now  transcended  itself  through  this  intro- 
Reflection  of  the  determinations  of  Judgment.  In  Negatively- 
infinite  Judgment  the  distinction  is,  so  to  speak,  so  great  that 
it  cannot  remain  a  Judgment;  subject  and  predicate  have  no 
positive  relation  to  each  other  at  all.  On  the  other  hand  in 
Positively-infinite  Judgment  there  is  nothing  but  identity:  there 
is  no  distinction  whatever,  and  consequently  no  Judgment. 

More  precisely,  it  is  the  Judgment  of  Inherence  which  has 
transcended  itself:  here  that  is  posited  which  the  copula  of  the 
Judgment  contains — namely,  that  the  qualitative  extremes  are 
transcended  in  this  their  identity.  But  this  unity  is  the  Notion, 
and  thus  this  identity  immediately  is  sundered  again  into  its 
extremes,  and  exists  as  Judgment,  the  determinations  of  which 
are  however  no  longer  immediate  but  intro-reflected.  The 
Judgment  of  Inherence  has  passed  over  into  the  Judgment  of 
Subsumption  [Reflection]. 


THE  JUDGMENT  279 

B 

THE  JUDGMENT  OF  SUBSUMPTION 

In  the  Judgment  which  has  now  arisen  the  subject  is  an 
individual  as  such;  and  similarly  the  universal  is  no  longer 
abstract  universality  or  individual  property :  it  is  posited  as  a 
universal  which  has  comprehended  itself  into  one  through  the 
relation  of  distincts,  or  (considered  according  to  the  content  of 
different  determinations  in  general)  as  the  automatic  coalescing 
of  manifold  properties  and  existences. — If  examples  are  to 
be  given  of  predicates  of  Judgments  of  Reflection,  they  must 
be  of  another  kind  than  for  Judgments  of  Inherence.  Really 
a  determinate  content — the  only  possible  content — is  given 
only  in  the  Judgment  of  Reflection ;  for  it  is  determination  of 
form  reflected  into  identity,  as  distinct  from  form,  in  so  far 
as  the  latter  is  distinct  determinateness,  which  it  still  is  as 
Judgment.  In  the  Judgment  of  Inherence  the  content  is  merely 
immediate  or  abstract,  and  indeterminate. — Consequently  the 
following  may  serve  for  examples  of  Judgments  of  Reflec- 
tion: "man  is  mortal";  "things  are  perishable";  "such  and 
such  a  thing  is  useful,  or  harmful."  Hardness  or  elasticity  of 
bodies,  happiness,  and  so  forth,  are  such  peculiar  predicates; 
they  express  an  essentiality,  which  however  is  a  determination 
in  the  relation,  or  a  comprehensive  universality.  This  univer- 
sality, which  will  further  determine  itself  in  the  movement  of 
the  Judgment  of  Reflection,  is  as  yet  distinct  from  the  uni- 
versality, as  such,  of  the  Notion ;  it  is  no  longer  the  abstract 
universality  of  qualitative  Judgment,  but  it  still  has  the  relation 
to  the  immediate  from  which  it  is  derived,  and  has  the  latter 
for  the  foundation  of  its  negativity. — The  Notion  at  first  deter- 
mines Inherence  to  exist  as  determinations  of  relation  or  con- 
tinuities of  themselves  into  the  various  manifold  of  existence; — 
so  that  the  true  universal  is  their  inner  essence,  but  is  also  in 
appearance;  and  this  their  relative  nature  or  characteristic  is 
not  yet  their  Being-in-and-for-Self.  • 

The  Judgment  of  Reflection  may  seem  almost  to  imply 
that  it  should  be  determined  as  Judgment  of  Quantity,  just  as 
the  Judgment  of  Inherence  was  determined  also  as  Qualitative 
Judgment.  But  immediacy,  in  the  latter,  was  not  only  existent 


2»o  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

immediacy,  but  essentially  also  was  mediated  and  abstract; 
and  similarly  here  this  transcended  immediacy  is  not  merely 
transcended  Quality ;  it  is  not,  then,  merely  Quantity.  Rather, 
as  Quality  is  the  most  external  immediacy,  this  similarly  is  the 
most  external  determination  which  belongs  to  mediation. 

A  further  observation  remains  to  be  made  about  determina- 
tion and  the  manner  in  which  it  appears  in  its  movement  in 
the  Judgment  of  Reflection.  In  the  Judgment  of  Inherence 
its  movement  showed  itself  in  the  predicate,  because  that  Judg- 
ment was  in  the  determination  of  immediacy,  and  consequently 
the  subject  appeared  as  the  fundamental  element.  For  the  same 
reason  the  progressive  movement  of  determining,  in  the  Judg- 
ment of  Reflection,  exhausts  itself  upon  the  subject ;  for  this 
Judgment  has  reflected  Being-in-Self  for  its  determination. 
Here  therefore  what  is  essential  is  the  universal,  or  the  predi- 
cate, which  consequently  constitutes  the  fundamental  element ; 
it  is  the  measure  of  the  subject,  which  must  be  determined 
in  accordance  with  it. — However,  through  the  further  develop- 
ment of  the  form  of  the  subject,  the  predicate  too  obtains  a 
further,  although  an  indirect,  determination ;  whereas  the  other, 
for  the  reason  which  was  indicated,  shows  itself  as  a  direct 
further  determination. 

With  regard  to  the  objective  significance  of  the  Judgment, 
the  individual  enters  into  existence  through  its  universality; 
but  it  does  this  as  in  an  essential  determination  of  relation, 
an  essentiality  which  preserves  itself  through  the  manifold  of 
appearance ;  the  subject  ought  to  be  that  which  is  determined 
in  and  for  itself;  and  it  has  this  determinateness  in  its  predicate. 
The  individual  on  the  other  hand  is  reflected  into  this  its 
predicate,  which  is  its  general  essence ;  in  so  far  the  subject  is 
that  which  exists  and  appears.  In  this  Judgment  the  predicate 
no  longer  inheres  in  the  subject ;  it  is  rather  that  under  which, 
while  it  is  in  itself,  the  other,  which  is  an  individual,  is  sub- 
sumed as  accidental.  If  the  Judgments  of  Determinate  Being  can 
also  be  determined  as  Judgments  of  Inherence,  the  Judgments 
of  Reflection  are  rather  Judgments  of  Subsumption. 

(d)  THE  SINGULAR  JUDGMENT 

The  immediate  Judgment  of  Subsumption  has  now  again 
become  this:  the  individual  is  universal;  but  subject  and  pre- 


THE  JUDGMENT 

dicate  have  the  significance  which  has  been  indicated ;  it  may 
therefore  be  further  expressed  thus :  This  is  an  essentially  universal 
entity. 

But  a  "this"  is  not  an  essentially  universal  entity.  And  this 
Judgment,  which  in  its  general  form  is  positive,  must  be  taken 
as  negative.  But,  since  the  Judgment  of  Subsumption  is  not 
merely  positive,  the  negation  does  not  directly  concern  the 
predicate,  which  does  not  inhere  but  is  the  term  which  is  in 
itself.  It  is  the  subject  that  is  changeable  and  must  be  deter- 
mined. Consequently  the  negative  Judgment  must  here  be 
framed  thus :  not  a  This  is  a  universal  of  Reflection ;  such  an  In- 
itself  has  a  more  universal  existence  than  merely  in  a  This. 
The  Singular  Judgment  thus  has  its  next  truth  in  the  Particular 
Judgment. 

(b)  THE  PARTICULAR  JUDGMENT 

That  non-individuality  of  the  subject  which  must  be  posited 
in  place  of  the  singularity  which  it  has  in  the  first  Judgment 
of  Subsumption,  is  particularity.  But  in  the  Judgment  of  Sub- 
sumption  individuality  is  determined  as  essential  individuality : 
particularity  therefore  cannot  be  simple  and  abstract  deter- 
mination, in  which  the  individual  would  be  transcended  and 
the  existing  would  have  perished :  it  is  only  the  extension  of  the 
individual  in  external  reflection.  Consequently  the  subject  is 
some  These ,  or  a  particular  number  of  individuals. 

This  Judgment,  some  individuals  are  a  universal  of  Reflection, 
appears  at  first  as  a  positive  Judgment;  but  it  is  equally 
negative.  For  "some"  contains  universality,  and  accordingly 
it  can  be  considered  as  comprehensive;  but,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
particularity,  it  also  is  inadequate  to  universality.  The  negative 
determination  which  the  subject  has  obtained  through  the 
transition  of  the  Singular  Judgment  is  also  (as  was  shown  above) 
determination  of  the  relation,  the  copula. — The  Judgment 
66 some  men  are  happy55  implies  immediately  "some  men  are 
not  happy/3  If  some  things  are  useful,  some  things,  in  conse- 
quence, are  not  useful.  Positive  and  Negative  Judgment  no 
longer  fall  apart:  the  Particular  Judgment  contains  both 
together  immediately,  just  because  it  is  a  Judgment  of  Sub- 
sumption. — But,  for  this  reason,  the  Particular  Judgment  is 
indeterminate. 


282  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

If  we  further  consider  the  subject  in  the  examples  of  such 
judgments  ("some  men/3  "animals,"  and  so  on),  we  find  that, 
besides  the  particular  determination  of  form  ("some"),  it  con- 
tains also  a  determination  of  content  ("man,"  and  so  on).  The 
subject  of  the  Singular  Judgment  could  be  "this  man,"  a 
singularity  which  really  is  proper  to  external  indication ;  really 
therefore  it  should  run  (for  example) :  "Gaius."  But  the  subject 
of  the  Particular  Judgment  can  no  longer  be  "some  Gaii,"  for 
Gaius  is  supposed  to  be  an  individual  as  such.  A  more  universal 
content  is  therefore  added  to  the  "some,"  such  as  "men," 
"animals,"  and  so  forth.  This  is  not  a  merely  empirical  content, 
but  one  determined  by  the  form  of  the  Judgment:  it  is  a 
universal  because  "some"  contains  universality,  and  because 
at  the  same  time  universality  must  be  separated  from  the 
individuals;  for  reflected  individuality  is  the  foundation. 
Further,  this  universality  is  also  a  general  nature,  or  the  genus 
man,  or  animal ; — that  universality  which  is  the  result  of  the 
Judgment  of  Subsumption  anticipates — as  also  the  Positive 
Judgment,  which  has  for  subject  the  individual,  anticipated — 
the  determination  which  is  the  result  of  the  Judgment  of 
Inherence. 

The  subject  which  contains  the  individuals,  their  relation 
to  particularity,  and  universal  nature,  is  in  so  far  already 
posited  as  the  totality  of  the  determinations  of  the  Notion.  But 
really  this  is  an  external  consideration.  What  is  here  posited 
in  the  subject  in  relation  to  one  another  through  its  form,  is 
the  extension  of  the  "this"  into  particularity.  But  this  extension 
is  not  adequate  to  it:  "this"  is  completely  determinate,  but 
"some  this"  is  indeterminate.  The  extension  is  meant  to  apply 
to  the  "this,"  that  is,  to  correspond  to  it  and  to  be  completely 
determinate :  now  such  an  extension  is  totality,  or,  at  this  point, 
universality  in  general. 

This  universality  is  founded  upon  the  "this,"  for  here  the 
individual  is  the  intro-reflected  term ;  its  further  determinations 
therefore  act  upon  it  externally.  For  such  a  reason  particularity 
determined  itself  as  "some,"  and  similarly  the  universality, 
which  the  subject  has  reached,  is  allhood:  the  Particular  Judg- 
ment has  passed  over  into  the  Universal  Judgment. 


THE  JUDGMENT  283 

(c)  THE  UNIVERSAL  JUDGMENT 

Universality  as  it  is  in  the  subject  of  the  Universal  Judgment 
is  the  external  universality  of  reflection,  or  allhood;  all  the 
terms  are  as  individuals,  and  the  individual  here  remains 
unchanged.  Consequently  this  universality  is  only  a  compre- 
hension of  individual  entities  which  persist  for  themselves ;  it 
is  a  common  quality  which  belongs  to  them  only  in  comparison. 
— It  is  this  common  quality  which  usually  first  occurs  to  sub- 
jective imagination  when  universality  is  mentioned.  The  fact 
that  a  determination  is  common  to  several  entities  is  given  as 
the  most  obvious  reason  why  it  should  be  looked  upon  as 
universal. — This  notion  of  universality  is  especially  present  also 
in  analysis,  when,  for  example,  the  development  of  a  function 
in  terms  of  a  polynomial  is  considered  to  be  more  universal 
than  its  development  in  terms  of  a  binomial,  since  the  poly- 
nomial represents  more  individualities  than  the  binomial.  The 
demand  that  the  function  should  be  represented  in  its  univer- 
sality really  asks  for  a  pantonomial,  or  exhausted  infinity ;  but 
here  the  barrier  of  that  demand  arises  automatically,  and 
the  representation  of  the  infinite  amount  is  forced  to  content 
itself  with  its  ought  and,  in  consequence,  with  a  polynomial. 
In  fact  however  the  binomial  is  pantonomial  already  in  those 
cases  in  which  the  method  or  rule  regards  only  the  dependence 
of  one  term  upon  another,  and  the  dependence  of  several 
terms  upon  their  antecedents  does  not  particularize  itself, 
one  and  the  same  function  still  remaining  fundamental.  The 
method  or  rule  must  be  looked  upon  as  the  true  universal ;  in 
the  continuation  of  development,  or  in  the  development  of  a 
polynomial,  it  is  only  repeated,  and  thus  gains  nothing  in 
universality  through  the  increased  number  of  terms.  Bad 
infinity  and  the  illusion  which  it  involves  have  already  been 
mentioned  above ;  the  universality  of  the  Notion  is  the  achieved 
Beyond,  while  this  infinity  remains  infected  with  this  Beyond 
as  with  an  unattainable  term,  in  so  far  as  it  remains  mere 
progress  to  infinity.  If  under  universality  nothing  better  is 
present  to  imagination  than  allhood,  a  universality  which  is 
supposed  to  be  exhausted  in  the  individuals  as  individuals,  then 
this  is  a  relapse  into  that  bad  infinity;  or  else  mere  manyness 
is  being  taken  in  place  of  allhood.  But  manyness,  however 


284  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

great  it  is,  still  remains  particularity  and  is  not  allhood. — A 
dim  image  of  the  universality  of  the  Notion  which  is  in  and 
for  self  is  here  presented :  it  is  the  Notion  which  forcibly  urges 
beyond  the  stubborn  individuality  to  which  imagination  clings 
and  beyond  the  externality  of  its  reflection,  substituting  all- 
hood  as  totality,  or,  rather,  categorical  Being-in-and-for-Self. 

This  appears  elsewhere  too  in  allhood,  which  indeed  is 
empirical  universality.  In  so  far  as  the  individual  is  pre- 
supposed as  an  immediate,  and  therefore  is  discovered  and 
taken  up  externally,  the  reflection  which  comprehends  it  into 
allhood  is  equally  external  to  it.  But  the  individual,  as  "this," 
is  utterly  indifferent  to  this  reflection,  and  therefore  universality 
and  such  an  individual  cannot  unite  in  one  unity.  Empirical 
allhood  therefore  remains  a  problem  or  "ought"  which  cannot 
be  represented  as  Being.  An  empirically  universal  proposition 
(for  such  are  nevertheless  advanced)  rests  only  upon  the  tacit 
agreement  that,  if  no  instance  of  the  opposite  can  be  adduced, 
the  majority  of  cases  is  to  be  reckoned  as  allhood;  or  that 
subjective  allhood  (namely,  the  cases  which  have  come  to 
knowledge)  may  be  taken  as  being  an  objective  allhood. 

The  Universal  Judgment  has  been  reached ;  if  it  is  considered 
more  closely,  the  subject  is  seen  to  contain  universality  which 
is  in  and  for  itself  as  posited,  whereas  before  (as  we  observed) 
it  contained  it  as  presupposed.  "All  men"  expresses,  first,  the 
genus  man,  and  secondly  expresses  this  genus  in  its  individu- 
ation,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  at  the  same  time  the  indi- 
viduals are  extended  into  the  universality  of  the  genus.  Con- 
versely, through  this  connexion  with  individuality,  universality 
is  determined  as  completely  as  individuality ;  hereby  posited 
universality  has  become  equivalent  to  presupposed  universality. 

But  properly  that  which  is  presupposed  should  not  be  re- 
garded first :  the  result  ought  to  be  considered  by  itself  in  the 
determination  of  form. — Individuality,  since  it  has  extended 
itself  to  allhood,  is  posited  as  negativity  which  is  identical  self- 
relation.  Thus  it  has  not  remained  that  first  individuality  (like 
that,  for  example,  of  "Gaius"),  but  is  that  determination  which 
is  identical  with  universality,  or  the  absolute  determinateness 
of  the  universal. — That  first  individuality  of  the  Singular  Judg- 
ment was  not  the  immediate  individuality  of  the  Positive 
Judgment,  but  arose  through  the  dialectic  movement  of  the 


THE  JUDGMENT  285 

Judgment  of  Inherence  in  general ;  and  this  individuality  had 
already  been  determined  to  be  the  negative  identity  of  the 
determinations  of  that  Judgment.  This  is  the  true  presupposition 
of  the  Judgment  of  Subsumption ;  as  against  the  positing  which 
operates  upon  it  that  first  determinateness  of  individuality  was 
its  in-itself;  that  which  it  is  in-itself  is  now,  accordingly,  posited 
through  the  movement  of  the  Judgment  of  Subsumption — 
namely,  individuality  as  identical  self-relation  of  the  deter- 
minate. By  virtue  of  this  that  Reflection  which  extended 
individuality  into  allhood  is  not  external  to  it;  but  through 
that  Reflection  it  only  becomes  for  itself  what  it  already  is  in 
itself. — The  result  is  thus  in  truth  objective  universality.  In  so  far 
the  subject  has  discarded  the  form-determination  of  the  Judg- 
ment of  Subsumption,  which  passed  from  "this"  through  "some" 
to  allhood;  in  place  of  "all  men"  we  must  now  say  "man." 

The  universality  which  has  hereby  arisen  is  the  genus — that 
universality  which  is  concrete  in  itself.  The  genus  does  not 
inhere  in  the  subject  and  is  not  an  individual  property  of  it, 
or  indeed  any  property ;  it  contains  every  isolated  determinate- 
ness  resolved  in  its  substantial  homogeneity. — For  this  reason — 
because  it  is  posited  as  this  negative  self-identity — it  is  essen- 
tially subject;  but  it  is  no  longer  subsumed  in  its  predicate. 
The  nature  of  the  Judgment  of  Subsumption  is  now  altogether 
changed  hereby. 

This  Judgment  was  essentially  Judgment  of  Subsumption. 
The  predicate  was  determined  as  the  universal  which  was  in 
itself  as  against  its  subject ;  according  to  its  content  it  could 
be  taken  as  essential  determination  of  relation,  or  also  as 
characteristic — a  determination  according  to  which  the  subject 
is  only  an  essential  appearance.  But,  determined  as  such  an 
objective  universality,  the  predicate  ceases  to  be  subsumed 
under  such  a  determination  of  relation  or  comprehensive  re- 
flection: rather,  such  a  predicate  is  a  particular  against  this 
universality.  The  relation  between  subject  and  predicate  has 
become  inverted,  and  in  so  far  the  Judgment  has  now  tran- 
scended itself.  . 

This  transcendence  of  the  Judgment  coincides  with  that 
which  becomes  the  determination  of  the  copula,  which  latter 
still  remains  to  be  considered :  the  transcendence  of  the  deter- 
minations of  the  Judgment  and  their  transition  into  the  copula 


286  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

are  one  and  the  same  thing.— For  in  so  far  as  the  subject  has 
risen  into  universality,  it  has  become  equal  to  the  predicate 
in  this  determination,  and  the  predicate,  as  reflected  univer- 
sality, also  includes  particularity;  subject  and  predicate  are 
consequently  identical,  thut  is,  they  have  coalesced  into  the 
copula.  This  identity  is  the  genus,  or  the  nature  which  is  in 
and  for  itself  of  a  thing.  And  in  so  far  as  this  nature  again 
sunders  itself  and  becomes  a  Judgment,  it  is  the  inner  nature 
through  which  subject  and  object  are  related  to  each  other, — 
a  relation  of  Necessity,  in  which  these  determinations  of  the 
Judgment  are  no  more  than  unessential  distinctions.  What 
belongs  to  all  the  individuals  of  a  genus  belongs  to  the  genus  through 
its  nature:  this  consequence  follows  immediately,  and  is  the 
expression  of  that  which  resulted  before,  namely,  that  the 
subject  ("all  men,35  for  example)  discards  its  form-determina- 
tion and  that  "man"  must  be  said  instead. — This  connexion, 
which  is  in  and  for  itself,  constitutes  the  foundation  of  a  new 
Judgment — the  Judgment  of  Necessity. 


C 

THE  JUDGMENT  OF  NECESSITY 

Universality  has  developed  into  a  determination  which  is, 
as  was  seen,  objective  universality  or  universality  which  is  in 
and  for  itself, — that  to  which  in  the  sphere  of  Essence  Sub- 
stantiality corresponds.  It  is  distinct  from  the  latter  in  that  it 
belongs  to  the  Notion;  hence  not  only  the  inner  but  also  the 
posited  necessity  of  its  determinations  is  immanent  in  it :  in 
other  words,  distinction  is  immanent  in  it,  whereas  in  Substance 
distinction  lies  only  in  its  Accidents  and  is  not  contained  in  it 
as  principle. 

Now  this  objective  universality  is  posited  in  the  Judgment, 
and  hence  first  with  this  its  essential  determinateness  as  imma- 
nent in  it,  and  secondly  as  distinct  from  it  as  particularity,  of 
which  this  universality  constitutes  the  substantial  foundation. 
In  this  manner  it  is  determined  as  genus  and  species. 


THE  JUDGMENT  287 

(a)  THE  CATEGORICAL  JUDGMENT 

The  genus  divides  or  repels  itself  essentially  into  species :  it 
is  genus  only  in  so  far  as  it  comprehends  inferior  species; 
species  is  species  only  in  so  far  as  (a)  it  exists  in  individuals 
and  (b)  is  a  higher  universality  in  the  genus. — Now  the  Cate- 
gorical Judgment  has  for  predicate  such  a  universality  as 
provides  for  the  subject  its  immanent  nature.  But  it  is  itself 
the  first  or  immediate  Judgment  of  Necessity ;  hence  the  deter- 
minateness  of  the  subject  by  virtue  of  which  it  is  a  particular 
or  individual  as  against  genus  or  species,  belongs,  to  this  extent, 
to  the  immediacy  of  external  existence. — But,  equally,  objective 
universality  has  only  here  its  immediate  particularization ;  for 
this  reason  it  is  determinate,  having  higher  genera  relatively 
to  itself; — and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  precisely  the  nearest 
genus,  that  is,  its  determinateness  is  not  precisely  the  principle 
of  the  specific  particularity  of  the  subject.  What  is  necessary 
in  it  is  the  substantial  identity  of  subject  and  predicate,  against 
which  the  peculiarity  by  which  the  former  is  distinct  from  the 
latter  is  only  an  unessential  positedness,  or  a  mere  name;  in 
its  predicate  the  subject  is  reflected  into  its  Being-in-and-for- 
Self. — Such  a  predicate  should  not  be  ranked  together  with 
the  predicates  of  the  Judgments  which  have  been  treated  so 
far ;  if,  for  example,  the  Judgments 

"the  rose  is  red," 
"the  rose  is  a  plant,55 
or  "this  ring  is  yellow,55 
"it  is  gold,55 

are  confounded  into  one  class,  and  if  so  external  a  property  as 
the  colour  of  a  flower  is  taken  as  a  predicate  of  equal  rank 
with  its  vegetable  nature,  then  a  distinction  is  overlooked  which 
must  be  obvious  to  the  most  vulgar  apprehension. — The  Cate- 
gorical Judgment  must  therefore  be  definitely  distinguished 
from  the  Positive  and  the  Negative  Judgment ;  in  these  that 
which  is  predicated  of  the  subject  is  an  individual  and  con- 
tingent content,  in  the  Categorical  Judgment  it  is  the  totality 
of  the  intro-reflected  form.  In  it  therefore  the  copula  signifies 
necessity,  but  in  the  Positive  and  Negative  only  abstract  and 
immediate  Being. 


288  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

At  this  point  the  determinateness  of  the  subject,  by  virtue 
of  which  it  is  a  particular  as  against  the  predicate,  is  still  con- 
tingent; subject  and  predicate  are  not  related  through  form 
or  determinateness  as  necessary ;  so  far,  therefore,  the  necessity 
is  still  an  inner  one. — But  the  subject  is  subject  only  as  par- 
ticular, and,  in  so  far  as  it  has  objective  universality,  it  is 
supposed  to  have  it  essentially  only  according  to  that  imme- 
diate determinateness.  The  objectively-universal  determines 
itself,  that  is,  it  posits  itself  into  the  Judgment ;  and  in  so  doing 
it  is  essentially  in  identical  relation  with  this  determinateness 
(which  has  been  repelled  out  of  itself)  as  such ;  that  is,  essen- 
tially this  determinateness  must  not  be  posited  as  merely 
contingent.  The  Categorical  Judgment  corresponds  to  its  ob- 
jective universality  only  through  this  necessity  of  its  immediate 
being:  in  this  manner  it  has  passed  over  into  the  Hypothetical 
Judgment. 

(b]  THE  HYPOTHETICAL  JUDGMENT 

If  A  u,  B  is ;  or,  the  being  of  A  is  not  its  own  being  but  the 
being  of  another,  of  B. — What  is  posited  in  this  Judgment  is 
the  necessary  connexion  of  one  immediate  determinateness  with 
another :  this  is  not  yet  posited  in  the  Categorical  Judgment. — 
Here  there  are  two  immediate  or  externally  contingent  exis- 
tences, whereas  in  the  Categorical  Judgment  there  is  one  only, 
namely  the  subject;  but,  since  one  is  external  as  against  the 
other,  this  other  immediately  is  also  external  to  the  first. — 
According  to  this  immediacy  the  content  of  each  side  is  in- 
different to  the  other ;  consequently  this  Judgment  at  first  is 
a  purely  formal  proposition.  Now  it  is  true  that  immediacy 
(i)  as  such  is  an  independent  and  concrete  Being;  but  (2)  its 
relation  is  what  is  essential ;  hence  equally  this  Being  exists  as 
mere  possibility ;  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  does  not  imply 
that  A  is  or  that  B  is,  but  that  if  one  is,  then  the  other  is : 
only  the  connexion  of  the  extremes  is  posited  as  being,  not  the 
extremes  themselves.  Rather,  in  this  necessity  each  is  posited 
as  equally  the  Being  of  an  Other. — The  proposition  of  identity 
merely  states  that  A  is  only  A  and  not  B,  and  B  is  only  B  and 
not  A :  in  the  Hypothetical  Judgment,  on  the  contrary,  the 
Being  of  finite  things  according  to  their  formal  truth  is  posited 


THE  JUDGMENT  209 

through  the  Notion;  that  is,  it  is  posited  that  the  finite  is  its 
own  Being,  but  equally  is  not  its  own  but  is  the  Being  of  an 
Other.  In  the  sphere  of  Being  the  finite  changes  and  becomes 
an  Other ;  in  the  sphere  of  Essence  it  is  Appearance,  and  it  is 
posited  that  its  Being  consists  in  this,  that  an  Other  shows  in 
it,  and  here  Necessity  is  the  inner  relation  not  yet  posited  as 
such.  But  the  Notion  is  this,  that  this  identity  is  posited,  and  that 
the  being  entity  is  not  abstract  self-identity,  but  concrete  identity ; 
it  is  immediately  of  itself  the  Being  of  an  Other. 

The  Hypothetical  Judgment  can  be  taken,  in  closer  deter- 
minateness  through  the  relations  of  Reflection,  as  relation  of 
ground  and  consequence,  condition  and  conditioned,  causality, 
and  so  forth.  In  the  Categorical  Judgment,  Substantiality  is 
in  its  notional  form :  in  the  Hypothetical  Judgment,  the  con- 
nexion of  Causality.  This  and  other  relations  are  all  subordinate 
to  it,  but  they  are  here  no  longer  relations  between  independent 
sides :  the  latter  exist  essentially  only  as  moments  of  one  and 
the  same  identity. — However,  they  are  not  yet  opposed  to  each 
other  in  the  Judgment  according  to  their  notional  deter- 
minations as  individual  or  particular  and  universal,  but  only 
as  moments  in  general.  In  so  far,  the  Hypothetical  Judgment 
has  rather  the  aspect  of  a  proposition;  the  Particular  Judgment 
was  of  indeterminate  content,  and  similarly  the  Hypothetical 
Judgment  is  of  indeterminate  form,  since  its  content  does  not 
reside  in  the  relation  between  subject  and  predicate. — In  itself 
however  the  Being,  since  it  is  Being  of  the  Other,  is  thereby 
unity  of  itself  and  the  Other,  and,  therefore,  universality ;  and 
for  that  reason  it  is  at  the  same  time  really  only  a  particular, 
since  it  is  determinate  and  in  its  determinateness  is  not  merely 
self-relating.  But  it  is  not  simple  and  abstract  particularity  that 
is  posited ;  but,  through  the  immediacy  which  belongs  to  each 
determinateness,  the  moments  of  particularity  are  distinct ;  and, 
at  the  same  time,  through  its  unity  (which  constitutes  their 
relation)  particularity  is  also  their  totality. — In  truth  therefore 
what  is  posited  in  this  Judgment  is  universality  as  the  concrete 
identity  of  the  Notion  whose  determinations  have  no  persistence 
by  themselves  but  are  only  particularities  posited  in  universality. 
Thus  it  is  the  Disjunctive  Judgment. 


VOL.  n. 


2go  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

(c)  THE  DISJUNCTIVE  JUDGMENT 

In  the  Categorical  Judgment  the  Notion  exists  as  objective 
universality  and  as  an  external  individuality.  In  the  Hypo- 
thetical Judgment  the  No  lion  in  its  negative  identity  emerges 
in  this  externality;  through  this  identity  its  moments  acquire 
the  determinateness  which  is  now  posited  in  the  Disjunctive 
Judgment ;  in  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  they  have  it  imme- 
diately. The  Disjunctive  Judgment  therefore  is  objective  uni- 
versality posited  at  the  same  time  in  conjunction  with  form. 
Hence  it  contains,  first,  concrete  universality  or  genus,  in  simple 
form,  as  the  subject;  secondly  it  contains  it  as  the  totality  of 
its  distinct  determinations.  A  is  either  B  or  C.  This  is  the 
necessity  of  the  Notion,  where,  first,  the  indiscernibility  of  the 
two  extremes  is  sameness  of  comprehensiveness,  content,  and 
universality ;  secondly,  they  are  distinguished  according  to  the 
form  of  the  determinations  of  Notion,  but  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  form  (because  of  this  identity)  is  mere  form.  For  this 
reason,  thirdly,  identical  objective  universality  appears  as  the 
intro-reflected  term  as  against  unessential  form, — as  content, 
which  however  has  in  itself  the  determinateness  of  form,  first 
as  the  simple  determinateness  of  genus,  next  as  this  same 
determinateness  developed  into  its  distinction, — in  which 
manner  it  is  the  particularity  of  species  and  their  totality,  the 
universality  of  the  genus. — In  its  development  particularity 
constitutes  the  predicate,  because  it  is  the  more  universal  in 
so  far  as  it  contains  the  whole  universal  sphere  of  the  subject, 
but  also  contains  it  in  the  analysis  of  particularization. 

If  this  particularization  is  considered  more  closely,  the  genus, 
first,  constitutes  the  substantial  universality  of  the  various 
species ;  consequently  the  subject  is  as  well  C  as  B ;  and  this 
"as  well  as"  designates  the  positive  identity  of  the  particular 
with  the  universal ;  this  objective  universal  preserves  itself  intact 
in  its  particularity.  Secondly,  the  species  are  mutually  exclusive ; 
A  is  either  B  or  C;  for  these  are  the  determinate  distinction 
of  the  universal  sphere.  This  "either — or"  is  their  negative 
relation.  But  here  they  are  identical  as  much  as  in  the  former 
relation;  the  genus  is  their  unity,  in  which  they  are  deter- 
minate particulars. — If  the  genus  were  an  abstract  universality 
as  in  the  Judgments  of  Inherence,  then  the  species  too  would 


THE  JUDGMENT  291 

have  to  be  taken  as  merely  various  and  indifferent  to  one 
another:  but  it  is  not  this  external  universality,  which  arises 
out  of  comparison  and  omission  only:  it  is  the  universality 
immanent  and  concrete  in  them. — An  empirical  disjunctive 
judgment  lacks  necessity;  A  is  either  B  or  C  or  D  and  so  forth 
because  the  species  -B,  C,  D  and  so  forth  are  given;  really  no 
4  'either — or33  can  be  expressed  by  this  judgment ;  for  such  species 
at  best  constitute  only  a  subjective  completeness.  One  species 
does  exclude  another;  but  *  'either — or33  excludes  every  other, 
and  thus  concludes  by  itself  a  total  sphere.  This  totality  has 
its  necessity  in  the  negative  unity  of  the  objectively  universal, 
which  contains  individuality  dissolved  within  itself,  immanent 
as  simple  principle  of  distinction :  through  this  the  species  are 
determined  and  related.  On  the  other  hand  the  empirical 
species  have  their  distinctions  in  any  contingent  characteristic, 
which  is  an  external  principle  and  therefore  not  their  own 
principle  or  the  immanent  determinateness  of  the  genus ;  for 
this  reason  too  they  are  not  related  according  to  their  deter- 
minateness.— But  the  species  constitute  the  universality  of  the 
predicate  through  the  relation  of  their  determinateness. — The 
so-called  contrary  and  contradictory  Notions  should  really  not 
find  their  place  until  this  point ;  for  in  the  Disjunctive  Judgment 
the  essential  distinction  of  the  Notion  is  posited ;  but  at  the  same 
time  they  have  here  their  truth,  which  is,  that  the  contrary 
and  contradictory  themselves  are  distinct  both  as  contrary  and 
as  contradictory.  The  species  are  contrary  just  in  so  far  as  they 
are  various, — that  is,  they  have  a  persistence  which  is  in  and 
for  itself,  through  the  genus  as  their  objective  nature ;  and  they 
are  contradictory  in  so  far  as  they  exclude  one  another.  But 
by  itself  each  of  these  determinations  is  one-sided  and  without 
truth;  in  the  "either — or33  of  the  Disjunctive  Judgment  their 
unity  is  posited  as  their  truth,  according  to  which  this  inde- 
pendent persistence,  as  concrete  universality,  is  itself  also  the 
principle  of  negative  unity,  by  means  of  which  they  exclude  one 
another. 

By  virtue  of  the  identity  of  subject  and  predicate  (which  has 
just  been  demonstrated),  according  to  negative  unity,  the  genus 
in  the  Disjunctive  Judgment  is  determined  as  that  which  comes 
next.  At  first  this  expression  points  to  a  merely  quantitative 
distinction  of  more  or  less, — which  determinations  a  universal 


292  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

is  supposed  to  contain  against  a  particularity  which  stands 
subordinate  to  it.  Accordingly,  it  remains  contingent  what  the 
next  genus  is,  in  fact.  But  in  so  far  as  the  genus  is  taken  as  a 
universal  which  is  formed  through  the  mere  omission  of  deter- 
minations, it  cannot  really  form  a  Disjunctive  Judgment ;  for 
it  is  contingent  whether  the  determinateness  which  constitutes 
the  principle  of  the  c  'either — or33  happens  to  remain  in  it;  the 
genus  then  would  not  be  represented  in  its  determinateness 
in  the  species,  and  these  could  have  only  a  contingent  com- 
pleteness. In  the  Categorical  Judgment  the  genus  remains  only 
in  this  abstract  form  as  against  the  subject :  it  is  therefore  not 
necessarily  the  genus  next  to  it,  and  in  so  far  is  external.  But 
the  genus  is  concrete  and  as  such  is  essentially  determinate 
universality,  and  therefore  as  simple  determinateness  it  is  the 
unity  of  moments  of  Notion  which  are  merely  suspended  in 
that  simplicity  but  have  their  real  distinction  in  the  various 
species.  The  genus  therefore  is  that  which  is  next  to  a  species 
in  so  far  as  the  latter  has  its  specific  distinction  in  the  essential 
determinateness  of  the  former,  and  the  species  in  general  have 
their  distinct  determination  as  principle  in  the  nature  of  the 
genus. 

The  side  which  has  just  been  considered  constitutes  the 
identity  of  subject  and  predicate  according  to  the  side  of 
determinateness  in  general,  a  side  which  was  posited  through 
the  Hypothetical  Judgment,  whose  necessity  is  an  identity  of 
immediate  and  various  entities — that  is,  essentially,  a  negative 
unity.  Indeed,  it  is  this  negative  unity  which  segregates  subject 
and  predicate,  although  now  it  is  itself  posited  as  distinct,  in 
the  subject  as  simple  determinateness  and  in  the  predicate  as 
totality.  This  segregation  of  subject  and  predicate  is  the  dis- 
tinction of  Notion ;  but  the  totality  of  the  species  in  the  predicate 
cannot  for  that  very  reason  be  any  other  distinction. — Thus  the 
determination  of  the  disjunctive  members  against  one  another 
results  from  this.  It  is  nothing  more  than  the  distinction  of 
the  Notion,  for  it  is  this  only  which  disjoins  itself  and  in  its 
determination  manifests  its  negative  unity.  The  species  further 
comes  under  consideration  here  only  according  to  its  simple 
Notion-determinateness,  and  not  according  to  shape,  which  is 
the  manner  in  which  it  has  passed  out  of  the  Idea  into  further 
independent  Reality.  The  latter  indeed  is  neglected  in  the 


THE  JUDGMENT  293 

simple  principle  of  the  genus ;  but  the  essential  process  of  dis- 
tinguishing must  be  a  moment  of  the  Notion.  In  the  Judgment 
which  is  here  under  consideration  the  developing  process  of 
self-determination  of  the  Notion  has  really  itself  posited  its 
disjunction, — that  is,  that  which,  under  Notion,  was  found  to 
be  its  determination  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  or  its  distinction 
into  determinate  notions. — Now  the  Notion  is  the  universal; 
it  is  equally  the  positive  and  the  negative  totality  of  the  par- 
ticulars, and  it  is  also  for  this  reason  immediately  one  of  its 
disjunctive  members;  the  other  member  is  this  universality 
resolved  into  its  particularity,  or  the  determinateness  of  the 
Notion  as  determinateness,  in  which  it  is  precisely  the  univer- 
sality which  represents  itself  as  totality. — If  the  disjunction  of 
a  genus  into  species  has  not  yet  attained  this  form,  this  is  a 
proof  that  it  has  not  yet  risen  to  the  determinateness  of  the 
Notion  and  has  not  emerged  out  of  it. — A  colour  is  either  violet, 
dark  blue,  light  blue,  green,  yellow,  orange,  or  red; — such  a 
disjunction  shows  plainly  its  empirical  admixture  and  impurity ; 
and  considered  from  this  side,  and  by  itself,  it  may  even  be 
called  barbarous.  If  a  Notion  is  formed  about  colour  that  it 
is  the  concrete  unity  of  light  and  dark,  then  this  genus  contains 
the  determinateness  which  constitutes  the  principle  of  its  par- 
ticularization  into  species.  But  one  of  these  must  be  just  simple 
colour,  which  contains  the  opposite  equally  balanced,  and 
enclosed  and  negated  in  its  intensity ;  opposed  to  it  the  oppo- 
sition of  the  relation  between  light  and  dark  must  present  itself, 
to  which  must  be  added  (since  this  is  a  phenomenon  of  nature) 
the  indifferent  neutrality  of  the  opposition. — If  mixtures  like 
violet  and  orange,  and  degrees  of  intensity  like  dark  and  light 
blue,  are  held  to  be  species,  this  can  only  be  the  result  of  a 
wholly  unconsidered  procedure,  showing  too  little  reflection 
even  for  empiricism. — But  this  is  not  the  place  for  developing 
what  distinct  or  more  closely  determinate  forms  may  belong 
to  disjunction  as  it  takes  place  in  the  element  of  Nature  or  of 
Spirit  respectively. 

The  Disjunctive  Judgment  has  the  members  of  disjunction, 
at  first,  in  its  predicate;  but  equally  it  is  disjunct  itself;  its 
subject  and  predicate  are  the  members  of  disjunction;  they 
are  the  moments  of  Notion,  posited  in  their  determinateness, 
but  also  as  identical — (a)  in  objective  universality,  which  in 


294  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  subject  is  as  simple  genus  and  in  the  predicate  as  the 
universal  sphere  and  as  the  totality  of  the  moments  of  Notion, — 
and  ()8)  in  negative  unity,  or  the  developed  connexion  of 
necessity,  according  to  which  simple  determinateness  in  the 
subject  has  separated  into  the  distinction  of  the  various  species, 
where  precisely  it  is  their  essential  relation  and  the  self-identical. 
This  unity — the  copula  of  this  Judgment,  where  the  extremes 
have  coincided  through  their  identity — is  thus  the  Notion  itself, 
and,  further,  as  posited;  and  now  the  mere  Judgment  of 
Necessity  has  risen  to  be  the  Judgment  of  the  Notion. 


D 

THE  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  NOTION 

A  skill  in  making  Judgments  of  Inherence,  such  as  "the  rose 
is  red/5  "the  snow  is  white,55  and  so  forth,  will  hardly  be 
accounted  as  evidence  of  great  power  of  judgment.  The  Judg- 
ments of  Subsumption  are  rather  propositions ;  in  the  Judg- 
ment of  Necessity  the  object  exists,  it  is  true,  in  its  objective 
universality,  but  its  relation  to  the  Notion  is  to  be  found  only 
in  the  Judgment  which  is  now  to  be  considered.  The  Notion 
thus  is  the  basis,  and,  since  it  is  in  relation  to  the  object,  it  is 
this  as  an  ought,  to  which  reality  may  or  may  not  be  adequate. — 
Consequently  it  is  only  this  Judgment  which  contains  a  true 
judgment;  the  predicates  good,  bad,  true,  beautiful,  correct, 
and  so  on,  signify  that  the  fact  has  been  measured  against  its 
general  Notion,  which  is  just  a  presupposed  ought,  and  that  it 
does,  or  does  not,  agree  with  it. 

The  Judgment  of  the  Notion  has  been  called  judgment  of 
modality ;  it  has  been  considered  to  contain  the  form  according 
to  which  the  relation  of  subject  and  predicate  is  found  in  an 
external  understanding,  and  to  concern  the  value  of  the  copula 
only  in  regard  to  thought.  Accordingly  the  Problematic  Judg- 
ment is  supposed  to  consist  in  its  affirmation  or  negation  being 
taken  as  optional  or  possible,  the  Assertoric  Judgment  in  its 
being  taken  as  true — that  is,  as  actual,  and  the  Apodeictic 
Judgment  in  its  being  taken  as  necessary. — It  is  easy  to  see  why 
in  this  Judgment  the  judgment  itself  is  so  readily  surpassed, 
and  its  determination  regarded  as  something  merely  subjective. 


THE  JUDGMENT  595 

For  here  it  is  the  Notion,  or  subjective  element,  which  emerges 
again  in  the  Judgment  and  stands  related  to  an  immediate 
actuality.  But  this  subjective  quality  must  not  be  confused  with 
external  reflection,  which,  though  it  is  of  course  subjective,  is 
subjective  not  in  the  same  sense  as  the  Notion  itself;  this  Notion, 
which  re-emerges  from  the  Disjunctive  Judgment,  is  indeed  the 
opposite  of  a  mere  way  and  manner.  In  this  sense  the  earlier 
Judgments  are  merely  subjective,  for  they  are  based  upon  an 
abstraction  and  one-sidedness  in  which  the  Notion  is  lost. 
Rather,  the  Judgment  of  the  Notion  is  objective  and  is  truth 
as  against  them,  just  because  it  is  founded  upon  the  Notion 
in  its  determinateness  as  Notion  and  not  in  external  reflection 
or  in  relation  to  subjective,  that  is,  to  contingent,  thought. 

In  the  Disjunctive  Judgment  the  Notion  was  posited  as 
identity  of  universal  nature  and  its  particularization :  thus  the 
relation  of  the  Judgment  had  cancelled  itself.  This  concretion 
of  universality  and  particularization  is,  at  first,  simple  result ; 
it  must  now  develop  into  totality,  since  the  moments  which  it 
contains  have  perished  in  it  and  do  not  yet  stand  opposed  to 
each  other  in  definite  independence. — The  inadequacy  of  the 
result  may  also  be  expressed  more  definitely  in  these  terms, 
that  in  the  Disjunctive  Judgment  objective  universality  has 
indeed  become  complete  in  its  particularization,  but  that  the 
negative  unity  of  the  latter  passes  back  only  into  the  former, 
and  has  not  yet  determined  itself  to  be  the  third  term,  or 
individuality. — But,  in  so  far  as  the  result  is  itself  negative 
unity,  it  is  already  this  individuality;  but  now  it  is  only  this 
one  determinateness  which  must  now  posit  its  negativity,  sunder 
itself  into  the  extremes,  and  in  this  manner  finally  develop  into 
the  Syllogism. 

The  first  diremption  of  this  unity  is  that  Judgment  in  which 
it  is  posited  first  as  subject,  as  an  immediate  individual,  and 
then  as  predicate,  as  determinate  relation  of  its  moments. 

(a)  THE  ASSERTORIG  JUDGMENT 

• 

At  first  the  Judgment  of  the  Notion  is  immediate :  thus  it  is 
the  Assertoric  Judgment.  The  subject  is  any  concrete  individual, 
and  the  predicate  expresses  this  same  as  the  relation  of  its 
actuality,  determinateness,  or  character,  to  its  Notion.  ("This 


296  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

house  is  bad/'  "this  action  is  good.")  Further  then  it  contains 
this: — (a)  that  the  subject  ought  to  be  something;  its  universal 
nature  has  posited  itself  as  the  independent  Notion ;  (b]  par- 
ticularity, which  exists  as  character  and  external  existence  not 
only  because  of  its  immediacy  but  also  because  it  is  expressly 
distinguished  from  its  independent  and  universal  nature ;  and, 
since  the  Notion  is  independent,  this  existence  for  its  part  is 
indifferent  to  the  universal,  and  may,  or  may  not,  be  adequate 
to  it. — This  character  is  the  individuality  which  lies  beyond 
the  necessary  determination  of  the  universal  in  the  Disjunctive 
Judgment,  a  determination  which  exists  only  as  particularization 
of  the  species  and  as  negative  principle  of  the  genus.  In  so  far 
the  concrete  universality  which  emerged  from  the  Disjunctive 
Judgment  is  split  into  the  form  of  extremes  in  the  Assertoric 
Judgment;  these  extremes  lack  the  Notion  as  posited  unity 
which  relates  them. 

For  this  reason  the  Judgment  so  far  is  no  more  than  assertoric ; 
it  is  vouched  for  by  a  subjective  asseveration.  It  depends  upon 
some  outside  third  term  whether  something  is  good  or  bad, 
correct,  fitting  or  unfitting,  and  so  on.  But  the  fact  that  this 
dependence  is  posited  externally  means  that  it  is  only  in  itself  or 
internal. — Consequently  nobody  will  suppose  that  if  something 
is  good  or  bad  (and  so  forth),  it  is  good  only  in  subjective 
consciousness  but  perhaps  bad  in  itself,  or  that  good  and  bad, 
correct,  fitting,  and  the  rest,  are  not  predicates  of  the  objects 
themselves.  The  merely  subjective  element  of  the  assertion  in 
this  Judgment  consists  then  in  this,  that  the  connexion  between 
subject  and  predicate,  which  is  in  itself,  is  not  yet  posited,  or, 
what  is  the  same  thing,  that  it  is  merely  external;  as  yet  the 
copula  is  an  immediate  and  abstract  Being. 

Consequently  the  asseveration  of  the  Assertoric  Judgment 
is  opposed  with  equal  authority  by  its  opposite.  If  it  is  stated 
that  an  action  is  good,  the  opposite  assertion,  that  it  is  bad, 
has  an  equal  justification. — Or,  considered  by  itself,  the  subject 
of  the  Judgment  is  immediate  individual,  and  therefore  in  this 
abstraction  np  determinateness  is  yet  posited  in  it  containing 
its  relation  to  the  universal  Notion.  It  is  therefore  still  contingent 
whether  it  corresponds  to  the  Notion  or  not.  Hence  the  Judg- 
ment is  essentially  Problematic, 


THE  JUDGMENT  297 

(b)  THE  PROBLEMATIC  JUDGMENT 

The  Problematic  is  the  Assertoric  Judgment  in  so  far  as  the 
latter  must  equally  be  taken  positively  and  negatively. — From 
this  qualitative  side  the  Particular  Judgment  is  also  a  Prob- 
lematic Judgment,  for  it  is  equally  valid  positively  and  nega- 
tively ; — and  similarly  in  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  the  being 
of  the  subject  and  predicate  is  problematic; — through  these  too 
it  is  posited  that  the  Singular  and  the  Categorical  Judgments 
are  still  something  merely  subjective.  But  this  positing  is  more 
immanent  in  the  Problematic  Judgment  as  such  than  in  those 
others ;  for  in  the  former  the  content  of  the  predicate  is  the 
relation  of  the  subject  to  the  Notion,  and  here  therefore  the 
determination  of  the  immediate  as  contingent  is  actually  given. 

At  first  it  only  appears  to  be  problematic  whether  or  not 
the  predicate  is  to  be  connected  with  a  certain  subject,  and  in 
so  far  the  indeterminateness  falls  within  the  copula.  No  deter- 
mination can  emerge  therefrom  for  the  predicate,  for  it  is 
already  objective  and  concrete  universality.  Thus  the  prob- 
lematic element  concerns  the  immediacy  of  the  subject,  which 
thus  is  determined  as  contingency. — Further,  for  this  reason 
abstraction  must  not  be  made  from  the  individuality  of  the 
subject :  purged  of  individuality  it  would  be  merely  a  universal ; 
the  predicate  contains  just  this,  that  the  Notion  of  the  subject 
is  to  be  posited  in  relation  to  its  individuality. — It  is  impossible 
to  say  "the  house' '  or  "a  house  is  good" ;  it  is  necessary  to  add 
"according  to  its  character." — The  problematic  part  of  the 
subject  in  itself  constitutes  its  contingency  as  moment :  it  con- 
stitutes the  subjectivity  of  the  thing  (as  opposed  to  its  objective 
nature  or  Notion),  and  the  mere  manner  or  character  of  it. 

Thus  the  subject  itself  is  distinguished  into  its  universality 
or  objective  nature  (its  ought)  and  into  the  particular  character 
of  Determinate  Being.  Hence  it  contains  the  Ground  whether 
it  is  as  it  ought  to  be.  In  this  manner  it  is  equated  with  the 
predicate. — The  negativity  of  the  problematic,  in  so  far  as  it 
is  directed  against  the  immediacy  of  the  subject,*  accordingly 
means  only  this  its  original  division  (and  it  already  exists  in 
itself  as  the  unity  of  the  universal  and  the  particular)  into  these 
its  moments — a  division  which  is  the  Judgment  itself. 

It  may  further  be  observed  that  each  of  the  two  sides  of  the 


298  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

subject,  its  Notion  and  its  character,  might  be  called  its  sub- 
jectivity. The  Notion  is  the  introverted  universal  Essence  of 
a  thing,  or  its  negative  self-unity :  this  constitutes  its  subjectivity. 
But  a  thing  is  also  essentially  contingent,  and  has  an  external 
character;  and  this  is  equally  called  its  mere  subjectivity,  as 
opposed  to  that  other,  which  is  its  objectivity.  The  thing  itself 
is  indeed  just  this,  that  its  Notion  as  negative  self-unity  negates 
its  universality  and  transposes  itself  into  the  externality  of 
individuality. — Here  the  subject  of  the  Judgment  is  posited  as 
this  duality;  and  those  opposite  meanings  of  subjectivity  reside, 
according  to  their  truth,  in  one  entity. — The  significance  of  the 
subjective  part  has  itself  become  problematic  because  it  has 
lost  the  immediate  determinateness  which  it  had  in  the  imme- 
diate judgment,  together  with  its  definite  opposition  to  the 
predicate. — This  opposite  significance  of  the  subjective  element, 
which  occurs  also  in  the  reasonings  of  ordinary  reflection,  ought 
by  itself  at  least  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that  in  one  of 
these  it  has  no  truth.  The  double  significance  is  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  fact  that  each  by  itself  is  one-sided. 

The  problematic  being  thus  posited  as  the  problematic  ele- 
ment of  the  thing,  or  the  thing  together  with  its  character,  the 
Judgment  itself  is  no  longer  Problematic,  but  Apodeictic. 

(c)  THE  APODEIGTIG  JUDGMENT 

The  subject  of  the  Apodeictic  Judgment  ("the  house,  if  of 
such  and  such  a  character,  is  good3' ;  "the  action,  if  of  such  and 
such  a  character,  is  just")  contains  first  the  universal  which  it 
ought  to  be,  and  secondly  its  character;  the  latter  contains  the 
ground  why  a  predicate  of  the  Notion-Judgment  belongs,  or 
does  not  belong,  to  the  whole  of  the  subject;  that  is,  whether 
the  subject  does  or  does  not  correspond  to  its  Notion. — Now 
this  Judgment  is  truly  objective;  that  is,  it  is  the  truth  of 
judgment  in  general.  Subject  and  predicate  correspond  to  each 
other  and  have  the  same  content,  and  this  content  itself  is 
concrete  posited  universality ;  for  it  contains  the  two  moments, 
the  objective  universal  (or  genus)  and  the  individualized  entity. 
It  is  here  therefore  the  universal  which  is  itself,  and  continues 
itself  through  its  opposite,  and  is  universal  only  as  unity  with 
the  latter. — A  universal  like  the  predicates  "good,35  "fitting,55 


THE  JUDGMENT  299 

"correct/'  and  so  forth,  is  based  upon  an  ought  and  also  contains 
the  fact  that  Existence  corresponds ;  it  is  not  the  ought  nor  the 
genus  by  itself,  but  this  correspondence,  that  is  the  universality 
which  constitutes  the  predicate  of  the  Apodeictic  Judgment. 

The  subject  too  contains  these  two  moments  in  immediate 
unity,  as  Thing.  But  its  truth  is,  that  it  is  inwardly  severed  into 
its  ought  and  its  is ;  and  this  is  the  absolute  judgment  about  all 
actuality. — This  original  division,  which  is  the  omnipotence 
of  the  Notion,  is  equally  return  to  its  unity  and  absolute 
relation  to  each  other  of  ought  and  is,  and  so  causes  the  actual 
to  be  one  Thing;  its  inner  relation,  this  concrete  identity, 
constitutes  the  soul  of  the  Thing. 

The  transition  from  the  immediate  simplicity  of  the  Thing 
to  that  correspondence,  which  is  the  determinate  relation  of  its 
ought  and  its  is,  or  the  copula,  is  now  seen  to  lie  in  the  particular 
determinateness  of  the  Thing.  The  genus  is  the  universal  which 
is  in  and  for  itself,  and,  in  so  far,  appears  as  unrelated ;  while 
the  determinateness  is  that  which  in  this  universality  reflects 
itself  into  itself  but  also  into  an  Other.  Consequently  the 
Judgment  has  its  ground  in  the  character  of  the  subject,  and 
thereby  is  Apodeictic.  Thus  there  is  now  given  the  determinate 
and  completed  copula,  which  formerly  consisted  in  the  abstract 
"is"  but  has  now  developed  itself  further  into  ground  in  general. 
At  first  it  exists  in  the  subject  as  immediate  determinateness; 
but  it  is  equally  relation  to  the  predicate,  which  has  no  other 
content  than  just  this  correspondence,  or  the  relation  of  the 
subject  to  universality. 

The  form  of  Judgment  has  thus  perished :  first,  because 
subject  and  predicate  in  themselves  are  the  same  content;  but 
secondly  because  the  subject,  through  its  determinateness,  points 
beyond  itself  and  relates  itself  to  the  predicate.  But,  thirdly, 
this  process  of  relating  has  equally  passed  over  into  the  pre- 
dicate ;  it  constitutes  the  latter's  content  alone,  and  is  thus  the 
posited  relation  or  the  Judgment  itself. — Thus  the  concrete 
identity  of  the  Notion,  which  was  the  result  of  the  Disjunctive 
Judgment  and  constitutes  the  inner  foundation  of.the  Notion- 
Judgment,  is  established  in  the  whole,  whereas  originally  it  was 
posited  only  in  the  predicate. 

If  the  positive  part  of  this  result,  which  effects  the  transition 
of  the  Judgment  into  another  category,  is  further  considered, 


300  SCIENCE   OF   LOGIC 

it  appears  (as  was  seen)  that  subject  and  predicate  are  in  the 
Apodeictic  Judgment  each  the  whole  of  the  Notion. — The  unity 
of  the  Notion,  as  that  determinateness  which  constitutes  the 
copula  which  relates  them,  is  also  distinct  from  them.  At  first 
it  merely  stands  on  the  other  side  of  the  subject  as  its  immediate 
character.  But  its  essential  function  is  to  relate,  and  thus  it  is 
not  only  such  immediate  character,  but  also  that  which  passes 
through  subject  and  predicate  and  is  universal. — On  the  other 
hand,  since  subject  and  predicate  have  the  same  content, 
the  form-relation  is  posited  through  this  determinateness,  that 
is,  determinateness  as  a  universal,  or  particularity. — Thus  it 
contains  the  two  form-determinations  of  the  extremes,  and  is 
the  determinate  relation  of  subject  and  predicate;  it  is 
the  completed  copula  of  the  Judgment,  full  of  content,  the 
unity  of  the  Notion  which  has  re-emerged  out  of  the  Judgment, 
where  it  lost  itself  in  the  extremes. — Through  this  completion 
of  the  copula  the  Judgment  has  become  the  Syllogism. 


CHAPTER   III 
THE  SYLLOGISM 

IT  has  resulted  that  the  Syllogism  is  the  reconstruction  of  the 
Notion  in  the  Judgment,  and  is  thus  the  unity  and  truth  of 
both.  The  Notion  as  such  holds  its  moments  suspended  in  unity ; 
in  the  Judgment  this  unity  is  internal,  or,  what  is  the  same 
thing,  it  is  external,  and  the  moments,  although  related,  are 
posited  as  independent  extremes.  In  the  Syllogism  the  Notion- 
determinations  are  posited  like  the  extremes  of  the  Judgment ; 
at  the  same  time  their  determinate  unity  is  posited. 

The  Syllogism  thus  is  the  Notion  posited  in  its  completeness ; 
consequently  it  is  the  Reasonable. — Understanding  is  taken  to 
be  the  capacity  of  the  determinate  Notion,  which  is  held  fast 
for  itself  through  abstraction  and  the  form  of  universality.  But 
in  reason  the  determinate  Notions  are  posited  in  their  totality 
and  unity.  Consequently  not  only  is  the  Syllogism  reasonable, 
but  whatever  is  reasonable  is  a  Syllogism.  To  syllogize  has  for 
long  been  held  to  be  the  part  of  reason ;  on  the  other  hand, 
reason  in  and  for  itself,  and  reasonable  axioms  and  laws,  are 
spoken  of  in  a  manner  which  leaves  it  dark  how  the  former 
syllogizing  reason  is  connected  with  the  latter  reason  which 
is  the  source  of  laws  and  other  eternal  truths  and  absolute 
thoughts.  If  the  former  is  supposed  to  be  only  formal  reason, 
while  the  latter  is  supposed  to  produce  the  content,  then, 
according  to  this  distinction,  it  is  precisely  the  form  of  reason, 
the  Syllogism,  that  could  not  be  lacking  in  the  latter.  In  spite 
of  this  both  are  commonly  kept  apart,  and  when  one  is  men- 
tioned the  other  is  neglected,  so  that  the  reason  of  absolute 
thoughts  seems  to  be  ashamed  of  the  reason  of  the  Syllogism, 
and  the  Syllogism  to  be  cited  only  traditionally  as  an  activity 
of  reason.  But,  as  has  just  been  observed,  logical  Reason,  when 
it  is  considered  as  formal,  plainly  should  be  recognizable  in 
that  reason  which  concerns  itself  with  a  content :  indeed,  con- 
tent can  be  reasonable  only  through  the  form  of  reason.  It  is 
impossible  here  to  have  recourse  to  common  chat  about  reason, 


302  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

which  refrains  from  stating  what  is  to  be  understood  by  reason ; 
this  cognition  which  is  supposed  to  be  reasonable  is  generally 
so  busy  about  its  objects  that  it  forgets  to  cognize  reason  itself, 
distinguishing  and  designating  it  only  by  those  objects  which 
are  supposed  to  belong  to  it.  If  reason  is  supposed  to  be  that 
cognition  which  has  knowledge  of  God,  freedom,  right,  duty, 
the  infinite,  the  unconditioned,  the  supersensuous,  or  even 
yields  only  ideas  and  sentiments  about  them,  then  partly  these 
latter  are  only  negative  objects,  and  partly  the  first  question 
still  remains,  what  it  is  in  all  these  objects  that  makes  them 
reasonable. — It  is  this : — that  their  infinite  element  is  not  empty 
abstraction  from  the  finite,  nor  universality  without  content 
or  determination :  it  is  filled  universality,  the  Notion  which  is 
determinate,  and  contains  its  determinateness  in  this  veritable 
manner,  that  it  distinguishes  itself  in  itself  and  exists  as  the 
unity  of  these  its  rational  and  determinate  distinctions.  It  is 
only  thus  that  reason  rises  above  the  finite,  conditioned,  or 
sensuous,  or  however  else  it  may  be  determined ;  in  this  nega- 
tivity it  is  essentially  full  of  content,  for  it  is  unity  as  unity  of 
determinate  extremes;  but  thus  the  reasonable  is  Syllogism 
and  Syllogism  only. 

At  first  the  Syllogism  like  the  Judgment  is  immediate ;  hence 
its  determinations  (termini)  are  simple  and  abstract  determinate- 
nesses;  thus  it  is  the  Syllogism  of  Understanding.  If  no  progress 
is  made  beyond  this  form  of  it,  its  reasonableness,  although 
present  and  posited  in  it,  is  insignificant.  Its  essential  elements 
are  the  unity  of  the  extremes,  the  middle  term  which  unites 
and  the  ground  which  sustains  them.  Abstraction  holds  fast  the 
independence  of  the  extremes,  and,  in  so  doing,  opposes  to 
them  this  unity  as  a  determinateness  which  is  equally  fixed  and 
is  for  itself;  in  this  manner  it  takes  it  as  non-unity  rather  than 
as  unity.  The  expression  "middle55  (medius  terminus)  has  been 
introduced  from  spatial  imagery,  and  contributes  its  part  in 
preventing  progress  beyond  the  mutual  externality  of  the  deter- 
minations. Now  if  the  Syllogism  consists  in  this,  that  the  unity 
of  the  extremes  is  posited  in  it,  and  if  this  unity  is  taken  alto- 
gether (a)  as  a  particular  by  itself,  and  (b)  as  a  merely  external 
relation,  non-unity  being  made  the  essential  relation  of  the 
Syllogism,  then  reason  (and  the  Syllogism  is  reason)  does  not 
help  to  produce  reasonableness. 


THE  SYLLOGISM  303 

First  the  Qualitative  Syllogism,  in  which  the  determinations 
are  thus  immediately  and  abstractly  determined,  demonstrates 
in  itself  (because,  like  Judgment,  it  is  their  relation)  that  they 
are  not  such  abstract  determinations,  but  that  each  contains 
the  relation  to  the  other,  and  that  the  middle  not  only  contains 
particularity  as  against  the  determinations  of  the  extremes,  but 
also  contains  particularity  posited  in  itself. 

Through  this  its  dialectic  it  becomes  the  Syllogism  of  Reflec- 
tion, the  second  Syllogism, — with  determinations  as  such,  in 
each  of  which  essentially  the  other  shows ;  in  other  words,  they 
are  posited  as  mediated,  and  this,  according  to  the  Syllogism, 
they  are  supposed  to  be. 

Thirdly,  this  showing  or  mediatedness  is  intro-reflected,  and 
thus  the  Syllogism  is  determined  as  Syllogism  of  Necessity, 
where  the  objective  nature  of  the  thing  is  the  mediator.  This 
Syllogism  equally  determines  the  extremes  of  the  Notion  as 
totalities;  it  has  thus  reached  its  truth — the  correspondence 
of  its  Notion  (or  the  middle)  and  its  Existence  (or  the  extreme 
distinctions).  It  has  thus  passed  over  from  Subjectivity  into 
Objectivity. 

A 

THE  QUALITATIVE  SYLLOGISM 

i.  The  Syllogism  in  its  immediate  state  has  for  its  moments 
the  Notion-determinations  as  immediate.  They  thus  are  the 
abstract  determinatenesses  of  the  form ;  they  have  not  yet  been 
shaped  by  mediation  into  concreteness,  but  each  is  only  an 
individual  determinateness.  The  first  is  therefore  the  strictly 
formal  Syllogism.  The  formalism  of  syllogizing  consists  in 
making  a  halt  at  the  determination  of  this  first  Syllogism.  The 
Notion,  sundered  into  its  abstract  moments,  has  individuality 
and  universality  for  its  extremes,  and  it  itself  appears  as  the 
particularity  which  stands  between  them.  Because  of  their 
immediacy,  and  as  only  self-relating  determinatenesses,  they 
are  all  together  one  individual  content.  Particularity  at  first 
constitutes  the  middle  in  so  far  as  it  immediately  unites  in 
itself  the  two  moments  of  individuality  and  universality.  It  is 
determinate  and  therefore  subsumed  under  the  universal;  on 
the  other  hand  the  individual  (as  against  which  it  has  univer- 


304  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

sality)  is  subsumed  under  it.  But  at  first  this  concretion  is  only 
a  two-sidedness ;  in  the  immediate  Syllogism  the  medius  terminus 
is  immediate  and  therefore  is  as  simple  determinateness ;  and 
the  mediation  which  it  constitutes  is  not  yet  posited.  Now  the 
dialectic  movement  of  the  Qualitative  Syllogism  consists  in 
this,  that  the  mediation,  which  alone  constitutes  the  Syllogism, 
is  to  be  posited  in  its  moment;. 

(a)  FIRST  FIGURE  OF  THE  SYLLOGISM 

The  general  scheme  of  the  determinate  Syllogism  is 
/  —  P  —  U.  Individuality  joins  itself  with  universality  through 
particularity ;  and  the  individual  is  not  immediately  universal, 
but  only  through  particularity;  and  conversely  the  universal 
is  likewise  not  immediately  individual,  but  lowers  itself  to 
individuality  through  particularity. — These  determinations 
stand  opposed  to  each  other,  as  extremes,  and  are  one  in  a 
different  third  term.  Each  is  determinateness,  and  in  this  they 
are  identical;  and  this  their  general  determinateness  is  par- 
ticularity. But  they  are  extremes  against  the  latter  as  much 
as  against  each  other,  because  each  is  in  its  immediate  deter- 
minateness. 

The  general  meaning  of  this  syllogism  is  that  the  individual 
(which  as  such  is  infinite  self-relation,  and  therefore  would  be 
only  inner)  passes  through  particularity  into  Existence  as  into 
universality :  here  it  no  longer  belongs  to  itself  alone,  but  has 
external  connexions.  Conversely  the  individual  severs  itself  into 
its  determinateness  as  particularity;  in  this  separation  it  is 
therefore  concrete,  and,  as  self-relation  of  determinateness,  a 
universal  self-relating  entity,  and  therefore  also  one  which  is 
truly  individual ;  in  the  extreme  of  universality  it  has  passed 
out  of  externality  into  itself. — In  the  first  syllogism,  the  objective 
significance  of  the  Syllogism  is  present  only  in  a  superficial 
manner,  for  here  the  determinations  are  not  yet  posited  as  the 
unity  which  constitutes  the  essence  of  the  Syllogism.  The  latter 
is  still  subjective  in  so  far  as  the  abstract  meaning  which  its 
terms  have  is  not  in  and  for  itself,  but  is  thus  isolated  only  in 
subjective  consciousness. — For  the  rest,  the  relation  between 
individuality,  particularity,  and  universality  is  the  necessary 
and  essential  form-relation  (as  was  seen)  of  the  determinations 


THE  SYLLOGISM  305 

of  the  Syllogism ;  the  fault  does  not  consist  in  this  determinate- 
ness  of  the  form,  but  in  the  fact  that  under  this  form  each 
individual  determination  is  not  also  richer. — Aristotle  clung 
rather  to  the  bare  relation  of  inherence  when  he  described  the 
nature  of  the  Syllogism  as  follows : — "If  three  determinations 
are  so  related  that  one  extreme  is  in  the  whole  of  the  middle 
determination,  and  this  middle  determination  is  in  the  whole 
of  the  other  extreme,  then  these  two  extremes  are  necessarily 
bound  together.53  What  is  here  expressed  is  rather  the  repetition 
of  the  same  relation  of  inherence  (a)  between  one  extreme  and 
the  middle  and  (b]  between  the  middle  and  the  other  extreme, 
than  the  determinateness  of  the  three  terms  to  one  another. — 
Now  the  Syllogism  rests  upon  this  their  determinateness  against 
one  another,  so  that  it  is  immediately  plain  that  other  relations 
of  the  terms  which  result  from  the  other  Figures  can  have 
validity  as  rational  syllogisms  only  in  so  far  as  they  can  be 
reduced  to  this  original  relation.  There  are  not  various  kinds 
of  Figures  standing  by  the  side  of  the  First  Figure;  but,  first, 
in  so  far  as  they  are  supposed  to  be  correct  syllogisms,  they  rest 
only  upon  the  essential  form  of  the  Syllogism  in  general,  which 
is  the  First  Figure;  and  next,  in  so  far  as  they  diverge  from 
it,  they  are  modifications  into  which  this  first  abstract  form 
necessarily  passes  over,  whereby  it  determines  itself  further,  and 
towards  totality.  The  nature  of  this  process  will  soon  be  seen. 

The  general  formula  of  the  Syllogism  in  its  determinateness 
is,  then,  I  —  P  —  U.  The  individual  is  subsumed  under  the 
particular,  and  the  particular  under  the  universal ;  consequently 
the  individual  is  also  subsumed  under  the  universal.  Or,  the 
particular  inheres  in  the  individual,  and  the  universal  in  the 
particular ;  consequently  the  universal  inheres  also  in  the  indi- 
vidual. In  one  direction  (namely,  as  against  the  universal)  the 
particular  is  subject ;  it  is  predicate  as  against  the  individual ; 
or  again  it  is  individual  as  against  the  former  and  universal  as 
against  the  latter.  The  two  determinatenesses  are  united  in  it, 
and  therefore  the  extremes  are  bound  together  through  this 
their  unity.  The  "consequently "  appears  as  the  conclusion 
which  has  taken  place  in  the  subject,  and  is  supposed  to  be 
derived  from  subjective  insight  into  the  relation  between  the 
two  immediate  premisses.  Subjective  reflection  asserts  that  the 
two  relations  of  middle  to  extremes  are  particular  and  indeed 

VOL.  n.  u 


306  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

immediate  judgments  or  propositions;  and  thus  the  conclusion, 
as  mediated  relation,  must  be  allowed  to  be  a  particular 
proposition;  the  "consequently"  or  "accordingly33  expresses 
that  it  is  the  mediated  proposition.  But  this  "consequently35 
must  not  be  considered  as  a  determination  external  to  this 
proposition,  having  its  ground  and  seat  only  in  subjective 
reflection :  it  is  grounded  in  the  very  nature  of  the  extremes, 
whose  relation  is  again  asserted  to  be  mere  judgment  or  pro- 
position only  as  a  makeshift  by  abstracting  reflection,  while 
their  true  relation  is  posited  as  the  middle  term. — Accordingly 
it  is  a  merely  subjective  circumstance  that  "/  is  t/33  is  a  judg- 
ment; the  Syllogism  is  the  very  fact  that  this  is  not  merely 
a  judgment,  that  is,  not  a  relation  effected  through  the  bare 
copula  or  the  empty  "is,33  but  through  the  determinate  middle 
which  is  full  of  content. 

If  then  the  Syllogism  is  merely  regarded  as  consisting  of  three 
judgments,  this  is  a  formal  view  which  takes  no  account  of 
the  relation  of  determinations,  which  alone  are  important  in 
the  Syllogism.  And  altogether  it  is  a  merely  subjective  reflection 
which  separates  the  relation  of  the  terms  into  detached  premisses 
and  a  conclusion  distinct  from  them : — 

All  men  are  mortal, 
Gaius  is  a  man, 
therefore  he  is  mortal. 

Boredom  immediately  descends  when  such  a  syllogism  is  heard 
approaching; — this  is  due  to  the  otiose  form,  which  gives  an 
appearance  of  variety  through  the  detached  propositions  that, 
in  fact,  is  immediately  dissolved.  It  is  this  subjective  formation 
that  chiefly  causes  syllogizing  to  appear  as  a  subjective  make- 
shift to  which  reason  or  understanding  has  recourse  when  it 
cannot  cognize  immediately. — The  nature  of  things — the 
reasonable — does  not  indeed  proceed  by  first  setting  up  a  major 
premiss  (the  relation  of  a  particularity  to  a  persisting  universal), 
and  next  discovering  a  detached  relation  of  an  individuality 
to  the  particularity,  whence  at  length  and  thirdly  a  new  pro- 
position comes  to  light. — This  process  of  syllogizing  which 
proceeds  by  detached  propositions  is  just  a  subjective  form: 
the  nature  of  the  situation  is,  that  the  distinct  Notion-deter- 
minations of  the  thing  are  united  in  the  essential  unity.  This 


THE  SYLLOGISM  307 

reasonableness  is  not  a  makeshift;  rather,  in  opposition  to  the 
immediacy  of  relation  which  still  is  found  in  the  Judgment,  it 
is  the  objective,  while  the  immediacy  of  cognition  is  the  merely 
subjective;  the  Syllogism,  again,  is  the  truth  of  the  Judgment. — 
All  things  are  a  Syllogism,  a  universal  which  is  bound  together 
with  individuality  through  particularity ;  but  of  course  they 
are  not  wholes  consisting  of  three  propositions. 

2.  In  the  immediate  Syllogism  of  understanding  the  terms  have 
the  form  of  immediate  determinations ;  it  must  now  be  con- 
sidered from  this  side,  according  to  which  its  terms  are  content. 
So  far  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  Qualitative  Syllogism;  and 
the  Judgment  of  Inherence  has  this  same  side  of  qualitative 
determination.  Hence  the  terms  of  this  Syllogism,  like  the 
terms  of  that  Judgment,  are  individual  determinatenesses ; 
for,  through  its  self-relation,  the  determinateness  is  posited  as 
indifferent  to  form, — that  is,  as  content.  The  individual  is  any 
immediate  concrete  object;  particularity  is  one  of  its  deter- 
minatenesses, properties,  or  relations ;  and  universality  is  a  still 
more  abstract  and  more  individual  determinateness  in  the 
particular. — The  subject  is  immediately  determinate  and  there- 
fore is  not  yet  posited  in  its  Notion ;  hence  its  concretion  is  not 
reduced  to  the  essential  Notion-determinations ;  consequently 
its  self-relating  determinateness  is  indeterminate  and  infinite 
manifoldness.  In  this  immediacy  the  individual  has  an  infinity 
of  determinatenesses  which  belong  to  its  particularity;  con- 
sequently each  of  these  can  constitute  a  middle  term  for  it  in 
a  syllogism.  But  through  every  other  middle  term  it  binds  itself 
to  another  universal;  through  each  of  its  properties  it  has  a 
different  contact  and  connexion  with  Existence. — Further,  in 
comparison  with  the  universal,  the  middle  term  is  a  concrete; 
it  itself  contains  more  than  one  predicate,  and  through  the 
same  middle  term  the  individual  may  again  be  bound  to  more 
than  one  universal.  Which  of  the  many  properties  of  a  thing 
is  taken  up,  so  that  it  may  serve  to  connect  it  with  a  predicate, 
is,  therefore,  a  matter  of  pure  contingency  and  caprice ;  other 
middle  terms  serve  as  links  with  other  predicates,  and  even  one 
and  the  same  middle  term  may  be  the  transition  to  various 
predicates;  for,  being  particular  as  against  the  universal,  it 
contains  several  determinations. 

But  it  is  not  only  true  that  for  any  one  subject  an  indefinite 


300  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

number  of  syllogisms  are  equally  possible,  and  any  individual 
syllogism  is  in  its  content  contingent:  these  syllogisms,  which 
relate  to  the  same  subject,  must  further  pass  over  into  con- 
tradiction. For  difference  in  general,  which  at  first  is  indifferent 
variety,  is  equally  essentially  opposition.  The  concrete  is  no 
longer  something  which  merely  appears,  but  is  concrete  through 
the  unity  of  opposites  (which  have  determined  themselves 
to  be  Notion-moments)  in  the  Notion.  Now,  according  to 
the  qualitative  nature  of  the  terms  in  the  formal  syllogism,  the 
concrete  is  taken  up  according  to  some  particular  one  of  the 
determinations,  which  is  proper  to  it,  and  the  syllogism  allots 
to  it  the  predicate  which  corresponds  to  this  middle  term.  But, 
from  some  other  side,  a  syllogism  reaches  the  opposite  deter- 
minateness,  and  thus  the  former  conclusion  shows  itself  to  be 
false,  although  in  themselves  its  premisses  and  also  its  con- 
sequence are  quite  correct. — If,  from  the  middle  term  that  a 
canvas  has  been  painted  blue,  the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  there- 
fore it  is  blue,  then  this  conclusion  has  been  drawn  correctly ;  but 
in  spite  of  this  conclusion  the  canvas  may  be  green  if  it  has  also 
been  covered  with  yellow  colour  (from  which  latter  circumstance 
by  itself  it  would  follow  that  it  was  yellow). — If,  from  the 
middle  term  of  sensuousness,  it  is  concluded  that  man  is  neither 
good  nor  evil,  because  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  can  be 
predicated  of  the  sensuous,  the  syllogism  is  correct  but  the 
conclusion  is  false ;  for  the  middle  term  of  spirituality  is  equally 
valid  of  man  as  the  concrete. — From  the  middle  term  of  the 
gravity  of  planets,  satellites,  and  comets  as  against  the  sun, 
it  follows  correctly  that  these  bodies  are  falling  into  the  sun; 
but  they  do  not  do  so,  for  they  are  each  equally  for  itself  a 
private  centre  of  gravity,  or,  as  the  expression  runs,  they  are 
driven  by  centrifugal  force. — And  similarly  the  community  of 
goods  among  the  citizens  may  be  reached  from  the  middle 
term  of  sociality,  while  the  dissolution  of  the  state  follows  from 
the  middle  term  of  individuality,  if  it  is  followed  with  equal 
abstractness ;  as  has  happened  for  example  in  the  Holy  Roman 
Empire,  singe  men  clung  to  the  latter  middle  term. — Justly 
nothing  is  held  to  be  more  inadequate  than  such  a  formal 
syllogism,  since  it  rests  upon  contingency  or  caprice  which 
middle  term  is  used.  However  prettily  such  a  deduction  has 
run  through  its  syllogisms,  and  however  completely  its  correct- 


THE  SYLLOGISM  309 

ness  may  be  admitted,  it  still  leads  nowhere,  for  it  is  always 
possible  to  find  other  middle  terms  from  which  the  precise 
opposite  can  equally  correctly  be  deduced. — Kant's  Antinomies 
of  Reason  are  just  this,  that  first  one  determination  of  a  Notion 
is  made  the  foundation  of  the  Notion,  and  next,  and  with  equal 
necessity,  the  other. — But  this  inadequacy  and  contingency  of 
a  syllogism  must  not  be  put  to  the  account  merely  of  the  con- 
tent, as  though  they  were  independent  of  the  form,  and  the 
latter  alone  concerned  logic.  Rather  it  is  implied  in  the  form 
of  the  formal  Syllogism  that  the  content  is  such  a  one-sided 
quality;  this  one-sidedness  is  determined  in  it  through  the 
abstract  form.  For  the  content  is  one  quality  of  the  many 
qualities  or  determinations  of  a  concrete  object  or  Notion,  since 
formally  it  is  supposed  to  be  nothing  more  than  such  an  imme- 
diate and  individual  determinateness.  The  extreme  of  indi- 
viduality, as  abstract  individuality,  is  the  immediate  Concrete, 
and  consequently  the  infinitely  or  indeterminably  Manifold; 
the  middle  is  equally  abstract  particularity,  and  consequently 
is  one  individual  quality  among  these  manifold  qualities ;  and, 
equally,  the  other  extreme  is  the  abstract  universal.  The  formal 
Syllogism  therefore  is  essentially  something  wholly  contingent 
in  its  content  because  of  its  form ;  this  is  not  because  it  is  the 
case  that  it  is  contingent  for  the  Syllogism  whether  this  or  some 
other  object  is  submitted  to  it ;  logic  abstracts  from  this  content ; 
but,  in  so  far  as  a  subject  is  the  foundation,  it  is  contingent 
what  content-determinations  the  Syllogism  infers  from  it. 

3.  The  determinations  of  the  Syllogism  are  content-deter- 
minations in  so  far  as  they  are  immediate,  abstract,  and  intro- 
reflected  determinations.  But  their  essential  element  is  that 
they  are  not  such  intro-reflected  and  mutually  indifferent 
determinations,  and  that  they  are  form-determinations :  in  so 
far  they  are  essentially  relations.  These  relations  are,  firstly, 
those  of  the  extremes  to  the  middle, — relations  which  are 
immediate  (the premisses} ,  partly  of  particular  to  universal  (major 
premiss),  and  partly  of  individual  to  particular  (minor  premiss). 
Secondly,  there  is  the  relation  between  extreme  and  extreme : 
this  is  mediated  (the  conclusion).  These  immediate  relations,  the 
premisses,  are  propositions  or  judgments  in  general,  and  con- 
flict with  the  nature  of  the  Syllogism,  according  to  which  the 
distinct  Notion-determinations  are  not  immediately  related: 


3io  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

their  unity  too  is  supposed  to  be  posited:  the  truth  of  the 
Judgment  is  the  Syllogism.  The  premisses  can  remain  immediate 
relations  all  the  less,  because  their  content  consists  of  imme- 
diately distinct  determinations,  so  that  they  are  not  immediately 
identical  in  and  for  themselves ;  unless  they  are  pure  identical 
propositions,  that  is,  empty  tautologies  which  lead  to  nothing. 

It  is  therefore  generally  demanded  of  the  premisses  that  they 
shall  be  proved,  that  is,  that  they  too  are  to  be  represented 
as  conclusions.  Thus  the  two  premisses  provide  two  further 
syllogisms.  But  these  two  new  syllogisms  in  turn  provide  alto- 
gether four  premisses,  which  require  four  new  syllogisms ;  these 
have  eight  premisses,  whose  eight  syllogisms  in  turn  for  their 
sixteen  premisses  provide  sixteen  syllogisms,  and  so  to  infinity 
in  geometrical  progression. 

Here  again  that  progress  to  infinity  re-emerges  which  before 
occurred  in  the  lower  sphere  of  Being  but  was  no  longer  to  be 
expected  in  the  field  of  the  Notion,  of  the  absolute  intro- 
Reflection  out  of  the  finite,  and  the  region  of  free  infinity  and 
truth.  It  was  shown  in  the  sphere  of  Being  that  where  bad 
infinity,  whose  manifestation  the  progress  is,  emerges,  a  con- 
tradiction is  present  between  a  qualitative  Being  and  an 
impotent  Ought  which  passes  beyond  it ;  the  progress  itself  is 
the  repetition  of  the  demand  for  unity  which  has  arisen  as 
against  the  Qualitative,  and  the  continued  relapse  into  the 
barrier  which  is  inadequate  to  this  demand.  Now  in  the  formal 
Syllogism  the  immediate  relation  or  the  qualitative  Judgment 
is  the  foundation,  while  the  mediation  of  the  Syllogism  is  that 
which  is  posited  against  it  as  the  higher  truth.  The  infinite 
process  of  demonstration  of  the  premisses  does  not  solve  this 
contradiction,  but  only  perpetually  renews  it:  it  is  the  repe- 
tition of  one  and  the  same  original  defect. — The  truth  of  the 
infinite  progress  is  rather  that  both  it  and  the  form  which  by 
it  is  determined  as  defective  are  to  be  transcended. — This  form 
is  the  form  of  mediation  as  /  —  P  —  U.  The  two  relations 
/  —  P  and  P  —  U  are  supposed  to  be  mediated ;  if  this  is  done 
in  the  same  manner,  the  defective  form  I  —  P  —  U  is  doubled, 
and  so  to  infinity.  P  also  has  to  /  the  form-determination  of 
a  universal,  and  to  U  the  form-determination  of  an  individual, 
since  it  is  the  case  that  these  relations  are  Judgments.  They 
therefore  require  mediation;  but  when  they  have  this  form, 


THE  SYLLOGISM  311 

that  relation  only  arises  again  which  is  supposed  to  be  tran- 
scended. 

The  mediation  must  therefore  be  made  in  some  other  manner. 
For  the  mediation  of  P  —  £/,  /is  given ;  consequently  the 
mediation  must  take  the  form  P  —  I  —  U.  To  mediate  /  —  P, 
U  is  given ;  consequently  this  mediation  becomes  the  syllogism 
I-U-P. 

If  this  transition  is  considered  more  closely,  according  to  its 
Notion,  then,  first,  the  mediation  of  the  formal  Syllogism 
according  to  its  content  is  contingent,  as  was  shown  above.  In 
its  determinatenesses  the  immediate  individual  has  an  indeter- 
minable number  of  middle  terms,  and  these  in  turn  have 
altogether  a  similar  number  of  determinatenesses ;  so  that  it 
lies  with  an  external  caprice,  or,  generally,  in  some  external 
circumstance  or  contingent  determination,  which  is  the  univer- 
sal with  which  the  subject  of  the  Syllogism  is  to  be  bound 
together.  According  to  its  content  therefore  the  mediation  is 
nothing  either  necessary  or  universal ;  it  is  not  grounded  in  the 
Notion  of  the  thing :  the  ground  of  the  Syllogism  rather  is  that 
which  is  external  in  it,  that  is,  the  immediate ;  but,  among  the 
Notion-determinations,  the  immediate  is  the  individual. 

With  respect  to  form  similarly  mediation  has  for  presup- 
position the  immediacy  of  relation;  the  former  therefore  is  itself 
mediated — through  the  immediate,  that  is,  the  individual. — 
More  precisely,  through  the  conclusion  of  the  first  Syllogism 
the  individual  has  become  the  mediator.  The  conclusion  is 
/  —  £7;  it  thus  posits  the  individual  as  universal.  In  one  of  the 
premisses  (the  minor  premiss,  /  —  P)  it  already  exists  as 
particular,  that  is,  as  that  in  which  these  two  determinations 
are  united. — In  other  words,  the  conclusion  in  and  for  itself 
expresses  the  individual  as  universal;  not  in  an  immediate 
manner  but  through  mediation,  that  is,  as  a  necessary  relation. 
Simple  particularity  was  middle  term;  in  the  conclusion  this 
particularity  is  developed  and  posited  as  the  relation  of  the 
individual  and  of  universality.  But  as  yet  the  universal  is  a 
qualitative  determinateness,  a  predicate  of  the  individual ;  the 
individual,  being  determined  as  universal,  is  posited  as  the 
universality  of  the  extremes,  or  as  middle ;  for  itself  it  is  extreme 
of  individuality,  but  it  is  now  determined  as  universal,  and 
therefore  at  the  same  time  it  is  the  unity  of  the  two  extremes. 


312  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

(b)  THE  SECOND  »  FIGURE  :  P  —  I  —  U 

i .  The  truth  of  the  first  qualitative  Syllogism  is  that  some- 
thing is  not  bound  together  in  and  for  itself  with  a  qualitative 
determinateness  as  a  universal  determinateness,  but  is  bound 
contingently  or  in  an  individuality.  In  such  a  quality  the  sub- 
ject of  the  Syllogism  has  not  returned  into  its  Notion;  a  Notion 
is  formed  about  it  only  in  its  externality.  Immediacy  constitutes 
the  ground  of  the  relation,  and  therefore  the  mediation :  in  so 
far  the  individual  is  in  truth  the  middle. 

But  further  the  syllogism-relation  is  the  transcendence  of 
immediacy:  the  conclusion  is  not  an  immediate  relation,  but 
the  relation  is  mediated  by  a  third  term;  consequently  the 
mediation  is  now  determined  to  contain  a  negative  moment. 

In  this  second  Syllogism  the  premisses  are  P  —  I  and  I  —  U; 
only  the  first  of  these  premisses  remains  immediate ;  the  second, 
/  —  £/,  already  is  mediated  (by  the  first  Syllogism) :  thus  the 
second  Syllogism  presupposes  the  first,  while  conversely  the 
first  presupposes  the  second. — Here  the  two  extremes  are  deter- 
mined against  each  other  as  particular  and  universal;  in  so 
far  the  latter  still  has  its  place,  it  is  predicate.  The  particular 
however  has  exchanged  its  place;  it  is  subject,  or  is  posited 
under  the  determination  of  extreme  of  individuality,  while  the 
individual  is  posited  with  the  determination  of  middle  or  of 
particularity.  Accordingly  neither  is  now  the  abstract  imme- 
diacy which  it  was  in  the  first  Syllogism.  They  are  nevertheless 
not  yet  posited  as  concrete:  because  each  stands  in  the  place 
of  the  other,  it  is  posited  in  its  own  determination  and  also 
(though  only  externally)  in  the  other  determination. 

The  determinate  and  objective  meaning  of  this  Syllogism  is, 
that  the  universal  is  a  definite  particular  not  in  and  for  itself 
(for  in  fact  it  is  the  totality  of  its  particulars),  but  that  it  is 
thus  one  of  its  species  through  individuality ;  its  other  species  are 
excluded  from  it  through  immediate  externality.  On  the  other 
hand  the  particular,  in  the  same  manner,  is  not  immediately 
and  in  and  for  itself  the  universal,  but  negative  unity  strips  it  of 
determinateness  and  thus  raises  it  into  universality. — Individu- 
ality is  negatively  related  to  the  particular  in  so  far  as  it  is  sup- 
posed to  be  its  predicate ;  it  is  not  predicate  of  the  particular. 

1  [The  ordinary  Third  Figure.  See  p.  314  below.] 


THE  SYLLOGISM  313 

2.  As  yet  however  the  terms  are  each  an  immediate  deter- 
minateness;  through  themselves  they  have  not  developed  to 
any  objective  significance.  The  changed  position  which  is  given 
to  two  of  them  is  formal,  and  at  first  it  is  external  to  them ; 
therefore,  as  in  the  first  Syllogism,  each  is  a  content  indifferent 
to  the  other — two  qualities  which  are  connected  by  a  contin- 
gent individuality  and  not  in  and  for  themselves. 

The  Syllogism  of  the  First  Figure  was  the  immediate  Syllo- 
gism, or,  equally,  it  was  Syllogism  in  so  far  as  it  is  in  its  Notion, 
as  abstract  form  which  has  not  yet  realized  itself  in  its  deter- 
minations. Now  this  pure  form  has  passed  over  into  another 
Figure;  hence  (i)  this  is  the  beginning  of  the  realization  of 
the  Notion,  the  negative  moment  of  mediation — and  hence  a 
further  form-determinateness — being  posited  in  the  determi- 
nateness  of  the  terms  which  so  far  is  immediate  and  qualita- 
tive.— (2)  At  the  same  time  the  pure  form  of  the  Syllogism  now 
becomes  other ;  the  Syllogism  no  longer  completely  corresponds 
to  it,  and  the  determinateness  which  is  posited  in  its  terms  is 
different  from  the  original  form-determination. — In  so  far  as 
it  is  considered  only  as  a  subjective  Syllogism  which  takes  place 
in  an  external  reflection,  it  is  reckoned  as  a  species  of  Syllogism 
which  should  correspond  to  the  genus,  namely  the  general 
scheme  of  /  —  P  —  U.  But  at  first  it  does  not  correspond  to 
this ;  its  two  premisses  are  P  —  I  (or  /  —  P),  and  I  —  U;  con- 
sequently the  middle  term  is  subsumed,  or  is  subject,  on  each 
of  the  two  occasions,  so  that  the  other  two  terms  inhere  in  it ; 
and  it  is  therefore  not  a  middle  which  is  supposed  first  to 
subsume  (or  to  be  predicate)  and  next  to  be  subsumed  (or 
to  be  subject),  or  to  inhere  in  the  one  term,  while  the 
other  inheres  in  it. — This  Syllogism  does  not  correspond  to  the 
general  form  of  the  Syllogism;  and  the  true  meaning  of 
this  fact  is,  that  the  form  has  passed  over  into  it,  since  its 
truth  consists  in  being  a  subjective  and  contingent  binding 
together.  If  the  conclusion  in  the  Second  Figure  (without 
recourse  being  had  to  the  limitation  which  is  about  to  be 
mentioned  and  which  makes  it  to  be  something  indeterminate) 
is  correct,  then  it  is  correct  because  it  is  so  for  itself,  and  not 
because  it  is  the  conclusion  of  this  Syllogism.  But  this  is  also 
the  case  with  the  conclusion  of  the  First  Figure ;  and  it  is  this 
its  truth  which  is  posited  by  the  Second  Figure. — The  opinion 


3H  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

which  holds  that  the  Second  Figure  is  only  one. species  over- 
looks the  necessary  transition  from  the  first  into  this  second 
form,  and  a  halt  is  made  at  the  first  as  being  the  true  form. 
Consequently,  in  so  far  as  a  correct  syllogism,  in  this  subjective 
sense,  can  be  constructed  in  the  Second  Figure  (which,  from 
old  habit,  is,  without  reason  given,  quoted  as  the  third),  such 
a  Syllogism  ought  to  be  conformable  to  the  first;  and,  since 
the  one  premiss  /  —  U  has  the  relation  of  subsumption  of  the 
middle  term  under  one  extreme,  the  other  premiss  P  —  I 
must  be  given  the  relation  opposite  to  that  which  it  has ;  and 
it  ought  to  be  possible  to  subsume  P  under  /.  But  such  a 
relation  would  be  the  transcendence  of  the  determinate  judg- 
ment /  is  P,  and  could  only  take  place  in  an  indeterminate, 
or  a  particular,  judgment;  whence  the  conclusion  in  this  figure 
can  only  be  particular.  But,  as  was  observed  above,  the  Par- 
ticular Judgment  is  as  well  positive  as  negative — a  conclusion 
to  which  for  this  reason  no  great  value  can  be  attached. — And 
in  so  far  as  particular  and  universal  are  extremes,  and  imme- 
diate and  indifferent  determinatenesses  as  against  each  other, 
their  relation  itself  is  indifferent ;  either  one  may  arbitrarily  be 
taken  as  major  or  as  minor  term,  and  consequently  either 
premiss  may  be  taken  indifferently  as  major  or  minor. 

3.  The  conclusion,  being  positive  as  well  as  negative,  is  a 
relation  indifferent  to  these  determinatenesses  and  therefore 
universal.  More  closely  considered,  the  mediation  of  the  first 
Syllogism  was  in  itself  contingent :  in  the  second  Syllogism  this 
contingency  is  posited.  It  is  thus  a  self-transcending  mediation ; 
the  mediation  has  the  determination  of  individuality  and  imme- 
diacy. What  is  bound  together  by  this  Syllogism  must  rather 
be  identical  in  itself  and  immediately;  for  that  middle  (the 
immediate  individuality)  is  infinitely  manifold  and  external 
determinateness.  Thus  rather  self-external  mediation  is  posited 
in  this  mediation.  But  the  externality  of  individuality  is  univer- 
sality; and  this  mediation  through  the  immediate  individual 
points  beyond  itself  to  that  which  is  other  to  it  and  which  thus 
takes  place  through  the  universal. — Or  what  is  to  be  united 
by  the  second  Syllogism  must  be  bound  together  immediately ; 
the  immediacy  which  is  its  foundation  does  not  serve  to  effect 
a  definite  binding.  The  immediacy  to  which  it  points  forward 
is  other  to  its  own  immediacy  (which  is  the  transcended  first 


THE  SYLLOGISM  315 

immediacy  of  Being) ;   it  is  therefore  intro-reflected  or  self- 
existent  immediacy,  and  abstract  universal. 

According  to  the  side  which  has  been  considered,  the  tran- 
sition of  this  Syllogism  was  a  becoming  other,  like  the  transition 
of  Being,  because  its  foundation  is  the  qualitative — immediate 
individuality.  But  according  to  the  Notion,  individuality  binds 
together  particular  and  universal  in  so  far  as  it  transcends  the 
determinateness  of  the  particular,  which  process  manifests  itself 
as  the  contingency  of  this  Syllogism.  The  extremes  are  not 
bound  together  by  their  determinate  relation,  which  is  their 
middle  term;  consequently  it  is  not  their  determinate  unity, 
and  that  positive  unity  which  does  belong  to  it  is  only  abstract 
universality.  But  the  middle  term  being  posited  in  this  deter- 
mination (which  is  its  truth),  a  different  form  of  the  Syllogism 
has  arisen. 


(c)  THE  THIRD  FIGURE  :  /  —  U  —  P 

i.  This  third  Syllogism  has  no  longer  any  immediate  pre- 
miss ;  the  relation  I  —  U  has  been  mediated  by  the  first  Syllo- 
gism, and  the  relation  P  —  U  by  the  second.  Hence  it  pre- 
supposes the  two  first  Syllogisms;  but,  conversely,  these  two 
presuppose  it,  and  indeed  each  one  presupposes  the  two  others. 
Thus  the  determination  in  general  of  the  Syllogism  is  completed 
in  it. — What  this  reciprocal  mediation  contains  is  this,  that  each 
Syllogism  is  mediation  for  itself  but  is  not  in  itself  the  totality 
thereof;  it  has  in  it  an  immediacy  whose  mediation  lies  out- 
side it. 

If  the  Syllogism  /  —  U  —  P  is  considered  in  itself,  it  is  the 
truth  of  the  formal  Syllogism.  It  expresses  this,  that  the  media- 
tion of  the  latter  is  the  abstractly  universal,  and  that  the 
extremes  according  to  their  essential  determinateness  are  con- 
tained not  in  the  middle  but  only  according  to  their  univer- 
sality; so  that  precisely  that  which  here  is  supposed  to  be 
mediated  is  not  bound  together  in  it.  Thus  that  in  which  the 
formalism  of  the  Syllogism  consists  is  here  posited ;  the  terms 
of  this  Syllogism  have  a  content  immediate  and  indifferent 
to  form,  or  (which  is  the  same  thing)  they  are  form-deter- 
minations which  have  not  yet  reflected  themselves  so  as  to 
become  content-determinations. 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

2.  The  middle  of  this  Syllogism  is  the  unity  of  the  extremes; 
but  in  this  unity  abstraction  is  made  from  their  determinatencss : 
it  is  the  indeterminate  universal.  This  universal,  however,  at 
the  same  time  is  distinct  (as  abstract)  from  the  extremes  (as 
determinate) ;  in  so  far,  however,  it  is  itself  also  determinate 
as  against  these,  and  the  whole  is  a  Syllogism,  whose  relation 
to  its  Notion  must  be  considered.  The  middle  as  the  universal 
is  related  as  subsuming,  or  as  predicate,  to  its  two  extremes: 
it  is  not  also  subsumed,  nor  is  it  subject.  Consequently,  in  so 
far  as  this  Figure  is  supposed  to  correspond  to  the  Syllogism 
as  being  one  species  of  Syllogism,  this  can  happen  only  if  the 
one  relation  / —  U  already  has  the  due  relationship  while  at  the 
same  time  the  other,  U  —  P,  also  acquires  the  same  relation- 
ship. This  happens  in  a  judgment  where  the  relation  of  subject 
and  predicate  is  indifferent,  that  is,  in  a  negative  judgment.  Thus 
the  Syllogism  becomes  legitimate,  but  the  conclusion,  neces- 
sarily, negative. 

Thus  also  it  has  now  become  indifferent  which  of  the  two 
determinations  of  this  proposition  is  taken  as  predicate  and 
which  as  subject;  and,  in  the  conclusion,  whether  it  is  taken 
as  extreme  of  individuality  or  of  particularity — that  is,  whether 
it  is  taken  as  minor  or  as  major  term.  According  to  the  common 
assumption  it  depends  upon  this  which  of  the  two  premisses 
is  to  be  major  and  which  minor;  thus  this  has  here  become 
indifferent. — This  is  the  ground  of  the  ordinary  Fourth  Figure 
of  the  Syllogism;  Aristotle  was  not  acquainted  with  it,  and 
indeed  it  deals  with  a  wholly  uninteresting  and  empty  dis- 
tinction. Here  the  immediate  position  of  the  terms  is  the  reverse 
of  their  position  in  the  First  Figure ;  in  the  negative  conclusion 
subject  and  predicate,  according  to  the  formal  consideration 
of  the  Judgment,  have  not  the  determinate  relation  of  subject 
and  predicate,  and  one  can  take  the  place  of  the  other ;  and 
therefore  it  is  indifferent  which  term  is  taken  as  subject  and 
which  as  predicate ;  and  consequently  it  is  equally  indifferent 
which  premiss  is  taken  as  major  and  which  as  minor. — This 
indifference,*  which  is  aided  by  the  determination  of  particu- 
larity (especially  in  so  far  as  it  is  remarked  that  it  may  be  taken 
in  the  comprehensive  sense),  renders  this  Fourth  Figure  quite 
nugatory. 

3.  The  objective  meaning  of  the  Syllogism  where  the  uni- 


THE  SYLLOGISM  317 

versal  is  the  middle  is  that  the  mediating  term  as  unity  of  the 
extremes  is  essentially  universal.  But  here  this  universality  is 
only  qualitative  or  abstract,  and  therefore  does  not  contain 
the  determinateness  of  the  extremes.  If  it  is  to  be  brought  about 
that  they  are  bound  together,  this  must  have  its  ground  in  a 
mediation  which  lies  outside  this  Syllogism ;  and,  with  respect 
to  this  ground,  it  is  quite  as  contingent  as  in  the  previous  forms 
of  Syllogisms.  But,  since  the  universal  is  determined  as  the 
middle  and  does  not  contain  the  determinateness  of  the  ex- 
tremes, this  determinateness  is  posited  as  completely  indifferent 
and  external. — From  this  bare  abstraction  a  Fourth  Figure  of 
the  Syllogism  has,  indeed,  arisen — that  of  the  relationless 
Syllogism,  or  U  —  U  —  £/,  which  abstracts  from  the  qualitative 
distinction  of  the  terms,  and  thus  has  their  merely  external 
unity,  namely  their  equality,  for  determination. 


(d)  THE  FOURTH  FIGURE  :  U  —  U  —  U,  OR  THE  MATHEMATICAL 

SYLLOGISM 

1 ,  The  Mathematical  Syllogism  runs :  If  two  things  or  deter- 
minations are  equal  to  a  third,  they  are  equal  to  each  other. — Here 
the  relation  of  inherence  or  subsumption  of  terms  is  extinct. 

The  mediating  term  here  is  a  third  term  in  general ;  but  it 
has  no  determination  whatever  as  against  its  extremes.  Con- 
sequently each  one  of  the  three  terms  may  equally  well  be  the 
third  term  which  mediates.  Which  shall  be  used  to  that  end, 
and  hence  which  of  the  three  relations  are  to  be  taken  as  the 
immediate  and  which  as  the  mediated,  depends  upon  external 
circumstances  and  other  conditions — namely,  upon  the  question 
which  two  of  them  are  the  immediately  given  terms.  But  this 
determination  does  not  concern  the  Syllogism  itself  and  is 
entirely  external. 

2.  In  mathematics  the  Mathematical  Syllogism  counts  as  an 
axiom, — as  an  elementary  and  self-evident  proposition  which 
neither  admits  nor  requires  proof  (that  is,  mediation),  pre- 
supposes nothing  beyond  itself,  and  cannot  be  derived  from 
anything. — When  this  its  advantage  of  immediate  self-evidence 
is  more  closely  considered,  it  appears  that  it  is  implied  in  the 
formalism  of  this  Syllogism,  which  abstracts  from  every  quali- 


3i8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

tative  variety  of  its  determinations  and  accepts  only  their  quan- 
titative equality  or  inequality.  But  for  this  very  reason  it  is  not 
without  presupposition  and  not  unmediated ;  that  quantitative 
determination  which  is  alone  regarded  in  it  exists  only  by  virtue 
of  abstraction  from  qualitative  distinction  and  Notion-deter- 
minations.— Lines  or  figures  which  are  posited  as  equal  to 
each  other  are  understood  only  according  to  their  magnitude : 
a  triangle  is  said  to  be  equal  to  a  quadrilateral,  but  only  in 
area  and  not  because  a  triangle  is  a  quadrilateral ;  and  so  on. 
And  similarly  the  Notion  and  its  determinations  have  no  place 
in  this  syllogizing;  it  thus  is  in  no  way  a  notional  process; 
understanding  even  has  not  so  much  as  the  formal  and 
abstract  Notion-determinations  before  itself;  and  the  self- 
evident  element  of  this  Syllogism  rests  only  upon  the  fact  that 
it  is  so  abstract  and  poor  in  thought-determination. 

3.  But  the  result  of  the  Qualitative  Syllogism  is  not  merely 
this  abstraction  from  every  Notion-determinateness ;  the  nega- 
tivity of  the  immediate  and  abstract  determinations,  which 
emerged  from  it,  has  another  and  positive  side,  namely  that 
where  its  other  is  posited  into  abstract  determinateness,  and 
it  thereby  has  become  concrete. 

First,  all  Qualitative  Syllogisms  presuppose  one  another,  and 
the  extremes  which  are  bound  together  in  the  conclusions  are 
true  and  bound  together  in  and  for  themselves  only  in  so  far 
as  they  are  otherwise  united  by  an  identity  which  is  grounded 
elsewhere ;  the  middle  term,  having  the  nature  which  it  has  in 
these  Syllogisms  which  have  been  considered,  is  supposed  to 
be  their  Notion-unity,  but  in  fact  is  only  a  formal  deter- 
minateness which  is  not  posited  as  their  concrete  unity.  But 
this  presupposed  element  in  each  of  these  mediations  is  not 
merely  a  given  immediacy  in  general  (as  in  the  Mathematical 
Syllogism),  but  is  itself  a  mediation — namely,  for  each  of  the 
other  two  Syllogisms.  There  is  before  us  here,  therefore,  in  fact 
a  mediation  founded,  not  upon  a  given  immediacy,  but  upon 
mediation.  Consequently  this  is  the  mediation  of  Reflection ; 
not  quantitative  or  abstracting  from  the  form  of  mediation, 
but  rather  mediation  relating  itself  to  mediation.  The  circle 
of  reciprocal  presupposing  which  these  Syllogisms  form  one 
with  another  is  the  self-return  of  this  presupposing,  which 
here  forms  a  totality,  having  that  Other,  towards  which  each 


3*9 

individual  Syllogism  points,  not  outside  (which  would  be  the 
work  of  abstraction),  but  included  within  the  circle. 

It  has  further  appeared,  from  the  side  of  the  individual  form- 
determinations,  that  in  this  Whole  of  the  formal  Syllogisms 
each  individual  determination  has  in  turn  had  the  place  of 
middle.  Immediately  it  was  determined  as  particularity ;  it  then 
determined  itself  by  dialectic  movement  as  individuality  and 
universality.  Similarly  each  of  these  determinations  passed 
through  the  places  of  the  two  extremes.  The  merely  negative 
result  is  the  extinction  of  the  qualitative  form-determinations 
in  the  merely  quantitative  Mathematical  Syllogism.  What  how- 
ever is  in  truth  given  here  is  this  positive  result,  that  mediation 
does  not  take  place  through  an  individual  qualitative  form- 
determinateness,  but  through  the  concrete  identity  of  the  form- 
determinations.  The  deficiency  and  formalism  of  the  three 
Syllogistic  Figures  which  have  been  considered  consists  pre- 
cisely in  this,  that  such  an  individual  determinateness  was 
supposed  to  constitute  their  middle. — The  mediation  has  thus 
determined  itself  as  the  indifference  of  the  immediate  or 
abstract  form-determinations  and  as  positive  Reflection  of  one 
into  the  other.  And  now  the  immediate  Qualitative  Syllogism 
has  passed  over  into  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection. 

Observation 

In  the  exposition  of  the  nature  of  the  Syllogism  and  its  various 
forms,  which  has  here  been  given,  that  element  too  was 
cursorily  regarded  which  is  of  main  interest  in  the  ordinary 
consideration  and  treatment  of  Syllogisms,  namely,  the  question 
how  in  each  figure  a  correct  syllogism  may  be  made.  However, 
only  the  chief  moment  was  indicated,  and  those  instances  and 
complications  were  omitted  which  arise  when  the  distinction 
between  positive  and  negative  judgments,  together  with  quan- 
titative determination  (especially  particularity),  is  also  taken 
into  consideration. — Some  observations  about  the  common 
view  and  treatment  of  the  Syllogism  in  logic  willt  not  be  out 
of  place  here. — It  is  well  known  that  this  system  was  de- 
veloped to  such  a  degree  of  exactitude  that  its  so-called  subtleties 
became  universally  tedious  and  disgusting.  Natural  understand- 
ing asserted  itself  against  the  unsubstantial  forms  of  reflection  in 


320  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

every  field  of  intellectual  development ;  and  thus  it  came  to 
revolt  against  this  artificial  cognition  of  the  forms  of  reason, 
and  thought  that  it  might  dispense  with  this  science  because 
it  effected  the  individual  operations  of  thought  specified  therein 
naturally  by  itself  and  without  having  to  learn  them  for  the 
purpose.   Indeed,  with  regard  to  reasonable  thought,  if  it 
depended  upon  the  laborious  study  of  syllogistic  formulae,  man 
would  be  in  as  sorry  a  case  as  he  would  be  (as  was  observed 
in  the   Preface)    if  he  could  not  walk  or  digest  without  a 
previous  study  of  anatomy  and  physiology.  The  study  of  these 
sciences  may  not  be  without  value  in  dietetics;  and  similarly 
the  study  of  the  forms  of  reason  may  doubtless  be  allowed  to 
have  an  influence  of  even  greater  importance  upon  the  correct- 
ness of  thought.  But  even  if  this  side  (which  concerns  the 
formation  of  subjective  thought  and  is  therefore  really  an 
educational  subject)  is  here  neglected,  it  will  have  to  be  ad- 
mitted that  the  study  which  concerns  itself  with  the  manners 
and  laws  by  which  reason  operates  must  be  of  the  greatest 
interest  for  itself,— at  any  rate  not  less  than  a  knowledge  of 
the  laws  of  nature  and  their  particular  formations.  It  is  esteemed 
no  mean  thing  to  have  discovered  some  sixty  species  of  parrots, 
one  hundred  and  thirty-seven  species  of  veronica,  and  so  forth; 
but  it  must  be  considered  much  less  a  negligible  matter  to 
discover  the  forms  of  reason ;  for  is  not  a  syllogistic  figure  an 
infinitely  higher  matter  than  a  species  of  parrot  or  of  veronica? 
If,  therefore,  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  just  barbaric  to  despise 
all  knowledge  of  the  forms  of  Reason,  still  it  must  equally  be 
admitted  that  the  ordinary  presentation  of  the  Syllogism  and 
of  its  particular  formations  is  not  a  reasonable  cognition ;  it 
does  not  present  them  as  forms  of  reason,  and  the  contempt 
which  syllogistic  lore  suffered  was  due  to  its  uselessness.  Its 
flaw  is  this,  that  it  just  stops  short  at  that  syllogistic  form  of 
understanding  according  to  which  the  Notion-determinations 
are  taken  as  abstract  formal  determinations.  It  is  all  the  more 
inconsistent  to  retain  them  as  abstract  qualities  because  in  the 
Syllogism  tjheir  relations  constitute  the  essential  part;  it  is 
already  implicit  in  inherence  and  subsumption  that  the  in- 
dividual is  itself  universal  because  the  universal  inheres  in  it, 
and  that  the  universal  is  itself  individual  because  it  subsumes 
the  individual,  while,  more  precisely,  the  Syllogism  expressly 


THE   SYLLOGISM  32* 

posits  this  unity  as  middle,  its  determination  being  just  media- 
tion, which  means  that  now  the  Notion-determinations  are 
no  longer  external  to  each  other  (as  in  the  Judgment)  but 
rather  have  for  foundation  their  unity. — The  Notion  of  the 
Syllogism  thus  declares  the  imperfection  of  the  formal  Syllogism, 
in  which  the  middle  is  to  be  held  fast,  not  as  unity  of  the 
extremes,  but  as  a  formal  determination,  abstract  and  quali- 
tatively distinct  from  them. — And  this  consideration  becomes 
further  exhausted  of  content  because  such  relations  and  judg- 
ments are  still  assumed  to  be  complete  relations,  even  though 
their  formal  determinations  become  indifferent  (as  in  the 
Negative  and  the  Particular  Judgment)  so  that  they  approxi- 
mate to  propositions. — The  qualitative  form  /  —  P  —  U  is 
counted  as  the  ultimate  and  absolute,  so  that  the  dialectic  view 
of  the  Syllogism  is  altogether  lost;  the  remaining  Syllogisms 
accordingly  are  not  considered  as  necessary  mutations  of  this 
form,  but  as  species. — It  is  here  indifferent  whether  the  first 
formal  Syllogism  is  considered  only  as  one  species  alongside 
the  others,  or  as  genus  and  species  simultaneously;  the  latter 
happens  when  the  other  Syllogisms  are  reduced  to  the  first.  If 
this  reduction  is  not  performed  expressly,  the  same  formal 
relation  of  external  subsumption  which  is  expressed  by  the  First 
Figure  always  lies  at  the  bottom. 

This  formal  Syllogism  is  a  contradiction  in  this  way,  that 
the  middle  is  supposed  to  be  the  determinate  unity  of  the 
extremes,  but  exists  not  as  this  unity,  but  as  a  determination 
which  is  qualitatively  distinct  from  those  terms  of  which  it  is 
supposed  to  be  the  unity.  The  Syllogism  is  this  contradiction, 
and  therefore  is  dialectical  in  itself.  Its  dialectic  movement 
presents  it  in  the  complete  Notion-moments,  and  shows  that 
not  only  this  relation  of  subsumption  (or  particularity)  but, 
equally  essentially,  negative  unity  and  universality  are  moments 
of  the  process  of  binding  together.  Each  of  these,  in  so  far  as 
for  itself  it  is  only  a  one-sided  moment  of  particularity,  is  like- 
wise an  incomplete  middle;  but,  simultaneously,  they  con- 
stitute together  the  developed  determinations  of  t  these.  The 
entire  course  taken  through  the  three  Figures  shows  the  middle 
in  each  of  these  determinations  one  after  the  other ;  and  the  true 
result  which  emerges  is  that  the  middle  is  not  one  from  among 
them,  but  their  totality. 

VOL.    II.  X 


3C2  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

The  flaw  of  the  formal  Syllogism  therefore  is  not  in  its  form 
— which  indeed  is  the  form  of  reasonableness — but  in  the  fact 
that  it  is  only  abstract,  that  is,  notionless,  form.  It  has  been 
shown  that  abstract  determination,  because  of  its  abstract  self- 
relation,  can  equally  be  considered  as  content;  in  this  regard 
the  formal  Syllogism  only  effects  this,  that  the  relation  of  a 
subject  to  a  predicate  follows  or  does  not  follow  from  a  given 
middle  term.  To  prove  a  proposition  by  such  a  Syllogism  is 
useless;  the  middle  term  is  abstractly  determinate  and  is  a 
notionless  quality,  and  therefore  there  may  equally  be  other 
middle  terms  from  which  the  opposite  follows,  and  it  is  even 
possible  to  derive  opposite  predicates,  through  further  Syllo- 
gisms, from  the  same  middle  term. — The  formal  Syllogism  not 
only  effects  very  little,  but  also  is  extremely  simple ;  the  many 
rules  which  have  been  invented  are  tiresome  both  because  they 
contrast  so  harshly  with  the  simple  nature  of  the  thing  in  hand, 
and  also  because  they  refer  to  those  cases  where  the  formal 
content  of  the  Syllogism  is  finally  reduced  through  external 
form-determination, — chiefly  that  of  particularity,   especially 
since  to  this  end  it  must  be  taken  in  the  comprehensive  sense ; 
formally  too  only  quite  empty  results  are  here  produced. — But 
the  justest  and  most  important  aspect  of  the  disfavour  into 
which  Syllogistics  have  fallen  is  this,  that  they  constitute  a 
cumbrous  and  notionless  occupation  with  an  object  whose  only 
content  is  the  Notion  itself. — The  multitude  of  syllogistic  rules 
recalls  the  procedure  of  arithmeticians,  who  also  give  a  mul- 
titude  of  rules   about   arithmetical   operations,   all   of  which 
presuppose  that  the  Notion  of  the  operations  is  not  in  the  mind. 
— But  numbers  are  a  notionless  material,  and  the  operations 
of  arithmetic  are  external  processes  of  connexion  or  separation 
— a  mechanical  procedure:  indeed,  machines  have  been  in- 
vented which  effect  these  operations.  It  is  the  severest  and  most 
violent  contradiction  if  the  form-determinations  of  the  Syllo- 
gism, which  are  Notions,  are  treated  as  a  notionless  material. 

The  extreme  example  of  this  notionless  treatment  of  the 
Notion-determinations  of  the  Syllogism  is  probably  Leibniz's 
subjection  of  the  Syllogism  (Opp.  Tom.  II.  P.  I)  to  the  calculus 
of  combinations,  by  which  he  calculated  how  many  formations 
of  the  Syllogism  are  possible — regard  being  had  to  the  dis- 
tinctions between  positive  and  negative,  and  between  universal, 


THE   SYLLOGISM  333 

particular,  indeterminate,  and  singular  Judgments :  2,048  such 
combinations  are  found  to  be  possible,  of  which,  after  exclusion 
of  the  useless  figures,  24  useful  figures  remain. — Leibniz  makes 
much  of  the  utility  of  combinatory  analysis  in  helping  to 
find  not  only  the  forms  of  the  Syllogism,  but  also  combinations 
of  other  Notions.  The  operation  by  means  of  which  this  is 
discovered  is  the  same  as  that  by  which  it  is  calculated  how 
many  combinations  of  letters  are  possible  in  an  alphabet,  how 
many  casts  in  a  game  of  dice,  how  many  games  in  a  hand  of 
ombre,  and  so  forth.  Thus  here  the  determinations  of  the 
Syllogism  are  placed  in  one  class  with  the  points  of  dice  and 
of  a  card  of  ombre ;  what  is  reasonable  is  taken  as  dead  and 
notionless,  and  the  peculiarity  of  the  Notion  and  its  determina- 
tions (namely  that,  as  spiritual  essences,  they  relate  themselves 
and  through  this  relating  transcend  their  immediate  deter- 
mination) are  left  on  one  side. — Leibniz's  application  of  the 
calculus  of  combinations  to  the  Syllogism  and  to  the  connexion 
of  other  Notions  differed  in  nothing  from  the  notorious  art  of 
Lullus1  except  that  it  was  more  methodical  in  regard  to  amount ; 
in  senselessness  they  were  equal. — This  procedure  is  associated 
with  a  favourite  idea  of  Leibniz,  conceived  in  his  youth  and 
never  surrendered  in  spite  of  its  immaturity  and  shallowness, 
the  idea  of  a  general  characteristic  of  Notions, — a  set  of  symbols 
in  which  each  Notion  is  represented  as  a  relation  derived  from 
others  or  as  related  to  others ; — as  though  in  that  reasonable 
connexion  which  is  essentially  dialectic  a  content  retained 
those  determinations  which  it  had  while  it  was  fixed  by  itself. 
Undoubtedly  PloucquetV  calculus  adopted  the  most  con- 
sistent method  by  which  the  relation  of  the  Syllogism  admits 
of  being  subjected  to  a  calculus.  Its  basis  is  this,  that  abstraction 
is  made  from  the  relation-distinction  (the  distinction  of  in- 
dividuality, particularity,  and  universality)  in  the  Judgment, 
and  the  abstract  identity  of  subject  and  predicate  is  retained ; 
they  are  thus  mathematically  equal, — which  relation  makes  the 
process  of  syllogizing  a  wholly  empty  and  tautological  casting 
of  propositions. — In  the  proposition  "the  rose  is  red/5  the 
predicate  is  not  to  denote  red  in  general,  but  only  the  particular 

1  Raymundus  Lullus,  c.  1232-1315:  Ars  magna  s.  generalis. 
3  Ploucquet,    Gottfried,     1716-1790:    Prindpia    de   substantiis  et  phaenomenis, 
accedit  methodus  calculandi  in  logicis  ab  ipso  inventa,  1753. 


3«4  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

red  of  the  rose;  in  the  proposition  "all  Christians  are  men,"  the 
predicate  is  to  denote  those  men  only  who  are  Christians. 
From  this  proposition  and  the  proposition  "the  Jews  are  not 
Christians"  follows  the  conclusion  (which  Mendelssohn  found 
so  poor  a  recommendation  of  this  syllogistic  calculus)  "there- 
fore the  Jews  are  not  men"  (namely  not  those  men  that  the 
Christians  are). — Ploucquet  states  that  it  follows  from  his  dis- 
covery "posse  etiam  rudes  mechanice  totam  logicam  doceri,  uti  pueri 
arithmeticam  docentur,  ita  quidem,  ut  nulla  formidine  in  ratiociniis  suis 
errandi  torqueri,  vel  fallaciis  circumveniri  possint,  si  in  calculo  non 
errant" — This  recommendation — that  by  means  of  the  calculus 
the  whole  of  logic  can  mechanically  be  inculcated  into  the 
ignorant — is  perhaps  the  worst  thing  that  could  be  said  about 
an  invention  touching  the  presentation  of  the  science  of  logic. 


B 
THE  SYLLOGISM  OF  REFLECTION 

In  the  course  of  the  Qualitative  Syllogism  the  abstract 
element  of  its  determinations  was  transcended ;  thus  each  term 
has  posited  itself  as  such  a  determinateness  as  has  the  other 
determinateness  showing  within  it.  Apart  from  the  abstract 
terms  the  Syllogism  also  contains  their  relation,  which,  in  the 
conclusion,  is  posited  as  mediated  and  necessary;  thus  every 
determinateness  in  truth  is  posited  not  as  individual  for  itself, 
but  as  relation  of  the  others,  or  as  concrete  determinateness. 

The  middle  was  abstract  particularity:  it  was  for  itself  a 
simple  determinateness,  and  was  middle  only  externally  and 
relatively  to  the  independent  extremes.  It  is  now  posited  as  the 
totality  of  the  determinations :  it  is  thus  the  posited  unity  of  the 
extremes;  but  so  far  it  is  the  unity  of  Reflection,  which  it 
includes  within  itself— an  inclusion  which,  as  first  transcendence 
of  immediacy  and  first  relating  of  the  determinations,  is  not 
yet  the  absolute  identity  of  the  Notion. 

The  extremes  are  the  determinations  of  the  Judgment  of 
Reflection — individuality  and  universality,  properly  so  called, 
as  determination  of  relation,  or  a  Reflection  comprehending 
a  manifold  within  itself.  But  also — as  was  shown  in  the  Judg- 
ment of  Reflection — the  individual  subject  contains  determi- 


THE   SYLLOGISM  32$ 

nateness  as  utterly  intro-reflected  universality  and  apart  from 
mere  individuality  (which  belongs  to  form), — determinateness 
which  is  genus  presupposed  or  here  still  taken  as  immediate. 

From  this  determinateness  of  the  extremes,  which  belongs 
to  the  course  of  the  determination  of  the  Judgment,  the  further 
content  of  the  middle  term  results :  the  middle  distinguishes 
the  Syllogism  from  the  Judgment,  and  is  therefore  of  capital 
importance  in  the  Syllogism.  The  middle  contains  (i)  indi- 
viduality, (2)  the  same,  but  extended  into  universality  as  All, 
(3)  the  fundamental  universality  which  unites  utterly  within 
itself  individuality  and  abstract  universality,  that  is,  the  genus. 
— It  is  now  only  in  this  manner  that  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection 
has  the  proper  determinateness  of  form,  the  middle  being 
posited  as  totality  of  the  determinations ;  the  immediate  Syllo- 
gism is,  as  against  it,  the  indeterminate  Syllogism,  since  the 
middle  still  is  abstract  particularity  in  which  the  moments  of 
its  Notion  are  not  yet  posited. — This  first  Syllogism  of  Reflection 
may  be  called  the  Syllogism  of  Allness. 

(a)  THE  SYLLOGISM  OF  ALLNESS 

I.  The  Syllogism  of  Allness  is  the  syllogism  of  understanding 
in  its  completeness,  but  as  yet  no  more.  It  is  indeed  an  essential 
requirement  for  the  Notion  that  the  middle  is  not  abstract 
particularity  in  it,  but  is  developed  into  its  moments  and  is 
therefore  concrete ;  but,  at  first  at  least,  the  form  of  Allness 
comprehends  the  individual  into  universality  only  externally, 
and,  conversely,  it  still  preserves  the  individual  as  something 
which  persists  immediately  for  itself,  in  universality.  The 
negation  of  the  immediacy  of  the  determinations  which  was 
the  result  of  the  Qualitative  Syllogism  is  only  first  negation, 
and  not  yet  the  negation  of  negation  or  absolute  intro- 
Reflection.  They  are  still  therefore  the  foundation  of  that 
universality  of  Reflection  which  comprehends  the  individual 
determinations  within  itself, — in  other  words,  Allness  is  not  yet 
the  universality  of  the  Notion,  but  the  external .  universality 
of  Reflection. 

The  Qualitative  Syllogism  was  contingent  because  its  middle 
term  is  a  single  determinateness  of  the  concrete  subject,  and 
as  such  admits  an  indeterminable  number  of  other  such  middle 


326  SCIENCE  OF   LOGIC 

terms,  so  that  it  was  possible  for  the  subject  to  be  bound 
together  with  predicates  indeterminably  other,  or  opposite. 
But  now  the  middle  contains  individuality  and  thereby  is 
concrete  itself,  so  that  it  can  serve  to  connect  only  one  pre- 
dicate with  the  subject,  which  belongs  to  the  latter  as  concrete. 
— For  example,  from  the  middle  term  *  'green5 '  it  might  be 
concluded  that  a  picture  is  pleasant  because  green  is  pleasant 
to  the  eye,  or  it  might  be  inferred  that  a  poem  or  a  building, 
and  so  forth,  is  beautiful  because  it  possesses  regularity;  but 
nevertheless  the  picture  (and  the  other  things)  might  be  ugly, 
because  of  other  determinations  from  which  one  might  con- 
clude to  this  latter  predicate.  But  now  the  middle  term  has  the 
determination  of  Allness,  and  therefore  contains  green  or 
regularity  as  concrete,  which  for  this  very  reason  is  not  the 
abstraction  of  something  merely  green  or  regular  and  so  forth; 
and  with  this  concrete  term  only  such  predicates  can  be  con- 
nected as  are  adequate  to  the  totality  of  the  concrete. — In  the 
judgment  "the  green  (or  regular)  is  pleasant,"  the  subject  is 
only  the  abstraction  of  green,  or  regularity ;  but  in  the  pro- 
position "whatever  is  green  (or  regular)  is  pleasant,33  the  subject 
is  all  actual,  concrete  objects  which  are  green  or  regular, — 
which  consequently  are  taken  as  concrete  with  all  their  proper- 
ties which  they  have  besides  greenness  or  regularity. 

2.  But  the  very  perfection  of  Reflection  in  this  Syllogism  now 
makes  it  a  mere  delusion.  The  middle  term  has  the  deter- 
minateness  of  "all" ;  to  these  latter  the  predicate  which  is 
bound  together  with  the  subject  belongs  immediately  in  the 
major  premiss.  But  all  are  all  individuals;  and  thus  each 
individual  subject  already  contains  the  predicate  immediately, 
and  does  not  wait  to  receive  it  through  the  Syllogism. — Or  again 
the  subject  obtains  a  predicate  as  a  consequence  in  the  con- 
clusion ;  but  the  major  premiss  already  contains  this  conclusion ; 
thus  the  major  premiss  is  not  valid  for  itself;  it  is  not  an 
immediate,  presupposed  judgment,  but  already  presupposes 
the  conclusion  of  which  it  was  supposed  to  be  the  ground. — 
In  the  favourite  complete  Syllogism: — 

All  men  are  mortal, 
Gaius  is  a  man, 
therefore  Gaius  is  mortal, 


THE  SYLLOGISM  397 

the  major  premiss  is  correct  only  because  and  in  so  far  as  the 
conclusion  is  correct ;  if  Gaius  happened  not  to  be  mortal,  the 
major  premiss  would  be  incorrect.  The  proposition  destined  to 
be  conclusion  must  be  correct  immediately  for  itself,  because 
otherwise  the  major  premiss  cannot  comprehend  all  the  in- 
dividuals ;  before  the  major  premiss  can  be  pronounced  correct, 
the  question  exists  whether  the  conclusion  itself  may  not  testify 
against  it. 

3.  In  the  Qualitative  Syllogism  it  resulted  from  the  Notion 
of  the  Syllogism  that  the  premisses,  as  immediate,  contradicted 
the  conclusion,  which  is  the  mediation  demanded  by  the  Notion 
of  the  Syllogism ;  so  that  the  first  Syllogism  presupposed  others, 
and  conversely  these  others  presupposed  it.  And  it  is  posited 
in  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection  itself  that  the  major  premiss 
presupposes  its  conclusion,  since  the  former  contains  a  con- 
nexion of  the  individual  with  a  predicate,  which  connexion 
precisely  is  itself  to  be  the  conclusion. 

The  position  which  has  been  reached  may  then  be  thus 
expressed,  that  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection  is  no  more  than  an 
external  and  empty  show  of  syllogizing,  and  that  consequently 
the  essence  of  this  syllogizing  rests  upon  subjective  individuality, 
which  latter  therefore  constitutes  the  middle  and  is  to  be  posited 
as  such, — the  individuality  which  exists  as  such  and  has  univer- 
sality only  in  an  external  manner. — Or  again,  it  appeared  from 
the  content  of  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection,  more  precisely 
examined,  that  the  individual  stands  in  an  immediate  and  not 
in  an  inferred  relation  to  its  predicate;  and  that  the  major 
premiss  (the  connexion  of  a  particular  with  a  universal,  or, 
better,  of  a  formally  universal  term  with  one  which  is  universal 
in  itself)  is  mediated  by  the  relation  of  individuality  which 
exists  in  the  former — individuality  as  Allness.  Now  this  is  the 
Syllogism  of  Induction. 

(b)  THE  SYLLOGISM  OF  INDUCTION 

i .  The  Syllogism  of  Allness  stands  under  the  scheme  of  the 
first  figure  I  —  P  —  U,  the  Syllogism  of  Induction  under  that 
of  the  second  U  —  I  —  P,  since  it  once  more  has  individuality 
for  middle, — not  abstract  individuality,  but  individuality 
posited  as  complete,  that  is,  posited  with  the  determination 


3*8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

opposite  to  itself,  namely  universality. — The  one  extreme  is 
just  any  predicate  which  is  common  to  all  these  individuals; 
its  relation  to  these  constitutes  the  immediate  premisses,  which 
are  such  that  one  of  them,  in  the  previous  Syllogism,  was  to  be 
conclusion. — The  other  extreme  can  be  the  immediate  genus 
as  it  is  found  in  the  middle  of  the  previous  Syllogism  or  in  the 
subject  of  the  Universal  Judgment,  which  genus  is  exhausted 
in  the  collected  individuals  (or  species)  of  the  middle.  Con- 
sequently the  Syllogism  has  this  shape: — 


i 
U  -     -P 

i 

i 

to  infinity. 

2.  The  second  figure  of  the  formal  Syllogism  U  —  I  —  P  did 
not  correspond  to  the  scheme,  because  in  one  of  the  premisses  /, 
which  constitutes  the  middle,  did  not  exist  as  subsuming,  or  as 
predicate.  This  fault  is  removed  in  Induction :  here  the  middle 
is  "all  the  individuals" ;  the  proposition  U  —  /,  which  contains 
the  objective  universal  or  the  genus  as  segregated  into  an 
extreme,  as  subject,  has  a  predicate  which  at  least  is  co-exten- 
sive with  it,  and  therefore,  for  external  reflection,  identical. 
Lion,  elephant,  and  so  on,  constitute  the  genus  of  quadruped ; 
the  distinction  that  the  same  content  is  first  posited  in  indi- 
viduality and  next  in  universality  is  thus  a  merely  indifferent 
form-determination — an  indifference  which  is  the  result  of  the 
formal  Syllogism  posited  in  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection :  here 
it  is  posited  through  the  equality  of  extent. 

Consequently  Induction  is  not  the  Syllogism  of  mere  per- 
ception or  of  contingent  Existence,  like  the  second  figure  which 
corresponds  to  it,  but  it  is  the  Syllogism  of  Experience — of  the 
subjective  comprehension  of  the  individual  in  the  genus  and 
the  binding  together  of  the  genus  with  a  universal  determinate- 
ness  because  it  is  found  in  all  the  individuals.  This  Syllogism 
has  the  further  objective  meaning  that  the  immediate  genus 
determines  itself  through  the  totality  of  individuality  into  a 
universal  property — that  it  has  its  existence  in  a  universal 
relation  or  characteristic. — However,  the  objective  meaning 


THE  SYLLOGISM  3*9 

of  this  Syllogism,  as  of  the  others,  is  as  yet  only  their  inner 
Notion,  and  is  not  yet  here  posited. 

3.  Rather,  Induction  is  still  essentially  a  subjective  Syllogism. 
The  middle  consists  of  the  individuals  in  their  immediacy;  their 
comprehension  into  the  genus  by  means  of  allness  is  an  external 
reflection.  Because  of  the  persistent  immediacy  of  the  individuals 
and  the  externality  which  follows  thence,  universality  is  no 
more  than  completeness,  or  rather  remains  a  problem  to  be 
solved. — Consequently  the  progress  to  bad  infinity  once  more 
emerges  in  universality  :  individuality  is  to  be  posited  as  identical 
with  universality ;  but,  the  individuals  being  equally  posited  as 
immediate,  this  unity  remains  no  more  than  an  enduring  Ought ; 
it  is  a  unity  of  equality ;  the  terms  which  are  to  be  identical 
at  the  same  time  are  not  to  be  identical,  a,  b,  cy  d,  e,  but  only  to 
infinity,  constitute  the  genus  and  give  perfected  experience. 
In  so  far,  the  conclusion  of  Induction  remains  problematical. 

But,  while  it  expresses  that  perception,  in  order  to  become 
experience,  ought  to  be  continued  into  infinity,  it  presupposes 
that  the  genus  is  bound  together  in  and  for  itself  with  its 
determinateness.  Thus  really  it  presupposes  its  conclusion  as 
immediate,  just  as  the  Syllogism  of  Allness  presupposes  the 
conclusion  for  one  of  its  premisses. — An  experience  which  rests 
upon  induction  is  taken  as  valid  although  admittedly  the  per- 
ception is  not  completed;  but  no  more  can  be  assumed  than 
that  no  example  can  be  produced  contrary  to  this  experience, 
in  so  far  as  the  latter  is  true  in  and  for  itself.  Thus  the  Syllogism 
through  Induction  grounds  itself  upon  an  immediacy,  but  not 
upon  that  upon  which  it  ought  to  ground  itself,  upon  the 
existent  immediacy  of  individuality ;  it  grounds  itself  upon  that 
only  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  or  universal  immediacy. — The 
fundamental  determination  of  Induction  is  that  it  is  a  Syllo- 
gism; if  individuality  is  taken  as  the  essential  determination  of 
the  middle,  and  universality  only  as  its  external  determination, 
the  middle  falls  apart  into  two  unconnected  parts,  and  no 
Syllogism  would  be  there :  this  externality  belongs  rather  to  the 
extremes.  Individuality  can  be  middle  only  as0  immediately 
identical  with  universality;  such  universality  is  really  objective 
— it  is  the  genus. — This  may  also  be  considered  in  the  following 
manner:  universality  is  external,  but  essential,  to  the  deter- 
mination of  individuality,  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  middle 


3$o  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

of  Induction ;  but  such  an  external  entity  is  equally  immediately 
its  opposite,  the  internal. — The  truth  of  the  Syllogism  of  In- 
duction is  therefore  such  a  Syllogism  as  has  an  individuality 
for  middle  which  is  universality  immediately  in  itself — the 
Syllogism  of  Analogy. 

(c)  THE  SYLLOGISM  OF  ANALOGY 

1 .  This  Syllogism  has  for  its  abstract  scheme  the  third  figure 
of  the  immediate  Syllogism,  I  —  U  —  P.  But  its  middle  no 
longer  is  any  individual  quality,  but  a  universality  which  is 
the  intro-Reflection  of  some  concrete  entity,  and  therefore  its 
nature; — and  conversely,  because  it  is  universality  as  univer- 
sality of  a  concrete,  it  also  is  this  concrete  in  itself. — Thus  here 
an  individual  is  the  middle,  but  is  so  according  to  its  general 
nature;  further  some  other  individual  is  the  extreme,  which 
has  the  same  general  nature  as  the  former.  For  example : — 

The  earth  has  inhabitants, 
the  moon  is  an  earth, 
therefore  the  moon  has  inhabitants. 

2.  The  analogy  is  the  more  superficial,  the  more  the  universal 
(in  which  the  two  individuals  are  one,  and  according  to  which 
one  individual  becomes  predicate  of  the  other)  is  a  mere  quality 
or  (since  quality  here  is  taken  subjectively)  some  characteristic 
or  other,  when  the  identity  of  the  two  in  it  is  taken  as  a  mere 
similarity.  But  there  should  be  no  place  in  logic  for  such  a 
superficiality  as  that  to  which  a  form  of  understanding  or 
reason  is  reduced  by  being  degraded  to  the  sphere  of  mere 
sensuous  representation. — It  is  also  improper  to  represent  the 
major  premiss  of  this  Syllogism  as  running  thus:  "whatever 
resembles  an  object  in  some  characteristics  also  resembles  it  in 
others."  In  this  manner  the  form  of  the  Syllogism  is  expressed 
as  a  content,  and  its  empirical  content  (which  really  deserves 
that  name)  is  altogether  localized  in  the  minor  premiss.  Thus 
also  the  whole  form  of,  for  example,  the  first  Syllogism  might 
be  expressed  as  its  major  premiss: — "if  A  is  subsumed  under 
another  term  in  which  a  third  term  inheres,  then  this  third 
term  too  inheres  in  A ;  now  .  .  ."  and  so  forth.  But  its  empirical 
content  is  irrelevant  to  the  Syllogism  itself,  and  it  is  as  indifferent 


THE  SYLLOGISM  331 

to  make  its  own  form  the  content  of  a  major  premiss  as  if  any 
other  empirical  content  were  taken  for  it.  But,  in  so  far  as  this 
content  were  irrelevant  in  the  Syllogism  of  Analogy  (which 
content  contains  nothing  but  the  peculiar  form  of  the  Syllo- 
gism), so  far  also  it  would  be  irrelevant  in  the  first  Syllogism ; 
that  is,  that  is  irrelevant  which  makes  the  Syllogism  a  syllogism. 
— What  matters  is  always  the  form  of  the  Syllogism,  whether 
it  has  for  empirical  content  this  form  itself  or  something  else. 
Thus  the  Syllogism  of  Analogy  is  a  peculiar  form,  and  it  is 
quite  invalid  to  refuse  to  regard  it  as  such  because  its  form 
might  be  made  the  content  or  matter  of  a  major  premiss  and 
matter  does  not  concern  logic. — This  idea  may  be  fostered  in 
the  Syllogism  of  Analogy,  and  possibly  in  the  Syllogism  of 
Induction,  by  the  fact  that  in  these  the  middle  and  the  extremes 
are  determined  further  than  in  the  merely  formal  Syllogism, 
so  that  the  form-determination,  because  it  is  no  longer  simple 
and  abstract,  must  also  appear  as  content-determination.  But 
the  fact  that  the  form  does  in  this  manner  determine  itself  as 
content  is,  first,  a  necessary  progress  of  the  formal  element,  and 
thus  touches  essentially  the  nature  of  the  Syllogism;  conse- 
quently, secondly,  such  a  content-determination  cannot  be 
looked  upon  in  the  same  light  as  any  other  empirical  content, 
nor  can  abstraction  be  made  from  it. 

The  form  of  the  Syllogism  of  Analogy  may  also  be  considered 
in  that  expression  of  its  major  premiss  which  states  that  if  two 
objects  agree  in  one  or  more  properties,  then  the  one  has  still 
a  further  property  which  belongs  to  the  other ;  and  if  this  is 
done  it  might  seem  as  though  this  Syllogism  contained  four 
determinations,  a  quaternio  terminorum ; — which  circumstance 
made  it  so  difficult  to  reduce  Analogy  into  the  form  of  a  formal 
Syllogism. — There  are  two  individuals,  thirdly  there  is  a  pro- 
perty which  is  immediately  assumed  to  be  common  to  them, 
and  fourthly  the  other  property,  which  the  one  individual  has 
immediately,  while  the  other  obtains  it  only  through  the 
Syllogism. — The  reason  for  this  is  that  in  the  Syllogism  of 
Analogy  (as  was  seen)  the  middle  is  posited  as  individuality, 
but  also  and  immediately  as  the  latter5 s  true  universality. — In 
Induction,  apart  from  the  two  extremes,  the  middle  is  an 
indeterminable  number  of  individuals ;  hence  in  this  Syllogism 
an  infinite  number  of  terms  ought  to  be  enumerated. — In  the 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Syllogism  of  Allness,  universality  is  in  the  middle  only  as 
external  form-determination  of  allness,  but  in  the  Syllogism  of 
Analogy  as  essential  universality.  In  the  above  example  the 
middle  term  (the  earth)  is  taken  as  a  concrete  which  in  its 
truth  is  a  universal  nature  or  genus  as  much  as  an  individual. 

From  this  side  the  quaternio  terminorum  does  not  make  Analogy 
into  an  imperfect  Syllogism.  But  the  Syllogism  does  suffer  this 
from  another  side ;  for  although  one  subject  has  the  same  general 
nature  as  the  other,  it  is  not  determined  whether  the  one 
subject  has  that  determinateness  which  is  also  inferred  for  the 
other  by  virtue  of  its  nature  or  of  its  particularity ;  whether, 
for  example,  the  earth  has  inhabitants  as  heavenly  body  in 
general,  or  as  this  heavenly  body  in  particular. — Analogy  is  still 
a  Syllogism  of  Reflection  in  so  far  as  individuality  and  univer- 
sality are  immediately  united  in  its  middle.  Because  of  this 
immediacy  the  externality  of  the  unity  of  Reflection  is  pre- 
served ;  the  individual  is  genus  only  in  itself,  it  is  not  posited  in 
that  negativity  through  which  its  determinateness  would  be 
the  peculiar  determinateness  of  the  genus.  For  this  reason  the 
predicate  which  belongs  to  the  individual  of  the  middle  is  not, 
for  that  reason,  also  predicate  of  the  other  individual,  although 
both  belong  to  the  same  genus. 

3.  /  —  P  ("the  moon  has  inhabitants")  is  the  conclusion; 
but  one  of  the  premisses  ("the  earth  has  inhabitants")  is  like- 
wise /  —  P ;  and  in  so  far  as  /  —  P  is  to  be  a  conclusion,  this 
includes  the  demand  that  that  premiss  too  shall  be  one.  This 
Syllogism  thus  is  its  own  postulation  as  against  the  immediacy 
which  it  contains :  it  presupposes  its  own  conclusion.  A  Quali- 
tative Syllogism  has  its  presupposition  in  the  other  Qualitative 
Syllogisms :  in  the  Syllogisms  which  have  just  been  considered 
the  presupposition  has  been  planted  within  them,  since  they 
are  Syllogisms  of  Reflection.  Accordingly,  since  the  Syllogism 
of  Analogy  is  the  postulation  of  its  mediation  as  against  the 
immediacy  with  which  its  mediation  is  infected,  it  is  the  moment 
of  individuality  of  which  this  Syllogism  demands  that  it  shall 
be  transcended.  Thus  the  objective  universal  remains  for  the 
middle,  purged  of  immediacy — the  genus. — In  the  Syllogism 
of  Analogy  the  genus  was  moment  of  the  middle  only  as  imme- 
diate presupposition ;  since  the  Syllogism  itself  demands  the 
transcendence  of  the  presupposed  immediacy,  the  negation  of 


THE  SYLLOGISM  333 

individuality,  and  hence  the  universal,  is  no  longer  immediate, 
but  posited. — The  Syllogism  of  Reflection  contained  only  the 
first  negation  of  immediacy :  now  the  second  has  appeared,  and 
has  determined  the  external  universality  of  Reflection  as  one 
which  is  in  and  for  itself. — Considered  from  the  positive  side, 
the  conclusion  shows  itself  to  be  identical  with  the  premiss,  and 
the  mediation  as  having  coincided  with  its  presupposition ;  thus 
there  is  an  identity  of  the  universality  of  Reflection  by  virtue 
of  which  it  has  become  a  higher  universality. 

If  we  contemplate  the  course  of  the  Syllogisms  of  Reflection, 
mediation  in  general  is  the  posited  or  concrete  unity  of  the 
form-determinations  of  the  extremes ;  Reflection  consists  of  this 
positing  of  one  determination  in  the  other ;  Allness  is  thus  the 
mediating  entity.  But  individuality  shows  itself  as  the  essential 
ground,  and  universality  as  a  merely  external  determination 
in  it — as  completeness.  But  universality  is  essential  to  the 
individual:  the  individual  must  be  middle,  and  must  bind 
together;  consequently  it  must  be  taken  as  universal  which  is 
in  itself.  But  it  is  not  united  with  universality  in  this  merely 
positive  manner :  it  is  transcended  in  it,  and  is  negative  moment ; 
and  thus  the  universal  (that  which  is  in  and  for  itself)  is  posited 
genus,  and  the  individual  as  immediate  is  rather  its  externality, 
or  is  extreme. — Taken  generally,  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection 
falls  under  the  scheme  P  —  I  --  £/;  the  individual  is  still  here, 
as  such,  essential  determination  of  the  middle.  But  its  imme- 
diacy has  transcended  itself,  and  the  middle  has  determined 
itself  as  universality  which  is  in  and  for  itself:  the  Syllogism 
then  has  entered  into  the  formal  scheme  /  —  U  —  P,  and  the 
Syllogism  of  Reflection  has  passed  over  into  the  Syllogism  of 
Necessity. 


C 

THE  SYLLOGISM  OF  NECESSITY 

The  mediating  element  has  now  determined^  itself  (i)  as 
simple  determinate  universality,  like  particularity  in  the  Quali- 
tative Syllogism;  but  (2)  as  objective  universality,  which  con- 
tains (that  is)  the  whole  determinateness  of  the  extremes  in 
their  distinctness,  like  the  allness  of  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection, 


334  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

a  completed  but  simple  universality, — the  general  nature  of 
the  Thing,  the  genus. 

This  Syllogism  is  full  of  content  because  the  abstract  middle 
of  the  Qualitative  Syllogism  has  posited  itself  as  determinate 
distinction  (as  it  is  as  middle  of  the  Syllogism  of  Reflection) , 
while  further  this  distinction  has  reflected  itself  into  simple 
identity. — Consequently  this  Syllogism  is  Syllogism  of  Necessity, 
since  its  middle  is  not  some  alien  and  immediate  content,  but 
is  the  intro-Reflection  of  the  determinateness  of  the  extremes. 
These  have  their  inner  identity  in  the  middle,  whose  content- 
determinations  are  the  form-determinations  of  the  extremes. — 
So  now  that  by  means  of  which  the  terms  are  distinct  from 
one  another  exists  as  external  and  unessential  form,  while  they 
themselves  exist  as  the  moments  of  a  necessary  Existence. 

At  this  point  this  Syllogism  is  immediate,  and  in  so  far  formal 
in  such  a  way  that  the  connexion  of  the  terms  is  the  essential 
nature,  as  content ;  the  latter  is  in  the  distinct  terms  in  only  a 
various  form,  while  the  extremes  for  themselves  are  only  as  an 
unessential  persistence. — This  Syllogism  must,  by  the  process 
of  its  realization,  be  determined  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
extremes  too  are  posited  as  this  totality  (which  the  middle  is  at 
first) ;  while  the  necessity  of  the  relation — which  at  first  is  only 
the  substantial  content — is  a  relation  of  the  posited  form. 

(a)  THE  CATEGORICAL  SYLLOGISM 

i.  The  Categorical  Syllogism  has  the  Categorical  Judgment 
for  one  or  both  of  its  premisses. — Here  this  more  determinate 
significance  is  connected  with  this  Syllogism  (as  with  the  Judg- 
ment), that  its  middle  is  objective  universality.  Superficially 
the  Categorical  Syllogism  too  is  taken  for  nothing  more  than 
a  mere  syllogism  of  inherence. 

According  to  the  significance  of  its  content  the  Categorical 
Syllogism  is  the  first  Syllogism  of  Necessity,  in  which  a  subject 
is  bound  together  with  a  predicate  through  its  substance.  But 
substance,  raised  to  the  sphere  of  Notion,  is  the  universal, 
posited  as  being  in  and  for  itself  in  such  a  way  that  it  has  for 
form  and  for  the  manner  of  its  being  not  accidentally  (which 
it  had  in  its  peculiar  relation)  but  the  Notion-determination. 
Its  distinctions  therefore  are  the  extremes  of  the  Syllogism,  or 


THE  SYLLOGISM  335 

(determinately)  universality  and  individuality.  The  former, 
as  against  the  genus  (which  now  is  the  closer  determination  of 
the  middle)  is  abstract  universality  or  universal  determin- 
ateness — the  accidentality  of  substance  comprehended  into 
simple  determinateness,  which  however  is  its  essential  dis- 
tinction or  specific  difference. — Individuality  on  the  other 
hand  is  the  actual ;  in  itself  it  is  the  concrete  unity  of  genus 
and  determinateness,  while  here  (as  in  the  immediate  Syllo- 
gism) it  is  as  yet  immediate  individuality,  accidentality  which 
is  comprehended  into  the  form  of  persistence  which  is  for 
itself. — The  relation  of  this  extreme  to  the  middle  constitutes 
a  Categorical  Judgment ;  but  the  other  extreme  too  expresses 
the  specific  difference  of  the  genus  or  its  determinate  principle, 
according  to  the  determination  which  has  been  mentioned; 
and,  in  so  far,  this  other  premiss  too  is  categorical. 

2.  At  first  this  Syllogism,  as  being  first  and  therefore  imme- 
diate Syllogism  of  Necessity,  stands  under  the  scheme  of  the 
first  formal  Syllogism  /  —  P  —  U. — But  the  middle  is  the 
essential  nature  of  the  individual,  and  not  just  any  deter- 
minateness or  property  of  it;  and  similarly  the  extreme  of 
universality  is  not  just  any  abstract  universal,  or  any  individual 
quality,  but  the  universal  determinateness,  the  specific  part  of 
the  distinction  of  the  genus;  and  therefore  that  contingency 
vanishes  which  would  cause  the  subject  to  be  bound  together 
by  just  any  middle  term  with  just  any  quality. — And  thus 
the  relations  of  the  extremes  to  the  middle  have  not  that 
external  immediacy  which  they  have  in  the  Qualitative  Syllo- 
gism, and  consequently  the  necessity  of  a  proof  does  not  arise 
as  it  did  there,  leading  to  the  infinite  progress. 

Further  this  Syllogism,  unlike  a  Syllogism  of  Reflection,  does 
not  presuppose  its  conclusion  for  its  premisses.  The  terms, 
according  to  their  substantial  content,  stand  to  one  another  in 
an  identical  relation  which  is  in  and  for  itself:  there  is  one 
essence  pervading  the  three  terms,  in  which  the  determinations 
of  individuality,  particularity,  and  universality  are  only  formal 
moments.  t 

Consequently  the  Categorical  Syllogism  is  in  so  far  no  longer 
subjective;  in  this  identity,  objectivity  commences;  the  middle 
is  the  identity  (which  is  full  of  content)  of  its  extremes,  and 
these  are  contained  in  it  according  to  their  independence ;  for 


3$6  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

their  independence  is  that  substantial  universality,  the  genus. 
The  subjective  element  of  the  Syllogism  consists  in  the  indif- 
ferent persistence  of  the  extremes  against  the  Notion  (or  the 
middle). 

3.  But  there  remains  something  subjective  in  this  Syllogism : 
the  identity  exists  still  as  substantial  (or  as  content),  and  not 
at  the  same  time  as  identity  of  form.  Consequently  the  identity 
of  the  Notion  is  still  an  internal  bond,  whence,  as  relation,  it  is 
still  Necessity;  the  universality  of  the  middle  is  solid  and 
positive  identity,  and  does  not  equally  exist  as  the  negativity 
of  its  extremes. 

More  closely  considered,  in  this  Syllogism  the  immediacy, 
which  is  not  yet  posited  as  that  which  it  is  in  itself,  is  present 
in  the  following  manner.  The  properly  immediate  element  of 
the  Syllogism  is  the  individual.  This  is  subsumed  under  its  genus 
as  middle ;  but  below  it  there  stand  other  individuals  of  inde- 
terminate number ;  it  is  therefore  contingent  that  only  this  one 
individual  is  posited  under  it  as  subsumed. — But  further  this 
contingency  does  not  belong  merely  to  external  reflection, 
which  discovers  the  individual  posited  in  the  syllogism  to  be 
contingent  through  comparison  with  others ;  rather,  it  is  posited 
as  contingent  (as  a  subjective  actuality)  because  it  is  itself 
related  to  the  middle  as  to  its  objective  universality.  On  the 
other  side  the  subject,  since  it  is  an  immediate  individual, 
contains  determinations  which  are  not  contained  in  the  middle 
as  in  the  universal  nature;  consequently  it  has  also  an  existence 
which  is  indifferent  to  it  and  is  determined  for  itself,  having 
a  peculiar  content.  And  hence  this  other  term  too,  conversely, 
has  an  indifferent  immediacy  and  an  existence  different  from 
the  former. — The  same  relation  subsists  also  between  the  middle 
and  the  other  extreme ;  for  the  latter  too  has  the  determination 
of  immediacy,  and  hence  of  a  contingent  being  as  against  its 
middle. 

The  following  then  are  the  positings  of  the  Categorical  Syllo- 
gism : — (a)  extremes  having  such  a  relation  to  the  middle  that 
they  have  objective  universality  or  independent  nature  in  them- 
selves and  at  the  same  time  exist  as  immediate  terms,  that  is, 
as  actualities  indifferent  to  each  other ;  (b)  they  exist  equally 
as  contingent,  that  is,  their  immediacy  is  determined  as  tran- 
scended in  their  identity.  But,  by  reason  of  this  independence, 


THE  SYLLOGISM  337 

and  totality  of  actuality,  this  identity  is  only  formal  and  inner ; 
thus  the  Syllogism  of  Necessity  has  determined  itself  as  the 
Hypothetical  Syllogism. 


(b)  THE  HYPOTHETICAL  SYLLOGISM 

1 .  The  Hypothetical  Judgment  contains  only  the  necessary 
relation  without  the  immediacy  of  the  related  terms.  If  A,  then 
B ;  in  other  words,  the  being  of  A  is  also  and  equally  the  being 
of  an  Other,  namely  B ;  but  this  implies  neither  that  A  is  nor 
that  B  is.  The  Hypothetical  Syllogism  adds  this  immediacy  of 
being : — 

If  A  is,  then  B  is, 
but  A  is, 
therefore  B  is. 

The  minor  premiss  by  itself  expresses  the  immediate  being  of  A. 
But  not  this  alone  has  been  added  to  the  Judgment.  The 
Syllogism  contains  the  relation  of  subject  and  predicate  not  as 
abstract  copula  but  as  completed  mediating  unity.  Consequently 
the  being  of  A  must  be  taken  not  as  mere  immediacy  but 
essentially  as  middle  of  the  Syllogism.  This  must  be  further 
considered. 

2.  First  the  relation  of  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  is  necessity 
or  inner  substantial  identity  combined  with  external  variety  of 
existence  or  mutual  indifference  of  the  being  which  appears — 
an  identical  content  which  forms  an  internal  foundation.  Con- 
sequently the  two  sides  of  the  Judgment  are  not  an  immediate 
being,  but  a  being  which  is  held  suspended  in  Necessity :  that 
is,  they  are  at  the  same  time  transcended,  or  merely  apparent, 
being.  Further  they  are  related  as  sides  of  the  Judgment,  as 
universality  and  individuality;  consequently  the  one  is  this 
content  as  totality  of  conditions,  the  other  as  actuality.  It  is 
however  indifferent  which  side  is  taken  as  universality  and 
which  as  individuality.  For  in  so  far  as  the  conditions  still  are 
the  inner  or  abstract  element  of  an  actuality,  they  are  the 
universal;  and  they  have  entered  into  actuality  by  virtue  of 
the  fact  that  they  are  comprehended  into  one  individuality. 
Conversely  the  conditions  are  an  isolated  and  scattered  appear- 

VOL.  H.  Y 


358  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

ance  which  acquires  unity,  significance,  and  a  universally  valid 
Determinate  Being  only  in  actuality. 

But  the  closer  relation  which  has  been  here  assumed  between 
the  two  sides  as  being  the  relation  between  condition  and 
conditioned,  can  also  be  taken  as  that  of  cause  and  effect,  or 
ground  and  consequence.  Here  this  is  indifferent;  but  the 
relation  of  condition  corresponds  more  closely  to  the  relation 
which  is  present  in  the  Hypothetical  Judgment  and  Syllogism, 
in  so  far  as  condition  essentially  is  as  an  indifferent  existence, 
while  ground  and  cause  pass  over  into  Other  through  them- 
selves; and  also  condition  is  a  more  universal  determination, 
for  it  comprehends  both  sides  of  these  relations,  since  effect, 
consequence,  and  the  like,  are  as  much  condition  of  cause,  or 
ground,  as  these  latter  are  of  the  former. — 

Now  A  is  mediating  being,  first,  in  so  far  as  it  is  an  imme- 
diate being,  an  indifferent  actuality;  but  also,  secondly,  in  so 
far  as  it  is  a  being  contingent  in  itself  and  self-transcending. 
What  translates  the  conditions  into  the  actuality  of  the  new 
shape  of  which  they  are  the  conditions,  is  this,  that  they  are 
not  being  as  the  abstract  immediate,  but  Being  in  its  Notion 
and,  at  first,  Becoming ;  but,  since  the  Notion  no  longer  is  the 
process  of  passing  over,  they  are  (being  more  closely  deter- 
mined) individuality  as  self-relating  negative  unity. — The  con- 
ditions are  a  scattered  material  awaiting  and  demanding 
employment;  this  negativity  is  the  mediating  entity,  the  free 
unity  of  the  Notion.  It  determines  itself  as  activity,  since  this 
middle  is  the  contradiction  between  objective  universality  (or 
the  totality  of  the  identical  content)  and  indifferent  immediacy. 
— This  middle  consequently  is  no  longer  necessity  which  is 
merely  inner,  but  existent  necessity;  objective  universality 
contains  self-relation  as  simple  immediacy,  as  Being; — in  the 
Categorical  Syllogism  this  moment  is  at  first  determination  of 
the  extremes,  but  it  determines  itself  as  contingency  against  the 
objective  universality  of  the  middle,  and  hence  as  something 
merely  posited  or  also  as  transcended,  that  is,  as  something 
which  has  passed  back  into  the  Notion  or  into  the  middle  as 
unity,  which  middle  itself  now  in  its  objectivity  is  Being. 

The  conclusion  "therefore  B  is"  expresses  the  same  con- 
tradiction, that  B  is  immediately  but  equally  is  through  an 
Other,  or  is  mediated.  Formally  therefore  it  is  the  same  Notion 


THE  SYLLOGISM  339 

which  the  middle  also  is ;  only  it  is  distinguished  from  Necessity 
as  the  Necessary, — in  the  form  (which  is  quite  superficial)  of 
individuality  as  against  universality.  The  absolute  content  of 
A  and  of  B  is  the  same ;  they  are  only  two  different  names  of 
the  same  foundation  for  imagination,  in  so  far  as  it  holds  fast 
the  appearance  of  the  diversified  shape  of  Determinate  Being 
and  distinguishes  its  necessity  from  the  necessary ;  but  in  so  far 
as  this  necessity  were  supposed  to  be  separated  from  By  it  would 
not  be  the  necessary.  There  is  thus  here  the  identity  of  mediator 
and  mediated. 

3.  The  Hypothetical  Syllogism  at  first  represents  the  necessary 
relation  as  connexion  through  form,  or  as  negative  unity,  just 
as  the  Categorical  Syllogism  represented,  through  positive 
unity,  the  solid  content,  or  objective  universality.  But  necessity 
collapses  into  the  necessary ;  the  formal  activity  of  the  trans- 
lation of  conditioning  into  conditioned  actuality  is  in  itself  the 
unity  in  which  the  determinatenesses  of  the  opposition  (which 
had  before  achieved  the  licence  of  indifferent  existence)  are 
transcended,  and  the  distinction  between  A  and  B  is  an  empty 
name.  Consequently  it  is  intro-reflected  unity, — and  therefore 
also  an  identical  content;  and  this  not  only  in  itself, — it  is  also 
posited  through  this  Syllogism,  since  the  being  of  A  is  not  its 
own  but  also  that  of  #,  and,  conversely  and  in  general,  the 
being  of  the  one  is  the  being  of  the  other,  and  in  the  conclusion 
immediate  being  or  indifferent  determinateness  exists  definitely 
as  mediated — since,  that  is,  externality  has  transcended  itself, 
and  its  unity  which  has  passed  into  itself  is  now  posited. 

The  mediation  of  the  Syllogism  has  thus  determined  itself 
as  individuality,  immediacy,  and  self-relating  negativity,  or  as 
identity  which  distinguishes  itself  and,  out  of  this  distinction, 
collects  itself  into  itself; — that  is,  as  absolute  form,  and  for  this 
very  reason  as  objective  universality  or  self-identical  content. 
In  this  determination  the  Syllogism  is  the  Disjunctive  Syllogism. 

(c)  THE  DISJUNCTIVE  SYLLOGISM 

The  Hypothetical  Syllogism  in  general  stands  under  the 
scheme  of  the  second  figure,  U—I—P:  the  Disjunctive 
Syllogism  stands  under  the  scheme  of  the  third  figure  of  the 
formal  syllogism,  /  —  U  —  P.  But  the  middle  is  universality 


340  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

filled  with  form ;  it  has  determined  itself  as  totality,  as  developed 
objective  universality.  Consequently  the  middle  term  is  as  well 
universality  as  particularity  and  individuality.  As  the  former 
it  is,  first,  the  substantial  identity  of  the  genus ;  but  secondly 
it  exists  as  one  which  has  absorbed  particularity,  as  being  equal 
with  itself,  that  is,  as  general  sphere  which  contains  its  total 
particularization — as  the  genus  divided  into  its  species,  or  A 
which  is  B  as  much  as  C  or  D.  But  particularization  is  dis- 
tinction, and  therefore  is  equally  the  alternativeness  of  5,  C, 
and  Z),  or  negative  unity,  or  reciprocal  exclusiveness  of  the 
determinations. — This  exclusiveness  further  is  not  only  reci- 
procal, and  the  determination  is  not  merely  relative,  but  is 
equally  and  essentially  self-relating  determination, — the  par- 
ticular as  individuality  to  the  exclusion  of  the  others. 

A  is  either  B  or  C  or  Z), 
but  A  is  B, 
therefore  A  is  neither  C  nor  D ; 

or  again 

A  is  either  B  or  C  or  Z), 
but  A  is  neither  C  nor  Z), 
therefore  A  is  B. 

A  is  subject  not  only  in  the  two  premisses,  but  also  in  the 
conclusion.  In  the  first  premiss  it  is  universal,  and  in  its  pre- 
dicate it  is  the  universal  sphere  particularized  into  the  totality 
of  its  species ;  in  the  second  it  exists  as  determinate  or  as  one 
species ;  in  the  conclusion  it  is  posited  as  the  exclusive  individual 
determinateness. — Or  again  the  subject  is  already  posited  in 
the  minor  premiss  as  exclusive  individuality,  and  in  the  con- 
clusion, positively,  as  that  determinate  entity  which  it  is. 

The  term  which  here  appears  as  mediated  is  the  universality 
of  A,  which  is  mediated  with  individuality.  But  the  mediating 
term  is  this  Ay  which  is  the  universal  sphere  of  its  particulariza- 
tions  and  is  an  entity  determined  as  individual.  Thus  the  truth 
of  the  Hyppthetical  Syllogism — the  unity  of  mediator  and 
mediated — is  posited  in  the  Disjunctive  Syllogism,  which  for  this 
reason  has  also  ceased  to  be  a  Syllogism.  For  the  middle, 
which  in  it  is  posited  as  the  totality  of  the  Notion,  contains 
itself  the  two  extremes  in  their  complete  determinateness.  The 


THE  SYLLOGISM  341 

extremes,  in  distinction  from  this  middle,  exist  only  as  a 
positedness  no  longer  having  a  peculiar  determinateness  as 
against  the  middle. 

If  this  is  considered  with  more  particular  respect  to  the 
Hypothetical  Syllogism,  it  appears  that  the  latter  contained 

(1)  a  substantial  identity  as  the  inner  bond  of  necessity,  and 

(2)  a  negative  unity  distinct  therefrom — namely  activity,  or 
the  form  which  translated  one  existence  into  another.  The 
Disjunctive  Syllogism  in  general  is  in  the  determination  of 
universality;  its  middle  is  the  A  as  genus  and  as  perfectly 
determinate  entity ;  by  virtue  of  this  unity  this  content  (which 
was  inner  before)  is  also  posited;  and  conversely  positedness 
or  form  is  not  external  negative  unity  as  against  an  indifferent 
existence,  but  is  identical  with  that  solid  content.  The  whole 
form-determination  of  the  Notion  is  posited  in  its  determinate 
distinction  and  at  the  same  time  in  the  simple  identity  of  the 
Notion. 

Hereby  the  formalism  of  the  syllogizing  process,  and  hence 
the  subjectivity  of  the  Syllogism  and  the  Notion,  have  tran- 
scended themselves.  This  formal  or  subjective  element  consisted 
in  this,  that  that  which  mediates  the  extremes  is  the  Notion 
as  abstract  determination,  so  that  this  latter  is  thereby  distinct 
from  them  while  it  is  their  unity.  But  in  the  perfection  of  the 
Syllogism,  where  objective  universality  is  equally  posited  as 
totality  of  the  form-determinations,  the  distinction  between 
mediator  and  mediated  has  disappeared.  What  is  mediated  is 
itself  an  essential  moment  of  its  mediator,  and  each  moment 
exists  as  the  totality  of  the  mediated. 

The  figures  of  the  Syllogism  represent  each  determinateness 
of  the  Notion  separately  as  the  middle,  which  at  the  same  time 
is  the  Notion  as  Ought,  as  a  demand  that  the  mediating  term 
shall  be  its  totality.  But  the  various  genera  of  Syllogisms  repre- 
sent the  stages  of  the  completion  or  concretion  of  the  middle. 
In  the  formal  Syllogism  the  middle  is  posited  as  totality  only 
by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  all  the  determinatenesses  (but  each 
separately)  run  through  the  function  of  mediation.  In  the 
Syllogisms  of  Reflection  the  middle  is  the  unity  which  externally 
comprehends  the  determinations  of  the  extremes.  In  the 
Syllogism  of  Necessity  it  has  determined  itself  to  be  a  unity 
equally  developed  and  total,  and  simple ;  and  the  form  of  the 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Syllogism,  which  consisted  in  the  distinction  of  the  middle  as 
against  its  extremes,  has  thereby  transcended  itself. 

And  now  the  Notion  altogether  has  become  realized,  or, 
more  exactly,  it  has  achieved  a  reality  which  is  Objectivity. 
The  last  reality  was  that  the  Notion  (as  internally  negative 
unity)  sunders  itself  and,  as  Judgment,  posits  its  determinations 
in  a  determinate  and  indifferent  distinction,  while  in  the 
Syllogism  it  opposes  itself  to  these.  Thus  it  is  still  the  internality 
of  this  its  externality ;  and  so  in  the  course  of  the  Syllogisms 
this  externality  is  equalized  with  the  internal  unity.  The  various 
determinations  return  into  this  unity  through  the  mediation 
which,  while  it  unites  them,  is  still  a  third  term.  Thus  exter- 
nality in  itself  represents  the  Notion,  which  now  is  no  longer 
an  internal  unity  and,  as  such,  distinct  from  it. 

But  that  determination  of  the  Notion  which  had  been  con- 
sidered as  reality  is,  conversely,  equally  a  positedness.  For  in 
this  result  the  truth  of  the  Notion  has  turned  out  to  be  the 
identity  of  its  internality  and  externality ;  and  not  only  this : 
already  the  moments  of  the  Notion,  in  the  Judgment,  remain, 
in  their  indifference  to  each  other,  determinations  which  have 
their  significance  only  in  their  relation.  The  Syllogism  is 
mediation — the  complete  Notion  in  its  positedness.  Its  move- 
ment is  the  transcendence  of  this  mediation,  in  which  nothing 
is  in  and  for  itself,  but  each  term  is  only  through  the  mediation 
of  another.  Consequently  the  result  is  an  immediacy  which  has 
emerged  through  the  transcendence  of  mediation,  a  Being 
which  is  equally  identical  with  mediation,  and  is  the  Notion 
which  has  constructed  itself  out  of  and  in  its  otherness.  Hence 
this  Being  is  a  Thing  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  or  Objectivity. 


SECTION   TWO 
OBJECTIVITY 

IN  the  First  Book  of  Objective  Logic  abstract  Being  was  shown 
as  passing  over  into  Determinate  Being,  but  as  passing  back 
also  into  Essence.  In  the  Second  Book  Essence  is  seen  to  deter- 
mine itself  to  be  Ground ;  thence  it  enters  into  Existence  and 
realizes  itself  as  Substance,  but  passes  back  again  into  the 
Notion.  Now,  so  far,  it  has  been  shown  of  the  Notion  that  it 
determines  itself  to  be  Objectivity.  It  is  self-evident  that  the 
latter  transition  is,  in  its  determination,  that  which  elsewhere 
had  a  place  in  metaphysics  as  the  Syllogism  of  the  Notion — 
that  is,  the  inference  from  the  Notion  of  God  to  his  existence, 
— or  as  the  so-called  ontological  proof  of  the  existence  of  God. — 
It  is  equally  well  known  that  the  most  sublime  conception  of 
Descartes,  that  the  God  is  that  whose  Notion  implies  his  Being, 
was  degraded  to  the  bad  form  of  the  formal  syllogism,  namely 
to  the  form  of  this  proof,  and  finally  succumbed  to  the  "critique 
of  reason"  and  to  the  idea  that  Existence  cannot  be  extracted 
out  of  the  Notion.  Some  points  concerning  this  proof  have  been 
examined  above.  In  Volume  One  (pp.  98  sqq.),  where  Being 
has  vanished  in  its  next  opposite,  Not-being,  and  Becoming  has 
shown  itself  to  be  the  truth  of  both,  attention  was  drawn  to 
the  confusion  which  arises  when,  in  some  particular  Determi- 
nate Being,  its  determinate  content  and  not  its  Being  is  held 
fast ;  in  this  case,  when  one  determinate  content  (for  example, 
a  hundred  thalers)  is  compared  with  some  other  determinate 
content  (for  example,  the  context  of  my  perception  or  the 
condition  of  my  purse),  and  a  distinction  is  found  there,  people 
have  treated  the  question  whether  these  two  contents  can  be 
juxtaposed  or  not,  as  if  the  distinction  between  Being  and  Not- 
being  or  (worse  still)  between  Being  and  the  Notion  were  in 
question.  Further,  an  examination  was  made  there  (p.  124, 
and  Volume  Two,  p.  69)  of  the  determination,  which  occurs  in 
the  ontological  proof,  of  a  sum-total  of  all  realities. — But  the 
essential  object  of  this  proof,  the  connexion  between  Notion 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  Existence,  falls  under  the  consideration  (which  has  just 
been  closed)  of  the  Notion  and  of  the  whole  progress  through 
which  it  determines  itself  as  Objectivity.  As  absolutely  self- 
identical  negativity  the  Notion  is  that  which  determines  itself. 
It  has  already  been  observed  that,  in  unfolding  itself  into  the 
Judgment  in  individuality,  it  posits  itself  as  real  and  existent. 
This  reality,  there  still  abstract,  perfects  itself  in  Objectivity. 

It  might  appear  that  the  transition  of  the  Notion  into 
Objectivity  is  something  different  from  the  transition  from  the 
Notion  of  God  to  his  existence.  In  this  case  it  must  be  observed 
(i)  that  the  determinate  content  (God)  would  make  no  dif- 
ference in  the  logical  process,  and  that  the  ontological  proof 
would  only  be  an  application  of  this  logical  process  to  that 
particular  content;  and  (2)  the  observation  must  especially 
be  recalled  which  was  made  above,  that  the  subject  obtains 
determinatcness  and  content  only  in  its  predicate,  and  before 
this  is  for  Notion-forming  cognition  only  a  name,  whatever  it 
may  be  for  sensation,  intuition,  or  imagination;  while  in  the 
predicate  realization  in  general  begins  simultaneously  with 
detcrminateness. — The  predicates  however  must  be  taken  as 
themselves  still  implicit  in  the  Notion,  and  therefore  as  some- 
thing subjective  which  has  not  yet  entered  into  Existence ;  and 
in  so  far  it  is  true  that  the  realization  of  the  Notion  is  not 
completed  in  the  Judgment.  But  on  the  other  hand  the  bare 
determination  of  an  object  by  means  of  predicates,  without 
being  the  realization  and  objectivation  of  the  Notion,  remains 
so  subjective  that  it  is  not  even  the  true  cognition  and  deter- 
mination of  the  Notion  of  the  object — something  subjective  in 
the  sense  of  abstract  reflection  and  images  which  have  not  been 
operated  upon  by  Notions. — God  as  living  God,  and  still  more 
as  Absolute  Spirit,  is  recognized  only  in  his  activity.  Man  has 
been  instructed  early  to  recognize  him  in  his  works ;  from  these 
alone  the  determinations  can  emerge  which  are  called  his 
properties  and  also  contain  his  being.  Thus  Notion-forming 
cognition  of  his  activity,  that  is,  of  himself,  comprehends  the 
Notion  of  God  in  his  being,  and  his  being  in  his  Notion.  Being 
by  itself,  anci  still  more  Determinate  Being,  is  so  poor  and 
restricted  a  determination  that  the  difficult  undertaking  of 
finding  it  in  the  Notion  could  probably  arise  only  from  the 
fact  that  no  consideration  was  given  to  the  meaning  of  Being 


OBJECTIVITY  345 

and  Determinate  Being  itself. — Being,  as  wholly  abstract  and 
immediate  self-relation,  is  simply  the  abstract  moment  of  the 
Notion ;  it  is  abstract  universality,  which  also  effects  that  which 
is  demanded  of  Being,  namely,  to  be  outside  of  the  Notion ; 
for,  however  much  universality  may  be  moment  of  the  Notion, 
it  is  equally  its  distinction  or  abstract  Judgment,  in  which  the 
Notion  opposes  itself  to  itself.  The  Notion  (even  as  formal 
Notion)  already  contains  Being  immediately  in  a  truer  and 
richer  form,  since,  as  self-relating  negativity,  it  is  individuality. 

The  difficulty  does  indeed  become  insuperable  of  discovering 
Being  in  the  Notion  in  general  and  in  the  Notion  of  God  in 
particular,  if  it  is  to  occur  as  palpably  perceived  in  the  context 
of  external  experience  or  in  the  form  of  sense-perception  (like 
the  hundred  thalers  in  the  state  of  my  fortune),  and  not  as 
conceived  in  its  Notion  by  the  spirit, — if  it  is  to  be  visible 
essentially  to  the  outer  and  not  to  the  inner  eye,  and  if  that 
Being  is  called  reality  and  truth  which  belongs  to  things  as 
sensuous,  temporal,  and  perishable. — If  a  philosophy  in  con- 
templating Being  does  not  rise  above  the  senses,  then  also  it 
does  not  cast  off  merely  abstract  thought  even  in  the  Notion, 
which  stands  opposed  to  Being. 

It  is  customary  to  take  the  Notion  for  something  as  one-sided 
as  an  abstract  thought;  and  this  custom  will  hesitate  to 
acknowledge  what  was  suggested  above,  namely,  that  the  tran- 
sition from  the  Notion  of  God  to  his  being  must  be  regarded 
as  an  application  of  the  logical  course  of  the  objectivation  of 
the  Notion,  which  has  just  been  set  out.  But  if  it  is  admitted 
(as  is  usually  done)  that  the  logical  is  the  formal  element  and 
as  such  constitutes  for  cognition  the  form  of  any  determinate 
content,  then  at  least  this  relation  ought  to  be  allowed ;  unless 
indeed  a  halt  is  made  at  this  opposition  of  Notion  and  Ob- 
jectivity— the  untrue  Notion  and  an  equally  untrue  reality  being 
taken  as  ultimate. — But  it  was  further  indicated  in  the  exposition 
of  the  pure  Notion  that  this  is  the  absolute  and  divine  Notion 
itself,  so  that  in  truth  this  relation  of  application  would  not  take 
place  at  all,  but  the  logical  process  would  in  fact  be  the  imme- 
diate demonstration  of  the  self-determination  of  Cod  as  Being 
But  here  this  further  remark  must  be  made,  that,  if  the  Notion 
is  to  be  represented  as  the  Notion  of  God,  it  must  be  taken  in 
that  form  in  which  it  has  already  been  admitted  into  the  Idea. 


3*6  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

That  pure  Notion  passes  through  the  finite  forms  of  Judgment 
and  Syllogism  because  it  is  not  yet  posited  as  being  in  and  for 
itself  one  with  Objectivity,  but  is  as  yet  conceived  in  the  stage 
of  Becoming  towards  it.  And  similarly  this  Objectivity  is  not 
yet  the  existence  of  God,  not  yet  Reality  which  shows  in  the 
Idea.  But  still  Objectivity  is  richer  and  higher  than  the  Being 
or  Existence  of  the  ontological  proof  by  as  much  as  the  pure 
Notion  is  richer  and  higher  than  that  metaphysical  void,  the 
sum-total  of  all  reality. — But  I  postpone  to  another  occasion 
a  closer  examination  of  the  manifold  misunderstanding  which 
was  introduced  by  logical  formalism  into  the  ontological  proof 
as  well  as  into  the  other  so-called  proofs  of  the  existence  of 
God,  and  of  Kant's  criticism  of  them;  and  I  refrain  at 
present  from  reconstructing  their  true  significance,  and  thus 
re-establishing  their  fundamental  ideas  in  their  worth  and 
dignity. 

It  has  been  recalled  that  already  several  forms  of  immediacy 
have  occurred,  although  in  various  determinations.  In  the 
sphere  of  Being,  immediacy  is  Being  itself  and  Determinate 
Being,  in  the  sphere  of  Essence,  Existence  and,  further,  Actuality 
and  Substantiality,  and  in  the  sphere  of  the  Notion  (apart  from 
immediacy  as  abstract  universality)  it  now  is  Objectivity. — 
Where  the  exactitude  of  philosophic  conceptual  distinctions  is 
not  concerned,  these  expressions  may  be  used  as  synonymous : 
those  other  determinations  have  arisen  from  the  necessity  of  the 
Notion.  Being  is,  in  general,  first  immediacy ;  and  Determinate 
Being  is  the  same,  plus  the  first  determinateness.  Existence,  plus 
the  Thing,  is  the  immediacy  which  emerges  out  of  Ground, — 
out  of  the  self-transcending  mediation  of  the  simple  Reflection 
of  Essence.  Then  Actuality  and  Substantiality  are  the  im- 
mediacy which  has  emerged  out  of  the  transcended  distinction 
between  Existence  (as  yet  unessential)  as  Appearance,  and  its 
essentiality.  Finally  Objectivity  is  the  immediacy  to  which  the 
Notion  determines  itself  by  the  transcendence  of  its  abstraction 
and  mediation. — Philosophy  has  the  right  to  select  from  the 
language  of  ^common  life,  which  is  adapted  to  the  world  of 
sensuous  representations,  such  expressions  as  seem  to  approxi- 
mate to  the  determinations  of  the  Notion.  Hence  it  cannot  be 
of  importance  to  demonstrate  for  any  word  which  has  been 
selected  from  the  language  of  common  life  that  the  same 


OBJECTIVITY  3*7 

Notion  for  which  it  is  used  in  philosophy  is  also  connected  with 
it  in  common  life;  for  common  life  has  no  Notions,  but  only 
sensuous  images ;  and  to  recognize  the  Notion  of  what  is  else 
mere  image,  this  is  philosophy.  It  must  therefore  suffice  if  in 
these  expressions  which  are  used  for  philosophic  determinations 
imagination  has  some  vague  idea  of  their  distinction,  as  should 
be  the  case  with  those  expressions,  so  that  in  them  certain 
shades  of  the  image  are  recognized  which  are  more  closely 
related  to  the  corresponding  Notion. — It  will  perhaps  less  readily 
be  admitted  that  something  can  be  without  existing;  but  at 
least  the  is  (for  example)  as  the  copula  of  a  Judgment  will 
hardly  be  confused  with  the  expression  "to  exist,"  nor  will  it 
be  said  that  "these  goods  exist  dear,  suitable/5  and  so  forth,  or 
"money  exists  metal,  or  metallic,"  instead  of  "these  goods  are 
dear,  suitable,"  and  so  forth,  and  "money  is  metal."1  But 
Being  and  Appearing,  Appearance  and  Actuality,  and  also 
mere  Being  as  opposed  to  Actuality,  are  distinguished  elsewhere 
too ;  and  all  these  expressions  are  distinguished  even  more  from 
Objectivity. — But  even  if  they  should  be  used  as  synonyms 
philosophy  is  still  at  liberty  to  make  use  of  such  linguistic 
superfluities  for  its  distinctions. 

Under  the  Apodeictic  Judgment,  which  is  the  perfection  of 
the  Judgment,  so  that  the  subject  there  loses  its  determinateness 
as  against  the  predicate,  mention  was  made  of  the  twofold 
significance  of  the  Subjectivity  which  is  due  to  this  fact :  the 
terms  of  duplication  are,  the  Notion,  and,  also,  externality  and 
contingency,  which  otherwise  stand  opposed  to  it.  Similarly  a 
twofold  significance  appears  for  Objectivity:  it  stands  opposed 
to  the  independent  Notion,  but  also  is  that  which  is  in  and  for 
itself.  In  this  sense  the  object  is  opposed  to  that  ego  =  ego  which 
subjective  idealism  asserts  to  be  the  absolute  truth;  it  is  thus 
the  manifold  world  in  its  immediate  existence,  with  which  Ego, 
or  the  Notion,  enters  into  infinite  conflict  only  to  achieve, 
through  the  negation  of  this  Other  of  primary  self-consciousness 
(which  in  itself  is  nothing),  the  actual  truth  of  its  self-equality. — 

• 

1  In  a  French  report,  where  the  commander  states  that  he  waited  for  the 
breeze  which  generally  rose  near  the  island  about  morning  in  order  to  make 
for  land,  the  expression  occurs  le  vent  ayant  it&  longtems  sans  exister;  here  the  dis- 
tinction arose  simply  from  the  common  idiom,  for  example,  il  a  iti  longtems  sans 
m'ecrire. 


348  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

In  a  less  determinate  sense  it  thus  means  an  object  in  general 
for  any  interest  or  activity  of  the  subject. 

But  in  the  opposite  sense  the  Objective  means  that  which  is 
in  and  for  itself  and  is  without  restriction  and  opposite.  Reason- 
able principles,  perfect  works  of  art,  and  the  like,  are  called 
objective  in  so  far  as  they  are  free  and  above  all  contingency. 
Reasonable  theoretical  or  moral  principles  belong  to  the  sphere 
of  the  subjective  and  to  consciousness,  but  still  that  element 
of  them  which  is  in  and  for  itself  is  called  objective:  the  know- 
ledge of  truth  is  placed  in  the  cognition  of  the  object  as  object 
and  without  the  addition  of  any  subjective  reflection ;  and  right 
action  is  placed  in  the  adherence  to  objective  laws  which  have 
no  subjective  origin  and  admit  no  caprice  and  no  treatment 
which  might  overthrow  their  necessity. 

At  this  point  of  our  treatment  Objectivity  has  the  meaning 
of  the  Being  (which  is  in  and  for  itself)  of  the  Notion ;  and  the 
Notion  has  transcended  the  mediation  which  is  posited  in  its 
self-determination  so  that  it  has  become  immediate  self-relation. 
For  this  reason  this  immediacy  is  itself  immediate  and  is  wholly 
saturated  with  the  Notion ;  and  also  its  totality  is  immediately 
identical  with  its  Being.  But  further  the  Notion  must  equally 
effect  the  free  Being-for-Self  of  its  subjectivity;  so  that  it  comes 
to  be  related  to  Objectivity  as  an  End,  where  the  immediacy 
of  the  latter  becomes  negative  as  against  the  Notion  and 
becomes  the  object  of  its  determining  activity;  it  thus  obtains 
the  other  meaning,  that  of  being  null  in  and  for  itself  in  so 
far  as  it  stands  opposed  to  the  Notion. 

First,  then,  Objectivity  in  its  immediacy  is  Mechanism.  In 
this  immediacy  its  moments  persist  external  and  independently 
indifferent  to  one  another,  as  Objects,  by  reason  of  the  totality 
of  all  the  moments ;  in  their  relation  they  have  the  subjective 
unity  of  the  Notion  only  as  inner  or  as  outer. 

But,  secondly,  this  unity  proves  to  be  the  immanent  law  of  the 
Objects  themselves ;  their  relation  thus  becomes  their  peculiar 
difference,  founded  upon  their  law.  In  this  relation  their 
determinate  .independence  transcends  itself.  This  is  Chemism. 

Thirdly,  however,  this  essential  unity  of  the  Objects  is  hereby 
posited  as  distinct  from  their  independence ;  it  is  the  subjective 
Notion,  posited  however  as  related  to  Objectivity  in  and  for 
itself,  as  End.  This  is  Teleology. 


OBJECTIVITY  3^9 

The  End  is  the  Notion  posited  as  related  to  Objectivity  in 
itself  and  as  transcending  its  deficiency  (which  is,  to  be  sub- 
jective) through  itself;  thus  the  adequacy  to  an  End,  which  was 
at  first  external,  becomes  internal  through  the  realization  of 
the  End ;  it  becomes  the  Idea. 


CHAPTER  I 
MECHANISM 

OBJECTIVITY  is  the  totality  of  the  Notion,  which  has  passed 
back  into  its  unity ;  thus  something  immediate  is  posited,  which 
is  this  totality  in  and  for  itself  and  is  also  posited  as  such, 
although  in  it  the  negative  unity  of  the  Notion  has  not  yet 
severed  itself  from  the  immediacy  of  this  totality; — or  Ob- 
jectivity is  not  yet  posited  as  Judgment.  The  Notion  is  immanent 
in  it,  and,  to  this  extent,  Objectivity  contains  the  distinction 
of  the  Notion;  but,  because  of  the  objective  totality,  the  distinct 
terms  are  complete  and  independent  Objects,  which  conse- 
quently, when  they  are  related,  are  related  only  as  independent, 
and  in  every  connexion  remain  external  to  one  another. — And 
this  constitutes  the  characteristic  of  Mechanism,  which  is,  that 
whatever  relation  relates  the  terms  is  foreign  to  them  and  does 
not  concern  their  nature ;  even  if  it  involves  the  appearance 
of  a  One,  it  remains  nothing  else  than  a  collocation,  mixture, 
heap,  or  the  like.  Spiritual  like  material  Mechanism  consists  in 
this,  that  the  terms  which  are  related  in  spirit  remain  external 
to  it  and  to  one  another.  A  mechanical  idea  or  memory,  habit, 
or  a  mechanical  manner  of  acting,  denotes  that  the  peculiar 
penetration  and  presence  of  spirit  is  lacking  in  that  which  it 
apprehends  or  does.  Though  its  theoretical  or  practical  mechan- 
ism cannot  occur  without  its  self-activity  or  without  an  impulse 
or  consciousness,  yet  the  freedom  of  individuality  is  lacking, 
and,  because  it  is  not  found  there,  such  activity  appears  to  be 
merely  external. 

A 
THE  MECHANICAL  OBJECT 

It  has  resulted  that  the  Object  is  the  Syllogism  whose  media- 
tion has  been  equalized  and  has  become  immediate  identity. 
It  is  therefore  universal  in  and  for  itself;  universality  not  in  the 
meaning  of  a  community  of  properties,  but  one  which  pene- 
trates particularity  and  in  it  is  immediate  individuality. 


MECHANISM 

i.  First,  then,  the  Object  does  not  divide  itself  into  matter 
and  form,  of  which  the  former  would  be  the  independent 
universal  part  of  the  Object  and  the  latter  the  particular  and 
individual;  such  an  abstract  distinction  between  individuality 
and  universality  is  not,  according  to  its  Notion,  present  in  it ; 
if  it  is  considered  as  matter,  it  must  be  taken  as  matter  formed 
in  itself.  It  may  also  be  determined  as  a  Thing  with  Properties, 
as  a  Whole  consisting  of  Parts,  as  Substance  with  Accidents, 
or  according  to  the  other  relations  of  Reflection.  But  these 
relations  have  altogether  perished  in  the  Notion;  hence  the 
Object  has  neither  properties  nor  accidents,  for  these  may  be 
separated  from  the  thing  or  the  substance,  whereas  in  the 
Object  particularity  is  simply  reflected  into  totality.  The  same 
independence  is  indeed  present  in  the  parts  of  a  whole  as 
belongs  to  the  distinctions  of  the  Object;  but  these  distinctions 
are  also  themselves  essentially  Objects  or  totalities,  which  have 
not — as  the  parts  have — this  determinateness  as  against  the 
whole. 

Consequently  the  Object  is  at  this  point  indeterminate  in  so 
far  as  it  has  no  determinate  opposite  in  itself;  for  it  is  mediation 
which  has  collapsed  into  immediate  identity.  In  so  far  as  the 
Notion  is  essentially  determinate,  it  has  determinateness  as  a 
complete  but  otherwise  indeterminate,  that  is,  relationless, 
multiplicity,  which  constitutes  a  totality  that  in  turn  is  itself 
as  yet  not  further  determined :  such  sides  or  parts  as  may  be 
distinguished  in  it  belong  to  an  external  reflection.  This  wholly 
indeterminate  distinction,  then,  is  only  this,  that  there  is  a 
plurality  of  Objects  each  of  which  contains  its  determinateness 
reflected  only  into  its  universality  and  does  not  show  outwards, 
— This  indeterminate  determinateness  is  essential  to  it;  it  is 
therefore  such  an  agglomeration  in  itself,  and  must  consequently 
be  regarded  as  composite  or  as  an  aggregate. — It  does  not 
however  consist  of  atoms,  since  these  are  not  Objects  because 
they  are  not  totalities.  Leibniz's  monad  would  more  nearly  be 
an  Object,  since  it  is  a  totality  of  representation  of  the  world: 
but,  locked  up  in  its  intensive  subjectivity,  it  is  supposed  to  be 
at  least  essentially  One  in  itself.  The  monad,  however,  deter- 
mined as  exclusive  One,  is  only  a  principle  which  reflectior 
assumes.  But  it  is  Object;  partly  in  so  far  as  the  ground  of  ifc 
manifold  images,  of  the  developed,  that  is,  the  posited,  deter 


352  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

minations  of  its  totality  (which  is  merely  in  itself),  lies  outside 
it ;  and  partly  in  so  far  as  it  is  indifferent  to  the  monad  whether 
it  constitutes  an  Object  together  with  others;  thus  in  fact  it  is 
not  exclusive  or  determinate  for  itself. 

2.  Now  the  Object  is  the  totality  of  determinateness,  but 
not  its  negative  unity,  because  of  its  indeterminateness  and 
immediacy;  and  consequently  it  is  indifferent  to  the  deter- 
minations as  individual  entities  determined  in  and  for  them- 
selves, and  these  themselves  are  indifferent  to  one  another. 
Consequently  neither  the  Object  nor  the  determinations  them- 
selves can  serve  as  basis  from  which  Notions  may  be  formed 
about  them;  the  totality  of  the  Object  is  the  form  of  general 
reflectedness  of  its  multiplicity  into  individuality  in  general 
which  is  not  determined  in  itself.  Consequently  every  deter- 
minateness  which  it  has  is  proper  to  it;  but  the  form  which 
constitutes  their  distinction  and  connects  them  into  a  unity  is 
external  and  indifferent ;  whether  this  form  is  that  of  a  mixture, 
order,  or  certain  arrangement  of  parts  and  sides,  these  all  are 
connexions  which  are  indifferent  to  the  related  terms. 

Thus  the  Object  has  the  determinateness  of  its  totality,  as 
well  as  a  Determinate  Being  in  general,  outside  itself — in  other 
Objects;  these  have  theirs  in  yet  other  Objects,  and  so  to 
infinity.  The  return  upon  itself  of  this  egress  into  infinity  must 
indeed  also  be  assumed,  and  must  be  imagined  as  a  totality 
or  a  world ;  but  this  world  is  just  universality  bounded  in  itself 
by  indeterminate  individuality ;  it  is  a  Universe. 

Thus  the  Object  in  its  determinateness  is  equally  indifferent 
to  them ;  and  thereby  it  again  points  on  beyond  itself  for  its 
determinateness  to  Objects  to  which  in  their  turn  it  is  indifferent 
whether  they  determine  or  not.  Hence  there  is  nowhere  a 
principle  of  self-determination;  determinism — which  is  the 
point  at  which  cognition  stands  in  so  far  as  the  Object,  as  it 
has  just  turned  out  here  to  be,  is  the  truth — indicates  that  its 
every  determination  is  that  of  some  other  Object;  but  this 
other  equally  is  indifferent  both  to  its  determinateness  and  to 
its  activity. — For  this  reason  determinism  itself  suffers  from 
an  indeterminateness  which  forces  it  to  go  on  to  infinity;  at 
any  point  it  may  halt  and  rest  satisfied,  because  the  Object 
to  which  it  has  passed  over  is  rounded  in  itself  as  a  formal 
totality  and  is  indifferent  to  determination  by  another.  Hence 


MECHANISM  353 

the  explanation  of  the  determination  of  an  Object,  and  the 
progress  of  this  idea  which  is  made  for  this  purpose,  is  only 
an  empty  word,  because  there  is  no  self-determination  in  the 
other  Object  to  which  it  moves  on. 

3.  Since  the  determinateness  of  an  Object  lies  in  another 
Object,  there  is  no  definite  distinction  between  them;  the 
determinateness  is  merely  double,  being  first  in  the  one  and 
then  in  the  other  Object :  it  is  just  identical,  and  in  so  far  any 
explanation  made  or  Notion  formed  is  tautological.  This 
tautology  is  external  and  empty  oscillation.  The  determinate- 
ness  acquires  no  peculiar  distinctness  as  against  Objects  which 
are  indifferent  to  it,  and  therefore  it  is  identical ;  there  is  con- 
sequently only  one  determinateness;  and  the  fact  that  it  is 
double  expresses  just  this  externality  and  nullity  of  a  distinction. 
But  at  the  same  time  the  Objects  are  independent  as  against 
each  other :  hence  in  this  identity  they  remain  utterly  external 
to  each  other. — Thus  there  is  here  a  contradiction  between 
the  complete  indifference  of  the  Objects  to  each  other  and  the 
identity  of  their  determinateness ;  or  of  their  complete  externality 
in  the  identity  of  their  determinateness.  Thus  this  contradiction 
is  the  negative  unity  of  a  plurality  of  Objects  mutually  self- 
repellent  in  it, — that  is,  the  Mechanical  Process. 


B 
THE  MECHANICAL  PROCESS 

If  the  Objects  are  considered  merely  as  totalities  rounded  off 
in  themselves,  they  cannot  act  upon  one  another.  In  this  deter- 
mination they  are  as  the  monads,  which  for  this  same  reason 
were  looked  on  as  quite  without  effect  upon  one  another.  But 
for  this  very  reason  the  Notion  of  a  monad  is  a  faulty  reflection. 
For,  first,  it  is  a  definite  image  of  its  totality  which  is  only  in 
itself ';  as  a  certain  degree  of  development  and  positedness  of  its 
image  of  the  world  it  is  determinate ;  and,  since  now  it  is  a 
self-rounded  totality,  it  is  also  indifferent  to  this  Determinate- 
ness  ;  hence  it  is  not  its  own  determinateness,  but  one  posited 
through  another  Object.  Secondly,  it  is  an  immediate  entity 
in  general  in  so  far  as  it  is  supposed  to  be  only  as  imaging ;  its 
self-relation  therefore  is  abstract  universality;  it  is  thus  a 


354  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Determinate  Being  which  is  open  to  others. — In  order  to  win 
the  freedom  of  substance,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  imagine  it  as  a 
totality  which,  complete  in  itself,  has  need  of  no  acquisitions 
from  without.  Rather,  notionless  and  merely  imaging  self- 
relation  is  a  passivity  as  against  Other. — Similarly  determinate- 
ness  is  external,  whether  it  is  taken  as  the  determinateness  of 
an  existent  or  of  an  imaging  entity,  or  again  as  a  degree  of  a 
peculiar  development  which  comes  from  within; — that  degree 
which  the  development  reaches  has  its  limit  in  an  Other.  If 
the  reciprocal  action  of  substances  is  attributed  to  an  external 
pre-established  harmony,  then  it  is  simply  made  a  presupposi- 
tion, that  is,  something  which  is  withdrawn  from  the  Notion. — 
The  need  to  escape  from  the  interaction  of  the  substances  was 
due  to  the  moment  of  absolute  independence  and  originality, 
which  was  made  the  foundation.  But  the  positedness — the 
degree  of  development — does  not  correspond  to  this  Being-in- 
Self ;  and  for  this  very  reason  the  positedness  has  its  ground  in 
an  Other. 

It  was  shown  in  the  proper  place  that  the  Relation  of  Sub- 
stantiality passes  over  into  the  Relation  of  Causality.  But  here 
the  existent  entity  has  no  longer  the  determination  of  a  Sub- 
stance, but  of  an  Object;  the  causal  relation  has  become  sub- 
merged in  the  Notion;  the  originality  of  one  substance  as 
against  another  has  proved  to  be  a  show,  and  its  action  a 
transition  into  the  opposite.  Consequently  this  relation  has  no 
objectivity.  Hence  in  so  far  as  the  one  Object  is  posited  in  the 
form  of  subjective  unity  as  active  cause,  this  no  longer  counts 
as  an  original  determination,  but  as  something  mediated ;  the 
active  Object  has  this  its  determination  only  through  some 
other  Object. — Mechanism,  since  it  belongs  to  the  sphere  of 
the  Notion,  contains  that  posited  in  itself  which  turned  out 
to  be  the  truth  of  the  causal  relation,  namely  that  the  cause, 
which  is  supposed  to  be  the  term  that  is  in  and  for  itself,  is 
essentially  also  effect,  or  positedness.  Consequently  in  Mechan- 
ism the  causality  of  the  Object  is,  immediately,  a  non- 
originality  ;  \t  is  indifferent  to  this  its  determination ;  and  the 
fact  that  it  is  cause  is  therefore  contingent  in  it. — In  so  far  it 
might  well  be  said  that  the  causality  of  substances  is  merely 
something  imagined.  But  precisely  this  imagined  causality  is 
Mechanism ;  for  Mechanism  is  this,  that  causality,  as  identical 


MECHANISM 

determinateness  of  various  substances  (that  is,  as  submersion 
of  their  independence  in  this  identity),  is  a  mere  positedness ;  the 
Objects  are  indifferent  to  this  unity  and  preserve  themselves 
against  it.  But  equally  this  their  indifferent  independence  is 
mere  positedness :  for  this  reason  they  admit  of  mingling  and 
aggregation,  and  of  becoming,  as  aggregate,  one  Object.  By 
virtue  of  this  indifference  both  to  their  transition  and  to  their 
independence,  the  substances  are  Objects. 

(a)  THE  FORMAL  MECHANICAL  PROCESS 

The  Mechanical  Process  is  the  positing  of  that  which  is  con- 
tained in  the  Notion  of  Mechanism ;  the  positing,  first,  then,  of 
a  contradiction. 

i.  The  interaction  of  the  Objects,  as  it  results  from  the 
Notion  which  has  been  explained,  is  the  positing  of  the  identical 
relation  of  the  Objects.  This  consists  in  this  alone,  that  the 
determinateness  which  is  determined  is  given  the  form  of 
universality, — a  communication  which  is  without  any  tran- 
sition into  opposite. — Spiritual  communication,  which  in  any 
case  takes  place  in  that  element  which  is  the  universal  in  the 
form  of  universality,  is,  by  itself,  a  relation  of  ideal  nature, 
wherein  a  determinateness  continues  itself  unclouded  from  one 
person  into  another,  and,  without  any  change,  universalizes 
itself— as  an  odour  spreads  freely  in  the  unresisting  atmosphere. 
But  even  in  the  communication  between  material  Objects,  their 
determinateness  spreads  out  (so  to  speak)  in  a  manner  which 
is  of  equally  ideal  nature ;  and  personality  is  an  infinitely  more 
intensive  hardness  than  that  which  belongs  to  Objects.  The 
formal  totality  of  the  Object  in  general,  which  is  indifferent 
to  determinateness  and  therefore  is  not  a  self-determination, 
makes  it  an  entity  undistinguished  from  the  other,  so  that  the 
interaction  at  this  point  is  an  unhindered  continuation  of  the 
determinateness  of  the  one  in  the  other. 

In  the  spiritual  sphere  now  the  communicable  content  is 
infinitely  manifold;  for,  being  taken  up  into  intelligence,  it 
achieves  this  form  of  universality  in  which  it  becomes  com- 
municable. But  that  which  is  universal  not  only  through  its 
form  but  in  and  for  itself,  is  (as  well  in  the  spiritual  as  in  the 
material  sphere)  the  objective  as  such,  against  which  the 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

individuality  of  external  Objects  (and  also  of  persons)  is  some- 
thing unessential  that  can  offer  it  no  resistance.  Laws,  manners, 
and  reasonable  ideas  in  general  are,  in  the  spiritual  sphere, 
such  communicable  entities,  which  penetrate  individuals  un- 
consciously and  assert  themselves  in  them.  In  the  material 
sphere,  movement,  heat,  magnetism,  electricity,  and  the  like — 
which  must  be  determined  as  imponderable  agents  even  if  it 
is  attempted  to  imagine  them  as  stuff  or  matter — are  agents 
lacking  that  part  of  materiality  which  is  the  foundation  of  their 
individualization . 

2.  Now  if  in  the  interaction  of  Objects  their  identical  univer- 
sality is  posited  first,  it  is  equally  necessary  to  posit  the  other 
moment  of  the  Notion,  namely  particularity:  the  Objects  con- 
sequently also  demonstrate  their  independence,  preserve  them- 
selves as  external  to  one  another,  and,  in  that  universality, 
establish  individuality.  This  reconstitution  is  reaction  in  general. 
This  must  not  be  taken  as  a  mere  cancellation  of  action  and 
of  the  communicated  determinateness ;  that  which  has  been 
communicated  is  universal,  and  as  such  is  positive  in  the 
particular  Objects,  and  particularizes  itself  only  in  their  variety. 
In  so  far,  then,  that  which  is  communicated  remains  what  it  is ; 
only,  it  distributes  itself  over  the  Objects,  or  is  determined  by 
their  particularity. — Cause  perishes  in  its  Other,  or  effect,  and 
the  activity  of  the  causal  substance  is  lost  in  its  action ;  but 
the  Object  which  acts  upon  others  merely  becomes  universal ; 
its  action,  at  first,  is  not  a  loss  of  its  determinateness  but  a 
particularization ;  by  means  of  it  the  Object,  which  at  first  was 
the  whole  of  that  determinateness  individual  in  itself,  now 
becomes  a  species  of  it ;  and  it  is  only  through  this  that  the 
determinateness  is  posited  as  universal.  Both,  the  elevation  of 
the  individual  determinateness  into  universality  (in  communi- 
cation), and  its  particularization,  or  degradation,  from  having 
been  one,  into  a  species  (in  distribution),  are  one  and  the  same 
process. 

Now  reaction  is  equal  to  action. — This  at  first  shows  itself 
in  this  manner,  that  the  other  Object  has  absorbed  within 
itself  the  whole  universal,  and  thus  is  now  the  active  term  as 
against  the  first.  Thus  its  reaction  is  the  same  as  the  action — 
a  reciprocal  repulsion  of  the  impulse.  Secondly,  that  which 
is  communicated  is  the  objective;  thus,  while  their  difference 


MECHANISM  357 

is  presupposed,  it  remains  substantial  determination  of  the 
Objects;  and  so  the  universal  forthwith  specifies  itself  in  them; 
each  Object  in  consequence  not  merely  gives  back  the  whole 
of  the  action,  but  each  also  has  its  specific  share.  Thirdly, 
however,  the  reaction  is  wholly  negative  action  in  so  far  as 
each,  through  the  elasticity  of  its  independence,  ejects  from 
itself  the  positedness  of  an  other,  and  preserves  its  self-relation. 
The  specific  particularity  of  the  communicated  determinate- 
ness  in  the  Objects  (which  was  called  species  above)  returns 
to  individuality,  and  the  Object  upholds  its  externality  as 
against  the  universality  which  was  communicated.  Hereby 
action  passes  over  into  rest.  It  turns  out  to  be  a  change  which 
is  merely  superficial  and  transient  in  the  self-rounded  and 
indifferent  totality  of  the  Object. 

3.  This  regress  constitutes  the  Product  of  the  Mechanical 
Process.  Immediately  the  Object  is  presupposed  (i)  as  in- 
dividual, (2)  also  as  particular  against  others,  and  (3)  as 
indifferent  to  its  particularity,  as  universal.  The  Product  is  this 
presupposed  totality  of  the  Notion  as  a  totality  which  now  is 
posited.  It  is  the  conclusion  in  which  the  communicated  universal 
is  bound  together  with  individuality  through  the  particularity 
of  the  Object;  but  at  the  same  time,  in  rest  mediation  is 
posited  as  such  as  has  transcended  itself;  or  it  is  posited  that 
the  Product  is  indifferent  to  this  its  process  of  determination, 
and  that  the  determinateness  which  it  receives  is  external  to  it. 

Thus  the  Product  is  the  same  as  is  the  Object  which  is  just 
entering  into  the  Process.  But  at  the  same  time  it  is  determined 
only  through  this  movement :  the  Mechanical  Object  is  Object 
only  as  Product,  because  that  which  it  is  is  in  it  only  through 
the  mediation  of  an  Other.  Thus,  as  Product,  it  is  what  it  was 
to  have  been  in  and  for  itself— a  conglomerate  or  mixture,  a 
certain  order  and  arrangement  of  the  parts ;  it  is,  altogether, 
an  entity  whose  determinateness  is  not  self-determination,  but 
something  posited. 

On  the  other  side  the  result  of  the  Mechanical  Process  equally 
is  not  already  present  before  itself;  its  ending  t  is  not  in  its 
beginning,  as  in  the  End.1  The  Product  is  a  determinateness, 
as  posited  externally,  in  the  Object.  Thus  according  to  the 

1  The  End  which  is  reached  through  Means  is  here  meant  (%wcck). — Translators9 
Note. 


35?  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Notion  this  Product  is  what  the  Object  is  already  from  its 
beginning.  But  in  the  beginning  external  determinateness  does 
not  yet  exist  as  posited.  In  so  far  the  result  is  something  wholly 
different  from  the  first  existence  of  the  Object,  and  exists  as 
something  utterly  contingent  for  it. 

(b)  THE  REAL  MECHANICAL  PROCESS 

The  Mechanical  Process  passes  over  into  rest.  For  that  deter- 
minateness which  the  Object  obtains  through  it  is  merely 
external.  This  rest  itself  is  equally  external  to  it,  since  it  is  the 
opposite  determinateness  to  the  action  of  the  Object ;  but  every 
determinateness  is  indifferent  to  the  Object.  Hence  the  rest 
may  also  be  regarded  as  the  effect  of  some  external  cause, 
just  as  much  as  it  was  indifferent  to  the  Object  to  be  active 
Object. 

Now  further  the  determinateness  is  a  posited  determinate- 
ness,  and  the  Notion  of  the  Object  has  passed  back  through 
mediation  to  itself;  it  is  therefore  an  intro-reflected  deter- 
minateness that  applies  to  the  Object.  Consequently  both  the 
Objects  in  the  Mechanical  Process,  and  the  Process  itself,  have 
now  a  more  closely  determined  relation.  They  are  not  merely 
various ;  they  are  distinct  in  a  determinate  manner  as  against 
one  another.  Thus  the  result  of  the  Formal  Process  is  on  the 
one  hand  determinationless  rest;  but  on  the  other  (by  virtue 
of  intro-reflected  determinateness)  it  is  the  distribution  among 
several  Objects  which  are  in  a  mechanical  relation  to  one 
another,  of  the  opposition  which  the  Object  in  general  has  in 
itself.  The  Object  is  on  the  one  hand  determinationless  and  is  in- 
elastic and  dependent ;  but  on  the  other  it  has  an  independence 
through  which  other  entities  cannot  break.  And  now  also  this 
more  closely  determined  opposition  of  independent  individuality 
and  dependent  universality  belongs  to  the  Objects  as  against 
one  another. — The  difference  taken  more  closely  may  be  appre- 
hended as  merely  quantitative  (as  between  the  various  mass- 
magnitudes  ojf  bodies),  or  as  a  difference  in  intensity,  and  in 
many  other  ways.  But,  in  general,  it  must  not  be  held  fast 
merely  in  this  abstraction :  as  Objects,  both  are  also  positively 
independent  entities. 

Here  as  before  the  first  moment  of  this  Real  Process  is  com- 


MECHANISM 

munication.  The  weaker  can  be  seized  and  penetrated  by  the 
stronger  only  in  so  far  as  it  absorbs  the  latter  and  constitutes 
one  sphere  together  with  it.  In  the  material  world  the  weak  is 
secured  against  what  is  incomparably  stronger  (as  a  linen  cloth 
freely  suspended  in  air  is  not  pierced  by  a  bullet,  and  a  weak 
organic  receptivity  is  susceptible  to  weak  more  than  to  strong 
irritants) ;  and  similarly  a  wholly  feeble  spirit  is  more  secure 
against  a  strong  than  is  one  which  stands  closer  to  the  latter. 
Imagine  something  wholly  dull  and  ignoble :  a  high  intelligence 
or  nobility  can  make  no  impression  upon  it ;  and  the  only  con- 
sistent expedient  against  reason  is  to  have  no  traffic  with  it. — In 
so  far  as  dependent  and  independent  cannot  coalesce,  and  no 
communication  can  take  place  between  them,  the  latter  also 
can  offer  no  resistance ;  that  is,  it  cannot  specify  for  itself  the 
universal  which  is  communicated  to  it. — If  they  were  not  in 
the  same  sphere,  their  mutual  relation  would  be  an  Infinite 
Judgment,  and  no  Process  would  be  possible  between  them. 

Taken  more  closely,  the  moment  of  the  overcoming  of  one 
Object  by  the  other  is  resistance,  since  it  is  the  beginning  moment 
of  the  distribution  of  the  universal  which  has  been  communi- 
cated and  of  the  positing  of  self-relating  negativity,  or  of  that 
individuality  which  is  to  be  constructed.  Resistance  is  overcome 
in  so  far  as  its  determinateness  is  inadequate  to  the  communi- 
cated universal  which  has  been  taken  up  by  the  Object  and 
is  supposed  to  singularize  itself  in  it.  The  Object's  relative 
dependence  manifests  itself  in  this,  that  its  individuality  has 
no  capacity  for  what  is  communicated  and  is  consequently  burst 
open  by  it,  since  it  cannot,  in  this  universal,  constitute  itself 
as  subject,  and  cannot  make  the  universal  its  predicate. — Force 
applied  to  an  Object  is  foreign  to  it  only  from  this  second  side. 
Power  is  an  objective  universality ;  and  it  becomes  force  in  that 
it  is  identical  with  the  nature  of  the  Object,  while  its  deter- 
minateness or  negativity  is  not  the  negative  intro-Reflection 
of  the  Object  itself,  according  to  which  the  Object  is  an 
individual.  In  so  far  as  the  negativity  of  the  Object  does  not 
intro-reflect  itself  in  power  (or  power  is  not  its  self-relation),  it 
is  as  against  power  only  abstract  negativity,  the*  manifestation 
of  which  is  submergence. 

Power,  taken  as  objective  universality  and  as  force  towards 
the  Object,  is  what  is  called  fate — a  notion  which  falls  within 


360  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Mechanism  in  so  far  as  it  is  called  blind ;  that  is,  in  so  far  as 
its  objective  universality  is  not  recognized  by  the  subject  in  its 
specific  peculiarity. — To  make  some  short  observations  on  this 
head,  the  fate  of  the  living  entity  in  general  is  the  genus,  which 
manifests  itself  through  the  transitoriness  of  the  living  indi- 
viduals, which  do  not  possess  it  as  genus  in  their  actual  indi- 
viduality. As  bare  Objects,  the  merely  living  natures  (like  other 
things  on  a  lower  stage)  have  no  fate ;  what  happens  to  them 
is  a  contingency;  but  in  their  Notion  as  Objects  they  are 
external  to  themselves ;  the  foreign  power  of  fate  is  therefore 
entirely  their  own  immediate  nature,  that  is,  externality  and 
contingency  itself  A  real  fate  is  peculiar  to  self-consciousness, 
since  it  is  free,  and  therefore,  in  the  individuality  of  its  ego, 
is  utterly  in  and  for  itself  and  can  oppose  itself  to  its  objective 
universality  and  make  itself  alien  to  this.  But  by  this  very 
separation  it  excites  against  itself  the  mechanical  relation  of 
a  fate.  If  therefore  a  fate  is  to  have  power  over  it,  it  must  have 
given  itself  some  determinateness  against  essential  universality : 
it  must  have  committed  an  act.  Hereby  it  has  made  itself  a 
particular;  and  this  Determinate  Being,  as  abstract  univer- 
sality, is  at  the  same  time  that  side  which  is  open  to  com- 
munication from  that  Essence  which  has  been  alienated  from 
it ;  it  is  here  that  it  is  snatched  away  into  the  Process.  A  people 
without  deeds  is  blameless ;  it  is  wrapped  in  objective  moral 
universality  and  dissolved  in  it ;  it  is  without  that  individuality 
which  moves  the  unmoved,  and  gives  itself  a  determinateness 
outwards,  and  a  universality  severed  from  objective  universality 
and  abstract.  But  in  this  process  the  subject  becomes  something 
which  has  shed  its  essence — an  Object :  it  has  entered  into  the 
relation  of  externality  as  against  its  own  nature,  and  into  that 
of  Mechanism. 

(c)  THE  PRODUCT  OF  THE  MECHANICAL  PROCESS 

The  Product  of  Formal  Mechanism  is  the  Object  in  general, 
an  indifferent  totality  in  which  determinateness  exists  as 
posited.  Hereby  the  Object,  as  determinate,  has  entered  into 
the  Process;  hence  (i)  in  its  submersion,  rest,  as  the  original 
formalism  of  the  object,  and  negativity  of  its  determinedness- 
for-self,  is  the  result ;  (2)  the  cancellation  of  determinedness, 


MECHANISM  361 

as  its  positive  intro-Reflection,  is  determinateness  which  has 
entered  into  itself,  or  the  posited  totality  of  the  Notion,  the  true 
individuality  of  the  Object.  The  Object,  determined  first  in  its 
indeterminate  universality  and  next  as  particular,  is  now  deter- 
mined as  objectively  individual;  so  that  here  that  show  of 
individuality  is  transcended  which  is  only  an  independence 
opposing  itself  to  substantial  universality. 

This  intro-Reflection,  in  the  shape  which  it  has  when  reached 
as  a  result,  is  the  objective  unification  of  the  Objects :  this  is 
individual  independence,  or  the  Centre.  Secondly,  the  Reflection 
of  negativity  is  universality  which  is  a  fate  not  opposed  to 
determinateness  but  determinate  in  itself,  and  reasonable, — 
a  universality  which  particularizes  itself  in  itself,  or  a  distinction 
which  is  at  rest  and  fixed  in  the  dependent  particularity  of  the 
Objects  and  their  Process:  that  is,  Law.  This  result  is  the  truth 
and  therefore  also  the  foundation  of  the  Mechanical  Process. 


G 

ABSOLUTE  MECHANISM 

(a)  THE  CENTRE 

First,  the  empty  manifoldness  of  the  Object  is  now  collected 
into  objective  individuality,  into  the  simple  self-determining 
middle-point.  Secondly,  in  so  far  as  the  Object  as  immediate 
totality  retains  its  indifference  as  against  determinateness,  in 
so  far  the  latter  also  is  present  in  it  as  unessential,  or  as  the 
mutual  externality  of  many  Objects.  The  first,  or  essential, 
determinateness  on  the  other  hand  constitutes  the  real  mean 
between  the  many  Objects  which  act  upon  one  another 
mechanically:  through  it  they  are  bound  together  in  and  for 
themselves,  and  it  is  their  objective  universality.  Universality 
showed  itself  first,  in  the  relation  of  communication,  as  one 
which  is  there  through  positing  alone;  while  as  objective  it  is 
the  penetrating  and  immanent  essence  of  the  Objects. 

In  the  material  world  it  is  the  central  body  which  is  the 
genus  but  also  the  individual  universality  of  the  individual 
Objects  and  their  Mechanical  Process.  The  unessential  in- 
dividual bodies  are  related  to  one  another  as  pushing  and 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

pressing :  this  relation  does  not  subsist  between  the  central  body 
and  the  Objects  of  which  it  is  the  essence,  for  their  externality 
no  longer  constitutes  their  fundamental  determination.  Con- 
sequently their  identity  with  it  is  rather  rest ;  they  are  in  their 
Centre,  and  this  unity  is  their  Notion  which  is  in  and  for  itself. 
But  it  remains  an  Ought,  since  the  externality  of  the  Objects 
(which  still  remains  posited)  does  not  agree  with  this  unity. 
Their  tendency  towards  the  Centre  is  therefore  their  absolute 
universality  which  is  not  posited  through  communication ;  this 
universality  constitutes  the  true  and  concrete  rest  not  posited 
from  without,  into  which  the  Process  of  dependence  must  pass 
back. — It  is  on  this  account  an  empty  abstraction  when  it  is 
assumed  in  Mechanics  that  if  a  body  is  set  in  motion  it  would 
move  in  a  straight  line  to  infinity  unless  it  lost  its  movement 
through  external  resistance.  Friction  and  all  other  forms  of 
resistance  are  only  manifestations  of  centrality :  it  is  this  which 
absolutely  brings  resistance  back  to  itself;  for  that  against  which 
the  moving  body  exerts  friction  has  the  force  of  a  resistance 
only  because  it  is  one  with  the  Centre. — In  the  spiritual  sphere 
the  Centre  and  the  unification  with  it  assume  higher  forms; 
but  the  unity  of  the  Notion  and  its  reality  (which  here  as  yet 
is  mechanical  centrality)  must  constitute  the  fundamental 
determination  there  too. 

In  so  far  the  central  body  has  ceased  to  be  a  mere  Object, 
for  in  a  mere  Object  determinateness  is  unessential ;  it  has  no 
longer  only  the  Being-in-Self,  but  also  the  Being-for-Self  of  the 
objective  totality.  For  this  reason  it  may  be  looked  upon  as  an 
Individual.  Its  determinateness  differs  essentially  from  a  mere 
order  or  arrangement  or  external  coagulation  of  parts;  as 
determinateness  which  is  in  and  for  itself  it  is  an  immanent 
form ;  it  is  itself  a  determining  principle  in  which  the  Objects 
inhere,  while  by  it  they  are  connected  into  a  true  One. 

But  so  far  this  Central  Individual  is  only  a  mean  which,  as 
yet,  has  no  true  extremes ;  however,  as  negative  unity  of  the 
total  Notion  it  sunders  itself  into  these.  In  other  words  the 
Objects  which  before  were  dependent  and  self-external  are 
likewise  determined  as  Individuals  by  the  regress  of  the  Notion ; 
the  self-identity  of  the  central  body,  which  still  is  a  tendency, 
is  infected  with  externality;  and,  since  it  has  been  absorbed 
into  the  objective  individuality  of  the  central  body,  this  in- 


MECHANISM  363 

dividuality  is  communicated  to  this  externality.  Thus,  having 
a  centrality  of  their  own,  they  are  placed  outside  the  first  Centre, 
and  each  is  a  Centre  for  the  dependent  Objects.  These  second 
Centres  and  the  dependent  Objects  are  bound  together  by  this 
absolute  mean. 

But  also  the  relative  Central  Individuals  constitute  the  middle 
of  a  second  syllogism,  which  (i)  is  subsumed  under  a  higher 
extreme,  namely  the  objective  universality  and  power  of  the 
absolute  Centre,  and  (2)  subsumes  under  itself  the  dependent 
Objects,  supporting  their  superficial  or  formal  isolation. — 
These  dependent  entities  too  are  the  middle  of  a  third  syllogism, 
the  Formal  Syllogism ;  for  they  are  the  bond  between  absolute 
and  relative  Central  Individuality  in  so  far  as  the  latter  has 
in  them  its  externality,  by  means  of  which  self-relation  also  is 
a  tendency  towards  an  absolute  middle-point.  The  formal 
Objects  have  for  their  essence  the  identical  gravity  of  their 
immediate  central  body,  in  which  they  inhere,  since  it  is  their 
subject  and  the  extreme  of  their  individuality.  By  means  of  the 
externality  which  they  constitute  it  is  subsumed  under  the 
absolute  central  body;  consequently  they  are  the  formal  mean 
of  particularity. — But  the  absolute  individual  is  the  objectively 
universal  mean,  which  binds  together  and  holds  fast  the  Being- 
in-Self  of  the  relative  individual  and  its  externality. — Similarly 
a  Government,  the  individual  citizens,  and  the  needs  or  the 
external  life  of  the  individuals  are  three  terms,  each  of  which 
is  the  mean  of  the  two  others.  The  Government  is  the  absolute 
Centre  in  which  the  extreme  of  the  individuals  is  bound 
together  with  their  external  persistence;  and  similarly  the 
individuals  are  mean:  they  manifest  that  universal  individual 
in  external  existence  and  translate  their  moral  essence  into  the 
extreme  of  actuality.  The  third  is  the  Formal  Syllogism  or 
Syllogism  of  Show,  showing  that  the  individuals  are  connected 
with  this  universal  and  absolute  individuality  through  their 
needs  and  external  Determinate  Being;  which  Syllogism  as 
being  merely  subjective  passes  over  into  the  others  and  has  its 
truth  in  them.  t 

This  totality,  whose  moments  are  themselves  the  complete 
relations  of  the  Notion — that  is,  syllogisms — where  each  of  the 
three  distinct  Objects  runs  through  the  determination  of  middle 
and  extremes,  constitutes  Free  Mechanism.  Here  the  distinct 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Objects  have  objective  universality — penetrating  gravity  which 
preserves  itself  self-identical  in  particularization — for  funda- 
mental determination. — The  relations  of  pressure,  impulse, 
attraction,  and  the  like,  as  well  as  aggregations  or  mixtures, 
belong  to  the  relation  of  externality,  which  is  the  foundation 
of  the  third  of  the  syllogisms  which  have  been  juxtaposed.  The 
order,  which  is  the  merely  external  determinateness  of  the 
Objects,  has  passed  over  into  immanent  and  objective  deter- 
mination :  this  is  Law. 

(b)  LAW 

In  Law  the  more  closely  determinate  distinction  between  the 
ideal  reality  of  objectivity  and  its  external  reality  comes  into 
view.  As  immediate  totality  of  the  Notion,  the  Object  does  not 
yet  possess  externality  as  distinct  from  the  Notion  which  is  not 
posited  for  itself.  Through  the  Process  it  has  passed  into  itself, 
and  thus  the  opposition  has  arisen  between  simple  centrality 
and  an  externality  which  is  now  determined  as  externality,  that 
is,  is  posited  as  something  which  is  not  in  and  for  itself.  This 
identical  or  ideal  element  in  individuality  is  an  Ought,  because 
of  its  relation  to  externality;  it  is  the  unity  of  the  Notion, 
determinate  in  and  for  itself  and  self-determining,  to  which 
that  external  reality  does  not  correspond,  whence  it  becomes 
no  more  than  a  tendency.  But  in  and  for  itself  individuality 
is  the  concrete  principle  of  negative  unity,  and  as  such  is  itself 
totality, — a  unity  which  sunders  itself  into  determinate  Notion- 
distinctions  and  remains  in  its  self-equal  universality :  it  is  thus 
the  middle-point,  extended,  within  its  pure  ideality,  by  dis- 
tinction.— This  reality,  which  corresponds  to  the  Notion,  is  of 
ideal  nature ;  it  is  distinct  from  that  other  reality  which  merely 
tends :  it  is  distinction  (which  at  first  is  a  plurality  of  Objects) 
absorbed  in  its  essentiality  and  into  pure  universality.  This  real 
ideality  is  the  soul  of  the  objective  totality  which  was  developed 
before :  it  is  the  identity,  determined  in  and  for  itself,  of  the 
system.  % 

Consequently  objective  Being-in-and-for-Self  turns  out,  in 
its  totality  and  in  a  more  closely  determinate  manner,  to  be  the 
negative  unity  of  the  Centre,  which  divides  into  subjective 
individuality  and  external  objectivity,  receiving  the  former  in 


MECHANISM  365 

the  latter  and  determining  it  in  a  distinction  which  is  of  ideal 
nature.  This  self-determining  unity,  which  absolutely  leads 
back  external  objectivity  into  ideality,  is  the  principle  of  self- 
movement  ;  the  determinateness  of  this  animation,  which  is  the 
distinction  of  the  Notion  itself,  is  Law. — Dead  Mechanism  was 
the  Mechanical  Process  of  Objects  which  immediately  appeared 
as  independent  (this  has  already  been  considered),  but  for  this 
very  reason  are  in  truth  dependent  and  have  their  Centre 
outside  themselves:  this  Process,  which  passes  over  into  Rest, 
shows  either  contingency  and  indeterminate  inequality,  or 
formal  uniformity.  This  uniformity  is  a  rule:  it  is  not  Law. 
Only  Free  Mechanism  has  a  Law,  the  peculiar  determination 
of  pure  individuality  or  of  the  Notion  which  is  for  itself:  as 
distinction  in  itself  it  is  the  imperishable  source  of  a  self- 
kindling  movement ;  and,  relating  itself  to  itself  alone  in  the 
ideality  of  its  distinction,  it  is  free  necessity. 

(c)  TRANSITION  OF  MECHANISM 

But  this  soul  is  still  drowned  in  its  body ;  the  Notion,  deter- 
minate now  but  inner,  of  objective  totality  is  free  necessity 
which  demands  that  the  Law  does  npt  yet  face  its  Object;  it 
is  concrete  centrality  as  universality  spread  out  immediately 
into  its  objectivity.  Consequently  this  ideality  has  not  the 
Objects  themselves  for  its  determinate  distinction;  these  are 
independent  individuals  of  the  totality,  or  also  (if  we  look  back 
upon  the  formal  stage)  non-individual  external  Objects.  Law 
is  indeed  immanent  in  them  and  constitutes  their  nature  and 
power;  but  its  distinction  is  locked  up  in  its  ideality,  and  the 
Objects  themselves  are  not  distinguished  into  the  difference 
(which  is  of  ideal  nature)  of  Law.  But  the  Object  has  its 
essential  independence  in  ideal  centrality  and  its  Law  alone; 
it  has  therefore  no  force  to  resist  the  judgment  of  the  Notion 
and  to  preserve  itself  in  abstract,  indeterminate  independence 
and  aloofness.  By  virtue  of  the  ideal  distinction  immanent  in 
it  its  Determinate  Being  is  a  determinateness  poshed  through 
the  Notion.  In  this  manner  its  dependence  is  no  longer  merely 
a  tendency  towards  the  middle-point,  as  against  which  it  still 
has  the  appearance  of  an  independent  and  external  Object 
precisely  because  its  relation  is  only  a  tendency:  it  is,  on  the 


$66  SCIENCE  OF  LOGiC 

contrary,  a  tendency  towards  an  Object  which  is  definitely 
opposed  to  it.  And  also  the  Centre  through  this  fact  has  fallen 
apart,  and  its  negative  unity  has  passed  over  into  the  objec- 
tivated  opposition.  Consequently  now  Centrality  is  the  relation 
of  these  objectivities  which  are  negative  and  tense  as  against  one 
another.  Thus  Free  Mechanism  determines  itself  to  be  Chemism. 


CHAPTER   II 
GHEMISM 

IN  the  whole  of  Objectivity,  Ghemism  constitutes  the  moment 
of  Judgment,  of  difference  and  Process  which  have  become 
objective.  It  begins  with  determinateness  and  positedness,  and 
at  the  same  time  the  Chemical  Object  is  objective  totality ;  hence 
its  immediate  course  is  simple,  and  is  completely  determined 
by  its  presupposition. 

A 

THE  CHEMICAL  OBJECT 

The  Chemical  is  distinct  from  the  Mechanical  Object  because 
the  latter  is  a  totality  which  is  indifferent  to  determinateness ; 
with  the  Chemical  Object  its  determinateness,  and  hence 
relation  to  other  and  the  way  and  manner  of  this  relation,  are 
part  of  its  nature. — At  the  same  time  this  determinateness  is 
essentially  also  particularization,  that  is,  it  is  absorbed  into 
universality;  in  this  manner  it  is  principle — universal  deter- 
minateness, and  not  only  determinateness  of  the  one  individual 
Object,  but  of  the  other  too.  Consequently  in  the  Object  its 
Notion  distinguishes  itself  (i)  as  the  inner  totality  of  both 
determinatenesses,  and  (2)  as  the  determinateness  which  con- 
stitutes the  nature  of  the  individual  Object  in  its  externality 
and  existence.  In  this  manner  it  is  in  itself  the  whole  of  the 
Notion :  it  therefore  has  in  itself  the  necessity  and  impulse  to 
transcend  its  opposite  and  one-sided  persistence,  and  to  make 
itself  in  Determinate  Being  the  real  Whole  which  it  is  already 
in  its  Notion. 

It  may  be  observed  with  regard  to  the  expression  "Chemism" 
for  the  relation  of  the  difference  (Different)  of  Objectivity  as  it 
has  here  turned  out,  that  it  must  not  be  understood  to  mean 
that  this  relation  is  only  found  in  that  form  of  elementary  nature 
which  has  the  name  of  so-called  Chemism  proper.  The  meteoro- 
logical relation  already  must  be  looked  upon  as  a  Process,  the 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

parts  of  which  have  the  nature  of  physical  rather  than  of 
chemical  elements.  In  life  the  relation  of  the  sexes  falls  under 
this  schema;  and  it  constitutes  also  the  formal  foundation  of 
the  spiritual  relations  of  love,  friendship,  and  so  on. 

If  the  Chemical  Object  is  further  considered  as  an  indepen- 
dent totality  in  general,  then  it  is  intro-reflected  and  to  this 
extent  distinct  from  its  reflectedness  outwards,  that  is,  an  in- 
different base  and  an  individual  which  is  not  yet  determined 
as  different:  even  a  person  is  such  a  merely  self-relating  base. 
But  this  immanent  determinateness  which  constitutes  its  dif- 
ference is,  first,  intro-reflected  in  such  a  manner  that  this  with- 
drawal of  the  relation  outwards  is  only  formal  abstract  univer- 
sality :  thus  the  relation  outwards  is  determination  of  its  imme- 
diacy and  existence.  From  this  side  it  does  not  pass  back  in 
itself  into  individual  totality ;  and  the  negative  unity  has  the 
two  moments  of  its  opposition  in  two  particular  Objects. 
Accordingly  a  Chemical  Object  is  not  intelligible  out  of  itself, 
and  the  being  of  one  is  the  being  of  another. — Secondly, 
however,  the  determinateness  is  intro-reflected  absolutely,  and 
is  the  concrete  moment  of  the  individual  Notion  of  the  whole, 
which  Notion  is  the  general  essence  or  real  genus  of  the  par- 
ticular Object.  Thus  the  Chemical  Object  is  the  contradiction 
of  its  immediate  positedness  and  its  immanent  individual  Notion; 
it  is  a  tendency  to  transcend  the  determinateness  of  its  Deter- 
minate Being  and  to  give  existence  to  the  objective  totality  of 
the  Notion.  Consequently  it  is  dependent  itself,  but  in  such 
a  manner  that  it  is  on  the  other  hand  subject  to  tension  through 
its  own  nature  and  that  it  begins  the  Process  by  self-determi- 
nation. 

B 
THE  PROCESS 

i.  The  Process  begins  with  the  presupposition  that  the 
Objects,  however  great  the  tension  of  each  against  itself,  have 
an  equal  tension,  for  this  very  reason,  against  one  another: 
this  relation  is  called  their  affinity.  Each,  by  virtue  of  its  Notion, 
stands  in  contradiction  with  the  one-sidedness  of  its  own  exist- 
ence and  tends  to  cancel  it ;  and  this  fact  immediately  implies 
that  each  tends  to  cancel  the  one-sidedness  of  the  other,  and, 


CHEM1SM  369 

by  means  of  this  reciprocal  compensation  and  connexion,  to 
posit  the  reality  in  conformity  with  the  Notion,  which  contains 
both  moments. 

In  so  far  as  each  is  posited  as  self-contradictory  and  self- 
transcending  in  itself,  they  are  held  only  by  external  force 
in  separation  from  each  other,  neither  completing  the  other. 
Now  the  mean  through  which  these  extremes  are  bound  to- 
gether is,  first,  the  self-existent  nature  of  both,  the  whole 
Notion  which  holds  both  within  itself.  But  secondly,  since  both 
are  opposed  to  each  other  in  Existence,  their  absolute  unity 
is  also  an  element  which  still  is  formal  and  exists  in  distinction 
from  them — the  element  of  communication,  through  which 
they  enter  into  external  community  with  each  other.  The 
real  distinction  belongs  to  the  extremes,  and  hence  this  mean 
is  only  their  abstract  neutrality  or  real  possibility ;  it  is,  so  to 
speak,  the  theoretic  element  of  the  existence  of  Chemical 
Objects,  of  their  Process  and  its  result.  In  matter  the  function 
of  this  medium  belongs  to  water;  in  spirit,  in  so  far  as  it  con- 
tains an  analogue  to  such  a  relation,  the  symbol  in  general,  and 
more  precisely  language,  must  be  regarded  as  this  analogue. 

In  this  element  the  relation  between  the  Objects,  as  bare 
communication,  is  (i)  a  quiet  coincidence,  but  also  and  equally 
(2)  a  negative  attitude,  since  the  concrete  Notion  which  is  their 
nature  is,  in  communication,  posited  into  reality,  so  that  the 
real  distinctions  of  the  Objects  are  reduced  into  the  unity  of 
this  Notion.  Thus  their  former  independent  determinateness 
is  transcended  in  the  unification  conformable  to  that  Notion 
which  is  one  and  the  same  in  both  ;  their  opposition  and  tension 
are  blunted,  and  so  the  process  of  tending  achieves  its  quiet 
neutrality  in  this  mutual  completion. 

In  this  manner  the  Process  is  extinguished ;  the  contradiction 
between  Notion  and  Reality  being  removed,  the  extremes  of 
the  Syllogism  have  lost  their  opposition,  and  simultaneously 
have  ceased  to  be  extremes  both  against  each  other  and 
against  the  mean.  The  product  is  neutral,  that  is,  it  is  a  product 
in  which  the  ingredients  (which  no  longer  c^n  be  called 
Objects)  have  lost  their  tension  and,  consequently,  those  pro- 
perties which  belonged  to  them  while  they  were  in  a  state  of 
tension,  while  the  capacity  for  this  former  independence  and 
tension  survives.  For  the  negative  unity  of  the  neutral  proceeds 

VOL.   II.  AA 


370  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

from  a  presupposed  difference;  the  determinateness  of  the 
Chemical  Object  is  identical  with  its  objectivity,  it  is  original. 
The  Process  which  has  been  considered  transcends  this  differ- 
ence in  a  merely  immediate  manner ;  consequently  the  deter- 
minateness as  yet  does  not  exist  as  absolutely  intro-reflected, 
and  the  product  of  the  Process  is  only  a  formal  unity. 

2.  Now  in  this  product  the  tension  of  opposition,  and  negative 
unity  as  activity  of  the  Process,  are  extinct.  Nevertheless,  since 
this  unity  is  essential  to  the  Notion,  and  also  has  itself  come 
into  existence,  it  is  still  present,  but  has  passed  outside  the 
neutral  Object.  The  Process  does  not  kindle  itself  again  spon- 
taneously, in  so  far  as  it  had  the  difference  only  for  pre- 
supposition and  did  not  itself  posit  it. — This  negativity,  which 
is  independent  outside  the  Object,  the  existence  of  abstract 
individuality  whose  Being-for-Self  has  its  reality  in  the  indif- 
ferent Object,  now  contains  its  own  tension  against  its  ab- 
straction and  is  an  inwardly  restless  activity  which  consumes 
itself  and  turns  outwards.  It  relates  itself  immediately  to  the 
Object,  whose  quiet  neutrality  is  the  real  possibility  of  its 
opposite;  the  Object  is  now  the  mean  of  the  neutrality  which 
before  was  merely  formal ;  now  it  is  concrete  and  determinate 
within  itself. 

Taken  more  closely  the  immediate  relation  of  the  extreme 
of  the  negative  unity  to  the  Object  is,  that  the  latter  is  deter- 
mined by  it  and  thus  is  sundered.  This  disruption  may  now 
be  regarded  as  the  reconstitution  of  the  opposition  of  tense 
Objects  with  which  Chemism  began.  But  this  determination 
does  not  constitute  the  other  extreme  of  the  Syllogism,  but 
belongs  to  the  immediate  relation  of  the  differentiating 
principle  to  the  mean,  in  which  the  latter  gives  itself  its 
immediate  reality:  it  is  that  determinateness  which  in 
the  Disjunctive  Syllogism  belongs  to  the  mean  apart  from 
the  fact  that  it  is  the  general  nature  of  the  object, 
whereby  the  latter  is  objective  universality  as  well  as  deter- 
minate particularity.  The  other  extreme  of  the  Syllogism 
stands  opposed  to  the  external  independent  extreme  of  in- 
dividuality ;  consequently  it  is  the  equally  independent  extreme 
of  universality;  and  hence  the  disruption  which  the  real 
neutrality  of  the  mean  experiences  in  it  is  that  it  is  analysed 
into  moments  which  are  not  different  but  indifferent  to  each 


CHEMISM 

other.  Accordingly  these  moments  are  (i)  the  abstract  indif- 
ferent base  and  (2)  its  animating  principle,  which,  through  its 
separation  from  the  base,  also  attains  the  form  of  indifferent 
objectivity. 

This  Disjunctive  Syllogism  is  the  totality  of  Chemism.  Here 
the  same  objective  whole  is  represented  as  independent  negative 
unity,  and  next,  in  the  mean,  as  real  unity ; — finally  Chemical 
Reality  is  represented,  resolved  into  its  abstract  moments.  In 
these  last  the  determinateness  has  reached  its  intro-Reflection 
not  in  an  Other  (as  it  did  in  the  neutral),  but  has  in  itself 
passed  back  into  its  abstraction,  and  is  an  element  determined 
originally. 

3.  Accordingly,  these  elementary  Objects  are  set  free  from 
chemical  tension ;  in  them,  the  original  foundation  of  that  pre- 
supposition with  which  Chemism  began  has  been  posited  by 
means  of  the  Real  Process.  Now  further,  first,  their  internal 
determinateness  as  such  is  essentially  the  contradiction  between 
their  simple  indifferent  persistence  and  themselves  as  deter- 
minateness, and  is  the  outward  impulse  which  sunders  itself 
and  posits  a  tension  in  their  Object  and  in  an  Other,  in  order 
that  it  may  have  an  entity  against  which  it  may  take  up  a 
relation  of  difference  and  may  neutralize  itself  and  give  existent 
reality  to  its  simple  determinateness ;  and,  in  so  far,  Chemism 
has  now  passed  back  to  its  beginning,  in  which  Objects  in 
reciprocal  tension  seek  each  other  and  then  unite  into  a 
neutral  entity  through  a  formal  and  external  mean.  Secondly, 
Chemism  transcends  itself  through  this  regress  into  its  Notion, 
and  has  passed  over  into  a  higher  sphere. 


G 

TRANSITION  OF  CHEMISM 

Even  ordinary  chemistry  exhibits  examples  of  chemical 
changes  in  which  a  body  (for  example)  assigns  a  higher  oxida- 
tion to  one  part  of  its  mass  and  thereby  reduces^  another  part 
to  a  lower  degree  of  oxidation,  so  that  now  only  can  it  enter 
into  a  neutral  combination  with  some  other  different  body 
which  is  approached  to  it — a  combination  to  which  it  would 
not  have  been  susceptible  in  the  first  and  immediate  degree. 


372  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

What  here  happens  is  this:  the  Object  does  not  relate  itseL 
to  another  according  to  some  immediate  and  one-sided  deter- 
minateness,  but,  in  accordance  with  the  inner  totality  of  an 
original  relatedness,  posits  the  presupposition  which  it  requires 
for  a  real  relation ;  thus  it  gives  to  itself  a  mean  through  which 
it  binds  together  its  Notion  with  its  reality.  It  is  individuality 
determined  in  and  for  itself,  the  concrete  Notion  as  principle 
of  disjunction  into  extremes,  the  reuniting  of  which  is  the 
activity  of  the  same  negative  principle,  which  thus  returns  to  its 
first  determination,  but  returns  to  it  having  been  objectivated. 
Chemism  itself  is  the  first  negation  of  indifferent  objectivity, 
and  of  the  externality  of  determinateness;  accordingly  Chemism 
is  still  infected  with  the  immediate  independence  of  the  Object 
and  with  externality.  Consequently  for  itself  it  is  not  yet  that 
totality  of  self-determination  which  emerges  from  it,  or  rather 
in  which  it  transcends  itself. — The  three  Syllogisms  which  have 
resulted  constitute  its  totality.  The  first  has  formal  neutrality 
for  middle,  and  the  Objects  in  a  state  of  tension  for  extremes ; 
the  second  has  for  middle  the  product  of  the  first,  that  is,  real 
neutrality,  and  for  extremes  the  sundering  activity  and  its 
product,  the  indifferent  element;  while  the  third  is  the  self- 
realizing  Notion,  which  posits  for  itself  the  presupposition  by 
which  the  process  of  its  realization  is  conditioned, — a  Syllogism 
which  has  the  universal  for  its  Essence.  But  chemical  objectivity 
is  subject  to  the  determination  of  an  immediacy  and  externality, 
and  these  cause  these  Syllogisms  as  yet  to  fall  apart.  The  first 
Process,  whose  product  is  the  neutrality  of  the  Objects  in  tension, 
is  extinguished  in  its  product,  and  it  is  kindled  again  only  by 
a  differentiation  which  is  added  from  without :  it  is  conditioned 
by  an  immediate  presupposition,  and  it  exhausts  itself  in  it. — 
Similarly  the  segregation  of  the  different  extremes  from  the 
neutral,  and  likewise  their  analysis  into  their  abstract  elements, 
must  start  from  conditions  and  stimulants  to  activity  which  are 
added  externally.  But  the  two  essential  moments  of  the  Process 
— first  neutralization  and  next  separation  and  reduction — are 
connected  int  one  and  the  same  Process,  and  the  union  of  the 
extremes  by  loosening  of  the  tension  between  them  is  also  a 
separation  into  such  elements;  and,  in  so  far,  and  also  by 
reason  of  the  externality  which  is  still  the  foundation,  these 
two  constitute  two  different  sides.  The  extremes  which  are 


CHEMISM  373 

segregated  in  the  same  Process  are  Objects  or  kinds  of  matter 
different  from  those  which  unite  in  it;  and  in  so  far  as  the 
former  emerge  again  different  they  must  turn  outwards.  Their 
new  neutralization  is  a  different  Process  from  that  which  took 
place  in  the  first  Process. 

These  various  Processes,  however,  which  have  proved  to  be 
necessary,  are  as  many  stages  through  which  externality  and 
conditionedness  are  transcended;  whence  the  Notion  emerges 
as  a  totality  determined  in  and  for  itself  and  not  conditioned 
by  externality.  In  the  first  process  the  mutual  externality  of 
the  different  extremes  which  constitute  the  whole  of  reality,  or 
the  distinctness  of  the  determinate  Notion  which  is  in  itself  from 
its  existent  determinateness,  transcends  itself;  in  the  second,  the 
externality  of  the  real  unity — the  union  as  merely  neutral — is 
transcended.  (Considered  more  closely,  the  formal  activity  first 
transcends  itself  in  equally  formal  bases  or  indifferent  deter- 
minatenesses,  whose  inner  Notion  now  is  absolute  activity  which 
has  passed  into  itself,  as  realizing  itself  in  itself;  that  is,  as  an 
activity  which  posits  within  itself  the  determinate  distinctions 
and  constitutes  itself  as  real  unity  by  means  of  this  mediation — 
a  mediation  which  accordingly  is  the  self-mediation  of  the 
Notion,  its  self-determination  and,  with  respect  to  its  intro- 
Reflection  thence,  a  process  of  immanent  presupposition.)  The 
third  Syllogism  is  on  the  one  hand  a  reconstruction  of  the 
preceding  Processes;  on  the  other  hand  it  cancels  the  last 
remaining  moment  of  indifferent  bases — the  wholly  abstract 
external  immediacy,  which  in  this  manner  becomes  a  proper 
moment  of  the  self-mediation  of  the  Notion.  The  Notion  thus 
has  transcended  as  external  all  the  moments  of  its  objective 
Determinate  Being  and  has  posited  them  into  its  simple  unity ; 
it  is  thus  completely  set  free  from  objective  externality,  to  which 
it  relates  itself  only  as  to  an  unessential  reality.  This  objective 
and  free  Notion  is  the  End. 


CHAPTER   III 
TELEOLOGY 

WHEN  adequacy  to  an  End  is  perceived,  an  understanding  is 
assumed  as  its  origin :  that  is,  the  proper  and  free  existence  of 
the  Notion  is  demanded  for  the  End.  Teleology  is  chiefly  con- 
trasted with  Mechanism,  where  the  determinateness  posited  in 
the  Object,  being  external,  is  essentially  of  such  a  kind  as 
manifests  no  self-determination.  The  opposition  between  causae 
efficientes  and  causae  finales — between  merely  efficient  and  final 
causes — refers  to  this  distinction ;  and  to  this,  taken  in  a  con- 
crete form,  the  investigation  reverts  whether  the  absolute 
essence  of  the  world  must  be  taken  as  a  blind  natural  Mechanism 
or  as  an  understanding  which  determines  itself  by  Ends.  The 
antinomy  between  fatalism  or  determinism  and  freedom  also 
regards  the  opposition  between  Mechanism  and  Teleology ;  for 
the  Free  is  the  Notion  in  its  existence. 

Older  metaphysics  have  treated  these  Notions  as  they  have 
treated  the  rest ;  partly  they  have  presupposed  an  idea  of  the 
world,  and  have  attempted  to  prove  that  one  or  another  Notion 
fits  it  and  that  the  opposite  is  defective  because  it  does  not 
suffice  to  explain  it;  and  partly,  in  doing  so,  they  have  not 
investigated  the  Notions  of  mechanical  cause  and  of  End  in 
order  to  ascertain  which  has  truth  in  and  for  itself.  When  this 
has  been  established  for  itself,  then  the  objective  world  may 
offer  mechanical  and  final  causes;  its  existence  is  not  the 
measure  of  truth ;  the  truth  is  rather  the  criterion  which  shows 
which  of  these  existences  is  its  true  existence.  As  subjective 
understanding  exhibits  errors  in  itself,  so  also  the  objective 
world  exhibits  those  sides  and  stages  of  truth  which  for 
themselves  are  only  one-sided  and  incomplete,  and  are  but 
relations  of  appearance.  If  Mechanism  and  adequacy  to  an 
End  stand  opposed  to  each  other,  they  cannot,  for  that  very 
reason,  be  taken  as  indifferent  to  each  other;  nor  can  it  be 
assumed  that  each  by  itself  is  a  correct  Notion  having  as  much 
validity  as  the  other,  the  only  question  being  where  either  of 


TELEOLOGY  3;5 

them  may  be  applied.  This  equal  validity  of  the  two  depends 
upon  the  fact  that  they  are,  and  are  because  we  have  them  both. 
But  the  necessary  preliminary  question  is,  since  they  are 
opposed,  which  of  them  is  true ;  and  the  higher  and  proper 
question  is  whether  a  third  term  is  not  their  truth  after  all,  or 
whether  one  is  not  the  truth  of  the  other. — But  the  End-relation 
has  turned  out  to  be  the  truth  of  Mechanism. — That  which 
represented  itself  as  Ghemism  is  comprehended  together  with 
Mechanism  in  so  far  as  the  End  is  the  Notion  in  free  existence : 
the  unfreedom  and  submersion  of  the  Notion  into  externality 
stand  opposed  to  the  End.  Thus  both  Mechanism  and  Chemism 
are,  then,  comprehended  under  natural  necessity:  in  the  first 
the  Notion  does  not  exist  in  the  Object  because  the  latter,  being 
mechanical,  does  not  contain  self-determination;  whereas  in 
the  second  the  Notion  either  has  a  tense  and  one-sided  existence 
or  else,  in  so  far  as  it  emerges  as  the  unity  which  holds  the 
neutral  Object  in  tension  into  extremes,  it  is  external  to  itself, 
in  so  far  as  it  cancels  this  separation. 

The  more  the  teleological  principle  was  connected  with  the 
notion  of  an  extra-mundane  understanding,  and,  to  this  extent, 
favoured  by  piety,  by  so  much  it  seemed  to  be  removed  from 
the  true  investigation  of  nature,  which  attempts  to  understand 
the  properties  of  nature  not  as  extraneous  but  as  immanent 
determinatenesses,  and  admits  only  this  kind  of  cognition  as 
a  forming  of  Notions.  The  End  is  the  Notion  itself  in  its  Exist- 
ence, so  that  it  may  seem  strange  that  the  cognition  of  Objects 
from  their  Notion  appears  as  an  unjustified  trespass  into  a 
heterogeneous  element,  whereas  Mechanism,  in  which  the 
determinateness  of  an  Object  is  a  determinateness  posited 
externally  in  it  by  an  Other,  is  held  to  be  a  more  immanent 
view  than  Teleology.  Mechanism  (or  at  least  the  ordinary  and 
unfree  Mechanism)  and  Chemism  must  indeed  be  regarded 
as  immanent  principles  in  so  far  as  the  determining  external 
element  is  in  turn  an  Object  of  the  same  kind,  determined 
externally  and  indifferent  to  such  determining,  while  in  Chem- 
ism the  other  Object  is  likewise  determined  chemically :  in  short, 
an  essential  moment  of  the  totality  always  lies  in  an  external 
term.  Consequently  these  principles  remain  within  the  same 
natural  form  of  finitude ;  but,  although  they  do  not  attempt 
to  pass  beyond  the  finite  and  only  lead  to  finite  causes  of 


376  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

phenomena,  which  causes  demand  further  progress,  yet  still 
they  extend  themselves  partly  into  a  formal  totality  in  the 
Notion  of  force,  cause,  and  similar  reflection-determinations 
which  are  intended  to  denote  originality;  while  partly  they 
do  so  through  the  abstract  universality  of  an  all  of  forces,  or 
a  whole  of  reciprocal  causes.  Thus  Mechanism  manifests  itself 
as  a  tendency  of  totality  in  that  it  seeks  to  seize  Nature  for 
itself  as  a  whole  which  requires  no  Other  for  its  Notion — a 
totality  which  is  not  found  in  End  and  the  extra-mundane 
understanding  which  is  associated  therewith. 

Adequacy  to  an  End  now  manifests  itself  in  the  first  place 
as  something  higher  in  general,  as  an  understanding  which  ex- 
ternally determines  the  manifoldness  of  the  Objects  by  a  unity 
which  is  in  and  for  itself,  so  that  the  indifferent  determinate- 
nesses  of  the  Objects  become,  by  virtue  of  this  relation,  essential. 
In  Mechanism  they  become  essential  through  the  mere  form 
of  necessity,  and  their  content  remains  indifferent,  for  they  are 
designed  to  remain  external:  understanding  alone  as  such  is 
designed  to  be  satisfied  in  recognizing  its  connexion,  which  is 
abstract  identity.  But  in  Teleology  the  content  becomes  im- 
portant, for  Teleology  presupposes  a  Notion,  that  is,  something 
determinate  in  and  for  itself  and  therefore  self-determining; 
it  has,  accordingly,  distinguished  between  the  relation  of  the 
distinctions  and  their  reciprocal  determinateness,  in  other 
words/orm,  on  the  one  side,  and  on  the  other  the  intro-reflected 
unity,  something  determinate  in  and  for  itself,  that  is,  a  content. 
But  if  this  content  is  otherwise  finite  and  insignificant,  it  is 
contrary  to  its  design;  for  formally  the  End  is  a  totality 
infinite  within  itself— especially  if  activity  which  operates 
by  Ends  is  taken  to  be  absolute  will  and  understanding. 
Teleology  has  incurred  the  reproach  of  triviality  so  heavily 
because  the  Ends  which  it  demonstrated  are,  as  it  befell,  more 
significant  or  more  trifling;  the  End-relation  of  Objects  thus 
necessarily  often  appeared  merely  childish,  because  this  relation 
appears  to  be  so  external  and  therefore  contingent.  Mechanism 
on  the  contrary  allows  to  the  determinatenesses  of  its  Objects 
their  value  as  contingent  according  to  their  content;  and  the 
Object  is  indifferent  to  these,  which  are  supposed  to  have  a 
higher  validity  neither  for  the  Objects  nor  for  subjective  under- 
standing. Consequently,  in  its  connexion  of  external  necessity, 


TELEOLOGY  3*77 

this  principle  affords  the  consciousness  of  infinite  freedom  as 
against  Teleology,  which  sets  up  as  something  absolute  what- 
ever it  contains  that  is  trivial  or  even  contemptible ;  and  here 
a  more  universal  thought  can  only  feel  infinitely  cramped  or 
even  nauseated. 

The  formal  disadvantage  to  which  this  Teleology  is  subject 
is  this,  that  it  does  not  progress  beyond  external  adequacy  to  an 
End.  Accordingly  the  Notion  is  posited  as  something  formal, 
and  thus  the  content,  for  Teleology,  is  something  given  exter- 
nally to  the  Notion  in  the  multiplicity  of  the  objective  world — 
given  in  precisely  that  collection  of  determinatenesses  which 
is  also  content  of  Mechanism,  but  there  is  external  and  con- 
tingent. By  reason  of  this  community  the  form  of  adequacy  to 
an  End  constitutes  by  itself  alone  the  essential  part  of  Teleology. 
In  this  respect,  and  without  regard  to  the  distinction  between 
outer  and  inner  adequacy  to  an  End,  the  End-relation  has 
proved  to  be,  generally  and  in  and  for  itself,  the  truth  of 
Mechanism. — Teleology  has  in  general  the  higher  principle, 
the  Notion  in  its  existence  which  is  in  and  for  itself  the  infinite 
and  absolute — a  principle  of  freedom  which,  utterly  certain  of 
its  self-determination,  is  absolutely  removed  from  the  external 
determination  of  Mechanism. 

One  of  Kant's  great  merits  in  philosophy  is,  that  he  estab- 
lished a  distinction  between  relative  or  external,  and  internal, 
adequacy  to  an  End.  In  the  latter  he  has  opened  up  the  Notion 
of  Life,  or  the  Idea,  and  has  thereby  positively  raised  philosophy 
above  the  determinations  of  reflection  and  the  relative  world 
of  metaphysics ;  though  in  the  Critique  of  Reason  this  is  done 
only  negatively,  incompletely,  and  in  a  very  crooked  fashion. 
— It  was  mentioned  that  the  opposition  between  Teleology  and 
Mechanism  is,  in  the  first  instance,  the  more  general  opposition 
between  freedom  and  necessity.  Kant  sets  out  the  opposition 
in  this  form  under  the  Antinomies  of  Reason,  as  the  "Third 
Conflict  of  Transcendental  Ideas/' — I  briefly  quote  his  ex- 
position, which  was  referred  to  before;  its  essential  part  is  so 
simple  that  it  requires  no  lengthy  analysis,  and  the  general 
manner  of  Kant's  Antinomies  has  been  examined  elsewhere 
in  greater  detail. 

The  thesis  of  the  Antinomy  here  to  be  considered  runs  as 
follows: — Causality  according  to  natural  laws  is  not  the  only 


3;8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

one  from  which  all  the  phenomena  of  the  world  may  be  derived  ; 
it  is  necessary  to  assume  another  causality  through  freedom  in 
order  to  explain  them. 

The  antithesis  is: — There  is  no  freedom,  but  everything  in 
the  world  happens  solely  according  to  natural  laws. 

The  proof,  as  with  the  other  Antinomies,  proceeds  (i)  apa- 
gogically,  the  opposite  of  either  thesis  being  assumed;  (2)  in 
order  to  demonstrate  the  contradictoriness  of  this  assumption, 
its  opposite  conversely  is  assumed  (that  is,  the  proposition  which 
is  to  be  proved),  and  is  presupposed  as  valid.  Thus  the  whole 
circumlocution  in  the  proof  might  be  spared,  since  it  consists 
merely  in  the  assertion  of  the  two  opposed  propositions. 

For,  in  order  to  prove  the  thesis,  the  assumption  is  first  to  be 
made  that  there  is  no  causality  except  according  to  natural 
laws,  that  is,  according  to  the  necessity  of  Mechanism  in  general, 
which  includes  Chemism.  It  is  said  that  this  proposition  is  self- 
contradictory  because  natural  law  consists  just  in  this,  that 
nothing  happens  without  a  cause  sufficiently  determined  a  priori, 
which  cause  thus  contains  an  absolute  spontaneity; — that  is, 
the  assumption  which  is  opposed  to  the  thesis  is  contradictory 
because  it  contradicts  the  thesis. 

In  order  to  prove  the  antithesis  it  has  to  be  posited  that  there 
is  a  freedom  as  a  particular  kind  of  causality — a  freedom  to 
initiate  a  state  and  hence  also  a  series  of  consequences  of  the 
state.  But  since  such  an  initiation  presupposes  a  state  (namdy 
that  of  freedom)  which  has  no  causal  connexion  with  the  pre- 
ceding state  of  freedom,  therefore  the  initiation  contradicts  the 
law  of  causality,  according  to  which  alone  unity  of  experience, 
or  indeed  any  experience,  is  possible ; — that  is,  the  assumption 
of  freedom,  which  is  the  opposite  of  the  antithesis,  cannot  be 
made  because  it  contradicts  the  antithesis. 

Essentially  the  same  Antinomy  returns  in  the  Critique  of  the 
Teleological  Faculty  of  Judgment,  as  the  contradiction  that  all 
production  of  material  things  takes  place  according  to  merely 
mechanical  laws  and  that  some  production  of  them  according 
to  such  laws  is  impossible. — Kant's  solution  of  this  Antinomy 
is  the  same  as  the  general  solution  of  the  others :  that  reason 
can  prove  neither  of  these  propositions,  since  we  can  have  no 
determinant  principle  a  priori  about  the  possibility  of  things 
according  to  merely  empirical  laws  of  nature;  consequently 


TELEOLOGY  379 

the  two  must  not  be  regarded  as  objective  propositions  but  as 
subjective  maxims :  on  the  one  hand  I  ought  always  to  reflect 
upon  all  natural  events  according  to  the  principle  of  pure 
natural  mechanism;  but  this  does  not  prevent  me  from  in- 
vestigating certain  forms  of  nature,  should  the  occasion  be 
given,  according  to  another  maxim,  namely,  that  of  final  causes ; 
— as  though  these  two  maxims  (which  further  are  supposed  to 
be  required  only  by  human  reason)  were  not  in  the  same 
opposition  in  which  the  propositions  stand. — As  was  observed 
above,  at  this  whole  standpoint  the  only  question  which  is 
demanded  by  philosophic  interest  is  not  looked  into,  namely, 
which  of  these  two  principles  is  true  in  and  for  itself;  but,  for 
this  point  of  view,  it  is  irrelevant  whether  the  principles  are 
to  be  considered  as  objective  determinations  of  nature  (that  is 
here,  as  determinations  existing  externally)  or  as  mere  maxims 
of  a  subjective  cognition. — But  in  fact  this  is  a  subjective,  that 
is,  a  contingent,  cognition,  which  applies  one  or  the  other 
maxim  as  the  occasion  may  suggest  according  as  it  thinks 
it  appropriate  to  the  given  objects,  but  otherwise  does  not 
concern  itself  about  the  truth  of  these  determinations  them- 
selves, or  ask  whether  both  are  determinations  of  the  objects 
or  of  cognition. 

But  however  inadequate  Kant's  discussion  of  the  teleological 
principle  may  be  in  regard  to  the  essential  point  of  view,  still 
the  position  which  Kant  assigns  to  it  is  remarkable.  He  ascribes 
it  to  a  reflecting  faculty  of  judgment,  and  thus  makes  it  the 
connecting  middle  link  between  the  universal  of  reason  and  the 
individual  of  intuition; — further,  he  distinguishes  between  this 
reflecting  faculty  of  judgment  and  the  determining  faculty, 
which  latter  according  to  him  merely  subsumes  the  particular 
under  the  universal.  Such  a  merely  subsuming  universal  is  an 
abstract  which  becomes  concrete  only  in  an  Other,  the  par- 
ticular. The  End  on  the  other  hand  is  the  concrete  universal 
which  contains  in  itself  the  moment  of  particularity  and  exter- 
nality, and  consequently  is  active  and  is  the  impulse  to  repel 
itself  from  itself.  It  is  true  that  the  Notion  as  End  is  an  objective 
judgment,  in  which  one  determination,  the  subjecf  (that  is,  the 
concrete  Notion),  is  self-determined,  while  the  other  is  not  only 
a  predicate  but  also  is  external  objectivity.  But  the  End-relation 
is  not  for  this  reason  a  reflecting  process  of  judgment  which 


380  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

considers  external  objects  only  according  to  a  unity,  as  though 
some  understanding  had  given  them  for  the  benefit  of  our  powers 
of  cognition :  the  relation  is  the  truth  which  is  in  and  for  itself, 
which  judges  objectively  and  absolutely  determines  external 
objectivity.  Thus  the  End-relation  is  more  than  Judgment ;  it 
is  the  Syllogism  of  the  independent  and  free  Notion,  which 
through  objectivity  binds  itself  together  with  itself. 

The  End  has  turned  out  to  be  the  complementary  third  term 
of  Mechanism  and  Chemism ;  it  is  their  truth.  Since  it  still 
stands  within  the  sphere  of  Objectivity  or  of  the  immediacy  of 
the  total  Notion,  it  is  still  affected  by  externality  as  such ;  an 
objective  world  to  which  it  relates  itself  still  stands  opposed  to 
it.  From  this  side  mechanical  causality  (in  which  generally 
Chemism  must  be  included)  still  appears  in  this  End-relation 
(which  is  external),  but  as  subordinated  to  it  and  as  transcended 
in  and  for  itself.  With  regard  to  the  closer  relation,  the  mechani- 
cal Object  is  in  the  relation  of  immediate  totality  to  its  deter- 
minedness,  so  that  it  is  indifferent  to  it  whether  it  determines 
or  not.  This  external  determinedness  is  now  developed  into 
self-determination,  and  thus  the  Notion,  which  in  the  Object  is 
merely  internal  (or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  merely  external),  is 
now  posited ;  at  first  the  End  is  just  this  Notion  itself  which  is 
external  to  the  Mechanical  Notion.  Thus  the  End  is  the  self- 
determining  entity  for  Chemism  too ;  that  entity  which  brings 
back  into  the  unity  of  the  Notion  that  external  determinedness 
by  which  it  is  conditioned. — From  this  results  the  nature  of  the 
subordination  of  the  two  previous  forms  of  the  objective  process : 
the  Other,  which  in  them  lies  in  the  infinite  progress,  is  the 
Notion  which  at  first  is  posited  as  external  to  them,  which  is 
End;  not  only  is  the  Notion  their  substance,  but  also  exter- 
nality is  the  moment  which  is  essential  to  them  and  constitutes 
their  determinateness.  Thus  mechanical  or  chemical  technique 
spontaneously  offers  itself  to  the  End-relation  by  reason  of  its 
character  of  being  determined  externally;  and  this  relation 
must  now  be  further  considered. 


TELEOLOGY  38' 

A 

THE  SUBJECTIVE  END 

In  the  central! ty  of  the  objective  sphere,  which  is  an  in- 
difference as  against  determinateness,  the  subjective  Notion 
has  now  again  discovered  and  posited  the  negative  point  of 
unity ;  in  Chemism  it  has  posited  the  objectivity  of  the  Notion- 
determinations,  by  means  of  which  alone  it  is  posited  as  concrete 
objective  Notion.  Its  determinateness  or  its  simple  distinction 
now  contains  the  determinateness  of  externality,  and  therefore 
its  simple  unity  is  the  self-repelling  and  in  this  process  self- 
preserving  unity.  Consequently  the  End  is  the  subjective  Notion 
as  essential  tendency  and  impulse  towards  external  self-positing. 
In  this  process  it  is  saved  from  transition.  It  is  neither  a  force 
which  manifests  itself,  nor  a  substance  and  cause  which  exhibits 
itself  in  accidents  and  effects.  Force  is  only  an  abstractly  internal 
entity  in  so  far  as  it  has  not  manifested  itself;  or,  it  has  Deter- 
minate Being  only  in  the  manifestation  which  it  must  be 
solicited  to  produce ;  and  so  with  cause  and  substance :  because 
they  have  actuality  only  in  accidents  and  in  effect,  their  activity 
is  a  transition  against  which  they  cannot  preserve  themselves 
in  freedom.  The  End  may,  indeed,  be  determined  as  force  and 
cause,  but  these  expressions  fulfil  only  an  incomplete  side  of  its 
significance ;  if  they  are  to  be  predicated  of  it  in  its  truth,  they 
can  be  predicated  only  in  a  manner  which  transcends  their 
Notion — as  a  force  which  solicits  itself  to  manifest  itself,  or  as 
a  cause  which  is  its  own  cause,  or  whose  effect  immediately  is 
the  cause. 

If  that  which  is  adequate  to  an  End  is  ascribed  to  an  under- 
standing, then,  as  was  previously  observed,  regard  is  being  had 
to  the  determinate  aspect  of  the  content.  But  the  content  must 
be  taken  in  general  as  the  reasonable  in  its  existence.  It  mani- 
fests reasonableness  because  it  is  the  concrete  Notion  which 
preserves  the  objective  distinction  in  its  absolute  unity.  Conse- 
quently it  is  essentially  the  Syllogism  in  itself.  It  is  the  universal 
which  is  equal  to  itself,  and,  as  containing  self-repellent  nega- 
tivity, it  is  here  universal,  in  so  far  as  it  is  still  indeterminate, 
activity.  But,  since  this  is  negative  self-relation,  the  activity 
immediately  determines  itself  and  gives  itself  the  moment  of 


382  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

particularity  and  this,  since  it  is  likewise  the  intro-reflected, 
totality  of  form,  is  content  as  against  the  posited  distinctions 
of  form.  Equally  immediately  this  negativity,  by  virtue  of  its 
self-relation,  is  absolute  int^o-Reflection  of  form,  and  individu- 
ality. This  Reflection  is  (i)  inner  universality  of  the  subject, 
and  (2)  Reflection  outwards;  and,  to  this  extent,  the  End  is 
still  subjective,  and  its  activity  is  directed  against  external 
objectivity. 

For  the  End  is  the  Notion  which  has  reached  itself  in  Ob- 
jectivity; the  determinateness  which  it  has  assumed  in  Objec- 
tivity is  that  of  objective  indifference  to  and  externality  of 
determinedness ;  consequently  its  self-repelling  negativity  is 
such  as  has  moments  which,  being  only  determinations  of  the 
Notion  itself,  have  also  the  form  of  objective  indifference  to 
each  other. — Already  in  the  formal  Judgment  subject  and 
predicate  are  determined  as  independent  as  against  each 
other;  but  as  yet  their  independence  is  only  abstract  univer- 
sality. Now  it  has  reached  the  determination  of  Objectivity ; 
but,  as  moment  of  the  Notion,  this  complete  variousness  is 
enclosed  in  the  simple  unity  of  the  Notion.  Now  the  End  is 
:his  total  intro-Reflection  of  Objectivity,  and  is  so  immediately ; 
and,  in  so  far  as  it  is  this,  first,  self-determination  or  particu- 
larity as  simple  intro-Reflection  is  distinct  from  the  concrete 
form  and  is  a  determinate  content.  Accordingly  the  End  is 
finite,  although  formally  it  is  infinite  subjectivity.  Secondly, 
its  determinateness  has  the  form  of  objective  indifference,  and 
therefore  has  the  shape  of  a  presupposition ;  in  this  direction 
its  finitude  consists  in  this,  that  it  has  before  it  an  objective, 
Mechanical  and  Chemical  world,  to  which  its  activity  relates 
itself  as  to  something  already  given ;  thus  its  self-determining 
activity  is  in  its  identity  immediately  external  to  itself,  and' 
as  much  as  it  is  intro-Reflection  it  is  Reflection  outwards.  And 
to  this  extent  it  still  has  a  truly  extra-mundane  existence, 
namely,  in  so  far  as  this  objectivity  stands  opposed  to  it;  while 
the  latter  on  the  other  hand  stands  opposed  to  it  as  a  Mechanical 
and  Chemical  whole,  not  yet  determined  and  penetrated  by 
the  End. 

Consequently  the  movement  of  the  End  may  now  be  ex- 
pressed in  this  manner,  that  it  proceeds  to  cancel  the  pre- 
supposition of  the  End — that  is.  the  immediacy  of  the  Object — • 


TELEOLOGY  383 

and  to  posit  the  Object  as  determined  through  the  Notion. 
This  negative  attitude  to  the  Object  is  equally  a  negative 
attitude  to  itself,  a  cancellation  of  the  subjectivity  of  the  End. 
Positively,  this  is  the  realization  of  the  End,  the  union  of 
objective  being  with  it,  so  that  this  being,  which  as  moment  of 
the  End  is  immediately  the  determinateness  identical  with  it, 
is  to  exist  as  external  determinateness;  while  conversely  the 
Objective  is  to  be  posited  as  presupposition  rather  than  as 
determined  by  Notion. — The  End  is  in  itself  the  impulse  to- 
wards its  realization;  the  determinateness  of  the  Notion- 
moments  is  externality ;  but  their  simplicity,  in  the  unity  of  the 
Notion,  is  inadequate  to  that  which  this  unity  is;  and  con- 
sequently the  Notion  repels  itself  from  itself.  This  repulsion  is, 
in  general,  the  resolution  of  the  self-relation  of  negative  unity, 
by  means  of  which  the  latter  is  exclusive  individuality ;  but 
through  this  exclusion  it  resolves  itself,  or  unfolds,  because  this 
is  self-determination,  or  self-positing.  On  the  one  hand,  while 
subjectivity  determines  itself,  it  makes  itself  particularity  and 
gives  itself  a  content  which,  enclosed  in  the  unity  of  the  Notion, 
is  as  yet  internal;  but  this  positing  or  simple  intro-Reflection 
is  also,  immediately  (as  has  appeared),  a  presupposing;  and 
in  the  same  moment  in  which  the  subject  of  the  End  determines 
itself,  it  is  related  to  an  indifferent  and  external  objectivity 
which  it  is  to  equate  with  that  inner  determinateness,  that  is, 
to  posit  as  something  determined  by  the  Notion :  this,  at  first, 
is  Means. 

B 

THE  MEANS 

The  first  immediate  positing  in  the  End  is  also  the  positing 
of  something  internal,  that  is,  something  determined  as  posited, 
and  also  the  presupposing  of  an  objective  world  which  is 
indifferent  to  the  End-determination.  But  the  subjectivity  of 
the  End  is  absolute  negative  unity:  its  second  determining  is 
therefore  the  transcendence  of  this  presupposition  in  general ; 
this  transcendence  is  the  return  to  self  in  so  far  as  through  it 
that  moment  of  first  negation,  the  positing  of  the  negative  as 
against  the  subject  (or,  the  external  object),  is  transcended. 
But,  as  against  presupposition  or  the  immediacy  of  determining, 


384  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

or  against  the  objective  world,  it  is  only  the  first  (and  con- 
sequently immediate  and  external)  negation.  Hence  this  positing 
is  not  yet  the  Realized  End  itself,  but  only  a  beginning  in  that 
direction.  The  object  thus  determined  is  only  the  Means. 

The  End  binds  itself  together  with  objectivity  through  a 
Means,  and  in  objectivity  with  itself.  The  Means  is  the  middle 
of  the  Syllogism.  The  End  requires  a  Mean  for  its  realization 
because  it  is  finite, — a  Means,  that  is,  a  Mean,  which  at  the 
same  time  has  the  shape  of  an  external  Determinate  Being, 
indifferent  to  the  End  itself  and  to  its  realization.  The  absolute 
Notion  contains  mediation  in  such  a  way  that  its  own  first 
positing  is  not  a  presupposing,  in  whose  object  indifferent 
externality  would  be  the  fundamental  determination:  rather, 
the  world  as  creature  has  only  the  form  of  such  externality,  but 
its  negativity,  and  positedness,  constitute  its  fundamental  deter- 
mination.— The  finitude  of  the  End  thus  consists  in  this,  that 
its  process  of  determining  is  altogether  external  to  itself,  so  that 
its  first  determining  (as  we  saw)  falls  apart  into  a  positing  and 
a  presupposing ;  consequently  the  negation  of  this  determining 
is  also  intro-Reflection  in  one  direction  only ;  in  the  other  it  is 
only  first  negation.  Or  again,  intro-Reflection  is  itself  self- 
external  and  is  Reflection  outwards. 

The  Means  is  therefore  the  formal  middle  of  a  formal  syllo- 
gism ;  it  is  external  as  against  the  extreme  of  the  Subjective  End, 
and  consequently  also  against  the  extreme  of  the  Objective 
End :  similarly  particularity  in  the  formal  syllogism  is  an  in- 
different medius  terminus,  whose  place  might  be  taken  by  any 
other.  Further,  particularity  is  middle  only  because  it  is  deter- 
minateness  in  relation  to  one  extreme  and  universal  in  relation 
to  the  other,  so  that  its  mediating  determination  belongs  to  it 
only  relatively  and  through  others;  and  similarly  the  Means 
is  mediating  mean  only  (i)  because  it  is  an  immediate  object, 
and  (2)  because  it  is  Means  by  virtue  of  the  relation  (which  is 
external  to  it)  to  the  extreme  of  the  End — which  relation  is  for 
it  a  form  to  which  it  is  indifferent. 

Consequently  Notion  and  Objectivity  are  connected  only 
externally  in  the  Means,  which  in  so  far  is  a  merely  mechanical 
object.  The  relation  of  the  object  to  the  End  is  a  premiss;  or  it 
is  an  immediate  relation  which  with  regard  to  the  End  (as  was 
shown)  is  intro-Reflection.  The  Means  is  an  inhering  predicate ; 


TELEOLOGY  38^ 

its  objectivity  is  subsumed  under  the  End-determination,  which, 
because  of  its  concretion,  is  universality.  Because  of  this  End- 
determination  which  exists  in  the  Means,  it  now  also  subsumes 
the  other  extreme  of  the  objectivity  which  up  to  this  point  was 
indeterminate. — Conversely  the  Means,  as  immediate  objec- 
tivity, has  universality  of  Determinate  Being  as  against  the  Sub- 
jective End.  The  subjective  individuality  of  the  End  still  lacks 
this. — Thus  at  first  the  End  is  merely  external  determinateness 
in  the  Means,  and  so  is  outside  it,  as  negative  unity ;  while  the 
Means  is  only  mechanical  object  having  the  End  merely  as  a 
determinateness  and  not  as  simple  concretion  of  the  totality. 
But  the  middle,  by  virtue  of  its  connecting  function,  must  itself 
be  the  totality  of  the  End.  It  has  appeared  that  the  End- 
determination  in  the  Means  is  at  the  same  time  intro-Reflection ; 
in  so  far  it  is  formal  self-reference,  since  determinateness,  as 
real  indifference,  is  posited  as  the  objectivity  of  the  Means. 
But  for  this  very  reason  this  subjectivity — which  from  one  side 
is  pure  subjectivity — is  also  activity. — In  the  Subjective  End 
negative  self-relation  remains  identical  with  determinateness  as 
such — with  content  and  externality.  But  in  the  objectivation 
of  the  End  which  is  commencing — in  the  becoming-other  of  the 
simple  Notion — these  moments  separate;  or,  conversely,  this 
becoming-other  or  externality  itself  consists  in  this. 

Thus  this  whole  middle  is  itself  the  totality  of  the  syllogism, 
in  which  abstract  activity  and  the  external  Means  constitute 
the  extremes,  whose  middle  is  constituted  by  the  determinate- 
ness  of  the  object  through  the  End  by  virtue  of  which  it  is 
Means. — But  further,  universality  is  the  relation  of  the  End- 
activity  and  the  Means.  The  Means  is  object,  and  is  in  itself 
the  totality  of  the  Notion ;  it  has  no  force  of  resistance  to  the 
End  such  as  it  has  against  some  other  immediate  object.  Thus 
it  is  entirely  penetrable  by  the  End  (which  is  the  posited 
Notion),  and  is  susceptible  of  this  communication  because, 
in  itself,  it  is  identical  with  the  End.  But  now  it  is  also  posited 
as  that  which  is  penetrable  by  the  Notion,  for  in  centrality  it 
is  something  which  strives  after  negative  unity;  similarly,  in 
Chemism,  it  has,  as  neutral,  and  also  as  different,  become 
dependent. — Its  dependence  consists  just  in  this,  that  it  is  only 
in  itself  the  totality  of  the  Notion ;  but  the  Notion  is  Being-for- 
Self.  Thus  as  against  the  End  the  object  has  the  character  of 

VOL.   II.  BB 


386  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

impotence  and  subservience ;  the  End  is  its  subjectivity  or  soul, 
which  has  its  external  side  in  the  object. 

The  object,  being  in  this  manner  immediately  subjected  to 
the  End,  is  not  an  extreme  of  the  syllogism ;  but  this  relation 
constitutes  one  of  its  premisses.  But  the  Means  also  has  a  side 
according  to  which  it  still  has  independence  as  against  the  End. 
The  objectivity  which  is  connected  with  the  End  in  the  Means 
is  still  external  to  it,  because  it  is  only  immediately  so  con- 
nected ;  and  consequently  the  presupposition  still  persists.  The 
activity  of  the  End  through  the  Means  is  still  therefore  directed 
against  this  presupposition,  and  the  End  is  activity  and  not 
merely  impulse  and  tendency,  just  in  so  far  as  the  moment  of 
objectivity  in  the  Means  is  posited  in  its  determinateness  as 
external  and  the  simple  unity  of  the  Notion  now  has  objectivity 
as  such  in  itself. 

G 

THE  REALIZED  END 

i.  The  End  in  its  relation  to  the  Means  is  already  intro- 
reflected ;  but  its  objective  return  upon  itself  has  not  yet  been 
posited.  The  activity  of  the  End  through  its  Means  is  still 
directed  against  objectivity  as  original  presupposition,  which 
is  precisely  this,  to  be  indifferent  to  determinateness.  In  so  far 
as  the  activity  should  again  consist  just  in  determining  the 
immediate  objectivity,  the  product  would  again  be  only  a 
Means,  and  so  on  to  infinity:  only  a  Means  adequate  to  the 
End  would  result,  but  not  the  objectivity  of  the  End  itself. 
Consequently  the  End  which  is  active  in  its  Means  must  not 
determine  the  immediate  object  as  something  external,  which 
therefore  must  collapse  through  itself  into  the  unity  of  the 
Notion;  in  other  words,  this  external  activity  of  the  End 
through  its  Means  must  determine  itself  as  mediation  and 
must  transcend  itself. 

The  relation  of  the  activity  of  the  End  to  the  external  object 
through  the  Means  is  at  this  point  the  second  premiss  of  the 
syllogism — ah  immediate  relation  of  the  middle  to  the  other 
extreme.  The  relation  is  immediate  because  the  middle  has  in 
it  an  external  object,  and  the  other  extreme  is  such  an  external 
object.  The  Means  is  effective  and  powerful  against  the  latter 


TELEOLOGY  387 

because  its  object  is  connected  with  the  self-determining 
activity,  while  the  immediate  determinateness  which  it  has  is 
indifferent  to  this  object.  In  this  relation  its  process  is  no  other 
than  the  mechanical  or  chemical  process;  in  this  objective 
externality  the  former  relations  emerge,  but  under  the  supre- 
macy of  the  End. — But,  as  has  been  seen,  these  processes  pass 
back,  through  themselves,  into  the  End.  If  then  at  first  the 
relation  of  the  Means  to  the  external  object  which  is  to  be 
operated  upon  is  immediate,  it  has  earlier  already  presented 
itself  as  a  syllogism,  the  End  having  turned  out  to  be  its  true 
middle  and  unity.  If  then  the  Means  is  the  object  which  stands 
on  the  side  of  the  End  and  contains  its  activity,  then  the 
mechanism  which  here  operates  is  also  self-return  of  objectivity 
into  the  Notion,  which,  however,  is  already  presupposed  as 
End ;  in  so  far  the  negative  attitude  to  the  object  of  the  activity 
which  is  adequate  to  the  End  is  not  external,  but  is  the  change 
and  the  transition  of  objectivity  in  itself  into  the  End. 

It  may  be  considered  as  force  that  the  End  immediately 
relates  itself  to  an  object  and  makes  it  a  Means,  and  that 
through  this  Means  it  determines  another;  for  the  End  seems 
to  be  quite  heterogeneous  from  the  object,  and  the  two  objects 
are  also  mutually  independent  totalities.  But  it  may  be  regarded 
as  the  cunning  of  Reason  when  the  End  puts  itself  into  mediate 
relation  with  the  object  and  inserts  another  object  between 
itself  and  it.  As  has  been  observed,  the  finitude  of  rationality 
has  this  side,  that  the  End  is  related  to  the  presupposition,  that 
is,  the  externality  of  the  object.  In  immediate  relation  to  the 
object  the  End  would  itself  enter  into  Mechanism  or  Chemism, 
and  thus  would  be  subject  to  contingency  and  to  the  destruction 
of  its  determination  as  Notion  which  is  in  and  for  itself.  But 
as  it  is  it  exposes  an  object  as  Means,  allows  it  to  exhaust  itself 
externally  in  its  place,  and,  surrendering  it  to  attrition,  shields 
itself  behind  it  from  mechanical  force. 

Further,  since  the  End  is  finite  it  has  a  finite  content; 
accordingly  it  is  not  absolute  or  utterly  and  in  and  for  itself 
reasonable.  The  Means  however  is  the  external  middle  of  the 
syllogism  which  is  the  realization  of  the  End ;  in  it  therefore 
reasonableness  manifests  itself  as  such — as  preserving  itself  in 
this  external  Other  and  precisely  through  this  externality.  In 
so  far  the  Means  is  higher  than  the  finite  Ends  of  external 


q88  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

usefulness:  the  plough  is  more  honourable  than  are  im- 
mediately those  enjoyments  which  are  procured  by  it,  and  are 
Ends.  The  instrument  is  preserved,  while  the  immediate  en- 
joyments pass  away  and  are  forgotten.  In  his  tools  man  possesses 
power  over  external  nature,  even  although,  according  to  his 
Ends,  he  frequently  is  subjected  to  it. 

But  the  End  does  not  only  remain  outside  the  Mechanical 
process :  it  also  preserves  itself  within  it,  and  is  its  determination. 
The  End,  as  the  Notion  which  exists  as  free  against  the  object 
and  its  process  and  is  self-determining  activity,  equally  is  the 
truth  which  is  in  and  for  itself  of  Mechanism ;  and  therefore  in 
it  the  End  coincides  only  with  itself.  The  power  of  the  End 
over  the  object  is  this  identity  which  is  for  itself,  and  the 
activity  of  the  End  is  the  manifestation  of  this  identity.  The 
End  as  content  is  determinateness  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  and 
which  in  the  object  is  indifferent  and  external ;  but  its  activity 
is  on  one  side  the  truth  of  the  process,  and  as  negative  unity 
it  is  the  transcendence  of  the  show  of  externality.  From  the 
point  of  view  of  abstraction  it  is  the  indifferent  determinateness 
of  the  object  which  equally  externally  is  replaced  by  another 
determinateness ;  but  the  simple  abstraction  of  determinateness 
in  its  truth  is  the  totality  of  the  negative — the  concrete  Notion 
which  posits  externality  within  itself. 

The  content  of  the  End  is  its  negativity  as  simple  intro- 
reflected  particularity,  distinct  from  its  totality  as  form.  Because 
of  this  simplicity,  whose  determinateness  in  and  for  itself  is  the 
totality  of  the  Notion,  the  content  appears  as  that  which  remains 
identical  in  the  realization  of  the  End.  The  teleological  process 
is  the  translation  into  objectivity  of  the  Notion  which  exists 
distinctly  as  Notion ;  it  appears  that  this  translation  into  a  pre- 
supposed Other  is  the  coincidence  of  the  Notion  with  and 
through  itself.  Now  the  content  of  the  End  is  this  identity  which 
exists  in  the  form  of  the  identical.  The  Notion  preserves  itself 
in  every  process  of  transition ;  for  example,  when  the  cause 
becomes  effect  it  is  the  cause  which  in  the  effect  coincides  with 
itself:  while  in  the  teleological  transition  it  is  the  Notion  which 
as  such  already  exists  as  cause,  as  the  absolute  and  concrete 
unity  which  is  free  as  against  objectivity  and  its  external 
determinability.  The  externality  into  which  the  End  translates 
itself  is,  as  we  saw,  itself  already  posited  as  moment  of  the 


TELEOLOGY  38g 

Notion,  as  form  of  its  internal  distinction.  Consequently  the 
End  has  its  peculiar  moment  in  externality ;  and  the  content, 
as  content  of  the  concrete  unity,  is  its  simple  form,  which,  in 
the  distinct  moments  of  the  End — as  Subjective  End,  as  Means 
and  mediated  activity,  and  as  Objective  End — not  only  remains 
implicitly  self-equal,  but  also  exists  as  that  which  remains  self- 
equal. 

It  may  then  be  said  of  the  teleological  activity  that  in  it  the 
end  is  the  beginning,  the  consequence  the  ground,  and  the 
effect  the  cause ;  that  it  is  a  becoming  of  that  which  has  become, 
that  in  it  only  that  which  already  exists  comes  into  existence, 
and  so  forth :  that  is,  that  altogether  all  relation-determinations 
which  belong  to  the  sphere  of  Reflection  or  of  immediate  Being 
have  lost  their  distinctions;  and  that  which  is  designated  as 
Other  (like  end,  consequence,  effect,  and  so  on)  no  longer  has 
the  determination  of  Other  in  the  End-relation,  but  rather  is 
posited  as  identical  with  the  simple  Notion. 

2.  If  now  the  product  of  the  teleological  activity  is  more 
closely  considered,  the  End  belongs  to  it  only  externally  in  so 
far  as  it  is  absolute  presupposition  as  against  the  Subjective 
End ;  that  is,  in  so  far  as  a  halt  is  made  at  the  point  where  the 
activity  which  is  adequate  to  an  End  is  related  through  its 
Means  only  mechanically  to  the  object,  and  posits,  instead  of 
one  indifferent  determinateness  of  it,  some  other  determinate- 
ness  which  is  equally  external.  Such  a  determinateness  which 
an  object  has  through  the  End  differs  generally  from  a  merely 
mechanical  determinateness  in  that  the  former  object  is  moment 
of  a  unity;  whence,  even  if  it  (that  is,  the  determinateness)  is 
external  to  the  object,  yet  in  itself  it  is  not  merely  something 
external.  The  object  which  shows  such  a  unity  is  a  whole,  and 
its  parts — its  own  externality — are  indifferent  to  this ;  it  is  a 
determinate,  concrete  unity,  which  unites  within  itself  various 
relations  and  determinatenesses.  This  unity,  of  which  no  notion 
can  be  formed  from  the  specific  nature  of  the  object,  and  which 
according  to  its  determinate  content  is  other  than  the  peculiar 
content  of  the  object,  is,  for  itself,  no  mechanical  determinate- 
ness  ;  but  it  is  still  mechanical  in  the  object.  In  this  product 
of  the  activity  which  is  adequate  to  an  End  the  content  of  the 
End  and  the  content  of  the  object  are  external  to  each  other, 
and  in  the  other  moments  of  the  syllogism  the  determinations 


390  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

of  this  activity  are  similarly  related : — these  are,  in  the  com- 
prehensive middle,  the  activity  which  is  adequate  to  the  End, 
and  the  object  which  is  Means;  and  in  the  Subjective  End 
(the  other  extreme),  infinite  form  as  the  totality  of  the  Notion, 
and  its  content.  According  to  the  relation  by  which  the  Sub- 
jective End  is  bound  together  with  objectivity,  both  premisses 
alike — the  relation  of  the  object  which  is  determined  as  Means 
to  the  object  which  still  is  external,  and  also  the  relation  of  the 
Subjective  End  to  the  object  which  is  made  Means — are  imme- 
diate relations.  Consequently  the  syllogism  has  the  common 
fault  of  the  formal  Syllogism,  namely,  that  the  relations  of 
which  it  consists  are  not  themselves  conclusions  or  mediations, 
and  that  in  fact  they  presuppose  the  conclusion,  to  produce 
which  they  are  to  serve  as  Means. 

If  we  consider  the  one  premiss — the  immediate  relation  of  the 
Subjective  End  to  the  object  which  thus  becomes  Means,  then 
the  relation  of  the  End  to  the  Means  cannot  be  immediate ; 
for  this  object  is  as  much  immediate  as  is  the  object  of  the 
other  extreme,  in  which  the  End  is  to  be  realized  through 
mediation.  In  so  far  therefore  as  they  are  posited  as  distinct, 
a  Means  of  their  relation  must  be  inserted  between  this  ob- 
jectivity and  the  Subjective  End;  but  this  Means  equally  is  an 
object  already  determined  by  the  End,  between  whose  ob- 
jectivity and  teleological  determination  a  new  Means  must  be 
inserted,  and  so  on  to  infinity.  This  is  the  positing  of  the  infinite 
progress  of  mediation. — The  same  also  takes  place  with  regard 
to  the  other  premiss,  the  relation  of  the  Means  to  the  as  yet 
undetermined  object.  These  are  utterly  independent,  and  there- 
fore they  can  be  united  only  in  a  third  term,  and  so  on  to 
infinity. — Or,  conversely,  the  premisses  already  presuppose  the 
conclusion,  and  therefore  the  latter  must  needs  be  incomplete 
in  the  state  in  which  it  is  when  it  is  only  by  virtue  of  these 
merely  immediate  premisses.  The  conclusion,  or  the  product 
of  activity  which  is  adequate  to  an  End,  is  simply  an  object 
determined  by  an  End  external  to  itself:  it  is  thus  the  same 
thing  as  the  Means.  In  such  a  product  therefore  only  a  Means 
and  not  a  Realized  End  has  resulted;  or,  the  End  in  it  has 
not  truly  reached  any  objectivity. — It  is  therefore  quite  indif- 
ferent whether  an  object  determined  by  external  End  is  con- 
sidered as  Realized  End  or  only  as  Means:  this  is  a  relative 


TELEOLOGY  391 

determination,  external  to  the  object  itself,  and  not  objective. 
All  objects,  then,  in  which  an  external  End  is  realized  are 
equally  only  Means  of  the  End.  That  which  is  required  for  the 
realization  of  an  End,  and  must  essentially  be  taken  as  Means, 
is  Means,  according  to  its  determination  as  something  which  is 
to  be  exhausted  by  attrition.  But  the  object  which  is  to  contain 
the  Realized  End  and  to  exhibit  itself  as  its  objectivity  is  also 
perishable :  it  too  does  not  fulfil  its  End  by  a  stable  and  self- 
preserving  existence,  but  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  exhausted  by 
attrition,  for  only  in  so  far  does  it  correspond  to  the  unity  of 
the  Notion,  inasmuch  as  its  externality,  that  is,  its  objectivity, 
cancels  itself  in  this  unity. — A  house,  a  clock,  may  seem  to 
be  Ends  as  against  the  instruments  which  are  used  to  produce 
them ;  but  the  stones  and  beams,  or  wheels  and  axles,  and  so  on, 
which  constitute  the  actuality  of  the  End,  fulfil  it  only  through 
the  pressure  which  they  undergo,  or  through  the  chemical  pro- 
cesses in  combination  with  air,  light,  or  water  to  which  they  are 
exposed,  and  of  which  they  relieve  man,  by  their  friction  and  so 
forth.  Thus  they  fulfil  their  determination  only  by  their  use  and 
wear,  and  correspond  to  what  they  are  supposed  to  be  only  by 
their  negation.  They  are  not  positively  united  with  the  End,  be- 
cause self-determination  is  applied  to  them  only  externally,  and 
they  are  only  relative  Ends ;  or,  essentially,  they  are  only  Means. 

Altogether  these  Ends,  as  has  been  shown,  have  a  restricted 
content;  their  form  is  the  infinite  self-determination  of  the 
Notion,  which,  through  the  End,  has  restricted  itself  so  as  to 
be  external  individuality.  The  restricted  content  makes  these 
Ends  inadequate  to  the  infinity  of  the  Notion,  and  makes  them 
untrue :  such  a  determinateness  is  offered  up  to  Becoming  and 
to  change  already  through  the  sphere  of  necessity  and  through 
Being,  and  is  perishable. 

3.  Thus  the  result  is  reached  that  external  adequacy  to  an 
End,  which  as  yet  has  only  the  form  of  Teleology,  really  only 
achieves  Means  and  not  an  objective  End,  since  the  Subjective 
End  remains  as  an  external  and  subjective  determination.  Or,  in 
so  far  as  the  End  is  active  and  realizes  itself,  if  only  in  a  Means, 
it  isstill  immediately  connected  with  and  immersed  in  objectivity : 
it  is  itself  an  object,  and  it  might  be  said  that  in  so  far  the  End 
cannot  reach  the  Means  because  it  requires  the  realization  of 
the  End  before  realization  through  a  Means  can  take  place. 


392  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

But  in  fact  the  result  is  not  only  an  external  End-relation, 
but  also  is  its  truth — inner  End-relation  and  an  objective  End. 
The  externality  of  the  object,  independent  against  the  Notion, 
which  the  End  presupposes  for  itself,  is  posited  in  this  pre- 
supposition as  an  unessential  show,  and  also  is  already  tran- 
scended in  and  for  itself;  hence  properly  the  activity  of  the  End 
is  only  the  exhibition  and  transcendence  of  this  show. — As  has 
appeared  through  the  Notion,  the  first  object  becomes  Means 
by  virtue  of  communication,  because  it  is  totality  of  the  Notion 
in  itself,  and  because  its  determinateness  (which  is  just  exter- 
nality itself)  is  posited  only  as  external  and  unessential,  and 
consequently  is  in  the  End  itself  as  the  peculiar  moment  of  the 
latter,  and  not  as  independent  of  it.  Hence  the  determination 
of  the  object  as  Means  is  utterly  immediate.  Consequently  the 
Subjective  End  requires  no  force  nor  other  affirmation  against 
the  object  than  self-affirmation,  in  order  to  make  it  Means; 
the  determination  of  itself  in  resolution  or  solution  is  the  merely 
posited  externality  of  the  object,  which  here  exists  immediately 
as  subjected  to  the  End,  and  has  no  other  determination  as 
against  it  except  that  of  the  nullity  of  Being-in-and-for-Self. 

The  second  transcendence  of  objectivity  by  objectivity  differs 
from  this:  here  the  former  term  (as  the  first)  is  the  End  in 
objective  immediacy,  while  the  latter  consequently  is  the 
transcendence  not  only  of  a  first  immediacy  but  of  both — of 
the  objective  as  something  merely  posited,  and  of  the  immedi- 
ate. In  this  manner  negativity  returns  upon  itself  in  such  a  way 
that  it  is  equally  reconstruction  of  objectivity,  but  of  objectivity 
as  identical  with  it,  and  therefore  is  also  a  positing  of  objectivity 
as  only  determined  by  the  End,  and  external.  By  reason  of  the 
latter  fact  this  product,  as  before,  remains  Means :  by  reason 
of  the  former,  it  is  the  objectivity  which  is  identical  with 
the  Notion,  the  realized  End,  in  which  the  side  of  being 
Means  is  the  reality  of  the  End  itself.  In  the  Realized  End  the 
Means  vanishes  because  it  would  only  be  objectivity  imme- 
diately subsumed  under  the  End — which  in  the  realized  End 
is  as  return  of  the  End  into  itself;  with  it,  further,  mediation 
itself  vanishes,  as  being  an  attitude  of  an  external  entity,  partly 
into  the  concrete  identity  of  the  objective  End,  and  partly  into 
the  same  as  abstract  identity  and  immediacy  of  Determinate 
Being. 


TELEOLOGY  393 

This  also  contains  the  mediation  which  was  demanded  for 
the  first  premiss — the  immediate  relation  of  the  End  to  the 
object.  The  Realized  End  is  also  Means,  and  conversely  the 
truth  of  the  Means  is  equally  this,  that  it  itself  is  real  End ; 
and  the  first  transcendence  of  objectivity  is  already  the  second, 
just  as  the  second  showed  itself  to  contain  also  the  first.  For 
the  Notion  determines  itself:  its  determinateness  is  external 
indifference,  which  is  immediately  determined  in  the  resolution 
as  transcended  (namely,  as  internal  and  subjective),  and  also 
as  presupposed  object.  Its  further  passage  out  of  itself,  which 
appeared  as  immediate  communication  and  subsumption  under 
itself  of  the  presupposed  object,  is  also  transcendence  (i)  of 
that  internal  determinateness  of  externality  which  is  enclosed 
in  the  Notion,  that  is,  is  posited  as  transcended,  and  at  the 
same  time  (2)  of  the  presupposition  of  an  object.  Thus  this 
apparently  first  transcendence  of  indifferent  objectivity  is  also 
the  second :  it  is  an  intro-Reflection  which  has  passed  through 
mediation,  or  it  is  the  Realized  End. 

Here,  in  the  sphere  of  Objectivity,  where  the  Notion  has  its 
determinateness  in  the  form  of  indifferent  externality  and  is  in 
reciprocal  action  with  itself,  it  becomes  doubly  difficult  and 
complicated  to  represent  its  movement,  since  it  is  itself  imme- 
diately twofold,  and  whatever  is  first  is  also  second.  In  the 
Notion  for  itself,  that  is,  in  its  subjectivity,  its  distinctness  from 
itself  exists  as  immediate  identical  totality  for  itself;  but  here 
its  determinateness  is  indifferent  externality,  and  therefore  its 
self-identity  therein  is  also  and  immediately  self-repulsion,  since 
that  which  is  determined  as  external  and  indifferent  to  it  is  in 
fact  itself,  while  itself  (the  identity)  as  itself  and  as  intro- 
reflectedis  rather  its  Other.  The  objective  return  upon  itself  of 
the  Notion,  that  is,  its  true  objectivation,  is  apprehended  only 
if  this  fact  is  held  fast, — when  it  is  also  apprehended  that  each 
of  the  individual  moments  through  which  this  mediation  takes 
its  course  is  itself  its  whole  syllogism.  Thus  the  original  inner 
externality  of  the  Notion,  by  means  of  which  it  is  self-repellent 
unity,  End,  and  its  struggle  into  objectivation,  is  the  immediate 
positing  or  presupposition  of  an  external  object;  self-deter- 
mination is  also  determination  of  an  external  object  which  is 
not  determined  by  the  Notion;  and  conversely  it  is  self-deter- 
mination, that  is,  externality  transcended  and  posited  as  inner, 


394  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

— or  the  certainty  of  the  unessentiality  of  the  external  object. — 
It  has  just  been  shown  of  the  second  relation — the  determina- 
tion of  the  object  as  Means — how  it  is  in  itself  the  self-mediation 
of  the  End  in  the  object. — Similarly  the  third  term,  or  Mechan- 
ism which  operates  under  the  domination  of  the  End  and 
transcends  the  object  by  the  object,  is  (i)  transcendence  of  the 
Means  or  of  the  object  which  is  already  posited  as  transcended, 
and  hence  also  second  transcendence  and  intro-Reflection ;  and 
(2)  a  first  determining  of  the  external  object.  The  latter,  as 
has  been  observed,  is  again  in  the  Realized  End  no  more  than 
the  production  of  a  Means;  the  subjectivity  of  the  finite  Notion 
contemptuously  casts  aside  the  Means — and,  reaching  its  goal, 
has  reached  nothing  better  than  this.  But  the  reflection  that 
the  End  is  reached  in  the  Means  and  that  in  the  fulfilled  End 
the  Means  and  mediation  are  preserved,  is  the  last  result  of  the 
external  End-relation, — a  result  which,  after  transcending  itself, 
this  relation  has  exhibited  as  its  truth. — The  third  syllogism 
which  has  just  been  considered  differs  in  this  respect,  that  it  is, 
first,  the  subjective  End-activity  of  the  preceding  syllogisms, 
but  is  also  the  transcendence  of  external  objectivity  and  is  there- 
fore externality  in  general  through  itself,  and,  consequently,  the 
totality  in  its  positedness. 

We  have  now  watched  the  Subjectivity  or  Being-for-Self  of 
the  Notion  pass  over  into  its  Being-in-Self  or  Objectivity;  and 
in  the  latter  the  negativity  of  its  Being-for-Self  has  once  more 
come  into  view.  In  it  the  Notion  has  determined  itself  in  such 
a  manner  that  its  particularity  is  external  Objectivity,  or  is  as 
the  simple  concrete  unity  whose  externality  is  its  self-deter- 
mination. The  movement  of  the  End  has  now  achieved  that 
the  moment  of  externality  is  posited  not  only  in  the  Notion,  and 
the  Notion  is  not  only  Ought  and  tendency,  but,  as  concrete 
totality,  is  identical  with  immediate  Objectivity.  On  the  one 
hand  this  identity  is  the  simple  Notion  and  equally  immediate 
Objectivity ;  but  on  the  other  it  is,  likewise  essentially,  mediation, 
and  is  that  simple  immediacy  only  through  the  latter  as  self- 
transcending  ( mediation.  Thus  the  Notion  is  essentially  this, 
that  it  is  distinct  from  its  Objectivity,  which  is  in  itself,  as 
identity  which  is  for  itself;  thence  it  has  externality,  but,  in 
this  external  totality,  it  is  the  self-determining  identity  thereof. 
Thus  now  the  Notion  is  the  Idea. 


SECTION    THREE 
THE   IDEA 

THE  Idea  is  the  adequate  Notion :  objective  truth,  or  the  truth 
as  such.  If  anything  has  truth  it  has  it  through  its  Idea ;  or 
something  has  truth  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  Idea. — Elsewhere  in 
philosophy  and  in  ordinary  life  the  expression  "idea"  has  often 
been  used  for  Notion  and  even  for  a  mere  image.  "I  have  no 
idea  yet  of  this  law-suit,  building,  or  region"  signifies  no  more 
than  image.  Kant  has  claimed  the  expression  "idea"  again  for  the 
Notion  of  reason. — Now  according  to  Kant  the  Notion  of  reason 
is  to  be  the  Notion  of  the  unconditioned,  and,  with  respect  to 
phenomena,  to  be  transcendent,  which  means  that  it  is  impossible 
to  make  any  adequate  empirical  use  of  it.  Notions  of  reason  are 
to  serve  for  the  conceptual  comprehension,  and  Notions  of 
understanding  for  the  bare  understanding,  of  perceptions. — 
But  in  fact,  if  the  latter  really  are  Notions,  then  they  are 
Notions, — conceptual  or  notional  comprehension  takes  place 
through  them,  and  a  process  of  understanding  perceptions 
through  Notions  of  understanding  will  be  such  a  process  of 
comprehension.  But  if  understanding  is  only  a  determining  of 
perceptions  through  such  determinations  as,  for  example,  whole 
and  parts,  force,  cause,  and  the  like,  then  it  signifies  only  a 
determining  through  reflection ;  and  similarly  by  understanding 
only  determinate  imagining  of  a  fully  determinate  sensuous 
content  can  be  meant :  as  one  who,  having  been  told  the  road 
and  that  he  must  turn  to  the  left  at  the  end  of  the  wood, 
replies  "I  understand"  means  nothing  more  by  those  words 
than  an  apprehension  into  imagination  and  memory. — "Notion 
of  reason"  too  is  a  somewhat  clumsy  expression;  for  the  Notion 
is  altogether  rational ;  and,  in  so  far  as  reason  is  distinguished 
from  understanding  and  the  Notion  as  such,  it  is  the  totality 
of  the  Notion  and  of  Objectivity. — In  this  sense  the  Idea  is  the 
rational ; — it  is  the  unconditioned  because  only  that  has  con- 
ditions which  essentially  relates  itself  to  an  objectivity — an 
objectivity  not  determined  by  that  itself,  however,  but  remain- 


396  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

ing  in  the  form  of  indifference  and  externality  against  it,  as  was 
the  objectivity  which  belonged  to  the  external  End. 

The  expression  "Idea"  being  thus  retained  for  the  objective 
or  real  Notion,  and  being  distinguished  from  the  Notion  itself, 
and,  still  more,  from  the  mere  image,  that  valuation  of  the  Idea 
is  even  more  to  be  rejected  which  takes  it  for  something  merely 
unreal.  It  is  said  of  true  thoughts  that  they  are  merely  Ideas :  now 
if  thoughts  are  merely  subjective  and  contingent  they  certainly 
have  no  further  value ;  but  in  this  they  are  not  inferior  to  the 
temporal  and  contingent  actualities,  which  also  have  no  value 
except  that  which  is  proper  to  contingencies  and  phenomena. 
And  if  conversely  the  Idea  is  not  to  be  rated  as  true  because, 
with  respect  to  phenomena,  it  is  transcendent,  and  no  object 
can  be  assigned  to  it,  in  the  sensuous  world,  to  which  it  con- 
forms, this  is  a  strange  lack  of  understanding, — for  so  the  Idea 
is  denied  objective  validity  because  it  lacks  that  which  con- 
stitutes appearance,  or  the  untrue  being  of  the  objective  world. 
With  respect  to  practical  Ideas  Kant  recognizes  that  "nothing 
could  be  found  more  harmful  or  more  unworthy  of  a  philo- 
sopher than  the  vulgar  appeal  to  an  experience  which  is 
asserted  to  conflict  with  the  Idea.  Such  an  experience  would 
never  exist  if,  for  example,  political  institutions  were  made  at 
the  fit  moment  in  accordance  with  Ideas, — in  the  place  of 
which  rough  notions,  just  because  they  were  drawn  from 
experience,  frustrate  every  good  intention."  Kant  looks  upon 
the  Idea  as  necessary  and  as  the  goal,  which,  as  the  prototype, 
should  be  set  up  as  a  maximum,  and  to  which  it  should  be  the 
object  of  endeavour  to  cause  the  condition  of  actuality  pro- 
gressively to  approach. 

But,  the  result  having  been  reached  that  the  Idea  is  the  unity 
of  the  Notion  and  Objectivity,  or  the  truth,  it  must  not  merely 
be  considered  as  a  goal  which  must  be  approached  while  it  still 
remains  a  kind  of  beyond :  it  must  be  held  that  whatever  is 
actual  is  only  in  so  far  as  it  contains  and  expresses  the  Idea. 
The  object,  and  the  objective  and  subjective  world,  not  merely 
ought  to  conform  to  the  Idea,  but  are  themselves  the  conformity 
of  Notion  and  reality :  that  reality  which  does  not  correspond 
to  the  Notion  is  mere  appearance,  or  that  subjective,  contin- 
gent, capricious  entity  which  is  not  the  truth.  If  it  is  said  that 
no  object  is  found  in  experience  which  completely  conforms 


THE  IDEA  397 

to  the  Idea,  then  the  latter  is  opposed  to  the  actual  as  a  sub- 
jective criterion.  But  it  is  hard  to  say  what  an  actuality  is 
supposed  in  truth  to  be,  if  its  Notion  is  not  in  it,  and  if  its 
objectivity  is  quite  inadequate  to  this  Notion ;  for  it  would  be 
Nothing.  The  Mechanical  and  Chemical  Object,  like  the  non- 
spiritual  subject  and  the  spirit  which  is  conscious  only  of  the 
finite  and  not  of  its  Essence,  have  their  Notion  existing  in  them, 
according  to  their  respective  natures,  but  not  in  its  own  free 
form.  But  altogether  they  can  be  true  only  in  so  far  as  they  are 
the  union  of  their  Notion  and  reality — of  their  soul  and  their 
body.  Wholes  like  the  State  or  the  Church  cease  to  exist  when 
the  unity  of  their  Notion  and  their  reality  is  dissolved.  Man, 
the  living  entity,  is  dead  when  soul  and  body  are  severed  in 
him ;  dead  nature,  the  mechanical  and  chemical  world  (if  the 
dead  is  taken  as  equivalent  to  the  inorganic  world — it  has  no 
other  positive  significance),  if  separated  into  its  Notion  and  its 
reality,  is  just  the  subjective  abstraction  of  a  form  which  is  the 
work  of  thought,  and  a  formless  matter.  A  spirit  which  is  not 
Idea,  or  unity  of  the  Notion  with  itself, — a  spirit  which  would 
be  the  Notion  having  the  Notion  itself  for  its  reality,  would  be 
dead  or  spiritless  spirit,  a  material  object. 

Being  has  reached  the  significance  of  truth,  since  the  Idea  is 
the  unity  of  Notion  and  reality ;  so  that  now  Being  is  only  what 
is  Idea.  Finite  things  therefore  are  finite  in  so  far  as  they  do 
not  fully  possess  the  reality  of  their  Notion  in  themselves,  but 
require  something  further  for  that  end, — or,  conversely,  in  so 
far  as  they  are  presupposed  as  objects,  and  thus  have  the  Notion 
applied  to  them  as  an  external  determination.  The  highest 
development  which  they  reach  according  to  the  side  of  this 
finitude  is  external  adequacy  to  an  End.  The  fact  that  actual 
things  do  not  conform  to  the  Idea  is  the  side  of  their  finitude 
or  untruth,  according  to  which  they  are  Objects,  determined 
according  to  their  several  spheres  and  in  the  relations  of 
Objectivity  either  mechanically,  chemically,  or  through  an 
external  End.  It  is  possible  that  the  Idea  should  not  completely 
have  leavened  its  reality,  and  should  have  subjected  it  imper- 
fectly to  the  Notion,  for  this  reason,  that  it  itself  has  a  restricted 
content,  and  that  it  is  as  essentially  the  distinction  between  as 
it  is  the  unity  of  the  Notion  and  reality;  for  only  the  Object 
is  immediate  unity,  that  is,  unity  which  is  only  in  itself.  But  if 


3p8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

an  object — for  example,  the  State — were  to  be  wholly  inade- 
quate to  its  Idea  (that  is,  rather,  were  not  to  be  the  Idea  of  the 
State),  if  its  reality,  which  is  that  of  the  self-conscious  indi- 
viduals, in  no  way  corresponded  to  the  Notion,  then  its  soul 
and  its  body  would  have  parted :  the  former  would  fly  into  the 
various  regions  of  thought,  the  latter  would  have  fallen  apart 
into  the  single  individualities.  But  the  Notion  of  the  State  so 
essentially  constitutes  their  nature,  and  therefore  is  so  powerful 
an  impulse  in  them,  that  they  are  forced  to  translate  it  into 
reality  (even  if  only  in  the  form  of  external  adequacy  to  an 
End),  or  to  submit  to  it  as  it  is,  or  else  perish.  The  worst  State, 
whose  reality  least  corresponds  to  the  Notion,  is  still  Idea  in  so 
far  as  it  exists ;  the  individuals  still  obey  a  ruling  Notion. 

But  the  Idea  has  not  only  the  more  general  meaning  of  true 
Being,  or  of  the  unity  of  Notion  and  reality,  but  also  the  more 
definite  meaning  of  the  unity  of  the  Subjective  Notion  and 
Objectivity.  For  the  Notion  as  such  is  already  identity  of  itself 
and  reality,  since  the  indeterminate  expression  "reality"  means 
just  determinate  Being,  and  this  the  Notion  has  in  its  particu- 
larity and  individuality.  And  further  Objectivity  equally  is  the 
total  Notion  which  out  of  its  determinateness  has  collapsed 
into  self-identity.  In  the  former  Subjectivity,  the  determinate- 
ness  or  distinction  of  the  Notion  is  a  Show  which  has  been 
transcended  immediately  and  has  passed  back  into  Being-for- 
Self  or  negative  unity,  or  is  inhering  predicate.  But  in  this 
Objectivity  the  determinateness  is  posited  as  immediate  totality, 
or  external  whole.  The  Idea  has  thus  shown  itself  as  the  Notion, 
liberated  again  into  its  subjectivity  out  of  the  immediacy  into 
which  it  is  immersed  in  the  Object,  distinguishing  itself  from 
its  Objectivity,  which,  however,  is  equally  determined  by  it 
and  has  its  substantiality  only  in  the  Notion.  This  identity  has 
therefore  rightly  been  determined  as  the  Subject-Object,  since 
it  is  the  formal  or  Subjective  Notion  as  much  as  it  is  the  Object 
as  such.  This  however  must  be  apprehended  in  a  more  closely 
determinate  manner.  The  Notion,  having  veritably  reached  its 
reality,  is  this  absolute  Judgment,  whose  Subject,  as  self- relating 
negative  unity,  distinguishes  itself  from  its  Objectivity  and  is 
the  Being-in-and-for-Self  of  the  latter,  but  essentially  relates 
itself  through  itself  to  it,  and  consequently  is  its  own  End  and 
impulse.  But  for  this  very  reason  Objectivity  is  not  applied 


THE   IDEA 

immediately  to  the  Subject,  for  then  the  Subject  would  only 
be  this  totality  of  the  Object  as  such  wasted  into  Objectivity. 
In  fact  Objectivity  is  the  realization  of  the  End,  an  Objectivity 
posited  through  the  activity  of  the  End,  which,  as  positedness, 
has  its  persistence  and  its  form  only  as  penetrated  by  its  Sub- 
ject. As  Objectivity  it  has  in  it  the  moment  of  the  externality 
of  the  Notion,  and  consequently  is,  in  general,  the  side  of 
finitude,  variability,  and  appearance,  which  however  perishes 
in  the  return  to  the  negative  unity  of  the  Notion ;  that  negativity 
in  which  its  indifferent  mutual  externality  of  elements  shows 
itself  as  unessential  and  as  positedness,  is  the  Notion  itself. 
Hence  in  spite  of  this  Objectivity  the  Idea  is  utterly  simple  and 
immaterial,  for  externality  is  only  as  determined  by  the  Notion 
and  is  taken  up  into  the  latter's  negative  unity ;  in  so  far  as  it 
persists  as  indifferent  externality,  it  is  not  only  laid  open  to 
Mechanism,  but  exists  only  as  the  perishable  and  untrue. — 
Although  then  the  Idea  has  its  reality  in  some  kind  of  matter, 
still  this  is  not  an  abstract  Being  persisting  for  itself  against  the 
Notion,  but  is  only  as  Becoming,  through  the  negativity  of 
indifferent  Being  as  simple  determinateness  of  the  Notion. 

From  this  result  the  following  closer  determinations  of  the 
Idea. — First  it  is  simple  truth,  the  identity  of  the  Notion  and 
Objectivity  as  a  universal,  in  which  the  opposition  and  the 
persistence  of  the  particular  is  resolved  into  its  self-identical 
negativity  and  exists  as  self-equality.  Secondly  it  is  the  relation 
of  the  Subjectivity,  which  is  for  itself,  of  the  simple  Notion  to 
the  Objectivity  which  is  distinct  from  it:  the  former  is  essen- 
tially the  impulse  to  transcend  this  separation;  the  latter  is 
indifferent  positedness,  or  persistence  which  in  and  for  itself  is 
null.  In  this  relation  the  Idea  is  the  process  in  which  it  sunders 
itself  into  individuality  and  its  inorganic  nature,  and  again 
brings  the  latter  back  under  the  power  of  the  subject,  returning 
to  the  first  simple  universality.  The  self-identity  of  the  Idea  is 
one  with  the  process;  and  the  thought  which  frees  actuality 
from  the  show  of  purposeless  changeability  and  transfigures  it 
into  the  Idea  must  not  imagine  this  truth  of  actuality  as  a  dead 
repose  or  bare  picture,  spent  and  without  impulse  or  motion, 
or  as  a  genius,  number,  or  abstract  thought.  In  the  Idea  the 
Notion  reaches  freedom,  and  because  of  this  the  Idea  contains 
even  the  harshest  opposition;  its  repose  consists  in  the  security 


400  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  certainty  with  which  it  eternally  creates  and  eternally 
overcomes  it,  coinciding  in  it  with  itself. 

But  again  at  this  point  the  Idea  is  merely  immediate,  or 
merely  in  its  Notion;  objective  reality  is  indeed  adequate  to 
the  Notion,  but  is  not  yet  freed  so  as  to  be  Notion,  and  the 
Notion  does  not  exist  for  itself  as  Notion.  In  this  manner  the 
Notion  is  Seele,  but  the  Seek  is  in  the  fashion  of  something 
immediate,  that  is,  its  determinateness  is  not  as  itself,  it  has 
not  apprehended  itself  as  Seele,  or  its  own  objective  reality  in 
itself;  the  Notion  is  as  a  Seek  which  is  not  yet  filled  with  Seele. 

Thus  the  Idea  first  is  Life :  the  Notion  which,  distinct  from 
its  Objectivity  and  simple  within  itself,  penetrates  its  objectivity 
and,  as  its  own  End,  has  its  Means  in  this  and  posits  it  as  its 
Means,  but  is  immanent  in  this  Means  and  in  it  is  the  realized 
and  self-identical  End. — Because  of  its  immediacy  this  Idea  has 
individuality  for  the  form  of  its  existence.  But  the  intro- 
Reflection  of  its  absolute  process  is  the  transcendence  of  this 
immediate  individuality ;  hence  the  Notion,  which  in  it  and  as 
universality  is  the  inner,  makes  externality  to  be  universality 
or  posits  its  Objectivity  as  self-equality.  Thus  the  Idea  is, 

secondly,  the  Idea  of  the  True  and  of  the  Good,  as  Cognition 
and  Volition.  At  first  it  is  finite  Cognition  and  finite  Volition, 
where  the  True  and  the  Good  are  still  distinct  and  each  is  only 
a  goal.  So  far,  the  Notion  has  only  freed  itself  into  itself  and 
has  given  itself  only  an  abstract  objectivity  by  way  of  reality. 
But  the  process  of  this  finite  cognition  and  action  makes  the 
universality  (which  at  first  is  abstract)  into  a  totality,  whence 
it  becomes  perfect  objectivity. — Or,  considered  from  the  other 
side,  finite,  that  is,  subjective  Spirit  presupposes  to  itself  an 
objective  world;  Life  has  such  a  presupposition;  but  its  activity 
is  that  of  transcending  this  presupposition  and  of  making  it 
something  posited.  Thus  for  Spirit  its  reality  is  the  objective 
world,  or,  conversely,  the  objective  world  is  the  ideality  in 
which  it  recognizes  itself. 

Thirdly,  Spirit  recognizes  the  Idea  as  its  absolute  truth,  as 
Truth  which  is  in  and  for  itself;  the  infinite  Idea  in  which 
cognition  and  action  balance,  an  Idea  which  is  absolute  self- 
knowledge. 


CHAPTER   I 
LIFE 

THE  Idea  of  Life  concerns  so  concrete,  or,  if  that  is  preferred, 
real  an  object,  that  when  it  is  touched  logic  as  it  is  commonly 
imagined  may  seem  to  have  overstepped  its  province.  And 
indeed  if  logic  is  to  contain  nothing  but  empty  and  dead 
thought-forms,  then  there  can  be  no  question  of  such  a  content 
as  the  Idea  of  Life.  But  if  absolute  truth  is  the  object  of  logic, 
and  truth  as  such  essentially  is  in  Cognition,  then  at  least 
Cognition  ought  to  be  treated. — And  indeed  in  general  so-called 
pure  logic  is  commonly  followed  by  an  applied  logic, — a  logic 
which  has  much  to  do  with  concrete  cognition,  quite  apart 
from  the  mass  of  psychology  and  anthropology  which  it  is 
frequently  deemed  necessary  to  introduce  into  logic.  But  the 
anthropological  and  psychological  side  of  cognition  relates  only 
to  its  appearance,  in  which  the  Notion  for  itself  has  not  yet 
reached  the  point  of  having  an  Objectivity  equal  to  it,  that  is, 
of  having  itself  for  Object.  That  part  of  logic  which  considers 
this  concrete  cognition  does  not  belong  to  applied  logic  as  such ; 
for  then  every  science  must  be  absorbed  in  logic,  since  each  is 
an  applied  logic  in  so  far  as  it  consists  in  apprehending  its 
object  in  forms  of  thought  and  of  the  Notion. — The  Subjective 
Notion  has  presuppositions  which  present  themselves  in  psycho- 
logical, anthropological,  or  some  other  form.  But  logic  is  the 
place  only  for  the  presuppositions  of  the  Pure  Notion,  in  so  far 
as  they  have  the  form  of  pure  thoughts  or  abstract  essentialities 
— the  determinations  of  Being  and  Essence.  And  similarly  logic 
must  treat,  in  Cognition  (which  is  the  self-comprehension  of 
the  Notion),  not  the  other  shapes  of  its  presupposition  but  only 
that  which  is  itself  Idea ;  this  however  logic  must  necessarily 
consider.  Now  this  presupposition  is  the  immediate  Idea;  for 
Cognition  is  the  Notion  in  so  far  as  it  is  for  itself  but  as  sub- 
jective in  relation  to  what  is  objective;  and  thus  it  is  related 
to  the  Idea  as  presupposed  or  immediate  Idea.  But  the  imme- 
diate Idea  is  Life. 

VOL.   II.  GG 


402  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

So  far,  the  necessity  of  considering  the  Idea  of  Life  in  logic 
would  then  be  founded  on  the  necessity,  otherwise  too  recog- 
nized, of  here  treating  of  the  concrete  Notion  of  Cognition.  But 
this  Idea  has  introduced  itself  through  the  proper  necessity  of 
the  Notion.  The  Idea — that  which  in  and  for  itself  is  true — is 
essentially  an  object  of  logic;  and  since  it  must  first  be  con- 
sidered in  its  immediacy,  it  must  be  apprehended  and  under- 
stood in  this  determinateness,  in  which  it  is  Life,  in  order  that 
its  consideration  may  not  be  something  empty  and  indeter- 
minate. All  that  it  can  be  necessary  to  remark  is  how  far  the 
logical  view  of  Life  differs  from  any  other  scientific  view  of  it. 
But  this  is  not  the  place  for  a  discussion  of  the  treatment  it 
receives  in  non-philosophic  sciences ;  only  the  distinction  must 
here  be  made  between  logical  Life  as  pure  Idea  and  natural 
life  which  is  considered  in  natural  philosophy,  and  also  life  in 
so  far  as  it  is  connected  with  Spirit. — The  first,  as  the  life  of 
nature,  is  Life  in  so  far  as  it  is  expelled  into  the  externality 
of  persistence  and  has  its  condition  in  inorganic  nature,  where 
the  moments  of  the  Idea  are  a  multiplicity  of  actual  formations. 
Life  in  the  Idea  is  without  such  presuppositions  which  are  as 
formations  of  actuality :  its  presupposition  is  the  Notion  as  it 
has  been  considered,  both  as  subjective  and  as  objective  also. 
In  nature  life  appears  as  the  highest  stage  which  is  reached  by 
its  externality  by  the  process  of  passing  within  itself  and  tran- 
scending itself  in  subjectivity.  In  logic  it  is  simple  Being-in-Self, 
which  in  the  Idea  of  Life  has  reached  the  externality  which 
truly  corresponds  to  it ;  the  Notion,  which  comes  on  the  scene 
earlier  because  it  is  subjective,  is  the  soul  of  Life  itself;  it  is 
the  impulse  which  mediates  its  reality  through  objectivity. 
Nature,  in  reaching  this  idea  from  its  own  externality,  over- 
passes itself;  its  end  is  not  as  its  beginning,  but  as  its  limit  in 
which  it  transcends  itself. — And  equally,  in  the  Idea  of  Life 
the  moments  of  its  reality  do  not  acquire  the  shape  of  external 
actuality,  but  remain  locked  within  the  form  of  the  Notion. 

But  in  Spirit,  Life  appears  partly  as  opposed  to  it  and  partly 
as  posited  as  at  one  with  it;  and  again,  Spirit  gives  a  clear 
birth  to  this^nity.  For  here  Life  in  general  must  be  taken  in 
its  proper  sense  of  natural  life,  for  what  is  called  the  life  of 
Spirit  as  Spirit  is  its  peculiarity  which  stands  opposed  to  bare 
life.  Similarly  the  nature  of  Spirit  is  spoken  of,  although  Spirit 


LIFE  40*2 

is  not  natural  and,  indeed,  is  the  opposite  of  nature.  Thus  Life 
as  such  is  partly  the  Means  of  Spirit,  and  as  such  opposed  to 
it ;  and  partly  it  is  the  Living  Individual,  and  Life  is  its  body ; 
while  partly  this  unity  of  itself  with  its  living  corporality  receives 
birth  out  of  Life  itself  into  the  ideal.  None  of  these  relations  to 
Spirit  concerns  the  Life  of  logic,  and  it  must  not  here  be  con- 
sidered either  as  the  Means  of  a  Spirit,  or  as  its  living  body, 
or  as  moment  of  the  ideal  and  of  beauty. — In  both  cases — 
both  as  natural  life  and  in  its  relation  to  Spirit — Life  has  a 
determinateness  of  its  externality;  in  the  first  case  through  its 
presuppositions,  which  are  other  formations  of  nature,  and  in 
the  second  through  the  Ends  and  activity  of  Spirit.  The  Idea 
of  Life  for  itself  is  free,  in  the  first  case  from  presupposed  and 
conditioning  objectivity,  and  in  the  second  from  relation  to 
subjectivity. 

Now  Life,  further  considered  in  its  Idea,  is  absolute  univer- 
sality in  and  for  itself;  that  objectivity  which  it  contains  is  wholly 
penetrated  by  the  Notion — it  has  its  substance  in  the  Notion 
alone.  That  which  is  distinguished  as  part,  or  in  accordance 
with  some  other  external  reflection,  has  the  whole  Notion  within 
itself:  the  Notion  is  the  omnipresent  Seek,  which  is  simple  self- 
relation,  and  remains  one  in  that  multiplicity  which  belongs 
to  objective  Being.  This  multiplicity,  as  self-external  objectivity, 
has  an  indifferent  persistence,  a  persistence  which,  in  space  and 
time  (if  it  were  possible  here  already  to  mention  these) ,  is  a 
juxtaposition  of  separate  and  independent  entities.  But  in  Life, 
externality  at  the  same  time  is  the  simple  determinateness  of 
its  Notion ;  and  thus  the  Seele  in  its  omnipresence  is  poured  into 
this  multiplicity  and  at  the  same  time  remains  just  the  simple 
self-unity  of  the  concrete  Notion. — In  considering  Life,  or  this 
unity  of  its  Notion  in  the  externality  of  objectivity  and  in  the 
absolute  plurality  of  atomic  matter, — thought,  which  clings  to 
the  determinations  of  the  relations  of  reflection  and  of  the 
formal  Notion,  reaches  its  thought's-end ;  for  reflection,  the 
omnipresence  of  the  simple  in  a  multiple  externality  is  an 
absolute  contradiction,  and,  in  so  far  as  reflection,  at  the  same 
time  must  take  this  omnipresence  from  the  perception  of  Life 
and  must  thus  admit  the  actuality  of  this  Idea,  it  is  an  incom- 
prehensible mystery;  for  reflection  does  not  apprehend  the 
Notion,  or,  apprehending  it,  does  not  apprehend  it  as  the 


404  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

substance  of  Life. — But  simple  Life  not  only  is  omnipresent, 
but  is  just  the  persistence  and  immanent  substance  of  its 
objectivity;  as  subjective  substance,  however,  it  is  impulse — 
the  specific  impulse  of  the  particular  distinction,  while  equally 
essentially  it  is  the  one  and  universal  impulse  of  the  specific, 
which  leads  back  into  unity  this  its  particularization  and  there 
preserves  it.  Life  is  self-relating  Life  which  is  for  itself— or  a 
Seele — only  as  this  negative  unity  of  its  objectivity  and  par- 
ticularization. It  is  thus  essentially  individual,  relating  itself  to 
objectivity  as  to  an  Other,  or  to  a  not-living  nature.  Conse- 
quently the  original  Judgment  of  Life  consists  in  this,  that  it 
separates  itself  as  individual  subject  from  the  objective,  and, 
constituting  itself  as  the  negative  unity  of  the  Notion,  makes 
the  presupposition  of  an  immediate  objectivity. 

First  therefore  Life  must  be  considered  as  Living  Individual, 
which  is  subjective  totality  for  itself  and  is  presupposed  as 
indifferent  to  an  objectivity  which  opposes  it  and  is  indifferent. 

Secondly,  it  is  the  Life-Process,  transcending  its  presuppo- 
sition, positing  the  objectivity  (which  is  indifferent  to  it)  as 
negative,  and  realizing  itself  as  the  power  and  negative  unity 
of  this  objectivity.  Thus  Life  makes  itself  a  universal  which 
is  the  unity  of  itself  and  its  Other.  Consequently  Life  is, 

thirdly,  the  Process  of  the  Kind,  transcending  its  individual- 
ization  and  relating  itself  to  its  objective  Determinate  Being 
as  to  itself.  This  process  is  accordingly  (i)  the  return  to  its 
Notion  and  the  repetition  of  the  first  diremption,  the  becoming 
of  a  new  individuality  and  the  death  of  the  first  and  immediate 
individuality;  (2)  the  Notion  of  Life  which  has  passed  into 
itself  is  the  becoming  of  the  self-relating  Notion  which  exists 
universally  and  freely  for  itself— the  transition  to  Cognition. 


A 

THE  LIVING  INDIVIDUAL 

i.  The  Nqjtion  of  Life,  or  universal  Life,  is  the  immediate 
Idea,  the  Notion  to  which  its  objectivity  is  adequate;  but  it  is 
adequate  only  in  so  far  as  the  Notion  is  the  negative  unity  of 
this  externality,  or,  in  other  words,  posits  it  as  adequate  to 
itself.  The  infinite  self-relation  of  the  Notion  is  negativity  and, 


LIFE  405 


as  such,  is  self-determination,  that  ia,  iu>  uwn  uiremption  into 
itself  as  subjective  individuality  and  itself  as  indifferent  univer- 
sality. The  Idea  of  Life  in  its  immediacy  is,  so  far,  only  the 
creative  universal  Seele.  By  reason  of  this  immediacy  its  first 
negative  relation  of  the  Idea  in  itself  is  self-determination  of  the 
Seele  as  Notion  —  that  positing  in  i  tself  which  becomes  Being-/0r- 
Selfonly  as  return  into  itself,  or  creative  presupposing.  Through 
this  self-determination  universal  Life  is  a  particular  ;  it  has  thus 
divided  into  the  two  extremes  of  the  Judgment,  which  imme- 
diately becomes  Syllogism. 

The  determinations  of  the  opposition  are  the  general  deter- 
minations of  the  Notion,  for  division  is  proper  to  the  Notion  ; 
the  completion  of  it,  however,  is  the  Idea.  The  one  side  of  it  is 
the  unity  of  the  Notion  and  reality,  which  is  the  Idea,  as 
immediate  Idea,  which  previously  showed  itself  as  Objectivity. 
But  here  the  Idea  is  in  a  different  determination.  There  it  was 
the  unity  of  the  Notion  and  reality  in  so  far  as  the  Notion  has 
passed  over  into  reality  and  is  only  lost  in  it  :  the  Notion  did 
not  stand  opposed  to  it,  or  because  the  Notion  is  only  its  inner, 
it  is  only  a  reflection  which  is  external  to  it.  Consequently,  that 
Objectivity  is  the  immediate  itself  in  an  immediate  manner. 
Here  on  the  other  hand  the  Idea  is  that  which  has  emerged 
out  of  the  Notion,  so  that  its  essence  is  positedness  or  the  fact 
that  it  is  negative.  —  It  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  side  of  univer- 
sality of  the  Notion,  and  hence  as  abstract  universality,  essen- 
tially inhering  only  in  the  subject,  and  in  the  form  of  immediate 
Being  which,  posited  for  itself,  is  supposed  to  be  indifferent  to 
the  subject.  Thus  the  totality  of  the  Notion  which  belongs  to 
Objectivity  is,  in  a  manner,  only  a  borrowed  Objectivity;  its 
last  independence  which  it  has  against  the  subject  is  this  Being, 
which  in  its  truth  is  only  that  moment  of  the  Notion  that  exists 
as  presupposing  in  the  first  determinateness  of  a  positing  which 
is  in  itself  and  does  not  yet  exist  as  positing  and  as  intro-reflected 
unity.  Thus,  having  emerged  from  the  Idea,  independent 
Objectivity  is  immediate  Being  only  as  the  predicate  of  the 
Judgment  of  the  self-determination  of  the  Notion,  —  a  Being 
which  is  different  from  the  subject,  but  is  at  the  same  time 
essentially  posited  as  moment  of  the  Notion. 

According  to  its  content  this  Objectivity  is  the  totality  of 
the  Notion,  which,  however,  is  faced  by  the  Subjectivity  (or 


406  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

negative  unity)  of  the  latter ;  and  this  constitutes  its  true  cen- 
trality,  namely,  its  free  self-unity.  This  subject  is  the  Idea  in 
the  form  of  individuality  as  simple  but  negative  self-identity — 
the  Living  Individual. 

This  latter  is,  first,  Life  as  Seek,  as  Notion  of  itself  which  is 
completely  determined  within  itself,  or  beginning  and  self- 
moving  principle.  The  Notion  in  its  simplicity  contains  enclosed 
within  itself  determinate  externality  as  simple  moment. — But 
further  this  Seele,  in  its  immediacy,  is  immediately  external  and 
has  an  objective  being  in  itself, — it  is  reality  which  is  subjected 
to  an  End,  the  immediate  Means,  or,  in  the  first  instance, 
Objectivity  as  predicate  of  the  subject;  but  besides  the  Seele  is 
the  middle  of  the  Syllogism ;  the  corporality  of  the  Seele  is  that 
by  means  of  which  it  joins  itself  with  external  objectivity. — 
Here  the  Living  has  corporality  as  reality  which  is  immediately 
identical  with  the  Notion;  and  in  so  far  it  has  this  reality  by 
nature. 

Now  this  Objectivity  is  predicate  of  the  Individual  and  is 
taken  up  into  the  subjective  unity,  and  hence  the  earlier  deter- 
minations of  the  Object  do  not  belong  to  it — namely  the 
Mechanical  or  Chemical  relation,  still  less  the  abstract  reflec- 
tion-relations of  Whole  and  Parts,  and  the  rest.  As  externality 
it  is  capable  of  such  relations,  but  to  that  extent  it  is  not  living 
existence ;  if  the  Living  Entity  is  taken  as  a  whole  which  con- 
sists of  parts  or  as  the  object  of  mechanical  or  chemical  causes 
— a  mechanical  or  chemical  product — whether  it  is  taken  merely 
as  such  or  as  determined  by  an  external  End,  then  the  Notion 
is  taken  as  external  to  it,  and  itself  as  dead.  The  Notion  is 
immanent  in  it,  and  therefore  the  adequacy  to  an  End  of  the 
Living  Entity  must  be  taken  as  inner;  this  Notion  exists  in  it 
as  a  determinate  Notion,  distinct  from  its  externality,  and,  in 
its  process  of  distinguishing,  penetrating  the  latter  and  remain- 
ing self-identical.  This  objectivity  of  the  Living  Entity  is 
Organism ;  the  objectivity  is  the  Means  and  instrument  of  the 
End,  and  wholly  adequate  to  the  latter,  since  the  Notion  con- 
stitutes its  substance.  But,  for  this  very  reason,  this  Means  and 
instrument  itself  is  the  Realized  End,  in  which,  in  so  far,  the 
Subjective  End  is  immediately  bound  together  with  itself. 
According  to  its  externality,  the  organism  is  a  multiplicity  not 
of  parts  but  of  members ;  and  these,  as  such,  (a)  consist  only 


LIFE  407 

in  individuality.  They  are  separable  in  so  far  as  they  are 
external  and  can  be  taken  in  this  externality;  but  in  so  far  as 
they  are  separated  they  revert  to  the  rule  of  the  mechanical 
and  chemical  relations  of  ordinary  Objectivity,  (b)  Their  ex- 
ternality is  opposed  to  the  negative  unity  of  the  Living  In- 
dividuality; the  latter  therefore  is  the  impulse  to  posit  the 
abstract  moment  of  the  determinatcness  of  the  Notion  as  real 
distinction.  This  distinction  is  immediate,  and  thus  is  the 
impulse  of  each  individual  specific  moment  to  produce  itself 
and  equally  to  raise  its  particularity  to  universality,  to  cancel 
the  other  moments  which  are  external  to  it  and  to  develop  at 
their  expense ;  equally,  however,  to  cancel  itself  and  to  make 
itself  a  Means  for  the  others. 

2.  This  process  of  the  Living  Individuality  is  restricted  to 
the  latter  and  falls  entirely  within  it. — In  the  Syllogism  of 
external  adequacy  to  End,  its  first  premiss  (namely,  that  the 
End  relates  itself  immediately  to  Objectivity  and  makes  it  a 
Means)  was  considered  in  a  manner  which  showed  that  in  it 
the  End  remains  self-equal  and  has  passed  back  into  itself,  but 
that  in  spite  of  this  Objectivity  in  itself  has  not  yet  transcended 
itself,  so  that  in  it  the  End,  to  that  extent,  is  not  in  and  for 
itself:  it  achieves  this  only  in  the  conclusion.  The  process  of  the 
Living  Entity  with  itself  is  this  premiss,  in  so  far,  however,  as 
the  latter  also  is  conclusion,  and  in  so  far  as  the  immediate 
relation  of  the  subject  to  Objectivity  (which  thereby  becomes 
Means  and  instrument)  is  at  the  same  time  the  negative  unity 
of  the  Notion  in  itself.  In  this  its  externality  the  End  realizes 
itself,  because  it  is  the  subjective  power  of  the  former  and  that 
process  by  which  externality  exhibits  its  self-dissolution  and 
return  into  this  the  negative  unity  of  the  End.  The  unrest  and 
changeability  of  the  external  side  of  the  Living  Entity  are  the 
manifestation  of  the  Notion  in  it ;  the  Notion,  which  is  nega- 
tivity in  itself,  has  Objectivity  only  in  so  far  as  its  indifferent 
persistence  shows  itself  as  self- transcending.  Thus  the  Notion,  by 
means  of  its  impulse,  produces  itself  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
product,  while  it  is  its  essence,  is  itself  that  which  produces ; 
for  it  is  product  only  as  externality  which  equally  posits  itself 
as  negative,  or  as  the  process  of  producing. 

3.  The  Idea  which  has  just  been  considered  is  the  Notion 
of  the  Living  Subject  and  of  its  Process;  the  two  determinations 


408  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

which  are  in  relation  to  each  other  are  the  self-relating  negative 
unity  of  the  Notion,  and  Objectivity,  which  is  its  Means 
although  in  it  the  Notion  has  returned  to  itself.  But  these  are 
moments  of  the  Idea  of  Life  within  its  Notion,  and  therefore 
they  are  not  the  determinate  Notion-moments  of  the  Living 
Individual  in  its  reality.  The  objectivity  or  corporality  of  the 
latter  is  concrete  totality;  but  these  moments  are  the  sides  out 
of  which  vitality  constitutes  itself,  and  consequently  they  are 
not  the  moments  of  this  vitality  which  has  already  been  con- 
stituted by  the  Idea.  But  the  living  objectivity  of  the  Individual, 
as  such,  gets  its  Seele  from  the  Notion  and  has  the  latter  for 
substance,  and  therefore  it  has  for  essential  distinction  such 
terms  as  are  determinations  of  the  Notion,  namely  Univer- 
sality, Particularity,  and  Individuality;  the  shape,  as  existing 
in  which  they  are  externally  distinct,  is  hence  divided  or  cut 
up  (insectum)  in  accordance  with  these. 

Accordingly  it  is,  first,  Universality ;  the  pure  internal  tremor 
of  vitality,  or  sensibility.  The  Notion  of  Universality  as  it  has 
turned  out  above  is  simple  immediacy,  but  it  is  this  only  as 
absolute  negativity  in  itself.  This  Notion  of  absolute  distinction, 
where  its  negativity  is  dissolved  in  simplicity  and  is  equal  to 
itself,  is  exemplified  in  sensibility.  It  is  Being-in-Self,  not  as 
abstract  simplicity,  but  as  an  infinitely  determinable  recep- 
tivity which,  in  its  determinateness,  does  not  become  something 
manifold  and  external,  but  is  simply  reflected  into  itself.  In 
this  Universality  determinateness  is  as  simple  principle;  the 
individual  external  determinateness,  or  a  so-called  impression, 
passes  back  out  of  its  external  and  manifold  determination  into 
this  simplicity  of  self-feeling.  Sensibility  may  thus  be  considered 
as  the  Determinate  Being  of  the  Seele  which  is  in  itself,  since 
it  absorbs  all  externality,  but  also  reduces  it  into  the  perfect 
simplicity  of  self-equal  Universality. 

The  second  determination  of  the  Notion  is  Particularity,  the 
moment  of  posited  distinction;  it  is  the  laying  open  of  the 
negativity  which  is  locked  up  in  simple  self-feeling,  or  in  it  is 
ideal,  and  not  yet  real,  determinateness, — that  is,  irritability. 
Because  of  the  abstraction  of  its  negativity,  feeling  is  impulse : 
it  determines  itself;  the  self-determination  of  the  Living  Entity 
is  its  judgment  or  finalization,  whereby  it  relates  itself  to  the 
external  as  to  a  presupposed  objectivity  and  is  in  reciprocal 


LIFE  40Q 

action  with  it. — Now  according  to  its  Particularity  it  is  pai  ,v 
species  among  other  living  species ;  the  formal  intro-Reflection 
of  this  indifferent  variety  is  the  formal  genus  and  its  systema- 
tization;  while  the  individual  Reflection  is  this,  that  Particu- 
larity (or  the  negativity  of  its  determinateness  as  a  direction 
outwards)  is  the  self-relating  negativity  of  the  Notion. 

According  to  this  third  determination  then  the  Living  Entity 
is  an  Individual.  Further,  this  intro-Reflection  determines  itself 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  Living  Entity  in  irritability  is  its 
own  externality  against  itself,  against  objectivity,  which,  as  its 
Means  and  instrument,  belongs  to  it  immediately  and  is  exter- 
nally determinable.  Intro-Reflection  transcends  this  immediacy, 
— (i)  as  theoretical  Reflection,  namely,  in  so  far  as  negativity 
exists  as  simple  moment  of  sensibility,  which  moment  was 
considered  in  it  and  constitutes  feeling;  and  (2)  as  real,  the 
unity  of  the  Notion  positing  itself  in  its  external  objectivity  as 
negative  unity — which  is  reproduction. — The  first  two  moments, 
sensibility  and  irritability,  are  abstract  determinations;  in 
reproduction  Life  is  concrete  and  is  vitality;  in  it,  as  its  truth, 
it  first  has  feeling  and  power  of  resistance.  Reproduction  is 
negativity  as  simple  moment  of  sensibility,  and  irritability  is 
only  living  power  of  resistance,  so  that  the  relation  to  the 
external  is  reproduction  and  individual  self-identity.  Each  of 
the  individual  moments  is  essentially  the  totality  of  all ;  their 
distinction  is  constituted  by  the  ideal  form-determinateness, 
which  in  reproduction  is  posited  as  concrete  totality  of  the 
whole.  Consequently  this  whole  is  opposed  to  these  determinate 
totalitfETas  a  third,  namely  as  a  real  totality,  while  at  the  same 
time  it  is  their  self-existent  essentiality,  being  also  that  in  which 
they  are  comprehended  as  moments  and  have  their  subject  and 
persistence. 

With  reproduction  as  the  moment  of  Individuality  the  Living 
Entity  posits  itself  as  actual  Individuality,  a  self-relating  Being- 
for-Self;  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  a  real  relation  outwards, 
the  Reflection  of  Particularity  or  irritability  against  an  Other, 
against  the  objective  world.  The  Process  of  Life  which  is  en- 
closed within  the  Individual  passes  over  into  relation  to  pre- 
supposed objectivity  as  such,  because  the  Individual,  in  positing 
itself  as  subjective  totality,  becomes  also  the  moment  of  its  deter- 
minateness as  relation  to  externality,  and  so  becomes  totality. 


410  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

B 

THE  LIFE-PROCESS 

The  fact  that  the  Living  Individual  moulds  itself  withii^  itself 
implies  a  tension  against  its  original  process  of  presupposition, 
and  opposes  it,  as  subject  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  to  the 
presupposed  objective  world.  The  subject  is  the  End  which  is 
its  own  End,  the  Notion  which  has  its  Means  and  subjective 
reality  in  the  objectivity  which  is  submitted  to  it ;  and  hereby 
it  is  constituted  as  the  Idea  which  is  in  and  for  itself  and  as  the 
essentially  independent,  against  which  the  presupposed  external 
world  has  the  value  only  of  something  negative  and  dependent. 
In  its  self-feeling  the  Living  Entity  has  this  certainty  of  the 
essential  nullity  of  the  otherness  which  opposes  it.  Its  impulse 
is  the  need  to  transcend  this  otherness  and  to  give  itself  the 
truth  of  this  certainty.  As  subject,  the  Individual  so  far  is  only 
the  Notion  of  the  Idea  of  Life ;  its  subjective  internal  process,  in 
which  it  draws  upon  itself,  and  the  immediate  objectivity  which 
it  posits  in  accordance  with  its  Notion  as  natural  Means,  are 
mediated  by  the  Process,  which  relates  itself  to  a  completely 
posited  externality,  to  an  objoctive  totality  that  stands  by  its 
side  indifferent. 

This  Process  begins  with  the  need,  that  is,  with  the  moment 
that  the  Living  Entity  (a)  determines  itself  and  thus  posits  itself 
as  denied,  whereby  it  relates  itself  to  an  indifferent  objectivity 
which  is  Other  to  it; — and  (b]  is  equally  not  lost  in  this  loss  of 
itself,  preserves  itself  in  it,  and  remains  the  identity  of  the  self- 
equal  Notion;  whereby  it  is  the  impulse  to  posit  this  other 
world  for  itself  as  equal  to  itself,  to  transcend  it,  and  to 
objectivate  itself.  Hereby  its  self-determination  has  the  form  of 
objective  externality,  and,  since  at  the  same  time  it  is  self- 
identical,  it  is  absolute  contradiction.  The  immediate  shape 
is  the  Idea  in  its  simple  Notion,  or  objectivity  which  is  adequate 
to  the  Notion :  thus  it  is  good  by  nature.  But  since  its  negative 
moment  realizes  itself  so  as  to  be  objective  particularity,  that 
is,  since  the  essential  moments  of  its  unity  are  each  realized  so 
as  to  be  totality,  therefore  the  Notion  is  severed  into  absolute 
inequality  of  itself  with  itself;  and,  since  just  as  much  it  is 
absolute  identity  in  this  severance,  the  Living  Entity  is  for  itself 


JLJLJFJ&  411 

tms  severance  and  has  the  feeling  of  this  contradiction,  which 
is  pain.  Pain  therefore  is  the  privilege  of  living  natures ;  they 
are  the  existing  Notion  and  therefore  they  are  an  actuality  of 
infinite  force  by  which  they  in  themselves  are  their  own 
negativity,  and  by  which  their  negativity  is/0r  them  and  they 
presefve  themselves  in  their  otherness. — It  is  said  that  con- 
tradiction cannot  even  be  thought :  but  in  the  pain  of  the  Living 
Entity  it  is  even  an  actual  existence. 

This  internal  diremption  of  the  Living  Entity  is  feeling,  the 
diremption  being  absorbed  into  the  simple  universality  of  the 
Notion,  into  sensibility.  From  pain  that  need  and  impulse  begin 
which  constitute  the  transition  by  which  the  Individual,  while 
it  is  the  negation  of  itself  for  itself,  is  also  to  become  identity 
for  itself — an  identity  which  exists  only  as  the  negation  of  thi 
negation. — The  identity  which  is  in  the  impulse  as  such  is 
subjective  self-certainty,  according  to  which  it  relates  itself  tc 
its  external  and  indifferently  existing  world  as  to  an  appear- 
ance, an  actuality  Notion-less  and  unessential  in  itself.  This 
latter  is  designed  to  acquire  the  Notion  in  itself  only  through 
the  subject,  which  is  the  immanent  End.  The  indifference  of 
the  objective  world  to  determinateness,  and  therefore  to  the 
End,  coilstitutes  its  external  capacity  for  being  adequate  to  the 
subject;  whatever  specifications  may  otherwise  belong  to  it,  its 
mechanical  determinability,  its  lack  in  the  freedom  of  the 
immanent  Notion,  constitutes  its  impotence  to  preserve  itself 
against  the  Living  Entity.— In  so  far  as  the  object  is  at 
first  an  indifferent  external  to  the  Living  Entity,  it  can  act 
upon*4Le  latter  mechanically :  but  then  it  does  not  act  as  upon 
a  Living  Entity;  in  so  far  as  it  stands  in  a  relation  to  this  it 
does  not  act  as  cause  but  as  irritant.  The  Living  Entity  is  impulse, 
and  therefore  externality  approaches  and  enters  it  only  in  so 
far  as  in  and  for  itself  it  is  already  in  it ;  the  action  upon  the 
subject  consequently  consists  in  this  alone,  that  the  latter  finds 
the  externality  which  is  offered  to  it  already  corresponding ; — 
and  even  if  the  externality  is  not  adequate  to  its  totality,  it  must 
at  least  correspond  to  a  particular  side  in  it,  and  the  possibility 
of  this  rests  precisely  in  the  fact  that,  preserving  its  external 
attitude,  it  is  a  particular. 

Now  the  subject  (in  so  far  as,  determinate  in  its  need,  it 
relates  itself  to  the  external,  and  therefore  is  itself  external  or 


412  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

instrument)  exerts  force  upon  the  object.  Its  particular  character 
and  its  finitude  in  general  fall  within  the  more  definite  appear- 
ance of  this  relation. — The  external  aspect  of  this  is  the  Process 
of  Objectivity  in  general,  Mechanism  and  Chemism.  But  this 
Process  is  immediately  cut  short,  and  externality  is  changed 
into  internality.  The  external  adequacy  to  an  End  which  at 
first  is  produced  in  the  indifferent  object  by  the  activity  of  the 
subject  is  cancelled  through  the  fact  that  the  object  is  not  a 
substance  as  against  the  Notion,  so  that  the  Notion  not  only 
can  become  its  external  form  but  also  must  posit  itself  as  its 
essence  and  immanent  penetrating  determination  in  accordance 
with  its  original  identity. 

Consequently,  the  object  being  subjected  to  force,  the 
mechanical  Process  passes  over  into  the  internal,  by  means  of 
which  the  Individual  appropriates  the  object  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  deprive  it  of  its  peculiar  nature,  making  it  its  Means  and 
giving  it  its  subjectivity  for  substance.  Hereby  this  assimilation 
coincides  with  the  process  of  reproduction  of  the  Individual 
which  was  considered  above :  in  this  process  the  Individual  at 
first  draws  upon  itself,  making  its  own  objectivity  its  object; 
the  mechanical  and  chemical  conflict  of  its  members  with  ex- 
ternal things  is  an  objective  moment  of  itself.  The  mechanical 
and  chemical  elements  of  the  process  are  a  commencement  of 
the  dissolution  of  the  Living  Entity.  Now  Life  is  the  truth  of 
these  processes,  and  therefore,  as  Living  Entity,  is  the  existence 
of  this  truth,  and  its  power;  it  accordingly  reaches  beyond 
them  and  penetrates  them  as  their  universality,  and  through 
it  their  product  is  completely  determined.  And  this  thel*  change 
into  Living  Individuality  constitutes  the  return  of  the  latter 
upon  itself,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  production  (which  as 
such  would  be  the  transition  into  an  Other)  becomes  repro- 
duction, wherein  the  living  entity  posits  itself  for  itself  as  self- 
identical. 

The  immediate  Idea  is  also  the  immediate  identity,  which 
is  not  for  itself,  of  Notion  and  reality.  The  Living  Entity  gives 
itself  its  self-feeling  through  the  objective  Process ;  for  here  it 
posits  itself  as  that  which  it  is  in  and  for  itself — namely,  as  the 
negative  unity  of  the  negative,  or,  as  self-identical  in  its  other- 
ness (which  is  posited  as  indifferent).  In  this  coincidence  of  the 
Individual  with  its  objectivity,  which  at  first  is  presupposed  as 


LIFE  413 

indifferent  to  it,  it  has  from  one  side  constituted  itself  as  actual 
unity ;  but  equally  it  has  transcended  its  particularity  and  raised 
itself  into  universality.  Its  particularity  consisted  in  the  diremp- 
tion  by  which  Life  posited  as  its  species  individual  life  and  the 
objectivity  which  is  external  to  it.  By  means  of  the  external 
Life-Process  it  has  thus  posited  itself  as  real,  universal  life,  as 
Kind. 

C 
THE  KIND 

The  Living  Individual,  abstracted  at  first  out  of  the  general 
Notion  of  Life,  is  a  presupposition  which  is  not  yet  verified  by 
itself.  Through  the  Process,  together  with  the  world  (which  is 
presupposed  simultaneously)  it  has  posited  itself— for  itself  as 
the  negative  unity  of  its  otherness, — as  the  foundation  of  its 
own  self;  thus  it  is  the  actuality  of  the  Idea  in  such  a  manner 
that  now  the  Individual  produces  itself  out  of  actuality,  while 
before  it  merely  emerged  out  of  the  Notion,  and  that  its  origin, 
which  was  a  process  of  presupposing,  now  becomes  its  pro- 
duction. . 

The  further  determination,  however,  which  it  has  obtained 
by  transcending  the  opposition  is  that  it  is  Kind  as  the  identity 
of  itself  with  its  previously  indifferent  otherness.  This  Idea  of 
the  Individual,  since  it  is  this  essential  identity,  is  essentially  its 
own  particularization.  According  to  the  totality  from  which  it 
emerges^this  its  diremption  is  the  duplication  of  the  Individual 
— a  presupposing  of  an  objectivity  which  is  identical  with  it, 
and  an  attitude  of  the  Living  Entity  to  itself  as  to  another 
Living  Entity. 

This  universal  is  the  third  stage,  the  truth  of  Life  in  so  far 
as  it  is  still  enclosed  within  its  own  sphere.  This  stage  is  the 
self-relating  Process  of  the  Individual,  when  externality  is  its 
immanent  moment;  and  secondly  this  externality  is  itself,  as 
living  totality,  an  objectivity,  which  for  the  Individual  is  the 
Individual  itself,  and  in  which  (not  as  something  cancelled 
but  as  something  persisting)  it  has  its  own  self-certainty. 

Now  the  relation  of  the  Kind  is  the  identity  of  the  individual 
self-feeling  in  an  entity  which  at  the  same  time  is  itself  an- 
other independent  Individual;  it  is,  therefore,  contradiction ; 


4/4  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  thus  the  Living  Entity  is  again  impulse. — Now  the  Kind 
is  the  completion  of  the  Idea  of  Life,  but  at  this  point  it  is  still 
within  the  sphere  of  immediacy ;  and  consequently  this  univer- 
sality is  actual  in  individual  form — the  Notion  whose  reality 
has  the  form  of  immediate  objectivity.  Hence,  although  the 
Individual  is  Kind  in  itself,  it  is  not  Kind  for  itself:  as  yet  that 
which  is  for  it  is  only  another  Living  Individual ;  the  Notion 
which  is  distinguished  from  itself  has  for  object  with  which  it 
is  identical,  not  itself  as  Notion,  but  a  Notion  which  as  Living 
Entity  at  the  same  time  has  external  objectivity  for  it, — a  form 
which  in  consequence  is  immediately  reciprocal. 

The  identity  with  other  or  universality  of  the  Individual  is 
thus  as  yet  merely  internal  or  subjective;  it  therefore  has  the 
desire  to  posit  this  identity  and  to  realize  itself  as  universal.  But 
this  impulse  of  the  Kind  can  realize  itself  only  by  the  tran- 
scendence of  the  single  individualities  which  still  are  particular 
as  against  one  another.  And  now,  in  so  far  as  it  is  these  that 
in  themselves  universally  satisfy  the  tension  of  their  desire  and 
resolve  themselves  into  their  universality  of  Kind,  their  realized 
identity  is  the  negative  unity  of  the  Kind  which  intro-reflects 
itself  out  of  the  division.  In  so  far  it  is  the  individuality  of  Life 
itself,  created  no  longer  out  of  its  Notion  but  out  of  the  actual 
Idea.  At  first  it  is  itself  only  the  Notion  which  has  first  to 
obj activate  itself,  but  the  actual  Notion — the  germ  of  a  Living 
Individual.  In  it,  that  which  the  Notion  is  is  given  to  ordinary 
perception;  and  it  is  given  that  the  subjective  Notion  has 
external  actuality.  For  the  germ  of  the  living  is  the  perfect 
concretion  of  individuality,  in  which  all  its  various  sicles, 
properties,  and  organic  distinctions  are  contained  in  their 
complete  determinateness,  and  totality  (at  first  immaterial  and 
subjective)  is  embryonic,  simple,  and  non-sensuous;  thus  the 
germ  is  the  whole  Living  Entity  in  the  internal  form  of  the 
Notion. 

According  to  this  side  the  intro-Reflection  of  the  Kind  is 
that  by  means  of  which  it  obtains  actuality,  because  the  moment 
of  negative  lenity  and  individuality  is  posited  in  it — the  pro- 
pagation of  living  generations.  The  Idea  (which,  as  Life,  is  still 
in  the  form  of  immediacy)  falls  back  into  actuality  in  so  far, 
and  this  its  Reflection  is  only  repetition  and  the  infinite  pro- 
gress in  which  it  does  not  emerge  out  of  the  finitude  of  its 


LIFE  4i<S 

immediacy.  But  this  return  into  its  first  Notion  has  also  this 
higher  side,  that  the  Idea  has  not  only  run  through  the  media- 
tion of  its  Processes  within  immediacy,  but  also  by  this  very 
fact  has  transcended  them  and  has  thereby  raised  itself  into 
a  higher  form  of  its  existence. 

For  the  Process  of  the  Kind  (in  which  the  single  Individuals 
cancel  in  one  another  their  indifferent  and  immediate  existence 
and  die  away  in  this  negative  unity)  has  further,  and  for  the 
other  side  of  its  product,  the  Realized  Kind,  which  has  posited 
itself  as  identical  with  the  Notion. — In  the  Process  of  Kind  the 
separated  individualities  of  individual  Life  perish;  the  negative 
identity  in  which  the  Kind  returns  into  itself  is  (a)  the  creation 
of  individuality,  but  (b)  is  also  its  transcendence:  it  is  thus  the 
self-coinciding  Kind,  or  universality,  which  becomes  for  itself,  of 
the  Idea.  In  the  process  of  generation  the  immediacy  of  living 
individuality  perishes :  the  death  of  this  Life  is  the  emergence 
of  Spirit.  The  Idea,  which  as  Kind  is  in  itself,  is  for  itself,  since 
it  has  transcended  its  particularity  which  constituted  the  living 
generations,  and  has  so  given  itself  a  reality,  which  is  itself 
simple  universality :  it  is  thus  the  Idea  which  is  related  to  itself 
as  Idea,  the  universal  which  has  universality  for  its  detcr- 
minateness  and  existence,  or,  the  Idea  of  Cognition. 


CHAPTER  II 
THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION 

LIFE  is  the  immediate  Idea,  or  the  Idea  as  its  Notion  which  is 
not  yet  realized  in  itself.  In  its  Judgment  it  is  Cognition  in 
general. 

The  Notion  is  as  Notion  for  itself  in  so  far  as  it  exists  freely 
as  abstract  universality,  or  as  Kind.  Thus  it  is  its  own  pure 
self-identity,  which  distinguishes  itself  within  itself  in  such  a 
manner  that  that  which  is  distinguished  is  not  an  objectivity, 
but  has  become  freed  so  that  it  too  is  subjectivity  or  the  form 
of  simple  self-equality;  hence  the  object  of  the  Notion  is  the 
Notion  itself.  Its  reality  in  general  is  the  form  of  its  existence, 
and  what  matters  is  the  determination  of  this  form ;  upon  this 
depends  the  distinction  of  that  which  the  Notion  is  in  itself  or 
as  subjective,  and  of  what  it  is  as  submerged  into  Objectivity, 
and  next  in  the  Idea  of  Life.  It  is  true  that  in  the  last  it  is 
distinct  from  its  external  reality  and  is  posited  for  itself ';  but  it 
has  this  its  Being-for-Self  only  as  the  identity  which  is  a  relation 
to  itself  as  submerged  into  its  subordinate  objectivity  or  to  itself 
as  indwelling  and  substantial  form.  The  elevation  of  the  Notion 
above  Life  means  this,  that  its  reality  is  the  Notion-form  freed 
so  that  it  becomes  universality.  By  means  of  this  Judgment  the 
Idea  is  duplicated — into  the  subjective  Notion  whoiV'SttcJity 
is  itself,  and  into  the  objective  Notion,  which  is  as  Life. — 
Thought,  Spirit,  and  self-consciousness  are  determinations  of 
the  Idea  in  so  far  as  it  has  itself  for  object  and  its  Existence, 
that  is,  the  determinateness  of  its  Being,  is  its  own  distinction 
from  itself. 

The  metaphysics  of  Spirit,  or,  as  was  the  more  usual  term, 
of  the  soul,  turned  upon  the  determinations  of  substance,  sim- 
plicity, and  immateriality; — determinations,  in  which  the 
general  idea  of  spirit  as  it  exists  in  empirical  consciousness  as 
subject  was  made  the  foundation,  whereupon  the  question  next 
was  asked  what  predicates  agree  with  the  observed  phenomena. 
This  procedure  could  go  no  further  than  that  of  physics,  which 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  41 * 

reduces  the  world  of  appearance  to  general  laws  and  deter- 
minations of  reflection,  since  here  too  Spirit  has  its  foundation 
only  in  its  appearance.  Indeed  this  method  necessarily  fell  short 
of  the  method  of  physical  science,  since  Spirit  not  only  is 
infinitely  richer  than  Nature,  but  the  absolute  unity  of  opposites 
in  the  Notion  constitutes  its  essence,  and  therefore  in  its  appear- 
ance and  its  relation  to  externality  it  manifests  contradiction 
in  its  highest  determinateness.  Consequently  it  must  be  possible 
to  cite  an  experience  for  each  of  the  opposite  determinations 
of  reflection,  or  to  arrive,  from  experience,  at  contradictory 
determinations  according  to  the  method  of  the  formal  syllogism. 
The  predicates  which  immediately  result  in  appearance  belong 
properly  to  empirical  psychology,  and  therefore  all  that  is  left 
over  for  metaphysical  consideration  is  some  rather  tenuous 
determinations  of  reflection. — Kant,  in  his  criticism  of  the 
rational  doctrine  of  the  soul,  nails  down  this  metaphysics  at 
this  point,  that,  in  so  far  as  it  is  supposed  to  be  a  rational 
science,  the  smallest  element  which  is  introduced  from  per- 
ception into  the  general  idea  of  self-consciousness  makes  this 
science  empirical  and  taints  its  rational  purity  and  complete 
independence  of  experience. — Thus,  he  argues,  nothing  remains 
but  the  simple  idea  (which  in  itself  is  quite  void  of  content)  of 
the  Ego,  of  which  it  is  impossible  even  to  say  that  it  is  a  concept, 
since  it  is  a  mere  consciousness  which  accompanies  all  con- 
cepts. Now  this  Ego  or  It  (the  Thing),  which  thinks,  represents 
nothing  more  (according  to  Kant's  further  conclusions)  than 
a  transcendental  subject  of  thoughts  =  #,  which  is  known 
on^VAoxigh  the  thoughts  that  are  its  predicates,  and  of 
which  by  itself  we  can  never  have  the  slightest  notion.  At 
the  same  time  this  Ego,  according  to  Kant's  own  expression, 
is  awkward  in  this  respect,  that  we  must  always  make  use  of 
it  in  order  to  make  any  judgment  about  it;  for  it  is  not  an  idea 
by  which  a  particular  object  is  distinguished  so  much  as  a  form 
of  ideation  in  general,  in  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  called  cognition. — 
The  paralogism  which  according  to  Kant  is  committed  by  the 
rational  doctrine  of  the  soul  consists  in  this,  that  modes  of  self- 
consciousness  in  thought  are  made  into  notions  of  the  under- 
standing which  imply  an  object;  the  "I  think"  is  taken  as  a 
thinking  being  or  Thing-in-itself; — in  consciousness  the  Ego 
always  occurs  as  subject  which  is  singular  and,  in  spite  of  the 

VOL.    II.  DD 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

multiplicity  of  ideation,  identical,  distinguishing  its  self  from 
this  multiplicity  which  is  external ;  and  hence  the  invalid  con- 
clusion is  drawn  in  this  manner  that  Ego  is  a  substance,  and 
further  that  it  is  qualitatively  simple  and  one  and  exists  inde- 
pendently of  the  things  of  space  and  time. — 

I  have  set  out  this  exposition  in  some  detail  because  the 
nature  of  the  old  metaphysics  of  the  soul,  as  well  as  the  criticism 
which  destroyed  it,  can  clearly  be  seen  in  it. — The  former 
attempted  to  determine  the  abstract  essence  of  the  soul ;  it  began 
originally  in  this  attempt  with  perception,  and  changed  its 
empirical  universality  and  the  reflection-determination  (which 
is  altogether  external  to  the  individuality  of  the  actual)  into 
the  form  of  the  determinations  of  essence  which  have  been 
recited. — Kant  had  in  mind  mainly  the  condition  of  contem- 
porary metaphysics,  which  generally  halted  at  such  abstract 
and  one-sided  determinations,  without  dialectic;  he  neither 
considered  nor  investigated  the  truly  speculative  ideas  of  older 
philosophers  about  the  notion  of  Spirit.  In  his  criticism  of  these 
determinations  he  simply  followed  Hume's  sceptical  manner: 
he  holds  fast  to  that  which  appears  as  Ego  in  self-consciousness, 
from  which  however  (he  insists)  everything  empirical  must  be 
omitted,  since  the  aim  is  to  know  its  essence,  or  the  ^Thing-in- 
itself.  Now  nothing  remains  but  the  phenomenon  of  the  "I 
think5 '  which  accompanies  every  idea;  and  nobody  has  the 
slightest  notion  of  this  "I  think." — It  must  certainly  be  admitted 
that  it  is  impossible  to  have  the  slightest  notion  of  Ego  or 
anything  else  (the  Notion  included),  if  no  Notion  is  formed  and 
a  halt  is  made  at  the  simple,  fixed  general  idea  and  fiaift'e.— It 
is  a  strange  thought  (if  it  is  to  be  called  a  thought)  that  Ego 
must  make  use  of  Ego  in  order  to  judge  about  Ego ;  the  Ego 
which  makes  use  of  self-consciousness  as  a  means  in  order  to 
judge  is  indeed  an  #,  of  which  (as  also  of  this  relation  of  making 
use)  it  is  impossible  to  have  the  slightest  notion.  But  it  is 
ridiculous  to  call  awkward  and  to  stigmatize  as  circular  this 
property  of  self-consciousness — that  Ego  thinks  itself  and  that 
it  cannot  be  thought  unless  it  is  Ego  that  thinks.  It  is  by  this 
very  relation^that  its  absolute  and  eternal  nature,  and  that  of 
the  Notion,  manifests  itself  in  immediate  empirical  self-con- 
sciousness, and  manifests  itself  because  self-consciousness  is 
precisely  the  existing  and  therefore  empirically  perceptible  pure 


THE  IDEA  OF   COGNITION  419 

Notion,  the  absolute  self-relation  which,  as  separating  Judg- 
ment, makes  itself  its  own  object  and  is  just  this  process  of 
thereby  becoming  a  circle. — A  stone  does  not  suffer  from  this 
awkward  property;  if  it  is  the  object  of  thought  or  judgment 
it  does  not  stand  in  its  own  way; — it  is  exempted  from  the 
trouble  of  being  its  own  instrument  in  this  operation ;  some- 
thing else  is  outside  it  which  must  undertake  this  burden. 

These  ideas,  which  may  be  called  barbarous,  set  it  down  as 
a  defect  that,  in  the  process  of  thinking  the  Ego,  Ego  itself  as 
subject  cannot  be  omitted;  and  the  same  defect  also  appears 
conversely  in  this  form,  that  Ego  occurs  only  as  subject  of 
consciousness,  or  that  Ego  can  only  use  itself  as  subject  of  a 
judgment,  while  the  intuition  is  said  to  be  lacking  by  which 
it  could  be  given  as  an  object ;  and  further  the  Notion  of  a 
thing  which  can  exist  only  as  subject  implies  no  objective 
reality. — If  objectivity  is  said  to  demand  external  intuition 
determined  in  time  and  space,  and  it  is  this  which  is  missing, 
it  is  quite  clear  that  by  objectivity  only  that  kind  of  sensuous 
reality  is  meant  which  it  is  a  condition  of  thought  and  truth 
to  have  superseded.  But,  of  course,  if  Ego  is  taken  not  as  a 
Notion  but  as  bare  and  simple  idea  in  the  manner  in  which 
we  prondunce  I  in  everyday  consciousness,  then  it  is  the 
abstract  determination  and  not  a  self-relation  having  itself  for 
object; — in  this  manner  it  is  only  one  of  the  extremes,  or  one- 
sided subject  without  its  objectivity;  and  it  could  also  be  object 
without  subjectivity  but  for  the  implication  of  the  awkward  fact, 
already  mentioned,  that  the  thinking  subject  cannot  be  forced 
awftrj-  £.:vmi  the  Ego  as  object.  But  in  fact  the  same  awkwardness 
is  also  to  be  found  in  the  first  determination,  or  the  Ego  as 
subject:  the  Ego  thinks  something — either  itself  or  something 
else.  This  inseparability  of  the  two  forms  in  which  it  opposes 
itself  belongs  to  the  most  peculiar  nature  of  its  Notion  and  of 
the  Notion  itself;  it  is  precisely  that  which  Kant  wishes  to  ward 
off  in  order  to  hold  fast  simply  the  general  idea  which  does 
not  distinguish  itself  within  itself  and  therefore  of  course  is 
Notion-less.  Now  it  is  true  that  such  a  Notion-less  entity  may 
oppose  itself  to  the  abstract  determinations  of  'reflection  or 
categories  of  the  earlier  metaphysics ; — for  in  respect  of  one- 
sidedness  it  stands  on  a  level  with  them,  although  these  are 
higher  as  products  of  thought ;  on  the  other  hand  it  appears 


420  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

all  the  poorer  and  emptier  compared  with  the  profounder  ideas 
of  older  philosophy  with  regard  to  the  notion  of  the  soul  or  of 
thought — for  example,  the  truly  speculative  ideas  of  Aristotle. 
If  Kant's  philosophy  investigated  these  determinations  of 
reflection,  it  ought  still  more  to  have  investigated  the  abstraction 
of  the  empty  Ego,  which  was  held  fast,  and  the  supposed  Idea 
of  the  Thing-in-itself,  which,  just  because  of  its  abstraction, 
shows  itself  to  be  wholly  untrue ;  the  experience  of  that  awk- 
wardness which  was  deplored  is  itself  the  empirical  fact  in 
which  the  untruth  of  this  abstraction  expresses  itself. 

Kant's  criticism  of  rational  psychology  mentions  only  Men- 
delssohn's proof  of  the  persistence  of  the  soul ;  and  I  cite  the 
refutation  of  this  proof  because  of  the  remarkable  nature  of  that 
which  is  opposed  to  it.  The  proof  is  based  upon  the  simplicity 
of  the  soul,  which  is  asserted  to  render  it  incapable  of  change, 
of  a  temporal  transition  into  an  Other.  Qualitative  simplicity 
is  the  form  of  abstraction  in  general  which  was  considered 
above ;  as  qualitative  determinateness  it  was  investigated  in  the 
sphere  of  Being,  when  it  was  shown  that  the  Qualitative  is  such 
an  abstractly  self-relating  determinateness,  and  as  such  is  for 
that  very  reason  of  dialectic  nature  and  only  the  transition 
into  an  Other.  But  under  the  Notion  it  was  shown  that,  if  the 
Notion  is  considered  with  respect  to  persistence,  indestructi- 
bility, and  imperishability,  it  is  the  eternal  and  that  which  is 
in  and  for  itself,  just  because  it  is  concrete  and  not  abstract 
simplicity ;  not  abstractly  self-relating  determinedness,  but 
the  unity  of  itself  and  its  Other,  into  which  accordingly  it 
cannot  pass  over  in  such  a  manner  as  to  undergtrr'kcAvge 
in  it,  precisely  because  the  Other,  the  determinedness, 
is  itself,  and  therefore  in  this  transition  it  only  reaches 
itself. — Now  Kant's  criticism  opposes  the  quantitative  deter- 
mination of  the  Notion-unity  to  this  qualitative.  The  soul 
(he  says)  is  not  a  manifold  of  juxtaposed  parts  and  contains  no 
extensive  magnitude ;  but  still,  consciousness  has  a  degree,  and 
the  soul,  like  every  existent,  has  an  intensive  magnitude ;  and 
hereby  the  possibility  is  posited  of  the  transition  into  nothing 
by  gradual  disappearance. — Now  what  else  is  this  refutation 
but  the  application  to  Spirit  of  a  category  of  Being — to  wit, 
Intensive  Magnitude? — a  determination  which  has  no  truth  in 
itself  and  in  fact  is  transcended  in  the  Notion. 


THE   IDEA  OF  COGNITION  421 

Metaphysics — even  that  kind  which  restricted  itself  to  fixed 
notions  of  understanding  without  rising  to  the  speculative 
and  to  the  nature  of  the  Notion  and  the  Idea — had  for  its 
end  the  cognition  of  truth,  and  asked  of  the  objects  of  its 
investigation  whether  they  were  something  veritable  or  not, 
substances  or  phenomena.  But  the  victory  of  Kant's  Critique 
over  this  consists  rather  in  abolishing  the  investigation  which 
has  truth  for  end,  together  with  this  end  itself;  it  does  not  ask 
the  one  question  which  is  of  interest,  namely,  whether  a  certain 
subject  (in  this  instance  the  abstract  Ego  of  imagination)  has 
truth  in  and  for  itself.  But  to  stand  fast  at  appearance  and  the 
data  given  to  mere  sensuous  representation  in  everyday  con- 
sciousness is  tantamount  to  a  resignation  of  the  Notion  and  of 
philosophy.  What  goes  beyond  this  is  given  in  Kant's  Critique 
the  name  of  something  extravagant,  to  which  Reason  has  no 
title  at  all.  The  Notion  does  in  fact  range  beyond  the  Notion- 
less,  and  its  immediate  title  to  this  transgression  is  (a)  itself 
and  (6),  from  the  negative  side,  the  untruth  of  appearance 
and  of  sensuous  representation,  as  well  as  of  abstractions  such 
as  the  Things-in-themselves  and  that  Ego  which  is  supposed 
not  to  be  its  own  object. 

In  the  connected  course  of  our  logical  exposition  it  is  from 
the  Idea  of  Life  that  the  Idea  of  Spirit  has  emerged ;  or,  what 
is  the  same  thing,  the  latter  has  proved  itself  to  be  the  truth 
of  the  former.  As  being  this  result  this  Idea  has  its  truth  in  and 
for  itself,  with  which  now  the  empirical  element,  or  the  Appear- 
ance of  Spirit,  may  be  compared,  to  see  how  far  they  agree ; 
n^feirtheifess  the  empirical  itself  can  be  grasped  only  through 
and  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Idea.  We  have  seen  of  Life  that 
it  is  the  Idea,  but  at  the  same  time  Life  showed  itself  to  be 
not  yet  the  true  representation  or  fashion  of  the  existence  of 
the  Idea.  For  in  Life  the  reality  of  the  Idea  is  as  Individuality ; 
Universality,  or  the  Kind,  is  inner;  consequently  the  truth  of 
Life  as  absolute  negative  unity  is  that  it  transcends  abstract 
or  (what  is  the  same  thing)  immediate  individuality,  and  that, 
as  identical,  it  is  self-identical,  and  as  Kind,  self-equal.  Now 
this  Idea  is  Spirit. — But  in  this  regard  the  furthef  remark  may 
be  made  that  Spirit  is  here  considered  in  that  form  which 
belongs  to  this  Idea  as  logical.  For  the  Idea  has  other  shapes 
too,  which  may  here  be  mentioned  in  passing,  under  which  it 


422  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

must  be  considered  in  the  concrete  sciences  of  Spirit — namely 
as  soul,  consciousness,  and  Spirit  as  such. 

The  name  of  soul  was  formerly  used  of  the  individual  finite 
spirit  in  general,  and  rational  or  empirical  doctrine  of  the  soul 
was  intended  to  mean  the  same  as  doctrine  of  spirit.  Where 
the  expression  "soul"  is  used,  the  idea  is  present  that  it  is  a 
thing  like  other  things;  its  seat  (the  spatial  determination 
whence  its  forces  operate)  is  asked  for,  and  the  further  question 
is  put  how  this  thing  can  be  imperishable,  subject  as  it  is  to 
the  conditions  of  temporality  but  free  from  temporal  change. 
The  system  of  monads  raises  matter  to  the  status  of  the  soul : 
the  soul  in  this  view  is  an  atom  like  the  atoms  of  matter  in 
general ;  it  is  said  that  the  atom  which  rises  as  steam  from  the 
coffee-cup  might,  with  luck,  develop  into  a  soul,  and  that  it 
is  only  the  greater  obscurity  of  its  process  of  mirroring  that 
distinguishes  it  from  the  kind  of  thing  that  appears  as  a  soul. — 
The  Notion  which  is  for  itself  is  necessary  also  in  immediate 
Existence ;  in  this  substantial  identity  with  Life — in  its  immer- 
sion into  its  externality — it  has  to  be  considered  in  anthropology. 
But  this  metaphysics,  where  this  form  of  immediacy  becomes 
a  soul-thing,  an  atom  like  the  atoms  of  matter,  must  remain 
alien  to  anthropology  too. — To  anthropology  those  dark  regions 
alone  may  be  ceded  where  spirit  stands  under  influences 
formerly  called  sidereal  or  terrestrial,  living  as  a  natural  spirit 
in  sympathy  with  nature  and  becoming  aware  of  its  changes 
in  dreams  and  premonitions,  and  dwelling  in  brain,  heart, 
ganglia,  or  liver,  and  so  on;  to  which  last  part,  according 
to  Plato,  the  god  gave  that  gift  of  prophecy  above  whicK  tfeff- 
conscious  man  is  raised,  in  order  that  the  unreasonable  part 
too  might  partake  of  his  goodness  and  have  a  share  in  higher 
things.  To  this  unreasonable  side  belongs  further  the  relation 
of  sensuous  representation,  and  of  higher  intellectual  activity 
in  so  far  as  it  is  exposed  in  the  individual  subject  to  the  play 
of  wholly  contingent  corporeal  nature,  external  influences  and 
particular  circumstances. 

This  is  the  lowest  of  the  concrete  forms  in  which  Spirit  is 
immersed  in* materiality;  its  immediately  higher  form  is  in 
consciousness.  In  this  form  the  free  Notion  as  Ego  which  is  for 
itself  is  withdrawn  out  of  objectivity,  but  it  relates  itself  to 
objectivity  as  its  Other,  as  opposed  object.  Here  Spirit  no 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  423 

longer  is  soul,  but,  in  the  certainty  of  itself,  the  immediacy  of 
Being  rather  has  the  significance  of  something  negative  for  it ; 
hence  the  self-identity  in  which  it  remains  in  objectivity  is  at 
the  same  time  only  a  show,  since  the  objective  also  has  still 
the  form  of  something  which  is  in  itself.  This  stage  is  the  object 
of  the*  Phenomenology  of  Spirit — a  science  which  stands  midway 
between  the  sciences  of  Natural  Spirit  and  of  Spirit  as  such,  and 
considers  Spirit  which  is  for  itself  at  the  same  time  in  its  relation 
to  its  Other  (which  thus,  as  was  mentioned,  is  determined  both 
as  object  which  is  in  itself  and  also  as  negated  object) — as 
appearing  and  as  representing  itself  in  its  own  opposite. 

But  the  higher  truth  of  this  form  is  Spirit  for  itself,  for  which 
the  object,  which  for  consciousness  is  in  itself,  has  the  form  of 
its  own  determination,  or  of  sensuous  representation  in  general ; 
this  Spirit,  which  operates  upon  determinations  as  determina- 
tions proper  to  itself — sensations,  images,  and  thoughts — is,  in 
so  far,  in  itself  and  in  its  form  infinite.  The  contemplation  of 
this  stage  belongs  to  the  doctrine  proper  of  Spirit,  which  would 
comprise  that  which  is  the  object  of  ordinary  empirical  psycho- 
logy, yet  cannot  go  to  work  in  an  empirical  manner  if  it  would 
be  science  of  Spirit,  but  must  be  taken  scientifically.— At  this 
stage  Spirit  is  finite  Spirit,  in  so  far  as  the  content  of  its  deter- 
minateness  is  immediate  and  given ;  the  science  which  is  con- 
cerned with  it  must  present  the  process  in  which  it  sets  itself 
free  from  this  its  determinateness  and  passes  on  to  the  com- 
prehension of  its  truth,  which  is  Infinite  Spirit. 

On  the  other  hand  the  Idea  of  Spirit,  which  is  an  object  of 
fo^ic*  is  Already  within  pure  science,  which  therefore  need  not 
witness  its  progress  where  it  is  implicated  in  nature,  in  imme- 
diate determinateness  and  in  matter,  or  in  sensuous  represen- 
tation, which  is  what  is  considered  in  these  three  sciences ;  this 
progress  it  has  already  left  behind,  or  (which  is  the  same  thing) 
it  rather  has  it  before  it, — the  former,  in  so  far  as  logic  is  taken 
as  the  last  science,  the  latter,  in  so  far  as  it  is  taken  as  the  first, 
out  of  which  at  last  the  Idea  passes  over  into  Nature.  Conse- 
quently in  the  logical  Idea  of  Spirit  Ego  forthwith  is  the  free 
Notion  (as  appeared  from  the  Notion  of  Nature  as  the  truth 
of  this  Idea) ;  the  free  Notion  which  in  its  Judgment  is  itself  the 
object,  or,  the  Notion  as  its  Idea,  But  even  in  this  form  the 
Idea  is  not  yet  complete. 


424  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

It  is  indeed  the  free  Notion,  which  has  itself  for  object;  but, 
just  because  it  is  immediate,  it  is  still  immediately  the  Idea  in 
its  subjectivity,  and  therefore  in  its  finitude  in  general.  It  is  the 
End  which  is  to  realize  itself;  or,  it  is  the  Absolute  Idea  itself 
still  in  its  appearance .  What  it  seeks  is  the  True,  this  identity 
of  the  Notion  itself  and  reality,  but,  as  yet,  it  merely  is  seeking; 
for  here  still  (as  it  is  at  the  beginning)  it  is  subjective.  Con- 
sequently the  object  which  is  object  of  the  Notion  is  here  also 
a  given  object,  but  it  does  not  enter  into  the  subject  as  an 
Object  which  operates  upon  it,  or  in  its  quality  as  object  having 
a  nature  for  itself,  or  as  image:  on  the  contrary  the  subject 
changes  it  into  a  Notion-determination;  it  is  the  Notion  that 
sets  itself  to  work  in  the  object,  relates  itself  to  itself  therein, 
and  finds  truth  in  giving  itself  its  reality  in  the  Object. 

Thus  at  this  point  the  Idea  is  one  extreme  of  a  Syllogism, 
as  the  Notion  which  as  End  has  itself  for  subjective  reality; 
the  other  extreme  is  the  barrier  of  the  subjective,  namely,  the 
objective  world.  The  two  extremes  are  identical  in  being  the 
Idea ;  their  unity,  first,  is  that  of  the  Notion,  which  in  the  one 
is  only  for  itself  and  in  the  other  only  in  itself;  secondly,  reality 
in  the  one  is  abstract  and  in  the  other  in  its  concrete  externality. 
— Now  this  unity  is  posited  by  Cognition;  and,  since  it  is  the 
subjective  Idea  that  starts  from  itself  as  End,  this  unity  is  at 
first  only  as  middle. — The  cognizing  entity  relates  itself  to  an 
external  world  by  means  of  the  determinateness  of  its  Notion 
(namely  abstract  Being-for-Self),  but  does  so  in  absolute  self- 
certainty  in  order  to  raise  its  own  reality  in  itself  (a  formal 
truth)  to  real  truth.  In  its  Notion  it  has  the  whole  essentiality 
of  the  objective  world;  its  process  is,  to  posit  the  concrete  con- 
tent of  the  objective  world  for  itself  as  identical  with  the  Notion, 
and  conversely  the  latter  as  identical  with  the  objectivity. 

Immediately  the  Idea  of  appearance  is  theoretic  Idea,  or 
Cognition  as  such.  For  immediately  the  objective  world  has 
the  form  of  immediacy  or  of  Being  for  the  Notion  which  is  for 
itself,  while  the  latter  at  first  is  to  itself  only  the  abstract  Notion 
of  itself,  bound  up  as  yet  in  itself.  The  Notion  consequently 
is  only  as/0rm;  its  reality,  which  it  has  in  itself,  is  no  more 
than  its  simple  determinations  of  Universality  and  Particu- 
larity :  this  form  receives  from  without  Individuality  or  deter- 
minate determinateness,  or,  its  content. 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  425 

A 

THE  IDEA  OF  THE  TRUE 

At  first  the  subjective  Idea  is  impulse.  For  it  is  this  contra- 
diction in  the  Notion,  that  it  has  itself  for  object,  and  is  its 
own  reality,  while  at  the  same  time  the  object  is  not  as  an 
Other,  independent  of  the  Notion,  nor  again  has  the  distinction 
of  itself  from  itself  the  essential  determination  of  difference 
and  of  indifferent  Existence.  Consequently  the  impulse  has  the 
determinateness  of  cancelling  its  own  subjectivity,  of  making 
concrete  its  reality  (which  was  abstract  at  first) ,  and  of  filling 
it,  for  content,  with  the  world  which  is  presupposed  by  its 
subjectivity. — From  the  other  side  it  determines  itself  in  the 
following  manner  by  this  process :  the  Notion  is  absolute  self- 
certainty,  but  its  Being-for-Self  is  faced  by  its  presupposition 
of  a  world  which  is  in  itself,  whose  indifferent  otherness,  however, 
has  the  significance  only  of  something  unessential  for  this  self- 
certainty.  In  so  far  the  Notion  is  the  impulse  to  transcend  this 
otherness  and  to  contemplate  self-identity  in  contemplating 
the  Object.  In  so  far  as  this  intro-Reflection  is  transcended 
opposition  and  posited  individuality  which  has  been  effected 
for  the  subject  (and  which  at  first  appears  as  presupposed 
Being-in-Self),  it  is  the  self-identity  of  the  form,  which  has  been 
constructed  out  of  the  opposition, — an  identity  which  thereby 
is  determined  as  indifferent  to  the  form  in  its  distinctness,  and 
is  content. 

*  This  iiftpulse  consequently  is  impulse  of  truth  in  so  far  as 
truth  lies  in  Cognition — of  truth  therefore  as  theoretic  Idea  in 
its  proper  sense. — Objective  truth  is  the  Idea  itself  as  the  reality 
which  corresponds  to  the  Notion,  and  in  so  far  an  object  may 
or  may  not  have  truth  in  it;  but  the  more  definite  meaning 
of  truth  is  this,  that  it  is  for  or  in  the  subjective  Notion,  or,  in 
knowledge.  Truth  is  the  relation  of  the  Notion-judgment,  which 
proved  to  be  the  formal  judgment  of  truth;  for  in  it  the  pre- 
dicate is  not  only  the  objectivity  of  the  Notion,  but  is  also  the 
relating  comparison  of  the  Notion  of  the  fact  and  its  actuality. — 
This  realization  of  the  Notion  is  theoretic  in  so  far  as  the 
Notion,  as  form,  still  has  the  determination  of  something  sub- 
jective, or  the  determination,  for  the  subject,  of  belonging  to 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

it.  Cognition  is  the  Idea  as  End  or  as  subjective,  and  so  the 
negation  of  the  world  which  is  presupposed  as  being  in  itself 
is  first  negation;  the  conclusion,  where  the  objective  is  posited 
as  subjective,  at  first  therefore  signifies  only  that  that  which 
is  in  itself  is  posited  only  as  subjective  or  is  only  posited  in  the 
Notion-determination,  but,  in  consequence,  is  not  there  in  and 
for  itself.  In  so  far  the  conclusion  reaches  merely  a  neutral 
unity  or  a  synthesis,  that  is,  a  unity  of  terms  which  originally 
are  separate  and  are  connected  in  this  manner  only  externally. 
— Consequently,  when  in  this  Cognition  the  Notion  posits  the 
Object  as  being  its  own,  the  Idea  at  first  merely  gives  itself 
a  content  whose  foundation  is  given,  and  in  which  only  the  form 
of  externality  has  been  transcended.  In  so  far  this  Cognition 
retains  itsjinitude  in  its  Realized  End;  in  its  End  it  has,  at  the 
same  time,  not  reached  its  End,  and  in  its  truth  has  not  yet 
arrived  at  truth.  For  in  so  far  as  the  content  in  the  result  is  still 
determined  as  given,  the  presupposed  Being-in-Self  standing 
against  the  Notion  is  not  transcended;  equally  therefore  the 
unity  of  Notion  and  reality,  or  truth,  is  not  contained  in  it. — 
Strangely  enough  this  side  of  finitude  has  latterly  been  seized 
upon  and  has  been  taken  to  be  the  absolute  relation  of  Cog- 
nition— as  though  the  finite  as  such  was  to  be  the  absolute ! 
At  this  point  of  view  the  Object  is  assigned  the  property  of 
being  an  unknown  Thing-in-itself  behind  all  knowledge,  which 
property,  together  with  truth,  is  considered  an  absolute  Beyond 
for  Cognition.  The  determinations  of  thought  in  general,  the 
categories  and  the  determinations  of  reflection  as  well  as  the 
formal  Notion  and  its  moments,  are  here  given  the  posith&i 
not  that  they  are  finite  determinations  in  and  for  themselves, 
but  that  they  are  so  in  the  sense  that  they  are  subjective  as 
against  that  empty  Thinghood-in-itself :  the  error  of  taking  this 
relation  of  the  untruth  of  Cognition  as  valid  has  become  the 
universal  opinion  of  modern  times. 

It  is  immediately  obvious  from  this  determination  of  finite 
Cognition  that  it  is  a  contradiction  which  cancels  itself— the 
contradiction  of  a  truth  which  at  the  same  time  is  not  to  be 
truth,  of  cogrfizing  that  which  is  while  it  does  not  cognize  the 
Thing-in-itself.  In  the  collapse  of  this  contradiction  its  content, 
namely  subjective  Cognition  and  the  Thing-in-itself,  collapses, 
that  is,  proves  itself  to  be  untrue.  But  Cognition  must  by  its 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  427 

own  process  resolve  its  finitude  and  therefore  its  contradiction. 
The  contemplation  to  which  we  subject  it  is  an  external 
reflection ;  but  Cognition  is  itself  the  Notion  which  is  its  own 
End  and  accordingly  is  realized  in  its  realization,  and  in  this 
realization  transcends  its  subjectivity  and  the  presupposed 
Being-in-Self. — Cognition  must  therefore  be  considered  by  itself 
in  its  positive  activity.  This  Idea,  as  was  shown,  is  the  impulse 
of  the  Notion  to  realize  itself for  itself ";  consequently  its  activity 
is  to  determine  the  Object  and  in  this  process  to  relate  itself 
in  the  Object  identically  to  itself.  The  Object  is  just  simply 
the  determinable,  and  in  the  Idea  it  has  the  essential  side  that 
it  is  not  opposed  in  and  for  itself  to  the  Notion.  This  Cognition 
still  is  finite  and  not  speculative,  and  therefore  the  presupposed 
objectivity  has  not  yet  for  it  the  form  of  being  simply  in  itself 
the  Notion,  containing  nothing  particular  for  itself  as  against 
the  Notion.  But  now  that  objectivity  is  counted  as  a  Beyond 
which  is  in  itself,  the  determination  of  being  determinable  by 
the  Notion  is  essential  in  it — for  this  reason,  because  the  Idea 
is  the  Notion  which  is  for  itself  and  that  which  is  utterly  infinite 
in  itself,  wherein  the  Object  is  transcended  in  itself  and  the  End 
now  onty  is  to  transcend  it  for  itself.  Consequently,  although  the 
Object  is  presupposed  by  the  Idea  of  Cognition  as  being  in 
itself,  yet  it  is  so  essentially  in  this  relation,  that,  being  certain 
of  itself  and  of  the  nullity  of  this  opposition,  the  Idea  is  to  reach 
the  realization  of  its  Notion  in  the  Object. 

In  the  syllogism  in  which  now  the  subjective  Idea  combines 
with  objectivity,  the  first  premiss  is  that  same  form  of  imme- 
(Mte  seizftre  and  relation  of  the  Notion  to  the  Object  that  we 
saw  in  the  End-relation.  The  determining  activity  of  the  Notion 
upon  the  Object  is  an  immediate  communication ;  it  spreads 
itself  upon  the  Object  unresisted.  Here  the  Notion  remains 
in  its  pure  self-identity ;  but  this  its  immediate  intro-Reflection 
equally  has  the  determination  of  objective  immediacy;  that 
which  for  it  is  its  own  determination  is  equally  a  Being,  for  it 
is  the  first  negation  of  the  presupposition.  The  posited  deter- 
mination consequently  counts  equally  as  a  presupposition  which 
is  merely  found  or  as  the  taking  up  of  something  which  is  given, 
wherein  the  activity  of  the  Notion  itself  is  rather  said  to  consist 
in  this,  that  it  is  negative  as  against  itself,  restraining  itself  in 
face  of  the  given  and  making  itself  passive,  so  that  the  given 


428  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

may  be  able  to  show  itself  as  it  is  in  itself  and  not  as  determined 
by  the  subject. 

In  this  premiss  therefore  this  Cognition  does  not  at  all  appear 
as  an  application  of  logical  determinations :  it  merely  accepts 
and  apprehends  them  as  found,  and  its  activity  appears  as 
restricted  to  the  removal  of  a  subjective  obstacle  or  external 
husk  from  the  object.  This  is  Analytic  Cognition. 


(a)  ANALYTIC  COGNITION 

It  is  sometimes  stated  that  the  difference  between  Analytic 
and  Synthetic  Cognition  is  that  the  one  proceeds  from  known 
to  unknown,  while  the  other  proceeds  from  unknown  to  known. 
But  if  this  distinction  is  more  closely  considered,  it  will  be 
found  difficult  to  discover  in  it  any  definite  thought,  much  less 
a  Notion.  It  may  be  said  that  Cognition  altogether  begins  with 
the  realm  of  the  unknown,  since  one  does  not  become  acquainted 
with  what  is  known  already.  And  conversely  Cognition  begins 
also  with  the  known.  This  is  a  tautology; — that  with  which  it 
begins  (and  which  therefore  it  actually  cognizes)  is,  for  that 
very  reason,  known ;  that  which  is  not  yet,  and  still  remains  to 
be,  cognized,  is  still  unknown.  In  so  far  it  must  be  said  that 
Cognition,  once  it  has  begun,  always  proceeds  from  known  to 
unknown. 

The  distinguishing  part  of  Analytic  Cognition  has  already 
determined  itself  to  the  effect  that,  since  it  is  the  first  premiss 
of  the  whole  syllogism,  mediation  does  not  yet  belong4  to  it,  but 
that  it  is  the  immediate  communication  of  the  Notion,  not  yet 
containing  otherness:  here  the  activity  resigns  its  negativity. 
But  this  immediacy  of  the  relation  is  itself  mediation,  since 
it  is  the  negative  relation  of  the  Notion  to  the  Object, 
which  relation  however  annuls  itself  and  thereby  makes  itself 
simple  and  identical.  This  intro-Reflection  is  merely  subjective, 
because  in  its  mediation  the  distinction  is  present  only  as  pre- 
supposed and  being  in  itself,  as  differentiation  of  the  Object 
within  itself. '"Consequently  the  determination  which  results 
from  this  relation  is  the  form  of  simple  identity  or  abstract 
universality.  Consequently  Analytic  Cognition  has  this  identity 
for  its  general  principle,  and  the  transition  into  other,  the 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION 

connexion  of  different  terms,  is  excluded  from  itself  and  from 
its  activity. 

If  now  Analytic  Cognition  is  further  considered,  its  beginning 
is  made  from  a  presupposed  (and  therefore  individual)  and 
concrete  object;  an  object  either  ready  for  sensuous  represen- 
tation or  else  a  problem — given  only  in  its  circumstances  and 
conditions,  but  not  yet  developed  out  of  these  by  itself  and 
presented  in  simple  independence.  Now  the  analysis  of  such 
an  object  cannot  consist  merely  in  its  dissolution  into  the  various 
ideas  which  may  be  contained  in  it ;  such  a  dissolution  and  its 
comprehension  are  a  business  which  does  not  belong  to  Cog- 
nition, but  would  merely  concern  a  closer  acquaintance,  a 
determination  within  the  sphere  of  sensuous  representation. 
Analysis  has  the  Notion  for  its  foundation,  and  therefore  has 
for  products  essentially  Notion-determinations — namely,  those 
which  are  immediately  contained  in  the  object.  It  has  resulted 
from  the  nature  of  the  Idea  of  Cognition  that  the  activity  of 
the  subjective  Notion  from  the  one  side  is  to  be  regarded  merely 
as  the  development  of  what  already  is  in  the  Object,  since  the 
Object  itself  is  just  the  totality  of  the  Notion.  It  is  one-sided  to 
imagine  analysis  in  such  a  manner  as  though  nothing  were  in 
the  object  except  what  has  been  put  into  it;  and  it  is  equally 
one-sided  to  think  that  the  determinations  which  result  are 
simply  taken  out  of  it.  The  former  idea  is  of  course  the  thesis 
of  subjective  idealism,  which  in  analysis  takes  the  activity  of 
Cognition  only  as  a  one-sided  positing,  beyond  which  the 
Thing-in-itself  remains  hidden ;  the  latter  idea  belongs  to  so- 
called  realism,  which  takes  the  subjective  Notion  as  an  empty  iden- 
tity that  absorbs  the  thought-determinations  from  without. — 
Analytic  Cognition,  or  the  transformation  of  the  given  material 
into  logical  determinations,  has  shown  itself  to  be  two  in  one — 
a  positing  which  equally  immediately  determines  itself  as  a 
presupposing ;  and  therefore,  because  of  the  latter,  the  logical 
element  can  appear  as  something  ready  in  the  object,  and, 
because  of  the  former,  as  the  product  of  a  merely  subjective 
activity.  But  the  two  moments  cannot  be  separated;  in  its 
abstract  form,  into  which  analysis  elaborates  it,* the  logical  is 
certainly  present  only  in  Cognition;  while  conversely  it  is  not 
only  something  posited  but  also  something  which  is  in  itself. 

Now  in  so  far  as  Analytic  Cognition  is  the  transformation 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

which  has  just  been  pointed  out,  it  passes  through  no  further 
intermediate  terms :  the  determination  in  so  far  is  immediate 
and  has  this  meaning,  that  it  is  peculiar  to  the  object  and  in 
kself  belongs  to  it :  it  is  therefore  taken  up  out  of  it  without 
subjective  mediation. — But  further,  Cognition  is  to  be  a  pro- 
gress, or  a  development  of  distinctions.  Now  according  to  its 
present  determination  it  is  Notion-less  and  undialectical ;  the 
distinction  which  it  has  is  therefore  only  given,  and  its  progress 
takes  place  solely  along  the  determinations  of  the  material.  It 
appears  to  have  an  immanent  progress  only  in  so  far  as  the 
derivative  thought-determinations  can  be  analysed  afresh  in 
their  quality  as  concrete :  the  highest  and  final  stage  of  this 
process  of  analysis  is  the  abstract  highest  essence  or  abstract 
subjective  identity — and,  opposed  to  it,  variety.  But  this  pro- 
gress is  nothing  further  than  the  repetition  of  the  original 
activity  of  analysis,  namely,  the  iterated  determination  as  con- 
crete of  the  term  which  has  already  been  taken  up  into  the 
abstract  Notion-form ;  which  action  is  followed  by  its  analysis, 
after  which  the  resultant  abstract  is  determined  anew  as  con- 
crete, and  so  forth. — The  thought-determinations  appear,  how- 
ever, to  contain  a  transition  in  themselves  also.  If  the  object 
has  been  determined  as  whole,  then  it  is  true  that  a  progress 
has  been  made  from  that  to  the  other  determination,  the  part, 
and  from  the  cause  to  the  other  determination  of  effect,  and 
so  on.  But  here  this  is  no  progress,  in  so  far  as  whole  and  parts, 
and  cause  and  effect,  are  relations — relations  which  for  this 
kind  of  formal  Cognition  are  ready  in  such  a  manner  that  one 
determination  is  found  in  an  essential  connexion  with  the  other. 
The  object  which  has  been  determined  as  cause  or  as  part  is, 
by  this  fact,  determined  already  by  the  whole  of  the  relation, 
and  by  both  sides  of  it.  Although  in  itself  it  may  be  synthetic, 
still  this  connexion,  for  Analytic  Cognition,  is  given  as  much 
as  any  other  connexion  of  its  material,  and  therefore  does  not 
belong  to  its  peculiar  business.  Whether  such  a  connexion  is 
otherwise  determined  as  a  priori  or  a  posteriori  is  here  indifferent 
in  so  far  as  it  is  taken  ^  found,  or,  as  it  has  been  called,  as  a 
fact  of  consciousness — namely,  the  fact  that  the  determination 
"part"  is  connected  with  the  determination  "whole,"  and  so 
on.  When  Kant  advances  his  profound  observation  of  synthetic 
principles  a  priori,  and  recognizes  that  their  root  is  the  unity  of 


THE   IDEA  OF  COGNITION  411 

self-consciousness  and  therefore  the  self-identity  of  the  Notion, 
he  nevertheless  takes  up  the  determinate  connexion  (the  relation- 
notions  and  the  synthetic  principles  themselves)  from  formal 
logic  as  given.  They  ought  to  have  been  deduced  by  the  ex- 
position of  the  transition  of  this  simple  unity  of  self-conscious- 
ness into  these  its  determinations  and  distinctions ;  but  Kant 
spared  himself  the  trouble  of  demonstrating  this  veritably 
synthetic  progress — the  self-producing  Notion. 

Arithmetic  and  the  more  general  sciences  of  discrete  mag- 
nitude are  of  course  by  preference  called  analytic  science,  and 
analysis.  And  indeed  their  method  of  cognition  is  in  the  most 
immanent  manner  analytic ;  and  the  foundation  of  this  fact 
must  briefly  be  considered. — Elsewhere  Analytic  Cognition 
begins  with  a  concrete  material  which  contains  a  contingent 
manifold ;  from  this  every  distinction  of  content  and  progress 
to  further  content  depends.  On  the  other  hand,  arithmetical 
and  algebraic  material  has  already  been  made  something  wholly 
abstract  and  indeterminate,  where  every  peculiarity  of  relation 
has  been  expunged,  so  that  every  determination  and  connexion 
is  external.  Such  is  the  principle  of  discrete  magnitude,  or 
the  One.  This  relationless  and  atomic  unit  can  be  increased 
to  a  plurality  and  can  be  determined  externally  and  unified 
into  an  amount;  this  multiplication  and  limitation  are  an 
empty  progress  and  determining,  which  do  not  move  beyond 
the  same  principle  of  the  abstract  One.  The  composition  and 
separation  of  numbers  further  depends  wholly  upon  the  positing 
activity  of  the  cognizing  being.  The  general  category  within 
Which  these  determinations  are  made  is  magnitude,  which  is 
determinateness  made  indifferent,  so  that  the  object  has  no 
determinateness  which  is  immanent  in  it  and  therefore  given 
to  Cognition.  Now  in  so  far  as  Cognition  has  given  itself  a 
contingent  variety  of  numbers,  these  merely  constitute  material 
for  a  further  treatment  and  for  manifold  relations.  Such  relations 
and  their  discovery  and  treatment  do  not  indeed  appear  as 
something  immanent  in  Analytic  Cognition — they  appear  as 
contingent  and  given;  and  indeed  these  relations  and  the 
relative  operations  are  generally  set  forth  in  a 'series  and  as 
different,  without  intimation  of  any  inner  connexion.  However, 
it  is  easy  to  recognize  a  guiding  principle :  it  is  the  immanent 
element  of  analytic  identity  which  appears  as  equality  in 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

variety;  and  progress  is  the  reduction  of  the  unequal  to  an  ever 
greater  equality.  To  give  an  example  in  the  first  elements, 
addition  is  the  comprehension  of  quite  contingently  unequal 
numbers,  while  multiplication  comprehends  equal  numbers; 
the  relation  of  equality  of  amount  and  unit  appears  later,  and, 
with  it,  the  power-relation. 

Now  the  determinateness  of  the  object  and  of  the  relations  is 
a  posited  determinateness,  and  therefore  the  further  operation 
with  them  is  wholly  analytical;  whence  analytic  science  has 
problems  but  no  theorems.  The  analytic  theorem  contains  the 
problem  as  already  solved  for  itself;  and  the  wholly  external 
distinction  between  the  two  sides  which  it  equates  is  so  un- 
essential that  such  a  theorem  would  appear  as  a  trivial  identity. 
Kant  indeed  declared  the  proposition  5  +  7  =  12  to  be  syn- 
thetic because  the  same  thing  is  represented  on  one  side  in  the 
form  of  a  plurality  (5  and  7)  and  on  the  other  in  the  form  of 
a  one  (12).  But  unless  analytic  is  to  mean  the  quite  abstractly 
identical  and  tautological  statement  12  =  12,  and  if  there  is 
to  be  any  progress  in  it  at  all,  then  there  must  be  some  dis- 
tinction,— a  distinction,  however,  which  is  founded  on  no 
quality,  nor  determinateness  of  reflection,  nor  (much  less)  of 
Notion.  5  +  7,  and  12,  are  entirely  the  same  content;  the 
former  side  also  expresses  the  demand  that  5  and  7  are  to  be 
comprehended  into  one  expression,  that  is,  that,  five  being  the 
end,  arbitrarily  reached,  of  a  series  which  might  equally  have 
been  prolonged,  so  now  the  process  of  enumeration  is  to  be 
continued,  with  the  provision  that  the  ones  which  are  to  be 
added  are  to  number  seven.  Thus  12  is  the  result  of  5  and  7 
and  of  an  operation  which  is  already  posited  according  to  its 
nature  as  a  wholly  external  and  thoughtless  activity,  an  activity 
which  may  for  that  reason  be  left  to  a  machine.  There  is  here 
not  the  least  transition  to  an  Other ;  it  is  a  mere  continuation, 
that  is,  repetition,  of  the  same  operation  that  created  5  and  7. 

If  such  a  proposition  were  synthetic  it  would  demand  a  proof; 
and  such  a  proof  would  consist  merely  in  the  operation  of 
counting  on  from  5  with  the  determination  of  7,  and  in  the 
recognition  that  the  result  thus  reached  agrees  with  what 
otherwise  is  known  as  12  and  in  fact  is  nothing  else  than  this 
particular  process  of  counting.  Consequently,  in  place  of  the 
form  of  theorem  the  form  of  problem  is  at  once  chosen — the 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  433 

demand  for  the  operation,  that  is,  the  enunciation  of  the  one 
side  only  of  the  equation,  which  would  constitute  the  theorem 
and  whose  other  side  is  now  to  be  found.  The  problem  includes 
the  content  and  indicates  the  particular  operation  which  is  to 
be  undertaken  with  it.  The  operation  is  not  restricted  by  any 
stubbo'rn  material  having  specific  relations  for  properties,  but 
is  an  external  subjective  activity  whose  determinations  are 
accepted  with  indifference  by  the  material  in  which  they  are 
posited.  The  only  distinction  between  the  conditions  set  in  the 
problem  and  the  result  in  the  solution  is  this,  that  in  the  latter 
these  unions  and  separations  have  actually  taken  place  in  the 
required  manner  as  they  were  indicated  in  the  former. 

The  application  of  the  form  of  geometrical  method  relating 
to  synthetic  propositions,  and  the  addition  of  a  proof  to  the 
solution  of  the  problem,  is  here  therefore  an  entirely  superfluous 
framework.  The  proof  can  only  express  the  tautology  that  the 
solution  is  correct  because  the  operation  has  been  concluded 
as  was  prescribed.  The  problem  being  to  add  together  certain 
numbers,  the  solution  is  to  add  them ;  the  proof  shows  that  the 
solution  is  correct  because  the  problem  was  to  add  and  addition 
has  taken  place.  If  the  problem  contains  more  composite  deter- 
mination!? and  operations  (for  example  to  multiply  decimal 
numbers),  and  the  solution  indicates  merely  the  mechanical 
procedure,  then  a  proof  does  become  necessary ;  but  the  proof 
can  be  nothing  else  but  the  analysis  of  these  determinations 
and  of  the  operation  whence  the  solution  emerges  by  itself. 
This  separation  of  the  solution  as  a  mechanical  procedure  and 
tfee  proof  2^  a  recollection  of  the  nature  of  the  object  which  was 
to  be  treated  and  of  the  operation  itself,  leads  to  the  loss  of  the 
advantage  of  the  analytic  problem,  which  is  that  the  con- 
struction can  be  derived  immediately  from  the  problem  and 
therefore  can  be  represented  as  reasonable  in  and  for  itself; 
while  the  other  way  expressly  affects  the  construction  with  a 
flaw  which  is  peculiar  to  the  synthetic  method. — In  the  higher 
analysis,  where,  with  the  power-relation,  relations  of  discrete 
magnitude  appear  which  are  chiefly  qualitative  and  depend 
on  notion-determinatenesses,  the  problems  and  theorems  cer- 
tainly contain  synthetic  determinations;  there  other  deter- 
minations and  relations  must  be  taken  as  intermediate  terms, 
than  are  indicated  immediately  in  the  problem  or  theorem. 

VOL.    II.  EE 


434  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

But  even  these  auxiliary  determinations  must  be  of  such  a  kind 
that  they  are  founded  upon  the  consideration  and  development 
of  one  side  of  the  problem  or  theorem ;  the  synthetic  appearance 
arises  solely  from  the  fact  that  the  problem  or  theorem  does 
not  itself  announce  this  side. — For  example,  the  problem  of 
finding  the  sum  of  the  powers  of  the  roots  of  an  equation  is 
solved  by  the  consideration  and  subsequent  connexion  of  the 
functions  which  are  the  coefficients  of  the  equation  of  the  roots. 
The  determination  of  the  functions  of  the  coefficients  and  their 
connexion,  which  here  is  employed,  is  not  already  expressed 
in  the  problem ;  but  for  the  rest  the  development  itself  is  wholly 
analytical.  Another  synthetic  solution  is  the  solution  of  the 
equation  xm~l  =  o  by  the  help  of  the  sine,  and  also  the  imma- 
nent algebraic  solution  through  the  consideration  of  the  resi- 
duum of  xm~*  —  i  divided  by  m  and  of  the  so-called  primitive 
roots ; — this  was  of  course  discovered  by  Gauss,  and  is  one  of 
the  most  important  modern  extensions  of  analysis.  And  these 
solutions  are  synthetic  because  the  determinations  employed 
— the  sine,  or  the  consideration  of  the  residua — are  not  deter- 
minations of  the  problem  itself. 

The  nature  of  the  analysis  which  considers  the  so-called 
infinitesimal  differences  of  variable  magnitudes — the  differential 
and  integral  calculus — was  treated  at  greater  length  in  the  first 
part  of  this  Logic.  It  was  shown  there  that  the  foundation  of 
this  is  a  qualitative  determination  of  magnitude  which  can  be 
apprehended  through  the  Notion  alone.  The  transition  to  this 
from  magnitude  as  such  is  no  longer  analytic ;  whence  to  this 
day  mathematics  has  failed  in  justifying  these  operations,  which 
are  based  upon  this  transition,  through  themselves,  that  is,  in 
a  mathematical  manner:  for  the  transition  is  not  of  mathe- 
matical nature.  Leibniz  is  given  the  credit  of  having  transformed 
the  arithmetic  of  the  infinitesimal  differences  into  a  calculus ; 
but  (as  was  shown  in  the  same  place)  he  made  the  transition 
in  the  most  inadequate  manner,  a  manner  both  thoroughly 
notionless  and  unmathematical :  once,  however,  the  transition 
is  presupposed — and  in  the  present  state  of  the  science  it  is  no 
more  than  a1 'presupposition — the  further  course  is  nothing  but 
a  series  of  ordinary  operations. 

It  was  mentioned  that  analysis  becomes  synthetic  when  it 
reaches  determinations  which  are  no  longer  posited  by  the 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  4314 

problems  themselves.  But  the  general  transition  from  Analytic 
to  Synthetic  Cognition  is  implied  in  the  necessary  transition 
from  the  form  of  immediacy  to  mediation,  from  abstract 
identity  to  distinction.  The  analytic  function  halts  in  its  activity 
at  the  determinations  in  general  in  so  far  as  they  are  self- 
related  ;  but  by  reason  of  their  determinateness  they  have  the 
essential  property  of  relating  themselves  to  an  Other.  It  has 
already  been  mentioned  that,  although  Analytic  Cognition 
proceeds  upon  relations  which  are  not  a  material  given  exter- 
nally, but  thought-determinations,  it  still  remains  analytic, 
since  for  it  these  relations  too  are  given  relations.  But  the  abstract 
identity  which  is  the  peculiar  object  of  this  Cognition,  is  essen- 
tially identity  of  distincts ;  hence  this  identity  even  as  such  must 
belong  to  this  Cognition;  while  the  connexion  must  both  be 
posited  by  and  become  identical  with  the  subjective  Notion. 

(b)  SYNTHETIC  COGNITION 

Analytic  Cognition  is  the  first  premiss  of  the  whole  syllogism, 
— the  immediate  relation  of  the  Notion  to  the  Object.  Con- 
sequently identity  is  the  determination  which  it  recognizes  as  its 
own :  it  is'only  the  apprehension  of  what  is.  Synthetic  Cognition 
endeavours  to  form  a  Notion  of  what  is,  that  is,  to  seize  the 
multiplicity  of  determinations  in  their  unity.  Hence  it  is  the 
second  premiss  of  the  syllogism  in  which  terms  various  as  such 
are  related.  Its  goal  is  therefore  necessity  in  general. — The  terms 
which  are  connected  are  partly  related,  and  then,  although 
related,  they  are  also  independent  and  indifferent  to  one  an- 
other; and  partly  they  are  knit  together  in  the  Notion,  which 
is  their  simple  but  determinate  unity.  Now  in  so  far  as  Synthetic 
Cognition  passes  over  from  abstract  identity  to  relation,  or  from 
Being  to  Reflection,  it  is  not  the  absolute  Reflection  of  the 
Notion  which  the  Notion  cognizes  in  its  object:  the  reality 
which  it  gives  itself  is  the  next  stage,  namely  the  identity 
(already  indicated)  of  various  terms  as  such,  which  consequently 
is  also  still  inner  (and  only  necessity)  and  not  subjective  and 
existing  for  itself,  and  is  not  yet,  therefore,  the  Nation  as  such. 
Consequently,  although  Synthetic  Cognition  has  the  Notion- 
determinations  for  its  content,  and  the  Object  is  posited  in 
these,  yet  they  are  merely  related  to  one  another  or  are  in 


436  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

immediate  unity,  which  unity  for  this  very  reason  is  not  that  by 
which  the  Notion  is  as  Subject. 

This  constitutes  the  finitude  of  this  Cognition :  this  real  side 
of  the  Idea  in  it  still  possesses  identity  as  inner ;  and  therefore 
the  determinations  of  the  latter  are  still  external  for  themselves. 
It  is  not  as  subjectivity,  and  therefore  that  peculiar  entity 'which 
the  Notion  has  in  its  object  still  lacks  individuality;  and  it  is 
no  longer  the  abstract  but  the  determinate  form  (that  is,  the 
particular  element  of  the  Notion)  which  corresponds  to  it  in  the 
Object,  while  the  individual  part  of  it  is  still  a  given  content. 
Consequently,  although  this  Cognition  transforms  the  objective 
world  into  Notions,  it  gives  it  only  a  form  according  to  the 
Notion-determinations  and  must  discover  the  Object  in  its 
individuality  or  determinate  determinateness :  it  is  not  yet 
itself  determinant.  Similarly  it  finds  propositions  and  laws  and 
demonstrates  their  necessity,  but  not  as  a  necessity  of  the  case 
in  and  for  itself  (that  is,  out  of  the  Notion),  but  of  Cognition 
which  progresses  along  given  determinations  (the  distinctions 
of  appearance)  and  cognizes  for  itself  the  proposition  as  unity 
and  relation,  or  cognizes  out  of  appearance  the  ground  of 
appearance. 

The  further  moments  of  Synthetic  Cognition  must  now  be 
considered. 


i.  DEFINITION 

First  of  all  the  objectivity  (which  still  is  given)  is  transformed 
into  the  simple  and  first  form,  that  is,  into  the  farm  of  the 
Notion.  Consequently  the  moments  of  this  apprehension  are 
just  the  moments  of  the  Notion,  namely,  universality,  par- 
ticularity, and  individuality. — The  individual  is  the  Object 
itself  as  immediate  image,  or  that  which  is  to  be  defined.  The 
universal  aspect  of  its  Object  has  turned  out  in  the  determina- 
tion of  the  objective  judgment  or  the  Judgment  of  Necessity 
to  be  the  Kind  and  further  to  be  the  next  term,  namely,  the 
universal  plus  that  determinateness  which  at  the  same  time 
is  the  principle  for  the  distinction  of  the  particular.  This  dis- 
tinction exists  in  the  object  as  specific  difference  which  makes 
it  a  certain  species  and  is  the  basis  of  its  disjunction  as  against 
the  other  species. 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  437 

In  this  manner  Definition  leads  back  the  object  to  its  Notion, 
and  in  doing  so  strips  off  those  of  its  externals  which  are 
requisite  for  existence;  it  abstracts  from  that  which  in  its 
realization  is  added  to  the  Notion,  by  means  of  which  it  emerges 
first  into  the  Idea  and  secondly  into  external  existence.  Descrip- 
tion is 'for  imagination,  and  absorbs  this  further  content  which 
belongs  to  reality.  But  Definition  reduces  this  wealth  of  the 
manifold  determinations  of  intuited  existence  to  the  simplest 
moments ;  it  is  implied  in  the  Notion  what  is  the  form  of  these 
simple  elements  and  how  they  are  determined  relatively  to  one 
another.  Thus,  as  has  been  indicated,  the  object  is  taken  as 
universal  which  at  the  same  time  is  essentially  determinate. 
The  object  itself  is  the  third  term,  the  individual,  in  which 
genus  and  particularization  are  posited  in  one :  here  something 
immediate  is  posited,  which  is  external  to  the  Notion,  since 
the  latter  is  not  yet  self-determining. 

In  these  determinations — the  form-distinction  of  Definition — 
the  Notion  finds  itself  and  has  the  reality  which  corresponds 
to  it.  But  the  intro-Reflection  of  the  Notion-moments,  or 
individuality,  is  not  yet  contained  in  this  reality;  the  Object, 
accordingly,  in  so  far  as  it  lies  in  Cognition,  is  not  yet  determined 
as  subjective ;  and  hence,  relatively  to  it,  Cognition  is  subjective 
and  has  an  external  beginning ;  or  again  it  is  subjective  because 
it  has  an  external  beginning  in  the  individual.  Consequently 
the  content  of  the  Notion  is  given  and  contingent.  Hence  the 
concrete  Notion  is  itself  contingent,  in  a  dual  aspect:  (i)  in  its 
content  generally,  and  (2)  according  to  the  content-determina- 
tions which  are  selected  for  the  Notion  from  the  manifold 
qualities  which  the  object  has  in  external  existence,  and  are 
made  to  constitute  its  moments. 

The  latter  respect  demands  further  consideration.  Individu- 
ality is  determinedness  in  and  for  itself,  and  therefore  lies 
outside  the  peculiar  Notion-determination  of  Synthetic  Cog- 
nition. Consequently  there  is  no  principle  to  determine  which 
sides  of  the  object  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  belonging  to  its 
Notion-determination  and  which  as  belonging  merely  to  ex- 
ternal reality.  This  constitutes  a  difficulty  in  Definitions  which 
cannot  be  removed  for  this  kind  of  Cognition.  A  distinction 
however  must  here  be  made. — Firstly,  it  is  easy  to  discover  the 
definition  of  products  of  self-conscious  aim  at  an  End ;  for  the 


4.^8  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

End  which  they  are  to  serve  is  a  determination  which  is  created 
out  of  subjective  resolution  and  constitutes  that  essential  par- 
ticularization  or  form  of  the  existing  which  here  alone  is 
important.  The  further  nature  of  ito  material  and  other  external 
properties  is  contained  in  its  determination  in  so  far  as  they 
correspond  to  the  End ;  and  the  others  are  unessential. 

Secondly,  geometrical  objects  are  abstract  spatial  determina- 
tions; the  fundamental  abstraction  (so-called  absolute  space) 
has  lost  all  further  concrete  determinations,  and  now  has  only 
such  shapes  and  figurations  as  are  posited  in  it :  they  are  there- 
fore essentially  only  what  they  ought  to  be;  their  Notion- 
determination,  and,  more  precisely,  the  specific  difference,  has 
its  simple  unimpeded  reality  in  them;  in  so  far  they  are  the 
same  as  the  products  of  external  adequacy  to  End,  and  they 
also  agree  with  arithmetical  objects  in  this  respect;  for  in  these 
too  only  that  determination  which  was  posited  in  them  is 
fundamental. — It  is  true  that  space  has  further  determinations ; 
it  has  three  dimensions,  and  continuity  and  divisibility,  which 
are  not  posited  in  it  by  the  external  determination.  But  these 
belong  to  the  material  which  is  absorbed  and  are  immediate 
presuppositions ;  and  synthetic  relations  and  laws  are  produced 
only  by  the  connexion  and  complication  of  these  subjective 
determinations  with  this  peculiar  nature  of  the  soil  into  which 
they  were  introduced. — With  numerical  determinations  the 
simple  principle  of  the  unit  is  the  foundation,  and  therefore 
the  connexion  and  further  determination  are  entirely  posited ; 
whereas  the  determinations  in  space,  which,  for  itself,  is  a 
continuous  juxtaposition,  spread  themselves  still  fufther,  and 
have  a  reality  different  from  their  Notion  but  no  longer  be- 
longing to  the  immediate  Definition. 

But,  thirdly,  the  Definition  of  concrete  objects  of  nature  as 
well  as  of  spirit  is  a  wholly  different  matter.  For  sensuous 
representation  such  objects  are  things  of  many  properties.  And 
it  is  here  important  to  apprehend  what  is  their  nearest  genus, 
and  then  what  is  their  specific  difference.  It  must  consequently 
be  determined  which  of  the  many  properties  belongs  to  the 
object  as  genii's  and  which  as  species,  and  further  which  of  these 
properties  is  the  essential  one;  and,  for  the  latter  end,  it  is 
necessary  to  understand  their  inter-connexion  and  whether  the 
positing  of  one  implies  that  of  another.  But  no  criterion  is  given 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  439 

for  this  end  except  their  existence  itself. — The  essentiality  of 
a  property  for  Definition  (where  it  is  to  be  posited  as  simple 
undeveloped  determinateness)  is  its  universality.  But  in  existence 
this  is  merely  empirical, — a  temporal  universality,  where  the 
property  is  permanent  while  the  others  show  themselves  tran- 
sitory in  the  persistence  of  the  whole, — or  a  universality  which 
emerges  from  the  comparison  with  other  concrete  wholes  and 
in  so  far  does  not  go  further  than  community.  Now  if  com- 
parison presents  the  total  habitus,  as  it  offers  itself  empirically, 
as  common  foundation,  then  it  is  the  office  of  reflection  to 
collect  it  into  a  simple  thought-determination  and  to  apprehend 
the  simple  character  of  such  a  totality.  The  attestation,  how- 
ever, that  a  thought-determination  or  any  one  of  the  immediate 
properties  constitutes  the  simple  and  determinate  essence  of 
the  object,  can  only  consist  in  a  derivation  of  such  a  deter- 
mination from  the  concrete  quality.  But  this  would  require  an 
analysis  which  transforms  into  thoughts  the  immediate  qualities 
and  reduces  their  concrete  element  to  something  simple;  an 
analysis  which  is  higher  than  that  which  has  just  been  con- 
sidered, because  it  ought  not  to  abstract  but  ought  to  preserve 
in  the  universal  the  determinate  part  of  the  concrete,  uniting 
it  and  showing  it  as  dependent  upon  the  simple  thought- 
determination. 

But  the  relations  of  the  manifold  determinations  of  immediate 
existence  to  the  simple  Notion  would  be  Propositions  requiring 
proof.  But  Definition  is  the  first  and,  as  yet,  undeveloped 
Notion,  and  therefore,  when  it  is  required  to  apprehend  the 
simple  defterminateness  of  the  object  (which  apprehension  is 
to  be  immediate),  it  can  use  only  one  of  its  immediate  so-called 
properties — a  determination  of  sensible  existence  or  of  sensuous 
representation ;  its  individualization,  which  takes  place  through 
abstraction,  thus  constitutes  its  simplicity,  while  for  univer- 
sality and  essentiality  the  Notion  is  referred  to  empirical 
universality,  to  persistence  in  changed  circumstances,  and  to 
reflection,  which  looks  for  the  Notion-determination  in  external 
existence  and  in  sensuous  representation — where  precisely  it 
cannot  be  found. — Consequently  Definition  automatically  re- 
nounces proper  Notion-determinations,  which  would  essentially 
be  the  principles  of  the  objects,  and  is  satisfied  with  charac- 
teristics, that  is,  determinations  in  which  essentiality  is  indifferent 


SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

for  the  object  itself,  their  end  being  to  furnish  tokens  for 
external  reflection. — Such  an  individual  and  external  deter- 
minateness  is  so  inadequate  to  the  concrete  totality  and  to  the 
nature  of  its  Notion  that  it  cannot  be  selected  for  its  own  sake 
nor  taken  in  such  a  manner  that  a  concrete  whole  coulji  have 
its  true  expression  and  determination  in  it. — Blumenbach,1  for 
example,  observed  that  the  lobe  of  the  ear  is  absent  in  all  other 
animals,  whence,  according  to  the  ordinary  phrases  about 
common  and  distinguishing  characteristics,  it  might  be  used 
with  perfect  correctness  as  the  differentiating  mark  in  the 
definition  of  physical  man.  But  such  a  wholly  external  deter- 
mination immediately  shows  itself  to  be  utterly  inadequate  to 
the  idea  of  the  total  habitus  of  physical  man,  and  to  the  demand 
that  the  Notion-determination  is  to  be  something  essential.  It 
is  quite  contingent  whether  the  characteristics  admitted  into 
Definition  are  such  pure  makeshifts  -or  approach  more  closely 
to  the  nature  of  a  principle.  Also  their  externality  proclaims 
that  no  beginning  was  made  from  them  in  Notion-cognition; 
in  fact  some  dim  feeling,  some  indefinite  although  profounder 
sense,  some  premonition  of  the  essential,  preceded  the  discovery 
of  genera  in  Nature  and  in  Spirit ;  a  determinate  externality 
was  sought  only  subsequently  for  understanding. — In  existence 
the  Notion  has  entered  into  externality,  and  thus  is  unfolded 
into  its  distinctions ;  it  cannot  therefore  be  entirely  attached  to 
any  one  of  such  properties.  Properties,  as  the  externality  of  the 
thing,  are  external  to  themselves ;  and  in  the  sphere  of  Appear- 
ance (under  the  Thing  of  many  Properties)  it  was  shown  that 
for  this  reason  they  even  became  independent  matters;  anci 
Spirit,  considered  from  this  same  standpoint  of  appearance3 
becomes  an  aggregate  of  many  independent  forces.  The  in- 
dividual property  or  force,  even  when  it  is  posited  as  indifferent 
to  the  others,  ceases,  through  this  standpoint,  to  be  a  charac- 
terizing principle;  and  then  the  determinateness,  as  deter- 
minateness  of  the  Notion  in  general,  disappears. 

Further,  besides  the  differences  between  properties,  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  Notion  and  its  actualization  emerges  in 
concrete  things.  In  Nature  and  in  Spirit  the  Notion  has  an 
external  representation,  where  its  determinateness  shows  itself 

1  Blumenbach,  Johann  Friedrich,  1752-1840,  Professor  at  Jena;  a  pioneer  in 
comparative  anatomy  and  physiology. 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  44$ 

as  dependence  upon  the  external,  as  transitoriness  and  inade- 
quacy. Thus  although  the  actual  something  shows  in  itself  what 
it  ought  to  be,  it  can  equally  show  (according  to  the  negative 
Notion-judgment)  that  its  actuality  corresponds  to  this  Notion 
but  imperfectly,  or  that  it  is  bad.  Now  Definition  must  indicate 
the  determinateness  of  the  Notion  in  some  immediate  property; 
and  there  is  no  property  against  which  some  instance  could 
not  be  adduced  in  which  the  whole  habitus  allows  the  concrete 
entity  (which  is  to  be  defined)  to  be  known,  while  at  the  same 
time  the  property  which  is  taken  for  the  mark  of  the  entity 
appears  crude  or  stunted.  In  a  bad  plant  or  bad  animal  genus, 
a  contemptible  man  or  a  bad  State,  some  sides  of  existence  are 
defective  or  wholly  obliterated  which  otherwise  might  be  taken 
as  the  distinguishing  mark  and  essential  determinateness  for 
Definition  in  the  existence  of  such  a  concrete  entity.  But  a  bad 
plant  or  animal  (and  so  on)  still  remains  a  plant  or  animal.  If 
therefore  the  bad  is  to  be  admitted  into  the  Definition,  then  all 
those  properties  which  empirical  search  wished  to  regard  as 
essential,  elude  it  through  instances  of  malformation  which 
lack  those  properties.  Thus,  for  example,  the  brain  is  proved 
unessential  for  physical  man  by  the  occurrence  of  acephalous 
births,  and  the  protection  of  life  and  property  unessential  for 
the  State  by  instances  of  despotic  States  and  tyrannous  govern- 
ments.— If  the  Notion  is  asserted  against  the  instance,  and  the 
latter  is   styled   a  bad  specimen   as   measured   against  that 
standard,  then  the  Notion  ceases  to  be  certified  by  Appearance. 
But  the  independence  of  the  Notion  is  antithetical  to  the 
^caning  *of  Definition,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  immediate 
Notion,  and  so  can  take  up  its  determinations  for  objects  only 
out  of  the  immediacy  of  existence  and  can  justify  itself  only 
in  its  discoveries. — Whether  its  content  in  and  for  itself  is  truth 
or  contingency  is  a  question   that  lies  outside  the  sphere  of 
Definition;  but  formal  truth,  or  the  agreement  between  the 
Notion  which  is  subjectively  posited  in  the  Definition,  and 
some  object  which  is  actual  outside  it,  cannot  be  established, 
since  the  individual  object  may  also  be  bad. 

The  content  of  Definition  in  general  comes  from  immediate 
existence,  and,  because  it  is  immediate,  it  has  no  justification, 
and  the  question  after  its  necessity  is  set  aside  through  the 
origin;  for  this  question  pronounces  the  Notion  to  be  merely 


442  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

immediate,  and  therewith  renounces  the  attempt  to  conceive 
the  Notion  itself.  Consequently  Definition  represents  nothing 
but  the  form-determination  of  the  Notion  upon  a  given  con- 
tent, without  any  intro-Reflection  of  the  Notion,  that  is,  without 
its  Being-for-Self. 

But  immediacy  in  general  only  emerges  out  of  mediation, 
and  must  therefore  pass  over  into  the  latter.  In  other  words 
the  content-determinateness  which  Definition  contains  is  not 
only  immediate  because  it  is  determinateness,  but  it  is  mediated 
through  other  terms.  Hence  Definition  can  comprehend  its 
object  only  through  the  opposite  determination,  and  con- 
sequently must  pass  over  to  Classification. 

2.  CLASSIFICATION 

The  universal  must  particularize  itself:  in  so  far  the  universal 
implies  the  necessity  of  Classification.  But  Definition  itself 
already  begins  with  the  particular,  and  therefore  the  particular 
implies  its  necessary  transition  to  Classification,  since  for  itself 
the  particular  points  on  to  another  particular.  Conversely 
the  particular  distinguishes  itself  from  the  universal  in  that  the 
determinateness  is  held  fast  in  the  need  for  its  distinction  from 
that  which  is  its  other;  thus  the  universal  is  presupposed  for 
Classification.  Thus  the  process  is  this,  that  the  individual 
content  of  Definition  rises  through  particularity  to  the  extreme, 
or  universality;  but  the  latter  must  now  be  taken  as  objective 
foundation;  and,  from  this  foundation,  Classification  is  pre- 
sented as  disjunction  of  the  universal  as  prius.  * 

Hereby  a  transition  has  arisen  which  takes  place  from 
universal  to  particular  and  therefore  is  determined  through 
the  form  of  the  Notion.  By  itself  Definition  is  individual;  a 
plurality  of  definitions  belongs  to  a  plurality  of  objects.  The 
progress  from  universal  to  particular,  which  belongs  to  the 
Notion,  is  the  foundation  and  possibility  of  a  synthetic  science, 
of  a  system  and  of  systematic  Cognition. 

The  first  requisite  for  this  is,  as  has  been  shown,  that  a 
beginning  shall  be  made  with  the  object  in  the  form  of  a 
universal.  In  actuality  (either  natural  or  spiritual)  the  concrete 
individuality  is  the  first  thing  that  is  given  to  subjective  and 
natural  Cognition ;  but  in  Cognition  (which  is  a  process  of  form- 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  443 

ing  Notions  at  least  in  so  far  as  it  has  the  form  of  the  Notion  for 
foundation)  the  simple  term  segregated  from  the  concrete  must 
be  the  prius,  because  the  object  has  in  this  form  alone  the  form 
of  a  self-relating  universal  and  of  something  immediate  accord- 
ing to  the  Notion.  It  may  be  objected  to  this  scientific  process 
that,  since  intuition  is  easier  than  Cognition,  that  which  can 
be  intuited  (concrete  actuality)  should  be  made  the  beginning 
of  science ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  this  course  is  more  natural 
than  that  which  begins  from  the  object  in  its  abstraction  and 
thence  follows  the  opposite  course  to  its  particularization  and 
concrete  individualization. — But,  where  Cognition  is  demanded, 
comparison  with  intuition  has  already  been  judged  and  sur- 
rendered, and  the  only  question  can  be  what  is  to  be  the  first 
thing  within  the  process  of  Cognition  and  what  is  to  be  the 
nature  of  the  sequel :  a  cognitive  progress,  and  no  longer  a 
natural,  is  now  required. — If  ease  is  the  only  question,  then 
it  is  self-evident  that  it  is  easier  for  Cognition  to  seize  the 
abstract  simple  thought-determination  than  the  concrete,  which 
is  a  manifold  concatenation  of  such  thought-determinations  and 
their  relations:  and  this  is  the  manner  in  which  the  concrete 
is  to  be  apprehended,  not  as  it  is  in  intuition.  In  and  for  itself 
the  universal  is  the  first  Notion-moment,  since  it  is  the  simple, 
and  the  particular  comes  after,  because  it  is  mediated;  con- 
versely the  simple  is  the  more  universal,  and  the  concrete,  since 
it  is  differentiated  in  itself  and  consequently  mediated,  is  that 
which  presupposes  the  transition  from  a  first  term. — This 
observation  applies  not  only  to  the  order  of  the  progress  in  the 
determinate  forms  of  Definitions,  Classifications,  and  Pro- 
positions, but  also  to  the  order  of  Cognition  in  general  and 
merely  with  respect  to  the  general  distinction  between  abstract 
and  concrete. — Consequently,  for  example,  where  reading  is 
learnt,  the  beginning,  rightly,  is  not  made  with  whole  words 
or  even  syllables,  but  with  the  elements  of  words  and  syllables 
and  with  the  symbols  of  abstract  sounds.  In  written  characters 
the  analysis  of  the  concrete  word  into  its  abstract  sounds  and 
their  symbols  has  already  been  completed ;  for  this  very  reason 
a  reading  lesson  is  a  first  occupation  with  abstract  objects.  In 
geometry  a  beginning  must  be  made  not  with  a  concrete  three- 
dimensional  figure,  but  with  the  point  and  the  line  and  next 
with  plane  figures ;  and  among  those  not  with  polygons  but  with 


444  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  triangle,  and,  among  curves,  with  the  circle.  In  physics  the 
several  natural  properties  or  matters  must  be  set  free  from  the 
manifold  complications  which  beset  them  in  concrete  actuality, 
and  must  be  represented  with  their  simple  and  necessary  con- 
ditions: they  too,  like  three-dimensional  figures,  may  be  in- 
tuited ;  but  first  the  way  for  their  intuition  must  be  cleared  by 
causing  them  to  appear,  and  be  held  fast,  free  from  all  modi- 
fications through  circumstances  external  to  their  peculiar 
determinateness.  Magnetism,  electricity,  various  kinds  of  gas, 
and  the  like,  are  such  objects  as  admit  of  determinate  Cognition 
only  if  they  are  taken  as  removed  out  of  those  concrete  circum- 
stances in  which  they  appear  in  actuality.  It  is  true  that 
experiment  presents  them  to  intuition  in  a  concrete  example; 
but,  in  order  to  be  scientific,  an  experiment  (a)  must  admit 
only  the  necessary  conditions  and  (b)  must  multiply  itself  in 
order  to  show  that  the  inseparable  concretion  of  these  con- 
ditions is  unessential,  since  they  appear  first  in  one  and  then 
in  another  concrete  shape,  so  that  for  Cognition  only  their 
abstract  form  remains. — To  mention  one  more  example,  it 
might  have  appeared  natural  and  profound  to  consider  colour 
firs  tin  the  concrete  appearance  to  the  subjective  animal  sense, 
next  as  a  spectral  appearance  suspended  outside  the  subject, 
and  finally  as  fixed  upon  objects  in  external  actuality.  But,  for 
Cognition,  the  universal  and  therefore  truly  prior  form  is  the 
middle  one  of  the  above-mentioned,  where  colour  stands 
midway  between  subjectivity  and  objectivity  as  the  well-known 
spectrum,  unentangled  as  yet  with  either  subjective  or  objective 
circumstances.  The  latter  merely  disturb  the  pure  contempla- 
tion of  the  nature  of  colour,  for  they  operate  as  active  causes 
and  therefore  make  it  impossible  to  decide  whether  the  definite 
changes,  transitions,  and  relations  which  take  place  in  a  colour 
are  grounded  in  its  own  specific  nature,  or  must  rather  be 
ascribed  either  to  the  abnormal  specific  quality  of  these  circum- 
stances, to  the  particular  affections  and  effects,  healthy  or 
diseased,  of  the  organs  of  the  subject,  or  to  the  chemical,  vege- 
table, and  animal  forces  of  the  objects. — Several  further  ex- 
amples might*  be  cited  from  the  cognition  of  organic  nature  and 
of  the  world  of  spirit :  the  abstract  must  everywhere  constitute 
the  beginning  and  the  element  in  which  and  from  which  the 
particularities  and  rich  shapes  of  the  concrete  spread  out. 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  445 

Now  in  Classification  (or  in  the  particular)  the  distinction 
between  it  and  the  universal  arises ;  but  this  universal  is  itself 
already  determinate  and  thus  is  only  a  member  of  a  Classifica- 
tion. Hence  there  is  for  it  some  higher  universal;  but  there  is 
again  a  higher  universal  for  the  latter,  and  so,  at  this  point, 
to  infinity.  The  Cognition  which  is  here  considered  has  no 
immanent  limit,  since  it  starts  from  what  is  given  and  the  form 
of  abstract  universality  is  peculiar  to  its  first  term.  Accordingly 
any  object  which  seems  to  have  an  elementary  universality  is 
made  the  object  of  a  particular  science,  and  is  an  absolute 
beginning  in  so  far  as  imagination  is  presupposed  to  be  ac- 
quainted with  it  and  for  itself  it  is  taken  not  to  need  any 
derivation.  Definition  takes  it  as  immediate. 

Next  the  further  progress  from  this  term  is  Classification. 
For  this  progress  only  an  immanent  principle,  that  is,  a  begin- 
ning from  the  universal  and  the  Notion,  would  be  required ; 
but  the  Cognition  which  has  here  been  considered  lacks  this, 
because  it  pursues  only  the  form-determination  of  the  Notion 
without  its  intro-Reflection :  it  consequently  takes  the  content- 
determinateness  out  of  what  is  given.  There  is  no  peculiar 
ground  for  the  particular  which  arises  in  Classification,  either 
in  regard'to  that  which  is  to  constitute  the  basis  of  Classification 
or  to  the  definite  relation  which  is  to  subsist  between  the 
members  of  the  disjunction.  Consequently  in  this  respect  the 
office  of  Cognition  can  only  be,  partly  to  order  the  particular 
which  is  discovered  in  the  empirical  material,  and  partly  to 
^nd  its  universal  determinations  by  means  of  comparison.  The 
ratter  determinations  then  count  as  grounds  of  Classification ; 
and  there  is  a  similar  number  of  Classifications  accordingly. 
The  mutual  relation  of  the  members  of  a  Classification  (the 
species)  has  only  this  general  determination,  that  they  must  be 
determinate  as  against  one  another  in  accordance  with  the 
ground  of  Classification  which  has  been  assumed;  if  their 
variety  rested  upon  a  different  consideration  they  would  not 
be  co-ordinated  upon  a  level  basis. 

Since  a  principle  of  determinedness  for  self  is  lacking,  the 
laws  which  are  employed  for  this  operation  of"  Classification 
can  consist  only  of  formal  and  empty  rules  which  lead  nowhere. 
— Thus  the  rule  is  set  up  that  the  Classification  should  exhaust 
the  Notion ;  but  in  fact  each  individual  member  of  the  Classi- 


446  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

fication  must  exhaust  the  Notion.  Really  however  the  deter- 
minateness  of  the  Notion  is  meant,  and  this  it  is  which  is  to  be 
exhausted ;  but,  since  species  here  have  an  empirical  multiplicity 
which  in  itself  is  without  determination,  the  number,  greater 
or  less,  of  species  which  are  discovered  does  not  contribute  to 
the  exhaustion  of  the  Notion.  For  example  it  does  not  concern 
the  exhaustion  of  the  genus  whether  a  further  dozen  is  dis- 
covered in  addition  to  the  existing  sixty-seven  species  of  parrots. 
The  demand  for  exhaustion  can  mean  only  the  tautological 
proposition  that  all  species  should  be  specified  completely. — 
Now  with  the  growth  of  empirical  knowledge  it  may  well 
happen  that  species  are  discovered  which  do  not  lie  under  the 
determination  of  the  genus  which  has  been  adopted ;  for  the 
latter  is  adopted  more  frequently  in  accordance  with  a  dim 
idea  of  the  general  habitus  than  in  accordance  with  the  more 
or  less  individual  characteristic  which  is  expressly  designed  to 
serve  for  its  determination. — In  such  a  case  the  genus  would 
have  to  be  changed,  and  a  justification  would  have  to  be 
furnished  for  regarding  some  other  number  of  species  as  species 
of  a  new  genus ;  that  is,  the  genus  would  be  determined  in 
accordance  with  a  collection  made  under  some  respect  which 
is  accepted  as  unity,  and  this  respect  itself  would  here  be  the 
basis  of  Classification.  Conversely,  if  the  determinateness  which 
originally  was  accepted  were  held  fast  as  the  peculiarity  of  the 
genus,  that  material  would  be  excluded  which  it  was  desired 
to  comprehend  in  one  as  species  with  former  species.  This 
Notionless  activity,  which  first  assumes  a  determinateness  to  be 
an  essential  moment  of  a  genus  and  accordingly  subordinates 
or  excludes  particulars,  but  next  begins  with  the  particular  and, 
in  arranging  it,  is  guided  by  some  other  determinateness,  pro- 
duces an  appearance  of  arbitrariness,  to  which  it  is  left  to 
determine  what  part  or  side  of  the  concrete  it  shall  hold  fast 
and  arrange  accordingly. — Physical  nature  offers  of  itself  such 
a  contingency  in  the  principles  of  Classification ;  because  of  its 
dependent  and  external  actuality  it  stands  in  a  connexion  which 
is  manifold  and  is  given  for  it  too.  Consequently  a  multitude 
of  principles  is  found  to  which  it  must  conform,  following  one 
in  one  of  the  series  of  its  forms  and  another  in  another,  and 
producing  hybrids  which  simultaneously  diverge  in  opposite 
directions.  It  thus  results  that  in  one  series  of  natural  obiects 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  447 

characteristics  emerge  as  extremely  expressive  and  essential, 
which  become  insignificant  and  purposeless  in  others,  so  that 
it  becomes  impossible  to  retain  a  principle  of  Classification  of 
this  kind. 

The  general  determinateness  of  empirical  species  can  be  only 
this,  that  they  are  generally  different  from  one  another  without 
being  opposite.  The  disjunction  of  the  Notion  has  already  been 
demonstrated  in  its  determinateness ;  if  particularity,  without 
the  negative  unity  of  the  Notion,  is  accepted  as  immediate  and 
given,  then  the  distinction  does  not  move  beyond  the  reflection- 
form  of  difference  in  general,  which  has  already  been  considered. 
That  externality,  which  is  the  peculiar  habitat  of  the  Notion 
in  Nature,  introduces  the  total  indifference  of  the  distinction ; 
consequently  a  common  determination  for  Classification  is 
derived  from  number. 

However  contingent  the  particular  is  here  as  against  the 
universal,  and  therefore  against  Classification  in  general,  it  may 
be  ascribed  to  an  instinct  of  reason  if  Classifications  and  grounds 
for  Classification  are  found  in  this  Cognition  which,  so  far  as 
sensuous  properties  admit,  show  themselves  to  be  more  ade- 
quate to  the  Notion.  Thus  for  animals  the  organs  of  eating 
(teeth  ahd  claws)  are  used  in  the  various  systems  as  a  com- 
prehensive ground  of  Classification;  at  first  they  are  taken 
merely  as  sides  in  which  the  characteristics  for  the  subjective 
purpose  of  Cognition  are  more  easily  designated.  But  in  fact 
these  organs  not  only  contain  a  distinction  which  belongs  to 
external  reflection,  but  also  they  are  the  vital  centre  of  animal 
individuality,  where  it  posits  itself,  in  distinction  from  external 
nature  (its  Other),  as  self-relating  individuality,  separating 
itself  from  the  continuity  with  Other. — For  the  plant  the 
fructifying  organs  constitute  the  highest  point  of  vegetable  life, 
by  which  it  intimates  the  transition  to  sexual  differentiation 
and  thus  to  distinct  individuality.  Systems  therefore  have  rightly 
turned  to  this  point  as  a  ground  for  Classification  which,  if  not 
wholly  adequate,  goes  far,  and  have  thus  based  themselves  on 
a  determinateness  which  is  not  only  a  determinateness  for 
external  and  comparative  reflection,  but  is  also  in  and  for  itself 
the  highest  that  a  plant  admits. 


448  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 


3.  THE  PROPOSITION 

i.  The  third  stage  of  this  Cognition,  which  progresses  in 
accordance  with  the  Notion-determinations,  is  the  transition  of 
particularity  into  individuality ;  the  latter  constitutes  the  content 
of  the  Proposition  (or  Theorem) .  What  must  here  be  considered 
is  the  self-relating  determinateness,  the  internal  distinction  of 
the  object  and  the  relation  to  one  another  of  the  distinct  deter- 
minatenesses.  Definition  contains  one  determinateness  only, 
and  Classification  one  determinateness  as  against  others:  in 
individualization  the  object  has  fallen  apart  within  itself.  Just 
as  Definition  does  not  go  beyond  the  general  Notion,  so  in 
Propositions  the  object  is  cognized  in  its  reality,  in  the  con- 
ditions and  forms  of  its  real  existence.  Thus  Joined  to  Definition, 
it  represents  the  Idea,  which  is  the  unity  of  Notion  and  Reality. 
But  the  Cognition  which  is  here  considered  and  is  still  engaged 
in  search  does  not  reach  this  representation  in  so  far  as  Reality 
with  it  does  not  emerge  out  of  the  Notion,  and  so  the  dependence 
of  Reality  upon  the  Notion,  and  therefore  the  unity  itself,  is 
not  cognized. 

Now  according  to  the  determination  which  has  been  indicated 
the  Proposition  is  the  properly  synthetic  part  of  an  object,  in 
so  far  as  the  relations  of  its  determinatenesses  are  necessary, 
that  is,  are  founded  upon  the  inner  identity  of  the  Notion.  In 
Definition  and  Classification  the  synthetic  element  is  a  com- 
bination admitted  from  outside ;  what  is  found  given  is  reduced 
into  the  form  of  the  Notion,  but,  as  given,  the  whoje  content 
is  merely  pointed  at,  whereas  the  Proposition  ought  to  be 
demonstrated.  This  Cognition  does  not  deduce  the  content  of 
its  Definitions  and  determinations  of  Classification,  so  that  it 
might  seem  that  it  could  also  spare  itself  the  proof  of  these 
relations,  which  are  expressed  by  Propositions,  remaining  satis- 
fied with  perception  in  this  respect  too.  But  Cognition  is  dis- 
tinguished from  bare  perception  and  sensuous  representation 
by  the  Notional  form  generally  which  it  imparts  to  the  content ; 
this  is  the  work  of  Definition  and  Classification.  Now  the  content 
of  the  Proposition  is  derived  from  the  Notion-moment  of 
individuality,  and  consequently  it  consists  in  determinations 
of  reality  which  no  longer  have  merely  the  simple  and  imme- 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  449 

diate  Notion-determinations  for  their  relation;  in  individuality 
the  Notion  has  passed  over  to  otherness,  to  the  Reality  by 
virtue  of  which  it  becomes  Idea.  Thus  the  synthesis  which 
is  contained  in  the  Proposition  no  longer  has  the  Notional  form 
for  justification :  it  is  a  combination  of  various  terms ;  conse- 
quently the  unity,  which  has  not  yet  been  posited,  remains  to 
be  demonstrated, — so  that  proof  becomes  actually  necessary 
for  this  Cognition. 

Here  the  first  difficulty  which  arises  is  to  distinguish  accu- 
rately between  the  determinations  of  the  object  which  can  be 
admitted  into  the  Definition  and  those  which  must  be  relegated 
to  the  Propositions.  There  can  be  no  principle  which  governs 
this.  A  principle  appears  to  lie  in  the  fact  that  that  which 
immediately  belongs  to  the  object  belongs  to  the  Definition, 
while  the  rest,  being  mediated,  must  first  have  its  mediation 
exposed.  But  the  content  of  Definition  is  determinate  in  general, 
and  therefore  is  essentially  mediated  itself;  its  immediacy  is 
merely  subjective,  that  is,  the  subject  makes  an  arbitrary 
beginning  and  allows  the  object  to  count  as  presupposition. 
Now  the  object  is  an  object  concrete  in  general  in  itself;  it  must 
also  be  classified,  and  thus  a  number  of  determinations  result 
which  by  their  nature  are  mediated,  and  are  taken  as  imme- 
diate and  undemonstrated, — not  by  virtue  of  a  principle,  but 
only  by  subjective  determination. — Even  in  Euclid,  who  has 
always  been  justly  recognized  as  the  master  of  this  synthetic 
kind  of  Cognition,  a  presupposition  about  parallel  lines  is  found, 
under  the  name  of  axiom,  which  has  been  thought  to  require 
proof;  an$l  attempts  have  been  made  in  various  ways  to  supply 
this  want.  In  several  other  theorems  it  has  been  thought  that 
presuppositions  have  been  discovered  which  should  not  have 
been  assumed  immediately  but  should  have  been  proved.  With 
regard  to  the  axiom  about  parallel  lines,  it  may  be  observed 
that  it  is  a  clear  example  of  the  justness  of  thought  of  Euclid, 
who  accurately  valued  the  element  and  nature  of  his  science. 
The  proof  of  this  axiom  might  have  been  deduced  from  the 
Notion  of  parallel  lines ;  but  such  a  proof  is  no  more  part  of  his 
science  than  the  deduction  of  his  definitions  and  axioms  or  of 
his  subject  in  general,  namely,  space  and  its  first  determinations, 
the  dimensions.  Such  a  deduction  can  only  be  made  out  of 
the  Notion,  and  the  Notion  lies  outside  the  peculiar  sphere  of 

VOL.    II.  FF 


450  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

Euclid's  science ;  these  therefore  are  necessarily  presuppositions 
for  it,  or  relative  priora. 

The  axioms  may  be  mentioned  in  this  connexion;  they  are 
members  of  the  same  class.  As  a  rule  they  are  incorrectly  taken 
as  absolute  prior  a^  as  though  in  and  for  themselves  they  required 
no  proof.  If  this  were  in  fact  the  case  they  would  be*  mere 
tautologies,  since  only  in  abstract  identity  is  there  no  variety 
and  consequently  no  need  for  mediation.  But  if  the  axioms  are 
more  than  tautologies  they  are  propositions  of  some  other 
science,  since  they  are  to  be  presuppositions  for  the  science  in 
which  they  serve  as  axioms.  Consequently  they  are  really 
theorems,  and  generally  logical  ones.  The  axioms  of  geometry 
are  such  lemmata,  or  logical  propositions  which  approximate 
to  tautology  since  they  refer  to  magnitude  only,  so  that  quali- 
tative distinctions  are  extinguished  in  them ;  the  capital  axiom 
— the  purely  quantitative  Syllogism — has  been  mentioned 
above. — Thus  the  axioms,  considered  in  and  for  themselves, 
require  proof  as  much  as  Definitions  and  Classifications,  and 
the  reason  why  they  are  not  made  into  Propositions  (or 
theorems)  is  only  that  they  are  taken  as  relatively  first  for  a 
certain  standpoint  and  therefore  as  presuppositions. 

With  respect  to  the  content  of  Propositions  a  further  dis- 
tinction is  to  be  made.  The  content  consists  in  a  relation  of 
determinatenesses  of  the  reality  of  the  Notion :  consequently 
these  relations  may  be  more  or  less  incomplete  and  individual 
relations  of  the  object,  or  else  may  be  such  a  relation  as  com- 
prehends the  whole  content  of  the  reality  and  expresses  its 
determinate  relation.  But  the  unity  of  the  complete  content-' 
determinatenesses  is  equal  to  the  Notion:  consequently  a 
proposition  which  contains  them  is  in  turn  a  Definition,  which 
however  expresses  the  Notion  not  only  as  taken  up  immediately 
but  as  developed  into  its  determinate  and  real  distinctions ;  it 
expresses  the  complete  existence  of  the  Notion.  Consequently 
the  two  together  are  the  Idea. 

If  the  Propositions  of  a  synthetic  science,  and  especially  of 
geometry,  are  more  closely  compared,  the  distinction  will  be 
observed  thatt  some  of  its  Propositions  contain  only  single 
relations  of  the  object,  and  others  contain  such  as  express  the 
full  determinateness  of  the  object.  It  is  a  very  superficial  view 
which  holds  that  all  propositions  have  the  same  value  because 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION 

each  contains  a  truth  anyhow,  and  each  is  equally  essential  in 
the  formal  demonstrative  progress  or  train  of  proof.  The  dis- 
tinction with  regard  to  the  content  of  Propositions  has  the 
closest  connexion  with  this  progress ;  some  further  observations 
upon  the  latter  will  serve  to  elucidate  this  distinction  and  also 
the  nature  of  Synthetic  Cognition.  We  will  take  for  example 
Euclidean  geometry,  as  representative  of  the  synthetic  method, 
of  which  it  furnishes  the  most  perfect  model ;  it  has  always 
been  praised  for  the  consecutive  arrangement  of  its  Propositions, 
whereby  for  each  theorem  those  other  propositions  which  its 
construction  and  proof  require  are  always  discovered  to  have 
been  already  demonstrated.  This  circumstance  relates  to  formal 
consecutiveness ;  and  however  important  this  is,  it  rather  regards 
external  arrangement  for  convenience,  and  for  itself  has  no 
relation  to  the  essential  distinction  between  Notion  and  Idea, 
which  involves  a  higher  principle  of  necessary  progression. — 
For  the  Definitions  with  which  a  beginning  is  made  take  the 
sensible  object  as  immediately  given,  and  determine  it  according 
to  its  nearest  genus  and  specific  difference;  and  these  too  are 
the  simple  immediate  determinatenesses  of  the  Notion,  Univer- 
sality and  Particularity,  whose  relation  is  not  further  developed. 
Now  the  first  Propositions  can  only  have  recourse  to  such 
immediate  determinations  as  are  contained  in  the  Definitions ; 
moreover  their  reciprocal  dependence  can  only  regard  this 
general  point,  that  one  is,  generally,  determined  through  the 
other.  Thus  Euclid's  first  theorems  about  triangles  regard  only 
their  equality,  that  is,  the  number  of  pieces  in  a  triangle  which 
must  be  determined  in  order  that  the  other  pieces  of  the  same 
triangle  (or  the  whole)  shall  be  altogether  determined.  The 
comparison  of  two  triangles  with  each  other  and  the  plan  of 
placing  equality  in  coincidence  is  a  detour  required  by  a 
method  which  is  forced  to  use  sensuous  coincidence  in  place 
of  the  concept  of  determinedness.  Considered  otherwise  by 
themselves,  these  theorems  themselves  contain  two  parts,  one 
of  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  Notion  and  the  other  as  the 
Reality,  or  that  which  completes  the  former  into  Reality.  For 
that  which  completely  determines  (for  example  the  two  sides 
and  the  included  angle)  is  already  the  whole  triangle  for  under- 
standing; nothing  further  is  wanted  for  its  complete  deter- 
minateness,  and  the  remaining  two  angles  and  third  side  are 


452  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  excess  of  Reality  over  the  determinateness  of  the  Notion. 
Thus  the  work  of  these  theorems  is  really  to  reduce  the  sensuous 
triangle  (which  of  course  does  require  three  sides  and  three 
angles)  to  the  simplest  conditions;  the  Definition  had  men- 
tioned only  the  three  lines  which  enclose  the  plane  figure  and 
make  it  a  triangle :  the  Proposition  at  length  contains  expressly 
the  determinedness  of  the  angles  through  the  determinedness 
of  the  sides ;  and  the  other  Propositions  contain  the  dependence 
of  three  further  parts  on  three  such  parts. — The  complete 
determinateness  of  the  magnitude  of  a  triangle  within  itself 
according  to  its  sides  is  contained  in  the  theorem  of  Pythagoras : 
this  is  the  equation  of  the  sides  of  a  triangle,  whereas  previously 
the  sides  achieve  only  a  general  determinateness  of  its  parts 
relatively  to  one  another,  and  not  an  equation.  Consequently 
this  Proposition  is  the  perfect  and  real  Definition  of  the  triangle, 
and  primarily  of  the  right-angled  triangle,  which  in  its  dis- 
tinctions is  simplest  and  most  regular. — With  this  Proposition 
Euclid  ends  the  first  book;  and  indeed  it  is  a  perfect  deter- 
minateness which  has  here  been  reached.  And  similarly, 
after  he  has  reduced  to  uniformity  the  triangles  which  are 
not  right-angled  and  are  affected  with  greater  inequality,  he 
ends  the  second  book  with  the  reduction  of  the  rectangle  to 
the  square, — which  is  the  equation  of  the  self-equal  (the  square) 
and  the  self-unequal  (the  rectangle).  Similarly  the  hypotenuse 
(which  corresponds  to  the  right  angle,  or  self-equal)  in  the 
theorem  of  Pythagoras  constitutes  one  side  of  the  equation, 
while  the  other  side  is  constituted  by  the  self-unequal,  namely 
the  two  catheters.  This  equation  between  square  and  rectangle 
is  the  basis  of  the  second  definition  of  the  circle — which  in  turn 
is  the  theorem  of  Pythagoras  just  in  so  far  as  the  catheters  are 
taken  as  variable  magnitudes.  The  first  equation  of  the  circle 
bears  the  same  relation  of  sensuous  determinateness  to  equation 
as  the  two  different  definitions  of  conic  sections  in  general  bear 
to  each  other. 

This  true  synthetic  progress  is  a  transition  of  the  universal  to 
individuality,  namely  to  that  which  is  determined  in  and  for 
itself  or  to  the'  unity  of  the  object  within  itself,  in  so  far  as  the 
latter  has  fallen  apart  and  has  been  distinguished  into  its 
essential  real  determinatenesses.  In  other  sciences  however 
the  usual  and  wholly  incomplete  progress  is  that,  while  the 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  453 

beginning  is  made  from  a  universal,  its  individual^  u^n  and 
concretion  are  only  the  application  of  the  universal  to  material 
which  is  introduced  from  elsewhere.  In  this  manner  the  truly 
individual  element  of  the  Idea  is  an  empirical  addition. 

But  however  complete  or  incomplete,  more  or  less,  the  con- 
tent of  a  Proposition  is,  it  must  be  proved.  It  is  a  relation  of 
real  determinations  which  have  not  the  relation  of  Notion- 
determinations ;  if  they  have  this  relation  (as  can  be  demon- 
strated in  those  Propositions  which  we  called  second  or  real 
Definitions),  then  for  this  very  reason  these  (a)  are  Definitions ; 
but  (b]  because  their  content  at  the  same  time  consists  in  a 
relation  of  real  determinations  and  not  merely  in  the  relation 
of  a  universal  and  of  simple  determinateness,  they  are  both 
in  need  and  capable  of  a  proof  in  comparison  with  such  a  first 
Definition.  They  are  real  determinatenesses,  and  as  such  have 
the  form  of  entities  persisting  indifferent  and  various;  con- 
sequently they  are  not  immediately  one,  and  for  this  reason 
their  mediation  must  be  exposed.  The  immediate  unity  in  the 
first  Definition  is  that  in  accordance  with  which  the  particular 
is  in  the  universal. 

2.  The  mediation  must  now  be  more  closely  considered.  It 
may  be  simple,  or  may  pass  through  several  mediations.  The 
members  which  mediate  are  connected  with  those  which  are  to 
be  mediated ;  but  it  is  not  the  Notion  out  of  which  the  media- 
tion and  Proposition  are  reduced  in  this  Cognition — the  tran- 
sition into  opposite  being  altogether  alien  to  the  Notion — ,  and 
therefore  the  mediating  determinations  must  be  produced  from 
'somewhere,  without  the  notion  of  connexion,  as  a  provisional 
material  for  the  framework  of  the  proof.  This  preliminary 
procedure  is  the  construction. 

Among  the  relations  of  the  content  of  the  Proposition,  which 
may  be  extremely  various,  only  those  must  now  be  enumerated 
and  made  imaginable  which  are  used  in  the  proof.  It  is  only 
in  the  proof  that  this  collection  of  material  achieves  a  meaning : 
in  itself  it  appears  blind  and  Notionless.  After  the  proof  it  is 
of  course  seen  that  it  was  suitable  to  draw  such  further  lines, 
for  example,  in  a  geometrical  figure  as  are  indicated  in  the 
construction;  but  in  the  construction  it  demands  blind  obe- 
dience, so  that  this  oper^fion  for  itself  is  without  understanding, 
since  the  end  which  guides  it  has  not  yet  been  expressed. — It 


454  SCIENCE   OF  LOGIC 

is  indifferent  whether  it  is  a  theorem  proper  or  a  problem  for 
which  the  construction  is  undertaken :  such  as  it  appears  before 
the  proof,  it  is  something  not  derived  out  of  the  determination 
given  in  the  theorem  or  problem,  and  is  therefore  a  meaning- 
less activity  for  anyone  who  does  not  yet  know  the  end ;  always 
it  is  ruled  by  an  external  end. 

This  temporary  secret  emerges  in  the  proof.  As  has  been 
stated,  the  proof  contains  the  mediation  of  that  which  the 
Proposition  enunciated  as  connected;  it  is  only  through  this 
mediation  that  this  connexion  appears  necessary.  The  con- 
struction by  itself  is  without  the  subjectivity  of  the  Notion;  and 
the  proof  similarly  is  a  subjective  activity  without  objectivity. 
For  the  content-determinations  of  the  Proposition  are  not  also 
posited  as  Notion-determinations,  but  as  given  and  indifferent 
parts  which  stand  in  manifold  external  relations  to  one  another ; 
and  therefore  the  necessity  shows  itself  only  in  the  formal  and 
external  Notion.  The  proof  is  not  a  genesis  of  the  relation  which 
constitutes  the  content  of  the  Proposition ;  the  necessity  exists 
only  for  intellectual  discernment,  and  the  whole  proof  for  the 
subjective  purpose  of  Cognition.  For  this  reason  it  is  altogether 
an  external  reflection  which  goes  from  without  inwards,  that 
is,  draws  conclusions  about  the  inner  nature  of  the'  relation 
from  external  circumstances.  The  circumstances  which  the 
construction  represented,/o//02wrffrom  the  nature  of  the  object : 
here  conversely  they  become  ground  and  mediating  relations. 
Consequently  the  middle  or  third  term,  in  which  the  terms 
connected  in  the  Proposition  represent  themselves  in  their 
unity — it  is  the  nerve  of  the  proof — is  only  an  entity*  in  which' 
this  connexion  appears  and  is  external.  The  consequence  which 
this  proof  pursues  is  the  converse  of  the  nature  of  the  thing,  and 
therefore  that  which  there  is  regarded  as  ground  is  a  subjective 
ground  from  which  the  nature  of  the  thing  emerges  for  Cog- 
nition only. 

What  has  been  said  so  far  makes  clear  the  necessary  limit 
of  this  Cognition,  which  very  frequently  has  been  misunder- 
stood. The  brilliant  example  of  the  synthetic  method  is  the 
science  of  gedmetry, — but  it  has  been  improperly  applied  to 
other  sciences,  and  even  to  philosophy.  Geometry  is  a  science 
of  magnitude,  and  therefore  formal  syllogizing  most  fittingly 
belongs  to  it.  Here  the  merely  quantitative  determination  is 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  455 

considered,  and  abstraction  is  made  from  the  qualitative  deter- 
mination; it  can  therefore  remain  within  formal  identity  or 
Notionless  unity,  which  is  equality  and  belongs  to  external 
abstracting  reflection.  The  object  (spatial  determinations)  is 
such  .an  abstract  object  as  has  been  prepared  for  the  end  of 
having  a  complete  finite  and  external  determinateness.  By 
virtue  of  its  abstract  object  this  science  has  on  the  one  hand 
the  sublime  quality  that  in  its  void  and  silent  spaces  colour 
is  extinguished  and  every  other  sensuous  property  has  vanished, 
and  that  every  other  appeal  is  silent  which  speaks  more 
intimately  to  living  individuality.  On  the  other  hand  the 
abstract  object  still  remains  space,  an  unsensuously  sensuous 
entity; — intuition  is  raised  into  its  abstraction.  It  is  a  form  of 
intuition,  but  still  it  is  intuition; — it  is  sensuous,  the  external 
juxtaposition  of  sensuousness  itself,  its  pure  Notionlessness. — 
Enough  has  been  heard  in  our  time  about  the  excellence  of 
geometry  from  this  side ; — the  fact  that  it  has  sensuous  intuition 
for  its  foundation  has  been  declared  its  greatest  advantage,  and 
it  has  been  thought  that  this  is  even  the  basis  of  its  high 
standing  as  a  science,  and  that  its  proofs  rest  upon  intuition. 
This  shallow  observation  must  be  met  by  the  platitude  that  no 
science  is  made  through  intuition,  but  through  thought  alone. 
Geometry,  by  virtue  of  its  still  sensuous  material,  rests  to  some 
extent  on  intuition ;  but  this  gives  it  only  that  kind  of  evidence 
which  the  sensuous  in  general  has  for  spirit  without  thought. 
And,  by  a  pitiful  error,  this  very  sensuousness  of  material  has 
been  counted  an  advantage  which  in  fact  marks  the  lowness 
of  its  standpoint.  It  owes  its  capacity  for  a  higher  scientific 
quality  to  the  abstraction  of  its  sensuous  object  alone;  hence 
also  its  great  advantage  over  all  the  other  collections  of  pieces 
of  knowledge  which  men  are  likewise  pleased  to  call  sciences 
and  which  have  for  content  a  concrete  and  perceptible  sen- 
suous, showing  a  dim  foreboding  and  allusion  to  the  demands 
of  the  Notion  only  through  the  order  which  they  attempt  to 
introduce. 

Geometrical  space  is  the  abstraction  and  void  of  external 
juxtaposition;  only  by  virtue  of  this  is  it  possible  that  the 
configurations  can  be  plotted  into  its  indeterminateness  in  such 
a  manner  that  their  determinations  remain  separate  in  stable 
fixity  and  contain  no  transition  into  opposite.  The  science  of 


456  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

geometry  is  thus  simple  science  of  the  finite  which  is  compared 
according  to  magnitude,  and  whose  unity  is  external,  or  is 
equality.  But  in  this  process  of  figuration  a  start  is  made  at  the 
same  time  from  different  sides  and  principles,  and  the  various 
figures  arise  each  for  itself;  and  thus  being  compared  thqy  still 
show  qualitative  unlikeness  and  incommensurability.  These 
properties  are  the  force  which  drives  geometry  from  finitude, 
where  it  was  pursuing  its  safe  and  regular  advance,  to  infinity — 
a  region  where  entities  which  are  qualitatively  different  are 
posited  as  like.  Here  its  self-evidence  ceases  in  this  respect,  that 
elsewhere  it  is  based  upon  fixed  finitude  and  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  Notion  and  its  Appearance,  which  is  the  transition 
that  has  just  been  mentioned.  Finite  science  has  here  reached 
its  limit,  since  the  necessity  and  mediation  of  the  synthetic 
element  are  no  longer  founded  upon  merely  positive,  but  upon 
negative,  identity. 

Geometry,  like  algebra,  soon  strikes  upon  its  limit  with  its 
abstract  objects  of  mere  understanding;  and  with  other  sciences 
the  synthetic  method  proves  from  the  beginning  all  the  more 
inadequate — most  of  all  with  philosophy.  With  respect  to 
Definition  and  Classification  what  is  required  has  already 
resulted ;  and  this  would  be  the  place  for  a  discussion  of  the 
Proposition  and  proof  only ;  but,  apart  from  the  presupposition 
of  Definition  and  Classification,  which  demands  and  presup- 
poses the  proof,  the  inadequacy  consists  in  their  general  attitude 
to  the  Propositions.  This  attitude  is  chiefly  remarkable  with 
the  empirical  sciences  (physics  for  example)  when  they  attempt 
to  assume  the  form  of  synthetic  sciences.  The  following  method 
is  used.  Reflection-determinations  about  particular  forces  or 
other  internal  and  essential  forms  which  result  from  the  manner 
in  which  empirical  data  are  analysed,  and  can  justify  themselves 
only  as  results,  must  be  given  the  prior  place,  in  order  that 
a  general  foundation  may  thus  be  obtained  which  may  after- 
wards be  applied  to  and  demonstrated  in  the  individual.  These 
general  foundations  have  no  foothold  for  themselves ;  they  are 
postulated  for  the  time  being;  and  it  is  noticed  only  in  the 
conclusions  derived  that  the  said  conclusions  are  the  real  ground 
of  these  foundations.  It  is  now  seen  that  the  so-called  explana- 
tion and  proof  of  the  concrete  element  which  is  brought  into 
Propositions  is  partly  a  tautology  and  partly  a  confusion  of  the 


.  THE   IDEA  OF  COGNITION  457 

true  relation;* further  it  is  seen  that  this  confusion  served  to 
disguise  the  trick  of  Cognition,  which  took  up  empirical  data 
one-sidedly  (the  only  manner  in  which  it  could  reach  its  simple 
definitions  and  formulae),  and  eludes  empirical  refutation  by 
examining  experience  and  allowing  it  validity  not  in  its  concrete 
totality  but  as  example,  and  only  in  that  direction  which  is 
serviceable  for  the  hypotheses  and  the  theory.  Concrete  ex- 
perience being  thus  subordinated  to  the  presupposed  deter- 
minations, the  foundation  of  the  theory  is  obscured,  and  is 
exhibited  only  from  that  side  which  is  in  conformity  with  the 
theory ;  and  altogether  this  method  makes  it  much  more  difficult 
to  contemplate  without  bias  concrete  perceptions  by  themselves. 
Only  if  the  entire  course  which  has  been  followed  is  inverted 
does  the  whole  obtain  the  right  relation,  where  the  connexion 
between  ground  and  consequence  and  the  correctness  of  the 
transformation  of  perception  into  thought  may  be  checked. 
Consequently  one  of  the  main  difficulties  in  the  study  of  such 
sciences  is,  to  penetrate  into  them ;  and  this  can  be  done  only 
if  certain  presuppositions  are  blindly  granted,  and  the  deter- 
minations are,  for  the  time  being,  memorized,  about  the  forces 
and  matt£rs  which  are  assumed,  together  with  their  hypothetical 
formations,  directions,  and  rotations,  while  as  yet  it  is  impossible 
to  form  a  Notion  about  them  or  even  a  definite  image — at  best 
a  confused  mental  picture  can  be  made.  If  the  necessity  and 
the  Notion  of  the  presuppositions  are  demanded  before  they 
are  accepted  and  counted  as  valid,  then  no  progress  can  be 
made  beyond  the  beginning. 

The  occasion  arose  above  of  speaking  about  the  impropriety 
of  applying  the  synthetic  method  to  strictly  analytic  science. 
Wolf  extended  this  application  to  every  possible  kind  of  know- 
ledge, and  drew  them  all  into  philosophy  and  mathematics, — 
knowledge  which  partly  is  of  wholly  analytic  nature  and  partly 
of  a  contingent  and  merely  professional  kind.  Such  a  material, 
which  by  its  nature  is  easily  apprehended  and  admits  of  no 
strict  and  scientific  treatment,  being  contrasted  with  the  stiff 
circumlocution  and  armour  of  science,  automatically  demon- 
strated and  discredited  the  clumsiness  of  such  an  application.1 

1  For  example,  in  Wolf's  Rudiments  of  Architecture  the  eighth  Theorem  runs: 
A  window  must  be  wide  enough  to  allow  two  persons  to  lean  through  it  side  by 
side  in  comfort. 

Proof.     It  is  a  common  practice  to  lean  through  a  window  with  another  person 


458  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

Nevertheless  this  abuse  could  not  extinguish  the  belief  in  the 
fitness  and  essentiality  of  this  method  for  scientific  exactness  in 
philosophy ;  and  Spinoza's  example  in  the  presentation  of  his 
philosophy  was  long  held  to  be  a  pattern.  But  in  fact  Kant  and 
Jacobi  overturned  the  whole  manner  of  the  older  metaphysics, 
and  with  the  manner  the  method.  Kant,  in  his  own  fashion, 
proved  of  the  content  of  these  metaphysics  that  it  led  by  strict 
demonstration  to  antinomies,  whose  further  nature  has  been 
examined  at  the  proper  places.  But  he  did  not  reflect  upon  the 
nature  of  this  demonstration,  which  is  bound  to  a  finite  con- 
tent ;  yet  the  two  stand  and  fall  together.  In  his  Foundations  of 
Natural  Science  he  has  himself  given  an  example  of  treating  as 
a  science  of  reflection,  and  by  the  method  appropriate  to  such, 
a  science  which  he  had  intended  to  reclaim  for  philosophy 
by  the  other  means. — Of  the  older  metaphysics  Kant  chiefly 
attacked  the  matter,  while  Jacobi  attacked  its  method  of  demon- 
stration, elaborating  in  the  clearest  and  profoundest  manner 
the  point  which  is  of  chief  importance — namely,  that  such  a 
method  of  demonstration  is  simply  bound  within  the  circle  of  the 
rigid  necessity  of  the  finite,  and  that  freedom  (that  is,  the 
Notion,  and  whatever  is  true)  lies  beyond  its  sphere  and  scope. — 
According  to  Kant's  result  it  is  the  peculiar  material  of  meta- 
physics that  leads  it  into  contradictions,  and  the  inadequacy 
of  Cognition  consists  in  its  subjectivity;  according  to  Jacobi's 
it  is  the  method  and  entire  nature  of  Cognition  itself,  which 
seizes  only  a  connexion  of  conditionedness  and  dependence, 
thus  proving  itself  inadequate  to  that  which  is  in  and  for  itself 
and  is  the  absolutely  true.  And  indeed  the  principle  of  philo- 
sophy is  the  infinite  free  Notion,  and  all  its  content  rests  upon 
this  alone ;  and  thus  the  method  of  Notionless  finitude  does  not 

and  to  look  about.  But  the  architect  must  satisfy  the  requirements  of  his  principal 
in  all  essentials  (§  i) ;  therefore  he  must  make  the  window  so  wide  as  to  allow 
two  persons  to  lean  through  it  side  by  side  in  comfort.  Q.E.D. 

In  his  Rudiments  of  Fortification  the  second  Theorem  runs:  If  the  enemy  camps 
near  by  and  it  is  supposed  that  he  will  attempt  to  relieve  the  fortress,  then  lines 
must  be  drawn  round  the  whole  fortress. 

Proof.  Such  Ijnes  prevent  anyone  from  penetrating  into  the  camp  from 
without  (§  311).  But  those  who  wish  to  relieve  the  fortress  require  to  penetrate 
into  the  camp  from  without.  Therefore  if  it  is  desired  to  keep  them  out  lines 
must  be  drawn  round  the  camp.  If  therefore  the  enemy  camps  near  by  and  it 
is  supposed  that  he  will  attempt  to  relieve  the  fortress,  then  the  camp  must  be 
entirely  enclosed  in  lines.  Q.E.D. 


THE   IDEA  OF   COGNITION  459 

fit  the  Notion. 'The  synthesis  and  mediation  of  this  method  (that 
is,  the  process  of  proof)  achieve  only  a  necessity  which  is  the 
opposite  of  freedom, — that  is,  an  identity  of  the  dependent 
which  is  only  in  itself  whether  it  is  taken  as  internal  or  as 
external,  where  that  which  constitutes  the  real  element  (that 
which  is  distinct  and  has  entered  into  existence)  remains  some- 
thing which  is  just  independently  different  and  therefore  finite. 
Here  this  identity  does  not  reach  existence  and  remains  the 
merely  internal;  or,  it  is  that  which  is  merely  external,  its 
determinate  content  being  given  it.  In  both  views  it  is  abstract 
and  does  not  contain  the  side  of  reality  within  itself,  and  is 
not  posited  as  identity  which  is  determined  in  and  for  itself. 
Thus  the  Notion  is  excluded  from  this  Cognition,  and  it  is  the 
Notion  which  is  the  only  goal  and  is  the  infinite  in  and  for 
itself. 

Thus  in  Synthetic  Cognition  the  Idea  reaches  its  end  only  in 
so  far  as  the  Notion  now  is  for  the  Notion  according  to  its 
moments  of  identity  and  the  real  determinations,  or  according 
to  universality  and  the  particular  distinctions,  and,  further,  as 
identity  which  is  connexion  and  dependence  of  the  different. 
But  this  its  object  is  not  adequate  to  it;  for  the  Notion  does  not 
become  unity  with  itself  in  its  object  or  its  reality.  In  necessity 
its  identity  is  for  it;  but  in  this  identity  the  necessity  is  not 
itself  determinateness,  but  is  a  material  external  to  it,  that  is, 
not  determined  by  the  Notion,  so  that  in  it  the  Notion  does  not 
cognize  itself.  Thus  altogether  the  Notion  is  not  determined  for 
itself,  not  determined  both  in  and  for  itself  according  to  its 
unity.  Hence  in  this  Cognition  the  Idea  does  not  yet  reach 
truth  because  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  object  to  the  subjective 
Notion. — But  the  sphere  of  Necessity  is  the  highest  point  of 
Being  and  of  Reflection ;  in  and  for  itself  it  passes  over  into 
the  freedom  of  the  Notion,  while  the  inner  identity  passes  over 
into  its  manifestation,  which  is  the  Notion  as  Notion.  It  was 
shown  under  the  heading  of  Necessity  how  the  transition  from 
the  sphere  of  this  latter  into  the  Notion  takes  place  in  itself; 
and  indeed  this  transition  presented  itself  as  the  genesis  of  the 
Notion  at  the  beginning  of  this  Book.  Here  Necessity  has  this 
position,  that  it  is  the  reality  or  object  of  the  Notion,  while  the 
Notion  into  which  it  passes  over  is  now  as  object  of  this  same. 
But  the  transition  itself  remains  unchanged.  Here  too  it  is  only 


460  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

in  itself,  and  as  yet  lies  outside  Cognition  in  our  reflection ;  that 
is,  it  is  the  Necessity  (which  as  yet  is  inner)  of  this  Cognition. 
Only  the  result  is  for  it.  The  Idea,  in  so  far  as  the  Notion  is 
now  for  itself  the  Notion  determinate  in  and  for  itself,  is  the 
Practical  Idea,  or  Action. 

B 
THE  IDEA  OF  THE  GOOD 

Since  the  Notion  which  is  its  own  object  is  determined  in  and 
for  itself,  the  subject  is  determined  for  itself  as  individual.  As 
subjective  the  Notion  has  again  the  presupposition  of  an  other- 
ness which  is  in  itself;  it  is  the  impulse  to  realize  itself,  or  the 
end  which  tries  to  give  itself  objectivity  in  the  objective  world, 
and  to  execute  itself,  through  itself.  In  the  Theoretical  Idea  the 
subjective  Notion  stands  opposed,  as  the  universal  which  is 
indeterminate  in  and  for  itself,  to  the  objective  world,  from 
which  it  draws  determinate  content  and  fulfilment.  But  in  the 
Practical  Idea  it  stands  opposed  as  actual  to  the  actual.  But 
the  self-certainty  which  the  subject  has  in  the  fact  of  its  deter- 
minedness  in  and  for  itself,  is  a  certainty  of  its  own  actuality 
and  of  the  non-actuality  of  the  world ;  what  is  null  for  it  is  not 
only  the  world's  otherness  as  abstract  universality,  but  its 
individuality  and  the  determinations  of  its  individuality.  The 
subject  has  here  appropriated  objectivity  for  itself;  its  deter- 
minateness  within  itself  is  the  objective,  for  it  is  universality 
which  equally  is  just  determinate;  the  heretofore  objective 
world,  on  the  other  hand,  is  only  something  posited,  something 
immediately  determined  in  manifold  ways ;  but,  because  it  is  only 
immediately  determined,  it  lacks  the  unity  of  the  Notion  within 
itself  and  for  itself  is  null. 

This  determinateness,  which  is  contained  in  the  Notion,  and 
is  equal  to  it,  and  includes  within  itself  the  demand  of  the  indi- 
vidual external  actuality,  is  the  Good.  It  appears  with  the  dignity 
of  absoluteness,  because  it  is  the  totality  of  the  Notion  within 
itself— the  objective  in  the  form  simultaneously  of  free  unity 
and  subjectivity.  This  Idea  is  higher  than  the  Idea  of  Cognition 
which  has  already  been  considered,  for  it  has  not  only  the 
dignity  of  the  universal  but  also  of  the  simply  actual. — It  is 
impulse  in  so  far  as  this  actual  is  still  subjective  and  posits  itself 


.  THE   IDEA  OF   COGNITION  461 

and  has  not  at  the  same  time  the  form  of  immediate  pre- 
supposition; its  impulse  towards  self-realization  is  not  really 
the  impulse  to  give  itself  objectivity  (for  this  it  has  in  itself), 
but  is  only  this  empty  form  of  immediacy. — Consequently  the 
activity  of  the  end  is  not  directed  against  itself,  for  the  purpose 
of  absorbing  and  assimilating  a  given  determination ;  it  aims 
rather  at  positing  its  own  determination,  and,  by  transcending 
the  determinations  of  the  external  world,  at  giving  itself  reality 
in  the  form  of  external  actuality. — The  Idea  of  Will  as  self- 
determining  for  itself  has  the  content  within  itself.  This  content 
is  determinate,  and  as  such  is  finite  and  restricted :  self-deter- 
mination is  essentially  particularization,  since  the  intro-Re- 
flection  of  Will  as  negative  unity  in  general  is  also  individuality 
in  the  sense  of  the  exclusion  and  presupposing  of  an  Other. 
But  still  the  particularity  of  the  content  is  at  this  point  infinite 
through  the  form  of  the  Notion  whose  peculiar  determinateness 
it  is,  while  in  it  the  Notion  has  negative  self-identity  and  there- 
fore not  only  a  particularity,  but  also  its  infinite  individuality. 
The  finitude  of  content  in  the  Practical  Idea,  which  has  been 
mentioned,  is  therefore  identical  with  the  fact  that  as  yet  it 
is  not  realized  Idea ;  for  the  content,  the  Notion  is  that  which 
is  in  and*  for  itself;  here  it  is  the  Idea  in  the  form  of  objectivity 
which  is  for  itself.  For  this  reason  (i)  the  subjective  is  no  longer 
merely  posited,  arbitrary,  or  contingent,  but  is  absolute;  but 
(2)  this  form  of  existence,  or  Being-for-Self,  has  not  yet  also 
the  form  of  Being-in-Self.  That  which  purely  formally  appears 
as  opposition  appears  as  simple  determinateness  of  the  content 
in  the  comtent,  which  is  the  form  of  the  Notion  reflected  so  as 
to  be  simple  identity;  hence,  although  valid  in  and  for  itself, 
the  Good  is  some  particular  end,  which  however  is  not  merely 
to  receive  its  truth  through  its  realization,  but  already  is  the 
true  for  itself. 

The  syllogism  of  immediate  realization  itself  requires  here 
no  further  exposition ;  it  is  nothing  whatever  but  the  syllogism 
of  external  adequacy  to  End  which  was  considered  above ;  the 
only  distinction  lies  in  the  content.  In  external  adequacy  to 
End  (since  it  is  formal)  this  content  was  merely  indeterminate 
and  finite  in  general ;  and  although  here  too  it  is  finite,  it  also 
has,  as  such,  absolute  validity.  But  a  further  distinction  arises 
in  regard  to  the  conclusion,  that  is,  the  Realized  End.  In  the 


462  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

process  of  realization  the  finite  End  equally  reaches  only  the 
Means;  and,  since  in  its  beginning  it  is  not  already  an  End 
determinate  in  and  for  itself,  it  remains  in  its  realization  some- 
thing which  is  not  in  and  for  itself.  And  if  the  Good  in  turn 
is  fixed  as  finite  and  is  essentially  so,  then,  in  spite  of  its  internal 
infinity,  it  cannot  escape  the  fate  of  finitude — a  fate  which 
appears  in  more  forms  than  one.  The  realized  Good  is  good 
by  virtue  of  what  it  is  already  in  the  Subjective  End,  in  its 
Idea ;  realization  gives  it  an  external  existence ;  but  this  exist- 
ence is  determined  only  as  an  externality  which  in  and  for 
itself  is  null,  and  therefore  in  it  the  Good  has  reached  only  an 
existence  which  is  contingent  and  subject  to  destruction,  and 
not  a  realization  corresponding  to  its  Idea. — And  further,  since 
with  respect  to  its  content  it  is  restricted,  there  are  varieties  of 
Good;  the  existent  Good  is  subject  to  destruction  not  only 
through  external  contingency  and  through  evil,  but  also  through 
the  collision  and  conflict  of  the  Good  itself.  An  objective  world 
is  presupposed  to  the  Good,  a  world  which  constitutes  the 
subjectivity  and  finitude  of  the  Good  and,  as  being  other, 
pursues  its  own  course :  and  in  it  even  the  realization  of  the 
Good  is  exposed  to  obstacles,  which  may  sometimes  be  insuper- 
able. Thus  the  Good  remains  an  Ought ;  it  is  in  and  for  itself, 
but  Being,  as  last  and  abstract  immediacy,  remains  determined 
against  it  as  a  Not-being  too.  Although  the  Idea  of  the  per- 
fected Good  is  an  absolute  postulate,  it  is  no  more  than  a 
postulate, — that  is,  the  absolute  infected  with  the  determinate- 
ness  of  subjectivity.  The  two  worlds  still  remain  in  opposition; 
one  a  realm  of  subjectivity  in  the  pure  spaces  of  transparent' 
thought,  the  other  a  realm  of  objectivity  in  the  element  of  an 
externally  manifold  actuality,  which  is  an  unexplored  realm 
of  darkness.  The  complete  development  of  the  unresolved 
contradiction,  of  that  absolute  end  which  the  barrier  of  this 
actuality  insuperably  opposes,  has  been  considered  more  closely 
in  the  Phenomenology  of  Spirit  (Eng.  tr.,  pp.  610  sqq.). — Since 
now  the  Idea  contains  the  moment  of  perfect  determinateness, 
the  other  Notion,  to  which  this  Notion  stands  related  in  the 
Idea,  contains  in  its  subjectivity  the  moment  of  an  Object; 
consequently  the  Idea  here  enters  into  the  shape  of  self- 
consciousness  and,  in  this  one  respect,  coincides  with  the 
presentation  of  the  latter. 


THE  IDEA  OF  COGNITION  463 

The  Practical  Idea  still,  however,  lacks  the  moment  of  real 
consciousness,  which  would  mean  that  the  moment  of  actuality 
in  the  Notion  had  reached  for  itself  the  determination  of 
external  Being. — This  lack  may  also  be  considered  in  this  way, 
that  the  Practical  Idea  is  still  wanting  the  moment  of  the 
Theorfetical  Idea.  For  in  the  latter  it  is  only  the  determination 
of  universality  that  stands  on  the  side  of  the  subjective  Notion 
which  comes  to  be  intuited  by  the  Notion  within  itself;  Cog- 
nition knows  itself  only  as  apprehension,  as  the  self-identity 
of  the  Notion,  which  for  itself  is  indeterminate :  fulfilment,  that 
is,  objectivity  determined  in  and  for  itself,  is  given  to  it,  and 
that  which  truly  is  is  the  actuality  that  is  present  independently 
of  subjective  positing.  The  Practical  Idea  on  the  other  hand 
counts  this  actuality  (which  at  the  same  time  opposes  it  as  an 
insuperable  barrier)  as  that  which  in  and  for  itself  is  null, 
which  is  to  receive  its  true  determination  and  sole  value  through 
the  ends  of  the  Good.  Will  itself  consequently  bars  the  way  to 
its  own  goal  in  so  far  as  it  separates  itself  from  Cognition  and 
external  actuality  does  not,  for  it,  obtain  the  form  of  that  which 
truly  is ;  consequently  the  Idea  of  the  Good  can  find  its  com- 
plement only  in  the  Idea  of  the  True. 

But  it  makes  this  transition  through  itself.  In  the  syllogism 
of  action  one  premiss  is  the  immediate  relation  of  the  good  end 
to  actuality,  of  which  it  makes  itself  master,  directing  it  (in  the 
second  premiss)  as  external  means  against  external  actuality. 
For  the  subjective  Notion  the  Good  is  the  objective;  actuality 
in  its  existence  opposes  it  as  insuperable  barrier  only  in  so  far 
as  itself  st^ll  has  the  determination  of  immediate  existence,  and 
not  of  something  objective  in  the  sense  of  Being-in-and-for-Self ; 
rather,  actuality  is  either  the  evil  or  the  indifferent  and  merely 
dcterminable,  which  does  not  contain  its  value  in  itself.  But 
the  Practical  Idea  has  itself  already  transcended  this  abstract 
Being  which  stands  opposed  to  the  Good  in  the  second  premiss ; 
the  first  premiss  of  its  action  is  the  immediate  objectivity  of 
the  Notion,  according  to  which  the  end  communicates  itself 
to  actuality  without  any  resistance  and  is  thus  in  simple  and 
identical  relation  with  it.  In  so  far,  then,  only  tine  meanings  of 
its  two  premisses  need  be  brought  together.  That  which  in  the 
first   premiss   is   already   immediately   consummated   by   the 
objective  Notion,  is  only  complemented  in  the  second  by  being 


464  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

posited  through  mediation  and  hence  for  the  objective  Notion. 
In  the  End-relation  in  general  the  Realized  End  is  also  only 
a  Means,  but  conversely  the  Means  is  also  the  Realized  End ; 
and  similarly  in  the  syllogism  of  the  Good  the  second  premiss 
is  immediately  present  implicitly  in  the  first;  but  this  imme- 
diacy does  not  suffice,  and  the  second  premiss  is  already  pos- 
tulated for  the  first  Good ;— the  realization  of  the  Good  in  the 
teeth  of  an  opposing  and  other  actuality  is  the  mediation  which 
is  essential  for  the  immediate  relation  and  actualization  of  the 
Good.  For  it  is  only  the  first  negation  or  the  otherness  of  the 
Notion,— an  objectivity  which  would  mean  that  the  Notion 
was  submerged  in  externality.   The  second   negation  is  the 
transcendence  of  this  otherness,  whereby  now  the  immediate 
realization  of  the  end  becomes  actuality  of  the  Good  as  Notion 
which  is  for  itself,  since  here  the  Notion  is  posited  as  identical 
with  itself,  not  with  an  Other,  and  therefore  alone  as  free.  If 
now  in  spite  of  this  the  end  of  the  Good  should  not  be  realized, 
then  this  is  a  relapse  of  the  Notion  to  the  standpoint  which 
the  Notion  has   before  its  activity — the  standpoint  of    that 
actuality  which  was  determined  as  null  and  yet  was  presup- 
posed as  real.  This  relapse  becomes  a  progress  to  bad  infinity; 
it  has  its  only  ground  in  the  fact  (i)  that  in  the  transcendence 
of  this  abstract  reality  the  transcendence  is  equally  immedi- 
ately forgotten,  or  (2)  that  it  is  forgotten  that  this  reality  has 
already  been  presupposed  as  non-objective  actuality  which  is 
null  in  and  for  itself.  This  repetition  of  the  presupposition  of 
the  non-realized  end  after  the  actual  realization  of  the  end 
consequently  also  determines  itself  in  the  following  manner  : 
the  subjective  attitude  of  the  objective  Notion  is  reproduced 
and  perpetuated,  whence  the  finitude  of  the  Good  as  permanent 
truth  (with  respect  to  both  its  form  and  its  content),  as  well  as 
its  actualization,  still  appears  merely  as  an  individual  and  not 
as  a  universal  act. — In  fact  this  determinateness  has  transcended 
itself  in  the  actualization  of  the  Good.  The  objective  Notion 
is  still  limited  by  its  own  view  of  itself,  which  vanishes  by  its 
reflection  upon  what  its  actualization  is  in  itself.  By  this  view 
it  stands  only  Jn  its  own  way,  and  in  this  matter  must  turn,  not 
against  any  outer  actuality,  but  against  itself. 

For  in  the  second  premiss  only  a  one-sided   Being-for-Self 
is   produced,  whence  the  product  appears  as  subjective   and 


THE   IDEA   OF   COGNITION  465 

individual,  so  that  in  it  the  first  presupposition  is  repeated; 
and  in  truth  this  activity  is  equally  the  positing  of  the  identity 
(which  is  in  itself)  of  the  objective  Notion  and  the  immediate 
actuality.  By  the  presupposition  the  latter  is  determined  as 
having  a  reality  of  appearance  only,  being  null  in  and  for  itself, 
and  dtterly  determinable  by  the  objective  Notion.  By  the 
activity  of  the  objective  Notion  its  external  actuality  is  altered, 
and  its  determination  is  accordingly  transcended ;  and  by  this 
very  process  it  loses  merely  apparent  reality,  external  deter- 
minability,  and  nullity,  and  it  is  thus  posited  as  being  in  and 
for  itself.  Presupposition  in  general  is  here  transcended, — that 
is,  the  determination  of  the  Good  as  an  end  which  is  merely 
subjective  and  restricted  in  its  content,  the  necessity  of  realizing 
it  by  subjective  activity,  and  this  activity  itself.  In  the  result 
mediation  transcends  itself;  the  result  is  an  immediacy  which 
is  not  the  reconstitution  of  the  presupposition  but  rather  the 
fact  of  its  transcendedness.  The  Idea  of  the  Notion  which  is 
determined  in  and  for  itself  is  thus  posited  no  longer  merely  in 
the  active  subject,  but  equally  as  an  immediate  actuality;  and 
the  latter  conversely  is  posited  as  it  is  in  Cognition,  as  objectivity 
which  is  veritable.  Hereby  the  individuality  of  the  subject,  with 
which  if  was  affected  by  its  presupposition,  has  disappeared ; 
it  is  thus  now  as  free  and  universal  self-identity;  for  it  the 
objectivity  of  the  Notion  is  given,  and  immediately  present  for 
the  subject,  just  as  much  as  the  subject  knows  itself  to  be  the 
Notion  determined  in  and  for  itself.  In  this  result  then  Cog- 
nition is  reconstructed  and  united  with  the  Practical  Idea ;  the 
actuality €which  is  found  as  given  is  at  the  same  time  determined 
as  the  realized  absolute  end, — not  however  (as  in  inquiring 
Cognition)  merely  as  objective  world  without  the  subjectivity 
of  the  Notion,  but  as  objective  world  whose  inner  ground  and 
actual  persistence  is  the  Notion.  This  is  the  Absolute  Idea. 


CHAPTER  III 
THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA 

THE  Absolute  Idea  has  now  turned  out  to  be  the  identity  of 
the  Theoretical  and  the  Practical  Idea ;  each  of  these  by  itself 
is  one-sided  and  contains  the  Idea  itself  only  as  a  sought  Beyond 
and  an  unattained  goal;  each  consequently  is  a  synthesis  of 
the  tendency,  and  both  contains  and  does  not  contain  the  Idea, 
and  passes  from  one  concept  to  the  other,  but,  failing  to  com- 
bine the  two  concepts,  does  not  pass  beyond  their  contradiction. 
The  Absolute  Idea,  as  the  reasonable  Notion  which  in  its  reality 
coincides  only  with  itself,  is  the  return  to  Life  by  reason  of  this 
immediacy  of  its  objective  identity;  but  on  the  other  hand  it 
has  equally  transcended  this  form  of  its  immediacy,  and  con- 
tains the  highest  opposition  within  itself.  The  Notion  is  not 
only  Seele  but  also  is  free  and  subjective  Notion,  which  is  for 
itself  and  therefore  has  personality, — the  practical  and  objective 
Notion,  determined  in  and  for  itself,  which,  as  person,  is 
impenetrable  and  atomic  subjectivity;  while  at  the  same  time 
it  is  not  exclusive  individuality,  but  is,  for  itself,  universality 
and  cognition,  and  in  its  Other  has  its  own  objectivity  for 
object.  Everything  else  is  error  and  gloom,  opinion,  striving, 
caprice,  and  transitoriness ;  the  Absolute  Idea  alone  is  Being, 
imperishable  Life,  self-knowing  truth,  and  the  whole  of  truth. 
The  Absolute  Idea  is  the  only  object  and  content  of  philo- 
sophy. As  it  contains  every  determinateness,  and  its  essence  is 
to  return  to  itself  through  its  self-determination  or  particu- 
larization,  it  has  various  phases.  It  is  the  business  of  philosophy 
to  recognize  it  in  them.  Nature  and  Spirit  are  different  manners 
of  presenting  its  existence ;  art  and  religion,  different  manners 
in  which  it  comprehends  itself  and  gives  itself  an  adequate 
existence.  Philosophy  has  the  same  content  and  end  as  art  and 
religion;  but  K  is  the  highest  manner  of  comprehending  the 
Absolute  Idea,  because  its  manner  is  the  highest — the  Notion. 
Consequently  it  comprehends  within  itself  these  phases  of  real 
and  ideal  finitude,  as  well  as  infinitude  and  holiness,  and  under- 


THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA  467 

stands  both  them  and  itself.  The  derivation  and  cognizance  of 
these  particular  modes  is  the  further  business  of  the  particular 
philosophic  sciences.  The  logical  element  of  the  Absolute  Idea 
may  also  be  called  one  of  its  modes ;  but  mode  denotes  a  par- 
ticular manner,  or  determinateness  of  form,  while  the  logical 
is  the  general  mode  in  which  each  severally  is  transcended  and 
enfolded.  The  logical  Idea  is  itself  in  its  pure  essence  when  it 
is  enclosed  in  its  Notion  in  simple  identity  and  has  not  yet 
entered  into  the  state  of  showing  in  any  form-determinateness. 
Consequently  the  Logic  represents  the  self-movement  of  the 
Absolute  Idea  only  as  the  original  word,  which  is  an  expression ; 
an  expression,  however,  which  as  external  has  immediately 
vanished  again  because  it  is.  The  self-determination  therefore 
in  which  alone  the  Idea  is,  is  to  hear  itself  speak:  it  is  in 
pure  thought,  where  the  distinction  is  not  yet  any  otherness, 
but  is  and  remains  completely  transparent  to  itself. — Thus  the 
logical  Idea  has  itself  as  infinite  form  for  content, — form  which 
is  the  opposite  of  content  in  so  far  as  the  latter  is  the  form- 
determination  which  has  passed  into  itself  and  in  identity  has 
transcended  itself,  which  it  has  done  in  such  a  manner  that 
this  concrete  identity  stands  opposite  to  that  which  is  developed 
as  form.  As  opposed  to  form,  content  appears  as  Other  and 
as  given,  while  the  former  simply  stands  related,  its  deter- 
minateness being  at  the  same  time  posited  as  show. — The 
Absolute  Idea  itself  has  only  this  further  content,  that  the  form- 
determination  is  its  own  perfected  totality — the  pure  Notion, 
Now  the  determinateness  of  the  Idea  and  the  whole  evolution 
of  this  Determinateness  constituted  the  object  of  the  Science 
of  Logic,  in  whose  course  the  Absolute  Idea  has  emerged  for 
itself;  but,  for  itself,  it  has  turned  out  to  be  this  fact,  that  the 
determinateness  has  not  the  shape  of  a  content,  but  is  simply 
as  form,  and  that  accordingly  the  Idea  is  simply  the  universal 
Idea.  What  remains  therefore  to  be  considered  here  is  not  a 
content  as  such,  but  the  universal  element  of  its  form — that  is, 
the  method. 

Method  at  first  may  appear  as  the  mere  manner  and  fashion 
of  cognition,  and  indeed  such  is  its  nature.  But  manner  and 
fashion  as  method  are  not  only  a  modality  of  Being,  determi- 
nate in  and  for  itself,  but  are  posited  as  modality  of  cognition 
as  determined  by  the  Notion,  and  as  form  in  so  far  as  form 


468  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

is  the  soul  of  all  objectivity  and  every  content  otherwise  deter- 
mined has  its  truth  in  form  alone.  If  content  is  assumed  as 
given  to  method,  and  is  assumed  to  be  of  peculiar  nature,  then, 
in  such  a  determination,  both  the  method  and  logic  in  general 
are  a  merely  external  form.  Against  this,  however,  an  appeal 
can  be  made  not  only  to  the  fundamental  notion  of  logic ;  its 
whole  course  too,  in  which  every  shape  of  a  given  content,  of 
every  object,  occurred,  has  demonstrated  their  transition  and 
untruth;  and  it  has  turned  out,  not  that  some  given  object 
could  be  the  foundation,  to  which  the  absolute  form  would  be 
related  as  a  merely  external  and  contingent  determination,  but 
on  the  contrary  that  the  form  is  the  absolute  foundation  and 
ultimate  truth.  Thus  the  method  has  emerged  as  the  Notion 
which  knows  itself  and  has  for  object  itself  as  the  Absolute, 
both  subjective  and  objective,  that  is,  as  the  pure  correspondence 
between  the  Notion  and  its  Reality,  as  an  existence  which  the 
Notion  itself  is. 

Accordingly,  what  must  now  be  considered  as  method  is  no 
more  than  the  movement  of  the  Notion  itself,  whose  nature  has 
already  been  understood.  This  meaning,  however,  is  now  added, 
that  the  Notion  is  everything  and  that  its  movement  is  the 
universal  and  absolute  activity,  the  self-determining  and  self- 
realizing  movement.  Hence  the  method  must  be  recognized 
to  be  universal  without  restriction,  to  be  a  mode  both  internal 
and  external,  and  the  force  which  is  utterly  infinite,  which  no 
object  can  resist  in  so  far  as  it  presents  itself  as  external  and  as 
removed  from  and  independent  of  reason,  while  also  it  can 
neither  have  a  particular  nature  as  against  it  nor  fail  to  be 
penetrated  by  it.  The  method  therefore  is  both  soul  and  sub- 
stance, and  nothing  is  either  conceived  or  known  in  its  truth 
except  in  so  far  as  it  is  completely  subject  to  the  method ;  it  is 
the  peculiar  method  of  each  individual  fact  because  its  activity 
is  the  Notion.  This  is  also  the  truer  meaning  of  its  universality: 
according  to  the  universality  of  reflection  it  is  merely  taken  as 
the  method  for  everything;  but  according  to  the  universality 
of  the  Idea  it  is  both  the  general  manner  of  cognizing  (of  the 
subjectively  selr-knowing  Notion)  and  also  the  objective  general 
manner  (or  rather  the  substantiality)  of  things — that  is,  of 
Notions,  in  so  far  as  at  first  they  appear  as  Others  to  imagina- 
tion and  reflection.  For  this  reason  it  is  not  only  the  highest, 


THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA  469 

or  rather  the  sole  and  absolute,  force  of  Reason,  but  also  its 
highest  and  only  impulse,  by  means  of  which  it  finds  and 
recognizes  itself,  through  itself,  in  everything. — Furthermore 
the  distinction  between  the  method  and  the  Notion  as  such 
— the  characteristic  of  the  method — is  here  indicated.  The 
Notion  considered  by  itself  appeared  in  its  immediacy;  re- 
flection, or  the  Notion  which  contemplated  it,  formed  part  of 
our  knowledge.  The  method  is  this  knowledge  itself,  and  for 
this  knowledge  the  Notion  is  not  only  as  object,  but  is  its 
own  peculiar  and  subjective  activity,  or  the  instrument  and 
means  of  cognitive  activity,  distinct  from  it,  but  as  its  own 
peculiar  essentiality.  In  inquiring  cognition  the  method  is 
likewise  in  the  position  of  a  tool,  of  a  means  which  stands  on 
the  subjective  side,  whereby  the  method  relates  itself  to  the 
object.  In  this  syllogism  the  subject  is  one  extreme  and  the 
object  the  other,  and  by  its  method  the  former  attaches  itself 
to  the  latter,  but  does  not  therein,  for  itself,  attach  itself  to 
itself.  The  extremes  remain  distinct  because  subject,  method, 
and  object  are  not  posited  as  the  one  identical  Notion,  and 
the  conclusion  consequently  is  always  the  formal  conclusion; 
the  premiss,  in  which  the  subject  posits  the  form  (as  its  method) 
on  its  own  side,  is  an  immediate  determination,  and  con- 
sequently contains  the  determinations  of  form,  of  Definition, 
Classification,  and  so  on,  as  facts  discovered  existing  in  the 
subject — as  was  seen.  But  in  true  cognition  the  method  is  not 
merely  a  quantity  of  certain  determinations :  it  is  the  fact  that 
the  Notion  is  determined  in  and  for  itself,  and  is  the  mean 
only  because  it  equally  has  the  significance  of  objective,  so 
that,  in  the  conclusion,  it  does  not  merely  achieve  an  external 
determinateness  through  the  method,  but  is  posited  in  its 
identity  with  the  subjective  Notion. 

i.  Thus  the  method  constitutes  the  determinations  of  the 
Notion  itself  and  their  relations,  which  must  now  be  considered 
in  their  significance  as  determinations  of  the  method. — First 
we  must  begin  from  the  beginning.  This  beginning  was  men- 
tioned at  the  commencement  of  the  Logic  and  also,  above, 
under  Subjective  Cognition,  and  it  was  shown  that,  unless  it 
is  made  arbitrarily  and  with  categorical  unconsciousness,  it 
may  seem  to  cause  many  difficulties,  but  is  really  of  extremely 
simple  nature.  Because  it  is  the  beginning  its  content  is  imme- 


470  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

diate,  but  an  immediate  which  has  the  meaning  and  form  of 
abstract  universality.  If  otherwise  it  is  a  content  of  Being  or  of 
Essence  or  of  the  Notion,  then,  in  so  far  as  it  is  immediate,  it 
is  something  taken  up  or  discovered  externally,  and  assertoric. 
But,  first,  it  is  not  an  immediate  entity  of  sensuous  intuition  or 
of  imagination,  but  of  thought,  which,  because  of  its  imme- 
diacy, may  also  be  called  a  supersensuous  or  internal  intuition. 
The  immediate  of  sensuous  intuition  is  a  manifold  and  in- 
dividual. But  Cognition  is  Notion-forming  thought,  and  con- 
sequently its  beginning  is  only  in  the  element  of  thought — it  is 
simple  and  universal. — Mention  was  made  of  this  form  above, 
under  Definition.  At  the  beginning  of  finite  cognition  univer- 
sality is  likewise  recognized  as  essential  determination,  but  is 
only  taken  as  determination  of  thought  and  of  Notion  in 
opposition  to  Being.  In  fact  this  first  universality  is  immediate, 
and,  for  this  reason,  equally  has  the  meaning  of  Being ;  for 
Being  is  precisely  this  abstract  self-relation.  Being  requires  no 
other  derivation,  as  though  it  belonged  to  the  abstract  part  of 
Definition  only  because  it  was  taken  from  sensuous  intuition 
or  some  other  source,  and  only  in  so  far  as  it  may  be  possible  to 
point  it  out.  This  pointing  and  derivation  relate  to  a  mediation 
which  is  more  than  a  mere  beginning,  and  which  does  not 
belong  to  the  formation  of  Notions  by  thought,  but  is  the 
elevation  of  imagination,  of  empirical  and  reasoning  conscious- 
ness, to  the  standpoint  of  thought.  According  to  the  current 
distinction  between  thought  or  Notion  and  Being,  it  appears 
an  important  truth  that  the  former,  by  itself,  has  no  being,  and 
that  the  latter  has  its  own  ground  which  is  independent  of 
thought.  But  the  simple  determination  of  Being  is  in  itself  so 
poor  that,  if  only  for  that  reason,  it  need  not  be  seriously  con- 
sidered; the  universal  is  itself  immediately  this  immediate 
because,  as  abstract,  it  is  merely  the  abstract  self-relation  which 
is  Being.  In  fact  the  demand  for  the  demonstration  of  Being 
has  a  further,  inner  meaning,  which  does  not  contain  merely 
this  abstract  determination :  here  it  is  meant  that  the  realization 
of  the  whole  Notion  is  demanded,  and  this  does  not  lie  in  the 
beginning  itself,  but  is  the  goal  and  task  of  the  entire  further 
development  of  cognition.  And  further  the  content  of  the 
beginning  is  to  be  justified  by  this  process  of  pointing  out,  in 
inner  or  outer  perception,  and  is  to  be  certified  as  something 


THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA  471 

true  or  correct:  therefore  now  it  is  not  the  form  of  universality 
as  such  that  is  meant,  but  its  determinateness — which  will  soon 
have  to  be  discussed.  The  certification  of  the  determinate 
content  with  which  the  beginning  is  made  seems  to  lie  behind 
it;  but  in  fact  it  must  be  considered  as  an  advance — that  is, 
if  the  certification  belongs  to  Notion-forming  Cognition. 

Thus  the  beginning  has  for  the  method  no  other  determinate- 
ness  than  that  of  being  the  simple  and  universal :  and  this  is 
just  the  determinateness  which  vitiates  it.  Universality  is  the 
pure  and  simple  Notion,  and  the  method,  as  consciousness  of 
the  Notion,  knows  that  universality  is  only  moment  and  that 
the  Notion  is  in  it  not  yet  determined  in  and  for  itself.  With 
this  consciousness,  however,  which  would  develop  the  begin- 
ning only  for  the  sake  of  the  method,  the  method  would  be 
something  merely  formal  and  posited  in  external  reflection. 
But  the  method  is  the  immanent  and  objective  form,  and  there- 
fore the  immediate  element  of  the  beginning  must  be  inherently 
defective  and  must  be  endowed  with  the  impulse  of  self- 
development.  In  the  absolute  method,  however,  the  universal 
does  not  mean  the  merely  abstract  but  the  objectively  universal, 
that  is,  that  which  is  in  itself  the  concrete  totality,  but  not  as 
posited  or/0r  itself.  Even  the  abstract  universal  considered  as 
such  in  the  Notion  (that  is,  according  to  its  truth)  is  not  only 
the  simple:  as  abstract  it  is  already  posited  as  affected  with 
a  negation.  For  this  reason  there  is  neither  in  actuality  nor  in 
thought  anything  so  simple  and  abstract  as  is  commonly 
imagined.  Such  a  simple  entity  is  a  mere  illusion  which  is  based 
on  ignorance  of  what  in  fact  is  given. — That  which  begins  was 
above  determined  as  the  immediate;  the  immediacy  of  the 
universal  is  the  same  as  that  which  here  is  expressed  as  Being- 
in-Self  without  Being-for-Self. — Consequently  it  may  well  be 
said  that  every  beginning  must  be  made  from  the  Absolute, 
while  every  progress  is  merely  the  exhibition  of  the  Absolute 
in  so  far  as  that  which  is  in  itself  is  the  Notion.  But  just  because 
as  yet  it  is  only  in  itself,  it  equally  is  neither  the  Absolute  nor 
the  posited  Notion  nor  yet  the  Idea,  for  these  are  the  fact  that 
Being-in-Self  is  only  an  abstract,  one-sided  moment.  The  pro- 
gress is  therefore  not  a  kind  of  overflow,  which  it  would  be  if 
in  truth  that  which  begins  were  already  the  Absolute ;  rather 
the  progress  consists  in  this,  that  the  universal  determines  itself 


472  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

and  is  the  universal  for  itself >  that  is,  is  equally  also  individual 
and  subject.  It  is  the  Absolute  only  in  its  completion. 

It  may  be  recalled  that  the  beginning,  which  in  itself  is 
concrete  totality,  can  also  be  free  as  such,  and  that  its  imme- 
diacy may  have  the  determination  of  an  external  existence : 
the  germ  of  life  and  the  subjective  end  in  general  have  shown 
themselves  to  be  such  beginnings,  and  both  therefore  are  them- 
selves impulses.  The  non-spiritual  and  non-living  on  the  other 
hand  are  the  concrete  Notion  only  as  real  possibility;  cause  is 
the  highest  stage  in  which  the  concrete  Notion  as  beginning 
has  an  immediate  existence  in  the  sphere  of  necessity ;  but  it 
is  not  yet  a  subject  which,  as  such,  preserves  itself  also  in  its 
actual  realization.  For  example  the  sun,  and  in  general  what- 
ever is  not  living,  are  determinate  existences  in  which  the  real 
possibility  remains  an  inner  totality;  their  moments  are  not 
posited  in  them  in  a  subjective  form,  and  in  so  far  as  they  do 
realize  themselves  they  acquire  an  existence  through  other 
corporeal  individuals. 

2.  The  concrete  totality  which  is  the  beginning  contains  as 
such  the  beginning  of  progress  and  of  development.  As  concrete 
it  is  internally  differentiated;  but  by  reason  of  its  original 
immediacy  the  first  differentiations  are  various.  The  immediate, 
however,  as  self-relating  universality  and  as  subject,  is  also  the 
unity  of  these  various  terms. — This  Reflection  is  the  first  stage 
of  advance — the  emergence  of  difference,  judgment,  deter- 
mination in  general.  The  essential  thing  is  that  the  absolute 
method  finds  and  recognizes  in  itself  the  determination  of 
universal.  The  procedure  of  common-sense  finite  cognition 
here  is  that  it  takes  up  again  equally  externally  from  the  con- 
crete that  which  it  had  left  out  in  the  abstractive  creation  of 
this  universal.  The  absolute  method  on  the  other  hand  does 
not  hold  the  position  of  external  reflection ;  it  draws  the  deter- 
minate element  directly  from  its  object  itself,  since  it  is  the 
object's  immanent  principle  and  soul. — It  was  this  that  Plato 
demanded  of  cognition,  that  it  should  consider  things  in  and 
for  themselves,  and  that  while  partly  considering  them  in  their 
universality,  it  should  also  hold  fast  to  them,  not  catching  at 
externals,  examples,  and  comparisons,  but  contemplating  the 
things  alone  and  bringing  before  consciousness  what  is  imma- 
nent in  them. — In  so  far  the  method  of  Absolute  Cognition  is 


THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA  473 

analytic.  If  it  discovers  the  further  determination  of  its  original 
universal  in  that  universal  alone,  then  this  fact  is  the  absolute 
objectivity  of  the  Notion,  whose  certainty  the  method  is. — But 
equally  the  method  is  synthetic,  since  its  object,  determined 
immediately  as  simple  universal,  shows  itself  to  be  an  Other, 
by  means  of  the  determinateness  which  it  possesses  by  virtue  of 
its  immediacy  and  universality.  But  this  relation  of  various, 
which  thus  the  object  is  within  itself,  is  no  longer  what  is 
meant  by  synthesis  in  finite  cognition ;  finite  cognition  equally 
determines  the  synthesis  (analytically)  as  being  relation  in  the 
Notion,  and  this  alone  distinguishes  it  completely  from  this  other 
synthesis. 

This  equally  synthetic  and  analytic  moment  of  the  Judgment, 
by  which  the  original  universal  determines  itself  out  of  itself 
to  be  its  own  Other,  may  rightly  be  called  the  dialectic  moment. 
Dialectic  is  one  of  those  ancient  sciences  which  have  been  most 
misjudged  in  modern  metaphysics  and  in  the  popular  philo- 
sophy of  ancients  and  moderns  alike.  Diogenes  Laertius  says 
of  Plato  that,  while  Thales  was  the  founder  of  natural  philosophy 
and  Sokrates  of  moral  philosophy,  he  was  the  founder  of  the 
third  science  which  belongs  to  philosophy,  namely  dialectic ; — 
so  that  this  was  counted  as  his  highest  merit  by  the  ancients, 
although  it  was  often  quite  neglected  by  those  who  were  fullest 
of  him  in  their  speech.  Dialectic  has  often  been  considered  an 
art,  as  though  it  rested  upon  a  subjective  talent  and  did  not 
belong  to  the  objectivity  of  the  Notion.  The  shape  and  result 
which  it  had  in  Kant's  philosophy  have  been  shown  by  the 
definite  examples  which  express  his  view  of  it.  It  must  be 
regarded  as  a  step  of  infinite  importance  that  dialectic  has  once 
more  been  recognized  as  necessary  to  reason,  although  the 
opposite  conclusion  must  be  drawn  to  that  which  was  reached 
by  Kant. 

Dialectic  generally  appears  as  contingent;  but,  further,  it 
usually  has  this  form,  that  opposite  determinations  are  demon- 
strated in  the  same  object  (such  as  the  world,  motion,  or  point, 
and  so  on) :  for  example  (in  the  above  order),  finitude  in  space 
and  time,  presence  at  a  given  point,  absolute  negation  of 
space, — and  also,  with  equal  necessity,  infinity  in  space  and 
time,  non-presence  at  a  given  point,  and  a  relation  to  space 
and,  consequently,  spatiality.  The  elder  Eleatic  school  applied 


474  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

its  dialectic  chiefly  against  motion,  Plato  frequently  against 
contemporary  ideas   and   concepts    (especially   those   of  the 
Sophists),   but   also   against  pure   categories   and   reflection- 
determinations  ;  the  developed  later  scepticism  extended  it  not 
only  to  the  immediate  so-called  data  of  consciousness  and 
maxims  of  ordinary  life,  but  also  to  all  the  concepts  of  science. 
The  conclusion  which  is  drawn  from  such  a  dialectic  is  con- 
tradiction in  general  and  the  nullity  of  the  assertions  made. 
But  it  may  be  drawn  in  a  twofold  manner, — in  the  objective 
sense,  the  self-contradictory  object  being  held  to  cancel  itself 
and  to  be  null  ( — the  Eleatic  conclusion,  by  which,  for  example, 
the   world,  motion,  and   the  point  were  deprived  of  truth), 
and  in  the  subjective  sense,  cognition  being  held  to  be  defective. 
The  latter  conclusion  is  sometimes  understood  to  mean  that 
it  is  only  this  dialectic  that  effects  the  trick  of  an  illusive  show. 
This  is  the  ordinary  view  of  so-called  sound  common  sense, 
which  holds  fast  to  the  evidence  of  the  senses  and  to  customary 
ideas  and  expressions;   sometimes  quietly  (as  in  the  case    of 
Diogenes  the  Cynic,  who  exposes  the  dialectic  of  motion  in  its 
weakness  by  silently  walking  up  and  down),  and  sometimes 
indignantly,  the  whole  matter  being  regarded  as  sheer  folly,  or 
(if  it  concerns  objects  of  moral  importance)  sheer  wickedness, 
which  tries  to  shake  what  is  essentially  firm  and  to  give  reasons 
to  vice.  The  view  occurs  in  Sokrates's  dialectic  against   that 
of  the  Sophists ;  the  indignation  in  turn  cost  Sokrates  his  life. 
That  vulgar  refutation  which  confronts  thought  (as  Diogenes 
did)    with    sensuous    consciousness    and    thinks    that   in  the 
latter  it  holds  the  truth,  must  be  left  to  itself;  but  in  so  far  as 
the  dialectic   transcends  moral  determinations,  reason  must 
be  trusted  to  reconstitute  them,  but  in  their  truth  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  their  limitations  no  less  than  of  their  rights. — Or 
again  the  result  reached — that  of  subjective  nullity — may  relate 
not  to  the  dialectic  itself,  but  rather  to  the  cognition  against 
which  it  is  directed,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  scepticism  and  likewise 
of  the  Kantian  philosophy,  to  cognition  in  general. 

The  fundamental  prejudice  here  is  that  the  dialectic  has  only 
a  negative  result;  this  will  soon  receive  its  further  determina- 
tion. Here  it  may  be  observed  about  the  form  mentioned,  in 
which  the  dialectic  usually  appears,  that  it  and  its  result  refer 
to  the  object  which  is  examined,  or  to  subjective  cognition. 


THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA  475 

declaring  the  latter,  or  the  object,  to  be  null ;  while  the  deter- 
minations which  are  demonstrated  in  the  object,  as  in  a  third 
term,  remain  disregarded  and  are  presupposed  as  valid  for 
themselves.  It  is  an  infinite  merit  of  Kant's  philosophy  that  it 
drew  attention  to  this  uncritical  procedure,  and  thus  initiated 
the  reconstruction  of  logic  and  dialectic  in  the  sense  of  the 
consideration  of  the  determinations  of  thought  in  and  for  them- 
selves. The  object  in  its  existence  without  thought  and  Notion 
is  an  image  or  a  name :  it  is  what  it  is  in  the  determinations 
of  thought  and  Notion.  They  alone  therefore  are  of  real  im- 
portance; they  are  the  true  object  and  content  of  reason,  and 
whatever  is  elsewhere  meant  by  object  and  content  in  opposition 
to  these  is  valid  in  them  and  through  them  alone.  It  must  not 
therefore  be  considered  the  fault  of  an  object,  or  of  cognition, 
if  they  prove  their  dialectic  nature  through  their  quality  or 
through  an  external  connexion.  In  this  manner  both  alike  are 
imagined  as  a  subject  into  which  determinations  (in  the  shape 
of  predicates,  properties,  or  independent  universals)    are  so 
introduced  that,   fixed  and  correct  in  themselves,   they  are 
placed  in  a  dialectical  and  contradictory  relation  only  by  an 
alien  and  contingent  connexion  operating  in  and  through  a 
third  tefrn.  Such  an  external  and  fixed  subject  of  imagination 
and  understanding,  and  such  abstract  determinations,  cannot 
be  regarded  as  ultimate  terms  which  remain  as  secure  founda- 
tions, but  must  rather  be  considered  as  themselves  immediate, 
or  as  just  such  presupposed  and  original  terms  as  must,  as  was 
shown  above,   in  and  for  themselves   be  the  foundation  of 
dialectic  ,because  they  must  be  taken  as  Notions  in  themselves. 
Thus  all  opposites  which  are  taken  as  fixed,  like  (for  example) 
finite  and  infinite  or  individual  and  universal,  are  contra- 
dictory not  in  virtue  of  some  external  connexion,  but  rather  are 
transitions  in  and  for  themselves,  as  the  consideration  of  their 
nature  showed;  the  synthesis  and  the  subject  in  which  they 
appear  are  the  product  of  the  auto-Reflection  of  their  Notion. 
Notionless  contemplation  halts  at  their  external  relation,  isolates 
them  and  leaves  them  as  fixed  presuppositions:  the  Notion 
scrutinizes  their  very  selves,  is  their  moving  soul,  and  stimulates 
their  dialectic. 

Now  this  is  the  standpoint  which  was  referred  to  above,  in 
which  any  first  term  considered  in  and  for  itself  shows  itself  to 


476  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

be  its  own  Other.  Taken  quite  generally  this  determination 
may  be  held  to  mean  that  what  first  was  immediate  is  thus 
mediated  and  related  to  an  Other,  or  that  the  universal  is  as 
a  particular.  The  second  term  which  has  thus  arisen  is  accord- 
ingly the  negative  of  the  first  and  (if  we  allow  in  advance  for 
the  further  development)  is  the  first  negative.  From  this  nega- 
tive side  the  immediate  has  become  submerged  in  the  Other, 
but  the  Other  is  essentially  not  the  empty  negative  or  Nothing 
which  is  commonly  taken  as  the  result  of  the  dialectic :  it  is 
the  Other  of  the  first,  the  negative  of  the  immediate ;  it  is  thus 
determined  as  mediated, — and  altogether  contains  the  deter- 
mination of  the  first.  The  first  is  thus  essentially  contained  and 
preserved  in  the  Other. — To  hold  fast  the  positive  in  its  nega- 
tive, and  the  content  of  the  presupposition  in  the  result,  is  the 
most  important  part  of  rational  cognition ;  also  only  the  simplest 
reflection  is  needed  to  furnish  conviction  of  the  absolute  truth 
and  necessity  of  this  requirement,  while  with  regard  to  the 
examples  of  proofs,  the  whole  of  Logic  consists  of  these. 

We  thus  have  now  the  mediated  term,  which  at  first,  taken 
as  immediate  in  its  turn,  is  itself  a  simple  determination,  since, 
the  first  term  having  perished  in  it,  its  only  content  is  the 
second.  But  also  the  first  is  contained  in  the  second,  and  the 
second  is  the  truth  of  the  first;  this  unity  can  therefore  be 
expressed  as  a  proposition  in  which  the  immediate  term  is  the 
subject  and  the  mediated  term  the  predicate,  as  "The  finite 
is  infinite/5  "One  is  many,"  "The  individual  is  the  universal." 
But  it  is  obvious  that  such  propositions  and  judgments  are 
formally  inadequate.  It  was  shown  under  the  Judgment  that 
its  general  form,  and  more  particularly  the  immediate  form  of 
the  Positive  Judgment,  is  incapable  of  comprehending  within 
itself  speculation  and  truth.  Its  next  complement,  the  Negative 
Judgment,  would  at  least  have  to  be  added  equally.  In  the 
Judgment  the  first  term  as  subject  has  the  appearance  of  an 
independent  persistence,  while  in  fact  it  is  transcended  in  its 
predicate  as  in  its  Other.  This  negation  is  contained  in  the 
content  of  the  above  propositions,  but  their  positive  form  con- 
tradicts the  content ;  thus  their  content  precisely  eludes  positing, 
although  this  is  the  whole  purpose  of  the  employment  of 
propositions. 

The  second  or  negative  and  mediated  determination  is  at 


THE  ABSOLUTE   IDEA  477 

the  same  time  the  mediating  determination.  At  first  it  may  be 
taken  as  simple  determination,  but  in  truth  it  is  a  reference 
or  relation;  for  it  is  negative — the  negative,  however,  of  the 
positive,  and  includes  the  latter.  It  is  not  therefore  the  Other 
of  a  term  to  which  it  is  indifferent,  for  thus  it  would  be  neither 
an  Other,  nor  a  reference  or  relation;  it  is  the  Other  in 
itself,  the  Other  of  an  Other.  It  thus  includes  its  own  Other, 
and  so  is  contradiction,  or  the  posited  dialectic  of  itself. — The 
first  or  immediate  term  is  the  Notion  in  itself,  and  therefore  is 
the  negative  only  in  itself9,  the  dialectic  moment  with  it  there- 
fore consists  in  this,  that  the  distinction  which  it  implicitly  con- 
tains is  posited  in  it.  The  second  term  on  the  other  hand  is 
itself  the  determinate  entity,  distinction  or  relation ;  hence  with 
it  the  dialectic  moment  consists  in  the  positing  of  the  unity 
which  is  contained  in  it. — If  then  the  negative,  the  determinate, 
the  relation  or  judgment,  and  all  determinations  which  fall 
under  this  second  moment,  do  not  of  themselves  appear  as 
contradictory  and  dialectical,  this  is  a  mere  fault  of  thought 
which  does  not  confront  its  thoughts  one  with  another.  For 
the  materials — opposite  determinations  in  one  relation — are 
posited  already  and  are  at  hand  for  thought.  But  formal  thought 
makes  identity  its  law,  and  allows  the  contradictory  content 
which  lies  before  it  to  drop  into  the  sphere  of  sensuous  repre- 
sentation, into  space  and  time,  where  the  contradictory  terms 
are  held  apart  in  spatial  and  temporal  juxtaposition  and  thus 
come  before  consciousness  without  being  in  contact.  In  this 
connexion  this  thought  makes  it  its  fixed  principle  that  con- 
tradiction is  unthinkable;  but  in  truth  the  thinking  of  con- 
tradiction is  the  essential  moment  of  the  Notion.  In  point  of 
fact  formal  thought  does  think  contradiction,  but  immediately 
disregards  it,  and  with  the  empty  assertion  of  that  principle 
passes  over  to  abstract  negation. 

The  negativity  which  has  just  been  considered  is  the  turning- 
point  of  the  movement  of  the  Notion.  It  is  the  simple  point  of 
negative  self-relation,  the  innermost  source  of  all  activity,  of 
living  and  spiritual  self-movement,  the  dialectic  soul  which  all 
truth  has  in  it  and  through  which  it  alone  is  truth;  for  the 
transcendence  of  the  opposition  between  the  Notion  and  Reality, 
and  that  unity  which  is  the  truth,  rest  upon  this  subjectivity 
alone. — The  second  negative,  the  negative  of  the  negative 


478  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

which  we  have  reached,  is  this  transcendence  cf  the  contra- 
diction, but  is  no  more  the  activity  of  an  external  reflection 
than  the  contradiction  is :  it  is  the  innermost  and  most  objective 
moment  of  Life  and  Spirit,  by  virtue  of  which  a  subject  is 
personal  and  free. — The  self-relation  of  the  negative  must  be 
considered  as  the  second  premiss  of  the  whole  syllogism.  If  the 
determinations  of  analytic  and  synthetic  are  used  as  opposite, 
then  the  first  premiss  may  be  regarded  as  the  analytic  moment, 
the  immediate  being  here  in  an  immediate  relation  to  its  Other, 
and  its  transition  into  it  being  thus  in  progress  or,  rather, 
accomplished.  At  the  same  time  this  relation,  as  was  men- 
tioned, is  also  synthetic,  because  the  term  into  which  it  passes 
over  is  its  Other.  The  second  premiss,  which  has  been  considered 
here,  may  be  determined  as  the  synthetic,  because  it  is  the 
relation  of  the  distinct  as  such  to  its  distinct. — The  first  premiss 
is  the  moment  of  universality  and  communication ;  the  second 
is  determined  by  individuality,  which  at  first  is  in  an  exclusive 
relation  to  the  Other,  as  existing  for  itself  and  as  different.  The 
negative  appears  as  mediator,  since  it  includes  both  itself  and 
the  immediate  term  of  which  it  is  the  negation.  In  so  far  as 
these  two  determinations  are  taken  as  externally  related  in  any 
manner,  the  negative  moment  is  merely  the  formal  mediating 
element;  but  as  absolute  negativity  the  negative  moment  of 
absolute  mediation  is  the  unity  which  is  subjectivity  and  soul. 
At  this  turning-point  of  the  method  the  course  of  cognition 
also  turns  back  upon  itself.  This  negativity,  as  self-transcending 
contradiction,  is  the  rcconstitution  of  the  first  immediacy,  of 
simple  universality ;  for,  immediately,  the  Other  of  the  Other 
and  the  negative  of  the  negative  is  the  positive,  identical,  and 
universal.  If  number  is  applicable,  then  in  the  whole  course 
this  second  immediate  is  the  third  term,  the  first  immediate 
and  the  mediated  being  the  other  terms.  But  it  is  also  third 
of  a  series  composed  besides  of  first  (or  formal)  negative  and 
absolute  negativity  or  second  negative ;  now,  since  the  former 
(the  first  negative)  is  itself  the  second  term,  the  third  term  may 
now  be  counted  as  fourth,  and  the  abstract  form  of  it  may  be 
taken  as  a  quadruplicity  in  place  of  triplicity ;  the  negative, 
or  distinction,  is  in  this  manner  counted  as  a  duality. — The 
third  (or  fourth)  term  is  just  the  unity  of  the  first  and  the  second 
moments,  of  the  immediate  and  the  mediated, — It  is  the  wholly 


THE  ABSOLUTE   IDEA  479 

superficial  and  external  side  of  the  manner  of  cognition  that 
apprehends  this  as  a  unity,  and  the  form  of  the  method  as  a 
whole  as  a  triplicity:  but  it  must  be  regarded  as  an  infinite 
merit  of  Kant's  philosophy  that  it  demonstrated  this,  and 
demonstrated  it  in  a  more  particular  application;  for  the 
abstract  form  of  number  itself  was,  of  course,  set  up  earlier, 
but  without  any  concept  and  therefore  without  consequence. 
The  syllogism,  and  the  threefold  generally,  has  always  been 
recognized  as  the  general  form  of  reason ;  but  it  was  considered 
as  a  wholly  external  form  which  did  not  determine  the  nature 
of  the  content,  and,  further,  the  syllogism  in  the  formal  sense 
ends  in  the  determination  of  identity,  made  by  understanding, 
and  therefore  it  lacks  the  essential  dialectic  moment,  or  nega- 
tivity. But  this  moment  does  enter  with  the  triplicity  of  deter- 
minations, because  the  third  is  the  unity  of  the  first  two  deter- 
minations, and  the  latter,  being  different,  can  be  in  unity  only 
as  transcended. — Formalists  have  seized  even  upon  triplicity, 
and  have  held  fast  to  its  skeleton;  and  this  form  has  been 
rendered  tedious  and  of  ill-repute  by  the  shallow  misuse  and 
the  barrenness  of  modern  so-called  philosophic  construction, 
which  consists  simply  in  attaching  the  formal  framework  with- 
out concept  and  immanent  determination  to  all  sorts  of  matter 
and  employing  it  for  external  arrangement.  But  its  inner  value 
cannot  be  diminished  by  this  vapid  misuse,  and  it  must  still 
be  deemed  a  great  matter  that  the  outward  form  of  rational 
procedure  has  been  discovered,  albeit  not  understood. 

Considered  further,  the  third  term  is  the  immediate  through 
transcendence  of  mediation,  the  simple  through  transcendence 
of  distinction,  and  the  positive  through  transcendence  of  the 
negative, — the  Notion  which  realizes  itself  through  its  other- 
ness, and  has  coincided  with  itself  through  the  transcendence 
of  this  reality,  and  has  established  its  absolute  reality,  or  simple 
self-relation.  Consequently  this  result  is  truth.  It  is  immediacy 
as  much  as  mediation ; — but  it  is  not  properly  comprehended 
by  forms  of  judgment  like  "the  third  term  is  immediacy  and 
mediation55  or  "it  is  their  unity,"  for  it  is  not  a  quiescent  third 
term,  but,  as  this  unity,  is  self-mediating  movement  and  activity. 
— The  beginning  was  the  universal ;  the  result  is  the  individual, 
the  concrete,  and  the  subject  ;  what  the  former  is  in  itself, 
the  latter  now  is  equally  for  itself ';  the  universal  is  posited  in 


480  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

the  subject.  The  first  two  moments  of  the  triplicity  are  the 
abstract  and  false  moments,  which  for  this  very  reason  are 
dialectical  and  make  themselves  into  the  subject  by  virtue  of 
this  their  negativity.  For  us  the  Notion  itself  is  (i)  the  universal 
which  is  in  itself,  (2)  the  negative  which  is  for  itself,  and  (3)  the 
third  term,  which  is  in  and  for  itself,  the  universal  which  runs 
through  all  the  moments  of  the  syllogism.  But  the  third  term 
is  the  conclusion,  in  which  it  mediates  itself  with  itself  through 
its  negativity,  and  is  thus  posited  for  itself  as  the  universal  and 
the  identity  of  its  moments. 

Now  this  result,  as  the  self-identical  whole  which  has  passed 
into  itself,  has  recovered  the  form  of  immediacy.  It  is  thus  an 
entity  of  the  same  kind  as  the  beginning  had  determined  itself 
to  be.  As  simple  self-relation  it  is  a  universal,  and  the  negativity 
which  constituted  its  dialectic  and  mediation  has,  in  this 
universality,  also  collapsed  into  a  simple  determinateness  which 
in  turn  can  be  a  beginning.  It  might  at  first  appear  as  though 
this  apprehension  of  the  result  must  be  an  analysis  of  it, 
separating  out  again,  in  the  manner  already  considered,  the 
various  determinations  and  their  movement,  through  which 
it  has  arisen.  If  however  the  treatment  of  the  object  is  in  fact 
made  in  this  analytic  manner,  then  it  belongs  to  the  stage  of 
the  Idea  which  was  considered  above,  namely  inquiring 
Cognition,  which  merely  states  of  its  object  what  u,  without 
the  necessity  of  its  concrete  identity  and  of  the  Notion  of  the 
latter.  But  the  method  of  truth,  which  forms  a  Notion  of  the 
object,  is  indeed  itself  analytic  (as  was  shown),  since  it  simply 
remains  within  the  Notion,  but  is  equally  synthetic,  since  the 
object  becomes  dialectical  by  virtue  of  the  Notion,  and  is 
determined  as  other.  The  result  which  is  reached  now  becomes 
object  and  is  the  new  foundation,  but  the  method  remains  the 
same  as  in  the  previous  foundation.  The  distinction  concerns 
only  the  relation  of  the  foundation  as  such :  it  is  still  foundation, 
but  its  immediacy  is  only  form,  because  at  the  same  time  it  was 
result ;  the  fact  that  it  is  determined  as  content  is  therefore  no 
longer  a  mere  assumption,  but  is  deduced  and  demonstrated. 

Here  at  last  the  content  of  cognition  as  such  enters  within 
the  sphere  of  our  contemplation,  for  now,  being  derivative,  it 
belongs  to  the  method.  By  the  addition  of  this  moment  the 
method  itself  is  extended  into  a  system. — At  first  the  beginning 


THE  ABSOLUTE  IDEA  481 

of  the  method  had  to  be  quite  indeterminate  in  regard  to 
content:  in  so  far  the  method  appears  as  the  merely  formal 
soul,  for  and  through  which  the  beginning  was  determined 
only  formally,  as  the  immediate  and  universal.  By  means  of  the 
movement  which  has  been  demonstrated,  the  object  has  ob- 
tained for  itself  a  determinateness  which  is  a  content  because 
negativity  which  has  collapsed  into  simplicity  is  transcended 
form,  and,  as  simple  determinateness,  stands  opposed  to  its 
development,  and,  first  of  all,  to  its  very  opposition  to  univer- 
sality. 

Now  this  determinateness  is  the  next  truth  of  the  indeter- 
minate beginning:  it  thus  is  a  reproach  to  its  incompleteness 
and  to  the  method  itself  which,  starting  from  it,  was  only 
formal.  This  may  be  expressed  now  as  the  definite  demand  that 
the  beginning,  because  it  is  itself  determinate  as  against  the 
determinateness  of  the  result,  shall  be  taken  not  as  immediate 
but  as  mediated  and  derivative :  this  may  seem  equivalent  to 
the  demand  for  an  infinite  backward  progress  in  proof  and 
derivation,  while,  from  the  new  beginning  which  has  been 
obtained,  a  result  likewise  emerges  in  the  course  of  the  method, 
so  that  the  progress  also  rolls  forward  to  infinity. 

It  has  been  shown  many  times  that  the  infinite  progress  in 
general  belongs  to  Notionless  reflection :  the  absolute  method, 
which  has  the  Notion  for  soul  and  content,  cannot  lead  into  it. 
At  first,  beginnings  like  Being,  Essence,  and  Universality  may 
appear  to  be  of  the  kind  which  have  that  perfect  universality 
and  lack  of  content  that  is  demanded  for  a  proper,  wholly 
formal,  beginning,  so  that,  as  absolutely  first  beginnings,  they 
neither  demand  nor  admit  any  regress.  Since  they  are  pure 
self-relations,  and  purely  immediate  and  indeterminate,  they 
have  not  indeed  that  distinction  which  is  at  once  posited  in 
any  other  beginning  between  the  universality  of  its  form  and 
its  content.  But  the  indeterminateness  which  these  logical 
beginnings  have  for  sole  content  precisely  constitutes  their 
determinateness;  for  the  latter  consists  in  their  negativity,  as 
transcended  mediation;  and  the  particularity  of  the  latter 
imparts  a  particularity  to  their  indeterminateness,  by  means 
of  which  Being,  Essence,  and  Universality  are  distinguished 
from  one  another.  Now  the  determinateness  which  belongs  to 
them  is  their  immediate  determinateness  if  they  are  taken  for 

VOL.   II.  HH 


482  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

themselves,  and  is  a  determinateness  as  much  as  one  which 
applies  to  any  content ;  it  therefore  requires  a  derivation ;  and 
it  is  indifferent  to  the  method  whether  it  is  taken  as  deter- 
minateness of  form  or  of  content.  Hence  in  fact  no  radical 
change  is  introduced  in  the  method  because  a  content  has  been 
determined  through  the  first  of  its  results :  the  method  remains 
no  less  formal  than  before.  For  it  is  the  absolute  form,  the 
Notion  which  knows  itself  and  everything  to  be  Notion ;  there 
is  therefore  no  content  which  could  stand  opposed  to  it  and 
determine  it  as  one-sided  and  external  form.  The  lack  of 
content  of  the  various  beginnings  does  not  make  them  absolute 
beginnings ;  and  similarly  it  is  not  the  content  as  such  that 
could  lead  the  method  into  the  infinite  progress  forwards  or 
backwards.  From  one  side  the  determinateness  which  it  pro- 
duces in  its  result  is  the  moment  through  which  it  effects  self- 
mediation  and  makes  the  immediate  beginning  a  mediated 
entity.  Conversely,  however,  this  its  mediation  takes  its  course 
through  determinateness ;  it  goes  through  a  content  as  through 
an  apparent  Other  back  to  its  beginning  in  such  a  manner  that 
it  not  only  reconstitutes  the  beginning  (as  determinate,  how- 
ever), but  that  the  result  equally  is  transcended  determinate- 
ness,  and  therefore  is  the  reconstitution  of  the  first  indeter- 
minateness  with  which  the  method  began.  The  method  effects 
this  as  a  system  of  totality.  It  still  remains  to  be  considered  in  this 
determination. 

It  has  been  shown  that  that  determinateness  which  was  result 
is  itself  a  new  beginning  by  virtue  of  the  form  of  simplicity 
into  which  it  collapsed;  and,  since  this  beginning  is  distinct 
from  its  antecedent  by  precisely  this  determinateness,  cog- 
nition rolls  forward  from  content  to  content.  This  progress 
determines  itself,  first,  in  this  manner,  that  it  begins  from  simple 
determinatenesses  and  that  each  subsequent  one  is  richer  and 
more  concrete.  For  the  result  contains  its  own  beginning,  and 
the  development  of  the  beginning  has  made  it  the  richer  by 
a  new  determinateness.  The  universal  is  the  foundation;  the 
progress  therefore  must  not  be  taken  as  a  flow  from  Other  to 
Other.  In  the  absolute  method  the  Notion  preserves  itself  in  its 
otherness,  and  the  universal  in  its  particularization,  in  the 
Judgment  and  in  reality ;  it  raises  to  each  next  stage  of  deter- 
mination the  whole  mass  of  its  antecedent  content,  and  by  its 


THE  ABSOLUTE   IDEA  483 

dialectical  pi  ogress  not  only  loses  nothing  and  leaves  nothing 
behind,  but  carries  with  it  all  that  it  has  acquired,  enriching 
and  concentrating  itself  upon  itself. 

This  expansion  may  be  regarded  as  the  moment  of  content, 
and,  in  the  whole,  as  the  first  premiss;  the  universal  is  com- 
municated to  the  richness  of  the  content  and  is  immediately 
contained  in  it.  But  the  relation  also  has  the  second  (the 
negative  or  dialectic)  side.  The  process  of  enriching  advances 
along  the  necessity  of  the  Notion,  it  is  supported  by  the  latter, 
and  each  determination  is  an  intro-Reflection.  Each  new  stage 
of  exteriorization  (that  is,  of  further  determination)  is  also  an 
interiorization,  and  greater  extension  is  also  higher  intensity. 
The  richest  consequently  is  also  the  most  concrete  and  sub- 
jective term,  and  that  which  carries  itself  back  into  the  simplest 
depth  is  also  the  most  powerful  and  comprehensive.  The  highest 
and  acutest  point  is  simple  personality,  which,  by  virtue  alone 
of  the  absolute  dialectic  which  is  its  nature,  equally  holds  and 
comprehends  everything  within  itself  because  it  perfectly 
liberates  itself, — becoming  simplicity  which  is  first  immediacy 
and  universality. 

In  this  manner  it  comes  about  that  each  step  in  the  progress 
of  further  determination  in  advancing  from  the  indeterminate 
beginning  is  also  a  rearward  approach  to  it,  so  that  two  pro- 
cesses which  may  at  first  appear  to  be  different  (the  regressive 
confirmation  of  the  beginning  and  its  progressive  further  deter- 
mination) coincide  and  are  the  same.  The  method  thus  forms 
a  circle,  but,  in  a  temporal  development,  it  cannot  anticipate 
that  the  beginning  as  such  shall  already  be  derivative:  it  is 
sufficient  for  the  beginning  in  its  immediacy  that  it  is  simple 
universality.  In  so  far  as  it  is  this  it  is  completely  conditioned, 
and  it  need  not  be  objected  that  it  should  be  allowed  to  count 
merely  as  provisional  and  hypothetical.  Any  objections  which 
might  be  advanced — about  the  limits  of  human  cognition,  or 
the  need  of  a  critical  investigation  of  the  instrument  of  cog- 
nition before  the  problem  is  attacked — are  themselves  sup- 
positions which,  as  concrete  determinations,  imply  the  need 
of  their  mediation  and  proof.  Formally  then  they  are  no  better 
than  that  beginning  against  which  they  protest,  and  rather 
require  a  derivation  by  reason  of  their  more  concrete  content ; 
so  that  it  is  sheer  presumption  to  demand  that  they  should 


484  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

have  preferential  consideration.  Their  content  is  untrue,  for 
they  make  incontrovertible  and  absolute  what  is  known  to  be 
finite  and  untrue  (namely,  a  restricted  cognition  which  is 
determined  as  form  and  instrument  as  against  its  content) ; 
and  this  untrue  cognition  is  itself  form  and  regressive  con- 
firmation.— The  method  of  truth  too  knows  the  beginning  to 
be  incomplete  because  it  is  beginning,  but  also  knows  this 
incomplete  term  in  general  as  necessary,  because  truth  is  only 
self-coincidence,  through  the  negativity  of  immediacy.  That 
impatience  whose  only  wish  is  to  go  beyond  the  determinate 
(whether  in  the  form  of  beginning,  object,  finite,  or  in  any 
other  form)  and  to  be  immediately  in  the  absolute,  has  nothing 
before  it  as  object  of  its  cognition  but  the  empty  negative,  the 
abstract  infinite, — or  else  a  would-be  absolute,  which  is  imagi- 
nary because  it  is  neither  posited  nor  comprehended;  it  can 
be  comprehended  only  through  the  mediation  of  cognition,  of 
which  the  universal  and  immediate  is  a  moment,  while  the 
truth  itself  is  only  in  its  extended  course  and  at  its  end.  The 
subjective  need  of  ignorance  and  the  resulting  impatience  may 
be  satisfied  with  a  preliminary  conspectus  of  the  whole,  by 
means  of  a  classification  for  the  use  of  reflection,  which,  after 
the  manner  of  finite  cognition,  predicates  the  particular  as 
given  in  the  universal  and  to  be  looked  forward  to  in  philosophy. 
Nevertheless  this  affords  no  more  than  a  picture  to  imagination ; 
for  the  true  transition  from  universal  to  particular  and  to  the 
whole  which  is  determined  in  and  for  itself  (where  this  first 
universal  itself,  according  to  its  true  determination,  again  is  a 
moment)  is  foreign  to  this  type  of  classification  and  is  only  the 
mediation  of  philosophic  science  itself. 

By  reason  of  the  nature  of  the  method  which  has  been  demon- 
strated the  science  is  seen  to  be  a  circle  which  returns  upon 
itself,  for  mediation  bends  back  its  end  into  its  beginning  or 
simple  ground.  Further,  this  circle  is  a  circle  of  circles ;  for  each 
member,  being  inspired  by  the  method,  is  intro-Reflection 
which,  returning  to  the  beginning,  is  at  the  same  time  the 
beginning  of  a  new  member.  The  various  sciences,  of  which 
each  has  a  before  and  an  after,  are  fragments  of  this  chain ; 
or  rather,  each  has  only  a  before,  and  in  its  conclusion  shows 
its  after. 

Thus  the  Logic  too  in  the  Absolute  Idea  has  returned  to  this 


THE  ABSOLUTE   IDEA  485 

simple  unity  which  is  its  beginning.  The  pure  immediacy  of 
Being,  in  which  at  first  all  determination  appears  to  be  extinct 
or  omitted  by  abstraction,  is  the  Idea  which  has  reached  its 
adequate  self-equality  through  mediation — that  is,  through  the 
transcendence  of  mediation.  The  method  is  the  pure  Notion 
which  is  related  only  to  itself;  it  is  therefore  the  simple  self- 
relation  which  is  Being.  But  now  it  is  also  Being  fulfilled,  the 
self-comprehending  Notion,  Being  as  the  concrete  and  also 
thoroughly  intensive  totality. — In  conclusion  the  following 
observations  may  be  made  about  this  Idea.  i.  In  it  the 
science  of  Logic  has  comprehended  its  own  Notion.  In 
Being  (the  beginning  of  its  content)  its  Notion  appears  as  a 
knowledge  external  to  the  content  in  subjective  reflection.  But 
in  the  Idea  of  Absolute  Cognition  the  Notion  has  become  its 
own  content.  Logic  is  itself  the  pure  Notion,  which  has  itself 
for  object,  and  with  itself  for  object  passes  through  the  totality 
of  its  determinations ;  in  doing  which  it  develops  into  the  whole 
of  its  reality,  into  the  system  of  philosophic  science,  and  ends 
by  comprehending  this  process  by  which  it  forms  its  Notion 
about  itself,  whereby  it  transcends  its  position  as  content  and 
object,  and  understands  the  Notion  of  philosophy. — 2.  This  Idea 
still  is  logical,  it  is  enveloped  in  pure  thought,  and  is  the  science 
only  of  the  divine  Notion.  The  systematic  development  is  itself 
a  realization,  but  is  maintained  within  the  same  sphere.  In  so 
far  the  pure  Idea  of  Cognition  is  enclosed  in  subjectivity,  and 
therefore  is  an  impulse  to  transcend  the  latter;  and,  as  last 
result,  pure  truth  becomes  the  beginning  of  another  sphere  and 
science.  This  transition  need  here  only  be  intimated. 

For  the  Idea  posits  itself  as  the  absolute  unity  of  the  pure 
Notion  and  its  Reality,  and  thus  gathers  itself  into  the  imme- 
diacy of  Being ;  and  in  doing  so,  as  totality  in  this  form,  it  is 
Nature. — But  this  determination  is  not  a  perfected  becoming  or 
a  transition,  like  that  by  which  above  the  subjective  Notion 
in  its  totality  becomes  objectivity  and  the  Subjective  End  be- 
comes Life.  Rather,  the  pure  Idea,  in  which  the  determinate- 
ness  or  reality  of  the  Notion  is  itself  raised  to  the  level  of  Notion, 
is  an  absolute  liberation,  having  no  further  immediate  deter- 
mination which  is  not  equally  posited  and  equally  Notion. 
Consequently  there  is  no  transition  in  this  freedom ;  the  simple 
Being,  as  which  the  Idea  has  determined  itself,  remains  per- 


486  SCIENCE  OF  LOGIC 

fectly  transparent  to  it,  and  is  the  Notion  which  in  its  deter- 
mination stands  fast  by  itself.  The  transition  here  therefore 
must  rather  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  Idea  freely  releases 
itself  in  absolute  self-security  and  self-repose.  By  reason  of  this 
freedom  the  form  of  its  determinateness  also  is  utterly  free — the 
externality  of  space  and  time  which  is  absolutely  for  itself  and 
without  subjectivity. — In  so  far  as  this  externality  is  only  in 
accordance  with  the  abstract  immediacy  of  Being,  and  is  com- 
prehended by  consciousness,  it  exists  as  mere  objectivity  and 
external  life ;  but  in  the  Idea  it  remains,  in  and  for  itself,  the 
totality  of  the  Notion,  and  Philosophy  related  to  Nature  as 
divine  knowledge.  But  this  next  resolution  of  the  pure  Idea — 
to  determine  itself  as  external  Idea — thereby  only  posits  for 
itself  the  mediation  out  of  which  the  Notion  arises  as  free 
existence  that  out  of  externality  has  passed  into  itself;  arises 
to  perfect  its  self-liberation  in  the  Philosophy  of  Spirit,  and  to 
discover  the  highest  Notion  of  itself  in  that  logical  science  as 
the  pure  Notion  which  forms  a  Notion  of  itself. 


SOME  ENGLISH  BOOKS -ON   HEGEL'S  LOGIC 

The  Subjective  Logic  of  Hegel.  Translated  by  H.  Sloman  and  J.  Wallon.  1855. 
The  Secret  of  Hegel.  J.  Hutchison  Stirling.  1865. 

The  Logic  of  Hegel.  Translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia  of  the  Philosophical 
Sciences,  with  Prolegomena.  W.  Wallace.  1874.  Second  edition, 
augmented.  1893-94. 

Hegel's  Logic.  A  critical  exposition.  W.  T.  Harris.  1890. 

Studies  in  Hegelian  Dialectic.].  M.  E.  McTaggart.  1896. 

The  Origin  and  Significance  of  Hegel's  Logic.  J.  B.  Baillie.  1901. 

The  Philosophy  of  the  Spirit,  with  a  supplementary  essay  on  the  Logic  of 
Hegel.  H.  W.  Dresser.  1908. 

A  Commentary  on  Hegel's  Logic.  J.  M.  E.  McTaggart.  1910. 

Hegel's  Doctrine  of  Formal  Logic ;  being  a  translation  of  the  first  section  of 
the  Subjective  Logic,  with  Introduction  and  Notes.  H.  S.  Macran. 
1912. 

The  Philosophy  of  Hegel.  A  systematic  exposition.  W.  T.  Stace.  1924. 


CEORGE  ALLEN  &   UNWIN  LTD 

LONDON:    40    MUSEUM    STREET,    W.C.i 

CAPE      TOWN:      58-60      LONG      STREET 

SYDNEY,      N.S.W. :      55      YORK      STREET 

TORONTO:     91     WELLINGTON     STREET    WEST 

CALCUTTA:  17  CENTRAL  AVE.,  P.O.  DHARAMTALA 

BOMBAY:     15    GRAHAM    ROAD,    BALLARD    ESTATE 

WELLINGTON,  N.Z.:  8  KINGS  CRESCENT,  LOWER  HUTT 


